Description

The Lost World of Mr Hardy is a fascinating new feature length Independent filmmakers Andy Heathcote and Heike Bachelier have now made an incredible, rich film about this much loved family business and the lost art of fishing tackle.

“Only the best is good enough for fisherman” said J.J. Hardy at the end of the 19th century and how right he was. The name Hardy has been synonymous with the best in angling for 135 years, a name to stir the heart of many a fisherman.

“Mister Jim” is how the employees respectfully addressed their boss Jim Hardy, the last of the family to work for the firm and now retired. His Grandfather and Great-Uncle, opened a small shop in the far north of England in 1873. Both passionate fisherman, they invented fishing tackle. Their skill, devotion, and innovative marketing strategies allowed them to conquer the world. Kings, Queens and Maharajahs loved them and the name Hardy's has been synonymous with fishing for more than a century.

Experience a beautiful, evocative film about the people who have spent their working lives in the pursuit of perfect fishing tackle.

See long forgotten films capturing an incredible world of 80 years ago with unbelievable rivers full of enormous salmon.

Discover a new world of rod and reel makers still working by hand today and the magic and elegance of the world's very best fishing tackle.

Be inspired by a poignant reflection of the world we live in and the myriad ways it has changed over 130 years.

Subtitles: German, French, Danish, Japanese, English (hard of hearing)

WHAT THE EXPERTS ARE SAYING:

" A beautiful film ... Essential." - Trout and Salmon magazine

"Exceptionally well made... I can't recommend it highly enough!" - Fly Fishing and Fly Tying magazine

"An excellent documentary,... this will be a future classic, I therefore give it 10 out of 10." - Fishingmagic.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR:

Andy Heathcote: producer/director,camera

I was a fanatical fly fisherman in my youth until I had to move south and trade in my angler’s pipe and Corona silk line for a camera and a career in filmmaking. After a degree in photography I progressed to camerawork and then editing at the BBC and commercials companies in London’s Soho. Film school took me to Lodz, to the renowned Polish Film School. Since then I have directed nearly forty films of all shapes and sizes, won many film prizes and my films like “English Goodbye” and “Sound Like Sunlight” have been selected for many of the most prestigious film festivals in the world.

After many, many years away I took a trip back up to Scotland and could finally rediscover my fishing. A big relief. (However I must admit to being pretty rubbish compared to the 15 year old, I once was.)

Fly fishing had always been an excuse to be in the countryside yet to feel like I had a purpose there. Filmmaking however was another animal, a way to explore and better understand the world we live in. If only I could combine these, the two greatest passions of my life.