Website: http://tapulous.com/

Tapulous, Inc. was an American software and video game developer and publisher headquartered in Palo Alto, California. It was a wholly owned subsidiary of The Walt Disney Company as part of Disney Interactive 's Disney Mobile unit. The company's most profitable products were the Tap Tap series of music games, which surpassed thirty-five million downloads.

Wikipedia

Associated sectors:

Video games;

Similar Companies:

Alchemist (company)

Japan

n/a

Alchemist is a Japanese video game developer. It specializes in the development of visual novel video games ports for use on home video game consoles such as the PlayStation 2 and the Dreamcast. They declared bankruptcy at April 1, 2016.

Beat The Bomb

USA

Privately Held

Beat The Bomb is the world's first interactive social video game company. Beat The Bomb is using real-world video games to reimagine the future of social entertainment. Since 2017, we have turned hi-tech digital rooms, multiplayer games, and incredible special effects endings into one of the most memorable group activities in the world. Over 500,000 friends, families, students, and co-workers have now visited our locations, which have been featured on NBC's Today Show, ABC, FOX5, and The Real Housewives of Atlanta.

Artificial Agency

Canada

Privately Held

Artificial Agency is a technology startup that develops an AI behavior engine to create more dynamic and realistic non-playable characters (NPCs) in video games. The AI engine replaces traditional decision trees and pre-written scripts used to guide NPCs with a set of motivations, rules and goals that influence how the NPCs interact with players. This technology can be integrated into existing video games or serve as the foundation for new games. Artificial Agency's AI behavior engine is aimed at enhancing the gaming experience by providing more realistic and dynamic interactions between players and NPCs.

GFAL

Spain

Privately Held

GFAL is a Web3 game startup that specializes in the development and publishing of innovative and engaging video games. The company launched its first mobile game, Elemental Raiders, and is on a mission to build new gaming experiences through Web3 technology. The company has also introduced its own token and works with the concepts of ownership, tradability, and standardization to enhance player engagement. GFAL is planning to release several new games and is striving to lead the next stage in the evolution of video games.

Creatures (company)

Japan

Privately Held

Creatures Inc. (?????, Kabushiki-gaisha Kurchzu?) is a Japanese video game development company affiliated with The Pokémon Company. It was founded by Tsunekazu Ishihara in November 1995, with the assistance of Nintendo 's Satoru Iwata, as a successor to Shigesato Itoi 's company Ape Inc. It is well known for producing Pokémon trading cards and toys, as well as developing many video games. Its current President is Hirokazu Tanaka, who was previously known for producing and composing various Nintendo games. The company has its headquarters on the second floor of the Gobancho KU Building (?KU?, Gobanch KU Biru?) in Chiyoda, Tokyo, in proximity to the Ichigaya Station.