Robert L. "Bob" Bender, 78 year old Woodward resident, died Sunday, April 30, 2017 at the Vici Nursing Home. A memorial service will be held at 2:00 p.m. Friday, May 5, 2017 at the First Christian Church in Woodward. Burial will follow in the Elmwood Cemetery. Visitation will be held at the Billings Funeral Home on Wednesday from 1:00 p.m. until 8:00 p.m. and Thursday from 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. Robert Leon Bender was born on April 29, 1940 in Raton, New Mexico. He was the son of Lloyd and Winifred (Winters) Arbogast. Bob was raised in Woodward, Oklahoma along with two brothers Joe Bill Bender and Tom Bender. Bob graduated from Woodward High School in 1958 and later attended Oklahoma State University where he earned his Business Degree. Bob served in the Oklahoma Army National Guard from 1961 until 1964 as a Forward Observer with the rank of 2nd Lieutenant. Bob met Julia Martin in Woodward, Oklahoma and they were married on June 30, 1967. Bob and Julie made their home in Woodward and raised three children, Richard Wayne, Connie Dale, and Kenneth Gene. Bob was a successful businessman who worked for Southwestern Stationery and Bank Supply for over 20 years. Eventually Bob and Julie ran their own office supply company out of their home for over 20 years. Bob was a 32nd Degree Mason and a member of the Woodward Elks Lodge. Bob was a member of the First Christian Church in Woodward where he served as a Deacon. Bob never met a stranger and he was loved by his family, children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren and many friends. Bob enjoyed bowling, basketball, golf, snow skiing, and gymnastics. He is survived by his son, Richard Bender of Woodward; son, Kenneth Bender and wife Jamie of Mesa, Arizona; brothers Joe Bill Bender and wife Jane of Enid; Tom Bender and wife Pat of Sharon; 14 grandchildren, Khristina and Brock Benson, Barry and Kelsey Martin, Adam Martin, Heather Skinner and Eric Charon, Kyle and Kimberly Bender, Kendra and Derek Sain, Kandace Bender, Tristen Bender and Bailey Bender, as well as 28 great-grandchildren, four great-great-grandchildren, and several nieces and nephews. He was preceded in death by his infant brother Jimmy Lee Arbogast, parents Lloyd and Winifred Arbogast, his beloved wife Julie Bender, and his daughter Connie Meredith. Memorials may be made to the United Fund of Woodward with the funeral home accepting the contributions on behalf of the family. Remembrances may be shared online at www.billingsfuneralhomewoodward.com