Seychelles Creole (Seselwa)

Seychelles Creole is a creole language spoken in the Seychelles by about 70,000 people. It is one of the official languages of the Seychelles, along with French and English. It is a French-based Creole and has much in common with Mauritian Creole. Other names include Seselwa Creole French, Seselwa and Seselwa Kreol.

Since the Seychelles became independent in 1976 the Seychelles government has sought to develop Creole as a language. They set up the Lenstiti Kreol (Creole Institute / l'Institut créole) to standardise the spelling and grammar. Today Seychelles Creole is used in everyday conversation, in schools and in shops, and is the mother tongue of the majority of Seychellois.

Seychelles Creole alphabet

Seychelles Creole pronunciation

Details of Seychelles Croele the alphabet and pronunciation provided by Wolfram Siegel

Sample text in Seychelles Creole

Nou tou imen nou'n ne dan laliberte ek legalite, dan nou dignite ek nou bann drwa. Nou tou nou annan kapasite pou rezonnen, e fodre nou azir anver lezot avek en lespri fraternel.

Translation

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

(Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights)

Sample videos in Seychelles Creole

Information about Seychelles Creole | Tower of Babel

Links

Information about Seychelles Creole

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seychellois_Creole

http://www.flw.com/languages/creoleseychelles.htm

Creole languages

Betawi, Bislama, Cape Verdean Creole, Chavacano, Chinook Jargon, Dominican Creole French, Fanagalo, French Guianese Creole, Guadeloupean Creole, Guinea-Bissau Creole, Haitian Creole, Jamaican, Kituba, Manado Malay, Mauritian Creole, Nagamese, Ndyuka, Norfuk, Nubi, Palenquero, Papiamento, Pijin, Réunion Creole, Sango, Saramaccan, Seychelles Creole, Sierra Leonean Creole, Singlish, Sranan, Saint Lucian Creole, Tok Pisin, Torres-Strait Creole

Languages written with the Latin alphabet

Page last modified: 23.04.21

[top]

Why not share this page:

If you like this site and find it useful, you can support it by making a donation via PayPal or Patreon, or by contributing in other ways. Omniglot is how I make my living.

Note: all links on this site to Amazon.com , Amazon.co.uk and Amazon.fr are affiliate links. This means I earn a commission if you click on any of them and buy something. So by clicking on these links you can help to support this site.

Get a 30-day Free Trial of Amazon Prime (UK)