Manisha Koirala has increasingly been seen in more and more Hindi projects ever since she took a hiatus from acting back in 2012. While a lot of her roles weren’t the lead, like in Ranbir Kapoor’s Sanju or Kartik Aaryan’s Shehzada, Koirala still made her presence felt through her nuanced performances.

Now, after the release of Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s Heeramandi: The Diamond Bazaar, which is currently streaming worldwide on Netflix, Manisha Koirala is back in the limelight in a major way.

The audience have been praising her performance in the period drama in which she plays the role of Mallika Jaan, the Chief courtesan of Shahi Mahal in Heeramandi in Lahore during the British Raj in pre-independent India.

The reason for Manisha Koirala’s hiatus was that she got diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2012 before returning to acting five years later with the movie Dear Maya. Koirala became cancer free later, and has since raised awareness about ovarian cancer.

Even during the shoot of Heeramandi, Koirala has to deal with the mental toll of filming a grand show made at an epic scale while trying to give her best performance.

In a new interview with NDTV, Koirala spoke about the same, detailing the effects of feeling depressed during the shoot of Heeramandi.

Koirala said, “Being impacted by cancer, I know how important your body, mind, and health are. How intertwined they are. How dependable they are. Sometimes when I'm in a deep depression… Even now sometimes I go into depression. When I was doing Heeramandi, it consumed me… My mood swings were constantly fluctuating. And I just knew, ‘Sail through this phase and once this is out, focus on your health.’”

This isn’t the first time that Manisha Koirala has worked with Sanjay Leela Bhansali. The actress was the lead opposite Nana Patekar and Salman Khan in the movie Khamoshi: The Musical, which was Bhansali’s directorial debut.

Talking about working with Bhansali, Koirala said she waited 28 years for “Sanjay to call,” saying it was an honor to work with “that genius.” When speaking about her role in Heeramandi, Koirala said, “It was possible only because of… Sanjay Leela Bhansali… He directed each of us… with a lot of detail that we looked so good. We don't know what we have done. He extracts it from you.”

Heeramandi: The Diamond Bazaar also stars Richa Chadha, Aditi Rao Hydari, Sharmin Segal, Sanjeeda Shaikh, Fardeen Khan, Shekhar Suman, Adhyayan Suman, and Taha Shah Badussha.