Ranked By

1.7K votes

447 voters

Voting Rules

Vote for your favorite movies, regardless of critic reviews or how big the role was.

List of the best Manisha Koirala movies, ranked best to worst with movie trailers when available. Manisha Koirala's highest grossing movies have received a lot of accolades over the years, earning millions upon millions around the world. The order of these top Manisha Koirala movies is decided by how many votes they receive, so only highly rated Manisha Koirala movies will be at the top of the list. Manisha Koirala has been in a lot of films, so people often debate each other over what the greatest Manisha Koirala movie of all time is. If you and a friend are arguing about this then use this list of the most entertaining Manisha Koirala films to end the squabble once and for all.

If you think the best Manisha Koirala role isn't at the top, then upvote it so it has the chance to become number one. The greatest Manisha Koirala performances didn't necessarily come from the best movies, but in most cases they go hand in hand.

List features films like Raja Ko Rani Se Pyar Ho Gaya, I Am.

"This list answers the questions, "What are the best Manisha Koirala movies?" and "What are the greatest Manisha Koirala roles of all time?"

Manisha Koirala is no stranger to working with popular directors, including Mahesh Bhatt, Ram Gopal Varma and Kasinadhuni Viswanath.

Most divisive: Loha

Over 400 Ranker voters have come together to rank this list of The 60+ Best Manisha Koirala Movies

1

Shah Rukh Khan, Preity Zinta, Malaika Arora Khan

Released : 1998

Directed by : Mani Ratnam

Dil Se is a 1998 Bollywood, romantic thriller film in the backdrop of terrorism, directed by Mani Ratnam. The film stars Shahrukh Khan and Manisha Koirala in lead roles while Preity Zinta appears in a supporting role. Mani Ratnam also co-wrote the screenplay for the film. It is the third in Ratnam's trilogy of terror films that depict human relationships against a background of Indian politics and military, after Roja and Bombay. Noted for its non linear screenplay, Dil Se was shot in Himachal, Kashmir, Assam, Delhi, Kerala, and other parts of India and Bhutan over a period of 55 days. The film is considered an example of Indian Parallel Cinema. The highly stylized film won awards for cinematography, audiography, choreography, and music, among others. The film was a success overseas earning $975,000 and £537,930 in the UK, becoming the first Indian film to enter the top 10 in the United Kingdom box office charts. The film won two National Film Awards, and six Filmfare Awards.

2

Arvind Swami, Manisha Koirala, Nassar

Released : 1995

Directed by : Mani Ratnam

Shekar (Arvind Swamy) and Shaila (Manisha Koirala) are in love, and although neither of their parents approve of their relationship -- he is Hindu, she is Muslim -- they decide to run off and get married. Shekar and Shahla have twin sons and raise the boys to appreciate both of their families' faiths and cultures, but the civil unrest in Bombay results in a horrific situation that causes Shekar and Shahla's parents to set aside their differences in order to save their children and grandchildren.

3

Salman Khan, Nana Patekar, Helen

Released : 1996

Directed by : Sanjay Leela Bhansali

Khamoshi: The Musical is a 1996 Indian musical drama film which was released on 9 August 1996. It starred Nana Patekar, Manisha Koirala, Salman Khan, Seema Biswas and Helen, and marked Sanjay Leela Bhansali's directorial debut. The film won several awards but flopped at the box office, grossing 77.5 million in India.

4

Rani Mukerji, Aamir Khan, Anil Kapoor

Released : 1999

Directed by : Indra Kumar

Mann is a 1999 Indian Hindi romantic drama film directed by Indra Kumar. The film stars popular actors Aamir Khan, Manisha Koirala and Anil Kapoor. Rani Mukerji also makes a special appearance in the movie. The movie is a remake of old classic Bheegi Raat starring Ashok Kumar, Meena Kumari and Pradeep Kumar, which is inspired from the Hollywood movie An Affair to Remember. This is Aamir and Manisha's second movie together after Akele Hum Akele Tum. The film was remade in the same year in Tollywood titled Ravoyi Chandamama starring Akkineni Nagarjuna, Anjala Zhaveri, Keerthi Reddy and Jagapati Babu.

5

Aamir Khan, Paresh Rawal, Rakesh Roshan

Released : 1995

Directed by : Mansoor Khan

Akele Hum Akele Tum is a 1995 Indian Hindi musical drama romance film. It starred Aamir Khan, Manisha Koirala and Master Adil, and was directed by Mansoor Khan. The music is by Anu Malik and the lyrics are by Majrooh Sultanpuri. The plot of this film is based on 1979 Academy Award winning film Kramer vs. Kramer, starring Meryl Streep and Dustin Hoffman. The film clashed with Ram Jaane starring Shah Rukh Khan. While Ram Jaane did an above average business at the box office, Akele Hum Akele Tum was declared blockbuster.

6

Anupam Kher, Anil Kapoor, Jackie Shroff

Released : 1994

Directed by : Vidhu Vinod Chopra

1942: A Love Story is a 1994 Bollywood film starring Anil Kapoor, Manisha Koirala, Jackie Shroff, Anupam Kher, Danny Denzongpa, and Pran. The film was the first ever to be given a U/A rating while featuring a scene, previously considered inappropriate for young children, showing the actors kissing. The film was highly acclaimed for its music, songs, picturization, cinematography, lyrics and the portrayal of its leading lady Manisha Koirala, a turning point for her career. The film was released some time after the death of the music director, Rahul Dev Burman. The film received nine Filmfare Awards. This is the first Indian film to use Dolby Stereo.