I know there is a thread Telegraph 1986, but this has not been prompting much response recently, so I thought it might be appropriate to go for Telegraph names and history --Something that people with memories of the paper can add to.

Let me begin by listing the editors of the paper, starting with a guy called Benson, who was the first Editor in 1855. He didn't stay long, and nobody seems to be sure what his Christian name was! All that is known is he was a Scot.

Other editors:

Mr Pearce (printer) 1855-1858

William Shepherdson 1858-1864

William C. Leng 1864-1902 --a key man in exposing William Broadhead as the man behind the trades union outrages.

R.H. Dunbar 1902-1910 --It seems likely that he was editor in all but name for many years during the Leng era, for Leng would be too busy with public matters to do much editing.

David M. Sutherland 1910-1912. He died in late 1951, aged 77.

John Oakley 1912-1937

F.K (Keith) Gardiner 1937-1955. He was also conected with Neepsend Steel in later life, and he was vice chairman of Sheffield Wednesday FC.

Bill Lyth 1955-1962

David Hopkinson 1962-1964. Won the Journalist of the Year award.

Michael Finley 1964-1969

J.D. M. (Michael) Hides 1969-1983

Peter Darling 1983-1986

If anyone has any biogaphical info on any of these people, especially the pre-1962 editors, it will be welcome.

Assistant/deputy editors.

Frederick Clifford

Charles Fraser Cameron

W. H. Hutchinson

William "Bill" Duck

Barry Askew. He was later editor of the News of the World.

Michael Crouch

Tony Fry

David Fitzpatrick

Leader Writers

Alexander Bell, 1890s

Harold Bunting

Alex Hartley

Peter Tinniswood --became a great writer --a man with a terrific sense of humour.

John Barry --he later moved to the United States, and in 2009 is still contributing to Newsweek.

Tony Cliffe. Was a producer at BBC Manchester (redio) in later years. In his tie in Sheffield he was the theatre critic. Does anyone know where he is these days?

News Editors/Chief Reporters:

W. R.M. Thwaites

Leslie F. Daniells –he was also Industrial Correspondent for some years, and then editor of Quality of Sheffield at the Chamber of Commerce.

Alf Dow –he was later training officer, then worked as Press Officer at Newton Chambers.

Ernest Taylor. He was one of the great characters of Sheffield journalism.

George Simpson

Cyril Dove. He had some connection with the Waggon & Horses at Millhouses.

Colin Graham. In his early years he did an angling column, and later did a jazz column called Longfellow's Log.

Michael Finley

Geoff Baylis –he later went to New Zealand, and was very successful, winning awards for his work. Geoff married Linda Dyson, who was a feature writer/reporter on the Telegraph.

Brian Stevenson. He went back to Barrow in his later years.

Barry Lloyd-Jones

Michael Corner (He later edited the new weekly Sheffield Weekly Gazette and The Star)

Eric Walker. He was later PRO to the Midland Bank.

Clive Jones.

Eric Barr

Bob Farrer

Neil Thacker

Chief Sub Editors

Frederick Percy Dickinson (from circa 1901-1911)

Tudor Thomas

J.H. Wiggins

Ken Statham

Jack Westwood

Stuart Machin

Note: Alf Martin, who was sports editor of the old SDT before World War I, was elected national vice-president of the NUJ in April 1916, and a year later becasme president. I would be very inteerested to know if anyone has any information on this man.

If anyone reading this worked on the editorial staff, please post details of dates and positions. If any member of your family was a reporter or sub-editor on the paper, and you have some details, please share them with us.

Here is some info from the Obituary of William SHEPHERDSON, one of the editors you mentioned.

Driffield Times, Oct 25, 1884

MR WILLIAM SHEPHERDSON

By J. Browne, Bridlington Quay

The announcement of the death, on Sunday week, of Mr Wm Shepherdson, journalist, will be received with sympathetic regret, not only by his own immediate relatives, but by an extensive number of literary and musical connections in various parts of the kingdom, to whom he was well known and by whom he was much respected.

As may be generally known in this town he was the eldest son of the late Mr George Shepherdson, cabinet maker and builder, and brother of Mr J.F. Shepherdson, of this place, architect and builder.

Deceased was born at Driffield on the 22nd November 1817, and had he lived to the 22nd of next month, he would consequently have attained his 67th year. He was brought up to his father's business, which he continued to follow until he married in 1841, when he commenced business on his own account here, and afterwards in Hull. He always had a taste for literary and scientific pursuits. He took great interest in the Driffield mechanics Institute from its commencement and was for several years, its secretary.

Literary pursuits being more consonant to his tastes than those of a mechanical character, he obtained the appointment of secretary to the Chester Mechanics Institute in 1854. After remaining there a year he was engaged on the staff of the Sheffield Daily Telegraph, then about to be brought out; but which, after surmounting some difficulty in its infancy, soon rose into notice and prosperity. It was one of the earliest provincial "dailies" and is now one of the most ably conducted and widest known papers in the provinces.

After a dozen years of arduous duty, from being originally the reporter he became the editor, and ultimately managing director and part proprietor. On the paper coming into the possession of a new firm in 1869, he retired from the concern. During his residence in Sheffield he took part in public matters, and at the municipal election for the borough in 1868 he was elected town councillor for St George's Ward.

He had built a beautiful residence in the suburbs of the borough and associated with many of he prominent members of the town, amongst whom was the millionaire, Sir John Brown, of whom he was a favourite protégé. Sir John was desirous of becoming a candidate for parliamentary honours and his claims for representing Sheffield were ably advocated in the Telegraph.

Born of musical ancestors, he inherited a love of the 'divine art' and early manifested a musical talent. He had an abiding affection for music and musical instruments – his favourite instruments being the organ and the violoncello. When a young man at home his musical genius assumed a practical shape in amateur organ building; and when an organ was required for the congregational chapel in his native town the order was given to him to construct the first organ which was introduced into the old chapel. On the erection of a new chapel some years after, an organ more in keeping with the site and the surroundings was considered desirable and the original organ was replaced by the present one.

On leaving Sheffield in 1869 he retired to York. On settling there he commenced the publication of the Yorkshire Orchestra, a musical periodical which he ably conducted, but unfortunately it did not prove a commercial success, and after it had existed for year it was given up. He soon after removed to Hull and obtained a literary employment on the Hull press. For some time he conducted the Eastern Morning News during the indisposition of Mr Hunt, the editor, by whom he was much respected. About that time, a warm controversy arose in the columns of the Eastern Morning News about the management of the Hull General Infirmary. Mr Shepherdson ably supported the side of the advocates of the existing state of management, and on a vacancy occurring in the secretaryship of the Infirmary he received the appointment. On entering on his duties he at once found a congenial subject for the occupation of his mind and his pen in tracing out the origin, progress, and the then state of the Infirmary. The result was the production of an interesting book, entitled,

"Reminiscenses of the Hull General Infirmary, 1873."

The work was sold for the benefit of the Institution. It was such an exhaustive account of this valuable hospital, and its claims for public support were so strikingly set forth that the book at once attracted fresh interest to this useful Institution and was the means of inducing many wealthy and benevolent benefactors to give large donations to its funds, amounting to several thousands of pounds.

He had long felt a strong desire to retire to some rural abode, not only for the benefits of his failing health, but where he could quietly pursue his literary labours and when his eyes and his brain should be weary he might be able to look upon the trees and green fields to rest and refresh them. He therefore removed to a pleasant residence in the outskirts of Beverley where he remained three years. During this period he conducted the Beverley Echo, a weekly paper published in the town. His health now began to fast decline, so much so that he was obliged to give up his literary occupations.

A long cherished desire to return to his native town and spend the remainder of his days there was now gratified. He removed to Driffield about a year ago and he entertained a hope that his native air would be beneficial to his health; but Hope – as she often does – "told a flattering tale." The strain on his mental system could not be restored. He had a severe stroke, he continued to get weaker and weaker and a few weeks ago, he took to his bed never to rise from it again; the death struggle came, and the vital sparks fled from its clay tenement about noon on Sunday, the 12th instant. He married Miss Emiley Thorney, daughter of Mr J.D. Thorney, of Hull, accountant, who survives him, as well as several sons and daughters.

His publications are numerous. He was a constant contributor of articles to newspapers, and to musical and other periodicals, amongst which was Chambers' Edinburgh Journal. For several years he wrote leading articles and musical notices for the London Musical Standard, a weekly journal of music. In September, 1862, Mr Shepherdson brought out

"A descriptive accont of the great organ, built by Herr Schulze for the Parish Church, Doncaster,"

which is an elaborate description of this grand instrument.

This was followed in 1873 by his work entitled, "The organ; its construction, purchase and preservation," with a beautiful illustration of the magnificent front of the organ case in the Hull Parish Church, drawn by Mr A.F. Lydon, late of Driffield.

"The new Hull guide, a modern picture of Hull, and the visitors' hand-book to the various objects of interest in Hull and the neighbourhood," was written by him during his residence in that town.

In 1876, he wrote his best book – "Starting a daily in the provinces," which is a graphic and amusing account of the mysterious manner in which the Sheffield Daily Telegraph was originated and its subsequent career, in which he had been so closely connected from its commencement. He also commenced compiling the "Modern history of Sheffield," but he did not live to complete it.

As already stated, Mr Shepherdson was passionately fond of music, and his opinion on musical matters was universally respected.

"He strove," says the Sheffield Telegraph, "to elevate music to its proper position as a fine art, and he had always the interest of the profession at heart. The organ and organ building was a happy theme on which he wrote as a practical authority,"

and the Sheffield Independent remarks that,

"his opinion and advice with respect to organs were often solicited and acted upon, and that his most permanent work and by which he is most widely known in the musical world is the one on, "the organ and organ building."

He numbered amongst his musical friends the late Sir Michael Costa, the great musical conductor; the late popular composer, organist and organ constructor, Mr Henry Smart, London; Dr Spark, organist, Leeds, and editor of The Organ; Dr Rogers, Doncaster; Mr John Ella; Mr R.W. Hammond, the late editor, and Mr F.H. Turpin, the present editor of the Musical Standard