Beschreibung

Listing Template 2018 Home About Us View Feedback Contact Us VANITY FAIR Lithograph print THE SHEFFIELD DAILY TELEGRAPH W.C Leng SPY (VF22)Click image to enlargeDescription'THE SHEFFIELD DAILY TELEGRAPH(SPY)'A fine original antique lithograph published for Vanity Fair.Overall size including margins approx 375mm x245mm including margins.Generally good condition with perhaps some light age spotting in the margins.For nearly fifty years, from 1868 to 1914, Vanity Fair displayed its political, social and literary wares weekly for the nineteenth-century Pilgrim. Inviting its readers to recognize the vanities of human existence, the publication, through its original format, prose and coloured caricatures, became the envy and model of other Society magazines. The most successful Society magazine in the history of English journalism was the result of the guiding genius of its founder and editor, Thomas Gibson Bowles (1842-1922), set against a background of historical circumstances ranging from the more mundane technological breakthroughs in printing and lithography to the sublime, the British Empire at its height. Written by and for the Victorian and Edwardian establishment, Vanity Fair was the magazine for those in the know. Members of the Smart Set delighted in finding themselves caricatured in prose and picture. For them, Vanity Fair summarized each week the important events of their world. It reviewed the newest opening in the West End and the latest novel in the club's library; it aroused their curiosity and envy; it angered and amused them. The news and Society columns, the book and play reviews, the serialized novels and word games and the colour lithograph caricatures give us a glimpse into the lives and reputations of men and women who achieved either lasting or fleeting fame and fortune during the heyday of the British Empire. The caricatures, which have become the magazine's chief legacy, fascinate the scholar, the lay person and the collector for their historical and biographical value and their satirical and artistic quality. Although Vanity Fair is best remembered for these chromolithographic caricatures, the magazine was, at its zenith, recognized and respected in its totality for its features, prose, advertising and format. View Our Categories Decorative Prints World Wide Maps Scotland Maps Architecture Design England Maps Royalty About UsWe specialise in selling all items that can be considered to be Antique Paper. * PRINTS * MAPS * HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS * POSTAL HISTORY * BOOKS * POSTERS * STAMPS * POSTCARDS * EPHEMERA And anything else that is considered Antique and made of Paper. ALL OF OUR ITEMS ARE ORIGINAL ANTIQUES - NOT MODERN COPIES. We are also very keen buyers of anything similar and especially after better collections, original archives, whole libraries and better single items and have Â£250,000 in cash funds at anyone time to buy the right items. Contact UsIf you have any questions then please do not hesitate to contact us through the eBay messaging system. Feedback We will always help you to have a 100% positive happy buying experience. Contact us if you are unhappy about any aspect of your purchase from us. We only want five star feedback from you so buy with confidence. Bestandsnummer des Verkäufers 384347805789_f8a0ca8

Verkäufer kontaktieren