Norfolk Ridge is a small community in the Grizzlies, consisting of 13 buildings. It is currently territory under the Council of Hrotagerinnvard. Its Chief-Bearer is Gjaen.

Etymology[]

The name "Norfolk Ridge" is a combinations of the words "Norfolk" and "Ridge"

"Norfolk" can be seen as a portmanteau of the words "Nord" and "Folk." While it is called a ridge because of its closeness to the Nova-Bjorn Hills.

History[]

The town of Norfolk Ridge was founded nearly 300 years ago, by noble people, including one named Avenaef Wind-Skars. It served as a minor outpost during the First Grizzlies Civil War; leading to the community to grow from there because of the occupation of soldiers there. This is also where the Council of Hrotagerinnvard would peacefully annex the community under its banner.

After the annexing of Norfolk Ridge, Avenaef Wind-Skars had became the first Chief-Bearer of Norfolk Ridge.

At 3 E, 130; it's believed that a small clan of vampires were at war with Norfolk Ridge's army, after the sudden disappearance of former guard captain Nasimel Culler, along with him randomly being found at the entrance of Dragonsreach nearly an hour later. Nasimel claimed that he had no recollection of what happened between the hour months after the event occured, but he does know that vampires apparently went into a short-lived civil war with the community, despite this; nobody at the town mentioned this, and there were no sightings of this ever happening.

At 3 E, 190; the Orrene Clan kidnappings occured at Norfolk Ridge. These were attacks by the Orrene people; who tried to take over the community, ultimately; they captured 4 people; 1 of whom died, 2 fled to Hrotagerinnvard, and 1 decided to return back to Norfolk Ridge.

During the Oblivion Crisis; Norfolk Ridge was one of the communities affected by the invading Dremora, leading to 5 deaths, and 41 injured people before the Dremora were stopped.

At 4 E, 50, the Gwinnett Family attempted to conquer Norfolk Ridge in a particularly disasterous military expedition. They ended up failing to take the location over, but did end up killing then Chief-Bearer Froa during the event.

At 4 E, 95, a peculiar High Elf named Aralas had visited Norfolk and has since lived there.

Nearly 11 years before the events of TES V, its believed the remenants of Morihaus Horseback went into the community to repent their sins.

Government[]

Main Article: The Government of Norfolk Ridge[]

The Government of Norfolk Ridge consists of 1 member in the Council of Hrotagerinnvard, whom is under the title Chief-Bearer. The system also has its own system of security, with a guard captain controlling matters regarding guards.

Characters[]

Abael the Red

Aralas

Criin

Deadwood

Gjaen

Geston

Grepis Vunin

Hovald Hawks-Teeth

Ramell

Tar-Ma

Places[]

Norfolk Ridge has 6 houses, 4 stores, 2 inns, a statue of a horse in the center of town with some benchs near it, and a Manor. It also has an unmarked location nearby; called the Norfolk Ridge Shipwreck.

Norfolk Ridge Shipwreck[]

This location is a small shipwreck found northwest of the town, near some land at which it sunk at. Although there are no ways to get inside of it, there is small holes; of which one has led to a chest to fall out. This chest; when unlocked, has a lot of gold and gems to take.

Nearby locations[]

Norfolk Ridge has 3 nearby locations;