In the pleasant barangay of Paliparan in Dasmariñas, Cavite province, only 30 kilometers south of busy and bustling Metro Manila, you will find a natural sanctuary of greenery and picturesque landscaped surroundings that will be a true pleasure to come home to for many years to come. We invite you to discover a world of peace and serenity in Norfolk Ridge, in Greenwoods - this collection of contemporary detached houses is part of the prime, 80-hectare Greenwoods development by NorthPine Land, a master-planned community of seven distinctive residential projects - Greenwood Heights, Parkview, Primrose Place, Rosewood, The Prime, Greenwoods and Norfolk Ridge - each with its own character, to cater to the rapidly growing demand for quality and affordable housing for middle-income Filipino families.

Despite its proximity to the city and easy access to work and shopping, The Norfolk Ridge residences are part of a community that enjoys the benefits of lush parklands, unbeatable amenities and a whole host of other facilities included for the exclusive use of the residents in this private enclave, where safety and security is assured by a perimeter fence and 24 hour guard services, where children can run and play in fresh air and sunshine and where you will have plenty of recreational and sporting facilities at your disposal such as a swimming pool, lap pool, covered badminton courts, basketball and tennis courts, woodland nature trails and even a fishing area. The surrounding area around Norfolk Ridge has been specially planted with beautiful evergreen Norfolk Pine or Araucaria trees, giving the entire neighborhood a naturally beautiful Alpine-inspired character and pine scented atmosphere.

Beautiful contemporary styling, warm ochre, cream and earth tones and well-designed, functional spaces are the hallmarks of all the homes at Norfolk Ridge. At Norfolk Ridge, you will have a selection of house models with generous lot and floor areas ranging from 165 square meters to 225 square meters that will suit every family's taste and needs.

Depending on the model type, Norfolk Ridge homes feature 3 bedrooms, walk in closets in the master bedroom, a living area, a dining area, a den/guest room, kitchen, powder room, maid's room, service area, lanai, family room, master bathroom and toilet, two common bathrooms and toilets, 2-car garages, balcony and porch.

The house models available at Norfolk Ridge are:

Torrey Pine

An elegant, Mediterranean inspired home with a natural stone facade front portico, Torrey Pine homes are two-storey detached houses with 3 bedrooms and an additional maid's room. Torrey Pine houses have a total floor area of 194 square meters on a lot area of 165 square meters.

Scots Pine

A modern, stylish home with an attractive ochre and white external color scheme complemented by a natural grey stone-facaded front portico and a large balcony, Scots Pine homes are two-storey detached houses with 3 bedrooms and an additional maid's room. Scots Pine homes have a total floor area of 197 square meters, on a lot area of 165 square meters.

Red Pine

A impressive and spacious family home, Red Pine homes have a cream and white external color scheme complemented by a natural brownstone-facaded front portico and a large balcony. Red Pine homes are two-storey detached houses with 3 bedrooms and an additional maid's room. These homes have a nicely spacious total floor area of 265 square meters on a lot area of 225 square meters.

All homes at Norfolk Ridge will have a telephone and a cable tv outlet, provision for air-conditioning units in each bedroom, and one shower heater for master bathroom. The prices of homes at Norfolk Ridge range from PHP7,200,000 to PHP8,700,000.

NorthPine Land is the result of a 1996 joint venture between Hongkong Land, Jardine Davies, Metrobank, Equitable Bank and San Miguel Properties, which was called Jardine Land. In 2006 the name was changed to NorthPine Land Inc. The company is committed to building quality, affordable residential developments in the Philippines, and since its inception its has gone from strength to strength building a solid reputation amongst homebuyers in the Philippines for the quality and value-for-money of its sold-out residential developments. Some of the other projects currently being understaken by NorthPine Land are Montana Views in San Fernando, Kahaya Place and Wind Crest in Dasmariñas, Forest Ridge in San Isidro, Antipolo, Kohana Grove in Silang, Cavite and South Hampton in Sta Rosa, Laguna.