Greenwoods - Norfolk Ridge is located strategically to prominent schools, hospitals, malls, recreational establishments and renowned beaches. The offices, learning centers and malls in Bonifacio Global City and Makati are easily reached through Upper McKinley Road. Even Ortigas is a stress-free drive away via the EDSA Kalayaan flyover or C-5 Road. If you have business trip, the international airport is accessible via Lawton Avenue. And the city's southern areas are minutes away using Sampaguita West Ramps 1 and 2.

The city of Dasmariñas is the largest city in Cavite province in the Philippines in terms of its size and population, with just under 700,000 people spread over 90 square kilometers. Dasmariñas is located just 30 kilometers south of Manila, and the rapid expansion of the Metropolitan Manila area has meant that Dasmariñas enjoys the knock-on effects of this growth – there has been rapid development in this city, and it has welcomed an influx of commercial, educational, medical and other institutions in recent years.

Many affluent Manila families choose to live in Dasmariñas due a combination of its proximity to the capital city and the suburban lifestyle here. There are also many foreign residents in Dasmariñas, including Koreans, Chinese, Japanese, Indians, Americans and Europeans.

The pleasant barangay of Paliparan, located south east of Dasmariñas, is one of the wealthiest barangays in Dasmariñas due to the presence of businesses and manufacturing here. Paliparan was once open grassland with no trees which provided wide open spaces for traditional kite-flying, dating back to the days of Spanish colonization.

These days, the affluent barangay of Paliparan has an extensive range of business, commercial and educational facilities to cater to the local and foreign resident population here.

These services including world class public and private hospitals, and you will not have to go very far from home in Norfolk Ridge to find the right healthcare for yourself and your family. The hospitals and medical centers located near Norfolk Ridge include:

St Mazenod Hospital

San Jose Hospital and Trauma Center

Asia Medic Family Hospital and Medical Center

St Paul Hospital Cavite

De La Salle University Medical Center

Pangamutan ng Dasmariñas

Dasmariñas City Medical Center

Metro South Medical Center

EAC Medical Center - Cavite

For all your daily grocery needs, you can find fresh foods and other necessities at the nearby Kadiwa Market. A little further afield, there are numerous shopping malls located within easy distance from home in Norfolk Ridge. These include:

SM City Dasmariñas

SM Mall of Asia

Robinsons Place Dasmariñas

Robinsons Pala-Pala

The District Dasmariñas

For families in Norfolk Ridge with school-going children, there are numerous public, private and international schools within a few kilometers from home: