Thanks!

One good turn deserves another?

Calgary Unix Users Group (CUUG) is hosting an interesting (YMMV) meeting in April…

http://www.cuug.ab.ca/

April General Meeting

YYCIX: Calgary Internet Exchange

Speaker: Theo de Raadt, Founder, OpenBSD

Five years ago, Calgary was the most populous city in the G8/G20 without an internet exchange. As a result, so-called boomerang routes were very common. Traffic sent from one local network to another local network would loop through Vancouver, Seattle, Toronto, Chicago, or even further afield.

An internet exchange is really just an “open switch” where networks can interconnect. Some other internet-improving services can also be established at this point to make our Alberta networking experience better.

YYCIX was built by a collection of volunteers who made arrangements with local partners to bring this function to the City. Theo de Raadt was one of those volunteers, and he will present an update on how things have progressed and where they may be headed next.

Theo de Raadt is widely recognized as a world class security expert. In October 1995, Theo founded the OpenBSD project. OpenBSD is the most secure of the publicly available operating systems.

In 1999, Theo created OpenSSH with other members of OpenBSD. It is now incorporated into all Unix systems plus hundreds of other network enabled products. It has become the most “vendor re-used” piece of open source software, with more than 95% of the SSH market.

Theo was awarded the Free Software Foundation’s 2004 Award for the Advancement of Free Software, for recognition as founder and project leader of the OpenBSD and OpenSSH projects. His work has also led to significant contributions to other BSD distributions and GNU/Linux. Of particular note is Theo’s work on OpenSSH, his leadership of OpenBSD, his commitment to Free Software and his advancement of network security.

Theo is also well known for his advocacy of free software drivers. He has long been critical of developers of Linux and other free platforms for their tolerance of non-free drivers and acceptance of non-disclosure agreements.

Central Library 616 Macleod Trail S.E.

Basement meeting room

5:30 PM, Tuesday, April 25, 2017

Snacks at 17:30. Meeting begins at 18:00.

Guests are welcome but must RSVP to office at CUUG no less than 48 hours prior to the meeting or pay $10 at the door.

Theo is always entertaining. And the YYCIX is a worthwhile project (IMHO), so there’s that too?

Cheers!,

DD