Last year, we announced our plans to migrate the Spiceworks Community to a new platform. Thank you to everyone who has tried out the Community " Playground " so far; your input is helping shape our future!

On February 29, 2024, we’ll start moving to the new platform and aim to complete it by Monday, March 4, 2024. At that time, the old platform will no longer be accessible.

We want to inform you of things occurring between now and the full migration and what you can do to prepare for it.

Dates to be aware of:

Monday, February 26th: We’ll perform a dry-run migration and will pause some action-based emails. This should not affect transactional emails or any emails you subscribe to for New Topic and New Reply notifications.

Note that the Community Playground may be inaccessible during this time.

Thursday, February 29th, at 6 PM CST ( what time is that for me? ), we will put the Spiceworks Community in full maintenance mode. At this point forward, the “vintage” version of the Spiceworks Community platform will no longer be available.

Friday, March 1st, we do not anticipate the re-platformed Spiceworks Community to be accessible. Starting the previous night and through the weekend, we will be performing and evaluating the migration, so you may have periods where the site is publicly accessible but then goes back into maintenance mode.

Monday, March 4th, the Community should be fully re-platformed and accessible. We will have a topic featured on the Community homepage, notifying you that this migration is complete and providing information to help you better get acquainted with the features and functionality of the new platform.

What should I do to prepare?

Most content and information will be transferred to the new platform, but not everything will be, and expect some things to be different. For a deep dive into this, check out the first reply to this topic. But here are a few things you can do to ensure you’re ready to go.

Usernames & URL names. Having your “Username” and “URL name” match as much as possible makes you easier to find and tag in the new platform. Details on how to update yours can be found in this topic: Prepare Now for the New Community Site! Do your Username and URL Name Match?

Collections. The new platform calls this feature “Bookmarks.” Your previous Collections will not migrate over. You will have to temporarily store any links you want to keep in another location, and then you can add anything you want to bookmark once the new platform is accessible.

Snap! email notifications. To continue to receive email notifications when the daily Snap! news brief is published, you’ll want to configure your current Community settings before we migrate to ensure that you are both “Following” and receiving email notifications. To confirm your settings are correct, visit the Snap! forum and select the pull-down menu. You should see “Stop email notifications” and “Unfollow”. If you see “Get email notifications” instead, emails are not enabled until you turn it on. If you only want to see the Snap! in your Feed, you must simply be “Following” the current group. In the new platform, this setting will be called “Watching First Post.”

Profile Projects. This is one of the elements of profiles that is not migrating to the new platform. We know some members have invested time and are proud of their projects, so we recommend backing these up.

Account Merges. Part of this migration is adjusting our identity and access management service. Due to these changes, we will not be able to merge accounts once we’re fully re-platformed, and we do not know when we may be able to in the future. If you have an older account that you’ve meant to merge the content into your existing account, you will want to have that done before Thursday, February 29th. Contact the team via community@spiceworks.com with the pertinent details to get assistance.

What does the future hold?

We’re committed to investing in our Community, and this re-platforming marks a significant milestone towards that. Our primary aim with this move is to establish a stronger foundation for future improvements; it’s just the first step in a series of enhancements we have planned. This migration has allowed us to look hard at what has been successful while looking toward what we feel is necessary for the future.

We know that change can be difficult. Many of us have been using the Spiceworks Community platform for years, and adapting to a new one can take time. However, the new platform offers improved performance, a significantly enhanced mobile experience, and features that have been long requested, such as dark mode. But we are most excited about what this platform will allow us to do moving forward. We are already exploring more updates, including re-envisioning old features, adding new ones, and tweaking existing ones.

Your input is incredibly valuable in shaping our Community. Do not hesitate to give us your feedback, including what you like, what you feel is missing, and any other constructive suggestions and criticism you have. Ultimately, the Spiceworks Community exists for you, and we want to ensure we’re building something that helps you get answers quicker, share your expertise, and connect with peers and colleagues.