Location Heber City, Utah, United States of America

SUMMARY

Heber City + Heber Valley Chamber of Commerce + The Community Alliance for Main Street are excited to announce Heber’s Art in Public Places Power Box Initiative. The goal of this initiative is to support the transformation of Heber’s historic downtown and expanded individual neighborhoods and quasi sub-communities in and around Heber City into a world class destination and hometown arts and culture collective.

DESCRIPTION

PLEASE THOROUGHLY READ THE INFORMATION BELOW BEFORE PROCEEDING TO THE APPLICATION FORM

ELIGIBILITY Open to all artists. Individuals younger than 18 years must have a parent's or guardian’s application and signature, for and in their behalf.

OPENING APPLLICATION DATE

Monday July 8th 2024

PROJECT SUMMARY We are seeking artists or artist teams to create paintings upon the various Heber Light and Power Boxes in and around Heber City, including into the outer reaches of individual neighborhoods. The surfaces of these boxes are coated painted metal, or metal siding (see pics and map below). The lengths vary generally between a two to four feet in length height and width. It is strictly prohibited to cover or alter any numbering upon the boxes. These are identifying marks and must be maintained and left visible. Any paintings or murals would be sized to fit the individual boxes.

The selected artwork should consider the themes of welcoming visitors, outdoor sports destination and activities, wildlife, local mountain and forest scenes, community, local historical agricultural or nostalgic images, historic Heber images, or variations of these themes.

It is encouraged that the artwork also be of a creative nature to serve as an social media photo-op for visitors or citizens.

2024 PROJECT TIMELINE/SCHEDULE

Monday July 8th 2024 through Thursday September 5th 2024: Applications/submittals are open.

Beginning Monday July 22nd through November 1st 2024: Submittal reviews by City Staff. During this time, weather permitting, artists will be vetted, selected and assigned power boxes. Initially and as a condition for selection, artists will submit sketches of their respective arts projects to City Staff, by completing the application below , to ensure project meets desired outcomes.

Selection: Throughout the period of July 22nd through November 1st 2024 applicants will be reviewed, selected and assigned boxes throughout the City.

July 22nd through November 1st 2024: Paintings will take place (exact dates are flexible within this timeframe and will be negotiated with individual artists).

Selected Artists, or teams of Artists will be required to execute an agreement detailing terms of the Artists’ engagement, to assure time lines, Heber Light and Power policies and restrictions, and quality of paint and work.

Artists will be compensated with a sense of civic pride and the personal satisfaction of having your work displayed in the most public of settings.

HOW TO APPLY

To apply, complete reading the summary description on this page, and select that you have read and understand the Summary and Description of the Heber Electrical Box Mural Painting Initiative.

Then, below, select "Yes" and select the "Continue" button to fill out the application and submit your work samples. Needed to be Included with the Application are the following items:

Application Form

Portfolio consisting of at least 1 previous work sample—art samples preferred—and reference information.

Detailed sketch and/or colored replica of proposed mural art work.

If you have questions about the application, please email shansen@heberut.gov or call 435-657-7899.

SELECTION PROCESS: City Staff will select artists and assign boxes based on the following list of criteria: • Artistic quality of submitted designs and past work samples • Appropriateness of artwork in scale and imagery to be visually effective • Relevance to the applicable themes as listed in the project descriptions.

BOX TYPES AND MAP OF LOCATIONS

Junction Box

SAMPLES and IDEAS of ART WORK

ABOUT HEBER CITY AND THE BEAUTIFUL HEBER VALLEY

Heber City Utah, is located in a beautiful mountain valley just a short drive from the Wasatch Front. The area offers outstanding year-round outdoor recreation including golf, fly fishing, boating, and watersports, plus skiing and other winter sports. In summer, temperatures are usually cool and pleasant. In winter, abundant snowfall makes this a paradise for winter recreation. Several outstanding resorts and romantic bed and breakfast inns are located here. Please visit https://www.gohebervalley.com/ for more information on Heber City and the Beautiful Heber Valley.

To apply, follow the instructions below: