Crazy Town frontman Shifty Shellshock has died.

Reports are coming in from the United States, with multiple outlets confirming news of his passing. According to the Los Angeles County Medical Examiner’s website, the singer – real name Seth Binzer – was found dead at his residence in Los Angeles. A cause of death has yet to be disclosed; he was 49 years old.

Crazy Town will forever be tied to the cusp of the Millennium, with the band producing a succession of summer-ready hits. The immortal ‘Butterfly’ rode on an elastic bass line, while Shifty Shellshock’s vocal blended rap flows with rock crunch, and a hefty dose of pop into the bargain.

The group started almost a decade before that. Shifty Shellshock met Crazy Town co-founder Bret Mazur in 1992, the pair making music for years without success.

Crazy Town settled in 1999, with Shifty Shellshock and Bret Mazur joined by Rust Epique, James Bradley Jr. (aka JBJ), Doug Miller, Adam Goldstein (aka DJ AM) and Antonio Lorenzo “Trouble” Valli.

Debut album ‘The Gift Of Life’ was released in 1999, while a high-profile support slot alongside Red Hot Chili Peppers endeared the band to the West Coast band’s audience.

2000 single ‘Butterfly’ was a breakout moment, becoming an international hit. Second album ‘Darkhorse’ landed in 2002, but amid shifting landscapes it failed to find the same audience.

Shifty Shellshock embarked on solo endeavours, linking with British superstar DJ and producer Paul Oakenfold for ‘Starry Eyed Surprise’, before sharing an album under his own name.

Open about his troubles, the singer gave numerous interviews in which he divulged his experiences with depression, anxiety, and addiction. Appearing on VH1’s Celebrity Rehab, he was admitted to hospital in 2012 and fell into a coma. He later made a full recovery.

Crazy Town reformed for live dates, but in 2022 made headlines for a high profile spat with a former drummer. The same year, Shifty Shellshock was arrested for DUI.

Shellshock is survived by his three children, Halo, Gage and Phoenix.

One more time…