“Now it’s onto Chicago and let’s win there!” he said, flashing a peace sign, just before he was gunned down in a kitchen corridor of the Ambassador Hotel. Robert Francis Kennedy was running for president, was destined to be president, and then he lay drenched in his own blood in a crumpled heap on the floor. It was 5 June 1968. Kennedy died the next day.

55 years on, the tragedy of Kennedy’s assassination still looms large in US politics. RFK’s presidential bid was based on the construction of a new social coalition that united middle-class liberals and student radicals with Black community activists with migrant farm workers with forgotten mining communities in Appalachia. Kennedy was assembling this social coalition around a united vision of America’s possible future. RFK’s vision was not just repudiation of what was, but a dream of what could be — a dream cut short by gunshots in a kitchen corridor.

Instead of Kennedy, there was Richard Nixon, the politics of cynicism, and the cultivated backlash to the American Civil Rights movement. A belief in a better, fairer, more progressive and united America was crushed beneath the racism of Nixon’s “southern strategy”, the immorality of his bombing of Viet Nam, Cambodia, Laos, and the outright corruption of Watergate. Nixon set the United States on a path gleefully followed by successive Republican leaders until the GOP morphed into its modern form: less a party of responsible government than a loose coalition dominated by racist reactionaries, free-market ideologues, and conspiracy-minded fanatics.

The assassination of Robert Kennedy still haunts the United States. And in ways that are underappreciated, his death still haunts its president.

Joe Biden’s career will forever be linked to Robert Kennedy’s. Biden once nominated Bobby Kennedy as “the man who I guess I admire more than anyone else in American politics”. In his first bid for the presidency in 1987, Biden plagiarised Kennedy (as well as others) in a mistake that fatally derailed an already shambolic campaign. And now, as he prepares to seek re-election in 2024, Biden is facing off against none other than Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., Bobby Kennedy’s son, in the Democratic Primaries. Kennedy Jr. has garnered opprobrium among progressives, and among his own family, for his vitriolic brand of conspiracy mongering.

But the significance of RFK and his political dreaming has a deeper resonance for Biden, a connection almost always missed.

As Fintan O’Toole has argued, Biden has spent his career trying to wrap himself in the Kennedy mythos, drawing on a shared Irish Catholicism to position himself as a reincarnation of the famed Kennedy clan. He has been successful in unexpected ways. Adorning himself in the pallor of grief, he has assumed Robert Kennedy’s role as America’s “mourner in chief” — a role Kennedy had been foisted into after his older brother was killed. The awful grace of tragedy that fell upon each man enabled them to become the spokespeople of a nation’s collective trauma.

But is this the limit of their connection? Biden is too often understood as an apolitical president. Though the president himself does not lack politics, he is often represented in the press and by other commentators as an almost singular figure, too avuncular to have an ideology, to prone to malapropisms and embarrassing gaffes to be the purveyor of a political vision.

A deeper look reveals another, less expected, point of connection to Robert Kennedy: the moral commitment to political change that has guided Biden, imperfectly, through his entire career.

Senator Joe Biden announces his candidacy for president in 1987. (Photo by Mark Reinstein / Corbis via Getty Images)

Take the famous plagiarism scandal of 1987. Biden’s speech didn’t take Kennedy’s word for word, but it close enough to RFK’s famous phrasing that it could not be mistaken for anyone else. In most accounts, the story ends there – with an embarrassing mistake, one among many by good ol’ Joe. But what was the speech that Biden chose to repeat? What were the words, the message, that had engraved themselves on his political consciousness that Biden felt it vital to speak them while presenting himself to the public as a potential president?

Speaking at the University of Kansas as presidential candidate in 1968, Kennedy described the malaise gripping the United States what he saw as an obsession with accumulation that had commodified the most fundamental elements of human life. Economic metrics such as the gross national product, he declared, could not measure:

the health of our children, the quality of their education or the joy of their play. It does not include the beauty of our poetry, or the strength of our marriages, the intelligence of our public debate or the integrity of our public officials. It measures neither our wit nor our courage, neither our wisdom nor our devotion to our country. It measures everything, in short, except that which makes life worthwhile, and it can tell us everything about America except why we are proud that we are Americans.

Two decades later, Biden delivered his own critique of the excessive commodification of the substance of life: “That bottom line can tell us everything about our lives except that which makes life worthwhile, and it can tell us everything about America except that which makes us proud to be Americans.”

Twenty years after his death, Kennedy’s words continued deeply to resonate in the United States of America. The tragedy of American history is that another 27 years on, they resonate more strongly still.

Robert Kennedy’s was an unfinished dream, a transformative project derailed in a sudden act of political violence — too common a theme throughout American history. Just weeks before Kennedy was killed at the Ambassador Hotel, Martin Luther King, Jr. was gunned down at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis. There have been more than 130 mass shootings in the United States so far this year.

Senator Robert F. Kennedy before he was fatally shot on 5 June 1968 during his Presidential Campaign at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles. (Photo by: Frank Carroll / NBC NewsWire / Getty Images)

When he ran for the presidency in 1968, Kennedy faced a country that was fracturing, many feared beyond repair. The United States was embroiled in a pointless war it was clearly losing. The President had lost all credibility. The racist backlash against the Civil Rights movement was on the march. Armed reactionaries were mobilising. State violence was being met with protest and rioting. The institutions of American democracy were being critiqued and rejected on left and right. A new disenfranchised generation was tuning in and dropping out.

Politics was a place of cynicism — little more than the powerful coming together to protect their own interests. Where did that leave those devoid of social power: in the urban ghettos, the migrant worker camps, in working-class towns that were collapsing? The United States was being torn apart by its own contradictions.

RFK’s dream was based on his clear understanding of both that reality and the practical possibilities for change. His vision of the future was not perfect, and it may well have proven unattainable under the daily grind of governing. But one thing is unquestionable: his vision for America was a future much better than its present. That is a vision Biden shares.

President Joe Biden delivers the State of the Union address at the US Capitol in Washington, DC, 7 February 2023. (Photo by: Jacquelyn Martin / AP / Bloomberg via Getty Images)

Like Robert Kennedy, Biden understands the fractures of the 1960s — fractures that were never repaired and that are widening once more. Biden understands the terrible danger this instability poses to the United States. And Biden understands something that few commentators have been able adequately to grasp: that leadership requires a vision of a better future that is a realistic and compelling enough basis on which to build a new social coalition.

For Kennedy, the vision was the was restoration of a form of moral calibre to American democracy. For Biden, the task is the protection of American democracy itself. Biden’s promise to rebuild the middle class, restore moral leadership, and protect the structures and institutions of democratic life in the world’s predominant superpower is not simple sloganeering. It is not the usual political rhetoric so easily dismissed, dropped as soon as the electoral cycle ends. It is part of a political project pursued with dedication and conviction throughout Biden’s political life.

Joe Biden is no Robert Kennedy. But there is something that he seems to have grasped about RFK that few others in American political life could claim to comprehend. Kennedy’s assassination, like his brother’s before him, represented not just the death of a president and a presidential aspirant. They represented the death of a rare moment of possibility, where the nation’s long-term descent could have been not just reversed, but radically transformed.

The 2024 Democratic Party nominating convention will take place in Chicago. Biden has the chance to do what Robert Kennedy never could — to not just win the presidency, but to utilise the power of the office across two terms to transform the political consensus, and to restore a sense of moral vision and purpose amid the crisis.

In his famous speech at the University of Kansas, Kennedy inveighed against entrenched poverty and disadvantage amid so much wealth:

If we believe that we, as Americans, are bound together by a common concern for each other, then an urgent national priority is upon us. We must begin to end the disgrace of this other America.

Biden has the opportunity RFK was denied, if he has the courage to seize it. Now, it’s onto Chicago.

Emma Shortis is a Lecturer in the Social and Global Studies Centre at RMIT University, Melbourne.