The Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature consists of a cash prize of US$5,000, and publication worldwide in English translation by the American University in Cairo Press.

It will be awarded every 2 years on December 11, the anniversary of Naguib Mahfouz’s birth. The next winner will be announced on 11 December 2024.

Applications are accepted starting November 15, 2023 and close on January 15, 2024. [Submissions are no longer accepted for the 2024 Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature]

The shortlist will be announced on August 30, 2024 and the winner will be announced on December 11, 2024.

Rules of entry

The award is open to contemporary novels, written and published in Arabic anywhere in the world, with a copyright date of 2022 or 2023, which have not yet been translated and published in English.

Novellas, short story collections, or poetry collections are not eligible. Self-published novels are not eligible. Submissions may be made by the author or the publisher. The author must be living at the time of submission.

By submitting a novel, the author or publisher (depending on who holds the English-language rights) are considered to have agreed that, in the event of their novel winning, it will be translated into English and published worldwide by AUC Press.

By submitting a novel, the author is considered to have agreed to be available for promotional activities such as media appearances related to the award and/or necessary travel within the Arab world.

AUC Press reserves the right to reject any submission that does not comply with the rules of entry.

The judging panel’s decision is final.

How to submit

UPDATE: Submissions are no longer accepted for the 2024 Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature

To apply, publishers or authors must submit five copies (one for each of the judges) of the printed book to AUC Press office (address below), fill out this Google form, send a PDF of the book, provide a digital cover image and author photo either through the form or via email: [email protected]

Att. Ms. Margaret Ghobrial

The Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature

The American University in Cairo Press

AUC Tahrir Campus

113 Kasr El Aini Street

P.O. Box 2511, Cairo 11511

EGYPT

Tel: +202 2797 6926

The 5 copies, the PDF, the completed submission form, the book cover, the photograph of the author MUST ALL be received by the AUC Press for a submission to be accepted. Any incomplete submission will be disregarded.

About the Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature

Since 1996 the AUC Press has presented the annual Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature, a major award in support of contemporary Arabic literature in translation.

The award is a cash prize of US$5,000, and the translation and publication of the winning novel throughout the English-speaking world, and is presented annually on 11 December, the birthday of Nobel laureate Naguib Mahfouz, by the president of the American University in Cairo in the presence of the Egyptian minister of culture and many other prominent leaders of Egypt’s cultural life.

The Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature is awarded for the best contemporary novel published in Arabic (but not yet in English) in 2022 or 2023, selected by the Mahfouz Award Committee, which is headed this round by award-winning literary translator Sarah Enany.

Enany is a professor in the English Department of Cairo University and is a recipient of the prestigious Banipal Prize for Literary Translation for her translation of The Girl with Braided Hair by Rasha Adly (Hoopoe, 2020) and has translated The Book Smuggler by Omaima Al-Khamis (Hoopoe,2021)and the Jewish Muslim trilogy by the late Kamal Ruhayyim.

Welcoming the award, Nobel laureate Naguib Mahfouz said: “The announcement of this award honoring writers and literature is the most pleasurable event on my birthday. I hope that this prize will also help to discover new talents in Arabic literature and introduce them to readers around the world.”

The American University in Cairo Press is the primary English-language publisher of Naguib Mahfouz and has published or licensed some 600 foreign-language editions of the Nobel laureate’s works in 40 languages.

Meet the judging panel for the 2024 Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature

Previous Winners of the Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature

The 27 winners of the Naguib Mahfouz Medal for Literature since its inauguration include 13 Egyptians (2 posthumously), 3 Palestinians, 3 Algerians, 2 Lebanese, 1 Moroccan, 2 Syrians, 1 Iraqi, 1 Sudanese, and 1 Saudi Arabian: