Naguib Mahfouz was the first Arabic writer to receive the Nobel Prize in literature, winning it in 1988. His total works included 35 novels, fourteen short story collections, and three collections of his journalism works. 34 films were based on his stories, though he refrained from a role in adapting the stories for the screen (El-Enany, 31). His writings shaped Arabic literature, as not many other Arabic authors were writing novels at the time.

Mahfouz was born on December 11, 1911 in Cairo’s al-Jamaliyya district and was the youngest of seven siblings with a ten year gap between him and his closest brother (El-Enany, 1). Family was important to Mahfouz and characters influenced by his family appear in his later writings. His family was religious and his father worked as a civil servant before managing the business of a merchant friend (El-Enany, 2). On growing up, Mahfouz said, “I grew up in a stable family. The atmosphere around me was one which inspired the love of parents and family. … The family was a basic, almost sacred, value of my childhood; I was not one of those who rebelled against their parents or rejected their authority” (El-Enany, 5). However, a friend of his family claimed that his father had been strict as Mahfouz grew up (El-Enany, 5). When Mahfouz was about twelve, his family moved to Abbasiyya, a suburb of Cairo. Both Jamaliyya and Abbasiyya were used as settings for Mahfouz’s stories (Aliprandini). The setting Mahfouz grew up in heavily inspired his future writings.

A few parts of childhood especially shaped Mahfouz’s life. His mother would take him to visit the sphinx, pyramids, and other archaeological sites, which likely sparked an interest for Mafouz in the stories of ancient pharaohs (El-Enany, 4; Aliprandini). This is reflected in his first novel, The Meanderings of Fate, which was set during the rule of the pharaohs (Aliprandini). Another life-shaping event for Mahfouz was the demonstrations against the British in 1919 in Cairo. He was able to watch them from his window and even watched on as people were shot in the streets. About the demonstrations he writes, “You could say that the one thing which most shook the security of my childhood was the 1919 revolution” (El-Enany, 3). The occurrence of the demonstrations may have marked the beginning of Mahfouz’s interest in politics.

Mahfouz attended Cairo University (which was then known as Kind Furad I University (El-Enany, 13)) and graduated in 1934 with a degree in philosophy (Aliprandini; Gunther). He began working towards a PhD in philosophy but changed his mind and decided to pursue writing (Aliprandini). He wrote the Cairo Trilogy consisting of Palace Walk, Sugar Street, and Palace of Desire during 1956-1957. The trilogy follows a family with three sons throughout Egypt’s fight for independence from Britain. It was noted by the Nobel Prize committee as Mahfouz’s best piece (Aliprandini). After writing the trilogy, Mahfouz took a break from writing, claiming that society had changed and that he no longer needed to continue writing about the same topics, though a critic suggested it was because Mahfouz was unable to write about what he wanted to (El-Enany, 22). A few years later Mahfouz released The Children of the Alley, or The Children of Gabalam. This was a story about children living in an alley next to a mansion. Each of the children had done something wrong in one way or another and throughout the book, biblical characters appear and leave, only to result in the children reverting back to their sin. The book was declared blasphemy by the Muslim community and was banned in all Arab countries besides Lebanon (Aliprandini).

Mahfouz’s writings consistently had political undertones. He stated, “In all my writing you will find politics. You may bind a story which ignores love, or any other subject, but not politics; it is the very axis of our thinking” (El-Enany, 23). The theme of politics could be seen in aspects of his life outside of writing too. For a while he worked in the Ministry of Religious Affairs and then eventually became the Consultant in Egyptian Ministry of Culture (Gunther). Unfortunately, it was also his interest in politics that led to his being stabbed in 1994. At the age of 83, Mahfouz was stabbed by two men who had never read his books, but disagreed with his politics. He did not die from this incident, continuing to live until his death in 2006 (Aliprandini).