The present dissertation is a broad-minded treatment of the political, cultural and social role of Turkic Literature in Ṣafavid Persia through the analysis of the literary works of Shah Ismā‘īl I (r. 907-930/1501-1524), the founder of the Ṣafavid dynasty, and Ṣādiḳī Beg (940?-1018/1533?-1609), a major painter and bilingual litterateur of the period. Situating these figures against the background of such large-scale historical processes of the epoch as confessionalization, vernacularization and early modern state building, it discusses the development of Turkic literature from the amalgamation of the Timurid and Western Oġuz Turkic literary traditions with the combination of historiographical, literary and philological methodologies. Chapter One is a historical analysis of Muslim Turkic literary traditions from the beginnings of Turkic literacy in the eighth through the Timurids in the fourteenth-fifteenth centuries. It offers possible ways to understand the connections between Turkic as a vernacular literary language in the Persianate world, mytho-genealogy and conversion. The next two chapters are dedicated to Shah Ismā‘īl’s poetry. Chapter Two is an analysis of the messianic content of his Dīvān, revisiting the old question of how its manuscript copies reflected changes in the messianic image of the Ṣafavids. Chapter Three analyzes the phenomenon of misattribution relating to Shah Ismā‘īl’s poetry and that of Nasīmī, another important Turkophone messianic poet from the late 14th-early 15th century. I claim that despite the obviously literate context of the copies of the two poets’ respective dīvāns, this kind of poetry was by its very nature deeply informed by the oral culture that characterized its Qizilbash-Turkmen audience. Chapters Four and Five are about Ṣādiḳī Beg. Chapter Four is his detailed biography, focusing on how he as a poet and painter fashioned his public image in the grand-scale political, artistic and literary changes in the latter half of the 16th century. Chapter Five discusses Turkic literary history in the Ṣafavid period through the lenses of Ṣādiḳī’s biographical anthology of poets, comparing this work with other similar biographical compilations and also giving a survey of Turkic literary activities in Persia down to the fall of the dynasty. Chapter Six analyzes through a handful of poems by Shah Ismā‘īl, Ṣādiḳī and others the two main Turkic literary traditions in Persia and how linguistic and literary choices informed the Turkophone litterateur’s public image. Finally, the Conclusion takes a step back and reviews the place of Turkic within the larger Turko-Persian world, elaborating on whether the Ṣafavid period brought any changes in this regard, and providing glimpses of how the case of Iran in the epoch compares with language ideologies in the Early Modern World east and west.

When we look at the Islamic cultural context, we can observe that both Arabic and Persian languages were vehicles of the cultural identity. What is implied with this statement is that the language was an idiom of Islamic cultural code. Starting from this premise, I studied manuscripts preserved both in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as in the wider region of former Yugoslavia. The manuscripts I studied belong to the divan literature and they emerged in the second half of the 15 th , and were written until the beginning of 20 th century. The main authors were Adni, Derviš-paša, Ziyayi, Talib, Rušdi, Hatem, Salahi, Fevzi Mostari and others. The divan literature understood as a medium of the cultural memory was consisted of the specific structures (that could be recovered through) temporal traces, reproduction of literary canon and observing the unbroken dialogue within it. Therefore, the canonic poets reappear all the times (Attar, Rumi, Sadi, Hafiz, and Jami). This canon and local Bosnian reinterpretation of it were grounded in the Sufi understanding of poetry. Poetry in Persian in Bosnia was taken to be the best form of transmission and commentary of the Sufi thought. The corpus of kasidas, ghazals, mufreds and tarihs gathered here represents erudition, philosophical eros, imaginative strength and personal lyric tenor of poets under research. This kind of poetry produces different results among readers. And these different results (stemming from different experiences of the text) were duly marked in manuscripts as copies and various marginalia. Therefore, we still need to study various manuscript versions to produce valuable critical editions. The question of contextualization of this literature is constantly evoked: should it be classified as Islamic, Ottoman or Bosnian literature. A logical answer is that these authors and their works should be studied as individual phenomena, as a part of national context, as a part of literary community of the Ottoman Empire, and finally as a part of global Islamic culture. It is obvious that different aspects of study and various questions should be approached through different contexts. The artifacts of our poets in those languages witness the high Islamic culture of these areas. These are the remnants of a specific culture. Their poetics is informed by Sufi thought with its esoteric dimension. It treats time and space of human existence. It communicates within itself and with other, but it addresses the universal metaphysical questions. One should never be tired of stressing that the basis for any serious analysis of this legacy is a responsible and painstaking study of manuscripts.

“Poetry in the Text: The Use and Function of Poetry in Rāwandī’s Rāḥat al-ṣudūr and Yazıcızāde 'Alī’s Translation of the Same Work in Tevārīkh-i Âl-i Selçūḳ,” The Journal of Ottoman Studies 42 (Winter 2013): 349-372. Abstract: Rāwandī’s Rāḥat al-ṣudūr wa-āyat al-surūr (“The Comfort of the Hearts and the Sign of Happiness”) is an early Thirteenth Century history of the Great Seljuq Empire giving a detailed account of its dissolution into minor local dynasties. This particular work is full of interjections of poetry and after almost every episode of historical events, Rāwandī includes a couplet or sometimes even a whole block of poetry to summarize these events or give a word of wisdom through poetry. Two centuries later, the Ottoman historian Yazıcızāde ‘Alī, who served twice as an envoy to the Mamluks during the first reign of Murād II (1421-1444), is today mainly famous for his five-volume work Tevārīkh-i Âl-i Selçūḳ (“The History of the Great Seljuqs”) which gives a detailed genealogical account of the Ottomans, tracing the histories of the Oghuz Turks, the Seljuqs, the Ilkhanids, as well as later Anatolian principalities. The second volume of this work is devoted to the history of the Seljuqs of Hamadān and Kermān, and is a word-for-word translation of Rāwandī’s Rāḥat al-ṣudūr. Interestingly, Yazıcızāde ‘Alī omits most of Rāwandī’s poetic interjections from his translation of Rāḥat al-ṣudūr; and in some cases, he rewrites them according to the Ottoman cultural context. This essay will explore what possible functions these poetic interjections actually serve within the context of these two historical works and later argue that Yazıcızāde ‘Alī’s perception of poetic interjections is that the use of poetry in historical texts is “culturally specific.”