Welcome to the Harry Turtledove Wiki

An encyclopedia of the works of Harry Turtledove that anyone can edit.

9,514 articles in English since 2005 Warning: Spoilers are to be expected. See our Spoiler Policy for details.

The Harry Turtledove Wiki is an encyclopedia of people, places, and events that are portrayed in the writings of Harry Turtledove, famed author in the genre of alternate history. These articles can include information about both the historical person and the alternate version(s) Turtledove creates in his fantastic stories. We also have articles on his novels, stories and other writings -- he's written numerous works of historical fiction, fantasy, and science fiction in addition to his alternate history works.Fan-fic and speculative writing should be kept in user blogs only!

Popular Categories

These categories are probably the most interesting to first-time visitors.

Bibliography

Videssos

Historical Figures

Alternate History

Southern Victory

Worldwar

The War That Came Early

Atlantis

The Hot War

Works by Laura Frankos and Rachel Turtledove

What's new on Turtledove

June 8, 2024

the July/August issue of Analog, containing "Murderbirds" is released today. Expect spoilers in the near future.

June 4, 2024

Tales of the United States Space Force, containing "Not a War" is released today. Expect spoilers in the near future.

December 12, 2023

The Wages of Sin is released today. Expect articles and spoilers in the near future.

To write a new article, just enter the article title in the box below.

How to Edit

The Most important Rules

While the nature of writing about fictional works requires a certain amount of flexibility, ad hoc decision making, and some policies may be subject to change, we have two cardinal rules we observe here:

When writing articles about the characters or events of a work, write in past-tense, and in-universe

Stay within the parameters of what Turtledove actually put on the page! No speculating. Fan-fic should be for blogs only!

Follow these, and you should be fine.

For more information on formatting, see our Policies page.

Featured article

World War III was a war between the United States and its allies in NATO, and the Soviet Union and its satellites. While the war had its roots in the Korean War, which began in June 1950, the immediate trigger for direct conflict between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. came in January 1951..

Read more

Featured media

Bombs Away is the first book in The Hot War series.

Create these articles

These are articles that have been linked but haven't been created yet:

Ibrahim ibn Abd al-Rahman‏‎ (79 links), Jamal Ashrawi‏‎ (77 links), Ebro River (The Hill of the Beast)‏‎ (58 links), Moishe Leutner‏‎ (58 links), Elatus‏‎ (53 links), Sabbatius‏‎ (53 links), Vucji Pastir‏‎ (53 links), Xanthippe (centaur)‏‎ (53 links), Lucius (Household Gods)‏‎ (46 links), Aurelia (Household Gods)‏‎ (45 links), Brigomarus‏‎ (45 links), Survey Service‏‎ (39 links), Gerald Ford‏‎ (34 links), Leo Spinelli‏‎ (34 links) and Lenelli‏‎ (32 links)

Expand these articles

See the Stub category for articles that have been created, but still need more content.

Historical Figures need pics

Some articles about Historical figures require pictures of the subject. Please feel free to add photos, drawings, paintings, etc.

Help build templates

We need help creating and/or improving templates. Here's what we have right now: Category:Templates.

Other wikis

Alternate history wikis

Alternative History Wiki, a creative writing wiki for people who write AH stories.

These are some of the wikis dedicated to other AH authors:

Eric Flint Wiki

For Want of a Nail Wiki

Emberverse Wiki

Islands in the Sea of Time Wiki

Turtledove's influences

These are some of the wikis dedicated to authors and/or works that influenced Turtledove. Turtledove has even written works set in their respective canons.

Isaac Asimov Wiki.

H.P. Lovecraft Wiki.

Conan Wiki, dedicated to Robert E. Howard's most famous creation.