By Calynn M. Lawrence

@fairytalefacesbycalynn

Lais Ribeiro is the Brazilian bombshell fashion model with a tiny waist and stark round curves who has been newly initiated as one of Victoria’s Secret Angels. Lais Ribeiro has walked the catwalk for huge names such as Chanel, Louis Vuitton and Marc Jacobs! Yet, what is just as impressive as her portfolio is her encouraging rise to fame. The literal rags to riches come up is beautiful and certainly exemplifies that you do not need to be perfect to be a success.

So how did she begin her career? Well, sources say that a year after giving birth to her son ,Alexandre, she followed her friend’s advice and started working as a model in her home country Brazil. Clearly, she earned a lot of work and within a few years was ble to land some high ranking jobs. In 2009, she walked in major international fashion shows for designers such as Shiatzy Chen, Chanel, Louis Vuitton, Gucci, Dolce & Gabbana, Versace, and Marc Jacobs. In Brazil fashion Week, for the spring-summer 2011 collections, Ribeiro was the most booked runway model with 27 shows during Sao Paulo Fashion Week and 26 shows during Rio Fashion Week.

Some of the magazine features (and covers) that she has landed are American, Brazilian, German, and Italian Vogue, as well as appearing in ad campaigns for Ralph Lauren, Christian Dior, Tom Ford, GAP and American Eagle.

As was one of ten models to earn their ‘wings’ and be named as one of Victoria’s Secret’s new Angels , Lais who has a seven-year-old son named Alexandre, has come a long away to the glitz and glmour of the fashion industry. She was born in Teresina, Piauí, and was raised in a remote rural town in Brazil. She never considered becoming a model until she was a teen mother.

Lais has appeared in the 2010, 2011, 2013, 2014, and 2015 Victoria’s Secret Fashion Show, as well as the 2011 Christmas commercial and the 2012 Valentine’s Day commercialIn 2013, because of what happened, the Victoria’s Secret producers gave Lais the opportunity to open the Birds of Paradise segment. As a means of giving back Lais donates to the needy and participates in The Charity Ride for Pelotonia! She also works as an activist for teen mothers, fighting discrimination against them. What an example she is.