May 21, 1999 — You won’t find his name on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, nor has he figured among the Oscar rolls of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. But Norman Rossington, who died on this day, has a unique claim to thespian fame: he is the only actor to have appeared on film with both Elvis Presley and the Beatles.

He played the Beatles' road manager Norm in A Hard Day's Night in 1964, and on the strength of that found a measure of fame in Hollywood, appearing with Presley in one of his admittedly forgettable movies, Double Trouble.

Rossington, born – like the Beatles – in Liverpool, trained with the celebrated Bristol Old Vic theatre company and went on to act with Laurence Olivier's company at Chichester and the Royal Shakespeare Company.

He appeared in more than 40 films including Lawrence of Arabia, The Longest Day, and The Charge of the Light Brigade, but is fondly remembered in England for a string of performances in domestic television comedies and dramas.

Six months before his death from cancer at the age of 70, Rossington was appearing in a musical on the West End stage in London.

In an interview, he remembered Presley during filming as “a quiet man who sat by himself in a corner and who would often borrow my newspaper”.

Published: April 24, 2016

Updated: November 17, 2019

Related Articles and Photos

Elvis Comes Fifth in Talent Show

Elvis Presley made his first public appearance as a singer on this day. It did not go well: he came fifth in a local talent show. But he was only ten years old.

Jailhouse Rock Premieres

A publicity shot from the film showing Elvis Presley during the dance sequence in Jailhouse Rock

Elvis Presley in the Army

Conscripted in 1958, Elvis Presley served two years in the U.S. Army

The Beatles? 'They have no future in show business'

In 1962, an unknown group called the Beatles travelled to London for a recording contract audition with one of the major record labels. They were rejected.

The Beatles on Ed Sullivan

The Beatles with TV host Ed Sullivan during their first appearance on his show in February 1964

Hey, Hey – We're The Monkees

We have the formula, the music and the female fans standing by ready to scream. All we need now is four likely lads to form the band. Enter "The Monkees".

Sgt Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band

One of the most famous album covers in music history, The Beatles' Sgt Pepper's Lonely Heart's Club Band, designed by artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth

Related Famous People

Singer and Cultural Icon

Elvis Presley

Singer-Songwriter

George Harrison

Musician and Beatle

John Lennon

Musician and Beatle

Paul McCartney

Beatles Drummer, Singer, and Actor

Ringo Starr

Articles on Events in May