There are real, significant differences between William Shakespeare’s play King Lear and Akira Kurosawa’s adapted film Ran. But the key elements—the parts that illustrate the struggles of being human—are present in both works.

The opening scene of Ran is made up of expansive, beautifully-framed shots filmed in the plains of Mount Aso, a volcano in Japan. In each shot, soldiers are framed against the landscape. A high, haunting violin score plays in the background. The scene seems to set the stage for the movie’s imminent militarism. In fact, that’s one way Ran strays from King Lear throughout its course. In Lear, we get very little staged battle—Shakespeare leaves it to the imagination. Kurosawa, rather, presents a few heavy battle scenes that are important to the film.

The first of those “battle” scenes isn’t really a battle scene; it’s a hunting scene. We see Ichimonji (Kurosawa’s Lear) and a group of hunters chasing a wild boar through the grassy plains. Ichimonji eventually kills it. The scene seems unimportant and ends quickly, but implies lots about the film. It’s an immediate nod to the animality of humans, one of the most important themes in Lear. In Ran, we eventually learn that Ichimonji hunted other people like he did the boar; he destroyed families to attain power. To reinforce the image of animalism, Kurosawa even has Ichimonji compare himself to the boar. When of his sons asks him whether they will eat the beast, Ichimonji says the boar’s “carcass was too tough and foul. Just like me.” Even more importantly, he asks his sons: “Would you eat me?”

The only one of his sons who could truthfully answer no to that question is Saburo, his youngest son who is influenced by Cordelia. Unlike some of the other Kurosawa characters, Saburo is pretty similar to his Shakespearean character throughout the film. He sees through the empty words of his power-hungry brothers and marries the daughter of a foreign Lord after Ichimonji banishes him. He eventually dies after being reunited with Ichimonji. Taro and Jiro (male versions of Goneril and Regan, respectively) are not as clear silhouettes of their Shakespearean counterparts. Taro receives the largest share of land and power from his father—Ichimonji essentially gives him dominion over everything, only retaining his titles and privileges as the Great Lord. Unlike Goneril, Taro dies about halfway through the film during a battle for Saburo’s unclaimed estate.

His death makes way for his wife Kaede, a vivacious, power-hungry vixen who creates major conflicts in Ran. Kaede is nearly all the female presence in the film, as Jiro’s wife Sué only appears in only one or two scenes. In fact, before Kaede, we see almost no women in the play at all. This is largely historical; women would have played little visible part in medieval Japan, when the movie is set. But she plays a very visible part in Kurosawa’s story, attempting to destroy the Ichimonji family by egging on their internal conflicts. In a scene soon after Taro’s death, Kaede chides the now-in-charge Jiro for wearing Taro’s armor. They go upstairs, and all of a sudden she is on top of him with a knife, gently slitting his throat and threatening to kill him if he doesn’t agree to share his new power. Despite her being fully-covered in several layers of royal garb, there’s an incredible amount of sensuosity to the scene. It’s no surprise that moments later she is on top of him again, kissing him passionately and sucking the blood from his neck. The sucking and Kaede’s lack of real eyebrows give her an strange, inhuman quality. She admits to Jiro that she only cares for herself, and then promptly seduces him. In some small ways Kaede is the equivalent of Edmond in Lear, but the Shakespearean character she is truly closest to is Lady Macbeth. She is constantly prodding Jiro’s manhood, telling him that he must kill and connive to please her. And it works.

Of course that’s not to say there is no autonomy for Taro and Jiro; they both have fair shares of malicious desires. Jiro almost immediately begins planning to be rid of Taro after Ichimonji puts Taro in charge. In a meeting with advisors, one Lord tells Jiro: “He who is not the hunter soon becomes the quarry.” A Google search revealed that this line is derived from Shakespeare’s play Cymbeline, but it fits Ran’s themes of hunting and animalism well. And when Taro and Jiro both deny their father a place for he and his warriors to stay, Ichimonji begins to feel a great loneliness, which he compares to being an animal: “Only the birds and the beasts live in solitude.” Like Lear begins to experience the humility of common folk, Ichimonji begins to experience the feeling of being nothing more than an animal. It’s especially interesting that he experiences that given he spent his life killing and pillaging.

It’s also the beginning of Ichimonji’s descent into madness, a long period of the movie that he spends wandering in the wilderness with his fool Kyoami and loyal servant Tango (the Kurosawa equivalent of Kent). Unlike Lear, whose madness is filled with strange, nonsensical speeches, Ichimonji stays largely silent during his insanity. At some points, it seems like he’s already dead. The silence contributes to that effect, but so does heavy makeup that makes Ichimonji appear skeleton-like, accentuating his cheekbones and giving his eyes a wide, frightening look. The wide eyes are also important; it’s Kurosawa’s reminder that Ichimonji’s madness is a transformative, eye-opening time. It’s like a clogged pipe in Ichimonji’s heart has been opened up. So much remorse and sorrow begins to flow that he is left speechless. And at the mention of Saburo’s name, he flees, terrified to face the only son who ever really loved him.

The theme of vision shows up in other places. During Ichimonji’s madness, Kyoami and Tango take him to the cabin of a hermit named Tsurumaru, who they soon discover is the brother of Jiro’s wife Sué. He is unable to see, and he tells them that it was Ichimonji who gouged out his eyes while besieging their castle. “I have no need of light,” Tsurumaru says, and then begins to play his flute, saying he will share with them a “hospitality of the heart.” Tsurumaru’s haunting tune hits a nerve inside Ichimonji, who bursts out of the cabin in a frenzy. No matter what the cause, it’s clear that Ichimonji is terrified of his past, and in his mortality fears there is no way to escape the sins he’s committed. In a scene just beforehand, Kyoami told him that “Heaven is far away, but hell can be reached in a day.” Ichimonji is feeling the fire of the underworld in his madness.

In a scene of similar desperation later on, Ichimonji, now on a cliff, tells the fool: “I’m lost, completely lost.” In this and other scenes, Kurosawa uses these short, sparse lines to expand Ichimonji’s character. Just like Lear, the most important things Ichimonji has to say are concise, poignant, and packed with meaning. The fool sarcastically tells Ichimonji to jump off the cliff, and he does (this moment clearly recalls Gloucester’s cliff jump in Lear). When the fool reaches the foot of the cliff, Ichimonji is seemingly unharmed. But then he begins to have flashbacks of the destruction he caused to Sué’s family, and unwilling to face his fears, runs off alone.

As in Lear, things get only more complicated as the movie progresses. Tango concludes that the only way to heal Ichimonji is to reunite him with his son Saburo; the only way to do that is to bring Saburo to Ichimonji. Saburo—who has remained loyal to his father—agrees to approach Jiro’s territory to find Ichimonji. Jiro’s troops meet a small pack of Saburo’s in the plains of Mount Aso—the way they travel in small herds again recalls the theme of men as animals. Although at first Jiro pledges peace, he attacks once Saburo leaves his men to find Lear.

This battle scene is very different from the earlier one; while the struggle at 3rd castle had only music set to the scene, we hear all kinds of cries and crashes of weaponry in this one. It seems like while we experienced the first battle through the senses of Lear, (who seemed oblivious to the warfare) now the camera is objective, and we are seeing it as a third party.

Meanwhile, Saburo and a small group of men find Ichimonji asleep in a pile of rocks. Here we begin to see very distinct similarities between Shakespeare’s play and Kurosawa’s film. Like in the reunion of Lear and Cordelia, Ichimonji is convinced at first that he is dead, asking “Why do you pull me from my grave?” Here, Kurosawa makes it literal; Ichimonji is trying to bury himself in a pile of stones. As Ichimonji realizes he is talking to his son Saburo, he runs away, uncontrollably ashamed of the way he treated him in the past. Saburo’s words, like Cordelia’s, are gentle and reassuring: “I don’t hate you, Father.”

For a few moments in the film, there is bliss. Saburo’s men have succeeded in defeating Jiro’s forces, and Ichimonji rides happily with Saburo, bubbling over with joy at the prospect of them spending time together. And then Jiro’s assassins shoot Saburo, and everything is again despairing. It takes Ichimonji a long moment to process what has happened, and he repeats “He is dead” before finally keeling over himself.

If there is hope in the waning minutes of Kurosawa’s movie, it is difficult to find. The fool, mourning the dead Ichimonji, claims that there are no gods and that Buddha does not exist, introducing more directly a nihilism that has permeated the movie. Tango, like Kent in Act 5, tries to refute that, but ends up being still fairly depressing; he says that men “prefer sorrow over joy, suffering over peace.” Meanwhile, Jiro’s general Kurogane kills Lady Kaede, leaving a blood-splattered image of violence. This scene too, represents a kind of nihilism; even Kurogane, who tried to do the right thing, says to Jiro: “We are undone. Prepare to die.” And in the film’s final scene, we’re reminded of Gloucester once again as Tsurumaru uses a stick to find his way to the edge of a cliff. He stumbles and drops a scroll depicting the Buddha Amida (it was given to him by Sué, who was killed as a result of a jealous command from Kaede). This literal “losing” of faith is an incredibly powerful moment. Is living nothing more than a blind stumbling on a cliff, a gain and loss of faith? The scene shows Tsurumaru, but we’re made to think that the blind man wandering on the edge of cliff might as well be Ichimonji, or Lear, or Kurosawa, or us.