While compelling storylines come in many forms, there’s something distinctly satisfying about a movie based on a real life story. Not only can you continually remind yourself that what you’re watching on screen really did happen (even when the likes of Brad Pitt or Meryl Streep are the stars), you can also find joy in learning about a captivating tale based on true events. Netflix even has an entire category on its platform dedicated to movies based on true stories.

Whether you're looking for a biopic, a serial killer mystery, a feel good tale of finding oneself, or a classic underdog story, these films take all of the facts and spin them into a drama that will inspire, astound, and haunt long after you've finished watching—because the best kind of movie is the one that makes you want to learn everything you can about the real story. From The Woman in Gold to The Theory of Everything, here are some of the greatest films of all time based on true stories.

In 18th-century England, Queen Anne (Olivia Colman) is on the throne. Lady Sarah (Rachel Weisz) and her cousin Abigail Masham (Emma Stone) both vie to be Anne's favorite. Queen Anne was, in all likelihood, interested in women—and the film centers on a lesbian love triangle.

The Favourite is based on a largely true story. Sarah Churchill, the eventual Duchess of Marlborough, was indeed childhood friends with then-Princess Anne. The nature of their relationship is subject to interpretation, but Sarah did really threaten to blackmail Anne with their letters. And Abigail Masham did work her way up to be a woman of the bedchamber for Queen Anne, and ultimately supplanted Sarah as the monarch's favorite.

One Night in Miami... is a fictionalized account of a February 1964 meeting of Malcolm X (Kingsley Ben-Adir), Muhammad Ali (Eli Goree), Jim Brown (Aldis Hodge), and Sam Cooke (Leslie Odom Jr.). Directed by Regina King, the film is based entirely on true events—the four men really did spend time together one night, after Cassius Clay (later Muhammad Ali) beat Sonny Liston in Miami.

"I was a journalist in my former life, and this was just a paragraph in a book that I'd been reading on the intersection between sports and the Civil Rights Movement," Kemp Powers, who wrote the screenplay for the film, explained. "There was one paragraph in the book that mentioned that the night Cassius Clay beat Sonny Liston, February 25, 1964, he went back to Malcom X’s hotel room with his friends, Malcolm, Sam Cooke, and Jim Brown. And the next morning is when he announced to the world that he was in the nation of Islam. So that was like, whoa! Could you imagine the night of conversation these men must have had?"