Birth Name: Robert John Gonzalez

Place of Birth: Tampa, Florida, U.S

Date of Birth: July 13, 1968

Ethnicity:

*father – Spanish, Cuban, Italian

*mother – Irish, English, remote Scottish, possibly French

Robert Gant is an American actor. He has also been credited as Robert J. Gant.

He is the son of Ann and Aurelio Gonzalez. Robert has stated:

[I grew up as] Bobby Gonzalez [and that’s still my name]. The reality is, I’m as much Italian, Irish, and English as Spanish. My dad’s Spanish-Italian, and my mom’s Irish-English. There’s a little Scottish in there as well. Maybe some French, but I think that’s arguable.

He also said that he is “Part northern Spain and part Cuban among many other things. So I’m total American mutt basically!”

Robert’s paternal grandfather was Aurelio “Joey” Gonzalez (the son of Aurelio “Yeyo” Gonzalez and Carmela/Carmen Vasquez). Robert’s grandfather Aurelio was born in Florida. Robert’s great-grandfather Aurelio was born in Cuba. Carmela was born in Cuba, to Spanish-born parents, with her mother, Consuelo Sanchez, being from Asturias.

Robert’s paternal grandmother was Catherine “Katie” Castellano (the daughter of Joseph Castellano and Eduvina Gonzalez). Catherine was born in Florida. Joseph was born in Florida, to Italian-born parents, Antonino/Antonio Castellano and Rosa Sedita. Eduvina was born in Florida.

Robert’s maternal grandfather was Allen Carey Tyrrell/Tyrell (the son of Marion Carey). Allen was born in New York. Marion was born in New York, the daughter of Stephen Joseph Carey, whose parents were Irish, and of Jessie Mary/Maria Osborn, who was born in Canada, and whose father was English.

Sources: Obituary of Robert’s father – https://www.dignitymemorial.com

Obituary of Robert’s paternal grandfather, Aurelio “Joey” Gonzalez – https://www.legacy.com

Obituary of Robert’s paternal grandmother, Katherine “Katie” (Castellano) Chavez – https://www.legacy.com

Obituary of Robert’s paternal great-grandmother, Eduvina (Gonzalez) Castellano – https://www.familysearch.org