Actor Paul McGann has split from his wife of 15 years and is now dating Pride And Prejudice star Susannah Harker.

The former Dr Who became friends with Miss Harker after starring together in a play, The Little Black Book, in London in 2003.

In recent months they have been spotted enjoying intimate meals in London and were photographed at society events.

Last weekend they enjoyed a romantic weekend at the exclusive Hotel Locarno in Rome.

A member of staff there said: "We get lots of famous people here, especially British. They sat in the bar for lunch and looked like any other couple."

McGann, 46, who appeared alongside Richard E. Grant in cult Eighties film Withnail And I, before appearing as the Time Lord in the 1996 Dr Who revival, has moved out of his marital home in Bristol and is now living alone in London.

His wife Annie, mother of his sons Joe, 17, and Jake, 15, is still living in Bristol, though they have not divorced.

Miss Harker, 41, famous for playing Jane Bennet opposite Colin Firth in the 1995 BBC adaptation of Jane Austen's Pride And Prejudice, was married to actor Iain Glen for eight years. They split in 2002 and have an 11-year-old son together.

Mr Glen was linked to Nicole Kidman following her split from Tom Cruise in 2001, although both denied any affair.

In 1994, Mr McGann was accused of having an affair with Catherine Zeta-Jones after they were seen kissing in his car. He denied it, but the incident was said to have put great strain on his marriage.

McGann met Annie when he was 22, on his first day as an actor. He was appearing in Much Ado About Nothing in Basingstoke, where Annie was assistant stage manager. They married in July 1991. He once said of her: "She was my idea of beautiful: dark-skinned, with dark hair."

Last night Mr McGann's spokesman onfirmed: "Paul and Susannah are an item. He has been separated from his wife for quite some time and now lives in London. Paul and Susannah got together after he split from his wife."

Both Annie and Miss Harker, who lives in South London, declined to comment.

Mr McGann comes from a major acting dynasty, with his three brothers, Mark, Stephen and Joe all in the business. But Paul maintains: 'We were, and are, ordinary. We just got on with it."

The boys, and a younger sister, grew up in a terraced house a mile from Liverpool's docks.

Paul, the second oldest, has said he was 'a quiet and private child' and is laid-back about his craft, saying: "I'm a fairly low-maintenance actor, just turn up and do it."