Merseyside actor Paul McGann said he was “thrilled and surprised” to pick up an honorary fellowship from Liverpool John Moores University.

The star received the honour during a graduation ceremony at Liverpool Cathedral, accompanied by mum Clare and his partner Susannah Harker.

The fellowship was awarded to him in recognition of his outstanding contribution to the arts.

McGann is the public face of LJMU’s Merseyside at War 1914-18 project, which provides local people with the chance to upload family war histories to an online archive.

He said he was surprised to be honoured - and joked that he would put his fellowship scroll in a study he was still trying to complete.

He said: “I left school as a teenager with nothing so I never thought I’d see a day like this, having lived in a university town for so long.

“I’m really proud of the connection with John Moores University.”

The actor studied at the prestigious Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts (RADA) and has enjoyed an illustrious career.

Highlights include The Monocled Mutineer, appearing alongside Richard E.Grant in the student cult film Withnail and I and becoming the eighth Doctor Who.

He made a surprise return as the Doctor last November in a seven-minute short marking the show’s 50th anniversary.

Asked if he would reprise the role in the future, he said: “I don’t know – if I do I’ll find out on a Wednesday and we’ll start shooting on a Thursday - that’s how it works. The thing I did in November, he (head writer Steven Moffat) wrote it the night before.

“I was with Steven Moffat and John Hurt the other night and it was lovely because he can field those questions!"

More Liverpool news

Man viciously attacked with 'machete' following car chase through city streets

Live: Build-up to The Open championship at Hoylake

Where to spot the celebrities in Hoylake and West Kirby for The Open golf championship

New Mayoral 100 Club launched to fund Mersey River Festivals

WATCH: Video shows bloodied man as police investigate Seel Street brawl

Multi-million pound revamp for Clayton Square shopping centre in Liverpool

Police turned down request from FA for Liverpool FC fans to be given larger end of Hillsborough stadium

Latest updates in our breaking news live blog throughout the day

Keep up-to-date with the latest Liverpool news & sport by using the ECHO's mobile app: click here for iPhone and here for android phones