Penny Mordaunt, former rising star of the Conservative party, has lost her seat in the 2024 General Election. She told supporters in her former Portsmouth North constituency, 'Democracy is never wrong. Tonight, the Conservative party has taken a bashing because it failed to honour the trust people placed in it.'

The former MP was tasked with carrying out one of the key roles at King Charles’s Coronation. As Leader of the House of Commons, Mordaunt also held the office of Lord President of the Privy Council, giving her the responsibility of carrying the 17th-Century Sword of State into Westminster Abbey for the Coronation service.

Following the historic honour, Mordaunt’s popularity reportedly rocketed among the grassroots Conservative base. According to The Telegraph, a Conservative Home survey of members for May 2023 revealed that Mordaunt had climbed to become the second most popular minister in Prime Minister Rishi Sunak’s Cabinet, having previously ranked in fourth place. Her net satisfaction rating rose from 49.5 in April to 62.4 based on the monthly poll of 3,300 party members.

Labour declares victory reminiscent of 1997, after a historic Election Night – catch up on Tatler's exclusive insider coverage of the night and morning

Join Tatler from 7pm until 7am for live, behind-the-scenes insight into the drama of election night as it unfolds

Arrow

Swathed in a deep blue, knee-length dress complete with matching headband and cape, the eyes of the world were on Mordaunt as she carried the ceremonial sword into the Abbey at the start of the Coronation service. Keeping the sword at right angles to her body, Mordaunt held it aloft for a good portion of the service. A symbol of ‘royal authority’, the sword dates from 1678, and has been used at a number of coronations, along with the then Prince Charles’s investiture as Prince of Wales in 1969. Penny Mordaunt became a standout star on social media, with viewers at home noting how impressed they were with her stamina.

An MP for Portsmouth North since 2010, Penny’s first big roles in government were under David Cameron, when she was both Armed Forces Minister and Defence Secretary, becoming the first woman to hold the former role. She has a strong military background: her father was a parachuter before retraining as a teacher, and she was named after HMS Penelope. She was also a member of the Royal Navy from 2010-2019.

Read More

He is the man at the heart of Channel 4's election night coverage: meet the real Rory Stewart

Rory Stewart is the romantic’s politician of choice: a man who came under siege in Iraq, got locked in a loo at Highgrove and electrified the Tory leadership campaign. David Jenkins sat down with him for this feature in the March 2020 issue of Tatler

Under Theresa May, Mordaunt took on several more high profile roles: Secretary of State for International Development (2017), Minister for Women and Equalities (2018) and Secretary of State for Defence (2019). When Boris Johnson was elected in December 2019, Mordaunt briefly left government, before returning in a cabinet reshuffle in February 2020. Over the course of 2022, Mordaunt ran for leadership twice following the resignation of Boris Johnson in July. She lost both campaigns, which in turn saw the short-lived Liz Truss and our current Prime Minister Rishi Sunak elected.

Prior to becoming an MP, Penny Mordaunt worked as Head of Youth for the Conservative Party under John Major, as well as Head of Broadcasting under William Hague. She also dipped her toe into politics across the pond, working on both George W. Bush’s 2000 and 2004 campaigns in the US. Her varied career has also seen her working in a Johnson & Johnson factory, training as a magician’s assistant, and volunteering at a Romanian orphanage.

Fans of ITV’s diving show Splash! might also recognise Mordaunt: she was a contestant on the 2014 edition, donating her £10,000 appearance fee to four armed forces charities as well as towards the renovation of a local lido.

Other fun facts: she’s related to actress Dame Angela Lansbury, Philip Snowdon, the first Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, and George Lansbury, a former Labour leader. She’s also a fan of astrology and owns four Burmese cats, and has been married and divorced once, with no children.