Pha Taem National Park (อุทยานแห่งชาติผาแต้ม) is a small national park near the Mekong River in Ubon Ratchathani Province, northeast of Thailand. The park, covering the area of 140 square kilometers, features the plateaus, hills, deciduous dipterocarp forest, sheer cliffs resulting from the earthquakes, irregular shaped sand stone which is scattered around and the beautiful wild flowers growing among the rocky ground. The highlight of the park are Pha Taem and Pha Kam which located near the National Park headquarters. The surface of the cliffs are filled with numerous prehistoric cave paintings dating back about 3,000 years that explore the traditional way of life of people who once lived here during the prehistoric days. Scenes in the paintings include fishing, hunting, human figures, animals, hands and geometric designs.

For the nature lovers, this area is truly incredible nature. The park also has several examples of mushroom rocks as well as one of the largest flower field in Thailand.

Under the Leadership of Dr Weerachai Nanakorn, 1st Vice President and Leader of the Natural History Section, the Society will arrange a study trip for members to visit many sites of interest in Pha Taem National Park which include a visit to prehistoric paintings, waterfalls, and various sites with many species of flowers blossoming among the rock terraces in the transition period of the rainy season to winter. Members will also stroll in the park to enjoy the unusual beauty of the sandstone terrace caused by the erosion of the Mekong water way that formed it into many different shapes of rock.

Booking

Note – To comply with the measures recommended by the government due to the COVID-19 pandemic protect yourself and others around you by knowing the facts and taking appropriate precautions. The Society kindly ask our participants to follow the safety and precaution measures that have been declared by the government and health organisations.

– Air tickets will be limited, so kindly make the payment as soon as you make a reservation.

The contribution of THB 16,000 (THB 17,000 for non-members), single room surcharge THB 1,300. will cover transportation as mentioned in the programme, accommodation for 2 nights (two persons per room), 5 meals, gratuities and other costs incurred to make this trip possible. In addition, basic travel insurance is included. There is a 4% surcharge for credit/debit card payment to cover bank charges. Please pay by cash or cheque payable to “The Siam Society”. Alternatively, you can transfer the money to The Siam Society travel account at TMB Bank, Asoke Branch, saving account no. 053-2-18000-7. Please fax or e-mail the deposit or transfer docket to us.

For further information and bookings please contact Khun Prasert at Tel. 02-661-6470-3 ext. 504 or Khun Supanut Tel. 02-661-6470-3 ext. 506, Fax 02-258-3491 or email: supanut@thesiamsociety.org. The Society office is open from 9am to 5pm, Tuesday to Saturday.