Named Professorships

The creation of a Professorship in the School of Medicine indicates that a sum of money has been added to the University endowment to generate income which supports a professor in a particular department.

A date in brackets indicates year the named professorship was established.

John Jacob Abel Distinguished Service Professorship in Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics [1962]: Ronald Schnaar, Ph.D.

Funded by a bequest in the will of Mrs. Anne D. Hamilton of Columbus, OH. Dr. Abel was the first Professor of Pharmacology (1893-1937) and a member of the original faculty of the School of Medicine.

Martin D. Abeloff Professorship [2007]: Drew M. Pardoll, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by the Seraph Foundation (Henry and Linda Spires, Trustees) for a professorship in the Department of Oncology for the purpose of advancing outstanding cancer research and treatment. The Director of the Department of Oncology, Dean of the School of Medicine, and Seraph Trustees has the discretion of appointment over current and future faculty to this professorship.

ABCD Charitable Trust Professorship in Schizophrenia [2022]: Unoccupied

This permanent endowment will be used to benefit the Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences.

Leonard & Madlyn Abramson Professorship in Neurodegenerative Diseases [2004]: Ted M. Dawson, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Leonard and Madlyn Abramson.

AEGON Professorship in Prostate Cancer Research [2008]: Michael Carducci, M.D.

Funding provided by AEGON.

Aetna U.S. Health Care Professorship in Medical Genetics [1996]: Garry Cutting, M.D.

Funding provided by U.S. Healthcare Corporation.

Mohamad E. Allaf Directorship in Minimally Invasive Urology Surgery [2014]: Mohamad E. Allaf, M.D.

Income from the Principal will be used “for a directorship and research program in minimally invasive urology… This gift is to be utilized by Dr. Mohamad E. Allaf at his discretion for salary support, clinical & research programs or other purposes as determined solely by Dr. Mohamad E. Allaf.” The endowment will be held in the Brady Urological Institute in the School of Medicine.

Elizabeth Plank Althouse Professorship in Alzheimer’s Research in Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences [2006]: Constantine Lyketsos, M.D., M.H.S.

Funding provided for researching the cause, prevention, treatment, and cure of Alzheimer’s Disease.

Andelot Professorship in Laryngology and Otology [1962]: David W. Eisele, M.D.

This Professorship was funded by a grant from Mr. Lamont DuPont Copeland of Wilmington, DE, a grateful patient of Dr. John Bordley. The Andelot name was selected by Mr. Copeland.

E. Cowles Andrus Distinguished Professorship in Cardiology [2001]: Edward K. Kasper, M.D.

Funding provided by Miriam Andrus, in memory of her husband, E. Cowles Andrus, M.D.

The Jennifer Arnold, M.D. Professorship in Medical Simulation & Innovative Education [2021]: Alyssa Rake, M.D.

Will be used to endow and support the Director of Medical Simulation and Eduation at Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital.

C. Michael Armstrong Professorship [2000]: Gregg L. Semenza, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Trustee C. Michael Armstrong to support medical research, with initial focus on stem cell research.

C. Michael and S. Anne Armstrong Professorship in Patient Safety [2014]: Allen Kachalia, M.D., J.D.

Funding provided by Trustee C. Michael Armstrong and his wife, S. Anne Armstrong, to support the director of the Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality.

Atran Family Foundation Endowed Professorship Fund in IBD Research [2021]: Florin Selaru, M.D.

This gift will benefit basic science research in the IBD section of the Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology.

Frances Watt Baker, M.D. and Lenox D. Baker, Jr., M.D. Deanship of Medical Faculty [1997]: Theodore L. DeWeese, M.D.

Dr. Frances Watt Baker and Dr. Lenox D. Baker, Jr. are 1966 graduates of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. Dr. Frances Baker is a pediatrician and Dr. Lenox Baker is a cardiothoracic surgeon and a member of the Johns Hopkins University Board of Trustees and the Board of Johns Hopkins Medicine.

Edmund F. and Virginia Ball Professorship in Ophthalmology [2005]: J. Fernando Arevalo, M.D.

Funding provided by Mr. Edmund F. Ball. This gift will be used to support research in macular degeneration and other retinal diseases.

Dr. Freida Derdeyn Bambus Professorship in Ophthalmology [2011]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Dr. Freida Derdeyn, a retired teacher, in appreciation for the care she received at Wilmer during treatment for macular degeneration.

Theodore and Ingrid Baramki Professorship in Reproductive Endocrinology [1994]: Howard A. Zacur, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Dr. Theodore Baramki, a member of the faculty of the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, and the estate of Clarice Reiss. This gift will be used to fund a professorship in reproductive endocrinology.

Philip Bard Directorship in the Department of Physiology [1999]: Unoccupied

Established through commitments made in 1999 by Roger Greif, Philip Davies, Elizabeth B. O’Connor, Vernon Mountcastle, Timothy Harrison, and various donors in honor of Philip Bard, Professor of Physiology, 1933 to 1964.

The Barry Family Professorship in Translational Medicine [2016]: Kenneth Kinzler, M.D.

The gift will be used to benefit the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for purpose of a professorship bearing the name.

The Charles T. Bauer Professorship in Transplant Surgery [2023]: Daniel Warren, Ph.D.

Funds will be used to support the Department of Surgery's Division of Transplant Surgery.

Baxley Professorship in Pathology [1901]: Ralph H. Hruban, M.D.

A bequest in the will of Dr. Henry Willis Baxley (1824-1876) provided funding for the first endowed chair in the School of Medicine.

Stanhope Bayne-Jones Professorship in Medicine [1974]: David L. Thomas, M.D.

Mrs. Nannie S. Bayne-Jones provided the funding for this Professorship in honor of her husband. Stanhope Bayne-Jones received his M.D. degree from Johns Hopkins in 1914. As an expert in infectious diseases, he served on the faculty of the University of Rochester and Yale Medical School, and he also served as Dean at Yale. In 1942, he was made a brigadier general in the Army Medical Corps and served in many government posts during and following World War II.

The Sheldon B. Bearman, M.D. Professorship in Radiology [2020]: Pamela T. Johnson, M.D.

A permanent endowment, established by the Herbert Bearman Foundation, benefiting the Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences.

Bendann Family Professorship in Ophthalmology [2011]: Esen K. Akpek, M.D.

An endowment fund at the School of Medicine, the income from the principal will be used for faculty support and the endowment will be held in the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Bendann-Iliff Professorship in Ophthalmology [1995]: Unoccupied

Established by Constance Bendann in honor of the Bendann Family and Charles E. Iliff, III, one of the pioneers of oculoplastics, the surgical restoration of the function and appearance of the eye.

Eugene L. and Barbara A. Bernard Professorship in Cerebrospinal Fluid Research [2022]: Abhay Moghekar, M.B.B.S.

The funds will be used to support a new professorship in hydrocephalus research in the Department of Neurology.

Dr. Bertram M. Bernheim Research Professorship in Surgery [1987]: Christopher Abularrage, M.D.

Funding for this Professorship was provided by members of the Bernheim family to honor Bertram M. Bernheim, a 1905 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. As a member of the faculty of the Department of Surgery, he was responsible for pioneering research which resulted in significant advancements in vascular surgery and blood transfusion.

The Berry-Brem Professorship in Neurosurgery [2017]: Mark Luciano, M.D.

Funding was provided by George and Mary Nell Berry. The endowment was established to honor Dr. Henry Brem, whose dedication, talents and skill has led the Department of Neurosurgery to unprecendented achievements.

George E. Bigelow, Ph.D. Professorship [2014]: Eric Strain, Ph.D.

Established in 2014 by an anonymous donor in honor of George E. Bigelow to support clinical behavioral pharmacology research and teaching with a primary focus on elucidating the mechanisms of addictive disorders and developing treatments.

Alfred Blalock Chair in Surgery [1992]: John L. Cameron, M.D.

Funding for this Chair was provided by contributions from Dr. Blalock’s residents. Dr. Alfred Blalock was Director of the Department of Surgery (1941-1964), and is credited with establishing the field of cardiac surgery. He is best known for the creation of the Blalock-Taussig operation for the treatment of cyanotic congenital heart disease.

Bloomberg-Kimmel Professorship in Cancer Immunotherapy [2018]: Dung Le, M.D.; Cynthia Sears, M.D. and Suzanne Topalian, M.D.

Professorship recognizing leadership in the Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute of Cancer Immunotherapy.

Marjorie Bloomberg Tiven Professorship in Neurofibromatosis [2017]: Jaishri Blakeley, M.D.

To benefit the Department of Neurology as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity and which will support a professor in the Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic Acceleration Program.

John E. Bordley Chair in Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery [1990]: Wayne Koch, M.D.

Funding for this Chair was provided by the McCarthy-Cooper Estate, patients, and residents of Dr. John E. Bordley, who was Director of the Department of Otolaryngology for 17 years (1952-1969).

Boury Professorship in Molecular Biology and Genetics [1937]: Unoccupied

This professorship was funded by a bequest in the will of Mr. Louis J. Boury. Mr. Boury was a native of Baltimore who moved to New York where he became a successful grain merchant.

Frederick Brancati Professorship [2012]: Jeanne M. Clarke, M.D., M.P.H.

Established by friends of Dr. Brancati in recognition of his extraordinary talents as a leader and mentor and his indefatigable commitment to human health. The income from the principal will be used for faculty support and held in the Division of Internal Medicine in the Department of Medicine.

Breast Cancer Research Professorship in Oncology [1992]: Vered Stearns, M.D.

Funds were provided by Mr. and Mrs. Jeffrey Legum, Mrs. Naomi Legum, grateful patients and friends.

Henry Brem Professorship in Neurosurgery [2014]: Henry Brem, M.D.

The income from the principal will be used for faculty support and held in the Department of Neurosurgery. The professorship was funded by multiple donors with lead donations from Josh Fidler and Dr. and Mrs. Irving Sherman.

The Patricia B. and William T. Bright Professorship in Mental Wellness [2018]: Susan W. Lehmann, M.D.

The fund will support a master clinician and educator who is dedicated to patient care, teaching, and leadership in child psychiatry or geriatric psychiatry, and the professorship will rotate between these two psychiatry disciplines.

Dana and Albert “Cubby” Broccoli Professorship in Oncology [2001]: Elizabeth M. Jaffee, M.D.

Funded by a gift from the Dana and Albert “Cubby” Broccoli Charitable Foundation to be used to endow a Professorship in Oncology, having an initial focus on research and treatment of breast cancer.

William R. Brody Professorship in Radiology [1992]: Zaver M. Bhujwalla, M.D.

Funding for this Professorship was provided by Dr. William R. Brody, who was the Director of the Department of Radiology from 1987 to 1994. In 1996, Dr. Brody was appointed President of the Johns Hopkins University.

Brown Advisory Colleagues Fund [2022]: Cynthia Wolberger, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Brown Advisory, Inc. to benefit the Institute for Basic Biomedical Sciences.

Thomas M. Brushart, M.D. Professorship in the Division of Hand Surgery [2000]: Dawn LaPorte, M.D.

Funding provided by Arthur H. and Dorothy M. Thornhill to provide faculty support in the Division of Hand Surgery, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

John L. Cameron, M.D. Professorship in Alimentary Tract Diseases in the Department of Surgery [2002]: Unoccupied

Established to support a prominent surgeon who devotes their efforts to determining the causes, encouraging prevention and developing management options for diseases of the alimentary tract.

Benjamin S. Carson, Sr., M.D. and Dr. Evelyn Spiro, R.N. Professorship in Pediatric Neurosurgery [2007]: Alan R. Cohen, M.D.

Funding for this professorship was provided by Mr. and Mrs. Donald Spiro to support the Chief of the Neurosurgery Pediatrics Division.

David J. Carver Professorship in Medicine [1974]: Henry R. Halperin, M.D.

Created by Dr. and Mrs. Samuel P. Asper in honor of Mrs. Asper’s father, Dr. Asper was a 1940 graduate of the School of Medicine and a member of the faculty. Previous occupants: Drs. Philip A. Tumulty and William Hazzard.

Tom Clancy Professorship in Ophthalmology [2004]: Unoccupied

Funding for this professorship was provided by author Tom Clancy, a friend of Johns Hopkins Medicine and Johns Hopkins Board of Visitors member.

Clayton Professorship in Oncology [1993]: Bert Vogelstein, M.D.

In 1947, Dr. and Mrs. William L. Clayton of Houston, Texas created the Clayton Fund, which was used to support projects in cardiovascular disease under the direction of Dr. Benjamin M. Baker, class of 1927. In 1984, the direction was shifted to studies of colon cancer in the Oncology Center.

Donald S. Coffey Professorship in Urology [2004]: Kenneth J. Pienta, M.D.

Established by the estate of Mr. and Mrs. J. Smith Michael, residents, fellows, graduate students, staff, and faculty of Johns Hopkins in honor of Donald S. Coffey

James P. Connaughton, M.D. Master Clinician Education and Professor for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry [2015]: Unoccupied

The endowed professorship is in alignment with Dr. James Patrick Connaughton's vision, as founder and director of the Johns Hopkins Children's Mental Healthcare Center. The leader installed in this position will espouse Dr. Connaughton's vision of service to children, community, and teaching the next generation of clinicians while developing the best practices to serve this constituency. This endowment will be held in the Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences.

Sara Miller Coulson and Frank L. Coulson Professorship in Medicine [2011]: Roy C. Ziegelstein, M.D.

Funding provided from income from the principal, which will be used “in honor of Dr. David Hellmann and that the holder of the chair be a physician who exemplifies Dr. Hellmann’s passion for clinical excellence and knowing their patient as a person.”

The Cross Family Professorship in Ophthalmology [2014]: Jennifer E. Thorne, M.D., Ph.D.

Income from the principal will be used for an endowment professorship in ocular immunology research. The endowment will be in the Division of Ocular Immunology in the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Michael J. Cudahy Professorship in Cardiology [1994]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Michael J. Cudahy, the founder of Marquette Electronics, which produces medical, diagnostic, monitoring, and clinical information systems.

Charles Cummings, M.D. Professorship in Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery [2005]: Carole Fakhry, M.D.

Established to honor Dr. Charles Cummings. The funding was provided by various donors.

Harvey Cushing Professorship in Neurosurgery [1981]: Henry Brem, M.D.

Funding provided by Mr. and Mrs. John H. Whitney of New York in honor of Mrs. Whitney’s father. Dr. Harvey Cushing, founder of the specialty of neurosurgery, was a member of the Johns Hopkins Department of Surgery from 1897 to 1912.

Dalio Family Professorship in Mood Disorders [2010]: Kay Redfield Jamison, M.D.

Funding provided by the Dalio Family to support the understanding, treatment, and dissemination of knowledge of mood disorders and support the position of the department director/s of the Johns Hopkins Mood Disorders Center.

Walter E. Dandy Professorship in Neurosurgery [2004]: Rafael J. Tamargo, M.D.

Funds provided by Walter E. Dandy, Jr.

Daniel & Gayle D'Aniello Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery [2020]: Unoccupied

The funds will be used to benefit the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Richard Bennett Darnall Professorship in Surgery [1964]: Jennifer Lawton, M.D.

Funding provided by a bequest in the will of Mrs. Eugenia B. Darnall, whose husband, Richard Bennett Darnall, was an attorney in Annapolis, Maryland.

Virginia DeAcetis Professorship in Basic Science Research [2021]: Andrew Ewald, Ph.D.

This fund will be used to support a professorship in basic science cancer research in the Institute for Basic Biomedical Sciences at the School of Medicine.

Catherine DeAngelis and Jackie Julio Professorship [2020]: Barry S. Solomon, M.D., M.P.H.

This endowment benefits the Johns Hopkins Children's Center and the Department of Pediatrics.

Eugene de Juan, Sr. Professorship in Ophthalmic Education [2006]: Fasika Woreta, M.D., M.P.H.

Funds provided by Eugene de Juan, Sr. to help support the residency program at the Wilmer Eye Institute.

DeLamar Professorship in Biological Chemistry [1919]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by a bequest in the will of Capt. Joseph R. DeLamar, who was born in Holland in 1843, came to America after the Civil War, and engaged in the marine salvage business. In 1878, he moved west, entered the mining business, and became the owner of the Utah Mine and Smelting Co. On the advice of his attorney, he divided his $30 million estate between the “three best medical schools of the day: Johns Hopkins, Harvard, and Columbia.”

Martin W. Donner Professorship in Radiology [1988]: Karen Horton, M.D.

Funding provided by contributions of current and former faculty, fellows, and house staff of the Department of Radiology. Dr. Martin W. Donner was Director of the Department of Radiology from 1972 to 1987.

Clarence Doodeman Professorship in Cardiology [2006]: Robert G. Weiss, M.D.

Funding provided by Edward and Loretta Downey to honor Mrs. Downey’s father, Mr. Clarence Doodeman.

Andreas C. Dracopoulos Professorship in Ophthalmology [2015]: Mandeep Singh, M.D.

Income from the principal will be used "to support the work of Dr. Finkelstein and his successors with a preference for the field of bioethics in ophthalmology.

Andreas C. Dracapoulos & Daniel Finkelstein, M.D. Rising Professorship in Opthalmology [2022]: Jefferson Doyle, M.D., Ph.D.

The gift will be used as a way to honor the memory and legacy of Dr. Daniel Finkelstein and designated as a Wilmer Eye Institute endowment to be held in perpetuity. The Donor understands that his commitment of $1 million will be matched by the Wilmer Eye Institute to create a position that will be known as the Andreas C. Dracopoulos and Daniel Finkelstein, M.D. Rising Professorship in Ophthalmology.

James T. Dresher, Sr., Professorship in Cardiac Surgery [2003]: James Gammie, M.D.

Funding provided by The Dresher Foundation, Inc., to establish an endowed professorship to honor James Dresher, Sr.

The Jim & Patti Dresher & Dresher Foundation Professorship in Medicine [2021]: Samuel Durso, M.D.

Funding will be used to benefit the Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center Department of Medicine as an endowed fund bearing the name of The Jim & Patti Dresher & Dresher Foundation Professor of Medicine. This will be conferred upon the Director of the Department of Medicine at Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center.

Drew Family Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery in honor of Alec John Cosgarea [2016]: Andrew J. Cosgarea, M.D.

Funding providing by Ina and Howard Drew to support the research and clinical work in the area of sports medicine being conducted by Andrew J. Cosgarea, M.D. or his successors.

Drew Family Professorship in UroGynecology [2023]: Victoria Handa, M.D.

The grant will be used to benefit the Division of Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery in the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of The Drew Family Professorship in UroGynecology ("Fund"),

Harry J. Duffey Family Professor of Palliative Care in Oncology [2011]: Thomas Smith, M.D.

Funding provided by the Harry J. Duffey family.

G. Edward and G. Britton Durell Professorship in Ophthalmology [1998]: Elia J. Duh, M.D.

Funding provided by the Altsheler-Durell Foundation, Inc. to establish a full professorship at the School of Medicine, which will support a leading specialist in retinal diseases, and, in particular, age-related macular degeneration and/or low vision.

George S. and Delores D. Eccles Professorship in Ophthalmology [1998]: Peter A. Campochiaro, M.D.

Funding provided by the Eccles Foundation and by Mrs. Eccles for a professorship in Ophthalmology.

Milton T. Edgerton, M.D. Professorship in Plastic Surgery [2011]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Dr. Milton T. Edgerton for an endowed professorship for the Director of the Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery.

Jules B. Edlow and Joan Edlow Professorship in Diabetes [2017]: Thomas W. Donner, M.D.

The income from the principal will benefit the Division of Endocrinology in the Department of Medicine as an endowed professorship to be held in perpetuity.

Dr. Dorothy Edwards Professorship in Gynecology and Obstetrics [1986]: Andrew J. Satin, M.D.

Funding provided by a bequest of Dr. Dorothy Edwards, who attended the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine from 1917 to 1921. She was a successful gynecologist in Chicago. She specified that the Professorship be known by her title, first name, and last name.

Akef El Maghraby Professorship in Preventive Ophthalmology [1991]: Sheila K. West, Ph.D., Pharm.D.

Funding provided by Dr. Akef El Maghraby.

Paul and Christine Englund Professorship [2017]: Unoccupied

The Englund Professorship was established in honor of the late Paul Englund, Ph.D., who served on the faculty of the Department of Biological Chemistry (1968-2010), and his wife, Christine Schneyer Englund, M.D., an adjunct faculty member in the Division of Endocrinology since 1990. Dr. Englund was known for his work on protozoan parasites that cause tropical diseases. The Englund Professorship supports a distinguished tenured faculty member who is widely recognized in the field of biological chemistry for their outstanding, peer-reviewed basic science research.

Eudowood Professorship in Pediatric Immunology [1986]: Jerry A. Winkelstein, M.D.

Funding provided by the Eudowood endowment. Eudowood was the name of a tuberculosis hospital officially known as The Hospital for Consumptives of Maryland, which joined with other institutions to form the Children’s Medical and Surgical Center. The Eudowood endowment is managed by a Board of Directors, which provides funding for this and other professorships.

R. Christian B. Evensen Professorship in Urology at the Brady Urological Institute [2014]: Unoccupied

Funding from the principal will be used to fund the Department of Urology at the Brady Urological Institute.

King Fahd Professorship in Molecular Medicine [1993]: Andrew P. Feinberg, M.D., M.P.H.

Funding provided by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The King Fahd Professorships in the School of Medicine represent “an indication of the mutual human interest and mutual support and friendship between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States of America.”

King Fahd Professorship in Pediatric Oncology [1993]: Alan D. Friedman, M.D.

Funding provided by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The King Fahd Professorships in the School of Medicine represent “an indication of the mutual human interest and mutual support and friendship between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States of America.”

Saul and Doris Farber Professorship in Clinical Care and Investigation in Pediatric Oncology [2013]: Allen Chen, M.D., Ph.D., M.H.S.

Established by Joshua Farber, M.D. in honor of Saul and Doris Farber. The income from the principal will be used for ongoing work to cure childhood cancers.

David L. Guyton, M.D. and Feduniak Family Professorship in Ophthalmology [2009]: Michael Repka, M.D.

Established by Robert and Maureen Feduniak to support patient care and research related to amblyopia, strabismus, and eye diseases of children.

Warfield M. Firor Chair in Surgery [1969]: Pamela A. Lipsett, M.D.

Funding provided by a bequest of Alice Larsen Fink reflecting her “deep regard for Dr. Firor as a fine surgeon, teacher, and humanitarian.” Dr. Warfield M. Firor was a distinguished practicing surgeon in the Department of Surgery.

Ken & Sherrilyn Fisher Professorship in Medicine [2012]: Paul Auwaerter, M.D.

The income from the principal will be used to attract, maintain, and empower a world-class clinician and investigator to focus his efforts on improving clinical care and translational research.

Elliot K. Fishman, M.D. Professorship in Radiology [2018]: Elliot K. Fishman, M.D.

It will be used to benefit the Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences as an endowed gift and held in perpetuity.

Carol Ann Flanagan Professorship in Breast Imaging [2014]: Unoccupied

The income from the principal will be used for the Professorship and will be held in the Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences.

John A. Flynn Professorship [2015]: Daniel J. Brotman, M.D.

The income from the principal will be used "to underwrite Dr. Flynn's current and future priorities in medical education and eventually will help advance the careers of young clinicians will see to emulate Dr. Flynn's approach to the field."

Blanket Fort Foundation Endowed Professorship in Pediatric Population Health & Health Equity Research [2022]: Sara B. Johnson, Ph.D., M.P.H.

The gift will be used to benefit the Johns Hopkins Children's Center & Department of Pediatrics as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing a name to be mutually agreed upon by the Donors & the University. This Professorship will support faculty working to address health & education disparities for children.

Nichols J. Fortuin, M.D. Professorship in Cardiology [2008]: Ronald D. Berger, M.D., Ph.D.

Funded by contributions from patients and friends of Dr. Fortuin.

Frank J. Frassica Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery [2011]: Mei Wan, Ph.D.

Established to provide faculty support in the Department of Orthopedic Surgery.

Jonas Friedenwald Professorship in Ophthalmology [2004]: Unoccupied

Named for Jonas Friedenwald, who was an associate professor at Wilmer. He was the father of experimental ophthalmic pathology and made key observations in glaucoma and ocular pharmacology.

James F. Fries Professorship in Medicine [2006]: Lisa A. Cooper, M.D., M.P.H.

Funding provided by James F. Fries, M.D. and Sarah Tilton Fries, M.P.H. to support a faculty member engaged in health outcomes research, clinical epidemiology, and/or health policy research.

Robert Garrett Professorship in Pediatric Surgery [1964]: David Hackam, M.D.

Funding provided by the Garrett Fund for the surgical treatment of children founded by Mary F. Jacobs.

William Thomas Gerrard, Mario Anthony Duhon, and Jennifer and John Chalsty Professorship in Urology [1998]: William B. Isaacs, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mr. William Thomas Gerrard and Mr. and Mrs. John Chalsty for the Department of Urology.

James P. Gills Professorship in Ophthalmology [1999]: Neil Bressler, M.D.

Funding by James P. Gills, who trained at Johns Hopkins Hospital.

The Helen Larson and Charles Glenn Grover Professor in Ophthalmology [2017]: Jeff Mumm, Ph.D.

Funding provided by the Grovers' estate and matched by the State of Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund for the purpose of macular degeneration research at the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Given Foundation Professorship in Pediatrics [1962]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by the Irene Heinz Given and John LaPoute Given Foundation of New York for the purposes of medical research and teaching.

Morton F. Goldberg Professorship in Ophthalmology [1999]: Jennifer Elisseeff, Ph.D.

Funding provided by a number of unrestricted bequests to the Wilmer Institute.

The David M. Goldenberg Family Chair of the Institute for Brain Protection Sciences at Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital [2021]: George Jallo, M.D.

The David M. Goldenberg Family Foundation Chair within the Institute for Brain Protection Sciences at Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital was established in 2021. This gift was matched 1:1 by the Institute for Brain Protection Services.

David Goldfarb, M.D. Research Professorship in Vascular Surgery [2014]: James Black, III, M.D.

Funding provided by C.R. Bard for endowed professorship om Vascular Surgery.

The Sol Goldman Professorship in Pancreatic Cancer Research [2015]: Michael G. Goggins, M.B., M.D.

Established by the Department of Pathology in honor of the Goldman Family to support a faculty member focused on pancreatic cancer research.

Vincent L. Gott, M.D. Professorship [2000]: Brett Mettler, M.D.

Funding provided by various residents, patients, and friends of Vincent L. Gott.

Dr. E. F. Gordon Professorship [2020]: Malcolm V. Brock, M.D.

This endowment benefits the Division of Thoracic Surgery in the Department of Surgery.

Katharine Graham Professorship in Ophthalmology [2002]: Sharon Solomon, M.D.

Funded by a major bequest from the Katharine Graham estate.

Lou & Nancy Grasmick Professorship in Cardiology [2021]: Wendy Post, M.D.

Funding will be used to benefit the Division of Cardiology as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of Lou & Nancy Grasmick Professorship in Cardiology. It will be filled by a qualified faculty member who has demonstrated a commitment to women professionals inn Cardiology.

Alex Grass Professorship in Oncology [2003]: David S. Ettinger, M.D.

Funding provided by Mr. Alex Grass of Wormsleyburg, PA.

Daniel B. & Florence E. Green Endowed Professorship in Ataxia [2021]: Liana S. Rosenthal, M.D.

This gift will be used to benefit the Department of Neurology as an endowment to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of Daniel B. and Florence E. Green Professorship in Ataxia. It is the donor's request that the professorship holder engaged in novel research (including pilot projects) with a basic science & translational focus & whenever possible, that the research explores the changes in the brain which contribute to cerebellar ataxia, including cerebellar ataxia of unknown etiology, and improve the quality-of-life of those with cerebellar ataxia.

Joseph E. Green Professorship in Macular Degeneration and Other Retinal Diseases [1997]: Morton F. Goldberg, M.D.

Funding provided by a bequest from Joseph E. Green to the Department of Ophthalmology, which will support research activities by a faculty member in macular degeneration.

W. Richard Green Professorship in Ophthalmology [2007]: Richard D. Semba, M.D., M.P.H.

Funding provided by various donors to support a faculty member in Ophthalmology.

Erwin and Stephanie Greenberg Professorship in Urology [2017]: David J. McConkey, Ph.D.

Established to benefit the Johns Hopkins Greenberg Bladder Cancer Institute.

John W. Griffin, M.D. Directorship for the Brain Science Institute [2010]: Jeffrey Rothstein, M.D.

Income from the principal will be used to provide faculty support and “advance the work of the Brain Science Institute. Through the support provided…the director will be better able to communicate with and serve a large and diverse neurosciences community, while making decisions efficiently and moving targeted programs along rapidly.”

John W. Griffin, M.D. Professorship in Neurology [2015]: Justin McArthur, M.D.

Funded by Jeffrey and Harriet Legum and will be held in Neurology and Brain Sciences.

John G. Griffith, M.D. Professorship in Gynecology [2019]: Jenell S. Coleman, M.D., M.P.H.

Funding provided by Dr. and Mrs. Lawrence Griffith, The Griffith Family and various donors for the support of a professorship in Gynecology honoring former faculty member, Dr. John Griffith.

Roland R. Griffiths, Ph.D. Professorship in Psychedelic Research on Secular Spirituality and Well-Being [2023]: David B. Yaden, Ph.D.

Funds will benefit the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences as an endowed fund to be held in perpetuity to support a professorship and to establish a world class, rigorous, empirical program of research with psychedelic substances to advance understanding of well-being and spirituality in the service of promoting human flourishing for generations to come.

Burton E. Grossman Professorship in Ophthalmology [1998]: Oliver Schein, M.D.

Funding for this professorship was provided by Dr. and Mrs. Burton Grossman to ensure the integration of the progression of specific ophthalmologic diseases and to develop techniques for preventing these diseases.

Guerrieri Family Professorship in Ophthalmology [1998]: Donald Zack, M.D.

Funded by the Guerrieri Family Foundation for the Center for Genetic Engineering and Molecular Ophthalmology at the Wilmer Institute.

Raj and Kamla Gupta Professorship in Infectious Diseases [2014]: Robert Bollinger, M.D.

The income from the principal will be used for scholarships for faculty support and held in the Division of Infectious Diseases in the Department of Medicine at the School of Medicine.

Willard and Lillian Hackerman Professorship in Radiation Oncology [1981]: Marikki K. Laiho, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mr. and Mrs. Willard Hackerman. Mr. Hackerman is a graduate of the Johns Hopkins University School of Engineering and was a long-time trustee of the University. He is the CEO of Whiting-Turner Construction Co. and founded the Whiting School of Engineering.

Karl H. Hagen Professorship in Ophthalmology [1998]: Jiang Qian, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mr. Karl H. Hagen to provide faculty support in the Department of Ophthalmology.

Haller Professorship in Pediatric Neurologic Diseases [1996]: Carl E. Stafstrom, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by a bequest from Miss Virginia Doriot Haller of Salem, VA, whose purpose is to support research with a primary focus on genetic, developmental, and environmental factors in the neurologic diseases of children.

Bayard Halsted Professorship in Cell Biology [1943]: Deborah Andrew, Ph.D.

Funding provided by a bequest in the will of Mr. Edward Bayard Halsted, a retired stock broker in New York City. “The income thereof shall be forever devoted to research work for the advancement of knowledge as to the nature, causes, means of prevention, and cure of such maladies in need of further study and investigation.” Previous occupants: Drs. David Bodian and Thomas D. Pollard.

William Stewart Halsted Professorship in Surgery [2000]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Department of Surgery’s Unit Executive Fund.

The George W. Hambrick, Jr., M.D. & Thomas G. Olsen, M.D. Professorship in Dermatology [2023]: Janis Taube, M.D., M.Sc.

Funding provided by Dr. Thomas Olsen, the State of Maryland, and friends and family of Dr. George Hambrick to benefit the Department of Dermatology as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of the George W. Hambrick, Jr., M.D. and Thomas G. Olsen, M.D. Professorship in Dermatology.

Jacob Handelsman Professorship in Surgery [2004]: Fabian Johnston, M.D.

Funding provided by grateful patient of Dr. Handelsman.

Joseph S. and Esther Handler Professorship in Laboratory Research in Nephrology [2017]: Paul A. Welling, M.D.

To benefit the Division of Nephrology in the Department of Medicine as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for the advancement of bench research in renal medicine.

James C. Harris, M.D. Professorship in Developmental Neuropsychiatry & Neurosciences Reseach [2021]: Unoccupied

The gift will be used to benefit the School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Division of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship.

Elizabeth Treide and A. McGehee Harvey Chair in The History of Medicine [1992]: Jeremy Greene, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Dr. and Mrs. Harvey, Dr. Harvey’s colleagues in the Department of Medicine, and many friends and relatives of the Harveys. This Professorship was placed in the Department of the History of Medicine to recognize Dr. Harvey’s (class of 1934) second interest in history after 27 years as Director of the Johns Hopkins Department of Medicine. Mrs. Harvey (class of 1943) was named to recognize her and other faculty wives for their contributions to this Institution.

Isaac Morris and Lucille Elizabeth Hay Professorship in Embryology [1996]: Peter Devreotes, Ph.D.

Funding provided by a commitment made in 1996 by Elizabeth D. Hay in memory of her parents.

Kyle Haydock Professorship in Oncology [2003]: Donald Small, M.D., Ph.D.

Endowed by author Tom Clancy memorializing a young friend who lost his life to cancer. To be used in perpetuity by a distinguished faculty member in Oncology for the purpose of advancing outstanding childhood cancer research and patient care.

David B. Hellmann, M.D. Endowed Professorship [2021]: David B. Hellmann, M.D.

The gift will be held in perpetuity to support the Johns Hopkins Center for Innovative Medicine in the Department of Medicine, under the direction of Dr. David B. Hellmann.

George J. Heuer Professorship in Neurosurgery [2014]: Allan J. Belzberg, M.D.

Income from the principal will be used to alleviate pain and suffering from neurosurgical diseases, and will be held in the Department of Neurosurgery.

Sherlock Hibbs/Eugene VanDyke Professorship for Research [2004]: Unoccupied

Fund established in the School of Medicine to be used to provide a professorship that will reside in the Dean’s Office.

Frank Hinman, Jr. Professorship in Urology [2013]: Bruce J. Trock, Ph.D.

Endowment established from the estate of Dr. Frank Hinman to benefit urologic research at The Brady Institute.

Rudolph Hoehn-Saric, M.D. & Evanne Hoehn-Saric, M.D. Professorship in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Anxiety Disorders Research [2014]: Gerald Nestadt, M.D., B.Ch., M.P.H.

Income from the principal will benefit the Rudolf Hoehn-Saric, M.D. Professor in OCD/Anxiety Disorders Research. The first recipient, Gerald Nestadt, M.D., Co-director of the OCD Clinic and Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, will use this funding for research in the areas of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorders, Anxiety Disorders, Tourette’s and Attention Deficit Disorder. This endowment will be held in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at the School of Medicine.

Charles J. Homcy, M.D./Simeon G. Margolis, M.D. Professorship [2015]: Alex Kolodkin, Ph.D.

The income from the principal will provide direct salary support for the Homcy/Margolis Professor for research and teaching in the Department of Neurosciences at the school, and the teaching of undergraduate and graduate neuroscience at the Krieger School of Arts and Sciences.

Rita Honey-Hiers Assistant Professorship for Tarlov Cyst Disease [2017]: Timothy F. Witham, M.D.

For faculty support for the professor focusing on Tarlov Cyst Disease in the Department of Neurosurgery. Funding provided by Charlie Scheeler and Mary Ellen Pease and a matching gift from the State of Maryland E-Nnovation grant.

Johns Hopkins Family Professorship in Oncology Research [2004]: Robert Brodsky, M.D.

Funds provided by the descendants of the parents of Johns Hopkins.

The Johns Hopkins Institute for Excellence in Education Professor of Medicine [2014]: Joseph Cofrancesco, M.D.

To be held by the Director of the Institute for Excellence in Education.

John Eager Howard Chair in Endocrinology and Metabolism [1990]: Paul W. Ladenson, M.D.

Funding provided by family, friends, colleagues, and grateful patients of Dr. John Eager Howard (class of 1928), who was a long-time member of the Johns Hopkins faculty and Chief of the Division of Endocrinology. He was a superb internist, as well as investigator. His research contributions include the elucidation of the relationship between unilateral renal disease and high blood pressure, and the role of a protein factor in urine in preventing the formation of kidney stones.

Ralph H. Hruban, M.D. Professorship in Pancreatic Cancer Research [2017]: James R. Eshleman, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by friends of Dr. Ralph Hruban, in gratitude, to support a faculty member focused on pancreatic cancer research in the Department of Pathology.

R. Dale Hughes Professorship in Oncology [1999]: Mario Eisenberer, M.D.

Established through commitments made in 1999 by R. Dale Hughes and Frances M. Hughes and other donors. Mr. Hughes is a grateful patient of the Oncology Center and made this commitment because of the care he has received since 1987.

David S. Hungerford, M.D. Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery [2001]: Unoccupied

Established through a commitment made in 1997 by Good Samaritan Hospital and patients of Dr. David S. Hungerford.

Craig B. Huston Professorship [2013]: Unoccupied

The income from the principal will be used for research in eye diseases and will be held in the Wilmer Eye Institute at the School of Medicine.

Charles E. Iliff III, M.D. Professorship in Ophthalmology [2005]: Unoccupied

Funding for this professorship provided by Dr. Helen Ossofsky-Iliff to honor Dr. Charles Iliff and to provide support for research which will improve the outcome of ophthalmic surgery.

Julius H. Jacobson, II, M.D. Professorship in Vascular Surgery [1998]: Bruce Perler, M.D.

Funded by Julius H. Jacobson, II, M.D. to establish a chair in vascular surgery in the Department of Surgery.

Jakurski Family Directorship [2013]: Unoccupied

Income from the principal will be used to support the Director of the Brady Institute.

Janssen/Strauss-Halbreich Professorship in Digestive and Motility Disorders [1998]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Janssen Pharmaceutical, Inc., Jeremy and Nancy Halbreich, Theodore H. Strauss, Janie Strauss McGarr and various donors to create a professorship at the Marvin M. Schuster Center for Digestive and Motility Disorders at the Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center.

Robert D. Jeffs Professorship in Pediatric Urology [2010]: John P. Gearhart, M.D.

Funding provided by the Zanvyl and Isabelle Krieger Fund. Income from the principal will be used for a professorship in pediatric urology. The endowment will be held in the Brady Urological Institute at the School of Medicine.

Jennison-Novak Families Professorship in Neurosurgery [2017]: Chetan Bettegowda, M.D.

Income from the principal will benefit the Department of Neurosurgery as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity and used toward a professorship bearing the name of The Jennison & Novak Families Professorship.

Allan and Claire Jensen Professorship in Ophthalmology [2022]: Megan Collins, M.D., MPH

This endowment will benefit the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Richard T. & Frances W. Johnson Professorship in Neurology [2021]: Ellen Mowry, M.D., MCR, FAAC, FANA

To be established by commitments made by the family and colleagues of Richard T. Johnson. Dr. Johnson was a member of the Department of Neurology when it was created in 1969 and served for many years as director of the department.

Howard J. Jones, Jr., and Georgeanna Seeger Jones Professorship [2013]: James Segars, M.D.

Funding provided by the estate of Dr. and Mrs. Lonnie Burnett. Income from the principal will be used for the “unrestricted use and benefit…to establish an endowed chaired professorship.” The endowment will be held in the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics at the School of Medicine.

The Dr. Sydney H. Kane, Emma B. Kane, David M. Kane, and Family Endowment Fund [2013]: Unoccupied

The income from the principal will be used for research in newborn medicine and will be held in the Children’s Center at the school in honor of the accomplishments of the late Dr. Sydney Kane, a noted neonatologist and research scientist.

Sheikh Khalifa Professor in Stroke Detection and Diagnosis in the Department of Neurology [2020] Argye E. Hillis, M.D., M.A.

Will benefit the Sheikh Khalifa Stroke Institute at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. There are two endowments which will provide an annual funding stream, in perpetuity, to advance the goals of the Institute, with a focus on research, teaching & clinical work that can be translated to the UAE whenever possible. The two professorships will provide additional faculty with opportunities and resources to achieve the research objectives of the Sheikh Khalifa Stroke Institute.

Sheikh Khalifa Professor in Stroke Treatment, Recovery and Rehabiliation [2020]: Preeti Raghavan, M.D.

The funding will benefit the Sheikh Khalifa Stroke Institute at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. There are two endowments which will provide an annual funding stream, in perpetuity, to advance the goals of the Institute, with a focus on research, teaching & clinical work that can be translated to the UAE whenever possible. The two endowments, along with a third to be funded in 2021, will support the work of the Director and two Center Directors, and will provide additional faculty with opportunities and resources to achieve the research objectives of the Sheikh Khalifa Stroke Institute.

Earl D. Kidwell, Jr., M.D. Professorship in Ophthalmology [2018]: Unoccupied

The funding will be used to support the academic and research activities of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Department of Ophthalmology in the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Sidney Kimmel Professorship in Radiation Oncology and Molecular Radiation Sciences [2014]: Theodore DeWeese, M.D.

The income from principal will be used for an endowed professorship to provide research initiatives within Radiation Oncology & Molecular Radiation Sciences. The endowment will be held in the Department of Radiation Oncology & Molecular Radiation Sciences in the School of Medicine.

KKESH/Wilmer Professorship in Ophthalmology [2010]: Ashley Behrens, M.D.

The King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital (KKESH) is the largest eye hospital in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and is one of the top-ranked medical facilities in the Middle East.

Knights Templar Eye Foundation Professorship in Ophthalmology (KTEF) [2016]: Unoccupied

An endowed gift to be held in perpetuity to benefit the Wilmer Eye Institute

Henry J. Knott Directorship of the McKusick/Nathans Center for Medical Genetics and Professorship in Medical Genetics [1999]: Ambroise Wonkam, M.D.

Funding provided by Marion I. Knott in honor of her late husband, who served as a Trustee of the Hospital and, with his wife, was an extremely generous supporter of Hopkins.

Marion I. Knott Directorship of the Oncology Center and Professor in Oncology [1999]: William Nelson, M.D.

Funding provided by Marion I. Knott in honor of her late husband, who served as a Trustee of the Hospital and, with his wife, was an extremely generous supporter of Johns Hopkins.

Eric Kobren Professorship in Applied Health Informatics [2019]: Mohamed A. Rehman, M.D.

Funding provided by Eric and Catherine Kobren to endow and sustain the professorship holder, providing resources for research and other academic pursuits.

Catherine Kobren Professorship in Patient Safety and Quality [2019]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Eric and Catherine Kobren to endow and sustain the professorship holder, providing resources for research and other academic pursuits.

Arlene and Robert Kogod Professorship in Mood Disorders in the Department of Psychiatry [2008]: Peter P. Zandi, Ph.D.

Funding will be provided by Arlene and Robert Kogod to provide the financial support and stability for research, education, and clinical activities of individual faculty members in the Department of Psychiatry.

Everett and Margorie Kovler Professorship in Pancreas Cancer Research [2009]: Scott Kern, M.D.

Funding provided by Everett and Marjorie Kovler to provide support of pancreatic cancer research. The endowment will be held in the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at the School of Medicine.

Peter and Judy Kovler Professorship in Breast Cancer Research [2020]: Andrea Richardson, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Peter and Judy Kovler to support a faculty member focused on breast cancer research in the Department of Pathology.

Zanvyl Krieger Professorship in Pediatric Ophthalmology [1991]: David L. Guyton, M.D.

Funded by a contribution from Mr. Zanvyl Krieger, a 1928 graduate of the Johns Hopkins University, a successful business man, and philanthropist. He is a benefactor of many components of the Johns Hopkins University.

Sachiko Kuno and Ryuji Ueno Innovation Professorship [2014]: Akira Sawa, M.D.

To accelerate clinical and scientific innovation in mental health and brain science in the world.

Maurice E. Langham, Ph.D. Professorship in Ophthalmology [2008]: Unoccupied

The income from principal will be used for Professorship in honor of Maurice E. Langham, Ph.D. The endowment will be held in the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Lawson Wilkens Professorship in Pediatric Endocrinology [2005]: Sheela N. Magge, M.D.

To provide professorship support to a faculty member in the division of Pediatric Endocrinology in the Department of Pediatrics.

George LeBoff Professorship for Research in Digestive Diseases [1999]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by the estate of George LeBoff for support in the Division of Gastroenterology.

Lederer Professorship in Pediatric Epilepsy [1991]: Carl Stafstrom, M.D., Ph.D.

Funded by a gift for research in the care and cure of pediatric epilepsy.

L. Douglas Lee & Barbara Levinson-Lee Professorship in Clinical Practice [2021]: Steven J. Kravet, M.D., MBA, FACP

Funding will benefit the Department of Medicine, General Internal Medicine Division to support the office of the President of Johns Hopkins Community Physicians and to elevate the importance of excellence in clinical practice.

L. Douglas Lee & Barbara Levinson-Lee Professorship in Ophthalmology [2021]: Shameema Sikder, M.D.

Funding will benefit the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Legum Professorship in Acute Neurological Medicine [1999]: Daniel Hanley, M.D.

Funding provided by Mr. and Mrs. Jeffrey Legum. Appointment to the Professorship will be made by the Dean on the recommendation of the Chairman of the Department of Neurology. The recipient will be a leader in research of severe brain injury and disease.

David Levine Professorship [2004]: Gail Daumit, M.D.

Established to be occupied by the Vice Dean for Clinical Investigations.

Julia G. Levy Ph.D. Professorship in Ophthalmology [2004]: Susan Bressler, M.D.

Funding provided by QLT, Inc. of Vancouver, BC.

Robert L. Levy Chair in Cardiology [1975]: Brian O’Rourke, Ph.D.

Funding provided by a bequest of Dr. Robert L. Levy, a graduate of the School of Medicine in 1913 and a highly respected practicing cardiologist in New York City. Previous occupants: Drs. J. O’Neal Humphries, Myron L. Weisfeldt, and Eduardo Marban.

John R. Lewis Professorship in Pathology [2022]: Clayton C. Yates, Ph.D.

Funding provided by anonymous donors in memory of the Honorable John R. Lewis, former United States Representative from Georgia, to support a faculty member in the Department of Pathology who is a member of an under-represented minority group.

Wayne Lewis Professorship in Orthopaedic and Shoulder Surgery [2006]: Edward McFarland, M.D.

Funding provided by Dextra Bank and Trust Co., Ltd. to create a professorship in orthopaedics and shoulder surgery.

Donlin M. Long Chair in Neurosurgery [2003]: Nicholas Theodore, M.D.

Established in 1999 by patients, colleagues, and friends in honor of Donlin Long, who served as Director of the Department of Neurosurgery from 1973 to 2000.

Mason F. Lord Chair in Geriatric Medicine [1996]: Cynthia Boyd, M.D., MPH

Funding provided by an anonymous gift to honor Dr. Mason F. Lord, a 1954 graduate of the School of Medicine, member of the faculty of the Department of Medicine, and Director of the Geriatrics Program at the Baltimore City Hospitals, now the Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center.

The Raymond and Anna Lublin Professorship in Medicine [1989]: Jeremey D. Walston, MD.

Funding provided by Dr. and Mrs. Raymond Lublin to support the leader of the Division of Geriatrics in the Department of Medicine. Dr. Lublin was a 1929 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, and practiced general surgery in East Hartford, CT.

Edyth Harris Lucas and Clara Lucas Lynn Chair in Hematology [1992]: Linzhao Cheng, M.D.

Funding provided by Clara Lucas Lynn, a grateful patient of Dr. William R. Bell.

Virginia and Daniel K. Ludwig Chair in Cancer Research [1996]: Stephen Baylin, M.D.

Funding provided by Daniel K. Ludwig, one of the world’s great ship owners, who dedicated his fortune to medical research on an international scale for the understanding and eradication of cancer.

Virginia and Daniel K. Ludwig Chair in Clinical Investigation of Cancer [1999]: Ross C. Donehower, M.D.

Funding provided by Daniel K. Ludwig, one of the world’s great ship owners, who dedicated his fortune to medical research on an international scale for the understanding and eradication of cancer.

Ian T. MacMillan Family Professorship in Clinical Pancreatic Cancer Research [2008]: Daniel Laheru, M.D.

Funding provided by the MacMillan Family to be used for clinical pancreatic cancer research at the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center.

David Marine Professorship of Medicine [1985]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by the estate of Dr. David N. Marine, a 1947 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. He specialized in the study of pulmonary disease and tuberculosis.

E. K. Marshall and Thomas H. Maren Professorship in Pharmacology [1997]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Dr. Thomas H. Maren, class of 1951, who was a faculty member in the Department of Pharmacology directed by Dr. Marshall.

J. Willard Marriott, Jr. Professorship in Ophthalmology [2020]: Peter L. Gehlbach, M.D.

The combination of these two endowments will establish a Professorship at the Wilmer Eye Institute at the School of Medicine.

Eli Kennerly Marshall, Jr. Professorship in Oncology [1978]: Unoccupied

E. K. Marshall succeeded Abel as Professor of Pharmacology. This Professorship was initially in the Oncology Division of the Department of Medicine, but moved to Oncology when Oncology became a department.

Bessie Darling Massey Chair in Biomedical Engineering [1971]: Michael I. Miller, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mr. and Mrs. Massey, grateful patients of John Bordley.

The A. Edward Maumenee Professorship in Ophthalmology [1993]: Harry A. Quigley, M.D.

Funding provided by Mrs. Margaret Mosher and other friends, colleagues, and grateful patients of Dr. Maumenee who was Director of the Wilmer Eye Institute and Director of the Department of Ophthalmology from 1955 to 1979.

Oliver Lee McCabe, III, Ph.D. Professorship in the Neuropsychopharmacology of Consciousness [2020]: Roland R. Griffiths, Ph.D.

This benefits the Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences. It will be used for the purposes of human research on the effects of psychedelic substances on consciousness, treatment of psychiatric and behavioral disorders, the improvement of public health, and the betterment of humankind.

David Hall McConnell Professorship in Urology [1973]: Misop Han, M.D.

Funding provided by Admiral H. P. John Duberg, a grateful patient of Dr. W. W. Scott. Adm. Duberg was married to Dorys McConnell Duberg, a daughter of David Hall McConnell who was the founder of the Avon Corporation.

The Hugh P. McCormick Family Professorship in Endocrinology and Metabolism [2003]: Sherita Hill Golden, M.D.

Funding provided by Hugh P. McCormick of McCormick Spice.

Martha McCrory Professorship in Medicine [2014]: Fred M. Wigley, M.D.

Funding to support a world-class physician whose clinical and research work is focused on efforts to cure scleroderma and provide patient care until that cure is discovered.

The Paul R. McHugh Chair in Motivated Behaviors [1998]: Timothy H. Moran, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mr. William F. Scandling and various donors in honor of Dr. Paul McHugh, Director of the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences.

Victor A. McKusick Professorship in Medicine and Genetics [2004]: Harry C. Dietz, III, M.D.

Funding provided by anonymous donor and friends of Dr. McKusick.

Menowitz/Rosenstein Professorship in Pediatric Respiratory Sciences [2018]: Peter J. Mogayzel, Jr., M.D., Ph.D., MBA

Benefits the Johns Hopkins Children’s Center, Department of Pediatrics, in the Eudowood Division of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences (Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine) to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name.

Eugene Meyer III Professorship in Psychiatry and Medicine [1982]: Glenn J. Treisman, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Dr. Eugene Meyer, family, and friends. Dr. Meyer, a 1941 graduate of the School of Medicine, trained in Medicine, Psychiatry, and the Professorship supports joint activities in these two departments.

Myra S. Meyer Professorship in Mood Disorders [2008]: Karen L. Swartz, M.D.

The income from the principal will be used to provide financial support and stability needed for the individual faculty members as it related to research, education and clinical activities in mood disorders.

Harvey M. Meyerhoff Professorship in Bioethics [1999]: Jeremy Sugarman, M.D., Ph.D.

Established by commitment made in 1999 by Harvey M. Meyerhoff, a long time University and Hospital Trustee and the founding Chairman of the Hopkins Health System Board.

Marilyn Meyerhoff Professorship in Thoracic Surgery [2022]: Julie Brahmer, M.D.

The donor intends to recommend that the grant be used to benefit the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of the Marilyn Meyerhoff Professorship in Thoracic Surgery.

Robert E. Meyerhoff Assistant Professorships [2007]: Eric T. Oliver, M.D.; Jelani C. Zarif, Ph.D., M.S.

Funding provided to enable Johns Hopkins Medicine to recruit junior faculty members with exceptional promise.

Robert and Jane Meyerhoff Professorship [2018]: Shawn M. Kunisaki, M.D., M.Sc.

Established for the recruitment of a junior faculty member with exceptional promise, and exemplary record of academic achievement in medicine and a demonstrated commitment to increasing opportunities for under-represented minorities and breaking down stereotypes. The ultimate goal will be to enable as many faculty candidates as possible and encourage them to either stay at Johns Hopkins as role models and mentors, or to move on to positions of national leadership, such as department chairs around the country.

Catherine Iola and J. Smith Michael Distinguished Professor in Urology [1988]: Shawn E. Lupold, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mrs. Catherine Iola Michael and Mr. Smith Michael. Mr. Michael was President and Board Chairman of the First National Bank of Aberdeen, which was later acquired by Equitable Trust Company. Both Mr. Michael and Mrs. Iola Michael grew up in Harford County, Maryland. Mr. Michael died in 1978. This Professorship was established in memory of Mr. J. Smith Michael.

Anne Gaines and G. Thomas Miller Professorship Scott M. Wright, M.D.

It was the desire of Sarah Miller Coulson with this gift to honor her mother, Anne and to remember her father, Thomas, and to support Dr. Scott Wright in the Center for Innovative Medicine (CIM). This professorship was created also to recognize Scott for his leadership of the Miller-Coulson Academy.

Edward D. Miller Professorship in Anesthesiology Research [2007]: Nicholas A. Flavahan, M.D.

Funding provided from the Johns Hopkins Hospital Endowment Fund, Inc. Funds will be used to support research activities and research infrastructure in the Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine.

Neil R. Miller, M.D. Professorship in Ophthalmology [2021}: Unoccupied

This gift will be used to support a faculty member of the Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins Medicine.

The Lloyd B. Minor, M.D. Vestibular and Skull Base Sciences Center Director [2020]: John P. Carey, M.D.

This benefits the Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery. It will fund the Lloyd B. Minor, M.D., Vestibular & Skull Base Sciences Center Director.

Michel Mirowski, M.D. Professorship in Cardiology [1998]: Charles J. Lowenstein, M.D.

Funding provided by the Mirowski Family Foundation, Inc., to provide faculty support in the Division of Cardiology in the School of Medicine. The Chair memoralizes Dr. Mirowski, a cardiologist at Johns Hopkins who played a key role in the development of the implanted defibrillator.

Arthur B. and Patricia B. Modell Professorship in Thoracic Surgery [2007]: Stephen C. Yang, M.D.

Funding provided by Mr. and Mrs. B. Modell to honor a faculty member in the Department of Surgery. This gift will allow the Department of Surgery to have a profound impact on the field of thoracic surgery.

C. David Molina, M.D., M.P.H. Chair in Medicine [2014]: Lawrence J. Appel, M.D., M.P.H.

Support for the chair holder who is committed to the health of all communities and to advancing medical well-being of individuals and communities and preventative medicine. Held in the Division of General Internal Medicine.

J. Mario Molina Professorship in History of Medicine [2022]: Mary E. Fissell, Ph.D., MA

Funds will benefit the History of Medicine. It will support a leading scholar and educator in the field, whose work communicates the enduring relevance of historical analysis to clinical practice, health policy, and the general public.

Russell H. Morgan Professorship in Radiology [1994]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by friends and colleagues of Dr. Russell H. Morgan, Director of the Department of Radiology from 1946 to 1971.

Richard and Kathleen Morton Chair in Genetic Research [1989]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Richard F. Morton and Kathleen C. Morton to provide faculty support in the Department of Genetic Medicine. Dr. Richard Morton completed an OB/GYN internship at Hopkins and also served on the School of Public Health faculty. Dr. Kathleen Morton is a pediatrician who served on the School of Medicine faculty and became the first woman named a dean there.

Margaret C. Mosher Professorship in Ophthalmology [2002]: John D. Gottsch, M.D.

Established in 2002 by a one-life gift annuity from the estate of Margaret C. Mosher of Santa Barbara, California.

James B. Murphy Professorship in Oncology [2000]: Richard F. Ambinder, M.D., Ph.D.

Established in 2000 by an anonymous donor in memory of James B. Murphy, Class of 1909.

Harry and Betty Meyerberg/Thomas R. Hendrix Professorship in Gastroenterology [2006]: Steven Meltzer, M.D.

Funding for this professorship provides faculty support in the Division of Gastroenterology in the Department of Medicine.

George T. Nager Professorship in Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery [1999]: Elisabeth Glowatzki, Ph.D.

Funding to support research in the Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery in the School of Medicine.

Daniel Nathans Directorship of the Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics and Professorship in Molecular Biology and Genetics [2000]: Rachel Green, Ph.D.

Funds provided by several anonymous donors in honor of Daniel Nathans. Dr. Nathans joined the faculty in 1962 and went on the direct the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology and Genetics. He served as interim president of the University from 1995 to 1996. He won the Nobel Prize in medicine in 1978 for his discovery and use of a restriction enzyme as “biochemical scissors” to cut and analyze DNA. In 1993, he received the nation’s highest scientific award, the National Medal of Science. Dr. Nathans died in 1999.

Paul K. Neumann Professorship in Pancreatic Surgery [1998]: Jin He, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mark D. and Robin Neumann in memory of Mr. Mark Neumann’s father to support a prominent surgeon in determining the causes, prevention, and management options for pancreatic cancer research.

Noxell Professorship in Dermatology [1985]: Sewon Kang, M.D.

Funding provided by the Noxell Foundation. The Noxell Company was a cosmetics company founded and based in Maryland which became a part of the Proctor and Gamble Co.

Odd Fellows Professorship in Ophthalmology [1963]: Henry D. Jampel, M.D., M.H.S.

Funding provided by a grant for research in eye disease and eye pathology.

Odd Fellows Rising Professorship in Ophthalmology [2022]: Fatemeh Rajali, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding will benefit the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Lewis J. Ort Professorship in Ophthalmology [1989]: Justin Hanes, Ph.D.

Funded by a gift from the Lewis J. Ort family for the support of diagnosis and management of hereditary eye diseases.

William Osler Professorship in Medicine [1978]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by a bequest in the will of Dr. J. Earle Moore, a prominent Baltimore internist and pioneer in the chemotherapy of syphilis. He was director of the Syphilis Clinic at Johns Hopkins. The Professorship is named for the first Director of the Department of Medicine, Dr. William Osler, and has been occupied by Directors of the Department.

The Lawrence C. Pakula, M.D. Professorship Fund [2020]: Frances Northington, M.D.

The gift will be used to benefit the Johns Hopkins Children's Center & Department of Pediatrics as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of The Lawrence C. Pakula, M.D. Professorship. When possible, the recipient will be involved in the advancement of pediatric residency and/or education programs.

The Sheila Sutland Pakula Professorship for Maternal & Newborn Health [2020]: Nicole A. Shilkofski, M.D., M.Ed.

Benefits the Department of Pediatrics, for maternal and newborn health.

Alan Partin, M.D., Ph.D. Professorship in Urology [2022]: Jun Luo, Ph.D.

Funding will be used to support a professorship focused on prostate cancer research in the Department of Urology.

Arnall Patz Distinguished Professorship in Ophthalmology [1993]: Kannan Rangaramanujam, M.D.

Funded by gifts from family, friends, colleagues, and grateful patients of Dr. Arnall Patz, who was Director of the Wilmer Eye Institute and Director of the Department of Ophthalmology from 1979 to 1989.

Dr. Arnall Patz Endowed Professorship for the Lions Low Vision Center [2014]: Unoccupied

Established in 2014 by Lions Clubs of Multiple District 22, Wilmer Residents Association members, and the Patz Family and Friends; After Patz died in 2010, many who had known, worked with, or been treated by him, including the Lions, rallied to endow the Dr. Arnall Patz Professorship for the Lions Low Vision Center. The Lions Low Vision Center at the Wilmer Eye Institute is a multidisciplinary team of doctors and rehabilitative specialists collaborating to restore and improve day-to-day functions—including reading, driving, shopping, and other important activities—lost to chronic visual impairment.

Helen Golden Paulson Professorship in Gastroenterology [1982]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by the estate of Helen G. Paulson in honor of Dr. Moses Paulson, who was a practitioner of internal medicine and gastroenterology in Baltimore. He was a member of the part-time faculty of the Department of Medicine.

Peavy Endowed Chair for Pediatric Diabetes Care at Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital [2019]: Unoccupied

The funding will be used to create an endowed Chair in the Department of Pediatrics with responsibility in Diabetes Care at JCACH. It will be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of the Peavy Endowed Chair for Diabetes.

Virginia M. Percy and William Algernon Percy Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery [1979]: Adam Levin, M.D.

Mrs. Percy was a grateful patient of Dr. Lee H. Riley, Jr.

Aliki Perroti Chair in the Department of Medicine [2006]: David B. Hellmann, M.D.

Funding provided by Mrs. Aliki Perroti. The recipient is to be a superior clinician committed to meeting the medical challenges of the twenty-first century and beyond.

Perry Family Professorship in Clinical & Translational Research [2021]: Neil Goldenberg, M.D., Ph.D.

The Perry Family Endowed Professorship in Clinical & Translational Research was established at Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital through an unrestricted gift from the Perry Family Trust & funds from Johns Hopkins All Children's Foundation.

Ronald R. Peterson Professorship in Medicine [2012]: Chirag Parikh, M.D.

The income of the principal will be used for the benefit of the Chair of Nephrology for Johns Hopkins Medicine.

Henry Phipps Professorship in Psychiatry [1908]: James B. Potash, M.D., M.P.H.

Created by a gift from Mr. and Mrs. Henry Phipps of Philadelphia for whom the Phipps Psychiatric Clinic is named.

Boone Pickens Professorship in Ophthalmology [2005]: Amir Kashani, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Mr. Boone Pickens of Dallas, Texas out of his respect for and admiration of Dr. Stark.

William V. Pitts Professorship [2020]: James Quintessenza, M.D.

Funding provided by the estate of William V. Pitts to be used to endow and sustain the director of the Johns Hopkins All Children’s Heart Institute.

Leslie Plotnick, M.D. Professorship in the Clinical Care and Research of Pediatric Endocrinology [2001]: Unoccupied

Funds provided to fund a professorship in the clinical care and research of Pediatric Endocrinology at the Department of Pediatrics.

Catherine Ellen Poindexter Professorship in Cardiology [2019]: Hugh Calkins, M.D.

The funding will be used to benefit the Division of Cardiology as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the above name.

Kenneth Jay Pollin Professorship in Cardiology [2013]: Roger Blumenthal, M.D.

Created by Mrs. Irene Pollin. To be held in the Division of Cardiology.

Margery K. and Thomas Pozefsky Professorship in Kidney Transplant Surgery [2007]: Kazuhiko Yamada, M.D.

The income from the principal will be used to support a kidney transplant professor pursuing kidney transplant research in the Department of Surgery.

Sachin N. Pradhan, M.D., Ph.D. and Sikta Pradhan, Ph.D. Professorship in Spine Surgery [2020]: Hamid Hassanzadeh, M.D.

Funded by Sikta Pradhan, Ph.D. and other patients, this professorship is for a spine surgeon in the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Rainey Professorship in Pediatric Hematology [1992]: James F. Casella, M.D.

Funding provided by Dr. and Mrs. Rainey, family, and friends. Dr. Rainey was a 1933 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and practiced internal medicine in Greenville, SC. A family member was a patient of Dr. William Zinkham. Its purpose is to provide stable support for the Division of Pediatric Hematology.

John G. Rangos, Sr. Professorship in Adult Medicine [2001]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by the John G. Rangos, Sr. Charitable Foundation to be designated for terms of at least five years to a physician-scientist both pursuing promising areas of research in gastrointestinal medicine and demonstrating exceptional promise in advancing new discoveries and treatments in the area of colon cancer.

Mark M. Ravitch Endowed Professorship in Surgery [1985]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by friends, patients, and colleagues of Dr. Mark M. Ravitch to promote surgical scholarship. Dr. Ravitch, a 1934 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, trained in surgery with Dr. Alfred Blalock. He held numerous posts in American academic surgery and finished his career as Professor of Surgery at the University of Pittsburgh. He was a general, thoracic, and pediatric surgeon best known for the introduction of surgical stapling and the surgical repair of pectus excavatum.

Rear Admiral Ray & Laura Conner Professorship in Pediatrics [1997]: Barry S. Solomon, M.D., MPH

The purpose of this funding is to provide for the care of indigent children in need of medical care. To accomplish the objective, the President of Johns Hopkins Hospital and the Dean of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine shall act jointly as to the specific application of such annual income. It has been decided that the annual income will provide funding for the Director of the Harriet Lane Clinic in the Department of Pediatrics in the School of Medicine.

Rosemarie Hope Reid, M.D. Professorship in PCLT [2021]: Colleen Christmas, M.D.

Funding will be used to benefit the Primary Care Leadership Track in the School of Medicine as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of the Rosemarie Hope Reid Professorship.

Rose-Lee & Keith Reinhard Professorship in Urologic Pathology [2001]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by Rose-Lee and Keith Reinhard to honor Patrick Walsh, M.D. and to further prostate cancer research by establishing an endowed professorship in the Brady Urological Institute. Dr. Walsh was the Director of the Department of Urology from 1974 to 2004.

Rembrandt Foundation Professorship in Pediatric Palliative Care [2015]: Renee Denise Boss, M.D., M.H.S.

For the purposes of creating a professorship (in Pediatric Palliative Care) at the School of Medicine’s Children’s Center.

Richman Family Professor for Alzheimer’s and Related Diseases [2008]: Gwenn Smith, Ph.D.

Funding provided by the Richman Family for the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences for Alzheimer’s and related disorders.

Lee H. Riley, Jr., M.D., Chair in Orthopaedic Surgery [1994]: Xu Cao, Ph.D.

Funding provided by the family, friends, colleagues, and patients of Dr. Riley to provide support for a clinical scholar in Orthopaedic Surgery. Dr. Riley was Director of the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery from 1979 to 1991.

The Shelley & Alan Holt Rising Professorship in Ophthalmology [2021]: Thomas Johnson, III, M.D., Ph.D.

The Shelly and Alan Holt Rising Professorship, part of the Sanford and Susan Greenberg Center to End Blindness at the Wilmer Eye Institute, provides financial support for an assistant professor that is equivalent to Wilmer’s traditional professorships for senior faculty members.

Alfredo Riviere and Norma Rodriguez de Riviere Professorship in Endocrinology and Metabolism [1997]: Gary S. Wand, M.D.

Funding provided by Alfredo Riviere and Norma Rodriguez de Riviere for thyroid related research.

David Robinson Professorship in Vestibular Neurology [2022]: David E. Newman-Toker, M.D., Ph.D.

Endowed purpose is being changed to a Professorship which was always the intent of David Robinson, et al. The State of Maryland has awarded the Department of Neurology at $1.8M grant to bolster the fellowship to a full professorship.

Robert A. Robinson Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery [1972]: James R. Ficke, M.D.

Established by contributions from grateful patients and colleagues of Dr. Robert A. Robinson, who was Director of the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery from 1953 to 1979.

Stephen and Jean Robinson Professorship for Eating Disorders [2014]: Angela S. Guarda, M.D.

To be used for the purposes of clinical care, research and education pertaining to improving the understanding and treatment of eating disorders. Associated with the Because It’s You Foundation.

Mark C. Rogers Chair in Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine [1993]: J. Danny Muehlschlegel, M.D.

Funding provided by the Unit Executive Fund of the Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine. Dr. Mark C. Rogers was Director of the Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine from 1980 to 1993.

Mary Jo Rogers Professorship in Cancer Immunology & Melanoma Research in Oncology [2016]: William Sharfman, M.D.

The fund will be used to establish an endowed professorship to support immunotherapy work in melanoma.

Robert and Marion Rosenthal Professorship in Spine Surgery [2013]: Khaled M. Kebaish, M.D., MS, FRCSC

The income from the principal will be used for a leadership fund and held in the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Barbara B. Rubenstein Professorship in Oncology [2002]: Saraswati Sukumar, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Trustee Mark Rubenstein and his children, David, Jonathan, and Hilary in memory of their wife and mother.

David M. Rubenstein Research Professorship [2015]: Paul A. Fuchs, Ph.D.

Income from the principal will be used “to create an endowed chair, the David M. Rubenstein Professor, who will dedicate their research efforts toward the goal of functional hearing restoration in our patients.” The endowment will be held in the David M. Rubenstein Hearing Center in the Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery.

Dr. Florence Sabin Professorship in Infectious Diseases [2022]: Amita Gupta, M.D.

This permanent endowment will establish an endowed Chair of Infectious Diseases in the Division of Infectious Disease in the Department of Medicine.

Murray B. Sachs Professorship in Biomedical Engineering [2012]: Natalia Trayanova, Ph.D.

Funding provided by Arthur J. Samberg in honor of Murray B. Sachs, Ph.D.

Salisbury Family Professorship in Neurosurgery [2008]: L. Fernando Gonzalez, M.D.

Funding provided by the Salisbury family.

Samsung Professorship in Medicine [1997]: Gail Daumit, M.D.

Funding provided by the Samsung Corporation to endow a chair in the Department of Medicine, Division of Internal Medicine.

Herman and Walter Samuelson Foundation Professorship in Oncology [1999]: Kenneth R. Cooke, M.D.

Funding provided by The Herman and Walter Samuelson Foundation for the purpose of advancing outstanding cancer research.

Fred & Janet Sanfilippo Professorship Fund in Pathology [2023]: Unoccupied

Funds will be used to benefit the Department of Pathology as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name The Fred & Janet Sanfilippo Professorship in Pathology (“fund”), Preference will be given to support a faculty member in the Department of Pathology spending more than fifty percent of their time conducting research and also serving in a leadership role in the Department.

Antoinette R. Schifanelli Endowed Fund Rising Professorship [2022]: Unoccupied

The gift will be used to support the Wilmer Eye Clinic of the School of Medicine for so long as the Board of Trustees of Johns Hopkins University determines that the need exists. This gift shall be entered into the University’s books and records as the Antoinette R. Schifanellli Endowment Fund.

D. William Schlott Professorship in Clinical Medicine [2001]: Bimal H. Ashar, M.D.

Funding provided by friends, patients, and colleagues of Dr. D. William Schlott.

Bernard L. Schwartz Distinguished Professorship in Urological Oncology [1996]: Christian P. Pavlovich, M.D.

Funding provided by Dr. and Mrs. Bernard Schwartz. Dr. Schwartz is the CEO of Loral Space and Communications, Ltd. and a grateful patient of Johns Hopkins.

Huntington Sheldon, M.D. Professorship in Medical Discovery [2014]: Geraldine Seydoux, Ph.D.

Funding provided by an anonymous donor. The endowment is to be used by the IBBS.

Lawrence Cardinal Shehan Chair in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation [1993]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by the Good Samaritan Hospital to support the Director of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.

Irving J. Sherman M.D. Research Professorship in Neurosurgery [2010]: Gregory J. Riggins, M.D.

Funds provided by Mr. and Mrs. Irving Sherman for the Department of Neurosurgery.

The Irving J. & Florence Sherman Professorship in Neurosurgery [2021]: Judy Huang, M.D.

The funds will be used to benefit the Department of Neurosurgery as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of The Irving J. and Florence Sherman Professorship in Neurosurgery.

Judy Yin Shih, Ph.D. Professorship in Anxiety Disorders Endowed Professorship [2019]: O. Joseph Bienvenu, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding will be used to benefit the Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of Soh Chao Shih, Ph.D. Professorship in Anxiety Disorders.

Milton and Muriel Shurr Endowed Directorship [2012]: Unoccupied

Income from the principal will be used to establish an endowed directorship of the General Eye Service and be held in the Wilmer Eye Institute at the School of Medicine.

Raj and Neerah Singh Professorship in Biomedical Engineering [2008]: Raimond L. Winslow, Ph.D.

Funding provided by the Raj and Neerah Singh Charitable Foundation and will be used by the Department of Biomedical Engineering to recruit, retain, or support a distinguished faculty member specializing in computational medicine.

Branna & Irving Sisenwein Professor in Ophthalmology [2018]: Akrit Sodhi, M.D.

Funded from the Sisenwein’s estate and matched with an $800,000 grant of the State of Maryland’s E-Nnovation Initiative Fund.

W.W. Smith Charitable Trust Professorship in Immunology [2002]: Ahmet Hoke, M.D.

Established by a grant from the W.W. Smith Charitable Trust as a reflection of Bill Smith’s exceptional vision and his desire to enhance medical excellence.

Snyder-Granader Family Professorship in Multiple Sclerosis [2022]: Unoccupied

This endowment will be used to benefit the Department of Neurology.

Solomon H. Snyder Professorship in Neurosurgery [2014]: Michael Caterina, M.D., Ph.D.

Income from the principal will be used to “alleviate pain and suffering from neurosurgical diseases.” Will be held in the Department of Neurosurgery.

Alfred Sommer Professorship in Ophthalmology [2004]: Unoccupied

Funds set aside by the Department of Ophthalmology for retinal research.

Lewis Cass Spencer Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery [1997]: Richard Skolasky, M.D.

Funding provided by Dr. Rowena Spencer, a member of the class of 1947, in honor of her father, the late Lewis Cass Spencer, M.D., an alumnus of the class of 1911 and the first orthopaedic surgical resident at Johns Hopkins.

Spiegel/Nichols Associate Professorship in Pediatric Urology [2011]: Heather DiCarlo, M.D.

Income from the principal will be used “for an Assistant Professorship”. The endowment will be held in the Division of Pediatric Urology in the Brady Urological Institute at the School of Medicine.

Paul D. Sponseller, M.D. Professorship in Pediatric Orthopaedic Surgery [2003]: Paul Sponseller, M.D.

Funding provided by Dr. and Mrs. David S. Hungerford.

Edward St. John Professorship in Cardiology [2019]: David D. Spragg, M.D.

Funding will be used to benefit the Division of Cardiology as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of the Edward St. John Professorship in Cardiology.

Theodore and Vada Stanley Distinguished Chair in Neurovirology in Pediatrics [1998]: Robert H. Yolken, M.D.

Funding provided by the Stanley Foundation. The endowment will support research in brain disorders, especially schizophrenia and bipolar disorders, which may be caused by infections in infancy and childhood.

Mary Wallace Stanton Professorship for Education [2004]: Roy Ziegelstein, M.D.

Funds provided by donor to endow Professorships in the School of Medicine.

Mary Wallace Stanton Professorship for Faculty Affairs [2004]: Unoccupied

Funds provided by donor to endow Professorships in the School of Medicine.

Walter J. Stark Chair in Ophthalmology [1992]: Albert Jun, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by grateful patients of Dr. Stark: Mrs. Margaret Mosher, Ralph S. O’Connor, Ray Stark, and Mr. and Mrs. Albert Broccoli.

Stermer Family Professorship in Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease [2001]: Maria Oliva-Hemker, M.D.

Funding provided by the Stermer Family for the Director of the IBD Center in the Department of Pediatrics.

Dr. Mary Betty Stevens Professorship in Rheumatology [1989]: Antony Rosen, M.B. CH.B.

Funding provided by colleagues, friends, and former patients of Dr. Mary Betty Stevens to support a clinical scholar in the Division of Rheumatology. Dr. Stevens, a 1955 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, specialized in clinical rheumatology and directed the division within the Department of Medicine.

Leonard and Helen R. Stulman Professorship in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry [2011]: John Campo, M.D.

An endowment fund at the School of Medicine, the income from the principal will be used for the Stulman Professor and may also help foster cross-collaboration between Johns Hopkins and other community organizations in the field of child and adolescent mental health, and will be held in the Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

Sunshine Natural Wellbeing Foundation Professorship in Chronic Fatigue Syndrome and Related Disorders in Pediatrics [2006]: Peter C. Rowe, M.D.

Funding provided to support a deserving faculty member.

Dr. Frank V. Sutland Chair in Pediatric Genetics [1991]: Ada Hamosh, M.D.

Funding provided by Mrs. Frank V. Sutland and family.

Josephine S. Sutland Professorship in Newborn Medicine [2007]: Akhil Maheshwari, M.D.

Funding provided by Mrs. Frank V. Sutland, Dr. Lawrence and Shelia Pakula, and the Louis Gross Foundation.

Diana Sylvestre, M.D. & Charles Homcy M.D. Professorship [2021]: Dwight Bergles, M.D.

The gift will be used to benefit the Department of Neuroscience in the Institute for Basic Biomedical Sciences in the School of Medicine as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of the Diana Sylvestre, M.D. & Charles Homcy, M.D. Professorship.

Helen B. Taussig Professorship [1987]: Shelby Kutty, M.D.

Funding provided by the sale of Dr. Taussig’s property on Cape Cod to provide support for the Division of Pediatric Cardiology. Dr. Helen B. Taussig, a 1927 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, founded the specialty of pediatric cardiology. In association with Dr. Alfred Blalock, she developed the first surgical procedure for treatment of cyanotic congenital heart disease (blue baby operation).

Richard W. TeLinde Distinguished Professorship of Gynecological Pathology [1989]: Robert J. Kurman, M.D

Funding provided by the estate of Dr. Richard W. TeLinde, Director of the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics from 1939 to 1960. He was an advocate of a close relationship between pathology and gynecology, and insisted that there be a pathology unit within the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics.

Richard W. TeLinde, M.D. and Edward E. Wallach, M.D. Professorship [2015]: Valerie Lynn Baker, M.D.

Funding provided by Howard Jones, Jr., M.D. and the Jones family. Income from the principal will be used for a Professorship. “Preference will be given to those working in gynecologic endocrinology and/or infertility.”

Terkowitz Family Professorship [2023]: Unoccupied

Funds will benefit the Department of Neurology & the Pedersen Brain Science Institute and will create a professor at the Assistant or Associate Professorship level. They will have an appointment in the Department of Neurology & the Pedersen Brain Science Institute.

Samuel Theobald Professor of Ophthalmology [2015]: Jeremy Nathans, M.D.

Income from the principal (which comes from funds designated to be used for “general purposes without restriction as to the use of income or principal”) will be used for an endowed professorship. The endowment will be held in the Wilmer Eye Institute in the School of Medicine.

Therapeutic Cognitive Neuroscience Professorship [2000]: Barry Gordon, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding by an anonymous donor to support wide ranging efforts to improve mental functions in people with brain disorders (The Department of Neurology).

Richard J. Traystman Professorship in Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine [2003]: Sujatha Kannan, M.D.

Endowed Chair of Pediatric Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine was renamed to honor Dr. Traystman.

The Leon Troper, M.D. Professorship in Computational Pathology [2020]: Alexander S. Baras, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding provided by Dennis Troper and Susan Wojcicki to support a professorship in computational pathology in the Department of Pathology in memory of Leon Troper, Dennis’ father, who was a pathologist.

Philip A. Tumulty Professorship in Medicine [1994]: Stephen D. Sisson, M.D., F.A.C.P.

Established in 1994 by various donors including Helena Hendrickson, a patient of Dr. Schlott.

Thomas and Dorothy Tung Professor in Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine [2010]: Cyrus D. Mintz, M.D., Ph.D.

Funded by Dr. Thomas and Dorothy Tung. Income from the principal will support the Tung Professor.

Hans and Ilza Veith Professorship in the History of Medicine [1998]: Unoccupied

Funded by Ilza Veith, Ph.D. to endow the Hans & Ilza Veith Professorship in the History of Medicine at the School of Medicine in memory of Professor Henry A. Siegerist.

Philip Franklin Wagley Chair in Biomedical Ethics [1995]: Ruth Faden, Ph.D.

Funding is provided by Dr. and Mrs. Wagley, family, friends, colleagues, and grateful patients. Dr. Philip F. Wagley, a 1943 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, practiced internal medicine in Baltimore. As a member of the faculty, he directed the course in medical ethics for medical students.

Henry N. Wagner, Jr., M.D. Professorship in Nuclear Medicine [2001]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by two anonymous donors and departmental funds to provide faculty support in the Division of Nuclear Medicine in the Department of Radiology.

A. Earl Walker, M.D. Professorship in Functional Neurosurgery [2008]: William S. Anderson, M.D., Ph.D.

Funding established to provide faculty support in Functional Neurosurgery in the Department of Neurosurgery.

Frank B. Walsh Professorship in Neuroophthalmology [1981]: Neil R. Miller, M.D.

Funding provided by friends and trainees. Dr. Frank B. Walsh was the founder of the subspecialty of neuroophthalmology.

Patrick C. Walsh Professorship in Urology [1998]: Arthur L. Burnett, M.D.

Dr. Walsh was the Director of the Department of Urology from 1974 to 2004. Funding was provided by an anonymous donor.

Susan Hill Ward Professorship in Psychedelics & Consciousness [2021]: Matthew W. Johnson, M.D.

Funding will be used to benefit the Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences as an endowed gift to be held in perpetuity for a professorship bearing the name of "Susan Hill Ward Professorship in Psychedelics and Consciousness" to be used for the purpose of human research on the effects of psychedelic substance, treatment of psychiatric and behavioral disorders & the improvement of public health.

Abraham & Virginia Weiss Professorship in Cardiology [2004]: David A. Kass, M.D.

Funded by the Abraham & Virginia Weiss Trust.

Dr. Myron L. Weisfeldt Professor in the Osler Medical Residency Program [2020]: Unoccupied

The donor intent for this endowment, to be held in perpetuity, is to provide support for the Director of the Osler Medical Residency Program.

Robert Bond Welch Professorship in Ophthalmology [2005]: James T. Handa, M.D.

A group of donors expressed their interest in making their donations in recognition of their respect and admiration for Dr. Robert B. Welch. Dr. Welch obtained his M.D. degree from Johns Hopkins in 1953. He completed his internship and residency at the Wilmer Eye Institute.

William H. Welch Professorship in the History of Medicine [1934]: Jeremy Greene, M.D., Ph.D.

This Professorship honors Dr. William H. Welch, the first Dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

Wellcome Professorship in Clinical Pharmacology [1971]: Craig Hendrix, M.D.

Funds were provided by the Burroughs-Wellcome Fund.

Sheila K. West Professorship in Ophthalmology [2018]: Pradeep Y. Ramulu, M.D., M.H.S., Ph.D.

Funding will be used in support of the academic and research activities of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Department of Ophthalmology in the Wilmer Eye Institute.

Charlotte A. Wilson & Margaret K. Whitener Professorship in Ophthalmic Pathology [2017]: Charles G. Eberhart, M.D., Ph.D.

The Charlotte A. Wilson & Margaret K. Whitener Professorship of Ophthalmology was established by the kindness of the estate of Margaret K. Whitener in memory of her mother, Charlotte A. Wilson.

Lawson Wilkens Professorship in Pediatric Endocrinology [2005]: Unoccupied

Funds will be used to support faculty and to honor Dr. Lawson Wilkins, the father of Pediatric Endocrinology.

William Holland Wilmer Professorship in Ophthalmology [1925]: Peter J. McDonnell, III, M.D.

Funding provided by charitable contributions of Col. and Mrs. Henry Breckenridge and the Wilmer Foundation. Dr. Wilmer was the first Director of the Wilmer Eye Institute and the first Director of the Department of Ophthalmology from 1925 to 1934.

Marcella Woll Professorship in Ophthalmology [2018]: Laura M. Ensign, Ph.D.

This unrestricted quasi endowment fund will be used for the primary purpose of furthering the search for a cure of macular degeneration at the Wilmer Eye Institute in the School of Medicine. Funded through the Woll estate and matched with a grant from the State of Maryland’s E-Nnovation Initiative Fund.

J. Donald Woodruff Chair in Gynecology and Obstetrics [1993]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by colleagues and friends of Dr. J. Donald Woodruff, a 1937 graduate of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. Dr. Woodruff was a distinguished teacher and clinician in the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics from 1942 to 1996.

Alan C. Woods Professorship in Ophthalmology [2002]: Unoccupied

Funding provided by the Department of Ophthalmology Unit Executive Funds.

Zadek Family Professorship in Orthopaedic Surgery [2014]: Lee Riley III, M.D.

Funding from the principal will be used to support the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery.

Drs. David S. and Marilyn M. Zamierowski Directorship of the Johns Hopkins Simulation Center [2008]: Elizabeth Hunt, M.D.

Income from the principal will be used “to endow permanently the Directorship of the Johns Hopkins Simulation Center.” The endowment will be held in the School of Medicine.

David S. Zee, M.D. Professorship [2017]: David Zee, M.D.

Paul and Betty Cinquegrana established this professorship through an estate gift to support the work of David Zee, M.D. or his successors, relating to research in the area of vestibular neurology.

Elias A. Zerhouni, M.D. Professorship [2020]: Hanzhang Lu, Ph.D.

The combination of the two endowments are designated to support research in the Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences.