“The Drowsy Chaperone” is a terrible show. The Legacy Theatre’s production of “The Drowsy Chaperone” is a really good show.

Don’t be confused. There’s a clever game at play in “The Drowsy Chaperone,” in which a Broadway buff plays a recording of his favorite musical comedy and provides commentary on why musicals are simultaneously atrocious and wonderful. And the Legacy’s entire production — the actors, director, writers, orchestra, set crew — lets the audience in on the joke.

Friday’s opening night performance (see ticket information below) had a few technical problems and botched sight gags. But the people sitting near me who were hyperventilating from laughing so hard didn’t seem to mind.

In “The Drowsy Chaperone,” we meet Man in Chair (Ed MacMurdo, who also directs). Man temporarily escapes his seemingly drab life through recordings of musicals. He especially loves “The Drowsy Chaperone,” a forgettable 1928 Broadway entry starring actors you’ve never heard of singing songs you’ve never heard.

As Man listens, the show comes to life in his apartment. He stops and starts the action by lifting the needle off his record player and offers the audience astute criticism balanced with sheer wonder at the world of a Broadway musical. (My favorite line, which was about a not terribly bright 1920s actress: “The stage was the only place for stupid people to earn a living … reality TV hadn’t been invented yet.”)

The basic plot: Broadway star plans to give up her career for marriage until a complication ensues. Sing, dance, emote, find a solution, the end. Everyone involved — the writers, director, actors — knows “Chaperone” is a bad show with a few good songs.

MacMurdo delightfully keeps things moving, both as director and star. He assembled a good cast that goes along with the gag — standouts included Greg Floyd as flamboyant ladies man Adolpho (with impossible hair), Anna Bussing as our bride-to-be, and Cynda Wrightsman as an egotistical actress playing the frequently drunken title character who’s not above blocking the audience’s view of a cast member.

Everything is exaggerated — but appropriately so, right down to the impressive number of costume changes for an amateur production.

In the first part of Friday’s performance, it was difficult to hear the lyrics over the orchestra. These issues were resolved relatively quickly. The actors also hadn’t quite nailed the admittedly complicated choreography and timing required to make the ambitious “Show Off” a showstopper.

But maybe that’s OK. Man in Chair loves “The Drowsy Chaperone” despite its flaws. I liked it, too.

Contact features editor Brien Murphy at 788-1515.

The Drowsy Chaperone