Description

454th Bomb Group 738th Bomb Squadron Easy Take Off B-24 Model

Fly with the 454th Bomb Group 738th Bomb Squadron Easy Take Off in this handcrafted B-24 Model. Each model is carved from wood and hand painted to provide a unique piece that will always be treasured.

Length – 11.5 inches

Wingspan – 17.5 inches

Made from Mahogany

US Veteran-Owned Business

Officially Licensed by Lockheed Martin

The product is not intended to be used by children 12 years and younger.

LOCKHEED MARTIN®, B-24 Liberator®, associated emblems and logos, and body designs of vehicles are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Lockheed Martin Corporation in the USA and/or other jurisdictions, used under license by Squadron Nostalgia LLC

The squadron was first activated as the 738th Bombardment Squadron in June 1943. After training in the United States with the Consolidated B-24 Liberator, the squadron deployed to the Mediterranean Theater of Operations, participating in the strategic bombing campaign against Germany. It earned two Distinguished Unit Citations for its combat operations. Following V-E Day, the squadron returned to the United States for conversion as a very heavy bomber unit, but was inactivated instead. The squadron was first organized as the 738th Bombardment Squadron at Alamogordo Army Air Field, New Mexico on 1 June 1943 as one of the four squadrons of the 454th Bombardment Group. It trained with Consolidated B-24 Liberator bombers. After completing training, it left for the Mediterranean Theater of Operations on 8 December 1943.[1][2]

454th Group B-24 over target in Europe[a] The squadron arrived in Italy, settling in at its combat station, San Giovanni Airfield, by the end of January 1944. Its primary focus was on long range bombing missions against industrial targets such as enemy oil refineries and munitions and aircraft factories. It struck transportation targets including harbors and airfields in Italy, France, Germany, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Greece and Romania The squadron received a Distinguished Unit Citation (DUC) for a raid on an airfield at Bad Vöslau, Austria on 12 April 1944. The squadron earned a second DUC during an attack on a steel plant at Linz, Austria, as the 454th Group led its wing through determined opposition.[2]

The squadron also flew air support and air interdiction missions against marshalling yards, troop concentrations and rail lines for Operation Strangle, the effort to choke off enemy supply lines in Italy. The squadron participated in the drive to Rome; Operation Dragoon, the invasion of southern France; and Operation Grapeshot, the Spring 1945 offensive in Northern Italy.[2]

The squadron left Italy in July 1945 and reformed at Sioux Falls Army Air Field, South Dakota the following month. It was redesignated as a very heavy bombardment squadron in anticipation of training and redeployment to the Pacific, but with the Japanese surrender, it was inactivated in October.[1]