Devil may Cry 4 – Special Edition brings back the action it had when it came out in 2008. Aside from the original story, the graphics were enhanced and added 3 more playable characters: Virgil, Trish, and Lady.

Devil May Cry 4 – Special Edition is an action-adventure hack and slash video game developed and published by Capcom in 2008 for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Windows platforms. The game is the fourth installment to the Devil May Cry series. It later on generated a handheld version released on iOS, titled Devil May Cry 4: Refrain. Chronologically, the game is set between the original Devil May Cry and Devil May Cry 2.

The story follows Nero, a teenager who possessed demonic powers who is on a mission to stop the series’ main character Dante who assassinated the leader of The Order of the Sword. The gameplay usually consists of fighting enemies in close combat using swords, guns, and other weapons.

Aside from the enhanced visuals, the new playable characters are the reason to own Devil May Cry 4 – Special Edition. Lady who first appeared in Devil May Cry 3: Dante’s Awakening, uses her trademark weapon: a bayoneted rocket launcher. Her attacks are slow but it has quite a devastating punch. Trish who first appeared in Devil May Cry uses the Sword of Sparda. Her fighting style has a balance of both speed and power which I have more fun in playing as her. And the last is Virgil, the twin brother of Dante, has a deadly mix of devastating speed and deliberate action. Playing as Virgil is more fun especially in every move he make while fighting enemies.

A fighting style that emphasizes economy of motion isn’t common to Devil May Cry, a series where hacking something to death is often encouraged as paramount to success, but this is a fun direction I hope Capcom explores in future sequels. The fact that you can respec a character’s moveset at any time is great, too – if Capcom was going to pull any forward-thinking feature from the rebooted DMC, I’m glad it was this one.

Rating: 8/10

Sources:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devil_May_Cry_4