Judge Brian Walsh QC, more than most, should have written his own obituary, as an exceptionally witty counsel who could also ambush court opponents with biting polemic. He would have mocked himself elegantly for a penchant for dramatic, high-profile cases, and especially for attempting the impossible: sorting out the corrosive divisions inside Yorkshire county cricket club.

Walsh, who has died of cancer aged 65, was the best-known figure on England's north-eastern circuit, and was appointed to the ancient ceremonial title of Recorder of Leeds four years ago. He was almost as well-known in northern cricketing circles after serving as chairman of Yorkshire CCC from 1986 to 1991, a period when arguments raged around Geoffrey Boycott and other strong-minded figures in the club.

His prominent briefs included defending Jon Venables, one of the two boys convicted of killing three-year-old James Bulger in 1993. He was also involved in the trial of miners after the "Battle of Orgreave" in the 1984-85 coalfield strike and in the Cleveland inquiry into claims of widespread child abuse.

Walsh earned a name for defending judicial and barristers' independence, attacking proposed changes in 1989 as threatening a state monopoly licensing system. He was also a regular scourge of inefficiency and legal delay, publicly berating police three times in a week in 1997 for deficiencies in bail arrangements.

Walsh came from a Leeds legal family, as the son of a local solicitor, and showed obvious promise at school. After a brief spell at college in Srinagar, India, because of his father's work, he became head boy of Leeds grammar school and in 1959 president of Cambridge university union.

National service as a pilot officer in RAF fighter command gave him another perspective, and his steady climb up the legal ladder was accompanied by campaigning, civic work.

As a Liberal, he polled respectably in the South Leeds byelection caused by the death in 1963 of the then Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell; he was also a strong supporter of the city's Jewish community, chairing the local campaign for Soviet Jewry during the worst years of communist persecution.

After appointment as a QC in 1977, he spent a decade heading Leeds chambers with another regular counsel in controversial cases, Gilbert Gray QC, before becoming leader of the north-eastern circuit and then, in 1996, a circuit judge. He served the profession nationally as a member of the General Council of the Bar from 1982-86 and 1990-96.

Walsh was in demand as an after-dinner speaker, where he showed the same timing that made his inquisition of evasive witnesses particularly deadly.

He leaves his wife Susan and two daughters, one of whom is a solicitor.