We've got a long weekend ahead of us in Buenos Aires, which means the tenth round of the Torneo Apertura won't end until Monday evening, when River Plate host Gimnasia La Plata. Estudiantes have the chance to extend their lead at the top of the table first thing on Friday evening, and in between Lanús... Continue Reading →

The goals from Saturday night's match in Mar del Plata between Independiente and Racing are right here. Racing claimed the Copa Ciudad de Mar del Plata with a 2-1 win over their Avellaneda rivals, with goals from new signing Claudio Bieler and Matías Cahais giving them the advantage before El Rojo's consolation with 8 minutes... Continue Reading →

Independiente and Racing Club played out a pre-season clásico de Avellaneda down by the seaside in Mar del Plata on Saturday night, and the result wasn't an encouraging one for Racing fans hoping their side will be able to keep up appearances in the Clausura and avoid another relegation battle. With goals from Hernán Fredes,... Continue Reading →

Independiente were the home side in Vélez's stadium for the clásico de Avellaneda on Saturday afternoon, and the result was one that didn't really suit either side. A win for Independiente would have put them in the Copa Sudamericana - one for Racing would have kept them in with a chance of avoiding a relegation... Continue Reading →

The Avellaneda derby between Independiente and Racing won't be taking place in Avellaneda this time round, on Saturday. In part that's because Independiente are the home side and, well, you can't very well play the derby at home when you're renting out your rivals' stadium for the season, can you? So instead, Diablos Rojos and... Continue Reading →

A big weekend this. Promedio strugglers Colón host title-chasing River on Sunday, and lowly Central are at home to Tigre in the weekend's first match, but the focus will be on Liniers on Saturday afternoon, because it's in Vélez's stadium (more as to the reasoning behind that and the problems it's causing on Friday during... Continue Reading →

Racing and Independiente played out the most boring match of the 2008 Torneo de Verano on Sunday night, drawing 0-0 in front of stultified fans in Mendoza. With this result, Independiente lead the table, and will claim the title unless River beat San Lorenzo in the one remaining match, on Tuesday night. Very little happened... Continue Reading →