Racing fans threaten and react against team

Two weeks ago, when Racing lost the Avellaneda derby against Independiente and put an end to the good streak that seemed to be their recovery from 4 consecutive losses, La Guardia Imperial, Racing's barrabrava, "paid a visit" to the players during training.

The main target of their insults and threats was striker Claudio Bieler, who had to be stopped by his teammates from reacting violently against the fans.

The next day, things were taken to another level: Brian Lluy, a 21-year-old defender who's played for Racing all his life, walked out of practice to find his car completely scratched. Another visit from the fans of his team.

On Saturday, when Racing left to the dressing rooms 0-1 down home against Argentinos Jrs, nothing but insults came from the stands. Racing ended up winning the game with 2 goals of Giovanni Moreno, and surprisingly, after the second goal that placed them on the lead 2-1, a flag that read "Russo andate", asking the coach Miguel Angel Russo to leave the team, was taken off.

But the good relationship between the fans and the team didn't last long: the players, still mad about what had happened during the week, left the pitch without the traditional salute to the fans, what only brought them another cascade of insults.

Around 20 fans waited around the door through which the players would leave the stadium and accused them of not having attitude on the pitch, of not giving everything for the shirt, of not respecting the fans that were always supportive.

This story came to an end in an almost surprising way: coach Miguel Angel Russo apologized to the fans, and so did captain Claudio Yacob during a press conference, promising it'd never happen again.

Claudio Yacob (right) and De Olivera had to apologize for reacting to the threats

River struggles against rivals, themselves, and the refs

The statistics of River so far this season (4 wins, 5 draws, 2 losses) aren't bad if they're compared to the last Clausura, for they're now only 3 points away of the total they won during that tournament.

However, it doesn't seem a good streak when you look at the last 5 games: 4 draws and 1 loss.

But the fact is that River still hasn't found a good level of playing, and so far hasn't showed much improvement from previous tournaments. And this struggle adds up to how the "small" teams have now lost respect for the so-called "big" teams, and there isn't one team that stands out from the others.

However, there has been lately another rival to River's fight to stay in first division: the referees. It seems unfair to blame River's bad performances on their calls, but the statistics put River as one of the teams that has been victim of most mistakes from part of the refs: 3 have already been suspended by AFA for bad performances after directing a River game.

Perhaps the worst was seen last Sunday, when Federico Beligoy made terrible mistakes in the River-Godoy Cruz game. It's fair to mention that the mistakes were seen on both sides, but perhaps the most important two ended up prejudicing River:

The first, an awful tackle against junior Lamela by Curbelo. Beligoy showed the Godoy Cruz player the yellow card, and he didn't rectify his decision when he saw how bad the injury was: instead, he told Lamela "hide the blood or I'll send you out." And even then, when the Godoy Cruz player airily complained for the card and threw the ball away (which would demand another yellow card) Beligoy ignored it and the Uruguayan continued to play until the end of the game.

Erik Lamela shows his leg after Curbelo's tackle

The match ended 2-2, but it could've been 3-2 for River in the last play. When Funes Mori received a pass from Ortega, controlled the ball with his chest and scored, the linesman that was beside him ran to the middle of the field, signalling it'd been a valid goal.

Beligoy, however, who was 40 meters away from Funes Mori and saw only the back of him, called it'd been a hand and said the goal wasn't valid, and he then refused to consult the linesman who, lacking some personality, stayed quiet and said nothing on it.

Coach Ángel Cappa left on his own terms before the game was over, throwing insults to the air. The referee then included in his match report that he'd sent Cappa out, and that therefore the coach should be suspended for the upcoming game.

The positions table

Next week will have a lot of important games, including Velez - Estudiantes the two leaders of the table, derby Huracán - San Lorenzo, derby Boca - Independiente, and derby River - Racing.

source, source, source