The Terminator RPG by Nightfall Games is a table-top roleplaying game where you and your fellow players play characters trying to survive in a world where Skynet unleashes Terminators to fight humanity.

Licensed by STUDIOCANAL, The Terminator RPG is based on the 1984 The Terminator movie and associated Dark Horse comics.

Mark Rapson, The Terminator RPG producer said

“Now we have passed our funding level on the Kickstarter campaign, we are looking forward to showing you the world compiled in ‘The Terminator RPG. It’s is not just a role-playing game though—it’s a sourcebook for the Terminator film and its expanded universe. Any Terminator fan will want this gorgeous book on their shelf, whether they intend to play or not.”

Nightfall Games is working with the challenges of the current pandemic and has shifted all their meetings online, chatting on messengers and over the phone as often as will allow, and are working as a team in spite of the challenges this brings. Nightfall Games’ previous project, SLA Industries 2nd Edition has now been delivered to all the Kickstarter backers and the team is now focused on the Terminator RPG.

Jared Earle, production director, teases us with designs for some of the accessories in the Kickstarter.

“As backers of the SLA Industries Kickstarter will know, the design, printing and manufacture of our games and accessories are of the highest quality. We have some wonderful exclusives coming including special edition covers and limited edition dice and dice trays.”

The art of The Terminator RPG is directed by the creator of SLA Industries Dave Allsop. Dave is working on the art direction for The Terminator RPG alongside his work on the next SLA Industries 2nd Edition supplements, adding

“Terminator has always been a favourite of mine, and it’s great to bring the stable of artists we gathered for Nightfall Games to such an exciting world,”

The setting team is led by 2020 ENnie and UKGE award-winning author Andrew E.C. Gaska (ALIEN RPG)

“I am looking forward to bringing the story to The Terminator RPG like I have already down with the Alien RPG. There is such a rich vein of information to delve into and so many stories yet to tell”.

ABOUT NIGHTFALL GAMES

Nightfall Games are Dave Allsop, Jared Earle and Mark Rapson. The company was founded in 1993 in Scotland and is responsible for the SLA Industries RPG which successfully relaunched with a 2nd Edition in 2019/20. Nightfall Games is known for high production values, evocative writing and some of the best art in the industry.

ABOUT CREATIVE LICENSING

Located in Los Angeles CA, Creative Licensing is a full service independent merchandise licensing agency that specialises in long-term brand development. Founded in 1982, Creative Licensing currently represents a large catalogue of classic films and properties.

ABOUT STUDIOCANAL

STUDIOCANAL, a 100% affiliate of CANAL+ Group held by Vivendi, is Europe’s leader in production, distribution and international sales of feature films and TV series, operating directly in all three major European markets – France, the United Kingdom and Germany – as well as in Australia and New Zealand.

STUDIOCANAL owns one of the most important film libraries in the world, boasting more than 6,000 titles from 60 countries. Spanning 100 years of film history, this vast and unique catalogue includes among others the iconic Terminator 2, Rambo, Breathless, Mulholland Drive, The Pianist and Belle de jour.

STUDIOCANAL has fully financed box office hits Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy, Paddington 1 and 2, The Commuter and Shaun The Sheep Movie. Upcoming films backed by STUDIOCANAL include Marc Munden’s The Secret Garden produced with Heyday Films (Paddington 1 & 2) starring Colin Firth and Julie Walters.

STUDIOCANAL is actively developing and distributing high-end TV series through its network of award-winning European production companies, including TANDEM in Germany (Shadowplay), the UK’s RED Production Company (Years and Years), Spain’s BAMBÚ PRODUCCIONES (On Death Row) and France’s STUDIOCANAL ORIGINAL (Mouche). STUDIOCANAL is also an associate of Danish-based SAM Productions founded by Søren Sveistrup and Adam Price (Ride Upon The Storm) as well as of UK-based GUILTY PARTY PICTURES; Benedict Cumberbatch’s production company SUNNYMARCH TV (Patrick Melrose) and URBAN MYTH FILMS (War of the Worlds).