The SCORE small business mentoring group's Tip of the Mitt chapter will team up with Google to offer its clients three free webinars this summer through Grow with Google.

These webinars will be presented by Pamela Star and are scheduled for June 21, July 14 and Aug. 17. To register, visit the SCORE group's Facebook page at https://www.facebook.com/SCORETipOfTheMittMI and click on "events."

Pamela Starr has expertise in building customer loyalty and is a professional speaker for Grow with Google. She aims to help people achieve more measurable and profitable results from their digital and offline communication programs. Her presentations are designed to provide attendees with real-world tools and strategies to drive stellar results.

The first of the upcoming webinars, "Use YouTube to Grow Your Business," is scheduled for 10-11 a.m. June 21. Participants can learn how to tap into the power of YouTube, and find out about best practices for creating a YouTube Channel and compelling video content that promotes their products and services and drives engagement with their brand.The webinar will explore various video formats, how to set up a YouTube channel and how to make creative videos that help in achieving business goals

Another webinar, "Make Your Website Work For You," is scheduled for 10-11 a.m. on July 14. Attendees can learn how to create a search-friendly website that drives user action and supports their goals. The webinar will address what type of design works best for a given organization, how to create a website that drives toward one's business goals and how to make a website more search-friendly on Google. It will also introduce participants to free Google tools that can help them improve the likelihood that their ideal customer will find their website on Google.

A third webinar, "Introduction to Google Ads for Success This Fall," is planned for 10-11 a.m. Aug. 17. Attendees will learn about Google resources to help them sell products online — including how to list products for free with Google My Business and Google's Merchant Center, which can help people find a business' products when they search on Google. The webinar will also preview a way for businesses to sell on their websites using an e-commerce store built with Shopify. In addition, the webinar will share information about more helpful tools to stand out online, such as Google’s Local Opportunity Finder and Grow My Store.