To cancel your membership, click here

If you have a problem with your password, click here

If you have a technical question or problem, click here

If you have a general question or comment, click here

For all issues that relate to creative written content,

E-mail us at webeditor@scorevideos.com

Know anyone who would like to model for our magazines and/or websites?

E-mail us at talent@scoregroup.com

Help us catch the content thieves and frauders!

E-mail us at legal@scoregroup.com

Requests for content removal

E-mail us at legal@scoregroup.com

TSG takes all content removal requests seriously and our dedicated support team works around the clock to quickly process and remove content that violates our Terms and services. Reports will be reviewed and resolved within seven business days.

Your report is completely confidential. When you report content, the user who posted the content will not see your name or any information about you.

Please Email us at legal@scoregroup.com should you be the victim of, or come across content that you have personal knowledge of as constituting:

Non-consensual production and/or distribution of your image (including but not limited to such things as: revenge porn, blackmail, exploitation);

Content that reveals personally identifiable information (including but not limited to such things as: name, address, phone number, IP address);

Otherwise abusive and/or illegal content

In your correspondence, please include your full name, URLs to the content, as well as any additional information.

If the content is deemed inappropriate, we will take the appropriate measures to remove such content. You may also contact legal@scoregroup.com for further clarifications of any action taken.

If you have been depicted in any content and would like to appeal removal of such content, please notify us by sending an email here legal@scoregroup.com. If there should be disagreement regarding an appeal, we will allow the disagreement to be resolved by a neutral body.

Our policy is to review and resolve all reported content complaints within seven (7) business days. In the event there is evidence of illegal content, it will be removed immediately and the Acquirer(s) will be notified of the event.