Flight of Dragons is one of Bass & Rankin's non-Holiday themed hand drawn animations - so the actual film was made by Topcraft (the precursor to Studio Ghibli). Toru Hara's team previously had The Hobbit (1977) and Return of the King (1980) outsoucred to them by the American producers - and would also release The Last Unicorn the same year. Flight is visually similar to these other fantasies, with complex character designs, and fine details abound.

The title, speculation on dragon flight, and hero take their names from a book by Peter Dickinson - while the companions and trials come out of Gordon R. Dickson's The Dragon and George. From the plot descriptions I've read - George is the main template,…

1982 In Review - August

#10

A young Boston writer goes back in time into an era where wizards and dragon reign and science is just barely known.

This is a Bass/Rankin animated feature much like The Hobbit and The Last Unicorn and it hasn't aged well at all. Coming across like a badly animated kids TV cartoon. Which is a shame really. If you can get past the obvious Lord of the Ring influences, this is trying to be more than just run of the mill fantasy.

This is more the story of science and logic versus magic and what happens when people stop believing in magic. It's based on the book by Gordon R. Dickson I think and…

I watched this as a child. I had a memory of seeing it in my younger years and spent ages trying to figure out what it was. I finally figured it out thanks to one of the #MTOS evenings on Twitter. Then I found it on the Internet Archives. And now I've finally rewatched it.

I have a vague memory of watching it with a friend who said to me “I think this film is for older children”. And I recalled The Flight of Dragons being somewhat profound and disturbing. I guess it retains some of this power, in its own way, I remember the fight with the Ogre on the bridge being something of a formative childhood experience. It…

Arthur Rankin Jr. and Jules Bass’s animated fantasy in which a young Boston writer journeys back in time into a period where wizards and dragon rule and science is just scarcely known.

Loosely linking the speculative natural history book of the same name by Peter Dickinson, which was published three years earlier, along with the novel The Dragon and the George by Gordon R. Dickson, which was published three years before the natural history book, the story concerns the kingdom of magic which is being endangered by the monarchy of logic, so Carolinus (Harry Morgan), the green sorcerer chooses to guard it for the remainder.

Ommedon (James Earl Jones), the nasty red wizard, stands in his way. Carolinus then calls…

"Inevitability is the strongest magic of all."

I was too young to see much Rankin and Bass stuff when it was actually fresh, but thanks to movie rental places (pour one out for West Coast Video) and parents who were infatuated with Lord of the Rings, they still became a big piece of my childhood. Coincidentally enough, this was also how I was introduced to Bakshi.

This is the most Bakshi of the Rankin/Bass films if that makes sense. SCIENCE VS MAGIC wasn't exactly the most unique subject in fantasy even in 1982, but slick old-school animation and just a fantastic voice cast help bolster what really is a perfectly paced fantasy tale. Also, hearing Harry Morgan completely commit to…