Zürich weather in February (Canton of Zurich, Switzerland)

What does the weather outlook for Zürich look like in February? Is now the perfect time to visit? Find all the weather insights for this month on this page.

Temperatures

The typical weather for February in Zürich includes low temperatures and moderate snow/rainfall. February is part of winter. You can expect daytime temperatures to reach around 7°C, while the nights will see a decline to about -1°C.

Precipitation

Zürich in February usually receives moderate snow/rainfall, averaging around 90 mm for the month. Enjoy the driest month with minimal rain interruptions. It's an excellent time for outdoor plans, from sports to festivals. Past climate data indicates that roughly 14 days will see snow/rain.

Average sunshine

The area experiences limited sunny days, amounting to roughly 88 hours of sunshine. This makes it perfect for those who lean towards cooler, cloudier settings rather than intense sunlit days.

If you're looking for dry conditions and comfortable temperatures, February may not be the ideal month to visit Zürich. May, June, July, August and September typically offer the best circumstances. While January, February, November and December tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Zürich climate page with graphs.

Zürich, monthly averages in February

Min Temperature -1°C

Max Temperature 7°C

Chance of Rain 46%

Precipitation 90 mm

Rainy days 14 days

Humidity 77%

Windspeed 11 km/h

Sunshine 88 hours

Percentage Sunshine 34%

Where to go in Switzerland in February

Find out more about the weather in Switzerland and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

Wear a base layer in cold weather; this is the #1 thing you can do to increase your overall body temperature.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 4/10

Cycling 4/10

Walking 4/10

Camping 1/10

Outdoor sports 4/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Zürich.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Switzerland? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Switzerland. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.