Big Fish Games overview

Industry

Video Games

Revenue

Headquarters

Employees

350

Founded In

Organization Type

Private

Big Fish Games is a game development studio and a game distribution platform for third party developers. Founded in 2002, Big Fish is the world's largest producer and distributor of casual games, delivering fun to millions of people around the world. Through its mobile and online distribution platforms, Big Fish has distributed more than 2.5 billion games to customers in 150 countries from a growing catalog of 450+ unique mobile games and 3,500+ unique PC games. After successfully transitioning from a PC-centric to a mobile-centric company, Big Fish has emerged as a top grossing mobile publisher worldwide with a portfolio that includes the #1 mobile social casino game, Big Fish Casino. The company is headquartered in Seattle, WA, with a regional office in Oakland, CA.

The staff at Big Fish Games come from unusually diverse demographic backgrounds. The company is 38.8% female and 34.8% ethnic minorities. Despite its diversity in other areas, Big Fish Games employees are noticeably lacking in political diversity. It has an unusually high proportion of employees who are members of the Democratic Party, at 92.0%. Employees seem to enjoy working in an otherwise diverse workplace that is dominated by members of the Democratic Party. Big Fish Games has great employee retention with staff members usually staying with the company for 3.6 years.The average employee at Big Fish Games makes $73,116 per year. Pay at Big Fish Games is significantly lower than some of its highest paying competitors, like Dropbox, Square, and GoPro, which pay $130,989, $119,615, and $119,000, respectively.

Based in Seattle, WA, Big Fish Games is a medium-sized technology company with 350 employees and a revenue of $150.0M.

Big Fish Games's Mission Statement

We make the best games, the best possible way. At Big Fish, we show up every day to enchant and delight our players and contribute to building a great company. We think big because that's what our players demand.