SEATTLE, July 17, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Big Fish Games, Inc., an innovative developer and world-class publisher of a diverse portfolio of casual game franchises, today completed its move of the company's 630+ Seattle-based people into the iconic Seattle waterfront Maritime Building. The Maritime Building was built in 1910 and was chosen by Big Fish as a celebration of its Seattle roots. Located at the corner of Alaskan Way and Madison Avenue, Big Fish's new location provides easy access to city transit, ferries, and amenities for the company's growing team of engineers, game designers, artists, business intelligence analysts, product marketers and more.

News Facts:

Big Fish is a leading developer of top-charting casual games and is known for its emphasis on putting its people first. This is exemplified by this new location's access to many transit options and walkable amenities.

With this move, the Big Fish team has reduced its overall commute to and from Big Fish's headquarters, doing its part to ease Seattle's traffic congestion and better the city's environment:

Most Big Fish employees can now take one bus direct to and from work, which is a significant improvement on the previous average of 2.7 bus trips per person.

Only 27% of employees will choose to drive to the new office – down from 40% in the previous location.

IA Interior Architects redesigned the office space, which spans eight floors and 190,000 square feet.

The employee-driven design includes:

Use of recycled natural materials and wood salvaged from the original Maritime Building.

Unique spaces to accommodate and energize all types of people and suit diverse working styles.

A rooftop amenities space that includes a gym, games room, and a deck complete with barbeque grill and fire pit.

A dedicated art space that will allow Big Fish's talented people to produce and display personal artwork.

Extensive daylight, external views, plants and natural materials throughout to enhance employee well-being.

To celebrate the new location, Big Fish has a fresh new look, complete with a new logo and brand that was designed to reflect the inspiring people who create Big Fish games, and the dynamic growth and evolution of the company.

Quotes:

Jeff Karp, Big Fish Managing Director and President, "Big Fish's people are the company's greatest asset. That's why this space has been built entirely around their needs - to nurture well-being, foster creativity and unlock more of the innovation that drives our people and our business. Our new office in the Maritime Building is an ideal work environment for Big Fish, which I am sure will help accelerate our success and growth going forward."

Evan Cottingham, Big Fish Director of Real Estate and Facilities, "We're proud of our Seattle heritage and our contribution to the development of the Seattle waterfront. Big Fish is successful because of our terrific local talent, and we're thankful for the opportunities Seattle has provided. The Seattle waterfront is a dynamic place, and Big Fish is looking forward to growing along with it."

Resources

Big FishGames, Inc.

Big Fish LinkedIn

Big Fish Careers

IA InteriorArchitects

About Big Fish

Founded in 2002, Big Fish Games, Inc., is an innovative developer and world-class publisher of a diverse portfolio of casual game franchises, including Big Fish Casino, Cooking Craze, Gummy Drop, Fairway Solitaire and Jackpot Magic Slots. Big Fish serves millions of players every day and is dedicated to enhancing life through exceptional play for everyone, anywhere, on any device. Big Fish offers immersive, beautifully-rendered, visceral gameplay experiences built upon its proprietary publishing platform, providing players with the opportunity to play, connect, compete and discover. The company is headquartered in Seattle, Washington, with a regional office in Oakland, California, and is part of Aristocrat Leisure Limited.

Contact:

Susan Lusty

PR for Big Fish

[email protected]

SOURCE Big Fish Games, Inc.

Related Links