A federal judge is allowing a class-action lawsuit to go forward against two entities with financial ties to Nebraska Book Co. over the decision to wind down operations, giving workers two days' notice before laying them off last year.

Attorneys for the former employees sued Nebraska Book Company and Nebraska Book Holdings, as well as Mountain Ridge Capital and Concise Capital Management, alleging the move violated the federal Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN) Act, which requires 60-day notice before a business with 100 or more employees is closed or has mass layoffs.

Mountain Ridge and Concise Capital had moved to dismiss the claims against them, arguing that the plaintiffs hadn't done enough to establish their potential liability.

Their attorneys contended they didn't qualify as the plaintiffs' employers under the WARN Act.

But last week, Senior U.S. District Judge John Gerrard denied the motion, saying the complaint "says enough" at this stage of the proceedings.

According to the lawsuit, Nebraska Book notified 242 employees by email Feb. 27, 2023, that it was terminating their employment with a wave of layoffs starting March 1 and then weekly through April as the business wound down.

Nebraska Book Company is a wholly owned subsidiary of Nebraska Book Holdings. But the role of the other entities is "a little murkier," Gerrard wrote in his order.

Concise Capital's attorney acknowledges it was Nebraska Book's secured lender and owned 100% equity in Nebraska Book Holdings.

Gerrard said Mountain Ridge's financial interest was more vague. But attorneys for the former employees alleged that whatever financial relationship they had, they collectively made the decision to terminate the employees and whether to pay out their accrued vacation time, the two matters at issue in the case.

Attorney Gerard Stranch said Nebraska Book Company and Nebraska Book Holdings had been pillars of the Lincoln community for over a century until Nebraska Book "unceremoniously closed its doors and announced that its employees, including plaintiffs, would all be terminated."

He said employees didn't receive proper notice, severance or even accrued vacation time.

"At first blush, the story seems simple enough: Nebraska Book went out of business and disregarded its legal obligations on the way out. Pulling back the curtain, however, reveals much more. Two other entities, not Nebraska Book, pulled the strings here: defendant Concise Capital and defendant Mountain Ridge," Stranch wrote in a brief fighting their dismissal from the suit.

He alleges that Mountain Ridge made the decision to announce the closure of Nebraska Book and terminate employees that weren't needed to process inventory and directed Nebraska Book to terminate anyone "not needed for management."

Concise Capital's attorney, Christopher Hedican, blamed Nebraska Book, which distributed physical textbooks and offered other services to bookstores, saying the company struggled to address the reduction in customers going to college campus bookstores to buy textbooks. And the COVID-19 pandemic only made things worse.

He said that between June 2020 and April 2022, Concise Capital made $16.5 million in capital infusions to Nebraska Book and "has effectively received zero return" on its overall investment and "expects to recognize an aggregate loss on the order of tens of millions of dollars" now that Nebraska Book has closed.

Hedican said by early 2023 it had become clear that Nebraska Book would run out of funding soon without additional capital investment of several million dollars.

He said Concise Capital worked with Mountain Ridge to find a new investor. But those efforts failed in late February 2023. When they did, Hedican said, Mountain Ridge agreed to fund two more payrolls on the condition that Nebraska Book make material reductions in staff and began to implement a liquidation plan.

"Under the circumstances, and with no alternatives that would be less harmful to its employees, Nebraska Book — and not Concise Capital nor Mountain Ridge — made the decision to cease operations and terminated NBC employees," Hedican said.

In his order last week, Gerrard said he disregarded Concise Capital's lengthy narrative of unpled facts, which didn't comply with federal rules of civil procedure or local rules.

The matter at issue involved only whether they qualified as employers under the WARN Act. And Gerrard found they did under separate tests.

He said Concise Capital acknowledged that it and Mountain Ridge made the ultimate decision to terminate employees March 1, 2023, but insisted, "beyond merely saying so, the only allegation connecting Concise Capital to the decision is Concise Capital's nominal ownership of equity of Nebraska Book."

"The phrase 'beyond merely saying so' has the same energy as 'Aside from that, Mrs. Lincoln, how was the play?' The entire purpose of a complaint is 'merely saying so,'" Gerrard said.

The judge said here the allegations concern proof in Concise Capital's sole possession and control and are supported by factual material that makes them plausible.

As for Mountain Ridge, Gerrard said the plaintiffs have alleged it was making business decisions for Nebraska Book.

"They're entitled to try and prove it, if they can," he wrote.

Reach the writer at 402-473-7237 or lpilger@journalstar.com.

On Twitter @LJSpilger

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

The business news you need

Get the latest local business news delivered FREE to your inbox weekly.

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

Lori Pilger

Courts reporter

Get email notifications on {{subject}} daily!

Your notification has been saved.

There was a problem saving your notification.

{{description}}

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Followed notifications

Please log in to use this feature

Log In

Don't have an account? Sign Up Today