An emotional Lleyton Hewitt brought the curtain down on his 18-year singles career as he lost to David Ferrer in the second round of the Australian Open.

Former world No 1 Hewitt went down in straight sets to Ferrer, the eighth seed in Melbourne, in two hours and 34 minutes at the Rod Laver Arena.

The Aussie battler said goodbye in typical fashion: received a code violation for an audible obscenity and tried to get a line judge removed after getting foot-faulted.

Outplayed in the first set, Hewitt, now ranked 308th in the world, upped his game in the second and third sets but, after cancelling out a break by the Spaniard in the third, he was immediately broken back and there was a sense that the end was nigh.

At the end of the 6-2 6-4 6-4 defeat, Hewitt met his opponent at the net with a toothy grin printed across his face and Ferrer asked him to exchange shirts, a request which the Aussie admitted in his on-court interview that he didn't quite understand at the time due to Ferrer's accent.

The two-time Grand Slam champion and 2005 finalist in Australia, his home major, was greeted on court by his three children at the conclusion of the match and his wife – ex-Home And Away actress Bec Cartwright – fought back tears in the stand as he thanked the raucous crowd, which had turned out in force in an attempt to will their hero to one unlikely final hurrah.

"I left nothing in the locker room. My whole career I've given 100%," Hewitt said.

"I love coming out here and competing. I've been so fortunate to have that opportunity 20 years in a row.

"I feel honoured to have had this support and this love from this crowd, it means so much for me.

"I've had so much success in big matches on this court and I feel fortunate to finish here. It's the perfect place to finish."

During the emotional post-match scenes, there were video tributes including one from Rafa Nadal.

Hewitt turned professional in 1998 and tasted major success for the first time at the 2001 US Open, thrashing 14-time Grand Slam winner Pete Sampras in the final 7-6 6-1 6-1 at the age of just 20.

He became the world's top ranked played in November that same year before winning Wimbledon in the summer of 2002 with a victory over David Nalbandian.

Hewitt went on to reach two more Grand Slam finals at the 2004 US Open and the 2005 Australian Open, but lost on both occasions to Roger Federer and Marat Safin respectively.

Injuries blighted the latter part of his career, as he underwent hip surgery in 2008 before having a metal plate inserted in his toe in 2012.

He announced his plans to retire following the 2015 Aussie Open and will now compete in the doubles event alongside countryman Sam Groth before calling it a day in all forms of the sport.