Henri Lopes, a writer and former prime minister of the Republic of Congo whose pioneering fiction mocked the abuses of African leaders but who later served one of the continent’s most brutal, died on Nov. 2 in Suresnes, a suburb of Paris. He was 86.

His death, in a hospital, was announced by the Republic of Congo’s embassy in Paris.

Mr. Lopes’s dual career spanned the formative years of both African nationhood and the continent’s literature. He was richly rewarded in both spheres, with high positions in politics and diplomacy and prestigious literary prizes.

His 1982 novel, “Le Pleurer-Rire” (“The Laughing Cry”), which satirizes a brutal and choleric African dictator, is regarded as a foundational work in African literature. His “Tribaliques,” a pugnacious short-story collection published in 1971 and much written about since, was an early depiction of the shortcomings of a nascent African society riven by ethnic rivalries.

Mr. Lopes (pronounced LO-pez) finished his career as the Republic of Congo’s ambassador in Paris, retiring in 2015. His country, a former French colony, lies across the Congo River from the much larger Democratic Republic of Congo, once a Belgian possession.

Mr. Lopes’s journey through ministries, ideologies, rulers and literary favor summed up the choice — and the dilemma — faced by African intellectuals in the latter half of the 20th century: Go along with the leadership in power or live precariously.

He went along. He was the Republic of Congo’s second-most-famous citizen, and he never broke with the first, the country’s president, Denis Sassou-Nguesso, who has ruled the country almost continuously — except for a five-year gap after losing an election in 1992 — since 1979.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.