So a few months ago, I got the opportunity to pursue a dream I have had since university - working as an expat on a mine in the DRC. The original dream was to work for a copper mine in the South of the DRC. The experience (and USD of course) would be of great value. This dream was however 'crushed' when the mine went into care and maintenance. But lo and behold, a few years down the line the dream presented itself once more. This time, it was a gold mine in the North-East of Congo. I gladly grabbed this gold nugget of an opportunity with both hands, and I am writing this to share some of my experiences.

So the most common questions people ask you when you tell them where you are going is: Why? Why would you risk your life for a job? Do you know how dangerous that side of the Congo is? Aren't there like dangerous diseases that could kill you?

So yes, at first I was very hesitant to take on this journey. But I decided that the only way I would find out if these questions have any value, is to go look for myself. So on the plane I got, not knowing what was waiting for me on the other side.

Here's what I found:

Weather

The first thing you notice whilst landing in the Congo is how lush and green it is. I always tell people it looks like a scene out of Jurassic Park. The rainy season lasts around 9 months a year. And when it rains here, it pours. Flying in during one of those rain storms on a small 20-seater Beechcraft really takes its toll on your heart though. It can get quite humid, with temperatures normally reaching the mid 30's. Although this does not sound too bad, I can attest to the fact that you nearly die of heat exhaustion when walking around in the plant during the day.

Accommodation

Coming to the Congo you don't expect any 5 star hotels or guest lodges, but I must say I was pleasantly surprised with the standard of the camp accommodation. The majority of the expats stay in air conditioned units equipped with DSTV, Wi-Fi (recently upgraded to fibre), a small kitchen and your own bathroom. It might be small, but all you might need is right there.

Safety

The North-Eastern part of the Congo has always been the most politically unstable, with rebel groups fighting with government troops to take control of certain areas. This was a big concern of mine, but I can happily say that the mine site is very safe. The community adjacent to the mine is also predominantly peaceful, and during the 8 years of the mine's existence there has not been any significant threats. Don't get me wrong, anything could happen in this unstable region. But my experience has only been good up to now.

Health

The long list of vaccines you have to get before travelling to the DRC is enough to put anyone off. Luckily when it's done, it's done (barring one or two booster shots here and there). And then you have Malaria, and more recently the even scarier one, Ebola. The Malaria epidemic is fairly well managed on site, with buildings being sprayed regularly to prevent infestations. The clinic is also well adept at treating Malaria if you are one of the unlucky ones who contract it. I can safely say I have not seen a lot of mosquitoes during my time here, and to my knowledge I have not been bitten (touch wood). Taking precautions, however, is still very important. Then, Ebola. Although it's still some 400 km away from us, it's still a concern. This concern is however very well managed, with good plans being set into motion. Hand-washing stations containing chlorine have been set up at every entrance, and thermometer readings are taken every other day. The communication from the mine management has also been impressive in this regard, keeping employees informed every step of the way.

Work

A normal working day starts at around 6:00 and ends at 18:00. This at least includes a 1 hr 30 min lunch break, which is usually spent having lunch and then a quick 'siesta'. Saturday is normally a half day, and then Sunday we only work the morning. These times are however largely dependent on circumstances, and a lot of extra hours are often put in. The fact that I don't have to worry about traffic means that my day basically emulates that of my friends working in Joburg or Cape Town. They might finish at 17:00, but that hour of traffic means we get home at the same time. So all and all, it's not too bad.

Almost 90% of the workforce are locals, so this is challenging. Especially with regards to communication, seeing as my French has not significantly improved since arriving here. The more skilled workers are proficient in English, which makes my life much easier.

Social

We are in the middle of the bush, so in terms of social activities we are basically limited to enjoying a drink at the bar, or exercising (running, biking, hiking, or going to the gym). That is basically it. Some guys occasionally go fishing in the river, and other guys go out into the village. Then you get those people that just work, eat and sleep. They repeat this until they either go on break or burn out. Whichever comes first.

So in conclusion, I can say that my experience as an expat in the DRC has been predominantly positive. It has however not been without sacrifice. Not being able to go out for drinks with friends, missing Sunday lunches with the family and not being able to play fetch with my dogs. And this list goes on. If you are willing and able to cope with the things you are going to miss, being an expat can be quite an adventure. You also gain valuable experience and a pathway to financial stability in the process.

Will I be an expat for the rest of my life? The answer is NO. I value family and friends (include my dogs here) too much. But for this period of my life, I believe the DRC is the place to be.