Philip José Farmer was born on January 26, 1918, in Terre Haute, Indiana, and grew up in Peoria, Illinois. In 1952, he won the first of three Hugo Awards for his novella, The Lovers, which is notable for its pioneering use of sexual themes in science fiction. He later won Hugo Awards for his novella, Riders of the Purple Wage, and To Your Scattered Bodies Go, and the first book in his Riverworld Series, which ultimately comprised five novels and numerous short stories. In 1975, Venus on the Half-Shell was published under the pseudonym, Kilgore Trout, the fictional writer-protagonist of several Kurt Vonnegut novels. Throughout his career, Farmer wrote nearly 60 novels, and over 100 short stories and novellas. He died on February 25, 2009.

The collection contains copies of Farmer's published work, including his novels (some in translation) and stories published in various science fiction periodicals. There are also many manuscripts, story notes, and character sketches. The collections also contains correspondence to and from Farmer, various personal papers, and printed material related to his involvement in the science fiction community.

Restrictions on Use

Copyright Information

Copyrights are retained by donor. The researcher assumes full responsibility for observing all copyright, property, and libel laws as they apply.

Restrictions on Use

Statement on Potentially Harmful Language and Images Found in Collections

The American Heritage Center aspires to approach all areas of our work in ways that are respectful to those who create, use, and are represented in our collections. For a variety of reasons, however, users may encounter offensive or harmful language or images in some of our finding aids, catalogs, and collection materials.

Note that the AHC does not censor or alter contents of the collections as they provide context and evidence of a time, people, place, or event. Therefore, we encourage users to bring questions and concerns about descriptions in our finding aids to our attention via email or anonymous web-form. For more information, read our full statement.

Preferred Citation

Item Description, Box Number, Folder Number, Collection Name, Collection Number, American Heritage Center, University of Wyoming.