From this Saturday at 12am Eastern, that’s 4pm Saturday in NZ, 2pm in Sydney and 5am in the UK, and repeated every four hours throughout the day, it’s the described Movies the Godfather Part II from 1974, and One Last Shot from 1998.

The Godfather Part II is a 1974 American epic crime film produced and directed by Francis Ford Coppola.

The film is partially based on the 1969 novel The Godfather by Mario Puzo, who co-wrote the screenplay with Coppola.

Part II serves as both a sequel and a prequel to the 1972 film The Godfather, presenting parallel dramas: one picks up the 1958 story of Michael Corleone (Al Pacino), the new Don of the Corleone family, protecting the family business in the aftermath of an attempt on his life; the prequel covers the journey of his father, Vito Corleone (Robert De Niro), from his Sicilian childhood to the founding of his family enterprise in New York City.

The ensemble cast also features Robert Duvall, Diane Keaton, Talia Shire, Morgana King, John Cazale, Mariana Hill, and Lee Strasberg.

Following the success of the first film, Paramount Pictures began developing a follow-up, with many of the cast and crew returning.

Coppola, who was given more creative control, had wanted to make both a sequel and a prequel to The Godfather that would tell the story of the rise of Vito and the fall of Michael.

Principal photography began in October 1973 and wrapped up in June 1974.

The Godfather Part II premiered in New York City on 12 December 1974, and was released in the United States on 20 December 1974, receiving divided reviews from critics; its reputation, however, improved rapidly, and it soon became the subject of critical re-appraisal.

It grossed $48 million in the United States and Canada and up to $93 million worldwide on a $13 million budget.

The film was nominated for eleven Academy Awards and became the first sequel to win Best Picture.

Its six Oscar wins also included Best Director for Coppola, Best Supporting Actor for De Niro, and Best Adapted Screenplay for Coppola and Puzo.

Pacino won Best Actor at the BAFTA's and was nominated at the Oscars.

Like its predecessor, Part II remains a highly influential film, especially in the gangster genre.

It is one of the greatest films of all time, as well as the rare example of a sequel that may be superior to its predecessor.

In 1997, the American Film Institute ranked it as the 32nd-greatest film in American film history and it retained this position 10 years later.

It was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry of the Library of Congress in 1993, being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

The Godfather Part III, the final instalment in the trilogy, was released in 1990.

Directed by: Francis Ford Coppola.

Screenplay by: Francis Ford Coppola , and Mario Puzo.

Based on: The Godfather by Mario Puzo.

Produced by: Francis Ford Coppola.

Starring: Al Pacino, Robert Duvall, Diane Keaton, Robert De Niro, Talia Shire, Morgana King, John Cazale, Mariana Hill, and Lee Strasberg.

Cinematography: Gordon Willis.

Edited by: Peter Zinner, Barry Malkin, and Richard Marks.

Music by: Nino Rota.

Production Companies: Paramount Pictures, and The Coppola Company .

Distributed by: Paramount Pictures.

Release dates: 12 December 1974 (New York City), and 20 December 1974 (United States).

File Length: 202 minutes.

Country: United States.

Languages: English , and Sicilian.

Budget: $13 million.

Box office: $48–93 million.

One Last Shot is a short comedy drama film from 1998.

Two best friends, Rob, and GW, spend a night out drinking before Rob moves away to start a new business.

This is a forerunner to the Trailer Park Boys series.

Director: Mike Clattenburg.

Writers: Mike Clattenburg, John Paul Tremblay, and Robb Wells.

Stars Robb Wells, and John Paul Tremblay.

File Length: 31 Minutes.

Country of origin: Canada.

Language: English.

Any questions, comments, or ideas for future described movies: e-mail me: anthony at mushroomfm dot com (e-mail address written that way to cut down on

spam)

Enjoy the movies,