Australasian Cinema > films >

Robbery under Arms

Robbery under Arms (Charles MacMahon, 1907) MacMahon's Exquisite Pictures, screenplay, scenario, script Charles MacMahon, from the novel by Rolf Boldrewood, dp Byers Coates, William Duff; Jim Gerald (Warrigal), George Merriman, Lance Vane, William Duff, Arthur Guest, Rhoda Dendron; 5000 ft.

The story of the young Marston brothers, who are led into a bushranging life by the notorious Captain Starlight, had been popular as a novel and a stage play for many years, and it became a favourite of Australian film producers. It inspired Spencer's Captain Starlight, or Gentleman of the Road (1911), and was re-filmed in 1920 by Kenneth Brampton and in 1957 by the Rank Organisation. It was also frequently proposed as a feature by Raymond Longford and Ken G Hall, but they were hampered by the New South Wales ban on bushranging films after 1912.

A relatively lavish production, Robbery Under Arms ran for over an hour and cost £1000. The action was staged by Charles MacMahon in bush locations near Sydney and further afield. Pike & Cooper: 7-8.

None of the film has survived.

Other films with the same title or subject

Captain Starlight, or Gentleman Of The Road (Alfred Rolfe, 1911) Spencer's Pictures, from the play by Alfred Dampier, based on the novel Robbery Under Arms by Rolf Boldrewood, dp Ernest Higgins; Alfred Rolfe, Lily Dampier [Rolfe's wife], Raymond Longford, Stanley Walpole, Augustus Neville; opened Spencer's Lyceum Sydney 16 March 1911 and ran for a profitable extended season; over 3000 ft

Robbery Under Arms (Kenneth Brampton, 1920) Pacific Photo Plays, wr. Kenneth Brampton, from the novel by Rolf Boldrewood, dp Lacey Percival; Kenneth Brampton, S. A. Fitzgerald, Ronald Conway, Cliff Pyatt, Roy Redgrave; 5200 ft

Robbery under Arms (Jack Lee, 1957) Peter Finch, Ronald Lewis, David McCallum, Maureen Swanson, Jill Ireland; from the novel by Rolf Boldrewood; Capt. Starlight has a black offsider; 96 min.

Robbery under Arms (Donald Crombie & Ken Hannam, 1985) Sam Neill, Steven Vidler, Christopher Cummins, Ed Devereaux, Tommy Lewis; 141 min.