Birth of Charles Darwin

On February 12, 1809, Charles Robert Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, England to parents Robert and Susannah. His father, Robert Darwin, was a very successful doctor, as was his grandfather. On the other hand his mother, Susannah Darwin, was a stay at home mom and the daughter of famous pottery maker Josiah Wedgwood. This event is significant because Charles Darwin would later present the theory of natural selection, that forever changed the future of biological studies (Charles Darwin Biography).

Americans Defeat British at the Battle of New Orleans

On January 8, 1815, American forces, led by Andrew Jackson, attack British forces at the Battle of New Orleans (Grun 382). Two weeks after the Treaty of Ghent was signed, officially ending the War of 1812, the Americans and British fought one more decisive battle, resulting in an American victory. This event is significant because it was the last major battle in the War of 1812, and the Americans' victory boosted moral and hope for survival as one, united nation (Battle of New Orleans).

Charles Darwin is Enrolled at Edinburgh University

On October 16, 1825, Charles Darwin is enrolled at Edinburgh University by his father. He is sent there to study medicine and to become a future doctor just like his father, and his grandfather before him. However, Charles was not a big fan of medicine and dropped out two years after being enrolled. This event is significant because it is here, Edinburgh University, that Charles Darwin realized he wanted to study biology and life sciences rather than medicine (Charles Darwin).

Unter den Linden, Berlin is Lit by Gas

In 1826, Unter den Linden, a boulevard in Berlin, Germany is lit by Berlin's first ever gas street lamps (Grun 391). Before this, Berlin had not used lighting for streets. However with the help of the British firm, Imperial Continental Gas Association (I.C.G.A), the city's first ever gas street lamps are put in place. This event is significant because it was the first time gas street lamps had ever been used in the city of Berlin and it had a huge impact on the city at night (Berlin's Gaslight).

Charles Darwin's Ship, the HMS Beagle, Sets Sail

On December 27, 1831, Charles Darwin and his crew set sail on their ship, the HMS Beagle for a five-year voyage. The ship's path involved cruising to South America's coats and then head south to Australia and New Zealand. Darwin kept detailed notes on his observations of the different plant and animal life. This event is significant because this voyage to various places allowed Darwin to gather important information vital to the production of a plausible explanation of evolution (Steves 114).

The MHS Beagle leaves South America and Heads for the Galapagos Islands

On September, 1835, Charles Darwin and his crew leave their last destination of South America and set sail for the Galapagos Islands on the MHS Beagle. The Galapagos Islands, located 600 miles into the Pacific Ocean from South America, call for a long journey. This event is significant because it is there, that Darwin gathered the most important research and observed the clearest changes in the populations. By doing so, he created his idea of evolution by means of natural selection (Karp 56).

Charles Darwin Leaves the Galapagos Islands

On October 2, 1836, Charles Darwin and his crew leave the Galapagos Islands and head back to England. Darwin gathered loads of information in his year inhabiting the islands which caused him to create a plausible hypothesis based on his observations. This event is significant because when Darwin returns to his home, he begins the creation of a book. The book provides evidence of his hypothesis on evolution and will forever change the future study of biology and even science as a whole (Karp 61).

The Pathfinder by James Fenimore Cooper is Published

In 1840, James Fenimore Cooper's book "The Pathfinder," or "The Pathfinder; or; The Inland Sea" is published. It is third book in The Leatherstocking Tales series, and was published in two volumes, creating the fourth and fifth novels of the series. This event is significant because Fenimore's novel is one of the first historical novels that describe and contain elements of a love story through its characters and how they act, while still focusing on important historical events (The Pathfinder).

The Blessed Virgin Mary is Reputed to Have Appeared to Bernadette Soubirous

On February 11, 1858, the Blessed Virgin Mary is said to have appeared to Bernadette Soubirous in Lourdes, France (Grun 422). She was 14-years-old at the time and was in a forest gathering firewood with her sister when a small, young woman appeared to her wearing blue and white with a rosary of ivory of gold. This event is significant because it really impacted the believers of Christianity in a positive way, having stronger beliefs now that someone had reportedly saw the her (Catholic Online).

Evolution by Natural Selection Paper is Presented

On July 1, 1858, Charles Darwin's two best friends, Charles Lyell and Joseph Hooker, present a joint paper by Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace on evolution by natural selection in front of the Linnaean Society of London. Darwin and Russel created the paper together after Darwin noticed that he was researching the same topic as he was, evolution. This event is significant because it was the first time Darwin's theory had been presented to the outsdie world as a scientific discovery (Steves 116).

Charles Darwin's Book is Published

On November 24, 1859, Darwin published his book "The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life." The book had a huge impact, but had everyone confused on whether to follow Darwin's studies or the previous beliefs that been established years earlier. This event is significant because it was the first time the public had been introduced to Darwin's ideas and evidence, causing disbelief among people (Charles Darwin Biography).

Article Published Against Darwin's Theory

In July of 1860, an article was published in the "Quarterly Review" that disregarded Charles Darwin's book and called Darwin a "flighty man who had written an utterly rotten fabric of guess and speculation." Many other people also started to dismiss his method, including Harvard naturalist Louis Agassiz, who deemed it false, not scientific, and mischievous. This event is significant because it began a period of debate between those who accepted Darwin's theory and those who opposed it (Karp 12).

The Opera "La Forza de Destino" by Giuseppe Verdino First Appears

On November 10, 1862, Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi's "La Forza de Destino" opera appears for the first time in St. Petersburg, Russia (Grun 424). Verdi had originally provided a brief orchestral prelude, which later adapted into a full- fledged overture. However, the overture was not presented to the public until late February in the year 1869. This event is significant because it is only one of two of Giuseppe Verdi's operas that were first introduced outside Western Europe (Freed).

Charles Darwin is Awarded the Copley Medal

On November 30, 1864 Charles Darwin was awarded the Copely Medal of the Royal Society of London for his amazing work in the scientific field. Each year the medal is given to the person that the committee believes to have the biggest impact with their studies from all fields of work in the scientific world. This event is significant because it signified that people had really started to accept his ideas and use them in scientific discussions and references (Timeline of Charles Darwin).

The Construction of the Cologne Cathedral is Completed

On October 15, 1880 the Cologne Cathedral's last piece of stone was put in place, completing the construction after beginning in 1248 (Grun 439). The Cathedral stretches 157 meters tall at its highest point, towering over the city of Cologne in Germany. This event is significant because after six centuries, the backbreaking labor that was building this cathedral was finally completed and it then became a symbol for the religious beliefs of the city (History of Cologne Cathedral).