Quantum Corp. (NASDAQ: QMCO) announced a reorganization of its engineering division, establishing two general manager positions with P&L responsibility to lead the company’s primary and secondary storage product lines, and adding a key executive role. The positions will enable Quantum to expand its leadership in storing video and other unstructured data, as well as build on its strengths in archive and data protection. The reorganization supports Quantum’s goals to grow both organically and via strategic acquisitions, and to extend its business model with recurring revenue streams as organizations shift to options such as storage-as-a-service.

Vice President and General Manager, Primary Storage – Ed Fiore

Ed Fiore previously served as co-founder and CEO of Atavium, a private data storage software company focused on bringing business intelligence to storage. Atavium’s metadata-rich file system combines real-time search and analytics with a data orchestration engine to provide workflow automation, hybrid multi-cloud collaboration, and policy-based data placement. As GM of primary storage, Fiore will continue to develop source code and intellectual property that Quantum acquired from Atavium, advancing StorNext developments to address customer needs for media library software, real-time search and analytics, a hybrid multi-cloud experience, and ease of use. Prior to Atavium, Fiore served as vice president of Storage Engineering for Dell where he was responsible for the Compellent, EqualLogic, and FluidFS engineering teams.

Also joining Quantum as a Technical Director on the Primary Storage team is Mark Bakke, an industry veteran who was one of the co-founders of Atavium. Bakke is widely respected for his contributions to next-generation, high-speed storage networking innovation - including the market’s first virtual switch and first iSCSI products - and will drive efforts developing enterprise-wide networking capabilities that are essential for emerging cloud solutions.

Vice President and General Manager, Secondary Storage – Bruno Hald

Bruno Hald is a seasoned engineering leader who has been with Quantum for over 25 years and currently leads the engineering teams for the archive and data protection product portfolio. Throughout his career, Hald has helped develop and launch many successful storage platforms that generated significant revenues for Quantum. In this new role he will leverage his extensive experience with hyperscale customers, large enterprises and big OEM accounts to help customers address their needs in the secondary storage space.

“With our new corporate structure in place Quantum is better able to help our customers who are seeking agile partners and more flexible solutions such as storage-as-a-service offerings that can enable them to weather today’s rapidly-shifting business climate,” said Jamie Lerner, President and CEO of Quantum. “It’s noteworthy that with the work we’ve done to rationalize our cost structure, we’re able to elevate our talent while decreasing operational expenses. Ed Fiore and Mark Bakke provide the startup caliber talent that is essential to our primary storage portfolio as we transition to delivering more software-defined solutions. I’m also thrilled to promote Bruno Hald to a new role that will enable us to focus on the unique requirements of archive and data protection customers who depend on Quantum.”

Additional Resources · To read the eBook STaaS: A Study of Enterprise User Perceptions and Requirements by Evaluator Group, visit: https://bit.ly/3aQm21p

About Quantum

Quantum technology and services help customers capture, create and share digital content – and preserve and protect it for decades. With solutions built for every stage of the data lifecycle, Quantum’s platforms provide the fastest performance for high-resolution video, images, and industrial IoT. That’s why the world’s leading entertainment companies, sports franchises, researchers, government agencies, enterprises, and cloud providers are making the world happier, safer, and smarter on Quantum. See how at www.quantum.com.

Quantum and the Quantum logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Quantum Corporation and its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

“Safe Harbor” Statement: This press release contains “forward-looking” statements. All statements other than statements of historical fact are statements that could be deemed forward-looking statements. Specifically, but without limitation, creation of new general manager roles within Quantum, statements regarding the Company’s goal to grow organically and through strategic acquisitions, the expectation that Atavium intellectual property will accelerate future StorNext developments and address customer needs, the development of enterprise wide networking capabilities, and the effect of new-hire costs on the Company’s operating expenses are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Safe Harbor. All forward-looking statements in this press release are based on information available to Quantum on the date hereof. These statements involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties, including the effects of the general manager roles on Quantum’s strategic execution, the Company’s ability to continue to grow organically or execute on strategic acquisitions, whether the Atavium intellectual property will achieve the desired goals of accelerating future StorNext developments and addressing customer needs, the impact of new hire costs on the company’s operating expenses and other factors that may cause Quantum’s actual results to differ materially from those implied by the forward-looking statements. More detailed information about these risk factors are set forth in Quantum's periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including, but not limited to, those risks and uncertainties listed in the section entitled "Risk Factors," in Quantum's Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 6, 2019. Quantum expressly disclaims any obligation to update or alter its forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law.