Joanne Friedman is CEO and Principal, Smart Manufacturing at Connektedminds Inc. where she empowers executives to be digital —not do digital to succeed at Digital Transformation or Industry 4.0. An award-winning technology innovator and industry thought leader, Dr. Friedman is a former manufacturing industry CIO turned IT Industry Analyst (Gartner) with a history of delivering innovative technology solutions to global leaders in the pharmaceutical and electronics manufacturing sectors. A natural storyteller, Joanne is an effusive personality whose passion for human centered design and penchant for witticisms punctuate her keynotes on Industrial transformation, cyber-security in manufacturing, AI, and CIO leadership. Ranked among the top 100 Global Voices on Digital Ecosystems by Thinkers 360 (2022) and among the top 30 Voices on Industrial IoT by Onalytica (2020) Dr. Friedman was elected to serve on the America’s Board of MESA.org in 2023, and continues to participate in technical standards development within iNEMI, W3C, ISO, IEEE. A staunch advocate for women in STEM, Joanne is a regular contributor on RackN’s Cloud 2030 podcast and featured speaker on Coffee with Digital Trailblazers. Most recently Joanne was featured on Endeavour Media’s Executive Perspectives, Nomad Futurist, IT Visionaries and is regularly quoted in CIO and trade publications. The author of Business Bites Back, and Zen and the Art of E-business early in her career, she is currently at work on her next tome, “Digi-waaat?”

David Berkowits has amassed 30 years of experience in the med-tech industry, serving in various technical and leadership roles. He previously worked for Philips and acquired extensive experience in the Netherlands, the United States, and Canada. Additionally, he collaborated with the leadership team at Altapacs in the role of a technical architect. Throughout their 15-year partnership, EFW and Mayfair Diagnostics, two of Canada’s largest radiology practices, jointly owned an organization, enabling them to design, build, and develop numerous clinical systems. Particularly noteworthy was the project he designed and coded, which revolutionized the provision of teleradiology services to the NWT and Yukon communities.

David, alongside his business partner, Dr. Norman Silver, has consistently sought to identify gaps in healthcare and address them through innovative solutions. Notably, they were part of the team that founded the Minor Illness and Injury Clinic, the first urgent-care clinic outside a hospital in Manitoba, the Penicillin Allergy Clinic, and a COVID-19 testing site at Red River College Polytechnic, which became operational within 8 days.

In December 2020, they realized a significant gap in the healthcare system, prompting them to conceptualize and subsequently launch the idea of QDoc. QDoc is a web-based platform that facilitates real-time virtual appointments between patients and physicians, utilizing unique proprietary software. Around May 2021, they incorporated and launched QDoc, aiming to ensure equal access to quality medical care for all Canadians, regardless of their geographic location or socioeconomic status. David’s transformative leadership recently earned him The Globe and Mail’s Best Executive of the Year award for 2022.

Rex Lee, the Chief Information & Technology Officer (CITO) at Canadian Tire Corporation (CTC), takes accountability for all aspects of technology, including strategy, architecture, development, operations, and cybersecurity across the CTC family of companies.

Rex played an essential role in the technology transformation at CTC, collaborating across the organization and with global technology partners. Since joining in 2012, he has critically contributed to digital transformation, implementing Agile operating models, modernizing technology, formulating cloud strategy & operations, enhancing cybersecurity, designing enterprise architecture, and establishing technical platforms for advanced analytics & artificial intelligence.

He passionately strives to advance the value of technology continuously, and his innovative approaches have gained recognition in various publications, such as the Wall Street Journal, CIO Magazine, and the bestselling book Groundswell. He serves as a member of various advisory boards and chairs the Digital Committee of Canada’s largest national cancer charity, The Canadian Cancer Society (CCS), where he also holds a position on the board of directors. With over 25 years of technology experience, including holding senior technology roles in telecommunications and high-tech industries, Rex has consistently demonstrated his ability to unlock value through technology.

Rex Lee earned an MBA in Marketing and Technology Management from McMaster University, and he obtained his undergraduate degree from the University of Western Ontario. In 2022, Rex received the Private Sector CIO of the Year award on behalf of IT World Canada (ITWC), Canadian CIO, and the CIO Association of Canada (CIOCAN) for his crucial leadership in guiding CTC’s digital transformation.

Monique Holz currently holds the position of Manager of Strategic Portfolio Management within the Corporate Services department at the City of Vaughan. In this capacity, she shoulders the responsibility of providing adept leadership and guidance to the Corporate Services Portfolio, which encompasses Information Technology (IT), Human Resources (HR), and Finance. Her scope of work includes strategic and operational planning, staff engagement, change management, program management, and portfolio management. Monique brings to her role a wealth of experience, spanning over 15 years, during which she has successfully led expansive enterprise-wide business transformation initiatives, demonstrating an unwavering commitment to cultivating high-performance teams to steer organizational change.

Prior to her tenure with the City, Monique’s professional journey led her to the Ministry of the Solicitor General, formerly known as the Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services, where she dedicated 8 years of service. In this capacity, she oversaw the implementation of recommendations stemming from high-profile inquiries such as the Goudge and Cornwall Public Inquiries, in addition to providing project management leadership to significant initiatives such as the Strategy for a Safer Ontario and the Corrections Transformation Strategy.

Before embarking on her public service career, Monique Holz gained valuable experience in the private sector, primarily within the Project Management Office. Throughout her professional endeavors, she remains a staunch advocate for staff engagement and maintains a profound interest in matters related to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion.

Keren Elazari is internationally recognized security analyst, author and researcher, with years of experience in the international cyber security industry. Since 2000, Keren has worked with leading Israeli security firms, government organizations, Big 4 firms, advised Fortune 500 and groundbreaking startup companies, helping global organizations navigate complex cyber security issues.

Elazari’s independent research work and writing about emerging security issues has been featured by Scientific American, WIRED, and she is a frequent speaker and commentator in international events and in the media. Ms. Elazari holds a CISSP certification, an MA in Security Studies from the prestigious Security & Technology workshop at Tel Aviv University – where she is a senior researcher with the Balvatnik Interdisciplinary Cyber Research Center, focusing on the complex relationships between hackers, industry and government. Elazari is also a Security Fellow and faculty member with Singularity University, a private future-forward think tank.

In 2014, Keren became the first Israeli woman to speak at the annual TED conference. Keren’s TED talk has been viewed by millions online, translated to 30 languages and selected for TED’s list of ‘Most Powerful Ideas’ and Inc.com’s list of ‘Top TED Talks of 2014’. Today, Keren’s TED talk is still one of TED’s most watched talks on the topic of security and hacking. Keren is also the founder of Israel’s largest security community event, BSidesTLV, part of the global SecurityBSides movement, and the Leading Cyber Ladies, global professional network for Women in Cyber Security.

Her collaborative book with 8 leading women, Women in Tech, was published by Penguin USA in March 2016 and became an Amazon bestseller. In July 2017, Keren was selected by Forbes as one of Israel’s “most influential women” and featured on the cover of Forbes Israel.

Robert Neel is a vice president for information security operations for The Allstate Corporation. He is responsible for the protection operations that keeps Allstate’s information secure from external and internal cybersecurity threats.

In addition, Neel is Chief Information Security Officer for Allstate Information Protection, a subsidiary of the Allstate corporation.

Neel works across the Allstate family of companies to ensure the protection of Allstate’s customer and corporate data through his accountability for the Global Security Fusion Center, incident response, and threat and vulnerability management.

In 2003, Neel joined Allstate and advanced through several management positions of increasing scope and responsibility. He was instrumental in establishing and expanding enterprise incident response, data loss prevention and threat detection capabilities. Under his leadership, Allstate matured an identify and access management program; leveraging technologies for authentication and authorization. He’s also been pivotal in the management and oversight of department finances and resource management.

Among his many certifications, Neel maintains his CFE, CISSP, GOSI, GSNA, GCTI, GSLC, GLEG, and GCIH. Neel holds both an MBA from University of Illinois and a master’s in clinical psychology from Sam Houston State University. In his time off he enjoys trips with his family and playing with technology.

With a focus on building our cybersecurity organization of the future, Neel is leading the way to strengthen our security across the entire enterprise.

Nicole Darden Ford is an IT strategic leader with 20-plus years of success spanning the federal government and corporate venues. Nicole has extensive knowledge and application experience in cybersecurity, cyber forensics and homeland security practices. In her current role as Vice President and Chief Information Security Officer for Carrier, she oversees global Information Security and Product (IoT) Cybersecurity. Prior to joining Carrier, Nicole was Vice President of Information Security and Chief Information Security Officer for Baxter International where she had global responsibility for Information Security, Information Governance and IT Quality Compliance. She was also Director of Information Security for Venable LLP, an AMLAW 100 law firm. She began her career in the U.S. military and federal government, including the Jt. Chiefs of Staff, where she handled security, network engineering and telecommunications. Nicole has a bachelor’s degree in Computer Information Systems from the University of Phoenix and a master’s degree in Management of Information Technology from the University of Virginia. She holds C|CISO, CISM, CEH and CISSP certifications. Nicole is an active corporate advocate for inclusion and diversity initiatives, women’s leadership and employee resource groups, including the Carrier Black Alliance. She currently serves on the boards of IT-ISAC, Tech Hub South Florida and the Lola Mercedes Parker Foundation. She is a past board member of H-ISAC, NTSC and Evanta. She is a charter member of the Stafford County Chapter of Top Ladies of Distinction, Inc.

Barak Eilam is the CEO of NICE, he leads the company’s vision, strategy, growth, and innovation with over 8,500 employees globally serving 25,000 organizations in more than 150 countries.

Since he became CEO in 2014, Eilam transformed NICE into a leader in cloud, analytics, digital and Artificial Intelligence (AI) through ground-breaking innovations and strategic acquisitions. Under his leadership, the company became the undisputed leader in all its domains, ranked #1 by all leading market analysts. In the last 9 years NICE revenue more than doubled, growth accelerated significantly and its profitability more than tripled, resulting in a seven-fold increase in market cap.

Eilam started his career as an engineer at NICE in 1999 and in his 24 years with the company held multiple senior leadership roles in R&D, product management and sales. Eilam established and led the company’s Analytics business, spearheading NICE’s transformation into an enterprise software company. Prior to becoming the CEO, Eilam served as the President of NICE Americas, significantly expanding NICE’s customer base, providing solutions to 85 of the Fortune 100 organizations.

Eilam’s passion for technology goes beyond his role as a CEO. He created a global initiative to promote equality, instilling the passion for technology in young girls. He is known for voicing his opinion publicly about the values of excellence, equality and transparency. He authored multiple patents and most recently has been named 2020 CEO of the Year by Calcalist, a leading financial newspaper in Israel.

Prior to joining NICE, Mr. Eilam was an officer in the Intelligence Corps of the Israeli army.

Mr. Eilam holds a B.Sc. in Electrical Engineering from Tel Aviv University. Eilam lives in New Jersey with his wife and two daughters.

Tera Ladner joined Aflac in 2015 as director of Information Governance at Aflac Incorporated to build a program to identify and classify all information to ensure proper protection and management. In 2019, she was promoted to her current role as vice president of Information Risk Management and Governance.

As a senior executive on Aflac’s Global Information Security leadership team, Ladner consistently applies defensible, risk-based approaches to assess vendors, evaluate emerging technologies, risks and information–handling methodologies. She and her team ensure Aflac can effectively and efficiently validate security posture, practices and evidence to external assessors.

Previously, she was group vice president of Information Governance at SunTrust Bank, now Truist, in Atlanta.

Ladner is a renowned thought leader in the cybersecurity industry. She actively participates in industry-aligned groups, such as the Evanta CISO community and the Executive Women’s Forum. She is a policy council member for the National Technology Security Council. Her dedication to sharing information about best practices, legal and regulatory impacts to programs, and cataloguing new and emerging threat–actor practices helps guide the industry to safer waters by helping others within the industry move in that same direction.

She has served in various leadership positions, including president for ARMA International, a global professional association for security, information governance and privacy professionals. She is a certified records manager, information governance professional and information security manager.

Ladner earned a Bachelor of Science degree from University of South Alabama and a Juris Doctorate degree from Georgia State University.

Mia Boom-Ibes is Vice President of Security Innovation, Strategy, Analytics and Governance, Risk and Compliance for Allstate Insurance Company. In this role, she is responsible for Allstate’s cybersecurity strategy and priorities. She manages relationships with key business and technology stakeholders to ensure alignment and enable consistency across the enterprise.

Mia’s leadership of the Governance, Risk and Compliance teams reduces corporate risk by strengthening the protection of Allstate’s most valuable assets, providing supplier security risk management and ensuring the organizations’ compliance with regulations.

In addition, Mia leads an Innovation and Analytics team to develop new capabilities and services in cybersecurity. Her team collaborates with research groups within Allstate as well as international academic groups and organizations to address global challenges such as digital identity, security and privacy in big data and security analytics.

Prior to becoming a vice president at Allstate in July of 2017, Mia was a director in Allstate Information Security with responsibility for setting the strategy and direction for information security governance, risk and compliance efforts across the corporation.

She spearheaded the creation of the company’s first Enterprise Information Security Policy and Information Security Risk Management program aligned with industry best practices and frameworks.In addition, Mia has designed and built security governance programs to obtain or retain PCI compliance status at multiple institutions.

Mia began her Allstate career in 2012 as an information security compliance and consulting manager, quickly progressing to roles of increasing leadership. She previously served in information security roles at John Deere Financial, PwC Consulting and Discover Financial Services.

In 2022, Mia joined the board of directors for Lumity, a non-profit organization that provides teenagers and young adults from under-resourced communities with transformational experiences that prepare them for lifelong STEM careers. As a director, Mia is responsible for strategic guidance and oversight at Lumity.

Mia holds CISSP and CISM certifications and bachelor’s degree from the College of Saint Benedict. As the proud mother of four sons, Mia leads an active lifestyle balancing her work responsibilities with learning new skills in mixed martial arts and enjoying time with her husband and children.

Bradley Cooper is an accomplished leader with a diverse and extensive professional background. He currently serves as the Associate Vice President of Technology at SASR Workforce Solutions, a prominent staffing company based in Cary, North Carolina. In this role, he leads the company’s technological initiatives, overseeing implementation, and maintenance of cutting-edge technology solutions that align with the company’s business objectives.

Before assuming his current position, he served as the Director of Information Technology at SASR Workforce Solutions, focusing on optimizing the company’s technology infrastructure and operations. He played an instrumental role in harnessing AI technology to streamline the staffing business, reducing time-to-hire and enhancing the candidate experience. With his background in technology and his strategic mindset, Bradley continues to be a driving force behind SASR’s innovative technology strategies, ensuring the company remains agile and competitive in the ever-evolving staffing industry.

Prior to his leadership roles at SASR, Bradley’s career journey included experiences across various industries. From his years in the U.S. Army, where he served in roles ranging from Medic to Healthcare Recruiter, to his time as the Assistant Director of Operations for the NC Dental Society Mission of Mercy, and even a Shipbuilder and Radio DJ, his career path exemplifies his adaptability, dedication to excellence, and commitment to continuous learning. His journey underscores his ability to lead and adapt in dynamic environments, making Bradley a driving force for the technological advancements and innovation within SASR Workforce Solutions and beyond.

Bradley is continuing his lifelong passion for volunteering as a mentor for military members, veterans, and their spouses through Veterati and as a member of the American Staffing Association’s Technology Taskforce.

Holly Ridgeway has extensive experience in providing visionary leadership and innovation while empowering the business strategy, balancing risk, privacy and compliance. For the past 20 years, Ridgeway has built enterprise security programs in both the commercial sector and the federal government.

Ridgeway served as FireEye/Mandiant’s Director, Information Security Programs, and led the Global Government and the Innovation Center. She spearheaded significant efforts to mature key services like the Security Program Assessment and developed new strategic offerings and partnerships in areas such as M&A and cyber insurance. Ridgeway either led or was instrumental in many of the largest and most strategically significant clients and engagements around the world.

Ridgeway has served as the Chief Information Security Officer for PNC Financial Services Group, and the Department of Justice. In these roles, she led the organization’s information security efforts with responsibility for leading all cyber program activities, including the creation of detection, monitoring, incident response, reporting and security services of the 24×7 PNC Fusion Center, and Department of Justice Security Operations Center. She is credited with developing and implementing a highly successful real-time situational awareness program and has successfully led many large incident response efforts, including Distributed Denial of Service attacks against the financial sector that occurred in 2012-13.

In 2013, Ridgeway was recognized by her peers and honored with the Global CISO Top Ten Breakaway Thought Leader Award.

Ridgeway serves as an Adjunct Professor at the University of Maryland, University College in the fields of Cybersecurity, Information Systems Management and Information Assurance. Ridgeway earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Information Systems Management and a Master of Science in Computer Systems Management with a specialty in Information Assurance.

Devon Bryan was appointed as the Global Chief Information Officer for Carnival Corporation effective December 14, 2022. He joined Carnival Corporation in October 2021 as the Global Chief Information Security Officer with responsibilities for conceiving, implementing, and leading technology solutions that assure compliance, protect personal data and corporate assets, increase organizational capability, and advance productivity within Carnival Corporation and its world-leading cruise line brands.

Prior to Carnival Corporation, Bryan was Managing Director, Chief Information Security Officer, MUFG Union Bank N.A where he was responsible for establishing and maintaining a comprehensive information security strategy and program to ensure that information assets and technologies were appropriately protected. He was also responsible for ensuring that information security risks were identified, evaluated, mitigated, and reported in a manner that meets compliance and regulatory requirements and aligned with the risk tolerance for MUFG in the Americas region.

Most recently, he served as the CISO for KPMG where he was charged with effectively designing and executing a best-in-class information and data security function with a proactive approach to enable business results.

Prior to KPMG, Bryan was the Executive Vice President and Chief Information Security Officer for the national IT organization of the U.S. Federal Reserve System. As the system-level CISO, he was responsible for ensuring the Fed’s information security policies, architecture, programs, and incident response team remain effective and efficient. Prior to the Fed, Bryan was the Global Chief Information Security Officer for the outsourced payroll and human resources provider ADP, where he led information security strategy, collaborating across the company’s geographically dispersed business operations to ensure coordination, consensus, and effective cybersecurity protections. Prior to joining ADP in 2011, he served as the Deputy Chief Information Security Officer for the Internal Revenue Service where he was appointed to the Senior Executive Services and directed the FISMA-compliant information security program and the cybersecurity incident response team. His information security career began in the U.S. Air Force, where he served as a captain and lead network security engineer working on systems and programs to protect the critical network and communications networks of the Air Force’s Air Combat Command.

Bryan is a co-founder of Cyversity, a nonprofit geared toward improving the representation of women and minorities in the field of cybersecurity through academic scholarships, certifications, mentoring, and networking opportunities.

Bryan received a Bachelor of Science, Applied Mathematics from South Dakota Technological University and a Master of Science, Computer Science from Colorado Technological University, graduating Summa Cum Laude. He holds multiple industry-recognized certifications, serves on several nonprofit boards, and participates in industry forums as a sought-after speaker and writer on emerging technology trends and issues.

Ben Miron has more than 20 years in the information and cybersecurity space and has held several roles in industry and consulting to build his expertise. At NextEra Energy, Miron’s responsibilities include developing the strategy and leading the team that operates and defends NextEra Energy’s technology systems to ensure power is safely generated and delivered to customers. This includes teams that run the data centers, network and computer operations, operational control technology, end user technology services and a full cybersecurity program including the Advanced Cyberdefense Center across NextEra Energy and its businesses.

Most recently, Miron worked for General Electric where he held several roles including Deputy CISO of GE Capital; CISO of GE Corporate and the Director of Application and Product Security. While at GE Capital, he was responsible for leading the cyber threat intelligence, incident detection and response, and insider threat functions. He was also responsible for the cybersecurity work stream with more than 40 divestitures occurring across the GE Capital business. Prior to joining General Electric, Miron was a manager at Ernst & Young in their Technology, Security and Risk Services practice where he led a team of security professionals to deliver advanced security assessments, compliance programs and strategic program management.

Miron sits on the State of Florida’s Cyber Security Task Force. He is a member of the CISO Board of Advisors for SYN Ventures and ClearSky Security venture funds and is involved in numerous industry and sector initiatives to improve energy and smart-grid cybersecurity.

Samantha Radocchia, or “Sam Rad,” is a futurist, best-selling author, multimedia storyteller, and frontier tech pioneer who combines the mindsets of an anthropologist and technologist.

Sam is the founder of Radical Next, a meta-media studio and strategic consultancy creating transformative stories, experiences, and media productions that shape the future. Her upcoming book by the same name, Radical Next: Thriving in Times of Radical Change explores how “radical next ideas” and technologies will transform societies in the decades to come.

A charismatic speaker and compelling storyteller, Sam delivers keynotes and creates experiences globally at industry events, Fortune 500 corporations, trade associations, national governments, international organizations, and NGOs — empowering individuals, leaders, and organizations not only to survive, but to thrive through radical and accelerating change.

Sam was trained in anthropology and symbolic systems, studying simulated and virtual realities, multiple dimensions, and metaverses — pushing the bounds of human consciousness and social organizations through her research. Her early work focused on virtual world economies, and she was amongst the first anthropologists to live in the virtual world “Second Life” in 2009.

As a futurist, this work has led Sam on a journey working with a range of frontier technologies, indigenous and emerging social structures, people, places, and practices. She refers to herself as an archaeologist of the future, as Fredric Jameson coined — applying a traditional anthropological ethnographic approach to envisioning and illustrating future possibilities.

A four-time entrepreneur, Sam holds several patents linking the physical and digital worlds, and has served across multiple founding executive roles across the C-Suite. An early blockchain and web 3 pioneer, she previously was co-founder of LOVE, a London-based Web 3 communication platform, and Chronicled, a San Francisco-based blockchain company bringing trust to global commerce and supply chains. Prior to Chronicled, Sam founded two companies leveraging AI to map personal taste.

Sam is the author of the #1 Best Seller, Bitcoin Pizza: The No Bullshit Guide to Blockchain, writes as a contributor to Forbes, and was named to the 2017 Forbes 30 Under 30 list. She’s deeply passionate about decentralization and believes technology is a tool to empower not entrench.

Sam is no stranger to risk and has accumulated over 700 jumps as a competitive skydiver.

Allie K. Miller is a top artificial intelligence leader, advisor, and investor who has led large global AI initiatives at two of the five largest cloud providers in the world. Allie was most recently the Global Head of Machine Learning for Startups & Venture Capital at Amazon Web Services (AWS).

Prior to that, Allie was the youngest-ever woman to build an artificial intelligence product at IBM—spearheading product development across computer vision, conversation, data, and regulation for thousands of companies.

Outside of work, Allie is changing the game of AI. Allie has spoken about AI around the world, advises on global AI public policy, and created eight guidebooks to educate businesses on how to build successful AI projects.

Allie was named as AIconic’s 2019 “AI Innovator of the Year”, LinkedIn Top Voice for Technology and AI 2019 & 2020 & 2021, Award Magazine’s Top 50 Women in Tech and Top 100 Global Thought Leaders, Chief in Tech’s Top 100 Women in Tech to Watch in 2022, ReadWrite’s Top 20 AI Speakers in the World, MKAI’s Top 20 AI Mavericks, Data Salon’s Top 25 Data Science influencers in the world, and Neptune’s Top 20 AI Influencers. Allie is also the co-founder of Girls of the Future, a national ambassador for the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), an ambassador for the 10,000-person organization Advancing Women in Product, an angel investor in machine learning startups, and has won the Grand Prize in three national innovation competitions.

Allie holds a double-major MBA from The Wharton School and a BA in Cognitive Science (coding a three-year ML study and studying Computer Science, Linguistics, Psychology) from Dartmouth College.

Christopher P. Boone, Ph.D. is an accomplished global executive, strategist, professor, social scientist, and data technologist with a passion for reinventing and transforming healthcare and life sciences companies utilizing enterprise data & analytics capabilities to drive value creation. Chris has a career-long history as a dynamic, innovative, and transformative data & analytics executive, thought leader, and a public voice on the power of real-world evidence, health informatics, and enterprise data & analytics and its ability to radically transform the global health care system into a learning health care system.

Chris served as the Vice President, Global Head of Health Economics and Outcomes Research at AbbVie. He is also an adjunct assistant professor of health administration at the New York University’s Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, an active board member of several influential organizations, and a co-founder of a few start-up companies. Prior to AbbVie, he served in two different roles at Pfizer: (1) the Vice President and Head of Global Medical Epidemiology and Big Data Analysis, and (2) the Vice President and Global Head of Real-World Data and Analytics.

Chris has been recognized as an inducted member of the Executive Leadership Council (2023), Top 50 Leadership Excellence Award by the National Diversity and Leadership Council (2023, 2021), a Global Top 100 Innovator in Data & Analytics (2020, 2019), an Emerging Pharma Leader by Pharmaceutical Executive (2018), and a Top 40 Under 40 Leaders in Health (2017) by the National Minority Quality Forum.

Chris holds appointments to some of the most influential national committees focused on health data and patient centricity, including the Board of Governors for PCORI, the Board of Directors for Global Medical Response, the Board of Directors for Stewards of Change Institute, the Advisory Board of Mango Sciences, the Advisory Board of TrialBee, the American Heart Association’s Clinical Studies Expert Panel, the Global Liver Institute for Liver Health Equity Advisory Board, and the Strategic Advisory Committee for the Texas Biomedical Institute.

Cisco Sanchez serves as Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer. In this role Sanchez leads the Qualcomm IT organization and works closely with the business partners to ensure the IT capabilities are available to help propel the Qualcomm company forward.

Sanchez brings more than 24 years of engineering and IT experience to the role.

Previously, he served as SVP & CIO for FedEx Ground company. In this role, Sanchez oversaw all IT services in the U.S. and Canada and lead a team of more than 2,300 employees and consultants who supported 600+ automated FedEx facilities and stations.

Cisco Sanchez joined FedEx in 1997 and during his tenure he gained expertise in architecture design, acquisition integration, enterprise IT systems. He is a proven leader in implementing customer-focused strategies, driving innovation, enabling efficiencies, working with global teams and setting out strategic direction. In addition to his technical leadership, Sanchez is passionate about culture and inclusion, and hosted the annual FedEx hackathon to drive new ideas and innovation.

Sanchez works closely with the For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology (FIRST) organization with a heavy focus on ensuring to continue the excitement of STEM in our young adults.

Sanchez holds a bachelor’s degree in computer science from Colorado State University and a master’s degree in management information systems from Colorado Technical University.

Srini serves as the Chief Technology Officer at Rackspace Technology® and is responsible for corporate strategy, technology management, IT, and Enterprise Security. He also serves on Rackspace International GmBH, Platform9, and SustainableIT.org boards.

Before his position at Rackspace Technology, Srini was General Manager and Managing Partner for Hybrid Cloud Advisory Services at IBM Consulting. He worked closely with CIOs there, shaping their hybrid cloud strategies and fostering innovation. Earlier, he was the Chief Information Officer for Magellan Health, where he built an Exponential IT organization that helped the company double its revenue over four years. Srini was also President and CEO of NTT Innovation Institute Inc., a Silicon Valley-based start-up building multi-sided cloud platforms for digital businesses. His earlier career saw C-Level roles at HP, Nationwide Insurance, and IBM.

Throughout his career, Srini has received numerous accolades for his innovative thinking and dynamic leadership. He was inducted into the CIO Hall of Fame in 2023, has been named an IBM Distinguished Engineer title twice, and is a two-time inductee into the IBM Academy of Technology. Among his global recognitions, he received the Sustainable IT Social Impact award. He was named a Computerworld Premier 100 Leader, an Elite 8 CIO, and was listed as one of Infoworld’s Top 25 CTOs.

Srini is a lifelong learner with an MBA from The Ohio State University, an MS in Computer Science from the University of Mumbai, and several executive education programs in Systems Thinking, Design Thinking, and Clean Energy from MIT, Stanford, and Singularity University. He is a Distinguished Certified IT Architect Profession Leader with The Open Group and a certified AWS, Azure, and Google Cloud architect.

Srini lives with his wife and two daughters in Columbus, Ohio. When not working, he enjoys traveling the world with his wife and family and is currently learning to play the acoustic guitar.

Maya Georgieva is a leading voice in the fields of innovation, immersive storytelling, and frontier technologies. As the Senior Director of the Innovation Center and XR, AI, and Quantum Labs at The New School, she leads a team that drives innovation in spatial computing, AI, Quantum Computing, future interfaces, and design.

Georgieva is a sought-after speaker and has delivered on topics such as the Metaverse, AI, and Quantum at prestigious events such as SXSW and the MIT Media Lab. Notable publications like The Atlantic and The Economist have featured her work, and she has earned recognition as one of the 30 Higher Education Influencers to follow in 2022.

She designed the first-ever Quantum Computing Design Jam for creatives, served as the final judge for the MIT Reality Hackathon in 2023, and actively writes and speaks on digital transformation, immersive storytelling, and the future of learning, creativity, and work. Maya Georgieva also consults with organizations and startups in this space and serves as a judge and coach for several competitions and accelerator programs. Georgieva has worked with major tech companies such as IBM, Google, HP, Microsoft, and Meta. She has given talks at United Nations, UNESCO, and European Commission forums on the ethics of XR and AI, and education, policy, and corporate Innovation forums.

Tejal Raoof is an organizational leader within J&J’s Digital Supply Chain (SC) healthcare technology organization. Ever since joining J&J as an intern over 26 years ago, she has focused on technology product management and team leadership, enabling a better Digital Healthcare SC for our Customers and Patients. Furthermore, she has directly impacted J&J’s e-commerce global footprint, improving customer experience and driving patient outcomes through a better digital experience. This has created a more efficient and digitally enabled SC across the CPG, Med Tech and Pharma industries.

Tejal’s early years at J&J Consumer nurtured her passion for improved Customer experience through delivering digitally enabled solutions across RFID, ERP, EDI, b2b e-commerce. Later, she drove Global Standards across Deliver, Commercial and R&D in Enterprise Architecture. Moreover, Tejal worked with the regional teams to drive a b2b eCommerce site in over 115 J&J countries. After that, she transitioned to bring our CIO 100 Award winner, Advance Case Management (ACM) to life and scaled it from pilot to production.

The ACM team connected to over 100 EMR systems and improved knee and hip predications with AI-enabled solutions. This allowed for a future-centric experience with our orthopedic surgical customers. In 2021, ACM earned a World Economic Forum Lighthouse designation. Currently, she is the Sr. Tech. Product Mgr. for Safe Returns which is the digital foundation for Janssen’s Device Circularity program to accelerate Janssen’s sustainability goals. More recently, she moved to the J&J Janssen Advanced Therapies organization, focusing on scaling and digitizing cell and gene therapy supply chain capabilities.

Most importantly, Tejal is a mother of two boys, ages 10 and 13 and a wife of an Infectious Disease physician. She enjoys cooking/baking, snowboarding, photography, Eagles Football, Phillies baseball and travelling. Tejal Raoof is a Graduate of Rutgers University School of Business, Bachelor of Science in Mgmt Sciences and Information Systems (MSIS) & minor in Psychology. She also holds an Executive MBA from NYU Stern, Management.

Nicholas Coussoule joined BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee in February 2008 as senior vice president and chief information officer. In this role, Nick is responsible for a broad range of strategic initiatives, technical and operational support functions. He leads more than 800 employees and oversees a $190 million budget for the company’s information services and business engineering divisions. He reports directly to BlueCross’ chief operating officer and serves on the company’s corporate leadership council.

Nick has more than 30 years of extensive experience in operations and technology consulting and IT management in the U.S. and internationally. He began his career in consulting with Keane Inc. serving as a project manager and account manager in the US and the Netherlands, before moving into senior management.

He has held senior IT leadership positions at Alumax Inc. as well as the chief information officer position at Pameco Corporation and Teltek Inc. Nick most recently served as the senior vice president and chief information officer at Crawford & Company, the world’s largest independent provider of claims management solutions.

At BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee he has been instrumental in helping the company successfully implement the requirements of the Affordable Care Act allowing BlueCross to obtain dominant market share while meeting our customer obligations. His team developed a Member 360 dashboard providing significantly improved customer service efficiency and effectiveness. His team also partnered with BCBST strategic marketing team to implement significant digital capabilities including an award winning member portal and award winning mobile applications.

Prior key accomplishments for Nick include being part of a leadership team that developed and implemented a global order management and inventory system for a Fortune 500 chemical company. Nick also led the executive committee IT research, due diligence, synergy plan, acquisition and integration of a $200 million third-party administrator of custom claims and medical management solutions.

Nick is a graduate of Dartmouth College, where he obtained a degree with honors in economics and mathematics. He is a graduate of the 2015 Nashville Healthcare Council Fellows program. Nick is also a member of the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics – the statutory public advisory body to the Secretary of Health and Human Services on health information policy.

Bianca Lochner, Ph.D., has over 20 years of experience in information technology and local government. Throughout her career, she led multiple digital transformations and innovations in education and the public sector, while modernizing legacy technology and positively impacting how citizens and businesses interact with the city government. As the Chief Information Officer for the City of Scottsdale, Arizona, she combines her passion for public service with technology’s power to transform how government delivers to the community it serves.

She previously served as the Assistant CIO for the City of Phoenix and as the CIO for two school districts, leading a broad portfolio of technology infrastructure and digital projects, developing Smart City strategies, creating a more transparent and open government, and fostering innovation and partnerships to improve efficiency and service delivery and enhance the citizen experience and well-being.

Bianca is the co-founder and co-chair of the Cybersecurity Council of Arizona, a nonprofit dedicated to expanding Arizona’s cybersecurity workforce. She is also a board member and advisor for the ArizonaCIO, Girls in Tech, the Arizona Technology Council, the Regional Wireless Consortium, Evanta, the Greater Phoenix Smart Region Consortium Connective, and the World Academy of Science, Engineering, and Technology.

She holds a Master’s Degree in Computer Science, a Master’s Degree in American Studies, a Ph.D. in Educational Technology, a Postdoctorate in Management of Information Systems, and an Executive MBA from ASU’s Thunderbird School of Global Management. Bianca Lochner received the 2022 GoldenGov City Executive of the Year award and Government Technology recognized her as one of the Top 25 Doers, Dreamers & Drivers of 2023.

Ron Culler is the Vice President, of Cyber Development Programs at CompTIA focused on Cybersecurity, be it the current or future threat landscape, certification, learning, or workforce development. His role is to be the voice of Cybersecurity for CompTIA across the organization.

Prior to Joining CompTIA Ron was the founder of Secure Designs Inc., and served as the CTO, technology architect, MSS visionary, and security evangelist for the company. Ron and his team built a successful MSSP managing over 10,000 firewalls globally until they were acquired in 2018. In addition, Ron is a US Navy veteran and was part of the Naval Security Group which he served for 10 years.

Ron is an out-of-the-box thinker actively engaged in expanding the understanding of Cybersecurity and technology for organizations of all sizes. Ron’s expertise as a Cybersecurity visionary and industry thought leader is in high demand, as a regular speaker and writer on Cybersecurity, technology legislation, cloud, and IoT/OT security. He has also been featured in numerous publications, including The Washington Post, The New York Times, Forbes, and even Billboard Magazine where he has shared his insights on the latest cybersecurity trends and best practices.

He has been involved in multiple industry advisory councils and boards and has served as the Chair of CompTIA’s IT Security Community, a Member of CompTIA’s Cybersecurity Advisory Council, and CompTIA ISAO SME Champions Council prior to joining CompTIA. In addition to the many industry councils and boards, he also provides mentorship to several entrepreneurial organizations.

Ron has won multiple industry awards and honors including the MSPmentor 250, ChannelPro 20/20 Visionaries, and the 2017 CompTIA Tech Champion award for leadership in the technology sector.

Dr. Sastry is President and CEO of Amesite. Dr. Sastry was previously President, CEO, Board Director and co-Founder of Sakti3, recognized as one of MIT’s 50 Smartest Companies (2015), and as a Crain’s Detroit Business Cool Places to Work winner (2017). Backed by a global team of venture capitalists, the company was acquired by Dyson in 2015 for $90M. Sastry was invited to the White House in 2015 to be recognized for her technology entrepreneurship and meet with President Barack Obama. Her technology and business work have been featured in the Wall Street Journal, Fortune, Forbes, the Economist, USA Today, the New York Times and on the cover of Inc.

Prior to starting her companies, she was Professor of Mechanical, Biomedical and Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Michigan, which is ranked among the top 5 public universities in the nation. She was named an Arthur F. Thurnau Professor (UM’s highest teaching honor) in 2008. Tenured and promoted early, Sastry was recognized with some of the highest honors in her scientific fields over her 17-year academic career, including the ASME Frank Kreith Energy Award (2011) and NSF’s Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (1997). She founded two academic research centers in intracellular signaling (Keck Foundation) and advanced automotive batteries (GM / Department of Energy), and a global graduate program in Energy Systems Engineering. She has co-authored over 100 publications and 100 patents and filings and has delivered over 100 invited lectures and seminars globally on a range of scientific and technology topics, spanning mathematics, physics, bioscience and battery technology.

Sastry is active in philanthropy and business mentorship, with a focus on education and poverty alleviation. She holds PhD and MS degrees from Cornell University, and a BS from the University of Delaware, all in mechanical engineering.

Jim Swanson is Executive Vice President, Chief Information Officer, and member of the Executive Committee for Johnson & Johnson. Based at Johnson & Johnson’s USA headquarters, Jim is responsible for accelerating Johnson & Johnson’s business outcomes and advancing human health with technology and digital innovation.

In his current role, Jim leads the Johnson & Johnson Technology organization. His team consists of more than 4,000 professionals across 50 countries. They are passionate about combining deep scientific expertise with the latest digital solutions. Their goal is to confront some of the most complex healthcare challenges of our time. Additionally, Jim and his team are responsible for powering the 144,000 colleagues across Johnson & Johnson. They also manage the digital ecosystem that connects the Company to patients and customers.

Jim Swanson has an overriding commitment to attracting and growing digital talent across the enterprise and forging external connections across industries and disciplines. He is known for saying that he has “the best job in the world” due to his ability to drive positive impact in the world using “tech for good”. Jim, along with the organizations he has led, has garnered industry accolades. These accolades recognize their contributions in leadership. Their successful application of technology to drive outcomes and deliver business value has also earned them acknowledgment. Furthermore, Jim’s leadership has earned them recognition as one of the best places to work in IT. Additionally, they have shown strong support for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) initiatives aimed at nurturing emerging talent.

Jim rejoined Johnson & Johnson in 2019 from Bayer Crop Science, where he served as a member of the Executive Leadership Team, Chief Information Officer, and Head of Digital Transformation. Before Bayer acquired the company, he held the position of Chief Information Officer at Monsanto for five years. Prior to that role, Jim spent nine years working as Vice President and Chief Information Officer for Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical, where he advanced technology throughout the company’s Research & Development organization.

Earlier in his career, Jim led the Research & Development and Commercial IT organizations at Merck. Jim began as a bench scientist at SmithKline Beecham before transitioning to IT. Throughout his professional life, he has had extensive international experience, including living in the United Kingdom and Germany.

Jim holds a bachelor’s degree in Bioscience and Biotechnology and a master’s degree in

Computer Science, both from Drexel University.

Jim, the proud father of three daughters, is married and enjoys running, biking, skiing, scuba diving, and boating in his free time. Additionally, he volunteers with United Way Ready by 21 and the American Heart Association.

Daniel Saroff is Group Vice President of Consulting and Research at IDC, where he is a senior practitioner in the end-user consulting practice. This practice provides support to boards, business leaders, and technology executives in their efforts to architect, benchmark, and optimize their organization’s information technology. IDC’s end-user consulting practice utilizes our extensive international IT data library, robust research base, and tailored consulting solutions to deliver unique business value through IT acceleration, performance management, cost optimization, and contextualized benchmarking capabilities.

Mr. Saroff also leads the CIO/End-User Research Practice at IDC. This practice provides guidance to business and technology executives on how to leverage technology to achieve innovative and disruptive business outcomes. IDC’s research enables clients to create grounded business and technology strategies and empowers IT leaders to deliver services and innovation that drive business growth and success.

Daniel Saroff has over twenty years of experience in senior-level positions in both consulting organizations and delivering technology. Prior to joining IDC, he served as the CIO for a major Massachusetts state agency, where he led the agency through cloud migrations, digital transformation, technology modernization, enterprise platform reengineering, security in-depth and zero trust, and defense and response to a major cyber-attack. He also held consulting positions at both Forrester and Gartner and was a IT Director at a major aerospace and defense company. Before joining IDC, he owned a private IT management consultancy.

In addition to his work in technology and consulting, Mr. Saroff co-founded and managed a neuroscience research laboratory focused on Alzheimer’s Disease and published multiple peer-reviewed research articles.

Simona is a strategic leader with extensive knowledge of how technology enables the customer experience and facilitates growth of business value. Simona brings a wealth of expertise across the Information Management and Technology sector, and has a diverse background in both corporate and government settings across the Banking, Aviation, Energy and Local Government sectors.

Simona has 20 years of expertise of enabling strategic delivery across technology and business functions. She has a proven track record of driving the successful delivery of large scale transformation programs.

As the CIO at Sutherland Shire Council, enabling $2.7B of assets, Simona achieved a 2 year digital transformation program in a few weeks, as published in the media:

ICT Digital Transformation Program: Story in Technology Magazine

With specialties building and delivering Technology Strategies, Cyber Security, Portfolio Management Offices, Service Management, Portfolio Delivery, Digital Operating Models and bringing Agility to practice, Simona has lead the evolution of IT across top tier brands within the Finance, Aviation, Energy and Government industries.

A strategic thinker with a passion for what she does, leading from the front, engaging and energising strategic partners and stakeholders as well as the wider business in supporting high impact, dynamic solutions to deliver business value. Integral in aligning portfolios to the strategic objectives of the organisation, she has a passion for continuous improvement and empowering businesses to reach their full potential, encouraging innovative thinking enabling best practice through the use of technology.

A people leader, driving cultural change with a growth mindset, priding herself in providing a coaching approach to ensure the team and the individual achieve their full potential.

History. Legacy. Character. Great leadership. Brad Meltzer draws upon the themes of his best-selling books and television shows, challenging audiences to look at their lives, work and mission through legacy’s lens. Brad’s highly inspiring keynotes showcase the motivational stories of both everyday heroes and history-making leaders. His moving message: Every life makes history. Ordinary people can change the world. If you can impact just one person, you won’t just live a good life. You will live forever.

Named as both “America’s Historian” and one of “Hollywood’s 25 Most Powerful Authors,” Brad is the #1 New York Times bestselling author of The Lightning Rod and twelve other bestselling thrillers. He also writes non-fiction books like The First Conspiracy and The Lincoln Conspiracy, and the Ordinary People Change the World kids book series, which inspired the Emmy-nominated TV show on PBS KIDS, Xavier Riddle and the Secret Museum.

In addition to fiction, Brad is one of the only authors to ever have books on the bestseller list in non-fiction children’s books and even comic books, for which he won the prestigious Eisner Award. He also hosts of Brad Meltzer’s Lost History and Brad Meltzer’s Decoded on the History Channel, which he used to find the missing 9/11 flag that the firefighters raised at Ground Zero. He later unveiled it for display at the 9/11 Museum in New York. Brad was selected to join America250 to help commemorate America’s 250th anniversary in 2026. He will be serving on the Arts & Culture Advisory Council along with Debbie Allen, Cal Ripken and other leaders and luminaries.

An inspirational voice, Brad Meltzer has earned a reputation for working closely with clients, speaking authentically from the heart, and receiving both high praise and standing ovations from Fortune 500 companies. Infusing humor and insights into engaging, highly moving narratives, his thought-provoking talks truly connect with audiences. Brad inspires us to examine our lives, shape our legacies and discover the potential within all of us to change the world. As he says, “Stories aren’t the beauty of what did happen. They’re the beauty of what could happen.”

When it comes to quiz shows, no one has done it better than Ken Jennings. The former Utah software engineer rose to fame in 2004 when he spent six months as a contestant on Jeopardy! His 75-game streak and $2.52 million in winnings are still Jeopardy! records today. In 2020, he was named the show’s “Greatest of All Time” after winning a prime-time tournament against legendary champs James Holzhauer and Brad Rutter and earned an additional $1 million. In 2022, he signed on as permanent co-host for the show with Mayim Bialik.

Jennings’ success should come as no surprise. A native of Seattle, he spent 15 years in South Korea and Singapore. His father worked as an attorney there. The only lifeline to American pop culture at the time was the Armed Forces Network, where he watched Jeopardy! after school every afternoon. He dreamed of being on the show. But as life got busy, the fantasy faded away.

Ken Jennings returned to the U.S. and while at Brigham Young University, he captained the university’s successful quiz bowl team and began writing and editing questions for National Academic Quiz Tournaments. He noticed a lot of his friends and acquaintances from the world of quiz bowl appearing on games shows — allowing them to pay off student loans or buy cars with their winnings. His long-ago dream of competing on Jeopardy! was revived. And in 2004 that fantasy became a reality.

In the wake of Jennings’ life-changing Jeopardy! reign, he appeared on TV shows from The Tonight Show to The Simpsons to Sesame Street. Barbara Walters named him one of the 10 most interesting people of the year. Jennings is the author of 12 books, including New York Times bestsellers like Maphead, about geography obsessives, and Because I Said So, debunking parenting myths. He currently stars on ABC’s hit game show The Chase, as well as Master Minds on GSN, and co-hosts the twice-weekly podcast Omnibus.

Tom Koulopoulos is Chairman and founder of Delphi Group, a 30-year-old Boston-based think tank named one of the fastest growing private companies by Inc. Magazine, and the founding partner of Acrovantage Ventures, which invests in early-stage technology startups. He is also the author of 13 books, an inventor with several patents, an Inc.com columnist, the past Executive Director of the Babson College Center for Business Innovation, the past director of the Dell Innovation Lab, and a professor at Boston University.

His insights have received wide praise from luminaries such as the late Peter Drucker, the father of modern management; Dee Hock, founder of Visa International; and Tom Peters, who called his writing, “a brilliant vision of where we must take our enterprises to survive and thrive.” His Inc. column is read by over one million people yearly.

Mr. Koulopoulos’ thirteen books include his most recent, Reimagining Healthcare, The Bottomless Cloud, Revealing the Invisible, The Gen Z Effect, and Cloud Surfing. His upcoming book, Gigatrends, looks at the seven tech trends that are shaping the future of how we live, work, and play.

Tom’s keynotes blend humor, insight, and a cutting-edge view of the future in a way that’s customized to each audience. According to Tom’s mentor, Peter Drucker, Tom’s writing “makes you question not only the way you run your business but the way you run yourself.”

Amanda Edelman is Chief Operating Officer of Edelman’s Gen Z Lab, a dedicated offering that lends expertise to and counsels clients looking to effectively engage Gen Z. Within Edelman, the world’s largest independent communications agency, the Gen Z Lab draws upon a hub of data-driven insights and a roster of internal and external advisers to harness the generation’s perspective and ambitions to solve issues such as diversity and inclusion, sustainability, and climate change, and align with brands to become catalysts for change.

She also serves as Associate Director of the Brand practice and contributes to strategic initiatives inside of Edelman, such as Edelman’s climate working group. She has worked with organizations across corporate affairs; brand; purpose; and environmental, social, and governance sectors in London, New York City, and Washington, DC.

Her prior work includes Pursuit, a social enterprise focused on increasing inclusion within the tech sector; Grameen America, a microfinance nonprofit that provides small business loans to underserved women in the United States; and the Boston Consulting Group.

Amanda sits on Rockefeller Capital Management’s Next Generation Advisory Council, advising the organization on next generation cultural and financial trends, and serves as a member of Leadership Now, a community of business professionals dedicated to preserving the future of democracy in the United States. She is a 2022 Atlantic Council Millennium Leadership Fellow and graduated from Stanford University, where she was President of her class and Vice President of the student body, and Harvard Business School.

In her spare time, Amanda can be found exploring new cities, neighborhoods, and cultural venues and reading any book she can get her hands on.

Reshma Saujani is a leading activist and founder and CEO of Moms First. She is also the founder and former CEO of Girls Who Code. She has spent more than a decade building movements to fight for women and girls’ economic empowerment, working to close the gender gap in the tech sector, and most recently advocating for policies to support moms impacted by the pandemic. Reshma’s newest book Pay Up: The Future of Women and Work (and Why It’s Different Than You Think) presents a bold plan to address the burnout and inequity harming America’s working women today. She is also the author of the international bestseller Brave, Not Perfect, and her influential TED talk, “Teach girls, bravery not perfection,” has more than five million views globally.

Reshma began her career as an attorney and Democratic organizer. In 2010, she surged onto the political scene as the first Indian American woman to run for U.S. Congress. During the race, Reshma visited local schools and saw the gender gap in computing classes firsthand, which led her to start Girls Who Code. She also served as New York City’s Deputy Public Advocate, where she created innovative partnerships to support DREAMers and promote campaign finance reform, among other initiatives.

In her nine-year tenure as the CEO of Girls Who Code, Reshma grew the organization to one of the largest and most prestigious non-profits in the country. Today, Girls Who Code has taught 300,000 girls through direct in-person computer science education programming, and reached 500 million people worldwide through its New York Times-bestselling book series and award-winning campaigns. In 2019, Girls Who Code was awarded Most Innovative Non-Profit by Fast Company.

In response to the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on America’s moms, Reshma launched the Marshall Plan for Moms to advocate for policies that value women’s labor in and out of the home. Reshma has successfully worked with House and Senate leaders to introduce “Marshall Plan for Moms” legislation at the federal level and is continuing to act as an outside agitator to change culture through creative awareness campaigns. In 2023, Marshall Plan for Moms became Moms First, a reflection of the progress made in the last two years and a rallying cry to expand the movement we’re building together.

Reshma is a graduate of the University of Illinois, Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, and Yale Law School. Her innovative approach to movement building has earned her broad recognition on lists including: Fortune World’s Greatest Leaders; Fortune 40 Under 40; WSJ Magazine Innovator of the Year; Forbes Most Powerful Women Changing the World; and Fast Company 100 Most Creative People, among others. She is the winner of the Harold W. McGraw, Jr. Prize in Education.

Reshma serves on the Board of Overseers for Harvard University and on the Board of Overseers for the International Rescue Committee, which provides aid to refugees and those impacted by humanitarian crises. In addition, she serves on the Board of Trustees of the Economic Club of New York, and as an ex-officio Trustee of the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). Reshma lives in New York City with her husband, Nihal, their sons, Shaan and Sai, and their bulldog, Stanley.

Carolyn Levy is the President of Randstad Technologies Group for Randstad Canada, leading the strategic direction of the division, with a deep commitment to matching exceptional tech talent with leading organizations across the country. For over 12 years, she has held a series of positions within Randstad Canada, starting as a staffing consultant and quickly progressing to a leadership role within the organization.

An innovative leader with a passion for excellent execution, Carolyn has a proven track record for developing strong sales teams and leaders. With an eye for detail, she’s focused on creative problem solving that allows for efficient and consistent service delivery and turns company objectives into real-world results.

Throughout her career, Carolyn has been a passionate advocate for creating inclusive and collaborative workplaces. She takes an active role in Randstad Canada’s efforts to develop productive attitudes towards diversity and inclusion across all industries, working with key stakeholders to break down barriers and create pathways for people from all backgrounds to build meaningful careers. In her own team, promoting women is a key mandate. Since 2010, Randstad Technologies’ leadership team has increased from 26% women to 46%.

In 2019, Carolyn was named the Executive Ambassador of Diversity & Inclusion at Randstad Canada. To support that role, she regularly takes part in panels and conferences about D&I and is an Individual Practitioner with CCDI (Canadian Centre for Diversity and Inclusion). She’s also the Executive Ambassador of Randstad Canada’s Women Transforming The Workplace program.

Carolyn is a graduate of the University of Calgary. She’s continuously expanding her leadership skills through international programs, including INSEAD graduate business school in France and the London Business School in the United Kingdom. Carolyn also sits on the board of the NACCB, the National Association of Canadian Consulting Businesses, an association that represents Professional Staffing firms on Canadian public policy issues that impact the IT Services industry. She’s also currently attending courses at the University of British Columbia to further expand her knowledge in the D&I space. Carolyn lives in Calgary with her husband and their two daughters.

Ivelisse Torres is a leader in the information security sector with more than 15 years of experience. She is dedicated to ensuring risk is properly mitigated in order to create the most appropriate security posture for ABM Industries. Ivelisse has proven to be skilled in managing inevitable organizational change and has the ability communicate effectively at all levels within the organization. Her expertise in managing multiple projects simultaneously while meeting strict deadlines has been a key skill in her career advancement.

Currently, Ivelisse is a Director of Information Security at ABM, a leading provider of integrated facility services with annualized revenue exceeding $7 billion and more than 100,000 team members in 350+ offices throughout the United States, United Kingdom, and other international locations. As part of the Cyber and Information Security Office Ivelisse is working to actively improve the overall security posture at ABM by establishing foundational security programs in multiple security verticals.

Ivelisse attended the University of Houston-Downtown and received both her Bachelor of International Business and a Master of Security Management. Additionally, she is seeking her Doctoral Degree in Digital and Cyber Forensic Science.

She is also enthusiastic about mentorship opportunities both in and out of the workplace. She seeks to help in the career development and advancement of others. Ivelisse is also an avid believer in creating a diverse working environment where team members can openly contribute and celebrate the value they bring to the organization because of their different cultural backgrounds.

Patrick Antoine is a Senior Managing Director who leads the Globant Canada team. Patrick works with clients to define their digital agenda to fortify their position for today and for tomorrow. Patrick’s team is composed of talented individuals who are ‘bi-lingual’ in Business and IT, with the objective of innovating with clients to show them real value, from ‘concept to code’.

Key outcomes Patrick focuses on for clients include digitally reinventing themselves, enhancing enterprise agility, leading with user experience, driving business insight, increasing revenue, and optimizing their operations. His team applies exponential technologies to transform clients’ businesses at scale. Areas of focus include experience and design, software engineering, digital platform development and implementation.

Patrick has over 25 years of experience in businessand technology transformation. He has sold and delivered strategy and transformation engagements in a variety of industries (both private and public). Prior to his current role, Patrick worked at IBM for many years, in various leadership roles in Canada and the U.S., including Customer Transformation, Enterprise Strategy, Business Analytics and Cognitive Process Services. Patrick also played a role as the Chief Strategy Officer for IBM’s BPO business.

Originally from New York City and has a B.S. degree from Manhattan College in Electrical Engineering and an M.B.A from Pace University. He has also completed Advanced Business Strategy and Advanced Operations Strategy executive courses at Harvard Business School and IMD. Patrick is married with three children and currently lives in Oakville,Ontario. His interests include world music, word games, running, and island hopping.

Carlos Valencia was appointed Director of Global Data Platforms in July 2021.

Carlos started at McCain in October 2000 as a Software Engineer and has taken a multitude of roles during his 22-year career in the company. In his initial years he led software development teams building, implementing, and supporting global solutions for the finance, commercial, and manufacturing business units.

In 2010, Carlos moved to Argentina with his family to assume accountability for the LATAM IS/IT department, as well as being part of the Global IS and the Latin America business leadership teams. While in this role, he also led the regional deployment of the last phase of a major multi-year global technology transformation that ended in 2014.

Since his return to Canada in 2015, Carlos has been in the Data and Analytics space. He is now driving the modernization of the data platforms to enable new capabilities and technologies in support of the company’s digital transformation to become a data-led organization. Carlos is originally from Colombia where he studied Computing Science Engineering at Francisco De Paula Santander University and a Master in Computer Science at Los Andes university. He lives in Florenceville-Bristol, New Brunswick with his wife Sandra Castaneda and two boys David and Daniel.

Sandra is an experienced and dedicated healthcare professional and nursing educator who possesses a wealth of knowledge, holding many senior leadership roles managing projects, operations, and education. Her current role is with the Office of the Chief Coroner as a Provincial Nurse Manager, supporting a team of nurses (Coroner Investigators) and administrators (Regional Death Investigation Administrators).

Sandra has worked with multidisciplinary subject matter experts and stakeholders across the province as well as representatives from the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care.

Sandra was instrumental in the development and implementation of large-scale organizational projects including QuinC: the electronic case management system at the Office of the Chief Coroner and the Ambulatory Referral Management System and was instrumental in the organization and delivery of the first National Paediatric Conference in Ontario. In addition, she has presented and produced publications that have been circulated nationally and internationally.

She holds a Master of Arts in Education from Central Michigan University in the US, a Project Management Certificate from Humber College, a Bachelor of Science in Nursing from Ryerson University, and a Diploma in Nursing from St. Clair College, in Ontario Canada.

She is active in her community, having served as a member of the Board of Directors for the Vaughan Community Heath Centre.

Gina is a senior leader with over 18 years of progressive leadership experience in strategic leadership, finance, accounting, business transformation, operations, and business improvement.

Her role at the Office of the Chief Coroner as an Executive Officer cultivated her passion for business improvement and modernization. Being no stranger to modernization, Gina also played a key role in the modernization of the tax administration process on Ontario with the implementation of a province wide electronic case management system known as OntTax. Both transformational projects are recognized nationwide as the benchmark in their respective areas.

Earlier in her career, Gina held several executive and senior management roles specifically spearheading the development of Beer and Wine tax audit in Ontario; led the audit for the 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games; Managing Land Transfer Tax, Gas and Fuel Tax, Beer and Wine Tax audit in Ontario.

Gina holds an undergraduate degree in Business Administration and Economics from Sir Wilfrid Laurier and a Certified Professional Accounting designation from CPA Canada.

Gina is the Executive Director of the Hellenic Canadian Board of Trade (HCBT) where she co-led a trade mission to Athens, Greece with Eurobank and Food Expo. She is an active member of the International Society of Female Professionals. She has also held leadership roles with the European Union Chamber of Commerce, Habitat for Humanity (New Orleans Re-Build Mission), the OPS United Way Campaign and the Greek Community of Durham Region as the Executive Board Secretary. She is committed to serving and giving back to her community. She is married and loves traveling and exploring the wonders of the world.

Deborah is a passionate Information Technology Executive whose career focus has been on the protection and privacy of information and information assets, as well as on technology innovation, education and awareness.

As the current Global Chief Information Security Officer for Delta Air Lines, Deborah brings more than 25 years of cyber security expertise, information technology risk management and data privacy experiences to the aviation sector. Deborah is a Board Director for the Aviation Information Sharing and Analysis Center and sits on A4A’s Cyber Security Council.

Deborah has applied her experience and skills in information technology risk management and cybersecurity in building security programs for PNC Bank, Fifth Third Bank, JPMorgan-Chase, Ally Financial, and Freddie Mac in addition to her work at Delta.

Deborah also serves as an independent Board Member for SERC Reliability Corporation; as a Board Trustee for Cristo Rey Atlanta Jesuit High School, and serves on the Customer Advisory Boards for Proofpoint, Sailpoint, Crowdstrike, and ForcePoint Software companies. Deborah was inducted into the 2022 CISO Hall of Fame, and has been recognized on the 2021 and 2022 Top 100 CISOs list by CISOs Connect, the 2020 Cyber Defense CISO 100 list, and was also recognized as the 2007 ISE CISO People’s Choice Award winner for CISO of the year.

Deborah holds a CISSP certification and is a graduate of the University of Colorado with a Bachelor of Science degree in Information Systems Management.

Deborah resides in Atlanta, Georgia with her husband and two of her four children. She enjoys the great outdoors and is an avid gardener and quilter in her spare time.

CIBC’s Architecture, Data, and Analytics (ADA) team is led by Brad Fedosoff. The ADA team provides services to the Enterprise that include Business Architecture, Technology Architecture, Data and Technology Governance, Data Engineering and Enablement, Advanced Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (AI). Brad and his team help enable CIBC business unit strategies by architecting the bank of the future, leveraging well managed high quality data and advanced tools and techniques to better understanding our clients and help make their ambitions a reality. The team also ensures that Data & Technology Risk are being managed in a balanced fashion ensuring our bank and customers are protected.

Brad has been with CIBC since 2007 and has held various roles within CIBC Technology including Global Systems Engineering and the Head of Technology Architecture. Prior to CIBC, Brad worked for Hewlett-Packard where he was a Chief Technologist across a number of Global accounts where he had both delivery oversight and Architecture teams reporting to him Globally. Brad has worked in the technology field for 20+ years and brings a unique multi-industry Global perspective to our people, processes, and technology. Brad is a Ryerson Polytechnic University graduate and a member of the Center for Information Systems Research at MIT. Children’s mental health is a very personal passion for Brad and his family, he’s currently Chair of the Board of Directors of the George Hull Centre for Children and Families, a leading children’s mental health research and treatment centre in Canada.

Stuart Kippelman is CIO of Parsons Corporation.

Prior to Parsons, Kippelman was the SVP and CIO for Platform Specialty Products, a global, diversified producer of high-tech specialty chemicals and provider of technical services. The business involves the formulation of a broad range of solutions-oriented specialty chemicals, which are sold into multiple industries, including agrochemical, animal health, electronics, graphic arts, plating, and offshore oil production and drilling.

Kippelman previously served as SVP and CIO for Covanta. He led all aspects of global IT, leveraging innovative technologies to transform the way the business runs and generates revenue. For his transformational work at Covanta, Stuart received numerous prestigious industry recognitions including Top 100 CIO’s in STEM 2015, Computerworld’s 2014 Premier IT Leader Award and the CIO.com Top 100 Award in 2012, 2013, and 2014.

Prior to joining Covanta, Kippelman held many leadership and technical roles of increasing responsibility at Johnson & Johnson. He was Corporate Director of Technology M&A and Emerging Market Growth, CIO/CTO of Health & Wellness, VP of Global Infrastructure Technology Engineering, and Development, as well as other roles in engineering, architecture, research, portfolio management, deployment, and operations.

Kippelman is a monthly guest columnist on WSJ, and is a featured blogger on Computerworld.com. He holds multiple patents in data mining, and Business Intelligence. As an accomplished speaker, he is a frequent presenter at many major industry conferences, delivering keynote presentations on a wide variety of topics ranging from Leadership, Innovation, Mobile Computing, Consumerization of IT, Cloud, and Cybersecurity.

He is actively engaged in helping guide and develop the next generation of IT leaders

Best known for founding Travelocity.com and serving as founding Chairman of Kayak.com, Terry Jones has become a powerful voice in the world of entrepreneurship through his numerous, customizable speaking engagements, both live and virtual, and the publication of his book, ON Innovation. His career path has established him as a thought leader on innovation in our increasingly digital world.

Terry Jones is a Digital Disruptor, an author and a venture capitalist with General Catalyst and Sierra Angels. A graduate of Denison University in Granville, Ohio, Jones, began his career as a travel agent, spent 24 years at American Airlines in marketing and information technology, capping his career as Chief Information Officer of its SABRE division. While at SABRE he led a team of six working on a project that became Travelocity.com. Jones served as CEO of Travelocity for seven years transforming it to a public company with three billion dollars in travel sales.

In his new book, Disruption OFF, Jones shares his thoughts on the new technologies and business models that startups and competitors are deploying to disrupt your company. More importantly he outlines the tools and techniques you must use to avoid disruption in this post COVID-19 world.

He left Travelocity when the company was taken private and became part of the founding team at Kayak.com, a company that yet again revolutionized how travel was purchased. He served as Chairman of the company from its founding until it was sold to Priceline for $1.8 billion dollars in 2013.

Today he is the managing principal of ON Inc, a consultancy he founded to help companies in their transition to the digital economy.

He serves on the boards of Boingo, Sonicwall, Kenzie Academy and Camping and Education Foundation. He has previously served on the boards of Smart Destinations, Cognite, Entrust, Overture, La Quinta Hotels, Luxury Link and EarthLink.

His career path has established him as a thought leader on innovation and disruption in our increasingly digital world. Terry has been helping companies use the tools and techniques he’s developed to keep up with this rapidly post COVID-19, changing world. His programs on innovation, disruption, marketing and AI are always thought provoking, entertaining and customized. Attendees walk away with inspired ideas and concrete action items to implement in their companies.

Dr. Mekala Krishnan is a partner at the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), McKinsey’s business and economics research arm, based in Boston, MA.

Her research focuses on various topics related to inclusive growth and economic development, including climate risk, globalization, and gender economics. Her most recent research focuses on the near-term impact of the climate transition and of physical climate risk across sectors and geographies, including its implications for companies and countries. She is an author of the recent McKinsey Global Institute research Climate Risk and Response: Physical hazards and socioeconomic impacts. Her past research has focused on the risks facing global value chains and the future of globalization. Mekala is a frequent speaker on these topics at global conferences as well as with executives at Fortune 500 companies. She has authored numerous articles and her work has been cited in leading business publications, including The Financial Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Economist, and Harvard Business Review.

Mekala is a member of a task force at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings focused on improving productivity measurement, serves on an advisory board for the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, serves on an advisory board for the Sibley School of Mechanical Engineering at Cornell University, and on the board of the Global Fund for Women, a leading public foundation dedicated to improving global gender equality.

Mekala received her Ph.D. and M.S. degrees in Mechanical Engineering from Cornell University in 2011. Prior to Cornell, she received a Bachelor of Technology degree in Mechanical Engineering in 2006 from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi.

Claus is the Chief Innovation Officer for Teladoc Health. He oversees all technology, IT, product design and management, product engineering, data science and analytics plus clinical program design.

Claus also leads the healthcare innovation that will deliver a new category of care, providing health consumers with guided choice and the ability to interact with healthcare resources where, when and how they want it. He works closely with leaders across Teladoc Health to design, create and optimize solutions that benefit patients, clinicians and administrators.

Claus is a transformational change agent with a track record of driving multi-year transitional agendas in large organizations, bringing together ideas, people and technology.

His background before Teladoc Health spans 20 years of transformational leadership roles at Danske Bank, IBM, CVS Health/Aetna and the latest as Chief Digital Officer at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. He is active in the community and has been a trusted advisor on business and IT transformation journeys for many Fortune 1000 organizations.

Claus enjoys learning about world history and spends his vacations exploring different parts of the United States with his wife and two daughters.

Claus has a PhD in Computer Science from Aarhus University, Denmark. He is a thought leader in business and IT integration, holds 17 patents and is a published author of six books and numerous articles.

MJ Petroni is a translator of trends, provocateur of new ways of thinking and guardian of values. He draws from his experience with startups and digital businesses, global travel, and research to create compelling narratives of our future which catalyze innovation for top teams at global companies, organizations and governments. MJ studies large shifts and finds the stories that validate them. Through curation of discoveries from around the world and his own publishing, he catalyzes conversation about the future and builds innovations needed today. MJ combines the passion of an entrepreneur, the informed optimism of a futurist and the can-do generalism of a digital native to produce results at the intersection of humans and technology.

A world traveler, MJ combines the rigor of traditional education with organic discovery, extensive practice and self-taught, just-in-time learning. Formally educated in Cyborg Anthropology (the study of humans and technology) at Lewis & Clark College, MJ went on to become a business innovator, producing results in the midst of recessionary forces pulling towards normalcy.

An experiential learner, MJ combines scrappy entrepreneurism and a respect for the power of institutions for an unusual blend of corporate scale and startup agility across continents. His focus on the technology, financial, social impact and diversity practices of world-class organizations made for several major leaps in reach, giving MJ access to learning from cutting-edge research and dialogues with top thought leaders to develop a grounded view of our possible futures.

The author of Causeit’s digitalfluency.guide, MJ’s work focuses on raising the lowest common denominator of Digital Fluency for individuals, teams, and entire organizations. Since founding Causeit, Inc. in 2006, MJ has shifted thinking for hundreds of global enterprises, including NTT, Accenture, Volkswagen, the Gates Foundation, SWIFT, and several major financial and media companies, raising Digital Fluency among hundreds of thousands of professionals.

MJ sits on the Accenture Tech Vision Advisory Board and is a faculty member at Singularity University.

Tim McKnight heads SAP’s Global Security unit in the Office of the CEO board area, reporting directly to Christian Klein, CEO and member of the executive board of SAP SE. He is responsible for SAP’s overall security strategy, ensuring that SAP and our customers have a consistent and convenient security experience, establishing SAP as a recognized and trusted leader in the industry.

In his role, Tim develops, implements, and manages SAP’s overall security policies, standards and guidelines in accordance with ongoing security initiatives and worldwide IT, physical and personnel security, cybersecurity activities, data protection and privacy laws. Before joining SAP in December 2018, Tim was chief information security officer for Thomson Reuters, responsible for all aspects of the company’s global information security risk management program.

Prior to that, he served as Chief Information & Product Security Officer for General Electric, executing its information security and IT risk strategy. Previously, Tim was executive vice president of Fidelity Investments’ Information Security and Technology Risk. He also served in various IT Security leadership roles at Northrop Grumman, BAE Systems and Cisco Systems. Tim began his career at the Federal Bureau of Investigation as lead investigator of National Infrastructure Protection Center matters, including high-tech crimes, corporate espionage, foreign counterintelligence and telecommunications fraud.

In addition to these roles, Tim has held the roles of chairman of the Internet Security Alliance

and taught undergraduate courses in digital forensics as an adjunct professor at Georgetown

University. He is also a member of the Board of Advisors for Google Cloud, Amazon Web

Services (AWS), ClearSky Security Fund and Tenable.

Vincent A. Marin is the Global Chief Information Officer at Sidley Austin LLP, one of the largest and most prestigious law firms in the world assisting clients in over 40 practice areas. In his role, Vince provides firmwide leadership for all technology services, business/digital transformation, and has had broad impact throughout his tenure. Vince has a very distinguished leadership background, including three years as CIO of Huron, a public company, 16 years at McKinsey & Company in five different roles with increasing responsibilities leading teams on five continents, each responsible for firmwide and client facing services.

Vince’s deep understanding of technology trends led him to transform IT services at McKinsey to fully support the evolving needs of the world’s leading strategy consulting firm to create new strategic capabilities and leverage the best in global services. He was also a key player in technology enabling the growth of the firm during this period, and established several IT enabled services for the benefit of the global firm and its clients. He has delivered similar impacts at Huron and Sidley.

Throughout his career, Vince has been recognized for his vision and strategy skills. His execution and service excellence coupled with his superb competency as a problem solver has positioned him as a change agent who delivers results and lasting impact for organizations. Vince’s core capabilities include identifying areas for change and opportunities to capitalize on with stakeholder engagement, consensus building, leading business transformation at multiple levels, enabling greater value realization from investments in technology, and inspirational people leadership that brings out the best in colleagues. He has leveraged these competencies extremely well for the benefit of the firms and their clients at McKinsey, Huron and Sidley. Vince is leading the technological transformation of the firm in multiple ways, including introducing many new capabilities such as enabling artificial intelligence tools in the practice of law.

A much sought-after people leader and developer, Vince was the recipient of McKinsey’s prestigious Marvin Bower Values award, which recognizes distinctive client service, fostering an inclusive, non-hierarchical work environment, and striving to improve the overall quality of the firm. Vince has a Master’s in Management Information Systems, a M.B.A. and bachelor’s in Finance. He is a passionate mentor to many and is very actively involved in several philanthropic causes in the U.S. and abroad.

Vince is a Chicago CIO of the Year, for achievement in leadership and management effectiveness, business value created by technology innovation, engagement in industry and community endeavors.

A member of the Wall Street Journal CIO Network – an invitation only membership exclusively for CIOs from the world’s largest and most influential companies, to identify key challenges in technology and new opportunities for innovation to unlock value to their organizations, and a member of CNBC Technology Executive Council – an invitation only membership for leaders transforming organizations by leveraging technological innovations and disruption. Vince has also been recognized as a Business Leader of Color for being a most influential, diverse, and inclusive leader in the Chicago community for providing shareholder value in the changing value of business and for inspiring others while continuing to build on success as a leader. Additionally, Vince is a Boardroom Certified Qualified Technology Expert (QTE).

Brian Kirkland is Chief Information Officer for Choice Hotels International, Inc. (NYSE: CHH), one of the world’s largest hotel companies. In this role, he oversees the company’s Information Technology organization, and is responsible for leading overall IT strategy, infrastructure, development, all aligning with Choice’s business objectives.

Mr. Kirkland joined Choice Hotels in 2015, where he led engineering development and operations at the company’s Phoenix-based technology headquarters. Mr. Kirkland notably guided Choice’s efforts to successfully design and launch the industry’s first new global reservation system in 30 years, choiceEDGE. Subsequently, he kicked off a multi-year cloud transformation and migration strategy for which Choice Hotels is the first major hotel company to commit to going all-in on the cloud with Amazon Web Services (AWS). Recently, leveraging cloud capabilities Mr. Kirkland is leading Choice’s innovation and modernization in technology.

Prior to joining Choice Hotels, Mr. Kirkland held key leadership positions at leading technology companies, GoDaddy and Media Temple (acquired by Go Daddy in 2013), most recently serving as vice president of engineering. There, Mr. Kirkland helped integrate the company’s IT structure as well as directed engineering. Earlier in his career, he held various software development positions at Hewlett-Packard and Intel.

Mr. Kirkland earned his bachelor’s degree in computer science and a master’s degree in business administration from Arizona State University. He is currently a member of Arizona’s Information Technology Authorization Committee (ITAC) and Arizona State University’s Executive Council for the Department of Information Systems. He also serves on the Board of Governors for Hospitality Technology Next Generation (HTNG).

David serves as Chief Information Officer at University of Miami Health System, Miami FL, where he is driving the value of IT through innovation, user experience, cost optimization and risk management. David is a leading health IT expert in the digitization of health care, platform technologies and tele-medicine. He is particularly focused on the intersection of EHRs, true interoperability and the consumerization of health care.

Prior to joining the University of Miami Health System, David was the CIO at Hackensack Meridian Health, a 17 hospital system in North New Jersey, and prior to that, CIO at Lahey Health, a 5 hospital system with more than 300 ambulatory locations. David started his healthcare IT career at Thomas Jefferson University and Hospitals where he held several IT leadership positions during his tenure. He has also held IT leadership positions in retail banking, public accounting and higher education.

David served eight years in the United States Marine Corps Infantry with a subspecialty in Arctic and Mountain Warfare. David earned a Bachelor’s degree in Organizational Management from Eastern University, a Master of Business Administration (e-Commerce) from Rosemont College, a Ph.D. in Information Systems from Nova Southeastern University (National Security Agency Center of Academic Excellence) and is a Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University Executive Scholar in Innovation. David also holds a variety of IT security certifications and is an active member in a number of associations including the Kellogg Alumni, American Legion, ISACA, (ISC)2 and InfraGard (FBI Background Check Required). David is a frequent speaker and interviewee on health IT related topics and in the past has taught undergraduate and graduate courses at Rosemont College, Drexel University and Northeastern University.

Diego Souza, is currently the Cummins Inc. Global Chief Information Security Officer, he is strategic thought leader adept at safeguarding the confidentiality, integrity, and

availability of company data, information systems, and operational technology (OT). He also has a proven aptitude for aligning Cyber Security hardware, software, and policies with corporate strategy. Skilled at planning, delivering, and managing global information security initiatives designed to thwart internal and external threats, Diego is Collaborative team mentor with the ability to build the best talent and inspire people through his leadership.

Diego also served as United Airline’s Managing Director, responsible for United’s global core security technologies where he focused on developing world-class security strategies and standards across the technology and digital organization. Before that, he served as a Senior Director for GE Oil & Gas, where he was responsible for leading the global IT security team in charge of driving efforts to maintain security controls around global GE Oil & Gas sites while also looking to new technologies and opportunities to enhance the business’s security aspects.

While in Brazil Diego has served as the Brazilian IT manager for Dresser business, leading the IT department in South America, joining GE through an acquisition in 2011 and has subsequently held several strategic roles, including participation in the honored GE leadership and career acceleration program called Corporate Audit Staff (CAS). Diego started his career at Hitechno, a family-based company in Brazil as the network administrator; subsequently, in 2003, he joined INPE (Brazilian government department) working on network security and as an administrator, providing incident response and security management to that organization.

Diego is married with his wife Flavia and they have an adorable daughter, Lara, they are located in Houston, Texas.

Talal Butt is vice president, Information Technology (IT) Enterprise Transformation and Architecture. In this role Talal is accountable for three key areas. First, he is responsible for our IT transformation and the execution of our IT strategy, while working across our business units and functions. This includes the alignment of processes and technology efforts related to our enterprise digital transformation journey in support of our broader business strategy. Second, he drives our process and project service excellence across our IT organization and the governance of IT portfolio management, investment planning and prioritization. Third, he leads the structured process for aligning business strategy to systems architecture that leads to speed, agility and better decision making in support of ou