A former commander of the 82nd Airborne Division will now helm a Charlotte-based children's charity.

Retired Maj. Gen. Charles H. Swannack Jr. has been named executive director of Speedway Children's Charities, according to officials.

The national organization, founded in 1982 by Charlotte Motor Speedway owner Bruton Smith, provides educational, financial, social and medical care to children.

According to a release, Speedway Children's Charities has provided more than $45 million for hundreds of nonprofit organizations throughout the nation, affecting more than 13 million children.

Swannack ended his 33-year Army career on Fort Bragg in 2004.

At the time, he was deputy commanding general of the 18th Airborne Corps and Fort Bragg.

The West Point graduate commanded the 82nd Airborne from 2002 to 2004 and was deployed for 16 of his final 24 months in the Army.

He replaces another retired general as the head of the charity.

Air Force Maj. Gen. Tom Sadler, who had served as executive director for nearly 25 years, has been named executive director emeritus, according to officials. He will serve as an advisor to Swannack and the charity's board of directors.

"Gen. Sadler set a high bar with his years of service and dedication to children," said Marcus Smith, president and chief operating officer of Speedway Motorsports Inc. and president of Speedway Children's Charities. "Now with his outstanding leadership credentials, Gen. Swannack will continue to move Speedway Children's Charities."

Swannack credited Sadler with growing the charity from a fledgling organization to "one of NASCAR's most respected charities."

"I look forward to working alongside Tom as I learn the ropes and continue to work to serve children facing educational, medical, financial and social needs," Swannack said.

Sadler said he could think of no one more qualified than Swannack to lead the charity.

The new job is the latest Swannack has taken on since his retirement.

Previously, he provided consultation for several defense corporations, serving as a trainer, coach and mentor to brigade combat teams preparing to deploy to Iraq and Afghanistan.

He's also worked with several charities, including the Military Family Lifestyle Charitable Foundation, based in Huntersville.

Military editor Drew Brooks can be reached at brooksd@fayobserver.com or 486-3567.