Loqmani va Ba Sharik Map — Satellite Images of Loqmani va Ba Sharik

original name: Loqmānī va Bā Sharīk

geographical location: Horasan, Iran, Asia

geographical coordinates: 36° 26' 46" North, 59° 32' 9" East

detailed map of Loqmani va Ba Sharik and near places

Welcome to the Loqmani va Ba Sharik google satellite map! This place is situated in Horasan, Iran, its geographical coordinates are 36° 26' 46" North, 59° 32' 9" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Loqmānī va Bā Sharīk. See Loqmani va Ba Sharik photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Loqmani va Ba Sharik in Iran. Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Loqmani va Ba Sharik or add new placemark for Loqmani va Ba Sharik.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotel reservations

Book hotel in Loqmani va Ba Sharik online and save money

Browse & Book hotels – low rates, no booking & cancelation fees »

Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotels – Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotel guide »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Loqmani va Ba Sharik, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Loqmani va Ba Sharik, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotels map

The location of each Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotel map is available where all hotels in Loqmani va Ba Sharik are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Loqmani va Ba Sharik

Sheraton Baku Airport Hotel (in Bina, distanced approximately 940 km)

Serin Hotel **** (in Baki, distanced approximately 940 km)

Atrium Hotel Baku International Trade Centre **** (in Baki, distanced approximately 950 km)

High Park Hotel (in Baki, distanced approximately 950 km)

Sea Port Hotel (in Baki, distanced approximately 950 km)

Excelsior Hotel Baku ***** (in Baki, distanced approximately 950 km)

12 Inn Bulvar Hotel **** (in Baki, distanced approximately 950 km)

more Loqmani va Ba Sharik hotels »

Loqmani va Ba Sharik car rental

Compare Loqmani va Ba Sharik car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Loqmani va Ba Sharik rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Loqmani va Ba Sharik car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Loqmani va Ba Sharik — we will do it for you!

Car hire Loqmani va Ba Sharik and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Loqmani va Ba Sharik the city centre. Compare Loqmani va Ba Sharik car rental offers by various suppliers.

BAKU INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT car rental (distanced approximately 940 km)

Baku - Downtown car rental (distanced approximately 980 km)

Islamabad City car rental (distanced approximately 1 300 km)

Islamabad International Airport car rental (distanced approximately 1 300 km)

Yerevan car rental (distanced approximately 1 400 km)

more offers and Loqmani va Ba Sharik car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Loqmani va Ba Sharik

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Loqmani va Ba Sharik »

Overview of flights to and from Iran »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Loqmani va Ba Sharik. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Loqmani va Ba Sharik and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Loqmani va Ba Sharik are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Mashhad Airport (distanced approximately 25 km) – airport hotels

Torbat-Heydarieh Airport (distanced approximately 130 km) – airport hotels

Sarakhs Airport (distanced approximately 140 km) – airport hotels

Sabzevar Airport (distanced approximately 180 km) – airport hotels

Ashabad Airport (distanced approximately 200 km) – airport hotels

Loqmani va Ba Sharik 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Loqmani va Ba Sharik in Iran

You can also dive right into Loqmani va Ba Sharik on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Loqmani va Ba Sharik 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Loqmani va Ba Sharik, Iran in Google Earth »

Get more out of Loqmani va Ba Sharik map

Add placemark to Loqmani va Ba Sharik

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Loqmani va Ba Sharik map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Loqmani va Ba Sharik google map link options

link to us:

small Loqmani va Ba Sharik google map image link

medium Loqmani va Ba Sharik google map image link

large Loqmani va Ba Sharik google map image link