Venus Williams is an American professional tennis player, often regarded as one of the best players ever.

Date of Birth: 17 June 1980 Birthplace: Lynwood, California, United States Residence: Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, United States Height: 6'1" (185 cm) Weight: 165 lbs (75 kg) Plays: Right-handed (two-handed backhand) Turned Pro: 1994

Venus Ebony Starr Williams was born on June 17th, 1980, in Lynwood, California, in the United States, to mother Oracene Price and father Richard Williams. She is Serena Williams' older sister.

Already in her junior days, Venus Williams was one of the most talented players, even holding a 63-0 record on the United States Tennis Association (USTA) junior tour, on which she was obviously ranked as no. 1 in the under-12 category in Southern California.

Despite reaching her first Grand Slam final already at the 1997 US Open, Venus won her first Grand Slam title after her younger sister when she lifted the 2000 Wimbledon title, and later also the US Open trophy the same year.

She repeated the same feat also in 2001, bringing her major total to four trophies, but from the 2002 Roland Garros to the 2003 Australian Open, Venus lost in four consecutive Grand Slam finals, all to her sister Serena.

In 2003, she lost in one more major final, once again to her sister Serena at Wimbledon. That's also one of the reasons why many argue that Venus Williams could be considered as possibly the second greatest female tennis player of all time, just behind her sister Serena, as she defeated her in seven Grand Slam finals.

In her career, Venus won seven Grand Slam singles titles, and along with her sister, she won 14 Grand Slam doubles titles, and teaming up with Justin Gimbelstob, Venus also won two mixed doubles titles.

She first reached the world no. 1 spot on February 25th, 2002, only a few months before her sister Serena did it. Despite having seven Grand Slam titles, Venus never managed to complete a Career Grand Slam, losing in the Australian Open final twice and once at Roland Garros.