Venus Williams Biography

Venus Williams the American professional Tennis Player biography is being searched by the fans. Here you can check the Venus Williams biography and a lot more details.

Venus Williams was born on June 17, 1980. Venus Williams has gained more popularity, so there are people who eagerly search for Venus Williams biography. Yes, check out Venus Williams biography below.

Article continues below advertisement

First let's start with Venus Williams Age, as per caknowledge Venus Williams is 42 years old. As per celebswiki24x7, Venus Williams stands 185 cm. Check out the complete Venus Williams biography from the table below.

Name

Venus Williams

Real NameVenus Ebony Starr Williams

Date of Birth

June 17, 1980

Age

42

Birthplace

Lynwood, California, United States

Height

185 cm

Weight

72.5

Venus Williams Real Name

Most people might not know Venus Williams's real name, so check out this section and know what is Venus Williams real name.

According to the britannica, it is known that Venus Williams real name is Venus Ebony Starr Williams.

TRENDING

Venus Williams Age

Venus Williams was born on June 17, 1980. As mentioned in the Venus Williams Biography table Venus Williams is 42 years old. Venus Williams was born in Lynwood, California, United States.

Article continues below advertisement

Article continues below advertisement

Venus Williams Height and Weight

People who don't know how tall Venus Williams is can check this section. As per celebswiki24x7, Venus Williams stands 185 cm and weighs 72.5.

Venus Williams Net Worth

Venus Williams has been so popular and successful. If you are among the people searching for Venus Williams Net Worth, then here is the information. As per fimlydivas Venus Williams net worth is estimated at $95 million.

Article continues below advertisement

Article continues below advertisement

Venus Williams Boyfriend/Husband

Is the American professional Tennis Player Venus Williams married or who is Venus Williams's boyfriend? Her fans are very much eager to know about her personal life. Well, as per Venus Williams's boyfriend/husband is .

Article continues below advertisement

Article continues below advertisement

Disclaimer: The above information is for general informational purposes only. All information on the Site is provided in good faith, however we make no representation or warranty of any kind, express or implied, regarding the accuracy, adequacy, validity, reliability, availability or completeness of any information on the Site.

ncG1vNJzZmikkamytMDNnq6sZpansrS0xKuqpaGmmnuku8xomKusmZi5pr%2BOr5ynraNixKq4y6KYpqtdl7aws9Gap6GxXaeyoriMp5imnV2WtKZ5x56goKCkYq6vsIywnKKfmKl6cnyXbGptbw%3D%3D