VENUS Williams has cemented herself as a legendary tennis champion.

Here's everything we know about the superstar athlete.

Who is Venus Williams?

Born on June 17, 1980, Venus Williams grew up in California, just outside of Compton.

By the age of 14, Venus had become a professional tennis player. She learned how to play on the courts of Los Angeles, and had a serve of over 100mph at the age of ten.

In the year 2000, she won both Wimbledon and the U.S. Open, earning herself a $40million contract with Reebok.

Her sister, Serena, was born a year after she was - in 1981. The two grew up playing tennis together, and credit each other with helping to shape their individual careers.

At the 2000 Olympics, Venus took home the gold medal with singles and again alongside Serena in the doubles competition.

Venus has been diagnosed with an autoimmune disease, but didn't let that stop her from continuing to play. After switching to a vegan diet and giving herself more recovery days, Venus proved to continue to be successful.

She has been named among the most powerful women in America, and earned her Bachelor's degree from Indiana University East in 2015.

What is Venus Williams' net worth?

According to Celebrity Net Worth, Venus Williams has an estimated net worth of around $95million.

Venus has earned 49 singles titles, trailing only behind her sister, Serena Williams, among active players on the Women's Tennis Association (WTA) Tour with most singles titles.

Along with her 22 WTA doubles titles and two mixed doubles titles, Venus' combined total of 73 WTA titles is also second among active players behind Serena.

She has earned seven Grand Slam titles, and four gold medals.

In 2007, Venus started her own fashion line: EleVen.

She's also released multiple books, including Come to Win: Business Leaders, Artists, Doctors, and Other Visionaries on How Sports Can Help You Top Your Profession and How To Play Tennis.

Venus and Serena are subjects in the new Will Smith movie, King Richard, which chronicles their upbringing and how their father coached them to their glory.

What is the movie King Richard about?

Released on November 19, 2021, King Richard is a biographical drama that follows the early lives of Venus and Serena Williams as their father, Richard Williams, shaped their tennis skills into a lifelong career.

The film sees Will Smith portraying the role of Richard, and Saniyya Sidney as Venus Williams with Demi Singleton as Serena.

According to the plot synopsis, "Richard Williams is determined to write his two daughters, Venus and Serena, into history ... Richard shapes the girls' unyielding commitment and keen intuition. Together, the Williams family defies seemingly insurmountable odds and the prevailing expectations laid before them."

The nearly two and a half hour movie has received critical acclaim from around the world, and even elicited a response from its main subjects: Venus and Serena.

On a special episode of Red Table Talk, the two tennis stars spoke with Will Smith about their reactions to the film.

"One of the best things that was ever told to us, and why we're so close, is that your sisters are your best friends," Venus said.

"You're not allowed to fight. We became each other's biggest supporters. That's what we were told to be."

King Richard is now available for viewing in theatres, as well as on HBO Max to users with an ad-free subscription.