Venus Williams is an American professional tennis player and entrepreneur. Her father nurtured her and her sister’s Serena Williams talents from a young age, allowing them to achieve what they have so far.

Venus Williams: Profile summary

Venus Williams: Early Life & Biography

Venus Ebony Starr Williams was born on June 17, 1980, in Lynwood city in Los Angeles, California, United States. Her father, Richard Williams, is a professional tennis coach, and her mother, Oracene Price, is a professional tennis coach. When Venus was ten, the family moved to Florida for the Academy of Rick Macci.

Venus Williams’s parents got divorced in 2002. Her sister Serena Williams is also well known as a professional tennis player. Venus Williams has many half-brothers and sisters, Isha Price, Lyndrea Price, Dylan Starr Williams, and Richard Williams III. She had a half-sister, Yetunde Price, who was her personal assistant, but she was murdered in 2003. Venus Williams has a degree in fashion from The Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale in Florida, and she graduated from the Indiana University East in 2015 with a Business Administration Bachelor of Science degree.

Venus Williams: Personal Life

Venus Williams had a relationship and was engaged to the professional golfer Hank Kuehne from 2007 – 2010. She is currently in a relationship with the Cuban model Elio Pis.

Venus Williams: Age, Height, and Weight

Venus Williams was born on 17 June 1980 and is 41 years old as of 2022. Her height is 1.85 m tall, and her weight is 75 kg.

Venus Williams: Career

Venus Williams and her sister Serena Williams had a father who always cared for them and was responsible for their talent’s rise and improvement. Venus Williams’s junior career was amazing; her record in the United States Tennis Association junior tour was 63 wins to 0 losses. She was ranked one among Southern California’s under 12 players by that time.

Venus Williams began her professional tennis career in 1994 when she was 14 years old, at the Bank of the West Classic tournament “Stanford Classic”, she lost to the Spanish player Arantxa Sánchez Vicario. In 1997, she finished her season ranked 22 in the world; after one year, she was 5th, and in 1999 she made it to 3. Venus Williams was ranked number 1 worldwide in 2002 but finished that year ranked 2 with seven titles.

Furthermore, Venus Williams found an interior design company named “V Starr Interiors,” and she is currently its chief executive officer. She also launched a fashion line named “EleVen” by partnering with Steve & Barry’s retail stores, which are now closed.

Venus Williams: Awards & Achievements

The professional tennis player Venus Williams has won many awards and titles. She was named the WTA Newcomer of the Year 1997, Tennis Magazine’s Most Improved Player, the 2000 WTA Player of the Year, Women’s Sports Foundation Sportswoman of the Year for team sports, Vogue Magazine Top 10 Best Dressed List for 2007, and the 2017 ESPN WTA Player of the Year.

Venus Williams has a few Award winnings, including the US Open Sportsmanship Award, ESPY Award for Best Female Tennis Player, ESPY Award for Best Female Athlete, Teen Choice Extraordinary Achievement Award, EMMA Best Sports Personality Award, Gitanjali Diamond Award, WTA February Best Dressed Player, WTA Roland Garros Best Dressed Player, and others.

Venus Williams: Net Worth

The estimated net worth of the professional tennis player Venus Williams is $100 million.