Dimpy (22) married Rahul (36) son of late Bharatiya Janata Party leader Pramod Mahajan, on NDTV Imagine’s reality show Rahul Dulhaniya Le Jayega in March.

“Rahul beat me up early on Thursday after waking me up to know the contents of a message that had beeped on my phone. When I asked him to go back to sleep, he began hitting me. He punched, kicked and dragged me by hair,” Dimpy said.

Dimpy showed bruises on her shin and hands. Her left cheek was also swollen and she had a lump on her head.

The model, who left home vowing never to return, said that she had had a “conversation” with Rahul, who expressed regret. Dimpy returned to the Mahajans’ Worli residence on Friday.

“Rahul has apologised and regrets his action sincerely. I am sad at what happened,” Dimpy said, adding “I haven’t recovered from what happened. I am extremely upset and hurt and need some time alone to recover.”

Asked about the future of her marriage, the model said “I need time to think. Till then I want to be left alone.”

Dimpy reportedly decided to talk things over with Rahul at the behest of his family. Rahul could not be immediately reached over phone for his comments and he did not respond to SMSes.

This is the second time that Rahul, who is also involved in a drug abuse case, has been accused of domestic violence.

His first wife, Shweta Singh, who was his childhood friend, had accused him of physically abusing her. The couple got divorced in 2008 after which Rahul participated in Colors’ reality show Big Boss. He remained in the limelight for his closeness with co contestants Monica Bedi and Payal Rohatgi.

Rohatgi too alleged harassment by Rahul. “I just don’t want to be harassed anymore. That’s about it. I don’t want to speak to him. He is a married guy,” Rohatgi said. However, Dimpy’s co contestant Nikunj Malik on the reality show, seemed less sympathetic to Dimpy’s plight.

“The kind of charges that Dimpy has pressed on Rahul, they sound very childish If she had such a fear for her life, she would have reported to the police rather than going to the media,” said Nikunj.