Reading time: 3 min

Connected objects

High tech

Personal data

Technology

We are now seeing the launch of growing numbers of “AI” PCs and smartphones. Will this trend bring about real change for consumers?

A lot depends on whether they are in the market for a new smartphone or a new PC. Most of the new AI features on smartphones are focused on improving marketability or on the creation of enhanced user experiences rather than on the provision of truly useful functionalities. For example, we already have automatic suggestions in messaging applications and impressive virtual assistants, even if, more often than not, they are viewed as gadgets. However, on-device AI does have enormous potential, and I am sure that technology companies will develop more and more features that do meet users’ real needs.

Developers could soon be working with large language models directly integrated on their PCs.

Why do you believe the situation will be different in the world of PCs?

In the world of PCs, the goal of on-device AI is to improve users’ efficiency at work. Unlike smartphones, which are mainly used for communication and entertainment, we look to PCs when we want to be more productive in tasks like the creation of documents, the manipulation of data and, of course, in the field of software development. For example, developers could soon be working with large language models directly integrated on their PCs. So too could multimedia content creators. In this context, AI can play a critical role by automating repetitive tasks, providing context-based recommendations, and facilitating more intuitive interaction with computers. For example, technologies like Copilot can help users to efficiently navigate through large quantities of data with smart recommendations that anticipate their needs

We already have access to cloud-based AI services. What are the benefits of integrating AI directly into users’ devices?

Data privacy and cybersecurity issues are of growing concern, particularly in Europe where data protection regulations are particularly stringent. For companies wishing to take advantage of AI while complying with these regulations, it is essential to implement robust data protection measures and ensure that all data, personal or otherwise, is handled responsibly and securely. To this end, they may opt for on-site AI solutions or on-device AI, rather than relying on cloud-based services.

How should we interpret massive investment in AI by companies like Intel and Qualcomm?

Massive investment by the likes of Intel, Mediatek and Qualcomm has highlighted the extent to which (original equipment manufacturers) are committed to artificial intelligence. These companies are shaping the future of on-device AI with the development of cutting-edge technologies that offer high-quality hardware and software solutions to device manufacturers. For example, they are developing specialist chips to take charge of intensive AI workloads and building software frameworks to enable developers to create innovative AI applications. All of this has major implications for consumers because it means that we can look forward to smarter future devices with the capacity to accommodate needs that demand more processing power.

Given that for you AI is more of a technology than a product, how do you think it will be adapted in consumer devices? What has to happen for consumers to benefit from it?

AI can look forward to a promising future in consumer electronics, but it will have to overcome several obstacles to its widespread adoption, especially in Europe. On the one hand, AI algorithms will have to be fine-tuned if they are to function reliably and efficiently on devices with limited resources. There are also issues relating to power, memory, and bandwidth usage. Above and beyond these technical constraints, there are ethical and regulatory questions to be considered, notably regarding privacy protection, the transparency and responsibility of AI systems, and the need to ensure that they are non-discriminatory and free of biases. In Europe, where regulations on the protection of personal data are particularly strict, technology companies will need to be careful to toe the line and adopt proactive measures to ensure that their AI systems are fully compliant with the highest possible ethical standards.