Don’t Call It A Comeback!

Birthed by the legendary Independent juggernaut Duck Down Records thirty years ago, Boot Camp Clik is a Brooklyn, NY supergroup comprised of the label’s eight core members; Buckshot (Black Moon, Tek and Steele (Smif N Wessun), Rock and the late great Sean Price (Heltah Skeltah) Starang Wondah, Top Dogg and Louieville (O.G.C.). The collective also recently added long-time affiliate Rustee Juxx into the fold as well.

One of the genre’s first true supergroups, the eight-man collective was undeniably one of the most trendsetting (music and fashion), impactful, and highly influential crews to emerge from Hip-Hop’s golden age. Individually, and collectively, the BCC has created numerous timeless classics albums and singles: Black Moon’s Enta Da Stage, Smif N Wessun’s Dah Shinin’, Heltah Skeltah’s Nocturnal, Fab 5’s (Heltah Skeltah & O.G.C.) ‘Leflaur Leflah Eshkoshka” & Sean Price’s Monkey Barz are among many in the collective’s pristine catalog, and their impacts are still felt today.

Now, with the global celebration for Hip Hop’s upcoming 50th Anniversary (#HH50) in full bloom, Boot Camp Click has re-assembled for the first time in 16 years with a new single and video for “Wotcha Call Strength,” both of which are now available.

“Wotcha Call Strength” is produced by The Arcitype, and the visual is directed by David Janoff and was filmed on location at Forest Hills Stadium in Queens, NY; which is also the site for the upcoming Rock The Bells Festival which will take place on 8-5-23 and will also feature a performance by Boot Camp Clik.

“In honor and celebration of Hip Hop 50, we felt that the BCC’s catalog of work, contributions and legacy needed to be recognized properly” BCC’s co-founder and glue Dru Ha asserts. It’s too easy to sit back and say the Hip Hop community should verify you and painstaking to go out and have to remind people with words, so we felt there was no better way to make a statement than to drop a new record with all the original members (RIP to Sean Price). With a high-energy track provided by The Arcitype and a ferocious lead-off verse from Rustee Juxx, the guys were inspired to work together as a collective again. Although it’s been many years since they’ve recorded together, they all remain bonded by their shared experiences and legacies. Once again, they truly demonstrated there’s power in numbers, showcased the unique chemistry they have with one another, and fittingly entitled the track “Wotcha Call Strength.” Partnering with Rock The Bells was the icing on the cake, as not only did they provide resources, but the indirect endorsement from Hip Hop royalty in LL Cool J adds even more credibility to the single, and helped solidify the marketing campaign that will be capped with a full BCC performance at the Rock The Bells Festival.”

Duck Down and Rock The Bells will also be collaborating on a merch drop, including new long and short sleeve shirts, hoodies, and hats. The merch drop will be available starting on 7-15-23 at https://shop.rockthebells.com/.