VIDEOS | PANDORA | WEBSITE | FACEBOOK | TWITTER

Don’t call it a comeback. Boot Camp Clik’s been here for years. In fact, with several revered releases last year, BCC’s presence is being felt more than ever. Cemented is BCC’s legacy in the Hip-Hop annals. Spitting hardcore raps over dirty samples, the BCC comprised of Buckshot, Smif N Wessun (Tek & Steele), Heltah Skeltah (Sean Price and Rock) and OGC, (Louieville Sluggah, Starang Wondah and Top Dog) have epitomized New York Hip-Hop throughout their storied career. Just when the West Coast G Funk was becoming Hip-Hop’s choice sound, Brooklyn’s BCC individual groups lead the East Coast resurgence with a couple of releases, Black Moon’s 'Enta Da Stage' (1993), which sold roughly 350,000 copies and Smif N Wessun’s 'Da Shinnin'' (1995), which scanned 300,000 copies. West Coast powerhouse Priority Records was seeking a presence on the East Coast and inked Duck Down Music to a label deal to enlist the services of Boot Camp’s next wave of groups. Heltah Skeltah’s 'Nocturnal' (1996) was released and won the group New Artist of the Year by the Source Magazine, followed by O.G.C.’s debut 'Da Storm' (1997).

After unleashing several projects and building anticipation for a collective set, BCC released its debut LP, For the People' (1997) which went on to sell over 250,000 copies and an impressive 50,000 in it’s first week. The squad later followed with 'Basic Training: The Best of Boot Camp Clik' (2000) which showcased the groups rich history of under the radar hits. The Camp went on to release individual group sophomore projects and in 2001 Independent giant KOCH DISTRIBUTION signed Duck Down to its first pure Distribution deal.

Boot Camp quickly assembled to drop their sophomore release 'The Chosen Few' (2002). The album’s Artwork was created by none other than Marc Ecko himself of ECKO CLOTHING further endorsing the groups popularity amongst trendsetters within the Industry. Production credits included beats from Alchemist, Hi -Tek, Beatminerz, & Bink!

BCC than followed up with 'The Last Stand' (2006). The album features all 8 original members including Rock of Heltah Skeltah who was absent on 'The Chosen Few'. With Da Beatminerz behind the boards as usual, the set also featured outside production from some of the game’s most consistent producers. The stellar line-up, which features 9th Wonder, Pete Rock, Large Professor, Illmind and Marco Polo among others, is a testament to BCC’s relevance in the immediate Hip-Hop landscape. The CD coincided with a supportive 35-city nationwide tour which took the crew to major markets like New York, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, Chicago and Seattle among other cities.

“The reason we call it The Last Stand is because it’s the last position we will stand on and we will take on all this bullshit,” Buckshot explained. “We can’t stand it no more. That’s how we feel with the game, with music, with even ourselves.”

In 2007, BCC released 'Casualties of War.' The album is compiled of leftover tracks recorded for the group's 'The Last Stand.'

Though the crew has never reached commercial success by mainstream standards, BCC more than makes up for it in respect. Over the years, the Brooklynites have worked with and collaborated on songs with legends like, Tupac Shakur, Mary J Blige, Q-Tip, Busta Rhymes, Sean 'Diddy' Combs, Wyclef Jean, Raekwon, Method Man, Spike Lee and KRS-One just to name a few. Respect comes from all angles. As the crew was getting ready to take the independent turn, West Coast luminary Dr. Dre flew Dru and Buck to Los Angeles to cut several songs and contemplate a potential partnership. The crew had also previously worked on the 'One Nation' album with Pac. Unfortunately, the CD was never released due to his untimely death. Several of the LP’s verses were gradually put onto other posthumous Pac released after his death. One Nation’s “Military Mind” was eventually placed on 2002’s Better Days. The crew also participated on Pac’s poetry album, The Rose Vol.2.,

In addition to four albums, BCC members have made noteworthy appearances on soundtracks like New Jersey Drive, Panther, Rhyme and Reason and Crooklyn.

Now, after over 3 million albums sold (Boot Camp-related projects) and countless classic releases, Boot Camp Clik is in the early stages of making their 5th album which is tentatively set for a 2012 release.