Description

First Edition, Publishers' Original Binding, With Dustwrapper

The first UK editions, first impressions of these works. In the original unclipped dustwrappers. Five novels in Sue Grafton's 'Alphabet Murders' series. Containing; 'K is for Killer', published in 1994. 'M is for Malice', published in 1997. 'P is for Peril', published in 2001. 'Q is for Quarry', published in 2002. 'R is for Ricochet', published in 2004. Written by Sue Grafton, who is best known for this influential and popular series of detective novels, known as the 'alphabet series'. She started writing her detective novels after a bitter divorce and custody battle, which resulted in Grafton imagining ways to kill or maim her ex-husband, providing inspiration for this detective series. Sadly, Grafton died before she was able to finish the series, writing a total of twenty-five novels only, ending with ''Y' is for Yesterday'.

Condition

In the original publisher's cloth binding, in the original unclipped dustwrappers. Externally, 'M', 'P', and 'Q' are fine. Dustwrapper of 'P', of 'Q' are fine. A little bumping to the head and tail of the spine of 'K' and some small marks to the boards. A very small amount of tape to the reverse of the spine of 'K', and a small amount of edge wear to 'K'. Small amount of tape to the revere of the dustwrapper of 'R', to the head and tail of the spine and to the folds. A very light marks to the boards of 'R'. Rear hinge of 'R' is lightly cracked. Light edgwear to the dustwrapper of 'M' and 'R'. Prior owner's ink inscription to the recto to the front endpaper of 'K'. Internally, firmly bound. Pages are bright and clean.

Overall: Near Fine

Delivery & payment

We send all of our books via courier which is a fully tracked and insured service. In our experience we find this to be the most reliable and quickest form of delivery. Our primary courier is DHL, but we are able to accommodate special requests if required, including postal delivery for items under 2kg. See More Details