June 27, 2024

Media Contacts:

Dr. Diana Garza, vice president of student affairs, dgarza@wvc.edu, 509-682-6805

Dr. Jennifer Korfiatis, interim public information officer, jkorfiatis@wvc.edu, 509-682-6650

Aracely Mendoza has been named as the interim director of Wenatchee Valley College Concurrent Enrollment Programs. She will replace Maria Christina Monroe, whose last day was June 14.

Mendoza, who has worked at Wenatchee Valley College since November 2021, was the educational planner for Concurrent Enrollment Programs before becoming the interim director. She was also a Running Start student at WVC, and Maria Christina Monroe was her advisor.

“It really is a full circle moment for me from being a student to a navigator and now an interim in this position,” Mendoza said.

After she graduated from WVC with an associate of arts and sciences transfer degree, she transferred to Washington State University, where she earned a dual degree in anthropology and digital technology.

“I have always enjoyed working with students and helping my community, and I hope to continue by working closely with our partners in our school districts,” Mendoza said.

“Aracely has been a participant of our program as a high school student and staff. Her insider perspective is an excellent foundation to step into the interim role and ensure we have limited interruption to our services,” said Dr. Diana Garza, vice president of student affairs.

WVC’s Concurrent Enrollment Programs include Running Start, Career and Technical Education, and College in the High School. All three programs allow students to simultaneously earn high school credit and college credit, accelerating them through higher education and into their chosen careers. WVC partners with 19 school districts for the CTE program and 7 districts for the CHS program. Running Start served 19 districts this spring.

###

Wenatchee Valley College enriches North Central Washington by serving educational and cultural needs of communities and residents throughout the service area. The college is committed to diversity, equity and inclusion for all students and employees and provides high-quality transfer, liberal arts, professional/technical, basic skills and continuing education for students of diverse ethnic and economic backgrounds. Visit our website, wvc.edu.

Wenatchee Valley College is committed to a policy of equal opportunity in employment and student enrollment. All programs are free from discrimination and harassment against any person because of race, creed, color, national or ethnic origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, the presence of any sensory, mental, or physical disability, or the use of a service animal by a person with a disability, age, parental status or families with children, marital status, religion, genetic information, honorably discharged veteran or military status or any other prohibited basis per RCW 49.60.030, 040 and other federal and state laws and regulations, or participation in the complaint process.

The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the non-discrimination policies and Title IX compliance for both the Wenatchee and Omak campuses:

To report discrimination or harassment: Title IX Coordinator, Mish ee twie, 1321A, (509) 682-6716, title9@wvc.edu.