Oracle Corp. cleared the last hurdle in its $5.85 billion takeover of Siebel Systems Inc. by winning approval from European Union regulators.

“The proposed transaction would not materially affect customers’ ability to choose between competing software vendors,” the European Commission, the 25-nation EU’s antitrust regulator in Brussels, said in a statement Thursday. The U.S. Justice Department approved the acquisition last month.

Chief Executive Officer Larry Ellison is counting on Siebel, the world’s No. 2 maker of customer-service software, to help expand Oracle’s applications sales. Ellison has spent more than $18 billion to buy 11 companies this year, including Siebel. Its largest deal, the $10.6 billion takeover of PeopleSoft Inc. in January, vaulted Oracle to the No. 2 position in the overall business-applications market behind SAP AG.

Redwood Shores-based Oracle said in a statement it is on course to complete a merger with Siebel in the first quarter as planned. The purchase will add to Oracle’s profit in its first full year in fiscal 2007, excluding some costs, the company said after announcing the acquisition in September.

Shares of Oracle rose 14 cents to $12.32 Thursday on the Nasdaq Stock Market. They have fallen 10 percent this year on concern the company is making too many acquisitions too quickly. Shares of Siebel advanced 4 cents to $10.57.

San Mateo-based Siebel, founded in 1993 by former Oracle executive and Ellison protege Tom Siebel, has been cutting costs and paring jobs after sales fell in the past year. Profit almost doubled last quarter and sales rose at the fastest pace in four years, buoyed by users’ confidence in the company now that it will be owned by Oracle, Siebel said in October.

Customer-service software lets businesses keep track of interactions with clients: the status of accounts, what products they buy, contact information and call logs of their activities. Ellison’s purchase of Siebel will tie Oracle with SAP as the world’s biggest maker of such programs this year, according to AMR Research Inc. in Boston. The market for customer-service software will top $11.4 billion thisfrom Business 1

year, AMR has forecast.

Business-management applications used to handle tasks such as customer service, payroll and human resources account for about 20 percent of new software license orders at Oracle. Ellison, 61, is counting on the business to help lessen dependence on sales of Oracle’s flagship database program.

He also may use Siebel to help fend off challenges in the customer-service software market from Microsoft Corp. and San Francisco-based Salesforce.com Inc. Microsoft, the world’s largest software maker, introduced a new version of its customer-service software earlier this month.