Introduction

Microsoft Academic is a free public search engine for academic publications and literature developed by Microsoft Research. This library has 375 million entries ,170 million of which are academic papers. You can now create an account, log in, and create a public profile by claiming the publications you have authored. Claiming your publications will help improve search accuracy, and will showcase your work to the world.

The service replaces the earlier Microsoft research project, Live search academic, Libra and Microsoft Academic search.

The Academic Knowledge API offers information retrieval from the underlying database using REST service endpoints for advanced research purposes.

Integrating Microsoft Academic knowledge(MAK) API into different applications, we need to create a subscription id. In this article, I will show how to generate MAK API key in azure.

Setup Academic Knowledge API

You can follow the below steps for creating an Academic Knowledge API account in the Azure Portal.

Step 1

Sign in to the Azure portal.

Step 2

Click + NEW and select / Search “Academic knowledge API” and read about the API and click on "Create".

Step 3

Provide the API name, pricing, location, resource group and click on create.

Name - Microsoft recommends a descriptive name for API, for example - <common name><APIName>Account.

Subscription - Select the available Azure subscriptions.

Location - Select the service locations.

Pricing tier - You can choose your pricing tier. F0 is a free service and S0 is a paid service. Based on your usage, you can choose the pricing tier you wish.

Select the Resource group > confirm the Microsoft notice and click on "Create" again for creating the account.

Step 4

Wait for a few seconds, and you will get a notification after completion. If the Cognitive Services account is successfully deployed, click the notification to view the account information. You can see and copy the Endpoint URL in the Overview section.

Step 5

You can also copy keys in the Keys section to start making API calls in your Xamarin or other applications.

Summary

In this article, you learned about how to Create a Microsoft Academic Knowledge Cognitive Services APIs account in the Azure Portal. If you have any questions/ feedback/ issues, please write in the comment box.