Presentation on theme: "Welcome to the Patient Financial Navigator Foundation, Inc."— Presentation transcript:

1 Welcome to the Patient Financial Navigator Foundation, Inc.

PFNF Education 2017

2 A Community Outreach Program

The Patient Financial Navigator Foundation, Inc with its home base in Twin Falls, Idaho, is thrilled to present free educational programs for patients to attack the hassle factor in healthcare. Day Egusquiza, President, with over 37 years’ experience in healthcare including 20 years at an Idaho hospital, will guide the Patient Financial Navigator Foundation which will create a pathway for patients with multiple educational efforts – thru employers, payers, boot camps– while developing networks and a Resource Library to help navigate thru the maze called healthcare. Transforming healthcare one patient at a time. An advocate for all! NO cost to the Employer for any employer programs. NO cost to the community for any community programs. NO cost to the community for the Boot camps

3 Why create the Patient Financial Navigator Foundation, Inc?

No one really understands their healthcare insurance until they need it. No one realizes the ‘next steps’ once the medical incident has occurred/been ordered. When a family is in a healthcare crisis, their life is disrupted, scared and vulnerable - coordination/communication is required to reduce the hassle factor. THE FOUNDATION IS AN INNOVATION LAB – finding new ways to transform today’s chaos. PFNF Education 2017

4 The Patient Challenges with HealthCare

No one ‘asks’ to come to a hospital. Patient’s lives are impacted – they are scared, they feel out of control, they are lost with the overwhelming factors of cost/unknown, multiple providers, and continuing frustration with ‘who knows all of this?” Patients are unaware of the many changes with their insurance, government programs, employer’s coverage and all the ‘rules’ associated with getting services paid. Patients historically access hospitals once a year or less. Healthcare is very personal!

5 But Patients Don’t Speak the Language of Health Insurance Today…

6 …and They May Not Identify with the Language of Value-Based Care Tomorrow

We say… Consumers said… Medical home “It sounds just like a nursing home.” “First you go to the medical home, then you go to the funeral home.” Integrated care “It sounds like a sales pitch in a cheap brochure.” Accountable “It’s kind of scary. I am going to go there and something bad is going to happen and someone has to be held accountable for it.” Value “It means things are cost effective. They are going to keep the value down. You aren’t getting the best care.” Source: M. Ross, T. Igus, and S. Gomez, “From Our Lips to Whose Ears? Consumer Reaction to Our Current Health Care Dialect.” The Permanente Journal. Winter 2009, Vol. 13, No. 1.

7 Additional ‘factors’ influencing the patient experience= confused=hassle factor

Electronic medical record /EHR – incentive and penalties Integrated systems between providers/doctors and hospitals but safety with data sharing a concern. Quality reporting systems –with rewards and penalties Physicians new payment system- MACRA & MIP Alternative payment systems for hospitals, doctors, long term care, DME , home health – all in the midst of rolling out with the goal of increased quality, reduced costs and more engaged patients. What about a change to ‘privatizing’ Medicare? Voucher program -means?

8 Take the Hassle Out of the Experience

Improve the experience Hassle Map: Elective Surgery for an Insured Patients- who knows to do this? Get a referral to a surgeon Find out if the surgeon, anesthesiologist, pathologist, and radiologist are in your network Find out if the hospital is in your network Find out how much the operation will cost you out-of-pocket (or hold your breath until the bill comes) Figure out where your out-of-pocket costs for pre-op tests will be lowest (or don’t think about this until you get the bill) Call to get a preauthorization from your health plan (or realize later that you forgot) Worry about whether you will have to pay anything in advance, and if so, how much Have the surgery Spend a month dreading getting the final bill in the mail Source: Based on the hassle-map construct developed by Slywotzky (2011).

9 What is the PFNF, Inc? A not-for-profit Foundation with the focus on transforming the hassle factor …thru Education. Three legs of the Foundation’s Outreach Mission: Community Outreach – Boot Camps Employer Outreach – Lunch and Learn for employees Navigator Resource Library- personal pt/family As significant healthcare changes occur along with ongoing ‘healthcare buzz’ updates= Foundation! PFNF Education 2017

10 Three components of this dynamic program- A community outreach program

Employer program Build historical info Lunch & Learn-onsite education with employers HealthCare Buzz EOB – how to read New healthcare changes-national and local Q&A –as requested by the site Community programs Networking with existing services Creating unique trainings Identify community healthcare legislative changes -educate Turning 65 Bootcamp National ‘new terms:- HSA, ACO, Quality based, Managed, Medicare, etc. Navigator Resource library * located at local hospital Employer specific guides Medicare & ME Traditional vs Mgd Translating ‘ease’ What to expect when?? General Education How to appeal?

11 1st) Example of Community Outreach Education – Boot Camps

Identify community leaders to participate in the boot camp trainings Identify thru existing community services, additional healthcare related ‘hassle factor’ training. Provide education to high schools, colleges, regional and others as requested. Join with existing educational groups to add the financial ‘translation’ for ease of understanding ‘what happens now.” Innovation lab – creating community specific ed.

12 Trusted HealthCare Educator

Participate: Office on Aging events Wellness Fairs Population Health dialogue/changes = ‘translator’ New transformations in healthcare Employer work place insurance initiatives Next generation of healthcare –with partners School outreach – high school, colleges As requested

13 Humana’s – Bold Goals program Major % of market is Seniors- Part C Medicare* (HEALTHCARE BUZZ EX)

65% of Seniors have multiple chronic conditions 1/3 have diabetes 1/4 have mental health 10% live below the poverty level 6 doctor visits yearly 27 prescriptions yearly High cost to the healthcare system for ‘navigating thru’ alone. Social-economic issues. EX) Depressed? Not taking chronic meds. EX) Can’t afford meds = ED is next. (Medicaid?) *Population Health Colloquium. March 27, Philadelphia PFNF Education 2017

14 Upcoming Community Outreach Boot Camps 2017

2nd 2017 Boot Camp: “Medicare 101, Social Security Benefits, and Assistance for Seniors” July 6th CSI Fine Arts 3rd 2017 Boot Camp: “Turning 65” Oct 28th CSI Fine Arts 4th 2017 Boot Camp: “The Language of Insurance” TBD PFNF Inc is committed to 4-6 community bootcamps yearly. All classes are available on the webpage prior to all trainings.

15 2nd) Example of Employer-Specific “Lunch & Learn”

Meet with the HR staff to learn about the employer’s insurance plan. Outline the key elements for education to be covered during the 30 min employee ‘Lunch and Learn.’ Hot spots for education (usually): EOB education, out of network, what happens when you are scheduled for a surgery and ‘HealthCare Buzz’ ++ Q&A. Innovation lab – taking the education to the employer.

16 Employer Insurance Costs/Changes

Healthcare spending Spending averaged $5141 per individual. Out of pocket rose 3% to aver $813 per capita Prescription drugs increased 3.5-9% Women of all ages spent $236 more out of pocket than men. $649 per capita was spent on brand prescriptions. The price of an ER visit jumped 10.5% to an aver of $1,863 Employers contribute about 73% toward the monthly premium for individuals. 38% for dependents. *MCOL 3-17 Average Health Savings Account balance for 2015 = $1844 (Can have up to $3400/single; $6750/family) Average contribution by individuals = $1864 Average employer contributions =$948 Average high deductible plan: $ ,100 /family; $ /single Benefit: Amt deferred for tax impact. Con: Family would have to pay premiums, deductible $, co- insurance $ AND have enough left to put money in the HSA.

17 So now you need healthcare – Outpt surgery (Sample) – in network

Surgeon’s office will contact your insurance carrier to get the surgery pre- authorized. Insurance carrier has their own criteria for medically necessary services. Many times requires ‘negotiation’ with provider and payer. Routine bills for an outpt surgery- usually each sent separately: Surgeon Anesthesiologist Pre-op testing Procedure location (Hospital, free standing ctr) IMPORTANT: Validate all of the above are within the network that is part of Cigna’s plan. IN NETWORK

18

19

20 Think like a pt – out of network (means what to the pt or family?)

40 year old has had emergency foot /ankle surgery approx 8 years ago and taken to a Boise hospital. The surgeon specialized in this type of foot surgery. Both in network at that time. 3 surgeries later –still problems with rebuilding the foot to allow the pt to walk. July 2013, employer changes plans and now the doctor and hospital who employees the doctor is out of network. The pt continues to go to the surgeon who does another surgery Oct and a follow up minor surgery in Pt was aware of the change but did not know to do anything different as he was in continuing care. Insurance pays significantly lower – no adjustment from charges as out of network/no contract. Pt pays all charges except actual payment to doctors, hospitals, tests. Huge financial hit. What does the employee or pt know of the a) ramifications of out of network, b) prior notice to get approved and c) appeal rights?

21 Let’s look at out of network- Surgery done at out of network hospital

Surgery done at an out of network hospital. Billed charges: $8000 Out of network deductible applied: $2000 individual Hospital bills Cigna; Cigna pays ‘reasonable amt’ that would be paid to IN network providers. Amt eligible for payment from Cigna: $4400 LESS $2000 out of network deductible LESS 50% out of network coinsurance after deductible: $2400 x 50% = $1200 TOTAL AMT PD BY CIGNA: $4400-$2000 ded- $1200 coins = $1200paid to out of network provider/hospital. But the hospital is NOT contracted. Therefore, the hospital accepted the $4400 but left due on the account for the pt to pay: $8000 – $1200 = $6800 from pt. **Out of network deductible: $2000 (Separate from any in network deductible) **PLUS 50% copayment: $1200 **PLUS balance billing due to no contract: $ $4400 =$3600 TOTAL DUE FROM PT: $6800

22 PFNF Education 2017

23 Health Care Buzz (Ex) 55% of Americans are paying more than last year for insurance. 1 of 4 Americans health worsened after delaying care because of cost concerns 30% said their health insurance coverage has gotten worse in the past year. 1 in 4 lost access to their doctors last year due to insurance networks. (out of network huge costs!!) 3 in 10 delayed emergency care in the last year out of fear of costs DailyFactoid / MCOL Morning consult Biggest changes Doctor’s expect to result from Millennial patient habits in coming years. Increased use of telemedicine (28%) Proliferation of walk-in clinic settings (27%) Growth in online scheduling and extended hrs (24%) Greater transparency for out of pocket costs (11%) Easily portable electronic health records (10%) Sprocket Rocket “Millennial patients challenging status quo, over 2900 US doctors say.” PFNF Education 2017

24 Employment “Norms” in Huge Flux

AARP & MIT Agelab (Population Health 3/17) By 2020: 1 in 5 students will be 35 yrs or older. By 2020: 10,000 will be turning 65 every day By 2020: 1 out of every 5 adults will be over 65; more than under 5 yrs. 57 year old's are the primary owner of IPad. 50% of over 60 year old's use the internet Over 50 years of age = 1/3 of the work force. Family Care Giver: 42 M adults , age 45-64, providing care for older family/parents. 17%/ 24 M are providing in addition to their ‘day job.’ Multi-generations in the work force. Norm: 3-4 generations. (BB and Millennials = both approach ‘work’ differently.) WOW! A huge opportunity to create a new work place for diverse employee needs/retention. HealthExecMobile -Multiples 18.4% of US adults had a mental illness in the past year. 8.6% reported substance abuse/dependence in the past year Almost 40% had at least one chronic medical condition during their lifetimes 1.2% had all three conditions: mental illness, substance abuse/dependence and at least one chronic medical condition. AND more than 50% of Americans now have at least ONE chronic health condition, mental disorder or substance use issue. (Taylor & Francis group news – “Psychology, Health, and Medicine” Oct 2016.) Employees/Pts look different – ages (3-17) Baby Boomers M Generation X M – to Surpass BB by2028 Millennials M – HAVE surpassed BB

25 Plus more working past 65…

“More Americans age 65 & over are still punching the clock and the last time the percentage was this high was when John F Kennedy was in the White House, “ “Last month, 19% of Americans age 65 and over were still working, according to government data released Fri. That’s the highest rate since, 1962 and it caps a long trend higher since the figure bottomed out at 10% in 1985.” Why? Some work to feel engaged. Others do not have enough money to retire. Employee Benefit Institute survey: Nearly 1/3 of all workers with less then $10,000 in savings will work until 70. *Associated Press Medicare Secondary Payer Older workers care giving for other adults PS By 2020 – 10,000 people will be turning 65 daily! WOW! PFNF Education 2017

26 3rd) Examples from the Hospital Navigator Resource Library

Thru employer specific meetings, build data base of insurance plans, how to read the EOB, deductibles, etc. 1 on 1 intervention with the patient/family – complete work paper Create glossary of terms Create reference guide for additional community resources Create networking ‘handoffs’ with existing hospital team - payment options, social work, estimates, patient experience, physician offices, others Innovation Lab: After Hours Q&A – Weds 5:00 -6:00 p.m.; using patient portal; tracking and trending improvements/feedback; integration with medical community; face to face and automation.

27 Think like the family who is scared with a new ER visit w/insurance, employer specific

Daughter has just been admitted thru the ER. (Inpt vs obs means what to the pt?) Parents are scared and distraught about the health of their daughter with the unplanned ‘admit.’ As comforting as the care givers are, the financial questions loom large. What happens now? Who has insurance? What was done with the insurance? What is my coverage? “I have never had to use it before, so I don’t know anything! “ Think Pt Financial Navigator Program referral

28 Think like a patient – Medicare Part C/Managed Care – comes to the ER

86 year old with Humana. What is done in the ER to inform the pt this is not traditional Medicare? If the pt is ‘admitting/obs or inpt” – what happens so the pt understands the difference between Traditional Medicare and Part C/Mgd Medicare? Now they are in a bed, what happens so the 86 year old understands their out of pocket, what coverage there is with Humana that may be different than Traditional, is this obs or inpt? Who has this information for our sick, confused Sr who does not have anyone to ask? Care givers/family – who do they ask about the above? Think Pt Financial Navigator Program referral

29 Included in Every Event/Training- “HealthCare Buzz”

Factoid: Health Exec Mobile Mon, March 27, 2017 “Although only 4% of all doctors are emergency physicians, they provide care for: 28% of all acute care visits 50% of all Medicaid and CHIP (children) visits 67% of all acute care to the uninsured patients. Healthcare Bulletin. The Slate Group. March 30, 2017 “An annual health survey conducted by states and Medicare/CMS found that the full ACA reduced the uninsured rate by 44% while also reducing the number of people without a primary care doctor by 12% and those not having an annual check up by 10%.”