Jamal Crawford, who was born and raised in Seattle, loves the Pacific Northwest. His love for the region was one reason why he signed with the Portland Trail Blazers in 2011.

LaMarcus Aldridge, one of Crawford's good friends, was on the team. The team was coached by Nate McMillan whom Crawford had known since his prep days in Seattle. The Blazers were coming off a 48-34 record and a trip to the playoffs. Crawford thought he was joining a team with a promising future. Instead, he joined a squad that was beginning a downward spiral.

"It was a little crazy. It was a lockout season and we didn't have a lot of time to get chemistry I think as as group," Crawford said. "I thought they were a team on the rise as far as the West. We were number one for the first two weeks of the season then we kind of fell apart after that."

The Blazers started the lockout shortened season with a 7-2 record, but that would be the high-water mark for them. The season spiraled downward and McMillan was fired after 43 games, replaced by Caleb Kanales.

Crawford, who saw himself as the replacement for the retired Brandon Roy, struggled during the season. He's more of a shooting guard and he was forced to play point guard after Raymond Felton was benched for poor performances. He averaged 14 points a game, his lowest average in nine seasons. He shot 30.8 percent from the three-point line, which was the worst since his rookie season.

Watching the team fall apart and seeing a longtime acquaintance canned was bad enough for Crawford. Then came speculation Crawford and guard Felton engineered the dismissal of McMillan, a charge that Crawford emphatically denies.

"In 16 years, that's never been attached to my name," Crawford said. "It's never, ever happened in my life. For it to happen here, all of sudden. I'm not that guy. I took less money to come here. I really wanted to be here. I was disappointed."

Crawford said the situation simply didn't work out for anyone.

"Nothing bad about here. They have great fans," Crawford said. "Even before that, I always loved coming here. My family comes down. I have love for the Northwest. No hard feelings."