Engaged. Century Allen Milstead, of Rock Island, Ill., left tackle on the Yale football eleven, to Miss Mildred Bechtel, of Milford, Conn.

Married. Miss Esther Tumulty, of Jersey City, to Joseph Francis Igoe of East Orange, N. J. The bride was given away by her brother, Joseph P. Tumulty, former Secretary to President Woodrow Wilson.

Married. Harry King Curtis, of Manhattan, son of U. S. Senator Charles Curtis of Kansas, to Mrs. Elliott Cameron of Washington.

Married. Miss Alma Rubens, cinema actress (current film: Under the Red Robe), to Dr. Daniel Carson Goodman, author and cinema producer. The marriage, which was celebrated “on or near Labor Day” in a place not designated, was only recently announced.

Died. Ambrose Higgins, Jr., four, in Manhattan, knocked down by a truck. Representing the children of America, he laid a wreath on the bier of President Harding when the latter’s body lay in state in the Capitol, Washington.

Died. Wilhelm Pfannkuch, 82, oldest member of the German Social-Democratic Party, personal friend of the late Karl Marx (1818-1883), in Berlin. He was Honorary President of the National Assembly at Weimar, 1919, which adopted the present constitution of the German Republic.

Died. Saburo Shimada, 71, Japanese politician and long one of the ablest lieutenants of the late Marquis Okuma (1838-1922).

Died. Dr. John Wanamaker, 3d, 47, nephew of the late John Wanamaker, in Philadelphia.

Died. Maurice Healy, 64, brother of Timothy Healy, Governor General of the Irish Free State, in Cork. He was an independent Nationalist member from Cork in the British House of Commons, 1909-1918.

Died. George Chadbourne Taylor, 55, President of the American Railway Express Co., at Pelham Heights, N. Y., of heart disease. Without funds or high influence, he started his career at the age of 17 as the driver of one of the wagons of the Company.

Died. Ernest August, Duke of Brunswick-Liineberg, formerly Duke of Cumberland, 78, at Gmunden, Austria, after an apoplectic stroke.

Died. Miss Hope Christy, sister of Artist Howard Chandler Christy, at Columbus, Ohio.

Died. Honorable Lady Herbert, in London, American wife of the late Sir Michael Henry Herbert, British Ambassador to Washington (1902-03).