In 1910, Bangalore Nagarathnamma, an artist, scholar, musician, and affluent devadasi resurrected the Telugu classic Radhika Santawanam written by an 18th century prominent devadasi Muddupalani. She wrote “I cannot let this book go no matter how many times I read it..it is as adorable as Lord Krishna”. A scholar in both her mother tongue Kannada and Tamil, it was her special interest in Telugu that led to her discovery of Muddupalani’s work.

Muddupalani was a celebrated courtesan and scholar during the reign of the Maratha king Pratapasimha in the 18th century Thanjavur. She wrote her magnum opus Radhika Santawanam (Appeasing Radhika), a sringara-prabandham popular in Telugu literature with 584 verses which depict Radha’s unfailing love for Krishna and her jealousy as he is married to a younger bride Ila.

The work was initially found and published in 1887 by an associate of CP Brown who removed parts that did not suit then Victorian notion of morality including the prologue of the Muddupalani which describes her proud literary lineage, and scholarly achievements.

So when Nagarathanamma discovered the original manuscript and the sanitised version, she decided to publish it in entirety in 1910. The lucidity of the text and it being written by a woman from the same tradition compelled Nagarathanamma in taking up the task. This was of course met with public notoriety and backlash from the British government which labelled it as obscene. It brought forward the questions around female sexuality which did not the suit the patriarchal set up around.

Among the harshest critics she faced then, Kandukuri Veeresalingam was probably the most prominent one. Veeresalingam, who was a prominent champion of women’s movement and a social reformer, commented that the certain aspects of the book are disgraceful and inappropriate for respectable to hear or talk about. He also went to call Muddupalani an ‘adulteress’ and “she was born into a community of prostitutes and does not have the modesty natural to women”.

Nagarathnamma questioned back sharply, “ Does the question of propriety and embarrassment arise only in the case of women, and not of men? Is he implying that it is acceptable for this author to write about conjugal pleasures in minute detail and without reservation because she was a courtesan, but it would not be so for respectable men? Then my question is: Are the obscenities in this book worse than the obscenities in vaijayantivilasam, a book which pantulu garu personally reviewed and approved for publication? And what about the obscenities in his own work, rasikajanamanobhiranjanam?”

However, post multiple raids, the the publishers were charged under Section 293 IPC (which we have even today) and copies of the book destroyed. It was the first non-political book to be banned and on grounds of obscenity.

It was only post-independence, the then Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, Tanguturi Prakasam revoked the ban and declaring “I am adding some pearls to the necklace that’s Telugu literature”.