Gerald Wallace, Niola Vucevic, Maurice Harkless

Boston Celtics forward Gerald Wallace, center, grabs a rebound between Orlando Magic center Nikola Vucevic (9) and forward Maurice Harkless, right, during the second half of an NBA basketball game, in Boston, Monday, Nov. 11, 2013. The Celtics defeated the Magic 120-105.

(AP Photo/Charles Krupa)

Upon being traded to the Boston Celtics last offseason, Gerald Wallace admitted it was initially tough to accept joining a rebuilding team late in his career. He ultimately adapted to his new home and called his first year with the Celtics "a great season," but at first the trade jolted him. Late in his NBA life, the 12-year veteran wants to challenge for a ring.

More than a decade ago, as an infrequently-used rookie, he almost captured one. If Wallace's Sacramento Kings had outlasted the Los Angeles Lakers in the 2002 Western Conference Finals, they would have been big favorites in the Finals against the New Jersey Nets. Instead the Kings lost in seven games, leaving Wallace to wonder what if.

Within a fantastic oral history of that series published Wednesday night on Grantland, Wallace said: "We were a referee away from going to the Finals."

The 2002 Kings-Lakers series has been considered controversial for years. Writing for ESPN at the time, Bill Simmons called it "from an officiating standpoint, the most one-sided game of the past decade."

Los Angeles attempted 27 free throws in the fourth quarter alone, prompting at least one in-depth study about the veracity of the calls. At 82Games.com, Roland Beech noted several dubious late calls but concluded: "As a whole, these plays suggest to me the refs were calling the game honestly, if perhaps not well." Even one of the referees, Ted Bernhardt, admitted to Grantland's Jonathan Abrams that he thought his partners "sucked." Bernhardt did not believe either team got "hosed or anything like that" but admitted, "I wasn't happy with the game. I wasn't happy with my partners as a whole."

Disgraced former referee Tim Donaghy (who did not officiate the game) later claimed knowledge that the league fixed Game 6 in favor of the Lakers. After the allegations, which came in 2008, Michael Wilbon wrote for the Washington Post: "Three terrific veteran officials -- Bob Delaney, Dick Bavetta and Ted Bernhardt -- called what I still consider the single worst-officiated game in the 28 years I've been covering professional basketball. It was egregiously, embarrassingly bad for the league and for the Kings. It's the only time, I think, I've ever written an entire column about refereeing for the purpose of being critical."

Obviously Donaghy isn't the most credible figure. Anyway, that series wasn't just legendary because of some missed calls. Beyond the controversy discussion, Abrams' oral history shares plenty of interesting recollections about one of the most memorable playoff series of my lifetime. The seven games included Shaquille O'Neal and Kobe Bryant in all their three-peat glory, a Kings team that played a superbly fun style, Robert Horry living up to his nickname "Big Shot Bob," an overtime Game 7, and just about anything else a single NBA playoff series can offer.

You should read Abrams' entire piece if only to remember how darn good those Kings were. We can forget them years later because they never won a title, because they never reached the Finals, but that team was stacked and cohesive and one play here or there away from reaching the Finals. Once there, things might have been easy. The Lakers swept the Nets for the title.

It could have been the Kings doing the sweeping. Wallace almost had his championship.

Maybe next year.

(Note: Almost definitely not next year. But maybe sometime after that.)