SACRAMENTO — There are times this season when the Sacramento Kings look like they”re starring in their own version of “The Wizard of Oz” searching for a heart, a brain and some courage.

Saturday night at Arco Arena, the Kings (16-30) spent much of the third quarter looking for all three in a 103-96 loss to the Charlotte Bobcats (24-22).

Down just two points heading into the second half, the Kings played like the Bobcats” house landed on them and allowed Charlotte and Gerald Wallace to run wild, outscoring the Kings 34-13 in the third quarter. A former Kings first-round draft pick, Wallace had 19 of his game- and season-high 38 in the period. He also had 11 rebounds, two steals, two assists and two key blocks in the fourth quarter. He was recently selected to play in the NBA All-Star Game and the dunk contest, as well.

“I told our players that this guy (Wallace) was a young guy struggling with the Kings and they had to let him go to the expansion draft,” said Kings head coach Paul Westphal. “He just kept improving and he”s fulfilling his potential right now.”

Wallace said he left Sacramento on good terms and wasn”t upset that the Kings left him unprotected during the expansion draft in 2004. As you”d expect, he”s looking forward to his first All-Star Game.

“I think it”s a great thing. Not just for me but for the coaches and the organization,” Wallace said. “Finally we have someone that will go down to the All-Star Weekend and represent our team, our organization, our fans and the city of Charlotte.”

The Kings were led by Kevin Martin”s 31 points. Martin made sure his scoring slump is a thing of the past by tallying 64 points in less than 24 hours after his 33-point outburst Friday night in a 101-94 loss in Utah.

Down by as many as 26 points, the Kings made a late run led by Sergio Rodriguez but fell short once again and will try to equal last season”s win total Monday night against the Denver Nuggets.

Tyreke Evans bruised his left hip Friday”s loss and tried to shake it off Saturday. His hip wouldn”t cooperate and Evans played just 28 minutes, well off his season average, and scored just four points.

“I was limping when I woke up this morning and it was sore,” said Evans, who did chip in with seven assists. “I was just trying to find people out there, whichever way I could. I just wanted to go out there and get a win.”

Rookie hazing — Each of the Kings rookies — Evans, Omri Casspi and Jon Brockman — are carrying around cute backpacks as part of their rookie hazing ritual. Brockman left the locker room Saturday night with his sporty powder-blue Tinkerbell backpack slung over his right shoulder. In it was his wallet and car keys.

“We all have to carry them,” Brockman said. “All season. They tell me the ritual has been going on for years.”

But the backpacks of Casspi and Evans were nowhere to be seen.

“Hey Omri,” Brockman yelled to Casspi across the locker room. “Where”s your backpack?”

Casspi looked sheepishly at his teammate and shrugged his shoulders.

“That ain”t right,” Brockman said, adjusting the straps of his backpack and walking out into the night.

Tank rolls in — Bobcats” assistant coach LaSalle Thompson, nicknamed “Tank,” received a warm welcome from the Arco Arena crowd Saturday during pre-game introductions. Kings fans remember Thompson for his workman-like efforts primarily as a rebounder.

Thompson was selected fifth overall in the 1982 NBA Draft by the then Kansas City Kings and played five seasons with the Sacramento Kings before being traded to the Indiana Pacers.

Before joining Larry Brown on the Bobcats” bench during the 2008-2009 season, Thompson served a stint as general manager and head coach of the San Diego Wildfire in the American Basketball Association during the 2000-01 season. He owns TNT Motorsports, a car and truck customizing business, and a land development firm. He and former Kings guard Henry Turner owned a TNT Motorsports outlet on the corner of Auburn Boulevard and Greenback Lane for three years until folding the business in 2008.