I am not Filipine so will use whatever name the locals choose. I would prefer a name with the easiest or most distinct pronounciation possible from other names/titles in the local language. Speaking in gibberish to a patriotic Filipine or accidentally insulting someone's immediate family member in Tagalog (or Malay or any other language) due to mispronunciation would not only be embarassing but might cause the next pancit or lumpia order to taste a bit funny or be a touch more spicy that anticipated.

What is your preferred name of the Philippines

Katagalugan/Selurong(Seludong/Saludong alt. spellings in Malay)

In context, Malay Historians use to call Luzon as Selurong while Moro historians refer to the people of Luzon as Tagalogs so basically in the same context, Katagalugan = Selurong, it is the preferred name of Bonifacio in the Philippines and the Majapahit and Ancient Malays called Luzon as Selurong.

Eastern Bruneian Empire

Maharlika

The name Preferred by Ferdinand Marcos.

Philippines or Filipinas

the OTL name.

Katagalugan would be too biased on the Northern part of the Philippines. Unless Visayas and Mindanao would have independence as separate countries, I would not like Katagalugan when everyone is not a Tagalog.

Eastern Brunei Empire is a no since that would make us not a Republic and would still be under the Brunei Sultanate.

Maharlika maybe but that would favor the Maharlika caste (the royalties and the elites) if my memory serves right.

Republic of the Philippines ironically would be the best for a country of several tribes and strata, but if we want to shake off colonialism, have it named "Republika ng Kalayaan" or something else.

Honestly nothing bad about just keeping Philippines. Its a name that gives some history and geography, the Isles of Philip. It tells the story of how King Philip of Spain, conquered the disparate Isles. Those other Pre-colonial names are harkening to a time, wherein there existed no unified Philippine identity only disparate warring tribes.

Yeah, that’s why I think Philippines is the best name. It may be a foreign name, but the positive in that is that it’s not giving precedence to any one region or group, and having no regional connotations means the entire country can get behind it, since without the Spanish colonial period to unite them all, there is no Filipino identity.

Kind of like how the name India is Greek in origin, but works since it doesn’t have any ethnic or religious ties, it’s a purely geographic term, whereas calling it something like “Hindustan” or “Aryavarta” or even “Bharat” has complications when considering groups like Muslims and Dravidians.

Ophir

Seriously though - the Philippines just narrowly escaped decades' worth of "hot" ethnic tensions by somewhat ignoring the cultural questions - and successfully doubling down on its dubious and half-baked solutions at that. You know it somewhat worked when people are talking about how to kick out the current government or at least its officials/liquidate subversives instead of seceding or ejecting territories.

Katagalugan would be too biased on the Northern part of the Philippines. Unless Visayas and Mindanao would have independence as separate countries, I would not like Katagalugan when everyone is not a Tagalog.

To be fair, Katagalugan does somewhat fit when you consider the historical ideas surrounding it. The leaders of the independence movement were almost all Tagalogs, and Bonifacio preferred to use Tagalog to refer to native Filipinos.

Katagalugan would be too biased on the Northern part of the Philippines. Unless Visayas and Mindanao would have independence as separate countries, I would not like Katagalugan when everyone is not a Tagalog.

I think Selurong and its associated terms should be used instead of Luzon for the Island because it is the authentic name of the island, not a misnomer, but using it and its associated terms with the whole Philippines would be unfair to the people of other island groups.