Katagalugan in English dictionary

Katagalugan

Sample sentences with "Katagalugan"

Declension Stem

During a mass gathering in Caloocan, the leaders of the Katipunan organized themselves into a revolutionary government, named the newly established government "Haring Bayang Katagalugan", and openly declared a nationwide armed revolution.

During Bonifacio's time, all of the Filipino people are referred collectively by the Katipunan as Tagalogs, while Philippines is Katagalugan.

Tagalog Republic (Filipino: Republika ng Katagalugan or Republikang Tagalog) is a term used to refer to two revolutionary governments involved in the Philippine Revolution against Spain and the Philippine–American War.

Another name for Bonifacio's government was Repúblika ng Katagalugan (another form of "Tagalog Republic") as evidenced by a picture of a rebel seal published in the same periodical the next month.

As the vice president of Macario Sakay's Tagalog Republic (Tagalog: Republika ng Katagalugan), he continued resistance against the United States up until the dissolution of the republic in 1906.

The society's primer explains its use of Tagalog in a footnote: The revolutionary Carlos Ronquillo wrote in his memoirs: In this respect, Katagalugan may be translated as the "Tagalog nation."

Katagalugan may refer to the historical Tagalog regions in the large island of Luzon, the northern part of the Philippine Archipelago.

He was elected Secretary of State for the Haring Bayang Katagalugan, a revolutionary government established during the outbreak of hostilities.

Andrés Bonifacio, a founding member of the Katipunan and later its supreme head (Supremo), promoted the use of Katagalugan for the Philippine nation.

("Long Live the Tagalog Nation!" -- Katagalugan (Tagalog Nation) being the Katipunan term for the Philippines) and "Mabuhay si Dr. José Rizal!"

Katipunan ng mga Samahang Magbubukid sa Timog Katagalugan (Kasama-TK), an organization of farmers in the Southern Tagalog Region, today appealed for help in the wake of Typhoon Glenda (international name: Rammasun), which has left thousands of farmers homeless and hungry.

In 1902, Macario Sakay formed another government, the Republika ng Katagalugan, in Rizal Province.

Random words: Balarila, Kamusta ka, Katagalugan, mundo, almusal

Armando Albarillo, secretary-general of Bagong Alyansang Makabayan (Bayan or New Patriotic Alliance)-Southern Tagalog and signatory to the 2008 impeachment complaint against President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo; Bayani Cambronero, eighth nominee and Southern Tagalog regional coordinator of Bayan Muna; Doris Cuario, secretary-general of Karapatan (Alliance for the Advancement of People’s Rights)-Southern Tagalog; Helen Asdolo, secretary-general of GABRIELA-Southern Tagalog, Luz Baculo, secretary-general of Pagkakaisa ng mga Manggagawa sa Timog Katagalugan (Pamantik or Unity of Workers in Southern Tagalog) and member of KMU’s National Council;

Available translations

Korean

Tagalog

Authors