In 1972, Irwin Allen produced box office smash hit The Poseidon Adventure. The film was based off of Paul Galico’s 1969 novel of the same name, about a group of survivors trying to escape an upside-down ocean liner that was hit by a massive tidal wave. It featured an all-star cast, including Gene Hackman, Ernest Borgnine, Shelley Winters, and Jack Albertson, as well as a score composed by John Williams. Like many films of that decade, the film would end up getting remade decades later.

2006 saw the release of Poseidon, a 160 million dollar blockbuster remake of Allen’s film. It was produced and directed by Wolfgang Petersen (known for films such as Das Boot and The Perfect Storm), starring Josh Lucas, Kurt Russell, and Richard Dreyfuss. While the film was nominated for an Academy Award for its special effects, its overall reception was negative.

When one views the promotional poster for each film, the designs reflect the time each film was made.

The original 1972 poster features two sections. First, there is the illustration of the ballroom flooding scene (one should note that the scene in the film is very different from the poster’s depiction). The next section features images of the film’s twelve stars lined up in a row

The ballroom flooding illustration is all about action. There is lots of action taking place on all sides of the scene. Front and center are the main characters running from the wall of water. Behind them and to the right are more people running for their lives, and on top of them people are falling from the ceiling. The artist did an impressive job of putting detail on every person in the scene, so one will notice something new every time they look at the poster. One should also note that the scene itself is angled, making the chaotic scene more dynamic. Below are twelve “headshots” of the cast members, taken from still frames from the film. All of the characters look like they have been through hell, and most of them are in the middle of some sort of action. When a moviegoer sees the amount of stars, there is one thing clear: this star-studded action-adventure cannot be missed. Like many films of the time, The Poseidon Adventure has short and sweet tagline, in this case: “Hell, upside down”. Written in big, bold yellow letters, it accurately reflects the scene below it, and the film itself.

The 2006 Poseidon poster is not about the characters- it is all about the ship. This entire poster is dedicated to the upside-down ocean liner, detailed with every window and light present. Surrounding the ship is the dark blue abyss, giving the viewer a sense of fear. This contrasts the few lights left on the ship- making it clear that while people are still inside, the passengers will not have an easy time. The title “Poseidon” is attached to the ship, and is also upside down- adding to the overall despair of the situation. Everything, not even the title is normal. Unlike the other poster, the cast list is reduced to a standard listing of the main players and production crew.