History

Named using a 17th century French naval convention, Le Terrible would see action on the Allied side during both the first and last years of the war, but was also set against the Allies in the service of the Vichy French state between 1940 and 1942. At the outbreak of the Second World War, Le Terrible was part of the most powerful squadron of the French Navy — the Force de Raid, based in the Atlantic Port of Brest. This fleet, under the command of Admiral Gensoul, included the modern battleships Dunkerque and Strasbourg, aircraft carrier Béarn, three La Galissonnière-class cruisers, and eight superdestroyers.

The first main task assigned to Le Terrible’s squadron was to conduct sweeping patrols of the North Atlantic, with eyes on halting any German shipping. Most importantly, she was charged with hunting down potential enemy surface raiders such as the Admiral Graf Spee, which had been making the rounds to the South since late September. Circumstances changed in early 1940, when fear of an Italian entrance to the war on Germany’s side prompted the French Navy to move the Force de Raid to the port of Mers-El-Kébir, in French North Africa, so as to be able to quickly assert control of the Western Mediterranean if the worse came to worse.

By June, the Battle of France appeared to be lost as German forces inched closer and closer to Paris, while the Force lay powerless in their African moorings. The British, fearing that the second largest fleet in Europe would fall into German hands after a French surrender, issued an ultimatum to Admiral Gensoul at Mers-El-Kébir, to hand over or retire their ships. Upon his refusal, the Royal Navy Force H began shelling the harbor from the North, destroying battleship Bretagne and provoking chaos amongst the French ranks. Le Terrible immediately set about escorting battleship Strasbourg out of the harbor in an attempt to escape East, narrowly avoiding the British 15-inch shells that crippled destroyer Mogador, just at the other end of the fleeing formation.

After Operation Torch in 1942, when French forces in North Africa — neutral since their surrender to Germany — rejoined the war on the Allied side. Le Terrible, being stationed at Dakar, was submitted to a large-scale program to modernize what was left of the French fleet after the mass scuttling at Toulon. To this end, she travelled to the Boston Navy Yard, where she remained for several months while she was equipped with 40 mm Bofors anti-aircraft guns, as well as the latest in naval technology, including radar and sonar.

Recreating Le Terrible

After World War I, the Marine Nationale would become well-known for both its very large and very fast destroyers. Le Terrible would certainly not fail to live up to this trope. One of six Le Fantasque-class super-destroyers laid down in the early 1930’s, this ship was conceived to fulfill a hybrid role, with high speed cruising capability, combined with effective surface combat performance. Le Terrible was intended to overwhelm enemy destroyers with superior firepower and make use of her speed to escape the range of cruisers.

To this end, she was equipped with powerful 74,000 hp machinery designed for a steady cruising speed of 37 knots. This number, however, would end up being soundly exceeded by Le Terrible when conducting her initial sea trials, reaching a record-breaking 45 knots. This made her the fastest major surface warship in the world, a title which she still holds to this day. Le Terrible was also significantly larger than previous destroyer classes, in part due to the need to accommodate the new armament.

Main battery: five single-mount 138.6 mm Mle 1929 guns. Unique to the Le Fantasque-class destroyers, these guns had a firing range of up to 20,000 m by design. In practice, however, the lead ship of the class was able to score a hit at 20,600 m during the battle of Dakar by taking advantage of its rolling motion in the water to achieve a higher gun elevation then the mount typically allowed. In ideal conditions, it was capable of an output of 12 shells per minute, but a cumbersome hoist system for transporting shells slowed it down to a practical rate of 7 rounds per minute.

AA: four 37 mm Mle 1933 guns in twin mounts. The cartridges used by these cannons were effective against the heavier attack planes and bombers of the 1940’s, but their disadvantage lay in their rate of fire, and another important factor for anti-aircraft armament: they were semi-automatic and hand-loaded, and therefore slow-firing. For this reason, Le Terrible, along with other major ships of the French Navy, would be refitted with the automatic 40 mm Bofors in 1942.

Heavy machine guns: French-made 13.2 mm Hotchkiss M1929. These were adapted for close-range AA defense in twin mounts, and were the basis used for the Japanese Navy’s own AA armament. By the 1940’s, these guns would prove rather ineffective against some of the more modern attack aircraft because of their small caliber and range. For this reason, Le Terrible would have these weapons replaced with the more effective 20 mm Oerlikon machine guns in 1942.

Torpedoes: nine 550 mm tubes in three triple mounts, using French Mle 1923DT torpedoes. With a maximum speed of just below 40 knots, Le Terrible could outrun her own torpedoes. At the battle of Dakar, French submarine Bévéziers fired a salvo of a submarine-adapted version of this torpedo at British battleship HMS Resolution, striking her amidships. A single torpedo caused heavy flooding, jammed the ship’s main battery, and started a number of electrical fires. Resolution was put out of action for the better part of a year as a result.