Snapshot

Name of the Book: Digital Fortress

Author:Dan Brown

Genre:Techno-Thriller, Mystery

Release Date: 1998

Synopsis

When a groundbreaking supercomputer, the TRANSLTR, gets infiltrated by an unbreakable code, America is at risk of involuntarily releasing highly confidential information to the general public. Commander Trevor Strathmore and cryptographer Susan Fletcher turn the NSA upside down, while David Becker, a professor of languages and fiancé to Susan, is given a major role in stopping it from happening.

Who should read this book?

How do you know if this book is for you?

There’s a good chance you’ll like ‘Digital Fortress’ if you can strike these off your list:

· Conspiracy theories

· Stories that stimulate your intellect

· Action sequences

· Mystery

· Fast-paced narrative that takes place over a short period of time

Who wrote this book?

Dan Brown is a critically acclaimed author who’s famous for writing the Robert Langdon series, which was later turned into a movie franchise. Being a standalone novel, “Digital Fortress” is Brown’s first and perhaps the most neglected book in his career.

Inspired by the mysterious air around ancient symbology and cryptography, Brown’s novels are international thrillers that take place in exotic locations. Brown has also had his share of criticism for presenting wrong information in his novels and having the wrong idea of technology. It’s interesting to note that in order to see things in a new perspective, Brown actually uses his gravity boots and hangs upside down, literally seeing the world in a different way.

Summary

When Susan Fletcher arrives at work one day, everything seems to be ordinary, except- the TRANSLTR, the supercomputer that stores highly confidential data about the country’s citizens, military and secrets ops, encounters an unbreakable code, the Digital Fortress, that it must crack before the timer runs out.

Ensei Tankado, a former NSA employee who firmly believes in being honest with the public about the existence of the TRANSLTR, turns out to be behind this misadventure. With little preparation, our brainy heroine and her boss set out to find the passcode required to stop the TRANSLTR from releasing data to the public. Meanwhile, when Strathmore learns that Tankado died in Seville, Spain, Strathmore hires Susan’s dreamy fiancé, David, to hunt for the passcode Tankado had set to stop the impending havoc.

Back at the NSA, while Susan speculates that the person with the codename “North Dakota,” who had sent an email to the NSA may be a fellow colleague, a murder occurs at the NSA, leaving everyone more confused than ever.

Meanwhile, David Becker gets caught up in a mess in Seville, putting himself in extreme danger. But, determined to finish the job he had been trusted with, he pushes himself forward and continues to hunt for the passcode.

The murderer at the NSA could be an insider, the spy sent to fetch the most important code in the history of digital security breaches is inexperienced, and Susan Fletcher is torn between saving the country from possible chaos and saving the love of her life from the most dangerous mission ever.

Will the intelligent woman, her boss, and her fiancé together form a good-enough team to save the nation?

Conclusion

The Good

It’s called a thriller for a reason- it’s fast-paced, gives the reader great anticipation, leaving the reader turning pages to the very last one. The idea of cryptography being the center focus in the story attracts many curious individuals, according to GoodReads. Although it was published in the late 90’s, data theft and security are more relevant today, in this Age of Information, that readers could very much understand the consequences of leaked government secrets.

The Bad

Critics have stated that Brown’s perception of technology and the NSA was incorrect, including his presentation of the city of Seville in Spain. Some readers from Amazon reviews state it was “great but technically flawed.” It’s widely accepted that this debut was just not as good as the Robert Langdon series that gripped the nation.

Dan Brown tends to have a winning recipe. While appealing to many, it put others off: the brainy beauty who seems to be perfect in every way, a conspiracy theory, and an awful lot of action sequences. For some, this really is the perfect recipe for a good book, and for others, it’s bland and repetitive.

Overall, Digital Fortress is a good book that you can read with great anticipation. Whether or not you’ll like the feel of it, you can only tell when you put it down.

Other Reviews

In Favor:

W. Frazier writes on Amazon Reviews:

“This thriller centers on cutting edge technology and NSA code-breaking abilities. And what is remarkable, is that this book still packs a punch 20 years after publication. In a fast-paced world of next generations, author Dan Brown gets major kudos for staying relevant. The story is well-developed and fast-paced. There are lots of false flags, a never ending halo of panic, and lots of twists and turns. It’s a suspense thriller that entertains. Good writing makes it an easy winner. Great pick up for the beach or airplane.”

A lot of people found this review helpful:

https://www.amazon.com/gp/customer-reviews/R16L0MU18V6PMG/ref=cm_cr_arp_d_viewpnt?ie=UTF8&ASIN=0312944926#R16L0MU18V6PMG

Not in Favor:

Martin from Amazon Reviews thinks Dan Brown is sexist:

“The heroine is beautiful and smart and a high IQ — surprise is expressed at this, why? All the good guys are smart good looking and white middle class americans. The baddie is a Japanese cripple. Do you see a pattern here? In the finale they are trying vainly to stop the BIG computer being hacked because the firewall has been deactivated. They could have just detached it from the internet — they are so smart they don’t think of this. It’s written to be a film which is too obvious. He has no idea about modern computing — he talks about people with rolls of Computer Printout and Blueprints. — things not seen since the early 1960’s. He must have had a tech researcher but chose to ignore the advice. An irritating and disappointing read.”

Hendrata from Goodreads recommends it for nobody:

“In short, the book is a bad novel, and a very bad novel if you know anything about math / cryptography.

Not only the technical errors were appalling, but the writing style itself is mediocre.”

To read more reviews on “Digital Fortress,” follow this link:

https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/11125.Digital_Fortress