Description

Before the multi-million, runaway bestseller The Da Vinci Code, Dan Brown set his razor-sharp research and storytelling skills on the most powerful intelligence organization on earth--the National Security Agency (NSA)--in this thrilling novel, Digital Fortress.

When the NSA's invincible code-breaking machine encounters a mysterious code it cannot break, the agency calls its head cryptographer, Susan Fletcher, a brilliant, beautiful mathematician. What she uncovers sends shock waves through the corridors of power. The NSA is being held hostage--not by guns or bombs -- but by a code so complex that if released would cripple U.S. intelligence. Caught in an accelerating tempest of secrecy and lies, Fletcher battles to save the agency she believes in. Betrayed on all sides, she finds herself fighting not only for her country but for her life, and in the end, for the life of the man she loves.

About the Author

Dan Brown is the author of numerous #1 bestselling novels, including Digital Fortress, Angels & Demons and The Da Vinci Code, which has sold more than 80 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best selling novels of all time. Named one of the World's 100 Most Influential People by TIME magazine, he has appeared in the pages of Newsweek, Forbes, People, GQ, The New Yorker, and others. His novels are published in 51 languages around the world. He is a graduate of Amherst College and Phillips Exeter Academy, where he spent time as an English teacher before turning his efforts fully to writing. He lives in New England with his wife.

Praise for Digital Fortress: A Thriller

“In this fast-paced, plausible tale, Brown blurs the line between good and evil enough to delight patriots and paranoids alike.” —Publishers Weekly

“Digital Fortress is the best and most realistic techno-thriller to reach the market in years... A chilling thrill a minute.” —The Midwest Book Review

“Digital Fortress is smart and reads with all the pace of a hit movie.” —Larry Lasker, Screenwriter, Wargames and Sneakers

“Exciting...will rivet cyber-minded readers.” —Booklist

"A disturbing, cutting-edge techno thriller that should galvanize everyone who sends or receives email or even dreams of navigating the Web."—John J. Nance, author of Pandora's Clock, The Last Hostage

“Brown isn’t just a novelist; he’s a crossover pop culture sensation"—The Boston Globe

"A master of the breathless, puzzle-driven thriller.”—Richmond Times-Dispatch

“What Brown does in a way that appeals to millions of people around the world is tell stories that remind us there’s more to the world than meets the eye.”—The Huffington Post

"Dan Brown is the master of the intellectual cliffhanger." —The Wall Street Journal