Kill Bill is a two-part film series directed by Quentin Tarantino and starring Uma Thurman. It is a part of The Tarantinoverse.

Victims[]

Volume One[]

Vernita Green/Copperhead - Stabbed in the chest by a knife thrown by Beatrix Kiddo.

Tommy Plympton - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Rufus - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Reverend Harmony - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Mrs. Harmony - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Erica - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Joleen - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Janeen - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Unnamed Man - Shot to death by O-Ren Ishii, Vernita Green, Elle Driver, Budd, and Bill off-screen, body shown.

Jasper - Tongue bitten off by Beatrix Kiddo.

Buck - Head bashed repeatedly by Beatrix Kiddo with a metal door, crushing his skull.

Boss Matsumoto's Guard - Head smashed against a wall and part of his face ripped off by O-Ren Ishii's Father, shown in flashback.

O-Ren Ishii's Father - Impaled and stabbed in the temple by one of Boss Matsumoto's guards with a katana, shown in flashback.

O-Ren Ishii's Mother - Impaled by Boss Matsumodo with a katana off-camera.

Boss Matsumoto - Stomach slashed open by O-Ren Ishii with a katana, shown in flashback.

Two of Boss Matsumoto's Guards - Shot in the leg and through the head by O-Ren Ishii, shown in flashback.

Unnamed President of Panama - Shot through the skull by O-Ren Ishii with a sniper rifle, shown in flashback.

Unnamed Man - Disemboweled by Gogo Yubari with a katana.

Boss Tanaka - Decapitated by O-Ren Ishii with a katana.

Miki - Stabbed in the stomach with a katana by Beatrix Kiddo.

Five Unnamed Members of The Crazy 88 - Chest slashed open by Beatrix Kiddo.

Gogo Yubari - Rammed in the side of the head by Beatrix Kiddo with a broken table leg with nails in it.

13 Unnamed Members of the Crazy 88 - Chest slashed open by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Eyeball ripped out by Beatrix Kiddo.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Face sliced by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Arm cut off by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Stabbed in the stomach by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Accidentally stabbed in the chest by an axe thrown by another Crazy 88 member.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Stabbed in the head by an axe thrown by Beatrix Kiddo.

Seven Unnamed Members of The Crazy 88 - Impaled and chest sliced by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Decapitated by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Mouth sliced open by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Vertically cut in half by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Unnamed Member of the Crazy 88 - Throat cut by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

40 Unnamed Members of the Crazy 88 - Sides and chest slashed, impaled and dismembered by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Johnny Mo - Legs cut off by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana, causing him to fall into a pool.

O-Ren Ishii/Cottonmouth - Scalped by Beatrix Kiddo with a katana.

Total - 98

Volume Two[]

Budd/Sidewinder - Bitten multiple times in the face by a black mamba in a trap set up by Elle Driver, causing him to die of the venom.

Pai Mei - Poisoned by Elle Driver with toxic fish heads for snatching out her eye, shown in a flashback.

Elle Driver/California Mountain Snake - Remaining eyeball ripped out by Beatrix Kiddo, causing her to die off-screen.

Emilio (Goldfish) - Stomped on by B.B. off-screen, mentioned.

Bill/Snake Charmer - Heart exploded after Beatrix Kiddo used the Five Point Palm Exploding Heart Technique on him.

Total - 5

Deaths[]

Total - 103

102 Humans

85 Men

10 Women

7 Victims of Unknown Gender

1 Animal

All Fish

Kill Counts[]