Quentin Tarantino and Uma Thurman found fame together when the actress starred in the former’s iconic 1994 film Pulp Fiction. Portraying the character of The Bride in the Kill Bill franchise, Thurman became an iconic actress to be reckoned with.

Advertisement

During her days of success with the Kill Bill franchise, Uma Thurman turned down an offer to play a role in Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings trilogy. Regretting the move, Thurman revealed that it was one of the worst decisions in her life!

Uma Thurman Turned Down A Major Role In Peter Jackson’s Trilogy!

Starring veteran actors like Viggo Mortensen, Sir Ian McKellen, and, Orlando Bloom alongside several others, Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings was a once-in-a-lifetime event that the world got to witness in the early 2000s.

Advertisement

Having hundreds of extras and 10s of lead characters, there were multiple actors and actresses who either turned down the role or fumbled their audition (just look at Jake Gyllenhaal). Speaking on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert, Uma Thurman revealed that she was also one of the actresses who turned down a role in Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings trilogy. Regretting the decision, Thurman revealed that it was a very major role that she was offered and that she should have taken it.

As per the reports and rumors, Thurman was offered the role of Éowyn, the brave Rohan princess who fought at the Battle of Pelennor Fields alongside her father King Theoden. Well, the role was portrayed by Miranda Otto, but it could have very well gone to Uma Thurman if she had said yes!

“It was a very long time ago, and I do consider it one of the worst decisions ever made. But I had just had my first child, and I just…I was a little housebound.”

Thurman further revealed that moving to New Zealand for three years was also a little tough for her. She ended her talks by admitting that passing on the movie was “definitely a regret”. Unlike Peter Jackson, Uma Thurman chose Quentin Tarantino’s films but as the two fell apart, Thurman revealed that Tarantino had evolved over the years.

Advertisement

The Kill Bill Actress Feels Quentin Tarantino Has Changed!

Working alongside the director back in 1994 when John Travolta and Samuel L. Jackson’s Pulp Fiction was released, Thurman found comfort in working with Tarantino. In an interview (via IndieWire), Thurman revealed that after the success of Pulp Fiction, Tarantino’s style of directing changed.

“I think it was probably the last film Quentin made that was on schedule, where he actually tried to make his days and make his weeks. I think after that, it’s been pretty improvisational for him.”

Later on, Thurman went on to work alongside the veteran director again in the iconic Kill Bill franchise which earned millions at the box office.

Starring Uma Thurman in the lead role, Kill Bill Vol. 1 and Kill Bill Vol. 2 are available to stream on Netflix in the U.S.