Marc Elihu Hofstadter was born in New York City in 1945. He received his B.A. in French Literature from Swarthmore College in 1967 and his Ph.D. in Literature from the University of California at Santa Cruz in 1975. He taught American literature at Santa Cruz, the Université d’Orléans (on a Fulbright Lectureship) and Tel Aviv University. In1980 he received his Master’s degree in Library and Information Studies from the University of California at Berkeley, and from 1982 to 2005 served as the Librarian of the City and County of San Francisco’s transit agency, the San Francisco Municipal Railway. *Dr. Hofstadter wrote ten previous volumes of poetry— House of Peace (Mother’s Hen Press, 1999), Visions (Scarlet Tanager Press, 2001), Shark’s Tooth (Regent Press, 2006), Luck (Scarlet Tanager Press, 2008), Rising at 5 AM (Latitude Press, 2010), Memories I’ve Forgotten (Dog Ear Publishing, 2014), Autumnal (self-published, 2019), Life Is Its Own Meaning (self-published, 2020), The Brass Ring (self-published, 2020), Poems Old and Older (unpublished, 2021) and a volume of essays entitled Healing the Split: The Collected Essays of Marc Elihu Hofstadter (Dog Ear Publishing, 2011). All of the published works are available at amazon.com. His poems, essays and translations of French poems appeared in over sixty magazines. He was a member of one of the United States’ leading intellectual families. His uncle Robert Hofstadter won the Nobel Prize in physics, his cousin Douglas Hofstadter was awarded the Pulitzer Prize. His father was a professor of philosophy at Columbia University and three other universities. His mother Manya Huber was an award winning concert pianist and his uncle Samuel Huber was a noted painter. Dr. Hofstadter lived with his partner, the paper doll artist David Zurlin, in the retirement community of Rossmoor in Walnut Creek, California, where he initiated and led groups of seniors in the art of writing poetry. He struggled valiantly to complete The Miracle Garden during the last six months of his life. It gave him great pleasure to put together this volume containing his own selection of what he considered the best poems from his many books. *Please note: David Zurlin is the copyright holder for all of Dr. Hofstadter's books.

Leer la biografía completa