About Us

Cunningham Broadcasting Corporation is an independent television broadcast company that, together with its subsidiaries, owns and/or operates 20 television stations in eighteen markets across the United States. Cunningham, (formerly Glencairn, Ltd. prior to 2002) is a Maryland corporation and is headquartered in Baltimore, Maryland.

Cunningham currently owns the Federal Communications Commission broadcast license and operates WTAT-TV, the Fox affiliate in Charleston, South Carolina, WWCP-TV, the Fox affiliate in Johnstown/Altoona/State College, Pennsylvania, and KTXD-TV in Dallas, Texas.

Cunningham Broadcasting owns the Federal Communications Commission broadcast license and operates WATM-TV, the ABC affiliate, through an interim operating agreement with Palm Television, in Johnstown/Altoona/State College, Pennsylvania.

Cunningham owns the FCC broadcast license and operates through a management agreement with Nexstar Broadcasting Group, Inc. WYZZ-TV, the Fox affiliate in Peoria, Illinois.

Cunningham Broadcasting owns the FCC broadcast licenses and operates through various management agreements with Sinclair Broadcast Group, Inc. WNUV-TV in Baltimore, Maryland; WTTE-TV in Columbus, Ohio; WMYA-TV in Anderson, South Carolina; WRGT-TV in Dayton, Ohio; WVAH-TV in Charleston, West Virginia; WDBB-TV in Bessemer, Alabama; WBSF-TV in Flint, Michigan; WGTU-TV in Traverse City, Michigan; KBVU-TV in Eureka, California; KCVU-TV in Chico-Redding, California; WEMT-TV in Greeneville, Tennessee; WPFO-TV in Portland, Maine; WYDO-TV in Greenville, North Carolina; and KRNV-TV & KENV-TV in Reno, Nevada.

Leadership Team

Michael Anderson

President and CEO

Michael Anderson is the President and Chief Executive Officer of Cunningham Broadcasting Corporation where he oversees the operations of numerous television stations. Michael came to Cunningham in 2009 with over 25 years of experience in investment banking, mostly in the media and communications industry. Prior to joining Cunningham, Michael held various senior management positions at Bear Stearns, Merril Lynch Citgroup, and Kidder Peabody. Michael is a graduate of Cornell University and received his MBA from the Columbia Business School. Prior to business school Michael was a Lt. in the US Navy.