Joining our production, engineering or administrative teams at our headquarters has many perks, including hand-crafting the world’s best-selling SR Series and the Collier Trophy-winning Vision Jet from start to finish. But, one of the primary perks is the opportunity to live in Duluth, Minnesota.

Located on the rugged shore of Lake Superior and the Minnesota/Wisconsin border, Duluth was tabbed by Outside Magazine as the “best town in America” due to its abundance of natural beauty, active lifestyle opportunities and entrepreneurial spirit. Duluth has been the home of our company since 1994 and the city continues to serve as the backbone of our global manufacturing operations – and we are very proud to say that every Cirrus aircraft is made in the United States, just one state away from where Cirrus Aircraft was born in 1984.

A vast port city, Duluth is the largest harbor located on Lake Superior which provides our manufacturing operations with a distinct advantage in terms of transportation and logistics. But, there is much more to the Duluth area than just convenience. This “Zenith City” is a true Midwest hidden gem that uniquely combines quaint natural beauty, stunning nautical views of the Great Lakes and an impressive array of urban amenities.

If you are considering joining our team, we’ve compiled a list of the many reasons we love living and working in Duluth. And, if you need more information or recommendations from a local, connect with us on LinkedIn and we’d be happy to help!

A Smorgasbord of Outdoor Activities

Enjoying the outdoors is what Duluth is all about. The city features 129 parks and 6,834 acres of parkland that is intentionally designed for hiking, cross-country skiing, horseback riding, mountain biking and more. The Superior Hiking Trail spans almost the entire length of the city. Park Point stands out as an incredible location for swimming and cross-country skiing. And, Boundary Waters Canoe area attracts over 100,000 water sports enthusiasts annually.

An Emphasis on Culinary Arts

Duluth’s burgeoning food and drink scene is rooted in brewing, baking and, maybe surprisingly, smoked meats. Duluth legends Vikre Distillery, Lake Avenue Restaurant and Bar, New Scenic Café, Duluth’s Best Bread and Northern Waters Smokehaus top our list of incredible dining options in town.

Abundant Entertainment Options

Duluth’s Amsoil Arena, Bayfront Festival Park and the Duluth Entertainment and Convention Center attract top entertainment talent from around the world. The Duluth Airshow, Bayfront Reggae & World Music Festival, John Beargrease Sled Dog Marathon, Duluth Drag Races and Car Show and AMSOIL SnoCross National make for incredible, must-experience annual events.

Stunning Scenic Neighborhoods Lake Superior’s stunning scenery can be enjoyed from almost every area of Duluth’s city limits. Historic Lakeside’s close proximity to nearby Lester Park’s hiking and groomed cross-country trails make it an outdoor lover’s paradise. Lincoln Park is quickly becoming known for its rapidly expanding culinary scene. And, Hermantown stands out as a tremendous option for a suburban environment.