The Royal Netherlands Air Force (RNLAF) is the air force protecting the Kingdom of Netherlands from any aerial threats. It is currently part of the United Nations and National Tranquility Organisation . Its Discord server can be found here.

Recruitment[]

Those wanting to join the RNLAF are required to visit the organisation's Discord server. They can then open a ticket, where they will be interviewed.

Those wanting to join the RNLN must specify so. For more information visit the RNLN page.

RNLAF squadrons[]

The RNLAF operates 8 total squadrons, with 2 fighter squadrons. 1 heavy bombardment, 1 rotor, 1 utility and 2 interceptor squadrons.

Squadron Name Role Commander Aircraft Flown 322 Koning Squadron Fighter Split, Koning der Nederlanden F-15C 312 Lion Squadron Fighter Cdre. Shiba F-15C 316 Aphrodite Squadron Interception Gen. Volkel F-35A 323 Diana Squadron Bombing Maj. Gen. 3021 F-35A 334 Kestrel Squadron Utility Gen. Volkel KDC-10, C-130, C-295 306 Black Hatters Squadron Aerobatic Gen. Volkel F-16 315 Rapid Jager Squadron Rapid Response TBD F-35A 637 Rotorcraft Squadron Drones/Helicopters Maj. Gen. 3021 MQ-9, Apache

Royal Netherlands Navy[]

The RNLAF works hand in hand with the RNLN which was formerly recognized in the WTO. They assisted each other in the Dutch annexation of Japan in the WTO.

History[]

Creation []

The RNLAF was created by General Concorde on the 7th of February to secure the Netherlands Air Space and make it safe. It soon began to gain members and became quite active.

First General Command[]

The first general command of the RNLAF was formed with Concorde in the middle. Concorde, of course, became the first CIC of RNLAF with LoneWolf737 as 2IC and Züwling as 3IC. There were also other important generals such as Bgen. Manek (D-2)(RNLAF)(IAF) and Dawson. At this period the only war the RNLAF currently experienced happened, the Belgium Madness War.

Decrease in Activity[]

The RNLAF became severely inactive starting from November. With Concorde becoming the only one active in the RNLAF. Concorde soon decided to take a break in GeoFS saying that she would come back within 3 years (by 2022).

Second General Command[]

After the retirement of Concorde and RNLAF losing activity Dawson decided to take control of the RNLAF, even though it is considered illegal as neither Concorde or RNLAF members weren't notified of the situation. Dawson is known for leaving the RNLAF server for some reason and then never creating a new one.

Third General Command[]

Not long after Dawson supposedly took control of RNLAF Concorde came online on discord for a short visit. After she heard about the news of Dawson taking control of RNLAF with nor his or his high command's approval and soon appointed Supreme1004 as the CIC of RNLAF. Soon Dawson was forced to resign from the rank of RNLAF CIC and Supreme officially became the CIC of RNLAF. After Supreme took control he immediately started a massive server and rank remap. ACMshl. A. James became the 2IC who helped a lot with setting and reorganizing the server and Fluttert became 3IC. After that, he started a massive recruit which helped out regain its activity. After things settled down the RNLAF HC decided to start another remap which created the Royal Netherlands Navy and the Netherlands Space Office and Supreme went off to become the PM of Netherlands. James and Fluttert took the CIC and 2IC's spot. AMshl. Gurses is the RNLAF's current 2IC Until Concorde rejoined on the 3rd of March of 2020, when Concorde came out of retirement. ACMshl. A. James had retired for a brief period in August 2020, making Fluttert the new CIC. James. has recently come out of retirement, becoming the 3IC and the Netherlands CIO.

Forth General Command[]

ACMsh. A. James and ACMsh. Fluttert retired from the Royal Netherlands Air Force and MRP due to in real life issues. DPM. Supreme immediately began searching for a new RNLAF HC team. In result the RNLAF had a massive reforms on its squadron and HC team. The position of Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister became non existent and PM. Concorde and DPM. Supreme stepped down and became the CIC and 2IC of RNLAF while AVM. Slap and ACdr. SpaceRage took the spot of 3IC and CIO of the Royal Netherlands Air Force.

Fifth General Command[]

The Forth General Command was considered to be a failure as RNLAF HC Activity decreased by a lot. How ever RNLAF was quick to respond with the situation. CIC. Concorde stepped down from the position of Commander in Chief retiring from RNLAF entirely while AVM. Slap, AVM. Phoenix and ACdr. SpaceRage retired as well. 2IC. Supreme became the CIC of RNLAF while Dylan became the 2IC of RNLAF along with EnZed becoming the 3IC of RNLAF. Furthermore Thunderbolt took the spot of AVM. This massive reform once again helped RNLAf regain its activity. With RNLAF stabilized there has been a few changes in the RNLAF such as 3IC. Enzed retiring from post. The fifth general command was finalized when CIC. Supreme stepped down from the rank of CIC handing it over to Dylan while he himself became Air Commodore Supreme. AVM. Thunderbolt became the new 2IC while AVM.Slap came out of retirement reclaiming the rank of AVM along with a promotion to 3IC. The Fight General Command showed major success with RNLAF winning strategic wars which further increased the reputation and capabilities of the RNLAF.

Sixth General Command[]

The Sixth General Command is considered to be the 'Golden Age' of the RNLAF, with CIC Dylan and King Konrad leading the RNLAF through victory after victory. Activity went up, as did recruiting. Dragon168 was the 3IC of the RNLAF before stepping down to allow Split to fill the spot. Soon after however, Volkel became 3IC and Leader of the Air Force and Navy. Dylan started as Queen of The Netherlands, before abdicating her throne to Konrad, and in turn she became the CDS. High Command saw many newcomers from other Air Forces, and the power began to be distributed. However, activity decreased little by little, and Dylan and Konrad both retired within days of each other, naming Prince Split to become King and 3IC Volkel to become the CIC of the RNLAF. Both Dylan and Konrad were awarded the Star of William, the highest honor in the RNLAF, and became Honorary RNLAF members.

Achievements[]

The RNLAF has had many achievements in its long history, Some notable examples are:

- Victory in Both Russo-Ukraine wars - Annexation of Belgium

- Victory in the ATO-Warsaw Pact War - Annexation of Luxembourg

- Victory in the Dutch-Anglo war - Annexation of Germany and Taiwan

And many more

Relations[]

The Netherlands is friendly with almost every nation in the UN, save for neutral relations with the GBE(Great British Empire)

Royal Canadian Air Force - Non-Aggression Pact

French Air Force- Non-Aggression Pact, Defense Pact

Russian Federal Aerospace Forces- Non-Aggression Pact

Italian Air Force- Non-Aggression Pact

Royal Australian Air Force- Non-Aggression Pact

UN United States Air Force- Non-Aggression Pact

Countries Interested in relations should dm Konrad (🇳🇱)#7030

Dutch Royal Family[]

The Royal Family is now head by King Split after King Konrad retired and abdicated his Kingship. Princess Khalifa is also next in line of succession.

Signatures:[]

Dylan, Crown Princess of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Belgium and provinces of Luxembourg and Denmark. Chief of Defense of the Netherlands Armed Forces.

His Majesty Konrad, King of the Netherlands, Prince of Orange-Nassau, etc.

Territory[]

The Netherlands currently operates in the mainland Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, France, Indonesia and its territories in the Dutch Caribbean.

Conflicts (wars and diplomacy)[]