Afghanistan is located in the subtropics of the northern hemisphere, although the northern part of the country already belongs to the temperate climate zone. The landlocked Central Asian country has a continental climate due to its altitude and distance from the sea. Winters are generally cold and summers very hot, with temperature differences sometimes exceeding 30 degrees between day and night. Due to the geographical differences, however, there are significant regional differences.

The north-eastern part of Afghanistan is in the Hindu Kush mountains. Here, winters are cold with average temperatures of -4 to 1°C, while summers tend to be mild with average temperatures of 18 to 25°C. However, it gets progressively colder at higher altitudes. Extreme temperatures below -50°C have also been measured in the high mountains.

The further south you go, the flatter the country becomes and the temperatures also rise significantly. Already in Kabul, temperatures often reach 35°C in summer. In winter, however, temperatures there are still frequently well below zero. In January 2023, Kabul suffered from a cold spell that resulted in numerous deaths at minus 30 degrees. The long-term average temperatures at this time are only a few degrees below zero.

Around Kandahar there is already a distinct desert climate. In winter, temperatures drop to as low as 5°C at night, while they range between 30 and 40°C during the day in summer. Humidity decreases significantly from here and precipitation is rare.

The type and amount of precipitation varies considerably in Afghanistan. Most of the moisture is brought in winter and spring by the westerly winds from the Atlantic and the Mediterranean. The northern mountains cool the humid air masses and force them to rise. As a result, rain and snow are most frequent in the mountainous regions, while there is almost no precipitation in the dry south. From June onwards, precipitation decreases drastically and it becomes very dry. The Nimroz region in the southwest is the driest in Afghanistan, with less than 100 mm of precipitation per year.

Hours of sunshine per day

Rain days per month

Precipitation in mm/day

Relative humidity in %

Absolute humidity in g/m³

Temperature records of the last 47 years

The hottest temperature measured from 1967 to December 2014 was reported by the Kandahar Airport weather station. In August 2009, the record temperature of 44.2 °C was reported here. The hottest meteorological summer from June to August, based on all 5 weather stations in Afghanistan below 1,790 meters altitude, was recorded in 1990 with an average temperature of 33.0 °C. This average temperature will normally be measured every four to six hours, thus also including the nights. Normally, this value is 29.2 degrees Celsius.

The coldest day in these 47 years was reported by the Herat weather station. Here the temperature dropped to -23.4 °C in January 2008. Herat lies at an altitude of 964 meters above sea level. The coldest winter (December to February) was in 1991 with an average temperature of 3.1 °C. In Afghanistan, it is usual to have about 4.5 degrees more at 7.6 °C for this three-month period.

The most precipitation fell in February 1982. With 5.6 mm per day, the Kandahar Airport weather station recorded the highest monthly average of the last 47 years.

Data basis and methodology

The data from the individual measuring stations are based on the archives of the German Weather Service, individual values averaged and supplemented by own elements. In order to determine a representative national average, average values were first calculated for each part of the country, which were then summarized at the national level. Thus, if a disproportionate number of weather stations are located in a small area, their number does not affect the national average. There are 6 stations in Afghanistan itself. In 3 cases, neighboring but nearby weather stations were also used to obtain more accurate values.