Weather overview

Kabul (Afghanistan) in general has a mild continental climate. The day temperatures range from 5Â Â°CÂ (41Â Â°F) in January to 34Â Â°CÂ (93Â Â°F) in July. The least rainy month in Kabul is October with its 3Â days of rain, the rainiest month is March, when it rains 9Â days. The highest night temperatures could be experienced in July with 17Â Â°CÂ (63Â Â°F), the lowest in January with -7Â Â°CÂ (19Â Â°F).

January weather

The day temperature reaches its minimum, with its value being 5Â Â°CÂ (41Â Â°F) in Kabul, and the minimum of the night temperature can be noticed as well in January. The number of rainy days starts to rise, with its value being 5Â days, while the rise of the rainfall amount can be observed, the value of this measure is 39Â mmÂ (1.52Â in). The number of sun hours (without clouds) is on its minimum, with its value of 6Â hours.

February weather

The number of rainy days rises similarly to the previous month, its value is 7Â days in Kabul, and the rainfall amount continues to rise too, the value of this measure is 61Â mmÂ (2.41Â in). The day temperature starts to rise, with its value being 7Â Â°CÂ (45Â Â°F), and the night temperature rise's start could be observed as well, with its value being -4Â Â°CÂ (24Â Â°F). The beginning of the rise of the number of sun hours (without clouds) could be noticed in February. The maximum of the humidity can be noticed, with its value being 68Â %.

March weather

The day temperature continues to rise, the value of this measure is 13Â Â°CÂ (56Â Â°F) in Kabul, and the rise of the night temperature can be observed as well, with its value being 2Â Â°CÂ (35Â Â°F). The maximum of the number of rainy days can be noticed, the value of this measure is 9Â days, and the maximum of the rainfall amount is observable too, the value of this measure is 67Â mmÂ (2.65Â in). The number of sun hours (without clouds) continues to rise, with its value of 6Â hours.

April weather

The rise of the day temperature can be observed, with its value of 20Â Â°CÂ (67Â Â°F) in Kabul, and the rise of the night temperature can be observed as well, the value of this measure is 7Â Â°CÂ (44Â Â°F). The rainfall amount starts to descent, the value of this measure is 62Â mmÂ (2.43Â in), and the number of rainy days starts to descent as well, with its value of 8Â days. The rise of the number of sun hours (without clouds) can be observed, with its value being 7Â hours.

May weather

The descent of the number of rainy days can be observed, with its value of 6Â days in Kabul, and the rainfall amount descents similarly to the previous month as well, its value is 25Â mmÂ (1.00Â in). The day temperature continues to rise, the value of this measure is 25Â Â°CÂ (78Â Â°F), and the night temperature rises similarly to the previous month too, with its value being 10Â Â°CÂ (50Â Â°F). The number of sun hours (without clouds) rises similarly to the previous month, the value of this measure is 10Â hours.

June weather

The tourist season is at its beginning this month in Kabul. The day temperature continues to rise, its value is 32Â Â°CÂ (89Â Â°F), and the night temperature rises similarly to the previous month as well, its value is 15Â Â°CÂ (58Â Â°F). The descent of the number of rainy days can be observed, the value of this measure is 3Â days, while the rainfall amount is on its minimum in this month. The number of sun hours (without clouds) is on its maximum, with its value of 11Â hours.

July weather

The maximum of the day temperature is observable, with its value of 34Â Â°CÂ (93Â Â°F) in Kabul, and the maximum of the night temperature is observable too, its value is 17Â Â°CÂ (63Â Â°F). The beginning of the rise of the number of rainy days could be noticed in July. There is pending tourist season, and the dry season is close to its peak as well. The number of sun hours (without clouds) starts to descent.

August weather

The beginning of the descent of the day temperature could be noticed in Kabul, and the beginning of the descent of the night temperature could be noticed as well, the value of this measure is 16Â Â°CÂ (60Â Â°F). The ongoing tourist season is noticeable. The rise of the number of rainy days can be observed, with its value of 5Â days. The number of sun hours (without clouds) continues to descent, its value is 10Â hours.

September weather

The descent of the day temperature can be observed, its value is 29Â Â°CÂ (84Â Â°F) in Kabul, and the night temperature continues to descent too, with its value of 11Â Â°CÂ (51Â Â°F). There is pending tourist season, while the dry season is about to start. The number of rainy days descent's start could be observed. The number of sun hours (without clouds) continues to descent, its value is 10Â hours.

October weather

There is pending tourist season in Kabul, and the dry season continues too. The day temperature continues to descent, with its value of 22Â Â°CÂ (72Â Â°F), and the night temperature descents similarly to the previous month as well, with its value of 4Â Â°CÂ (40Â Â°F). The descent of the number of sun hours (without clouds) can be observed, with its value of 9Â hours. The minimum of the number of rainy days is observable, with its value being 3Â days.

November weather

The day temperature descents similarly to the previous month, with its value of 14Â Â°CÂ (58Â Â°F) in Kabul, and the descent of the night temperature can be observed too, with its value of -1Â Â°CÂ (30Â Â°F). There is pending dry season. The rainfall amount rise's start could be observed, with its value being 16Â mmÂ (0.63Â in). The descent of the number of sun hours (without clouds) can be observed, with its value being 8Â hours. The wind speed is on its minimum, with its value being 1.

December weather

The rainfall amount continues to rise, the value of this measure is 24Â mmÂ (0.93Â in) in Kabul. The descent of the day temperature can be observed, with its value being 8Â Â°CÂ (46Â Â°F), and the night temperature descents similarly to the previous month too, with its value being -5Â Â°CÂ (23Â Â°F). The dry season is taking place. The descent of the number of sun hours (without clouds) can be observed, with its value being 6Â hours. The minimum of the day length is observable in this month.

How humid is Kabul in March?

In Kabul in March, expect humidity around 63Â %.

Is April part of the dry season in Kabul?

No, April is not a dry month in Kabul, expect rain approximately 8Â days in a month.

How many hours of sun to expect in Kabul in May?

In May in Kabul, you can expect around 10Â hours of sunshine. This value is 2Â hours higher than last month. This means that the value difference is 30Â %.

Are there good conditions to visit in June in Kabul?

June is one of the best months to visit Kabul. The daily temperatures in this month reach pleasant 32Â Â°CÂ (89Â Â°F). You can expect just 3Â days of rain during the month, taking an umbrella is not necessary. The temperature of 15Â Â°CÂ (58Â Â°F) at night may make it better to dine inside or to put on more clothes for a dinner outside.

Is July part of the wet season in Kabul?

No, there is no wet season in Kabul in July - you can expect 4Â days of rain during the month.

How many days of precipitation on average can I expect in August in Kabul?

In Kabul in August, we can expect 5Â days to be rainy, that is, days when precipitation exceeds 2Â mmÂ (0.08Â in). Converted to days of the week, this means that it will occur on an average of 1.1Â days of the week, or in general - 15Â % days.

Is it hot in September in Kabul?

In Kabul in September, you will enjoy nice warm weather, but it will also be pleasant and you probably won't feel hot.

What is the temperature in Kabul during the day in October?

The average daily temperature in October in Kabul is 22Â Â°CÂ (72Â Â°F). A comfortable temperature for most people, where it is neither too cold nor too hot, and a large number of activities can be carried out comfortably, including sunbathing by the water. The value is lower by 7Â Â°CÂ (44Â Â°F) than in the previous month. Lighter clothing will be suitable - shorts, skirts, t-shirts, jackets; a light sweater and long trousers may also be useful.

What is the air temperature in November in Kabul at night?

The average night temperature in Kabul in November is -1Â Â°CÂ (30Â Â°F). The nights will be cool, layers of clothes will be needed for evening and morning walks, the hotel should be equipped with heating. The value is lower by 5Â Â°CÂ (42Â Â°F) than in the previous month.

How windy is Kabul in December?

An average wind scale that can be expected in December in Kabul is 2. It is rather a milder or unnoticeable wind, therefore it will not bother you during your holiday.