HISTORICAL MONTHLY AVERAGES FOR AUGUST

The information presented below gives detailed historical monthly average weather conditions along with exceptional weather occurrences. To maintain relevance to current weather trends the displayed information has been calculated using data collected over the past two decades. The climate profile is taken from closest available data source to Kabul.

Temperature

Throughout the month of August daytime temperatures will generally reach highs of around 37°C that's about 99°F. At night the average minimum temperature drops down to around 19°C, that's 66°F.

In recent times the highest recorded temperature in August has been 45°C that's 113°F, with the lowest recorded temperature 8°C, about 47°F.

Relative Humidity

The average daily relative humidity for August is around 33%.

Heat Index

The Heat Index is a measure of how hot it feels when relative humidity is added to actual air temperature. From this a comfort level is calculated providing categories on how heat conditions might adversely affect someone.

Comfort Levels: Given average maximum temperatures and humidity levels generally you should not anticipate any discomfort from heat (see heat index for more information).

Precipitation

The average monthly amount of precipitation has been recorded at around 0 mm, that's 0 inches. Throughout the month you can expect to see rain or drizzle falling on 0 days of the month.

Estimated Hours of Sunshine per Day

We calculate sunshine hours per day using our past forecast data. For August expect the sun to shine for an average of 13 hours per day. This represents the average number of hours in the daytime that the sun is visible and not obscured by cloud e.g. the average number of hours the sun is actually out and shining. Note we calculate hours of sunshine per day using our past forecast data, not observation data, thus it is an estimate and not actual.

Wind

The average daily wind speed in August has been around 10 km/h, that’s the equivalent to about 6 mph, or 5 knots. In recent years the maximum sustained wind speed has reached 87 km/h, that’s the equivalent of around 54 mph, or 47 knots.

Fog

On average the month of August is not affected by foggy conditions.