The Keisei Main Line is a railway line that runs between Keisei Ueno Station in Tokyo and Narita Airport. The line connects Tokyo with several cities in Chiba Prefecture.

This line is operated by the private railway company Keisei Electric Railway, so it is not covered by the Japan Rail Pass. At Keisei Ueno Station trains depart from platforms 1, 2, 3 and 4.

Key Destinations

There are 42 stations on the Keisei Main Line.

Keisei Ueno – Nippori – Shim-Mikawashima – Machiya – Senjuohashi – Keisei Sekiya – Horikirishobuen – Ohanajaya – Aoto – Keisei Takasago – Keisei Koiwa – Edogawa – Konodai – Ichikawamama – Sugano – Keisei Yawata – Onigoe – Keisei Nakayama – Higashi-Nakayama – Keisei Nishifuna – Kaijin – Keisei Funabashi – Daijingushita – Funabashikeibajo – Yatsu – Keisei Tsudanuma – Keisei Okubo – Mimomi – Yachiyodai – Keisei Owada – Katsutadai – Shizu – Yukarigaoka – Keisei Usui – Keisei Sakura – Osakura – Keisei Shisui – Sogosando – Kozunomori – Keisei Narita – Narita Airport Terminal 2·3 – Narita Airport Terminal 1

The main destinations of interest and transfer points are listed below. Example train fares and train times for local trains are given from Keisei Ueno Station.

Keisei Ueno Station

Ueno’s attractions include Ueno Zoo, Ueno Park and the large number of museums that are inside the park. Ueno is also a busy commercial district with shopping malls, department stores, and plenty of bargain stores along the Ameya-Yokocho shopping street. There is also a large mall with shopping and dining facilities within the JR Ueno Station building.

Keisei Main Line passengers can transfer at Ueno to a number of rail services for easy access to all parts of the city and there also several regional services.

JR Ueno Station is a 4 minute walk from Keisei Ueno Station. Here passengers can transfer to the Yamanote Line which connects most of the major areas of Tokyo in a loop. Other JR lines here are the Keihin-Tohoku, Utsunomiya, Takasaki, Joban, and Ueno-Tokyo lines.

Regional bullet train services here are the Tohoku Shinkansen, Yamagata Shinkansen, Akita Shinkansen, Joetsu Shinkansen, Hokkaido Shinkansen, and Hokuriku Shinkansen.

Tokyo Metro’s subway station is also just a 4 minute walk from Keisei Ueno Station and here you can access the Ginza Line for Asakusa, Ginza and Shibuya, and the Hibiya Line for Ginza, Roppongi, Nakameguro and Kita-Senju.

Nippori Station

Nippori Station is convenient for the traditional shopping street of Yanaka Ginza, Yanaka cemetery (a cherry blossom viewing spot), Tennoji Temple which was first established in 1274, and the view from “Yuyake Dandan” (the “Sunset Stairs”).

Transfer at Nippori Station to JR East’s Yamanote Line, Keihin-Tohoku Line, and Joban Line, the Keisei Main Line, and the Nippori-Toneri Liner. Skyliner passengers coming from Narita Airport will usually transfer to the Yamanote Line here.

Machiya Station

Arakawa Nature Park is a 5 minute walk from this station. The park has lawns, ponds, flower beds, a wildflower garden, tennis courts, a baseball field, a children’s playground, and a swimming pool.

An unusual attraction in this area is the Nurie Museum which is dedicated to the history of coloring pictures, and particularly to those coloring pictures created by the artist Kiichi Tsutaya between the years 1945-65. The museum is a 12 minute walk from Machiya Station.

Transfer at Machiya Station to the Tokyo Metro Chiyoda Line and at Machiya-ekimae Station to the Toden Arakawa Tramline.

Senjuohashi Station

Sekido Museum of Art is a 3 minute walk from this station. This museum mainly exhibits ceramics, metalwork, lacquerware and sculptures. The surrounding Senju district has many busy shopping streets and old alleyways lined with bars and restaurants. Download an English language map and guide to the Senju area.

Keisei Sekiya Station

Transfer to the Tobu Skytree Line at nearby Ushida Station.

Horikirishobuen Station

This station is named after the Horikiri Iris Garden which is a nine minute walk to the south. There are around 6,000 iris flowers here which bloom in early to mid-June.

Ohanajaya Station

Exit here for Katsushika City Museum. This museum exhibits local history and culture and also includes a planetarium and an observatory with a large telescope. The museum is an 8 minute walk from the station.

Aoto Station

Katsushika Symphony Hills is a cultural center with a number of multi-purpose halls used which are used mainly for musical performances. This venue is a 7 minute walk from Aoto Station.

Keisei Takasago Station

Keisei Takasago Station is also served by the Narita Sky Access Line, the Keisei Kanamachi Line, and the Hokuso Railway Line.

Edogawa Station

Koiwa Iris Garden is a 3 minute walk from Edogawa Station. Here 50,000 multi-colored iris flowers come into bloom from early to mid-June.

Konodai Station

This station is a 12 minute walk from the Kiuchi Gallery. The Kiuchi Gallery is a historical Western-style building built in the early 20th century as the residence of the politician Kiuchi Jushiro. Now the house is a cultural center that hosts exhibitions and events. Yoshizawa Garden Gallery is another art museum with spacious gardens just 15 minutes from Konodai Station and 9 minutes from the Kiuchi Gallery.

Ichikawamama Station

Exit here for I-Link Town Observation Deck. This open-air deck is on the 45th floor of a high-rise block called “The Towers West” and is free to enter. The deck is 150 meters high and offers a panoramic view over Ichikawa and Tokyo with a clear view over the Edogawa River, and if the weather is good, both Mount Fuji and Tokyo Skytree can be seen very clearly. For a perfect photograph of the Tokyo skyline this is the place to come. I-Link Town is a 9 minute walk south of Ichikawamama Station.

Keisei Yawata Station

Exit here for Katsushika Hachimangu Shrine. The shrine was founded in the 9th century and is dedicated to the god of war, so many military rulers such as the shogun Tokugawa Ieyasu (1543-1616) prayed here. Inside the shrine grounds is a gingko tree called senbon-icho or “thousand trunk gingko” which is believed to be 1,200 years old. The tree has many trunks which grew after the main trunk was broken by a lightning strike. This tree is a nationally designated Natural Monument. There is also an avenue of (much younger) gingko trees leading to the shrine which turn a vivid yellow in the autumn. The gate of the shrine is designated by Ichikawa City as a tangible cultural property and was previously a Buddhist temple gate until temples and shrines were separated by law during the 19th century. The shrine gate is a 4 minute walk from Keisei Yawata Station.

Keisei Yawata Station is a 4 minute walk from Motoyawata Station which is served by the JR Chuo-Sobu Line and the Toei Shinjuku Line.

Onigoe Station

Exit here for Chiba Museum of Science and Industry. The museum provides an entertaining introduction to the world of science and technology which is suitable for children and adults. As well as interactive science displays and exhibits on the history of industry, there is a science stage for live experiments and demonstrations, a lightning hall for high voltage electrical displays, and a planetarium for a spectacular astronomy show. The museum is an 11 minute walk from Onigoe Station.

Keisei Nakayama Station

Exit here for the Higashiyama Kaii Memorial Hall and for Hokekyoji temple.

Higashiyama Kaii Memorial Hall is a 13 minute walk from Keisei Nakayama Station. This museum is dedicated to the life and work of Higashiyama Kaii, a 20th century artist who is famous for the dream-like images of his Nihonga paintings.

Hokekyoji Temple was established in the year 1260 and has several designated Important Cultural Properties including the 5-storied red pagoda which dates from 1622. The temple is a 10 minute walk from Keisei Nakayama Station.

Keisei Funabashi Station

This station is a 3 minute walk from Funabashi Station which is served by JR East’s Chuo-Sobu Line and Sobu Line, and the Tobu Urban Park Line.

Daijingushita Station

Exit here for Funabashi Daijingu Shrine (also called Oohi Jinja Shrine). This is the oldest shrine in the city of Funabashi and according to legend it dates back to the year 110. The original shrine was destroyed by fire in 1873, but was rebuilt over a long period between 1873 and 1985. Among the current buildings is an unusual wooden lighthouse which was built in 1880 in a mixture of Western and Japanese styles. This is the largest privately owned lighthouse in Japan and is designated as a tangible cultural property by Chiba Prefecture. The shrine festival is held on October 19th and 20th and includes an amateur sumo wrestling contest. The shrine is a 5 minute walk from Daijingushita Station.

Funabashikeibajo Station

Funabashi Racecourse is a 6 minute walk from this station.

Yatsu Station

Exit here for Yatsu Rose Garden. This is a large, peaceful park with 7,500 rose bushes of 800 varieties, walkways, archways, and fountains. The rose garden is a 7 minute walk from Yatsu Station. Just beyond the rose garden are the wetlands of the Yatsu Higata Tidal Flat. This is a nature preserve and a very good location for observing wild birds. Yatsu Higata Nature Observation Center is on the south side of the tidal flat and is a 23 minute walk from Yatsu Station. The center has instructors, an exhibition space, an observation area, and a tearoom.

Keisei Tsudanuma Station

Transfer here to the Keisei Chiba Line and the Shin-Keisei Line.

Katsutadai Station

This station is a 4 minute walk from Toyo-Katsutadai Station where you can transfer to the Toyo Rapid Railway Line.

Yukarigaoka Station

Transfer here to the Yamaman Yukarigaoka Line.

Keisei Sakura Station

There are a number of sites of cultural interest within walking distance of this station.

Sakura Sightseeing Information Center is a 3 minute walk south of the station and can supply you with maps, information and directions for all of Sakura City’s attractions. They also have a rental cycle service to help you get around town.

The National Museum of Japanese History has exhibits and dedicated to archaeology, Japanese history from the 8th to the 20th centuries, and the culture of folklore. The museum also has a botanical garden which features plants that have played an important role in Japanese culture whether as food, or as materials for clothing, tools, and other everyday needs. The museum is located in Sakura Castle Ruins Park and is a 20 minute walk west of Keisei Sakura Station.

Just south of Sakura Castle Ruins Park are three preserved samurai houses with thatched roofs which are open to the public. In addition to the traditional architecture and gardens, visitors can view antique furnishings, and suits of armor. The samurai houses are an 18 minute walk south of Keisei Sakura Station.

The Tsukamoto Sword Museum has a collection of 400 Japanese katana swords, of which 20 are displayed on a rotating basis. The museum is free to enter but is closed on weekends, Mondays, and public holidays. The museum is a 12 minute walk south of Keisei Sakura Station and a 7 minute walk from the preserved samurai houses.

Sakura City Museum of Art is located in a Western-style red brick former bank building dating from 1918. The museum’s collection features the work of Asai Chu (1856 – 1907) a Western-style painter who was born in Sakura. The museum is a 10 minute walk from the Keisei Sakura Station and a 2 minute walk from the Tsukamoto Sword Museum.

Kyu Hotta-tei (Former Hotta Residence) is a historical house built in 1898 that is a nationally designated Important Cultural Property and its garden, called the Sakura Teien, is a National Place of Scenic Beauty. It is a 24 minute walk from Keisei Sakura Station, and a 16 minute walk from Sakura City Museum of Art.

Sogosando Station

Exit here for Toshoji Temple. This temple is also called Sogoreido after a local hero called Sakura Sogo (1605 – 1653) who complained directly to the shogun about heavy taxes on local poor people, and was then executed. There are displays in the temple telling the story of Sogo’s life. The temple is a 16 minute walk from Sogosando Station.

Keisei Narita Station

This station serves the city of Narita. Narita’s most famous attraction is Naritasan Shinshoji Temple which dates from 940. There are several temple buildings, including the pagoda and main gate, which are nationally designated Important Cultural Properties. This large temple complex holds a number of popular festivals throughout the year. Particularly well known is the Narita Drum Festival in April and the Narita Gion Festival in July. The temple is a 15 minute walk from Keisei Narita Station.

The road that leads to the temple is called Naritsan Omotesando Street and is lined with many historical shops and restaurants selling traditional food and souvenirs. Nearby Naritasan Park is a large scenic public garden which is well known for its plum blossoms in February and March, and for its autumn foliage in the fall.

Transfer at Keisei Narita Station to the Keisei Higashi-Narita Line. Transfer at nearby Narita Station to the JR Narita Line.

Narita Airport Terminal 2·3 Station

Exit here for Terminals 2 and 3. The station itself is located at Terminal 2 but shuttle buses to Terminal 3 take just 5 minutes. This station is jointly run by Keisei Electric Railway and JR East. Keisei Electric Railway run services on the Keisei Main Line and Narita Sky Access Line, and JR East run services on the Narita Line for destinations in Tokyo and Chiba. Passengers can also board the the Narita Express here which is JR East’s alternative high speed service between Narita and central Tokyo.

Narita Airport Terminal 1 Station

Exit here for Terminal 1. This station is jointly operated by Keisei Electric Railway and JR East. Passengers can access services on the Keisei Electric Railway’s Keisei Main Line and Narita Sky Access Line, or JR East’s Narita Line and the Narita Express.

Services

There are a variety of services running on the Keisei Main Line. The main services are Local, Rapid, Limited Express and Rapid Limited Express. Only Local trains stop at all stations. Rapid trains make 27 stops, Limited Express trains make 17 stops and Rapid Limited Express trains make 13 stops.

There is no extra charge for using Rapid Limited Express or Limited Express services, so the full journey between Ueno and Narita Airport costs only 1,030 yen. Rapid limited Express and Limited Express services are quite frequent and can take between 71 – 80 minutes to complete the full journey.

The Access Express and the Keisei Skyliner are the fastest services bound for Narita Airport. These services follow the Keisei Main Line between Keisei Ueno and Keisei Takasago and then join a bypass line called the Narita Sky Access Line. The Access Express has no extra charges and costs 1,240 yen for a journey that can take around 60 – 75 minutes between Ueno and Narita Airport. The Skyliner on the other hand takes only around 44 minutes to make the same journey. However, the Skyliner does have a surcharge so the full fare is 2,470 yen.

The Morningliner and Eveningliner are limited express commuter services that follow the Keisei Main Line but stop at only 9 stations.

Keisei Ueno – Nippori – Aoto – Keisei Funabashi – Yachiyodai – Keisei Sakura – Keisei Narita – Narita Airport Terminal 2·3 – Narita Airport Terminal 1

Morningliner services run from Narita Airport Terminal 1 to Keisei Ueno at 7.50 and 8.40 on weekdays, and 7.44 and 8.35 on weekends and holidays.

Eveningliner services run from Keisei Ueno to Narita Airport and are more frequent. There are departures from Ueno at 18.40, 19.20, 20.00, 21.00, 22.00, and 23.00. These times are the same for weekdays, weekends, and holidays. To use the Morningliner or Eveningliner requires a “Liner ticket” surcharge of 410 yen, so the full fare between Keisei Ueno Station and Narita Airport Terminal 1 is 1,440 yen. These services take between 72 – 78 minutes to complete the full journey between Ueno and Narita Airport.

Discount Tickets

Although the Keisei Railway network is not covered by the Japan Rail Pass, there are a number of economical discount passes that can be used instead.

The Greater Tokyo Pass is a 3-day ticket that provides unlimited rides on the Keisei Railway network together with 11 other private railway companies and 51 bus companies in the designated area. For details check the official Greater Tokyo Pass website.

The Shitamachi Biyori Pass is a 1-day ticket that provides unlimited rides on the Keisei Railway network within the designated area. This pass is useful if you want to explore Tokyo’s “shitamachi” or downtown area, and connects sightseeing locations such as Ueno, Shibamata, and Tokyo Skytree. For more information, download an English language pamphlet.

The Narita Kaiun Pass is a round-trip ticket for Keisei Narita Station. For more information, download an English language pamphlet.

For information on discount tickets for the Keisei Skyliner, please visit the Keisei Railway’s discount tickets webpage.

Useful Links

Download a complete route map of the Keisei Network which shows all the stops for the different services.

Timetables from Narita Airport, Nippori Station, and Keisei Ueno Station can be found on the Keisei Railway website.

Use English language route finders like the Japan Transit Planner and Hyperdia to plan your trips.

Article and original photos by Michael Lambe. All rights reserved.