by Stephen Garrett

“Lulu on the Bridge” is Paul Auster’s directing debut, although 1993’s “The Music

of Chance” was his first script for the screen; and his following experiences

collaborating with director Wayne Wang on 1995’s “Smoke” and “Blue in the Face“

was, he felt, his own film school, during which he learned everything about

the craft that made it possible to undertake his first directing job alone.

In the film, Harvey Keitel is a jazz saxophonist crippled by a random gunshot

that leaves him unable to make music anymore. As he recuperates and finds a

new balance in life, random and magical circumstances lead to his meeting and

falling in love with an aspiring actress played by Mira Sorvino, who falls

equally head over heels. More than anything, Lulu is about true love and the

pitfalls that sometimes come between fated lovers. Mixing fantasy with

reality, and injected with a hefty dose of romance, American critics have

given Lulu a mixed reception here at Cannes, which possibly has served as more

of a reflection on cultural tastes than on the merit of Auster’s aspirations.

indieWIRE: “Lulu” has certain references to other films, like “Pandora’s Box” and

“Singin’ in the Rain”. Why did you decide to make these allusions?

Paul Auster: Oh, you know, these things just develop, they just organically

start coming together. I love “Singin’ in the Rain” — I really do think what

[Willam Dafoe’s character] says in the movie is true — it really is about

laughing your way through adversity. It’s so deeply American. I really

believe it’s a great American contribution to the world.

iW: So then your film shares that same sense of being light-hearted in the

face of despair?

Auster: Definitely. Not to be light-hearted, but to overcome everything, rather

than be crushed by it. Stanley Donen, the director of “Singin’ in the Rain”,

was going to be in the film, but then he got sick and couldn’t do it. He was

going to play that walk-on part that David Byrne did — I don’t know if you

noticed — in the pie-in-the-face scene. David Byrne is Mira’s date at the

table.

iW: How did the cast come together?

Auster: I wanted all the people that are in the film, and I asked them. Many of

them I knew — that was my casting technique.

iW: So you have your dream cast?

Auster: I do. If you notice, when Mira walks into her bedroom and plays her

telephone message, the agent was played by Stockard Channing.

iW: You were here last year as a member of the Cannes jury. What’s it like to

be here now as a director?

Auster: It’s as if I’m in two different places. The palm trees look the same, but

everything else is different.

iW: Are you a little more nervous?

Auster: Yeah, you bet.

iW: The film has sold so far in most major territories, including Canada, but

not America. Why is that?