Different regions of the ZBTB18 promoter were amplified by PCR from brain (cortex)-derived RNA and cloned in the pGL3 vector (Promega). The activity of each promoter was measured by dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were seeded at 50% confluence in 6-well plates 24 hours prior to transfection. Cells at 80% to 90% confluence were transiently transfected with 2.5 μg of each pGL3-ZBTB18 promoter vector or pGL3 as a negative control, together with 0.5 μg of pRL-TK (Renilla luciferase reporter, Promega). Transfections were done using Lipofectamine 2000 as directed by the manufacturer (Life Technologies) in serum-free medium. All transfections were done in triplicate. After 48 hours, cells were lysed with passive lysis buffer (Promega). Luciferase activity of each sample was determined in technical triplicate using a Thermo Scientific Appliskan luminometer. All data were reported relative to luciferase activity (firefly/renilla). Twenty micrograms of pGL3-ZBTB18 promoter 4 vector was methylated with SssI methylase or with HpaII methylase (all from New England Biolabs, 2.5 U/μg DNA) in the presence of 160 μmol/L S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM; New England Biolabs), in a manufacturer-supplied buffer at 37°C for 2 hours. The unmethylated DNA was treated as above but without methylases or SAM. The plasmid DNA was extracted by phenol/chloroform, ethanol precipitated, and quantified using a Nanodrop Spectrophotometer (Peqlab). The completion of methylation reaction was controlled by digesting both methylated and unmethylated DNAs using the methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme Hpa II and the methylation-insensitive restriction enzyme McrBC.

Linear regression analyses and graphical model validation were executed using R software. Scatterplots and locally weighted least squares (LOWESS) smooths were used to confirm the suitability of linear regression analyses, and statistical significance of these relationships was assessed according to the P value for the estimated slope of the regression line. A multiple linear regression model was computed based on the ordinary least squares method. Expression analysis of the TCGA data was performed by R software. Publicly available Level 3 TCGA (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/docs/publications/tcga/) data were used for analysis. Data were downloaded at the UCSC Cancer Genome Browser. Only patients with full datasets (expression, methylome, and clinical information) were included. Expression analysis was performed based on Agilent array data (TCGA GBM G4502A) for high-grade glioma and RNA-seq data (TCGA LGG HiSeqV2 PANCAN) for low-grade glioma. Both datasets were normalized and log2 transformed. Methylation data from Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip for lower-grade and high-grade glioma were used for further analysis. For TCGA Expression/Methylation Analysis, normalized expression values were analyzed in tumor subtypes (mesenchymal, proneural, classical, and neural) by a one-way ANOVA model. Survival analysis was performed by Cox proportional hazards model and plotted by Kaplan–Meier survival statistics. Patients without survival data were censored. Robustness was ensured by 10-fold cross-validation. Methylation of the cg23829949 was extracted and analyzed by Wilcox regression model and one-way ANOVA. Significant level was defined as P < 0.001. Analysis was performed by survival package included in R-Software. Different tumor numbers used in the analyses reflects sample availability in different genomic datasets and their overlap.

Our previous study identified ZBTB18 as a putative negative regulator of the MGES of GBM (8). Moreover, cluster analysis shown in Fig. 1B indicates that ZBTB18 is downregulated in both mesenchymal and classical GBMs, suggesting that low ZBTB18 expression is associated with the more aggressive GBM subtypes. To validate ZBTB18-repressive function, we first analyzed the expression of mesenchymal genes previously predicted to be negatively connected to ZBTB18 in the ARACNE network (8), using SNB19 GBM cell lines transduced with FLAG-ZBTB18 or control vector (Fig. 2A; Supplementary Fig. S3A and S3B). Among 13 putative targets analyzed, 8 genes were clearly downregulated upon ZBTB18 overexpression (Fig. 2A). ChIP revealed ZBTB18 binding at ACTN1, PTRF, SERPINE1, and CD97 promoters (Fig. 2B), indicating that, at least for a subset of targets, ZBTB18 is directly involved in gene repression. To better understand the role of ZBTB18 in high-grade gliomas, we performed overexpression studies and subsequent GSEA (http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp) on mesenchymal patient-derived BTSC-like cell line (BTSC233; Figs. 1D and E and 2C and D) and a patient-derived GBM xenoline (JX6; ref. 24) which was classified as classical according to the Verhaak study (Figs. 1D and E and 2E and F). Interestingly, we also detected a lower band similar to those observed in GBM-derived cells at around 30 kDa (Figs. 2C and E and 1D). Sequence analysis by MS confirmed that the peptides correspond to the N-terminal portion of ZBTB18 up to around amino acid 270 (Supplementary Fig. S1A and S1B). Western blot analysis of the transduced cells with a polyclonal anti-ZBTB18 antibody showed almost no expression of ZBTB18 in the control cells; the shorter band was weakly recognized because the antibody is directed to central region of ZBTB18 sequence (amino acids 228–498; Supplementary Fig. S1C and S1D). GSEA analysis for the gene signatures described by Phillips and colleagues (2) revealed a strong enrichment for mesenchymal genes in BTSC233 cells expressing a control GFP vector compared with BTSC233 cells expressing ZBTB18 (Fig. 2G; Supplementary Fig. S2A). Surprisingly, the same analysis using gene signatures from the Verhaak classification (3) did not show any specific signature enrichment (Supplementary Fig. S2B). Validation by qRT-PCR in BTSC233 expressing ectopic ZBTB18 confirmed the downregulation of several mesenchymal genes (Fig. 2H). The repressive function of ZBTB18 on a subset of genes was further validated in JX6 cells (Fig. 2I). GSEA showed a strong downregulation of the Phillips proliferative signature in JX6 transduced with a ZBTB18 expressing lentiviral vector compared with the control vector, but again no significant change was induced in the Verhaak signatures (Fig. 2J; Supplementary Fig. S3A). As the classification by Phillips is based on gene expression data of GBMs and grade III gliomas, with the goal of identifying survival-associated genes, we reasoned that the different results might indicate a role of ZBTB18 in the negative regulation of genes associated with poor survival (i.e., proliferative and mesenchymal genes). Interestingly, some of the validated ZBTB18 targets have been previously associated with unfavorable prognosis in glioma (25–27). Further examination of the top downregulated genes by ZBTB18 in JX6 cells by gene expression array highlighted many genes previously reported to play a role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT; Fig. 3A; refs. 28–34). ID1 and ID3 were also downregulated, as consistent with previous findings (Fig. 3A; ref. 35). The repressive role of ZBTB18 was validated by qRT-PCR in JX6 (Fig. 3B) and BTSC233 (Fig. 3C) cells. Many of the validated genes have been reported as part of a multi-cancer gene expression signature associated with prolonged time-to-recurrence in GBM (36, 37). As such, GSEA showed a strong loss of this multi-cancer signature (Anastassiou_cancer_mesenchymal_transition signature) upon ZBTB18 overexpression (Fig. 3D). These data further suggest that ZBTB18 downregulation in high-grade gliomas leads to re-expression of genes associated with malignant features and poor outcome. Interestingly, ZBTB18 re-expression in BTSC233 and JX6 cells led to upregulation of epithelial markers which are often repressed during EMT (refs. 38–43; Fig. 3E and F), further reinforcing the idea that ZBTB18 could play a role in suppressing an EMT-like phenotype in GBM. Consistent with our data and with its previously reported tumor-suppressive role (11), ZBTB18 reexpression in SNB19 affected cell proliferation, migration, and invasion (Supplementary Fig. S4). The same effect on cell proliferation, migration, and invasion was confirmed in BTSC233 cells (Supplementary Fig. S5A, S5C, and S5D). In JX6 cells, ZBTB18 overexpression also reduced cell proliferation and migration (Supplementary Fig. S5B and S5E), although no clear effect on invasion was observed, probably due to the higher invasive properties of those cells (data not shown).

To elucidate the mechanism by which ZBTB18 is downregulated in GBM, we examined the ZBTB18 promoter in silico (http://genome.ucsc.edu). The analysis revealed the presence of two CpG islands (Fig. 5A and B), suggesting that DNA hypermethylation could play a role in ZBTB18 transcriptional repression. To verify this hypothesis, we first cloned several promoter regions covering the two CpG islands from a pool of normal brains, GBM samples (BTs), and GBM cell lines after bisulfite modification (Fig. 5A and B). Sequence analysis of the cloned DNA fragments revealed no change in DNA methylation in the more upstream CpG island (CpG1, containing 27 CpGs; Fig. 5B). Conversely, higher methylation in CpG island 2 (CpG2, containing 9 CpGs) was detected in the pool of tumor samples (Fig. 5B). Pyrosequencing of promoter regions containing 6 CpGs located in CpG2 and 2 more downstream CpGs located in the 5′UTR revealed that, although not statistically significant, methylation of ZBTB18 CpG2 tended to be higher in the glioma samples compared with normal brain (Supplementary Fig. S6A). Furthermore, methylation of the 2 CpGs in the 5′UTR (5′UTR CpG -1 and 5′UTR CpG -2) was higher in gliomas compared with normal brain samples (P = 0.0184, unpaired t test; Supplementary Fig. S6B and S6C). The significance was even higher when only GBM samples were included in the analysis (P = 0.0017, unpaired t test; Fig. 5C).

To further prove that the ZBTB18 region, including 5′UTR CpGs-1 and -2, is important for ZBTB18 promoter activity, we cloned several ZBTB18 promoter regions and analyzed their activity by luciferase reporter assay. As shown in Fig. 6A and B, the ZBTB18 promoter region 3, which does not contain the core promoter and the 5′UTR CpGs-1 and -2, had no promoter activity compared with other cloned promoter regions in which the core promoter and 5′UTR CpGs-1 and -2 were included (Fig. 6A and B). Next, we investigated the effect of DNA methylation on the luciferase reporter activity controlled by the ZBTB18 promoter region with the highest activity. As displayed in Fig. 6C and D, the promoter activity was completely inhibited by the SssI methylase, an enzyme that methylates all CGs, and to a less extent by HpaII methylase, which methylates only CGs in the CCGG context (Fig. 6C and D). These results further indicate that the ZBTB18 promoter region, which includes the core promoter and 5′UTR CpGs-1 and -2, is responsible for promoter activity and sensitive to DNA methylation. This is consistent with the expected role of methylated CpGs close to the TSS in gene expression regulation (44).

Promoter methylation analysis of the subset of gliomas with low ZBTB18 expression/high promoter methylation (indicated in red) versus high ZBTB18 expression/low promoter methylation (indicated in blue) previously analyzed using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (ref. 45; Supplementary Fig. S7D) confirmed differential methylation of CpG island 2 between the two tumor groups covering CpGs located in the same region analyzed by pyrosequencing (probes cg19698993 and cg12869659). Intriguingly, tumor samples with high ZBTB18 expression and low ZBTB18 promoter methylation analyzed by DNA methylation array showed high levels of global methylation (45), suggesting that silencing of ZBTB18 by promoter methylation could be a hallmark of non G-CIMP gliomas. Consistent with this hypothesis, ZBTB18 methylation correlated with G-CIMP and IDH1 mutation status so that ZBTB18 was more methylated in IDH1 wild-type compared with IDH1-mutant gliomas (Fig. 7C P = 1.914e−10, Welch two-sample t test). Consistent with this, ZBTB18 expression was higher in G-CIMP GBMs (Fig. 7D). We then investigated the relationship between ZBTB18 methylation (HumanMethylation27 platform) and GBM subclasses in 283 TCGA GBM samples. This analysis revealed a highly significant association between ZBTB18 methylation in a region confirmed by pyrosequencing (probe cg23829949) and mesenchymal GBM subtype (Fig. 7E). Accordingly, regression analysis of ZBTB18 expression on ZBTB18 methylation revealed a strong correlation only in mesenchymal tumors but not in nonmesenchymal tumors (all GBMs: P = 0.000026; mesenchymal tumors: P = 0.0136; nonmesenchymal tumors: P = 0.13, linear regression), further highlighting that methylation-induced silencing of ZBTB18 might be particularly important in the mesenchymal subclass (Supplementary Fig. S7A–S7C). This is consistent with previous analysis indicating that the mesenchymal tumors are usually non–G-CIMP (46, 47). Expression analysis of selected mesenchymal genes (CD97, ACTN1, EMP3, and CHI3L1) revealed an inverse association with ZBTB18 promoter methylation (Fig. 7E and F), further indicating that silencing of ZBTB18 through promoter hypermethylation could play a role in mesenchymal differentiation in GBM.

Here, we describe a new role for the transcriptional repressor ZBTB18 as a negative regulator of signatures associated with poor survival in GBM, and we propose DNA methylation as a mechanism to silence ZBTB18 in the mesenchymal tumor subtype. Our finding is in accordance with a previous study reporting that ZBTB18 is lost in established human GBM cells and identifying ZBTB18 as a brain tumor-suppressor gene (11). We demonstrate that ZBTB18 is mostly expressed in low-grade gliomas and proneural GBMs but less expressed in mesenchymal GBMs. This is consistent with our previous identification of ZBTB18 as a transcription factor negatively associated with mesenchymal GBMs (8). ZBTB18 reexpression in primary BTSCs dampens the adherence poor-prognosis proliferative and mesenchymal signatures, which were identified as mutually exclusive to proneural in the subtype classification by Phillips and colleagues. Although the association between patient survival and mesenchymal subtype has not been confirmed in the previous TCGA study involving GBMs only (18), mouse models for glioma show that sequential mutations causing a shift from proneural to mesenchymal GBM are also associated with reduced survival (19, 20). Moreover, because tumors often show mixed subtype profiles (20, 21), it is possible that this might mask an association with survival. This was clearly shown by Patel and colleagues who demonstrated that pure IDH1 wild-type proneural tumors were associated with a better survival compared with highly heterogeneous proneural tumors containing cells with other subtypes (21). Similarly, tumor purity was recently shown to be an important parameter to determine a positive association of MGMT methylation with patient survival (17). We show that ZBTB18 attenuates the expression of genes associated with EMT and with time-to-tumor progression in GBM (36, 37). This is in line with our analysis that presented a strong link between ZBTB18 methylation and time-to-tumor progression of GBM but only a trend of association with patient overall survival (data not shown). This finding is in accordance with the prevailing argument that time-to-tumor progression might relate more closely to tumor repopulation, aggressiveness, and therapy resistance, which are biological properties also associated with mesenchymal differentiation of GBM. Given this link to tumor progression and the fact that the mesenchymal phenotype is more prevalent in recurrent GBM (2), ZBTB18 hypermethylation might play a role in both the mesenchymal differentiation characteristics of the de novo tumor and the progression toward a more mesenchymal phenotype. However, as reported in our previous study (8) and also confirmed by others (7), several transcription factors usually cooperate to regulate specific GBM subclasses. So, it would be interesting to study how deregulation of ZBTB18 fits in the previously described regulation of mesenchymal genes by other master regulators (i.e., STAT3, CEBPB, and TAZ). The recent report that, at the single-cell level, a GBM often consists of mosaic of subtype makes the picture even more complicated (48). Still, identifying regulators of different GBM subtype could be important since regulators of different subclasses co-existing in the tumor could be targeted.