The Safavid Royal Precinct is located in the heart of the historical city and in the midst of a large garden, boasting its historical glory.

It is a reminder of being Iran's capital city for more than half a century.

The compound is now around six hectares. Tahmasb I, the second Shah of Safavid Dynasty from 1524 to 1576, ordered the construction of the complex when he decided to move the capital from Tabriz in Azarbaijan province to Qazvin.

Tahmasb I planned to set up a capital far away from Ottoman Empire borders; so, he ordered the construction project in Qazvin 10 years prior to moving the capital of his government to the city.

According to some historical reports, the compound consisted of 14 or even 21 palaces and mansions, but there is only Chehel Sotoun Palace nowadays. It has been turned into calligraphy museum.

The Safavid dynasty set up Chehel Sotoun Palace in Isfahan inspired by Chehel Sotoun Palace of Qazvin.

Aali Qapu Gate is another monument remained from the Safavid era. It was one of the seventh gates of the Royal Precinct.

After the Safavid era, some other buildings had been constructed in the compound. Qazvin Grand Hotel was one of the first modern hotels in Iran, which was constructed in Qajar dynasty. Omid School was also the first modern school in Qazvin, which was built in Pahlavi era in the compound.

Tomb of the Four Prophets (Chahar Anbia) is a holy monument, which is located on the west part of Chehel Sotun Palace in Qazvin. People believe that four Bani Israeli prophets named Salam, Salom, Sahouli and Akhalia were buried in this place. The building of the shrine dates back to Safavid era. The Safavid governmental structure is located in vicinity of the tomb.

Jameh (Grand) Mosque of Qazvin is one of the oldest mosques in Iran, which is the congregational mosque of Qazvin. The mosque has been preserved despite the fact that it dates back to more than 1,000 years and harms inflicted on the mosque following Mongol invasion.

Therefore, the ancient city of Qazvin provides tourists with tens of historical attractions. There are also some cultural and artistic programs to be held during Nowruz holidays (March 21, 2022 to April 2, 2022).

1424