President John F. Kennedy died on Nov. 22, 1963, when he was assassinated in Dallas, Texas.

Kennedy had started his term as the 35th president of the United States in January 1961.

Kennedy and his wife, Jacqueline, were riding in a motorcade from the airport headed to a luncheon where he was scheduled to speak. They were accompanied by Texas Governor John Connally and his wife, Nellie.

JFK and Connally were shot as the car passed the Texas School Book Depository.

The car sped off to Parkland Memorial Hospital where JFK was pronounced dead at 1 p.m. His body was taken to Air Force One where, before the plane took off, Lyndon B. Johnson was administered the oath of office at 2:38 p.m.

Connally was seriously injured and underwent surgery for wounds to his back, chest, wrist and thigh, according to history.com.

Kennedy and Connally were shot by Lee Harvey Oswald who was arrested for shooting Dallas police officer J.D. Tippit about 45 minutes after the shooting of Kennedy. Oswald was killed two days later by former Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby.

Across the globe, people were shocked and saddened by the president’s death. Sports events across the nation were canceled. Television stations cleared their schedules to air all coverage of the assassination.

The headline across the top of The Patriot read: “Hidden Assassin Murders President”

“Suspect Charged After Death Stalks Dallas Motorcade”

A gunman assassinated president Kennedy from ambush yesterday with a high-powered rifle. Nearly 12 hours later, a 24-year-old man who professed love for the Soviet Union was charged with his murder. The charge was filed against Lee Harvey Oswald, 24. Officers said he was the man who hid on the fifth floor of a textbook warehouse and snapped off three quick shots that killed the President and wounded Gov. John B. Connally of Texas.

As the shots reverberated, blood sprang from the President’s face. He fell downward in the back seat of his car. His wife grasped his head and tried to lift it, crying, ‘Oh, no!’”

In Harrisburg, The Patriot reported, “News of President Kennedy’s death hit Harrisburg hard.

When the news broke here, people said: ‘It can’t be. I don’t believe it.’

In a matter of moments, the city was stunned.

A waitress in a Market Square restaurant said: ‘That man can’t die.’

A bus driver said: ‘No, no, it’s all wrong. Not him.’

But President Kennedy was dead. And Harrisburg was one of many cities facing the fact: ‘Our president was murdered.’”

Kennedy visited Harrisburg in 1960 when he was campaigning for president and in 1962 after he was elected, he campaigned for others. His 1962 visit included a speech at the Farm Show Arena.

The Evening News reported on Sept. 16, 1960, that more than 9,000 people attended a dinner with Kennedy at Zembo Shrine Mosque and Scottish Rite Cathedral. Tents were set up on the lawn to accommodate the crowd.

On that visit, Kennedy made stops in Harrisburg, Lebanon, Reading, Lancaster, Columbia and York before heading to Baltimore.

The paper said he received “a rousing reception.”

His remarks in Market Square were brief – only 4 minutes. And, he was 65 minutes late. State employees had been released early so they could hear his speech.

The crowd in Reading was estimated at between 20,000 and 30,000 people.

"The reception in Reading was so enthusiastic the Massachusetts senator's shirt was ripped in the crowd that swarmed over his motorcade.

Kennedy stopped at a filling station outside Reading and went into the owner's cottage behind the station to change shirts.”

In 1962, the paper reported that 10,000 people heard Kennedy speak at the Farm Show. His speech there was interrupted 19 times, according to the newspaper report, by “thunderous applause. At the end of his speech, which took less than 20 minutes, the tumultuous roar was greater than ever. Kennedy started the applause early with an introductory remark: ‘I will introduce myself. I am Teddy Kennedy’s brother.’”