Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich married morganatically in 1911 to Natalie Sergeyevna Sheremetyevskaya, a twice-divorced Russian noble, without permission from his brother, Nicholas II. Natalie had already given birth to a son, George, out-of-wedlock in 1910. For this action, Michael was banished from Russia and removed from the imperial succession by his brother.

Eventually, Nicholas forgave his brother and legitimized the marriage by granting Natalie the style of Countess Brassova. But their son, George, Count Brassov, was morganatic and not a dynast. Natalie and Count Brassov escaped Russia and George Brassov subsequently died in a car crash in 1931 in France at the age of 20. He never married or had any children.

So, this so-called "grandson" would not be a dynast under any circumstances.

I certainly agree under the old laws, and very aware of this morganatic marriage. These are the claimant's grand parents! His father was born to the GD and Natalya on the 31 July 1916 (Saint Petersburg), long after the Tsar legitimized the marriage, and granted the formal style back to his brother. He was passed to a couple that the GD selected to bring the baby out of Russia, into the arms of his mother, Natalya. There is also documentation of the young man's father taking visits to his grand mother's, Maria Feodorovna, up until she died.

Both the Tsar, and his mother, The Dagmar, were present at this baby's baptismal in Saint Petersburg. The young claimant has record of this. He also has record of the certificate of birth, signed by the GD and Natalya. Getting the baby out of Russia was both a painful and expensive finanical endeavor for the GD, to avoid being uncovered by the Bolcheviks (October 1917), after being placed under house arrest. We know the rest of this story, for the GD was murdered in February 1918 (Perm), three months before the Imperial family (who were also under house arrest).

In comparison to 'other' claims, if this claim becomes fact, would he not be closest in line to the family of Tsar Nicholas II? We make the act of divorce sound so terrible, when actually, it was a common action amongst Prince's and Princess's in the lines of succession. The Tsar reserved the right to 'change' or wave morganatic law, as he saw fit. He wished for his brother, GD Mikhail, to be by his side during WWI. Thus, this 'second' child, born in 1916, would technically still be named a Prince. The GD Mikhail, actually reigned as Tsar for one day, after the title was passed to him from his brother, Tsar Nicholas II. The GD stepped aside, without resignation, for the "people" to decide whether the monarchy would be restored.

I have spent over three months communicating with this young gentleman in Uruguay. He is a graduate of The University of Glasgow, Scotland, where his mother's family (Stewart) were raised , and lived. She is the daughter of Manfred Wilhelm Hohenzollern (b 22 May 1915 - d 12 April 1996), and Katherine Stewart (b 15 September 1919 - d 4 July 2004), Edinburgh, Scotland UK. This young man is 27 years old.

I have collected all of our communication, which is translated from Spanish to English, written in his own hand. I am happy to share this with those that have an open mind. The level of intrigue and espionage during this period, raises many questions to the validity morganatic law, when there is no monarchy around to upold it. So, In reference to your last statement, this young man would (or could) be a dynast under all circumstance.

If anyone is interested, please let me know.

HMB

Who is the Head of the Imperial Family?

Below, I have attached one communication that answers questions that I needed to begin his family tree.

It is written in his native language (Spanish). I have translated it as best as possible, to English:

Mr. Harry Binkow: "Decir de mi abuela Natalya, ella vivio exiliada en Paris en el año 1952, puede decir que ella fue la esposa del Zar ya Mikhail fue Zar de Rusia por un dia, del dia 15 a 16 de Marzo del año 1917 con 38 años de edad. Mi abuela fallecio de Cáncer en un hospital, en la miseria..... ya que mi padre ya no podia hacer nada por ella. Ya que le imploro que se fuera lejos.. se del accidente de George en el año 1931."

Translation:

Mr. Harry Binkow: Saying of my grandmother Natalya, she lived exiled in Paris in the year 1952, can say that she was the wife of the Czar already Mikhail was Czar of Russia , as given on 15 to 16 of March of the year 1917 with 38 years of age. My grandmother died of Cancer in a hospital, in misery. .... since my father no longer being able to do nothing by her. Since I implore him that was itself far away.. itself of the accident of George in the year 1931.

This is just one simple communication. I have many that are detailed with family questions. Here is one more:

Es un placer que usted haya estudiado a mi familia, le escribo en español ya que es la lengua que más gusta a mi persona, usted a estudiado la historia de nuestra familia de comienzo de la esposa de Ivan Ivanovich conocido como el Zar Ivan el terrible o desde 1612 el tiempo en que los Rusos expulsaron a la Liga Polaco-Lituana, y que en ese entonces se nombro Zar despues de tanto revueltas a mi antepasado Mikhail I Romanov,

ya que mi padre estaria antes que ella, pero mi padre al fallecer el 9 de julio de 1993 a la edad de 76 años yo seria el unico que pudiera reclamar la corona de Rusia, pero mi padre oculto toda su vida su identidad ya que su vida corrio peligro en muchas ocaciones, una pista la madre de mi padre fallecio de cancer en francia y mi tio fallecio en accidente de transito dudoso de ser un atentado, mi abuelo lo oculto a mi padre por que ya sabia de los planes de los Bolcheviques cuando nacio mi padre, lo que es mas solo la Iglesia Ortodoxa tiene constancia del nacimiento de mi padre pero lo a ocultado ya que es un secreto dado a mis abuelos.

Translation:

It is a pleasure that you've studied my family, I am writing in Spanish because the language is more like me, you studied the history of our family from the beginning of the wife of Ivan Ivanovich known as the Tsar Ivan the terrible or time since 1612 that the Russians expelled the Polish-Lithuanian League, and then called Czar riots after both my ancestor Mikhail I Romanov,

because my father would be before her, but my father died on 9 July 1993 at the age of 76 I would be the only one who could claim the crown of Russia, but my father all his life hiding his identity as his life was in danger on many occasions, a track my father's mother died of cancer in France and my uncle died in traffic accident doubtful if an attack, hidden from my grandfather that my father already knew about the plans of the Bolsheviks When my father, which is but only the Orthodox Church is aware of the birth of my father but to what is hidden as a secret because my grandparents.

Best regards,

HMB

Here is one other...I believe that one can determine his anxiety, along with his father. After all, the claimant was born in 1982 (Edinburgh, Scotland), and his father died 16 years ago (1993). Aside from documents, and intimate conversation, it certainly did not give the two of them much time for history lessons. At least, his father told him who he is...

September 16 at 2:22pm

Con respecto a esta pregunta... ¿Por qué, específicamente lo que sus padres ocultar su nacimiento? ¿Fue porque sabían que pueden ser encarcelados o asesinados? ¿Cómo va a explicar su heridity? Mikhail sabia de las intenciones de los Bolchevique de asesinar a la familia Imperial Romanov, hasta el Zar Nikolai cuando su hermano le comento lo que habia averiguado Nikolai le dijo que era imposible que era tan imposible como querer transportar los Urales a cualquier parte del mundo el que los Bolcheviques que tuvieran exito en tal cosa. Pero el miedo de mi abuelo de proteger a su esposa su hijo George y el bebe que venia en camino, le dijo a su hermano que el respetaba su desicion de no creerle pero que el se iba a asegurar de proteger a su familia a costa de su propia vida y que habia desidido cuando naciera su segundo hijo fuera niño o niña, de no darlo a conocer al medio publico por la seguridad de la vida del bebe, ya que seria más facil de proteger no sabiendose de su existencia.... Y aunque tuviera que gotear su ultima gota de sangre por proteger a su pequeño George y a su amada Natalya, y a su segundo fruto de su matrimonio, mi padre.

Con respecto a mi madre ella es una Von Hohenzollern por padre y como le dije por parte de su madre es una Stewart...

Saludos Cordiales,

Translation:

Re: Romanov Family

With regard to this question ... Why, specifically what their parents conceal his birth? Was it because they knew they could be jailed or killed? How will you explain your heridity? Mikhail knew about the intentions of the Bolsheviks to kill the Imperial Romanov family, to the Tsar Nikolai when his brother told him what he had learned Nikolai said it was impossible it was as impossible as trying to carry the Urals to anywhere in the world that the Bolsheviks were successful in that. But the fear of my grandfather to protect his wife and baby son George who was on the way, he told his brother that he respected his decision to not believe him but that he would ensure to protect your family at the expense of his own life and that he had desidido when his second son was born child, not made known to the public means for the safety of your baby's life, and it would be easier to protect not knowing of their existence .... And if he had to dribble his last drop of blood to protect her little George and his beloved Natalya, and his second fruit of their marriage, my father.

With respect to my mother she is a von Hohenzollern by father, and told by her mother is a Stewart ...

HMB

THis is, pardon me, impossible. You stated the second son was born in 1916. In 1916 Nicholas II., not Grand Duke Mikhail had any idea the revolution would occure. They didn´t - read their letters and diaries. Until the last moment they didn´t know. There would be NO reason to hide any baby. The story, even though it has great timeline, does not have logic.

Plus the first revolution had NOTHING to do the Bolsheviks at all....

I would understand sending Natasha off with children AFTER the revolution.

And what is most convinving - there is no way that none of the people included would never ever utter a word about a matter such important in their letters or diaries.

Dear Velkoknezna Maria,

First, you may believe what you wish. Second your date chronology is way off. The birth date in question is July 31, 1916. I am not sure I follow your statements...

The Revolution we are speaking of, February 1917 (March in the Gregorian calendar), was focused in and around Saint Petersburg, where the families were living. The GD knew of these Bolchevik plans to take over Russia, though there was a provisional government in place. The Tsar was warned, even by the British government, as early as January, that he must commit to reform. The Tsar was made aware of this by his younger brother, yet he did not believe it. The Tsar was a good family man, however, let his administrators run Russia. They were corrupt and interested only in their own personal gain. The Tsar even ignored his families suggestions on reform. He was completely aware, yet was living in denial of his situation. Who would have thought a 300 year old monarchy would fall? How do you find logic in chaos? The Tsar was completely out of touch with what was going on. The GD was not!

Sometimes, life and the protection of it, has no logic! There could not have been logic, when one would not know what would be thrown at them at any given point in a day. This was not a time where technology allowed the communication of an uprising, or Twitter taking photos of a riot. This was a spontaneous revolt to over throw the autocratic government of the Tsar!

The Dagmar lived through very trying times. What makes you think that she had no pride, or that she could not keep a secret to save someone's life? What makes you think that she would not keep a secret that her youngest son asked her to keep?

By October 1917, when the Bolcheviks overthrew the provisional government, Lenin was in control of the cities, and a civil war broke out around the countryside. The monarchs were either under house arrest or fleeing the borders with what they could take with them. Some stayed to organize and fight with the "white" Russians. The GD smuggled his children out of Russia to Denmark. Countess Brassova followed later. What was she doing, that she could not go with the other children? Was she caring for a baby, or just not willing to leave her husbands side? Ultimately, she did leave, with a Danish passport, she left Russia for London. Who gave her the passport? Perhaps the Dagmar?

Can you imagine, this young man's father, living a life of secrecy, through his entire life, and the cold war with the Soviets. The fall of the Berlin wall, and eventually the collapse of the USSR, was only four years before his death. Did we know this was going to happen? I am not concerned about being ridiculed. I have researched the facts, and I am only concerned about them. This claimant is not wishing to be the next Tsar of Russia. He is only wanting to claim his ancestry, and attempt to follow his father's wishes. That being to exume his body, and bury the family with one another.

History is what is written for us. Yes, diaries and obituaries tell us many things about what was going on, however, not everything.

I am happy to entertain your questions. This is not a fairy tale. This is what a young man of 27 years of age is learning about himself. He and his father had only 10 years to share life. How much history can you teach a ten year old child? Believe what you wish, Velkoknezna Maria, and question what you believe is a hoax. I have over 100 communications over the last three months. I am going to help this young man learn the history of his family. If he is the grandson of Mikhail, I will be happy for him.

I´m sorry if I didn´t make myself clear, I´ll try so now:

1. The child was presumably born on 31st July 1916. By that time NOBODY knew about the revolution coming, definitely nobody within Imperial family. Why to hide a morganatic and politically absolutely unimportant child? Even more - if nobody was toknow about the boy, Natasha would have to be in total hiding herself almost since the beggining of 1916. How could anybody know what will happen next year??? The Revolution was long prepared, but to Imperial family it was a very sudden and unexpected blow. I have NEVER seen anything that would indicate otherwise.

2. How in the world, in the middle of war, whe German troops are advancing, could a little baby with nurse leave safely Russia???

3. I cannot imagine Mikhail saying "Mama, could you please never ever mention my son in your very own completely personal not for anybody else to read diary? Thanks." Ont he opposite. When Minnie met Natasha and her son George, which by the way was most probably the ONLY time they ever met (years after the revolution), the only thing Minnie wrote was very disapointed "he does´t resemble my Misha at all". Seems absolutely incredible that this other child would simply visit her - and there would be NO record about it.

4. The children were indeed taken to Denmark. Two children. George and Tata. Didn´t you said the "second son" was under supervision of some other family and already taken out? Why would Dagmar be giving Natasha Danish passport? Mikhail did. Minnie was in the time of the revolution faaaaaaaar away in Kiev and later she went to Crimea. We have seen Natasha´s passport and we have seen George´s. But no other.

5. Why should this man live in secrecy? AS I have stated above, he was in no way a danger to Bolsheviks and of absolutely no importance. There was plenty of LEGAL possible heirs to the throne.

6. I´m not ridiculing the claim, I´m using logic and historical facts. Whatever this young man may believe, I´m convinced he´s on the totally wrong track.

Dear Velkoknezna Maria,

Thank you for making your statements more clear. I can only answer for you what I know. Let me try to present another out look to your statements, as you have done...

1. July 1916, is only eight months before rebellions increased, and the February revolution came to Saint Petersburgh. Tsar Nicholas abdicated in March 1917. It was known by laisons of the British government, exactly what was to happen with regard to over throwing the Russian aristocracy. How can you state that the Imperial family knew nothing. They knew what they wanted to know...History tells us they were almost in complete denial. The Kaiser sheltered Lenin, for just the right time...

I cannot say where Countess Brassova was, or if she was in hiding. We know that she was not part of the Imperial court.

Your case in point. YOU have NEVER seen anything. That is what secrets are about. Understand that it was not a secret to the Imperial family. I am told the Tsar was present at the baptismal of this child. So, let us see how this plays out.

2. Saint Petersburgh, geographically is no where near the German front. It was also far from Moscow. It may have been easier than you think to leave Saint Petersburgh for Denmark or Scotland. The GD was not murdered until June 1918. This gave him plenty of time to make consideration of his immediate family.

3. Here, I have attached some of my communication with the claimant. (We communicate in Spanish, for that is his personal language. He does speak German). I have translated communication as best as possible without touching his hand.

Harry Binkow September 4 at 6:01pm

Gracias por su correspondencia, sin embargo muchas de mis preguntas siguen sin respuesta. ¿Es debido a la dificultad? He aprendido el protocolo de la monarquía de Rusia.

Su tío fue, George (Brasov), Sus padres fueron Miguel IV de Rusia y su amante, Natalia Serguiéievna Sheremetyevskaya. Su padre era el hijo menor del Emperador Alexander III de Rusia y de la emperatriz María Fiódorovna (antes princesa Dagmar de Dinamarca), una hermana del rey George V de la madre del Reino Unido, la reina Alexandra. padre. Él lleva el nombre de su tío, el Gran Duque Jorge Alexandrovich de Rusia, que había muerto de tuberculosis en 1899. Conde primo hermano de Brasov, fue el zarevich .. En Casa de la Rusa de Derecho, su padre, como miembro de la familia imperial, no podía casarse sin el consentimiento del monarca reinante. Este consentimiento no hubiera sido concedida como su madre se divorció dos veces y no de sangre real. A pesar de que había sido legitimado, él y sus descendientes serían excluidos de la orden de sucesión. Más tarde, el Gran Duque Cirilo Vladimirovich, el pretendiente al trono, le concedió el título de Príncipe. Está enterrado en el Cementerio de Passy en París, (b.1910 - d. 1931). Aunque no tenía los derechos de sucesión, debido a que el matrimonio morganático de sus padres, George era el último descendiente varón de la línea de Alexander III de Rusia.

Aquí, Emmanuel, estoy confundido con respecto a su heridity. Usted afirma que, usted es el nieto de Mikhail Aleksandrovich Romanov (1878-1918). El Gran Duque tenía un solo hijo (Jorge), con su esposa, Natalya Serguiéievna Wulffert. No puede hacer referencia a su padre, Dmitri Mijáilovich Románov en cualquier lugar. ¿Su padre utilizar otro nombre? No puedo localizar el padre de tu madre, Manfred Wilhelm Hohenzollern. El hijo menor del emperador Guillermo II, el Príncipe Joachim. ¿Sería capaz de ayudarme a organizar este heridity?

English translation:

Thanks by its correspondence, nevertheless many of my questions continue without answer. Due to the difficulty? I have learned the protocol of the monarchy of Russia. You uncle was, George (Brasov), His parents were Miguel IV of Russia and his lover, Natalia Serguiéievna Sheremetyevskaya. Their father was the son less than the Emperor Alexander III of Russia and of the empress María Fiódorovna (before princess Dagmar of Denmark), a sister of the king George V of the mother of the United Kingdom, the queen Alexandra. father. He carries the name of his uncle, the Grand Duke Jorge Alexandrovich of Russia, that had died of tuberculosis in 1899. Prime count brother of Brasov, was the zarevich.. At home of the Russian of Right, its father, like member of the imperial family, could not be married without the consent of the reigning monarch. This consent was not to have been granted as his mother was divorced two times and not of real blood. In spite of the fact that he had been legitimized, he and his descendants would be excluded of the order of succession. Later, the Grand Duke Cirilo Vladimirovich, the suitor to the throne, the title of Prince granted him. It is buried in the Cemetery of Passy in Paris, (b.1910 - d. 1931). Although did not have the right of succession, due to that the morganatic marriage of his parents, George was the last descendant male of the line of Alexander III of Russia.

Here, Emmanuel, I am confused with regard to his heridity. You affirm that, you are the grandson of Mikhail Aleksandrovich Romanov (1878-1918). The Grand Duke had a single son (Jorge), with his wife, Natalya Serguiéievna Wulffert. He cannot refer to his father, Dmitri Mijáilovich Románov in any place. His father to utilize another name? I cannot locate the father of your mother, Manfred Wilhelm Hohenzollern. The son less than the emperor William II, the Prince Joachim. It would be capable of helping to organize this heridity?

Emmanuel's Reply: September 4, 2009

de acuerdo sere breve, con respecto a esto mi padre, fue ocultado del medio social al nacer, solamente habia pruebas de su nacimiento en el lugar donde fue bautizado de la Iglesia ortodoxa en San Petersburgo, pero su padre o como quiera decirlo mi abuelo lo oculto solamente sabiendolo la familia más allegada de mi padre de sus tios el Zar Nikolai II y su abuela Maria Feodorovna, es un tema que sigue en suspenso hasta el dia de hoy, del cual mi padre se lo llevo hasta su tumba. mi abuelo el padre de mi madre es el hijo de Joachim

English translation:

sere under brief, with respect to that my father was hidden from the social environment at birth, but had evidence of birth in the place where he was baptized in the Orthodox Church in St. Petersburg, but his father or whatever you say my grandfather knowing it hidden only close family of my father of his uncles Tsar Nikolai II and his grandmother Maria Feodorovna, is a subject that is on hold until this day, of which my father took him to his grave. my grandfather on my mother's father is the son of Joachim

Harry Binkow September 7 at 4:24pm

RE: Grand Duke Michael Aleksandrovich of Russia

1. Emmauel,

¿Es posible que tu padre era su nieto, pero no el resultado de un matrimonio?

Por ejemplo, yo era adoptada, y mi madre biológica no estaba casada cuando quedó embarazada de mí. Asimismo, no se casó con mi padre paterno. Por lo tanto, yo soy un bastardo.

Es esto lo que estas' tratando de explicar?

Recuerdos,

Harry

Harry Binkow September 7 at 7:13pm

2. Emmauel,

Si usted es interesado, link al árbol familiar conectado de la ascendencia. Anote al mejor de su conocimiento los nombres y apellidos de sus padres y abuelos. Sería feliz de completar los demás para usted.

Las consideraciones,

Harry

http://www.byub.org/ancestors/firstseries/teachersguide/pdf/pedigree.pdf

English Translation(s):

1. Emmauel,

Is it possible that your father was her grandson, but not the result of a marriage?

For example, I was adopted and my birth mother was not married when she became pregnant with me. It did not marry my father's father. Therefore, I'm a bastard.

Is this what you are 'trying to explain?

Regards,

Harry

2. Emmauel,

If you are interested, link to online family tree of descent. Enter the best of his knowledge the names of their parents and grandparents. I would be happy to complete the rest for you.

With consideration,

Harry

continued....