James Roland Cupp, 83, passed away at 5:29 p.m. Monday, Nov. 25, 2013, at Joplin Health and Rehab. James was born Dec. 10, 1929, in Carthage, Mo., he was the son of Ivan Roscoe Cupp and Lela Fern Fenimore Cupp. James was born and raised in Carthage, returning to the Joplin area from California in 1969. He served in the National Guard. He worked as a Body and Fender man. James was a truck driver for several years at Tri-State Motor Transit, Hilt Trucking and Bill Heisten Trucking. James was born and raised in Carthage, returning to the Joplin area from California in 1969. He served in the National Guard. He worked as a Body and Fender man. James was a truck driver for several years at Tri-State Motor Transit, Hilt Trucking and Bill Heisten Trucking. James is survived by two sons, Clifford R. Cupp, of Midland, Texas and Bryan Lee Cupp, of Joplin; one daughter, Janet Kay Kern, of Joplin; one brother, Kenneth Cupp, of Joplin; and one sister, Karen Joy Holman, of Palo Alto, Calif.; six grandchildren; and 13 great-grandchildren. Memorial Graveside Services will be 2 p.m. Friday, Nov. 29, at Fullerton Cemetery, south of Carthage. Arrangements are under the direction of the Ulmer Funeral Home. On line condolences may be sent at www.ulmerfh.com

Published on November 28, 2013

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of JamesHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of James

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree