You may have heard of SiliconGraphics, later known as Silicon Graphics, Inc, and then simply SGI, but few home users outside of an enthusiastic hobbyist community ever used its computers. That's because SGI was dedicated to manufacturing high-performance workstations, software design, and supercomputers for professionals specializing in 3D graphics.

At its peak in the 1990s, Silicon Graphics had legendary status among 3D and graphic designers who leveraged the unique power of these workstations that were at cutting edge of visual computing.

The legacy of Silicon Graphics can still be seen in the Nintendo 64, which they helped develop, and several Hollywood movies, including Jurassic Park, Twister, Congo, Toy Story, and many others. You can also find the beginnins of 3DFX in SGI. Read more about the Origins (pun intended) of Silicon Graphics at Silicon Graphics - Wikipedia

This thread is about SGI hardware, software and its operating system, Irix.

What systems/boards do you currently have or have had, and state or repair/dis-repair?

When I was studying at Griffith Uni back in the 90s, I was one of the clever folks who elected to study the graphics/image processing subjects. We were given exclusive access to a small room of SGI Indy workstations (I don't recall the exact model). The workstations were all securely chained up to the desk so nobody could flog them. They ran SGI IRIX OS and had 100Mhz 64bit CPUs. It felt like a real privilege to be able to walk into that quiet room and almost always find one of these beasty boxes available while all the other IT students on campus fought over 486s in a crowded noisy lab. Actually I think even the 486s were chained up also, but not to the same degree as the Indies were.

They were the standard machine for Mine Planning CAD work when I first started working (early/mid 90's). Used Indigo2, Indy, O2 and Octanes at different times in different jobs. We also had a new SGI server at one site - I can't recall the model, but I do remember it was about the size of a small fridge

I bought an Octane dirt cheap some years ago, and still have it in storage. Not sure what I'll ever do with it, but it was too sweet to pass up.

I will always remember the time we discovered we could play a sound file remotely through the network on another workstation - of course this led to recording a really full on fart sound and remotely playing it on someone else's workstation while they were on the phone Good times

Lol!!!

Anyhows, i've still got a few boxes. Ive had many more in the past, but these days, I have restrictions on space and the fact that sometime, id have to transport all my stuff back to Oz..

Currently have.

*Octane R10k225 MXI (racer)

*Octane2 R12k D400, V6 Pro (speedracer)

*O2 lowly R5k180 OCed to 200mhz.

*O2+ R12k400 (purple People Eater)

*Indigo2 MaxImpact R10K195 (purple)

*Indi

Lol and a bunch of N64's

I also have enough motherboards and parts for O2+ mooseheads to probably build another 3 or 4.. lolol..

Ive also had various parts here and there to keep some of these systems alive/running. Currently only my Octane2 and O2+ are operational. My Indigo 2 is working, however only has a Impact PSU in it... which is bloody annoying, as someone has swapped out the PSU before i got my grubby hands on it.. very pissed about that.. (its aesthetically my favorite box)

My lowly O2's (i think there are still 3 or 4 left) are in Sydney, as is the Indi. These were acquired from one of my good school buddies who runs a lab at a uni in Sydney. Old gear they were going to put in E-waste. (this is the same guy who gave me his Dad's Amiga 1000)

My original Indigo2r4.4k ,Octane1r10k and 2 O2's (there was probably more) went out on council cleanup when my brother visited, while I was working in Perth. While I was working in Adelaide, i came across a Onyx2 Infinite Reality. Bought that puppy for i think its was 500 bucks.. took a truck to get it home and then proceeded to do absolutely nothing with it as it required 3 phase power to boot up.

I dismantled it and sold the boards/cpu nodes to guys around the world. I kept the skins and the rack itself, and i think i still have a few cpu nodes from the Origin part of the Oynx2. I remember in particular there was one add-on board in there with a huge stencil of a monkey in a palmtree, which turned out to be a pretty rare addon board, that i sold to a guy in Italy.

My first SGI was an O2, blue toaster, long sold, while I was at Newcastle Uni. Cool little box and played BZflag like a champ. Home - BZFlag

I'll post up some hinv when I get a chance.

About 20 years ago I put together a really interesting computer for a customer who wanted to GAME and Work on the same machine. I installed a top of the range SGI (I think) card in it at the time that cost like $2000 iirc. But it has no Win98?? XP?? drivers so it can't play games lol. I installed a 2nd GPU in it for gaming and made it so he can dual boot. It was a bit of a work around but surprisingly it worked lol. That GPU was longest thing I've ever seen. So much RAM on it. Can't for my life remember what it was though. Oxygen something maybe? Would love to find it again to see compare specs lol

Ah I remember these. They appeared in some of the first large scale CAD workstations I was managing for a large architecture firm as the time.

Cost an absolute packet, but they literally made the difference between the lead architects being able to see the detail they needed on our large Olympic Games sites and stadia, and machines just grinding to a halt or crashing under the load.

Later on we trialled them in early 3DSMax workstations for accelerated viewports, which were pretty mind blowing at the time on humble x86 gear. But then this strange company named Nvidia showed up...

Yeh those were all the rage at the time for CAD workstations. The workstation my client was looking at was $20k and the PC I built for him was $10k with the same GPU. He was pretty happy with it. I never got to play with the card properly though.