Shrewsbury, Charles Talbot, 1st duke of

Shrewsbury, Charles Talbot, 1st duke of (1660–1718). The last person to hold the office of lord treasurer. Brought up a Roman catholic, Talbot converted to Anglicanism in 1679, and was one of the ‘Immortal Seven’ who, in 1688, signed the letter inviting William of Orange to invade. In 1689 he was appointed secretary of state, but became disillusioned with growing party strife, resigned in 1690, and went into opposition (being suspected of Jacobite sympathies). In 1694 he again became secretary of state and was created a duke (having succeeded as earl of Shrewsbury in 1668). Appointed lord chamberlain in 1699, he resigned on health grounds in 1700. He lived abroad (1700–7), chiefly in Rome, and upon his return became alienated from his former Whig associates. He was appointed lord chamberlain in the Tory ministry (1710–14), and lord-lieutenant of Ireland in 1713. On the dismissal of Harley, Queen Anne appointed Shrewsbury lord treasurer (30 July–11 October 1714), thwarting Bolingbroke's ambition, and upon the queen's death (1 August) he helped to secure the Hanoverian succession. His final office was again as lord chamberlain (1714–15).

Clyve Jones

Cite this article

Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.

MLA

Chicago

APA

JOHN CANNON "Shrewsbury, Charles Talbot, 1st duke of ." The Oxford Companion to British History. . Encyclopedia.com. 30 Jul. 2024 <https://www.encyclopedia.com>.

JOHN CANNON "Shrewsbury, Charles Talbot, 1st duke of ." The Oxford Companion to British History. . Encyclopedia.com. (July 30, 2024). https://www.encyclopedia.com/history/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/shrewsbury-charles-talbot-1st-duke

JOHN CANNON "Shrewsbury, Charles Talbot, 1st duke of ." The Oxford Companion to British History. . Retrieved July 30, 2024 from Encyclopedia.com: https://www.encyclopedia.com/history/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/shrewsbury-charles-talbot-1st-duke

Learn more about citation styles

Citation styles

Encyclopedia.com gives you the ability to cite reference entries and articles according to common styles from the Modern Language Association (MLA), The Chicago Manual of Style, and the American Psychological Association (APA).

Within the “Cite this article” tool, pick a style to see how all available information looks when formatted according to that style. Then, copy and paste the text into your bibliography or works cited list.

Because each style has its own formatting nuances that evolve over time and not all information is available for every reference entry or article, Encyclopedia.com cannot guarantee each citation it generates. Therefore, it’s best to use Encyclopedia.com citations as a starting point before checking the style against your school or publication’s requirements and the most-recent information available at these sites:

Modern Language Association

http://www.mla.org/style

The Chicago Manual of Style

http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html

American Psychological Association

http://apastyle.apa.org/

Notes:

Most online reference entries and articles do not have page numbers. Therefore, that information is unavailable for most Encyclopedia.com content. However, the date of retrieval is often important. Refer to each style’s convention regarding the best way to format page numbers and retrieval dates.

In addition to the MLA, Chicago, and APA styles, your school, university, publication, or institution may have its own requirements for citations. Therefore, be sure to refer to those guidelines when editing your bibliography or works cited list.