Today is the anniversary of the death of Charles Talbot, first Duke of Shrewsbury in 1718. Celebrate this event any way you deem fit.

Talbot was descended from the very Talbot who has a starring role in Shakespeare’s Henry VI Part One – Talbot first Earl of Shrewsbury, just as Charles Talbot was the first (and last) Duke of that name.

He seems to have flirted with Jacobitism (like so many in those uncertain times) without ever really being burned by it, and at two decisive historical moments – he jumped protestant. He was one of the so-called “Immortal Seven” who invited William of Orange to take the throne in 1688. In the turbulent decades that followed, he managed to stay “thereabouts” without making many enemies.

As a consequence, Shrewsbury was the one left holding the keys after Oxford and Bolinbroke had left the building when Queen Anne died in 1714. It was Shrewsbury who officially endorsed and presided over the subsequent Hanoverian takeover.

Oxford, meanwhile, was soon arrested and sent to the Tower while triumphant Whigs tried to prove that the Treaty of Utrecht was a treasonable project. Bolinbroke, of course, fled to France and declared for the Pretender. Shrewsbury – despite being a high profile champion of the now detested Peace – was never molested.

If there was any danger of civil broils and discord in 1714, then Charles Talbot was the man responsible for averting it. If there really was imminent bloodshed to be averted, then he was the one who averted it – less perhaps because of any specific policy decisions he made during his brief tenure as Lord Treasurer than because of his all round reputation for “niceness”. He also well served by his oft-quoted distaste for political life. Because he was generally regarded as not politically ambitious (despite holding many significant offices of state), as well as not particularly politically savvy, his actual political impact was rather greater than many political figures whose political skills were more highly regarded.

In other words, he was a kind of “anti-political” politician, who survives and prospers by exuding a general sense of well bred unwillingness. His niceness saved lives.

in addition to facilitating two major regime changes, Shrewsbury also served as Ambassador to Paris during the crucial final stages of negotiation that ended the War of Spanish Succession – a global conflict that had caused untold death and misery, although it was my guy – the decidedly plebian poet Matthew Prior – who did a deal of the actual hard work of face to face negotiation – bless ‘im.

Prior gave a copy of the works of Montaigne to his friendly patron Shrewsbury around this time, with a handwritten poem inside. Montaigne was a congenial literary figure for both Prior and Shrewsbury – representing a tolerant, relaxed, sociable and digressive spirit of restless but not frantic intellectual inquiry. Here are the verses.

To His Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury with Montaignes Essays

Dictate, O mighty Judge, what Thou hast seen

Of Cities, and of Courts, of Books, and Men:

And daign to let Thy Servant hold the Pen.

Thrô Ages thus I might presume to Live;

And from the Transcript of Thy Prose receive,

What my own short Liv’d Verse can never give.

Thus shou’d fair Britain with a gracious Smile

Receive the Work, the Venerable Isle

For more than Treaties shou’d bless my Toil.

Nor longer hence the Gallic Stile preferr’d,

Wisdom in English Idiom shou’d be heard:

While Shrewsbury told the World where Montaign’ Err’d.

It is, as far as modern readers are concerned – painfully self-deprecating poem. But self-deprecation is a key aspect of diplomacy. To achieve lasting peace, everybody needs to go home feeling they have one. To tout one’s own diplomatic skills is to undermine the self esteem of others. Prior and Shrewsbury had worked together to conclude one of the most destructive conflicts Europe could remember. And to do so, they needed a truckload of charm and a convoy full of strategic modesty.

I’ve recently discovered a wonderful online resource dealing with cultures of diplomacy…