Before celebrated soprano vocalist Angel Blue graced theater stages around the world, she studied music at the University of Redlands as a classical pianist. But the Apple Valley native says her heart was always in opera.

“To be honest, I didn’t think I had what it took to be a singer,” admits Blue. “I was playing a lot of Rachmaninoff and loud show pieces. I was good at that, [yet] it didn’t feel like what I wanted. There was always something missing.”

Blue, who also plays sax and bass guitar, graduated from Los Angeles County High School for the Arts and won the Redlands Bowl’s Young Artists Competition in 2002. She helped fund her college tuition by entering regional beauty pageants (including claiming a first runner up finish in the 2006 Miss California pageant).

After obtaining a bachelor’s degree from the U of R, Blue received her master’s in opera at UCLA. She trained at LA Opera’s prestigious Young Artist Program under the tutelage of General Director Plácido Domingo.

Since then, the award-winning vocalist has performed internationally with prominent symphony orchestras in operas like “La Traviata,” “Carmen,” “Tosca,” “Porgy & Bess,” “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” and “Don Giovanni.”

A few years ago, Blue became a TV presenter for the BBC Proms, London’s long-running summer classical music festival (she helmed BBC’s “Cardiff Singer of the World” in Wales last month).

On Tuesday, when she returns to Redlands — a place where she likes to spend free time — many friends and family members will be in attendance.

We caught up on the phone with Blue in Dresden, Germany, where she had finished a stint as Myrtle in “The Great Gatsby” before moving onto the role of Mimi in “La Bohème.”

Question: Did winning the Redlands Bowl competition have a major effect on your burgeoning career?

Answer: It gave me more confidence and helped me see that I could make a mark in my field. That award was one of the most meaningful times at the start of my career. It allowed me to see that I could move forward in the art form. Also, I got to do [a song from] “La Traviata” by Verdi. That meant a lot, because opera singers are often told “You shouldn’t sing this until you’re older.” It made me feel like an opera star. That’s a great feeling.

Q: When you return to the Bowl, what are you looking forward to the most?

A: Working with Frank Fetta. I met him when I was 19 and had no idea what I was doing when I auditioned [for the Redlands Bowl competition]. I was just a young college student who really liked opera. I was competing against people who were more seasoned than I was. … I went in and everyone else had an accompanist. I only had a stereo player. He said, “If you can come in and sing like that with a ghetto blaster, you deserve to win.”

Q: How does the Redlands Bowl compare to other places you’ve performed?

A: I’m biased because I went to the University of Redlands. … No matter where I’ve traveled, coming home to Redlands and being able to sing

there will always represent my roots. What I love about the atmosphere is it’s very enchanting. Standing onstage and seeing the audience with smiles on their faces and their picnics, it makes my job much easier.

Q: Did you attend shows there while growing up in the I.E.?

A: My parents would take us to see the summer concert series for kids; I went to a couple of those. When I was about 15, I saw a musical.

Q: After completing the LA Opera program, you performed with Plácido Domingo several times. What were those experiences like?

A: I first met him when I was 23. It was a weird time because my father had just passed away. I really needed to find someone who could continue what my dad had started — my love for opera. Maestro Domingo provided that and was very encouraging. He continues to be. Singing with him is just awesome. I feel blessed to be able to say that I’ve sung with him all over the world — in Asia, the Middle East, the United States. The only reason I’ve been to South America was to do a concert with him in Brazil.

One thing I really enjoy about being onstage with him is [seeing how] he’s a great musician and really good actor. On top of that, there’s something about the way he performs that brings everybody who’s onstage with him up a notch. Working with him has made me a better artist.

Q: Did he ever give you any advice that helped with your singing?

A: Absolutely. He said, “Make sure you always have time to spend with your family.” My mom and I have been to his home. We had a concert in Acapulco in 2013.

Q: How many languages did you learn to be able to sing opera?

A: Italian, German, French, Spanish and Russian. I studied Russian for a year. I only really speak Spanish fluently. While I’m in Germany, they speak to me in the rehearsals in German, and I can understand them.

Q: You’ve performed “La Bohème” many times in the past. Would you consider it to be one of your favorites?

A: Definitely. … Mimi is a wonderful character with some really fantastic music.

Q: In 2011, you shared a stage with Chaka Khan, the late Donna Summer and other prominent pop/R&B acts during the David Foster & Friends show in Las Vegas. What was that like?

A: I was so nervous, but I had a great time. … The atmosphere around his concert is relaxed, but serious. He’s responsible for some of the greatest music that has ever been recorded. I felt totally honored. I learned a lot from him and Chaka Khan. There was a strong sense of camaraderie that I think the opera world needs more of … Donna Summer was at that concert. Then I saw her again in Napa Valley at the Festival del Sole, which I’m doing this year [“Porgy & Bess,” July 22]. What an incredible, supportive woman.

Q: Three years ago, you released a solo album, “Joy Alone.” Were you satisfied with how it turned out?

A: For the most part. I am very thankful to have an album, more so for myself, just to know it is something that is achievable. … There were a lot of things happening personally that didn’t help me sing my best, but I’m proud of it. I wouldn’t take it back. It was a learning experience.

Q: Was it difficult transitioning into television for the BBC?

A: It’s a very different beast than singing, but it provided me with another side of the entertainment industry that I also enjoy. I’m so used to having an audience that is live and moves. The camera presents [everything] straight down the lens. In a way, that’s more intimidating.

The BBC has been very kind to me. They continue to use me, and I’m grateful for that.

Can I add something? I absolutely adore Redlands. I’m a very proud Bulldog and Johnston Community member. I absolutely love my alma mater.

Young Artists Grand Finals

What: Young Artists Concerto Competition Grand Finals, featuring Angel Blue, Music Director Frank Paul Fetta and orchestra

When: 8 p.m. Tuesday, July 11

Where: Redlands Bowl, 25 Grant St.