<strong>CARON</strong> <strong>WHEELER</strong> TWO-TIME GRAMMY AWARD-WINNING SINGER/SONGWRITER Caron Wheeler is a two-time Grammy Award-winning singer/songwriter, producer, advocate and humanitarian. Caron has been involved with music, international causes and concerns for well over twenty years. Caron does not just write music and sing songs ... she lives to effectuate change! Caron Wheeler's voice first caught collective and international attention in 1989 with the British group, Soul II Soul. Caron Wheeler is the singular voice that captivated the world with her performances of the Grammy Awardwinning, multi-platinum “Keep On Movin” and “Back to Life” smash hits -- two of her most popular, signature songs that are till global favorites heard everyday around the world. Both songs are indeed anthems that often help others to persevere beyond challenges and struggles. The songs have been performed at an presidential inaugural ball for President Obama on January 20, 2009, and at international festivals, gala benefits, professional league ball games, and as part of commercials and motion picture soundtracks. Back To Life has recently been sampled and recorded by Fat Joe (featuring Young Jeezy), Estelle, and Big Boi. Caron Wheeler's voice can also be heard during the opening promo of “The Michael Baisden Show” -- a nationally syndicated radio program airing weekdays, and broadcast locally in New York City on WRKS 98.7 Kiss-FM beginning at 2 p.m. Caron is currently prepping for a documentary/reality show, and she is also planning to make her Broadway debut in early 2011. New Caron Wheeler music and Soul II Soul music are expected to released later this year. Caron is now a New Yorker, by way of London. Wish-list collaborations for Caron Wheeler include the talents of Chaka Khan, Tony Bennett, Bono, Usher, Quincy Jones, Elton John, Roberta Flack, Lauryn Hill, Hal David, Third World, John Legend, Joss Stone, Questlove, The Roots, India Arie, Oprah Winfrey, Floetry, Taylor Swift, Wyclef Jean, T-Pain, Tituss Burgess, Sting, Sheryl Lee Ralph, Mehmet Oz aka Dr. Oz, Bill T. Jones, Elvis Costello, Maxwell, Kelly Clarkson, Rick Ross, Kerry Rhodes Foundation, Nota, Mercedes Ellington, Justin Timberlake, Lee Summers, Wilber Wise, Justin Tuck & R.U.S. H. for Literacy, Ray Chew, Wat-aah, Sherri Shepherd, Q Tip, Roger Ross Williams, Prudence Mabhena, RayDon, and others. Recent/upcoming appearance highlights for Caron Wheeler include: Caron Wheeler in Concert -- July 27, 2010 (Chicago) Soul II Soul Performance/Guest Appearance -- July 18, 2010 (London) MTV Networks -- Black Music History Month Salute -- Performance/Guest Panelist -- June 2010 (NYC) Songwriters Hall of Fame and Induction -- June 17, 2010 (NYC) New York Premiere of Academy Award-winning film, Music by Prudence -- May 10, 2010 (NYC) Oprah's "Live Your Best Life" Weekend-Walk -- May 9, 2010 (NYC) - Ribbon-Cutting Grand Opening of Fashion to Figure -- May 1, 2010 (NYC) The Dr. Oz Show taping -- Friday, April 23, 2010 (NYC) - Dr. Oz's HealthCorps Gala Performance www.healthcorps.org -- April 21, 2010 (NYC) Soul II Soul Performance/Guest Appearance -- April 10, 2010 (London) MSL's New York Red Bull -- Red Bull Arena Grand Opening -- March 20, 2010 (New Jersey)