Post by I on

Caron Wheeler

Born in England on January 19, 1963, Caron Wheeler was raised in Jamaica by her musical parents. Her mother is a singer with a Jamaican drama company, and her father plays the bass guitar. Caron is a Grammy Award-winning British R&B/soul singer, who came to fame as a member of the popular Brown Sugar lovers rock female trio, and scored heavily in the late 1970s with songs 'I'm In Love With A Dreadlocks', Our Reggae Music' and 'Black Pride'.

Following a further success with Soul II Soul by writing and singing the lead vocals on the two biggest hits for the group, 'Keep On Movin'' and 'Back To Life', Wheeler embarked on a solo career, and released two albums: 'UK Blak' (1990) and 'Beach Of The War Goddess' (1993). Her biggest solo hit was the single 'Livin' In The Light' from the 'UK Blak' album, which reached the UK Singles Chart and also hit the Billboard Hot 100.

Wheeler's only other solo Top 40 hit single was the title track from 'UK Blak'. She also featured with Soul II Soul on the soundtrack to the Angela Bassett movie, How Stella Got Her Groove Back in 1998. And in 2003, she contributed the track 'Another Star' to the Stevie Wonder tribute album 'Conception - An Interpretation of Stevie Wonder's Songs'.

Caron is reportedly working on a new solo album to be released in 2009. She is also back in the recording studio with Jazzie B recording tracks for a new Soul II Soul album.

Dennis Bovell

Born in St Peter, Barbados, on May 22, 1953, Dennis Bovell is, unusually for a non Jamaican, the foremost reggae producer in the UK and virtually the inventor of the lovers rock style.

He joined his parents in London at the age of twelve and while still at school joined his first band Road Works Ahead, before forming the group Stonehenge. His band gave birth to the three-part harmony section that was later to become the trademark of his next group Matumbi, formed in 1970.

During the mid-1970s, he worked as an engineer at Dip Records, recording in a variety of styles, most notably helping establish the lovers rock genre with singles for TT Ross, Cassandra, Brown Sugar, Carolyn Catlin, Errol Dunkley, Trevor Hartley and others. At the same time, he was producing top selling lovers rock hits with his group Matumbi on ‘After Tonight’ and ‘The Man In Me’, though his greatest success with the style was reserved for his big hit with Janet Kay’s ‘Silly Games’ in 1978.

In 1979, he opened his own recording facility Studio 80 and formed the Dub Band, beginning an enduring partnership with dub poet Linton Kwesi Johnson. The 1980s saw Bovell in great demand as a producer, working with bands as diverse as The Slits, Chalice, The Thompson Twins and Bananarama. He remixed albums for Marvin Gaye as well as Wet Wet Wet and The Boomtown Rats and worked closely with Nigerian Fela Anikulapo Kuti.

Dennis Bovell has deservedly earned himself the reputation of being Britain's reggae maestro. He is renowned as an accomplished multi-instrumentalist (playing guitar, bass and keyboards), sound engineer, composer, band leader and producer and continues to lead the UK scene with innovative and adventurous music.

Errol Dunkley

Errol Dunkley was born in Western Kingston, Jamaica in 1951 and attended Kingston Secondary School and Warren Hall High School. Following in the footsteps of Delroy Wilson, he was the second artist to achieve local success as a teenage singing star!

His recording career began in 1965 with a duet recorded alongside his friend Junior English for Prince Buster entitled ‘My Queen’, which he followed up with ‘Love Me Forever’ for the same producer, though his first big hit was ‘You’re Gonna Need Me’ for Joel Gibson in 1967. The following year, ‘Please Stop Your Lying’ and ‘I'm Going Home’ for Gibbs helped cement his reputation.

In 1971, he reworked his three big Joe Gibbs hit for the medley ‘Three In One’, issued on Rupie Edwards’ Success label, and the following year had another huge hit for the producer with ‘Darling Ooh (Your Love Is Amazing)’. In 1972, an association with Jimmy Rodway brought further successes with ’Black Cinderella’ and ‘Keep The Pressure Down’, after which he formed the African Museum record label together with Gregory Isaacs and scored an immediate hit with ‘Movie Star‘.

Dunkley came to live in the UK in 1974 and continued to record throughout the 1970s, with most of his records coming out on Count Shelly’s Third World label and in 1977 he had one of his biggest reggae hits with a reworking of a song originally cut for Sonia Pottinger entitled ‘A Little Way Different’, a big sound system tune of the late 1970s produced by Dennis Bovell. His popularity in the UK grew, resulting in a breakthrough UK Singles Chart hit in 1979 with ‘OK Fred‘, a cover version of a John Holt-penned song, that reached number 11 on the national chart. He avoided the one-hit wonder tag, by securing a minor chart placing with the 1980 follow-up release, ‘Sit Down And Cry‘.

Jazzie B

Born Trevor Beresford Romeo in Hornsey, North London on January 26, 1963, the ninth of a family of 10 children, several of whom began running sound systems in the 1960s and 1970s. His first engagement in music was in 1977 working with friends under the nomenclature Jah Rico. He changed the group’s working name to Soul II Soul in 1982. Soul II Soul was originally an umbrella name for several of Jazzie B's operations, including sound systems as well as the group itself.

Jazzie B has also produced and remixed tracks for The Fine Young Cannibals, Incognito, Maxi Priest, James Brown, Kym Mazelle, Rose Windross, Cheryl Lynn, Public Enemy, Johnny Gill, Caron Wheeler, Isaac Hayes, Sinead O'Connor, Teena Marie, Ziggy Marley, Yorker, The Jones Girls, Nas, and Destiny's Child. He has produced and presented a number of various artists compilations, including ‘…Presents Soul II Soul at the Africa Centre’ (2004); ‘…Presents School Days: Life Changing Tracks From The Trojan Archives’ (2008); and ‘Masterpiece’ (2008).

In 2002, he was listed first in the business category of the 100 Great Black Britons list. He was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2008 New Year Honours and in May 2008, was awarded the first Inspiration award at the Ivor Novello Awards, for being “a pioneer” and “the man who gave black British music a soul of its own”.

Jimmy Lindsay

Born in Kingston, Jamaica in 1950, Jimmy relocated to the UK with his family at the age of nine and started out singing soul music as a twelve-year old Brixton schoolboy, though his best known recording came with his lovers rock interpretation of ‘Easy’ in 1977.

In 1965, he joined a group named The Healers, followed by a short term with The Nighthawks. Other ventures included a spell with the rock band Pure Medicine, and soul with The Garments. He first came to fame as vocalist for the London based Cymande group of Jamaican and Guyanese musicians, joining the Nyah-funk group during the recording of their third album ‘Promise Heights’ in 1974 and replacing vocalist Joey Dee. He worked with the group on the road for about eight months before they called it a day.

By 1976 he had began concentrating on reggae and recorded lead vocals on the sound system hit ‘What You Gonna Do’. This encouraged Lloyd Coxsone to produce him as a soloist. The first release, ‘Motion’, surfaced on Cactus, followed by ‘Easy’, a cover version of the Commodores hit, issued on Lloyd's own Tribesman label. The tune was an immediate favourite with the lovers crowd and was licensed to Island Records, who sold over 70,000 units of the title. Jimmy claims he was paid £700 for its issue on Tribesman but received nothing for its Island release

The single's success led Lindsay to put his energies into his own Music Hive label and, sharing lead vocals with Larry Walker under the collective name of Dambala, they enjoyed a big sound system hit with ‘Zimbabwe’. The group was comprised of a multiracial line-up, including members from Nigeria, Guyana, St. Lucia, Barbados and the UK. Lindsay began to concentrate on his solo career when he signed a contract with the Gem label, and in the autumn of 1979 he released ‘Where Is Your Love’, produced by Lloyd Coxsone. To promote the album he toured with his new band Rasuji, including members from Dambala in the line-up. In 1980, he released ‘Children Of Rastafari’, which conveyed a more spiritual message, notably on the track ‘It's Hard (For A Dread To Live In Babylon)’. It was lifted for single release and promoted on a tour of the UK when Lindsay supported Steel Pulse.

Kofi

Born in Lambeth, South London, Kofi, whose African name means “Friday’s Child”, is the third youngest of six children. With her Church of God upbringing, and with the sound of everything from ska, reggae, jazz and soul emanating from the family home, Kofi’s natural love of music was enhanced, and following a brief flirtation with acting when she attended drama school, her urge to make music began to dominate.

Joining the three part harmony group Brown Sugar as a 14 year-old in 1977, Kofi had instant success when the trio released a series of chart topping singles on the Lovers Rock label with ‘I’m In Love With A Dreadlocks’, ‘Hello Stranger’, I'll Never Let You Go Out Of My Life’, ‘Black Pride’ and ‘Do You Really Love Me?’.

In 1990, her first album ‘Black…With Sugar’ was issued on the Mad Professor’s Ariwa label, followed by ‘Wishing Well’ two years later and then ‘Friday’s Child’ im 2002. Unbeknown to the artist, she was being carefully watched by Jazzie B of Soul II Soul, who had been approached by Motown to set up a subsidiary label called Funky Dreds. He contacted Kofi and the artist was signed to the new Motown/Funky Dred label.

During her time with the Detroit label, Kofi was commissioned to work on a musical project put together by Disney/Buena Vista, a musical tribute to the company’s many successful movies over the years and as such they marked the occasion by featuring many top rated artists to each take a very famous song from one of their beloved movies and perform it in their own unique style. Kofi made her contribution to the project with her rendition of ‘Kiss The Girl’ from ‘The Little Mermaid’.

Her latest LP, ‘Rocking Eternally’ was produced by Mafia & Fluxy and issued on the Cousins label last year.

Lorna Bennett

Born June 7, 1952, in St. Elizabeth, Jamaica, Lorna Bennett is best remembered for her reggae version of Baby Washington’s ‘Breakfast In Bed’.

While still at school, she began singing with the Bare Essential Band, and at one of their performances was noticed by Geoffrey Chung, who nurtured her early recording career. A recording of ‘Morning Has Broken’ was not commercially successful, but led to producer Harry Johnson commissioning Chung to record Bennett's version of ‘Breakfast in Bed’ in 1972, which was a success both locally and in the United Kingdom. With the song, Bennett became the first female artist to top the singles chart in Jamaica for five years, a feat repeated with the follow-up, a cover of The Dixie Cups’ ‘Chapel of Love’.

Further recordings followed, including her debut album, ‘This Is Lorna’. Bennett then put her music career on hold while she moved to Barbados to complete a law degree, but on her return in 1974 recorded the Pluto Shervington song ‘Dancing To My Own Heartbeat’. She then gave up her musical career, and moved back to St. Elizabeth and opened a legal practice.

In 2001, she decided to return to music, performing at Christmas Vintage shows and the Heineken Startime concerts, as well as appearances in Miami and England. She then began working on new material with Sly & Robbie. In 2003, Bennett delivered a eulogy at the funeral of David "Scotty" Scott, the deejay with whom she had shared her first number one single on ‘Skank In Bed’.

Louisa Mark

Born in Shepherds Bush, London in 1961, Louisa “Markswoman” Mark was voted the top female reggae vocalist of 1978 ahead of Marcia Griffith. Her sweet vocal style and updated rock steady rhythms have made her a queen of lovers rock.

It was within the walls of the Four Aces club in Dalston that the 14 year-old Louisa Mark made her debut appearance at a talent competition. Mark won the competition at the first attempt, and went on to triumph for ten weeks in a row. Lloydie Coxsone and Dennis Bovell were impressed and took her into Gooseberry Studios in Soho to record a sumptuous cover of ‘Caught You In A Lie’, a song originally recorded by the soul man Robert Parker. Matumbi provided the backing track. The song was a huge hit at sound system events around the UK, earning Mark celebrity status in the classrooms of Hammersmith County School. This was then followed by another monster success entitled ‘All My Loving’. Despite the song’s popularity, Louisa Mark quit recording for over 18 months because of contractual disputes.

She was then linked up with house producer and A&R manager for Trojan Records Clem Bushay, veteran of the UK reggae scene, cutting her next hit ‘Keep It Like It Is’. Again the song was well received but poor promotion proved disillusioning and despite the terms of her one year contract she declined to record further. Once free from Trojan, Louisa’s music began to take off. Her rendition of Michael Jackson's ‘Even Though You’re Gone’ was released on the Bushays label and sold well. She followed this up with ‘6 Six Street’ penned by Joe Charles, Clem Bushay and The In Crowd, which hit the number one spot in its first week of release.

She is now resident in Ghana, West Africa.

Maxi Priest

Born Max Alfred Elliott in Lewisham, London on June 10, 1962, Maxi Priest is a reggae vocalist of Jamaican descent who enjoyed sustained success in the 1990s.

The second youngest of nine children and named after the British pop singer Max Bygraves, Maxi Priest grew up listening to gospel, reggae and rhythm and blues. His uncle, the reggae icon Jacob Miller, was the front man in the popular Jamaican group Inner Circle.

Priest’s musical career began with him singing on the South London reggae sound system Saxon Studio International, after which some independent single releases followed. His first major album was the eponymous ‘Maxi Priest’ (1988) which, along with his cover of Cat Stevens’ ‘Wild World‘, established him as one of the top British reggae singers.

He is one of only two British reggae acts (along with UB40) to have a American Billboard number one: ‘Close to You’ in 1990. A duet with Roberta Flack, ‘Set The Night To Music’, reached the American Top Ten in 1991. His duet with Shaggy in 1996, ‘That Girl’, was also a hit in the United States, peaking at number twenty.

In the latter half of his recording career, Priest has favoured working alongside other artists, both established and up-and-coming. In addition to Roberta Flack and Shaggy, he has worked with Sly & Robbie, Beres Hammond, Jazzie B, Apache Indian, Shabba Ranks and Lee Ritenour.

In 2008, it was reported that Priest would be replacing Ali Campbell as the new lead singer of UB40, and that he had recorded a cover of Bob Marley’s ‘I Shot the Sheriff’. Priest had joined UB40 on tour in 2007, culminating in sell out shows at the National Exhibition Centre in Solihull in December of that year.

Michael Gordon

Born in London, England, Michael Gordon was taken to Jamaica at the age of four, where he was raised in the Parish of St Mary until the age of 14, when he returned to England. He attended secondary school in South London until the age of 16 years old.

In 1976. Michael reluctantly joined a local band, which soon became well known as The Investigators. Lacking musical experience, he was encouraged by guitarist Colin Burton to front the band as lead vocalist. This was the start of something wonderful for Michael Gordon, as they went on to record lovers rock gems like ‘Turn Out The Light’, ‘Baby I’m Yours’ ‘Close To You’, ‘Summertime Blues’ and ‘Love Is What You Make It’, all issued on their own Inner City recording label.

In 1985 the band split and Michael was signed to UK based Fashion Records, working with such as Drummie Zeb and Tony Gad from Aswad. The collaboration spawned hit tracks such as ‘Magic Feeling’ and ‘Love Is In The Air’, which subsequently led to his debut solo album ’Feelings Of Love’, which went to the top spot in the reggae album chart.

In the early 1990s, Michael started his own recording label called Sweet Freedom Records and released The Investigators’ ‘Greatest Hits’ album in June 1991. Within its first week it had climbed to the top spot on the reggae album charts. This proved a fantastic success for the label as the album remained at the top of the chart for 14 weeks.

Paul Dawkins

Born in London, England in October 1962, Paul Dawkins is a great journeyman reggae singer who has been a prominent personality on the UK reggae scene for more than 30 years.

The first song he ever sung on was called ‘Why Oh Why’ in 1976 before joining forces with Paul “Echo” Thompson, Les McNeil, Chris "Buff Head" Henry and Tony "Drummie" Matthews to form one of the very first lovers rock groups, Tradition. The group all hailed from the north west London area and congregated around Don Tyrone’s Gangsterville record shop in the Harrow Road. Tyrone was the producer of the band’s debut album ’Movin’ On’, which was released in 1977. The band also backed visiting Jamaican reggae stars like Delroy Wilson, Alton Ellis and Owen Gray and went on tour supporting acts such as Shawaddywaddy, Boomtown Rats, The Cars and Thin Lizzy. Also in 1977, Paul was singing for rival producer Delroy Witter as part of the Heptics group, who scored a huge hit with ‘Natural Woman’ that year.

In 1980, Paul joined forces with lovers rock producer Patrick Cann and notched up a succession of lovers rock favourites on his Arawak record label. The pair came up with an immediate classic in ‘To Love Someone’. ‘Sweet Feelings’ and ‘One More Step’ were other popular titles from the Cann/Dawkins combination. By the middle of the 1980s, he and the Heptics were singing for the Starlight label on titles like ‘Spend Some Time Together’ and ‘Come My Baby’.

Sandra Cross

A native of South London born of Jamaican parentage, Sandra Cross is the only girl among seven brothers. She started singing in the Pentecostal Church and led the choir when she was a mere nine years-old. At 14, she recorded with a friend as Love & Unity. The song ‘I Adore You’ was released on Studio 76 Records, and stayed at number one for four consecutive weeks in 1979,

Following this, the duo had three more hits before they parted ways two years later. Sandra dabbled in small solo projects for a short while, until she eventually met The Mad Professor in 1983. The Professor had just started a record company called Ariwa Records, and in 1985 her first solo recording with the label was released, a rendition of the Stylistics ‘Country Living’, which quickly topped ther UK reggae chart. Her next two records ‘You’re Lying’ and ‘It’s You’, repeated this same chart topping success. These popular records led to her being voted Britain’s Best Female Reggae Singer consecutively for six years between 1986 and 1991.

In 1992, Sandra and her family migrated to Barbados and focused on other personal commitments. The temptation to retire from the music industry was always on her mind; however, a voice from within beseeched her to be patient and wait for the right timing to present itself again. The opportunity she had been preparing herself for presented itself in the summer of 2005, when Florida based producer Lloyd Campbell of Joe Fraser Records gave Sandra a call, while vacating with his family in Barbados. They immediately got together and recorded two tracks for his ‘Loving Pauper Meets Hypocrite’ various artists project, released later that year. Received with resounding accolades from reggae radio and sound system personalities worldwide, she continued the partnership and released the smash song ‘Someone Special’ at the beginning of 2008, and began celebrating her official comeback.

Sugar Minott

Born Lincoln Barrington Minott in Kingston, Jamaica on May 25, 1956, Sugar Minott is a Jamaican reggae singer, producer and sound-system owner and the recording artist who more than any other started the dancehall trend in the late 1970s.

He began his singing career as one part of The African Brothers harmony trio in 1969, along with Tony Tuff and Derrick Howard. The group released several singles in the early half of the 1970s before Minott teamed up as a solo act with producer Clement Dodd, and soon began recording his own singles. He developed a talent for writing new songs to fit over existing rhythms, pioneering an approach that would be central to the emerging dancehall style.

After a number of moderately successful hits for Studio One, such as ‘Vanity‘, ‘Hang On Natty’ and ‘Mr. DC‘, his debut LP ‘Live Loving’ made his name and increased his popularity. He soon became a bigger star in the UK than in Jamaica, leading Minott to relocate to the UK, where he became a focus for UK reggae.

A cover of a Michael Jackson song, ‘Good Thing Going’ was distributed by RCA and reached Number 4 in the UK Singles Chart in March 1981, leading to an album of the same name. Returning to Jamaica, his Youth Promotion sound system performed regularly in Kingston's Maxfield Park. Meanwhile, his Black Roots label featured productions with artists such as Barry Brown, Tenor Saw, Little John, Tony Tuff, Barrington Levy, Horace Andy, Nitty Gritty, Junior Reid, and Garnett Silk.

One of reggae music’s great veterans, Sugar Minott continues to record and tour across the globe. He has released over 60 albums and many hundreds of singles.

Susan Cadogan

Born Alison Anne Cadogan in Kingston, Jamaica on February 11 1951, Susan Cadogan is a reggae singer best known for her lovers rock smash ‘Hurt So Good’ records in the 1970s.

She is the daughter of singer Lola Cadogan, who released several 78rpm singles of devotional music during the 1950s, and spent several years of her childhood in Belize, where her family had moved, before returning to Jamaica. She trained and qualified as a librarian, taking a job in the library of the University of the West Indies at Mona.

Her talents as a singer led to her meeting with Lee Perry the Upsetter, who was so impressed by her voice that he recorded an album’s worth of material with her and renamed her Susan. Her first release for Perry, a cover of Millie Jacksons soul hit ‘Hurts So Good‘, was released to little effect in Jamaica but was released in the UK by Dennis Harris's DIP International label, and topped the UK Reggae Chart. Other Perry productions included ‘In The Ghetto’ and ‘Fever’, though they lacked the impact of her big hit. Two mid-1970s albums, ‘Doing It Her Way’ and ‘Hurt So Good’ were also disappointing, sales wise.

Susan returned to her library job, but resurfaced as a recording artist in 1982, having a string of hits in Jamaica including covers of ‘Tracks Of My Tears’ and ‘Piece Of My Heart, and 1983’s ‘(You Know How To Make Me) Feel So Good’ - a duet with Ruddy Thomas. More recently, she has toured together with Glen Adams and The Slackers.

Trevor Walters

Born on September 7, 1960 in London, England, Trevor Walters embarked on a musical career in reggae by adding his distinct soprano voice to a succession of youth groups, singing and recording with such as Youth And Youth, The Itals and Santic.

Prior to embarking on a solo career, Walters recorded the ‘Back Together Again’ duet with Jean Adebambo, which gave an early indication of the potential of these two fine vocalists. This release was followed by the protest song, ‘They'll Never Get Away’.

In 1981 Walters wrote and recorded ‘Give Love A Try’. which topped the reggae chart and in October 1981 he reached number 27 in the UK pop charts with ‘Love Me Tonight’. It appeared that Walters was destined to be a one-hit-wonder in the annals of pop music, but he still attracted some derision from reggae aficionados because of his crossover success.

Nevertheless, he continued releasing material that maintained a respectable profile in the reggae chart, including Jimmy Jones’ ‘Handy Man’, ‘Comma Comma’ and, in combination with Jah Bunny, ‘Lovers Medley’. The singer returned to the UK pop charts in July 1984, reaching number nine with his rendition of Lionel Richie’s ‘Stuck On You’.

He also covered Richie's ‘Penny Lover‘, which, although an exemplary effort riding a gentle lovers rock rhythm, did not chart. His crossover success inspired Polydor to sign him for a cover version of Andrew Gold’s ‘Never Let Her Slip Away‘.

Vivian Jones

Born in Trelawny, Jamaica, in 1957, Vivian Jones is a sophisticated singer with a warm and soulful voice who has been charting in the UK for almost three decades now. He left the island at the age of ten to settle in England and in 1976 joined the band The Spartans when he began to write his own material.

His earliest releases were for John Rubie’s Freedom Sounds label in 1978, for whom he recorded ‘Black, Green & Gold’, ‘It’s A Heartache’, ‘Punishment’ and ‘Jah Music’ and in 1980 he achieved a number one slot on the UK reggae charts with a song for Unity sound system owner Ribs called ‘Good Morning’. The following year, he was voted the most talented singer/songwriter in the UK by Black Echoes but the problem of lack of remuneration for reggae recording artists made him contemplate his future. So, in 1984 he went back to Jamaica, and ended up recording songs with Roots Radics. He returned to England, where he collaborated with Jah Shaka, and began to concentrate on his own music once more.

In 1988, Vivian scored saw another number one hit in the reggae charts with ‘Sugar Love’, which stayed there for four weeks. His ‘Extra Classic Super Fantastic Love’ reached number 3 in August 1989 and stayed in the charts till January 1990, when ‘The Hurt’ was released. His album ‘Jamaican Love’ was released in early 1990 and features Vivian's hit singles from 1988 to 1990, while 1991 saw another five week slot at the top with ‘Strong Love’ and in the same year he was awarded the title of Best Male Artist.

Another trip to Jamaica in 1993 had Vivian recording with top producers Junior Reid and Bobby Digital, following which he returned to England to cut ‘Ethiopian Eyes’ and ‘African Love’, both of which were hits. He then started work on the ‘Love Is For Lovers’ LP, the title track from which was released in 1994.

Throughout the 1990s, he recorded prodigiously for labels like Stingray, Charm and Fashion, as well as his own Imperial House imprint. John Levi from Regal Records in Doncaster described Vivian as being “the John Holt of Europe. You go to the record shop and just ask for the tunes, you don't need to hear them play.”

Winston Reedy

Born in St Catherine, Jamaica on July 13, 1950, Winston Reedy is renowned as one of the most successful and popular UK based reggae singers. Arriving in England at the age of 17, his first foray into music making came when he joined the band X Press as their lead singer. The group came to prominence after backing Ginger Williams on her lovers rock recording of ‘I Can’t Resist Your Tenderness’, a massive hit in UK West Indian circles.

Shortly after, he joined forces with one of the UK’s top reggae bands, The Cimarons. The group made a trip to Jamaica in 1975 to record an album called ‘On The Rock’, issuing a single from the set of Bob Marley’s ‘Talking Blues’, sung by Reedy and a big hit on the island. After signing a deal with Polydor, the group then made an album ’Maka’ that made further inroads on the scene.

The Cimarons were one of the UK’s most dynamic stage acts and toured Europe, the Middle East, Far East, Japan and the West Indies. This created the opportunity for Winston to work with some of the industry’s top names, including Jimmy Cliff, Bob Marley, Dennis Brown, The Pioneers and Paul McCartney. This resulted in Winston appearing in a video of Paul McCartney & Stevie Wonder’s collaborative ‘Ebony And Ivory’, a worldwide hit.

By 1982, Winston had embarked on a solo career. His first single after leaving The Cimarons was ‘Daughters Of Zion’, which immediately soared to the top of the Black Echoes reggae chart. This was followed by a series of top selling singles, including ‘Paradise In Your Eyes’, ’Moi Emma Oh’ and ’Dim The Light’, a lovers rock classic which topped the Black Echoes chart for nine consecutive weeks and remains one of the most popular reggae hits of all.

Penny Reel

Penny Reel first heard Jamaican music playing from Nat’s record stall in Dalston’s Ridley Road market. He remembers names like Lascelles Perkins, Owen Gray, Laurel Aitken, The Mellowlarks and Higgs & Wilson. He thought these were obscure New Orleans recordings and could barely believe it when Nat told him they were manufactured in Jamaica. He started buying these Kingstonian sounds the following year and has been collecting the music ever since. In 1963, he wrote a short article on ska for a club magazine and in 1973 began writing professionally on the subject of reggae. He was at the New Musical Express for 11 years and with Black Echoes for nearly 25 years. He has met virtually anybody who is anybody in the music and interviewed, among hundreds, the likes of Dennis Brown, Bob Marley, Peter Tosh, Prince Far I, Hugh Mundell, Keith Hudson and Nitty Gritty, In addition, he has written about Jamaican music for many other magazines and in 2000 published a book entitled Deep Down With Dennis Brown, charting the early career of the late superstar. He is also the journalist credited with coining the term lovers rock in an article he wrote called This Is Lovers Rock in New Musical Express in 1978. With 50 years of collecting the music and nearly 40 writing about it, Penny Reel has been invaluable in helping spread the positive message of reggae music worldwide.

John Masouri

John Masouri has interviewed virtually every singer, musician and producer you can think of, from Prince Buster to Busy Signal. Although a regular visitor to Jamaica, he’s always supported British reggae talent, and believes in its strength and importance. He started writing for Echoes more than 20 years ago, but outside of the UK, he’s written for magazines in France, Germany, Japan, America and the Caribbean, and has been a contributor to numerous radio and TV documentaries.

Last year saw the publication of his book Wailing Blues: The Story Of Bob Marley's Wailers, which he wrote with Aston "Family Man" Barrett, that leading authorities have described as the best book ever written on Bob Marley. He is currently working on a film script with Maxi Priest and a biography of the late Peter Tosh.

Snoopy

Snoopy began writing about reggae music in 1975 and for the next six years had his work published in newspapers and magazines such as New Musical Express, Album Tracking, Billboard, Caraibes, Record Business and primarily the black-music weekly Black Echoes. He also helped to instigate and co-ordinate the very first British reggae awards ceremony in 1978, which was the first show to recognize and celebrate British reggae talent. He also worked for Dennis Brown at DEB Music and in 1979 spent a whole month in Jamaica researching the Kingston music scene, courtesy of producer Joe Gibbs. He also worked as a vocal coach and in 1980 topped the reggae charts himself as part of vocal trio Eargasm with their medley of songs called ‘This Is Lovers Rock’. He now works with young people, particularly young offenders, using music, drama and the arts to empower them and provide them with a positive attitude towards life.

Observer