RICARDO BOFILL

Ricardo Bofill, born in 1939 in Barcelona, graduated from the Barcelona University School of Architecture and the School of Geneva. In 1963 he gathered a multidisciplinary, multitalented group in order to confront the complexity of architectural practice; architects, engineers, planners, sociologist, writers, movie makers and philosophers, conformed what is known today as the Taller de Arquitectura.

In Bofill’s work, History has been a constant presence, not only in the form of the continuing analysis and interpretation of the culture and architecture of the past, but also by means of the impetus given to new tendencies, to involvement in the social movements of the day and the creation of alternative responses to contemporary problems. The professional progress of the Taller de Arquitectura, marked by the stimulus and the conception of life, the vital vision of an inexhaustible Ricardo Bofill, has undergone a series of practical and theoretical changes closely linked to the political and social transformations of recent years. An analysis of the body of Bofill’s work as a whole reveals a tremendous degree of coherence and a continuity of thinking that are the product of a history and a language that are uniquely personal.

In his first period, Bofill recuperated the characteristic craft elements of traditional Catalan architecture. Later on, he began to deal with urban planning problems at a local level within the Spanish political and social context. Because of the necessity to approach major projects, Bofill’s team conceived a methodology based on the geometric formation of elements in space, developed in a theoretical manner with the project The City in Space, and made it concrete with the construction of Walden 7.

Interested in the urban planning problems of the developing countries, Bofill transported a part of his team to Algeria where he collaborated with the government in the urban planning and housing field. His work culminated two years later with the construction of Houari Boumédienne Agricultural Village in the south-eastern part of the country.

In 1971 he formed a complementary team in Paris, in response to the demands of various projects for the French “New Towns”. During this phase, Bofill introduced in his proposals symbolic elements directly related to the French monumental architecture. La Petite Cathédrale and La Maison d’Abraxas are examples of these inhabited monuments.

From 1979 on, the activities of Bofill’s Taller de Arquitectura took place mainly in France, with the simultaneous construction of four projects: Les Arcades du Lac and Le Viaduc in Versailles; Le Palais d’Abraxas, Le Théâtre and L’Arc in Marne-la-Vallée; Les Echelles du Baroque in the XIV district in Paris; as well as Antigone in Montpellier. His team settled in Paris and worked on the industrialized construction of social housing.

Bofill’s design studies for precast concrete units contributed in the 80’s, to the Taller’s affirmation of the validity of classical forms and geometry in contemporary architecture. In the 90’s, the inclusion of glass and steel amongst the materials used in his projects is simply the outcome of a process marked by the study of and research into forms and materials.

In 2000 Bofill regrouped his activity in Spain. From his headquarters, a former cement factory in the outskirts of Barcelona, Bofill’s Taller continues the spirit and philosophy that motivated his team in the early 60s to approach international projects from the large scale of urban design contributing to a new "integrated urbanism”, which include the schemes for Luxembourg’s Place de l’Europe, New Castellana in Madrid, Boston Central Artery; large infrastructures for public transport, as the recent Terminal 1 for Barcelona Airport; sports, cultural, and retail facilities in Europe and Asia; both social and Class A residential buildings, from Dakar to Stockholm, from Beijing to Paris; office buildings and headquarters of leading companies in the US, France, Spain…

Ricardo Bofill’s reputation worldwide relies on the fact that no other architect has continuously worked with success in so many countries. Many projects worldwide validate his capacity to design in harmony with different local cultures as the result of combining know-how and global experience.