The presenter is Chris Hofmann, The title of Chris’ talk is “Amazon Involvement with Mozilla and Open Source Projects.” A few Amazon employees are already involved with Open Source and all of the conference attendees use Open Source software. (Apparently, FireFox has a 90% market share, well, at least in the conference room.) Everyone’s use […]

Introduction to Eclipse, Bjorn Freeman-Benson of Predictable Software. Member of the Eclipse board, and a Committer Representative. Project has lots of users, some contributors, and a few who can make commits to the source code repository. He worked at OTI (Object Technology International) putting together Eclipse, has written plug-ins, but has a different perspective because […]

Brian Aker is the Director of Architecture at MySQL. Brian was invited to speak at Amazon DevCon and told that he could talk about anything. Brian chose Writing Storage Engines, because his favorite thing to talk aobut is the guts of MySQL and the storage engine. Brian is the author of lots of stuff. See […]

New Amazon CTO Werner Wogels, who called himself as a “recovering academic, introduced Margo Seltzer from Sleepycat software and lauded Berkeley DB for its model of simplicity. “Try to do less, but better,” he told us, rather than trying to do everything, but poorly. Margo went on to describe what it means for Berkeley DB […]

The title of the presentation is, “Struts and JavaServer Faces,” given by Craig R. McClanahan, Senior Staff Engineer at Sun Microsystems. He’s here to tell the audience everything there is to know about Struts. Craig’s current position is as an architect for the Java Studio Creator. Earlier, he was the creator of the Struts framework. […]

Margo Seltzer is CTO of SleepyCat Sleepycat is a successful model of how to take OSS and make it available for both commercial and non-commercial use. Survey, who uses BDB, who knows about it, who has used it (hands all around). First half of talk is intro to BDB, is new goodies and product direction. […]

I came into Gregor Kiczales talk a bit late to find that the room was standing room only. I was was standing towards the back, with barely enough room to cradle my laptop on one arm. Gregor’s a professor at the Software Practices Lab at the University of British Columbia, working on research “directed at […]

Michael Tiemann Wrote the first native code C++ compiler, founded Cynus Solutions, now part of Red Hat. Talking to clients about the state and strategy of open source. At an IT technology forum last year, CEO speaker of $1B company said they would rearchitect the company around open source. IT cost and head count as […]