rev., Jan 1, 2020.

Clownhouse is the first movie made by Victor Salva, and notorious for its backstory, in that Salva sexually abused its 12 year old star, during the shoot, serving two years in prison, before coming back out to direct the Jeepers Creepers franchise after 2000. It is hard, then, to watch this movie without that retrospective gloss, and especially in the opening scenes when we sees three brothers being much more open with each other in terms of dressing and undressing in front of each other than I ever was with my brothers, there is a kind sting of homoerotic whisperings. Along those lines, I almost froze when I saw the 12 year lead come out of his bedroom to walk to the bathroom and he walks by a classic pair of Blue Boy and Pinkie pictures, both mean a child of that gender in the house is in trouble, but recently I have refined the trope to indicate that a Pinkie is a female character who, while innocent, suffers because she thinks everyone thinks she is guilty, while a Blue Boy is a problematic male who is taken out by a fellow victim who exploits the crisis to get rid of him, blaming him for the problem. While this does not entirely play out here, it is certainly true that the three brothers have a tense little knot of triangulated emotions, and, in fact, the movie’s failing is in that, like the “cops and robbers” of the investigatory part of any movie like this, the movie never lets go of their interactions, to even create space for true haunting or scary sequences. Another problem is that the director relied on a strangely obtuse, all but ambient depiction of the threat of a scare looming over all, in a quite abstract way that some might think is arty, but results only in tensions, not scares. In any, the youngest is alerted to a coming-to-town of a circus, featuring his personal bogeyman, being a coulrophobe, fear of clowns, clowns, by the old trope stretched to all but the incredible as a flyer for the circus is blown by the wind up to plaster against his window, freaking him out. But, then, they go to the circus anyway, for him to rightly scared. At one point he goes to a palmist who in a gruff and unpleasant manner says that his life line is severely distressed. In the ring, he is scared to death by a support clown who makes eye contact then tries to engage with him, so he runs out of the tent. The moment that, however, causes his eyes to boggle with terror, in a close-up formation I call the Watcher, is when he sees a sideway barker twist balloons into a dog, I guess it signified to him what clowns wanted to do to him. At this point, they return home, there are a few genre intervals, but then the story is three inmates from the local insane asylum, so that trope, have escaped, and having passed through the gauntlet of the circus have emerged out the other side wearing clown costumes, with, I must say, impeccable makeup. Now they target the big house that the boys live in, with overly scenic and obtuse shots of an overly arty nature to indicate that they pose a threat, even if at this point they have done nothing. When the older brother realizes that he has no food for the others they then run to a shop seven minutes away, which causes the clowns to chase them, especially the youngest. The boys also had put out a hanged man on a tree out front for Halloween, and not only do the clowns hang around around it, which I supposed to be spooky, but at several points the youngest thinks the figure has changed, ending up, in fact, as his oldest brother (whom in this case would be the Blue Boy). There is then some clownscare business in the barn, and, finally, the clowns get into the mostly dark, very large house. Problem is, even as they get it, and it is by this point very late in the movie, all they do most of the time is appear as shadows at windows and doors, walking up steps and down hallways, coming in bedroom doors, looking under beds, it is as if the director thought that their presence was enough to scare, none of these appearances followed up by a coherent scare sequence. At last, they get the clowns, the youngest in particular taking one out in his bedroom, It’s weird, even in the highlight sequence, the attack in the bedroom, him hiding under the table, it is as if the director is more interested in creating arty abstract shots with playing cards or toy clowns in the picture, than actually filming a scare. Somewhere along the way, in fact, the older brother, whom the younger suffer under, does die, leaving the youngest then to be, and in off-hours on set too, the ultimate pinkie of the venture. Final note, I generally admire arty shots but in a horror movie at some point you have to let go of them too to film a coherent scare sequence, and because of repeated reversion to boy talk and then evasion in arty shots this movie strangely plateaus precisely where it should be peaking.