Final 1 In Stock - Buy it Now

$33.99

| /

✅ RareVinyl.com's 100% Guarantee

We guarantee you'll be delighted with your purchase, and its condition. If not, we'll quickly resolve the issue or refund your payment.

Be the first to know if it's back in stock

Checkmark icon Thank you. Your email has been registered.

A valid email address is required.

By entering your Email Address you agree to receive marketing emails from us.

ARTFUL DODGER It's All About The Stragglers (2000 Japanese 13-track promo sample CD album issued to radio stations and reviewers ahead of the actual release date, the one & only album from Mark Hill & Pete Devereux with guest vocals from Craig David, Michelle Escoffery, Lifford, Robbie Craig & more, including the singles Re-Rewind, Woman Trouble, Please Don't Turn Me On, Twentyfourseven plus the bonus recording Woman Trouble [Original Version] and What You Gonna Do? [ArtfulDodger House Remix]. Custom stamped inner rim on the disc complete with picture sleeve, Japanese lyric insert & promo stickered obi-strip AMCE-7191)

TRACKLISTING AND EXTRA INFORMATION

1. Think About Me - Vocals by Michelle Escoffery

2. Re-Rewind - Vocals by Craig David

3. Outrageous - Vocals by Lynn Eden

4. Please Don't Turn Me On - Vocals by Lifford

5. Twentyfourseven

6. Something - Vocals by Lifford

7. R U Ready - Vocals by MC Alistair

8. I Can't Give It Up

9. Woman Trouble - Vocals by Robbie Craig featuring Craig David

10. What You Gonna Do? - Vocals by Craig David

11. We Should Get Together

Bonus Recordings:

12. Woman Trouble - Original Version

13. What You Gonna Do? - Artful Dodger House Remix

Artist - Artful Dodger (click link for complete listing)

Title - It's All About The Stragglers (click link for more of the same title)

Promo - This item is a Promotional Item - Promos or ‘advance’ pressings differ to final or commercial releases, and are often unique. Typically sent to record stores, radio stations and DJs to market the artist, music, or both.

Year of Release - 2000

Format - CD album (CDLP)

Record Label - EastWest

Catalogue No - AMCE-7191 (click link for more)

Country of Origin - Japan

Language - Regardless of country of origin all tracks are sung in English, unless otherwise stated in our description.

Additional info - Deleted, Picture Sleeve

Global Trade Item Number (GTIN) - 5053200195644

Condition - This item is in Excellent condition or better (unless it says otherwise in the above description). We buy items as close to Mint condition as possible and many will be unplayed and as close to new as you could hope to find. Irrespective of the source, all of our collectables meet our strict grading and are 100% guaranteed. Click here for more info.

RareVinyl.com Ref No - ATDCDIT666251

GENRES

00s Artists, Dance, House/Garage.

ORDERING

Availability - In Stock - Buy Now for shipping today

Postage/Shipping Cost - Add item to your basket for a postage/shipping quote. For further delivery info click here

Email - sales@rarevinyl.com to contact our sales team.

To order by phone - Call (+44) 0147485010

RareVinyl.com Reference Number - ATDCDIT666251

SELL TO US

Got vinyl records, CDs or music memorabilia to sell? – Sell to us at our buying site https://vinyl-wanted.com