Artful Dodger

It's All About the Stragglers (London)

****

£14.99

Perhaps even more than Fatboy Slim and the Chemical Brothers, Artful Dodger are the most successful dance act in Britain today. The Southampton thirtysomethings Mark Hill and Pete Devereux have their own show on Capital Radio with an audience of more than 250,000. They sold upwards of 1.5m copies of their first three singles, Re-Rewind, Movin' Too Fast and Woman Trouble, over the last 12 months. Their collaboration with Craig David on Re-Rewind and Hill's polished US R&B sound on David's solo album, Born to Do It, haven't just brought the teenage singer-writer to national attention, they've helped make him potentially the UK's first black music superstar.

Artful Dodger are the only production team since Stock, Aitken and Waterman to have achieved renown in their own right. When, two weeks ago, Hill and Devereux won a Q award for best producers, it was a significant nod of approval from the rock community for the duo who made their name on the garage circuit. By all accounts, they were delighted with the accolade.

Like every dance music form before it, garage - otherwise known as two-step, because the second and fourth bass-drum beat in every bar is omitted, creating its unusual faltering rhythm - will soon mutate into something quite different. Eventually the records, their potency reduced by mainstream ubiquity, their use on TV adverts, and so on, will sound like period pieces, historical curios: like disco or early rave. No wonder Artful Dodger fear extinction by association with two-step and are already looking for a way out.

But the duo's long-awaited debut LP is less a signpost towards garage's future than a glorious summation of the music to date. A series of team-ups (several one-offs), featuring a host of mainly unknown vocalists, It's All About the Stragglers is like a mix CD or a compilation - Now That's What I Call Garage Vol 1, or The Best Two-Step Album in the World... Ever! Re-Rewind and Movin' Too Fast are here, as is Woman Trouble (co-starring Craig David and respected Brit-soul man Robbie Craig). But there are other tracks that lend it a story-so-far feel: Something, featuring new boy Lifford, was a club hit but was never properly released; the same goes for What You Gonna Do, another vehicle for Craig David's dulcet tones that dates back to 1998. Please Don't Turn Me On (with Lifford again on vocals) is already pencilled in for a single release.

So Artful Dodger's first LP is also their first greatest hits collection. No surprise, really: this is great pop music, like Motown or Philly, with Devereux-Hill the Holland-Dozier-Holland or Gamble and Huff of the scene. Although their sound bears comparison with that of American producers Timbaland and Rodney Jerkins, it is to their credit that they've managed to give it a uniquely British spin. Recorded on a shoestring in a soundproofed room next to a radio station in Southampton, and using fairly basic equipment, these 12 tracks have a rough, lo-fi quality compared to the hi-tech future-funk of their Stateside counterparts. Even when they share many of the same elements (such as the strings and lush keyboard sounds) and the singers affect US accents, Artful Dodger's songs are immediately recognisable as the sound of urban contemporary Britain.

And they are songs, not just looped grooves or repetitive beats. Close proximity to that radio station has clearly honed the duo's commercial instincts to the point where anything extraneous to the melody and the hook is removed (although the background detail, notably those "boink!"s and smashed-bottle effects on Re-Rewind, is superb).

It's ironic that this music synonymous with prole life - music that can normally be heard blasting out of hairdressing salons and factory floors, music that has provided the soundtrack to a million school-playground crushes - has been created by a pair of university-educated, classically trained players, one of whom has performed with the Welsh Philharmonic Orchestra, the other boasting a Grade 8 in piano.

God knows Hill and Devereux, like that other garage artist with classical credentials, MJ Cole, have sufficient know-how to "do a Goldie" (ie waste valuable CD time with showing off), but they resist every temptation here.

One of the weekly music papers recently waged war on garage, accusing it of being sterile and formulaic next to sports metal or goth-rock. It's true that there is a recognisable method to Artful Dodger's hit-making. There are signifiers of sophistication and "classiness" - the Spanish guitar on Think About Me, the harpsichord on TwentyFourSeven - to make your average hairy frat-rocker blanche. And the songs do all share a patented structure, with lyrics drawn from the language of teenage luv.

Really, though, it's no more smoothly calculated than, say, Travis and Coldplay's rote miserabilism. Besides, when was the last time you heard a pizzicato violin motif on an indie-guitar record?