Jason Boland & The Stragglers are marking the release today of their ninth and newest album, “Hard Times Are Relative,” via Thirty Tigers.

As previously reported, The Stragglers, who are known as torchbearers for old-school, frills-free country music, are celebrating their 20th anniversary this year.

In 1998, singer-songwriter Jason Boland, bassist Grant Tracy and drummer Brad Rice planted the seeds of a robust country band deep in the fertile red dirt music scene of Stillwater, Oklahoma.

Along with the likes of Cody Canada and Mike McClure, Boland in the 1990s helped popularize red dirt music -- a rich, rootsy blend of country, folk, Western swing, blues and rock -- in Stillwater and beyond. The trio will reunite June 22 to perform a song swap called “Yellow House Revisited,” named for the ramshackle Stillwater house where various red dirt musicians lived and jammed back then, at Oklahoma City’s Tower Theatre.

A steadfastly independent band, The Stragglers have sold more than half a million albums in the past 20 years, starting with its auspicious debut, 1999’s “Pearl Snaps,” produced by future Grammy winner Lloyd Maines.

The band made its new album at yellow DOG Studios in Wimberley, Texas, co-producing with Dave Percefull and Adam Odor. The Stragglers recorded the new collection of songs live to tape, which has become a hallmark of their authentic country sound.

“Adam was the assistant engineer on ‘Pearl Snaps.’ We’ve worked with both of them on and off for years. … You don’t even really have to ask what somebody’s gonna do, and production ideas run so much faster. But it’s more than it just being fast – it makes it more fun and relaxed, too,” Boland told me in a recent interview.

“The process we do, it’s more difficult. … It’s mostly about mixing to tape. We don’t use Pro Tools or any of the computers. We just mix through the board. We cut as much as you can live and then go back in and do the normal amount of overdubs. … It’s a difficult process, but it just sounds so much more groovy and pure, to most of our ears anyway – everybody’s within the band.”

A ballad that is as adroitly penned as it is adoringly phrased, “I Don’t Deserve You” opens the "Hard Times Are Relative" in heartfelt fashion, aided by pretty guest vocals from Texas songstress Sunny Sweeney.

The rowdy “Tattoo of a Bruise” colorfully inks in a musical portrait of people who peaked in high school reliving their old memories, while the title track not only provides a worthy slogan but also spins a vivid tale of two siblings struggling for survival. The tuneful baseball metaphor “Going, Going, Gone,” which he co-wrote with fellow red dirt standout Stoney LaRue, is one of the few songs on the new collection that weren’t written in the three years since the band’s previous release, 2015’s “Squelch.”

“I don’t write a lot of songs that I don’t finish. I’m just more of an experiential, write ‘em as they go and we record ‘em as they go. And they tend to be the right amount at the right time,” Boland told me.

“‘Searching for You’ is really a fairly fictional song. It’s really a stalker is what it is. I even introduced him like that. It’s ‘Everybody, stalkers, they’re people, too.’ … I was obviously thinking about how if you lost something that was important to you, how long you would search for it, too. But it’s definitely a tongue-in-cheek, goofy song about somebody losing their mind obsessing over searching for someone.”

Although the band is based in Texas, Boland, who hails from Harrah, and The Stragglers – Tracy, Rice, Nick Worley (fiddle) and Cody Angel (lead guitar, pedal steel and dobro) – often get back to Oklahoma.

In fall, Boland and Jennings will be reunited again in Tahlequah, where The Stragglers in 2013 founded the Medicine Stone music and camping festival with fellow red dirt band the Turnpike Troubadours. The 2018 festival is set for Sept. 20-22 at Diamondhead Resort and will feature about 30 acts, including Randy Rogers Band, Cody Canada & The Departed, The Toadies, Kaitlin Butts, Wade Bowen, John Fullbright and Jamie Lin Wilson.

To read more of my recent interview with Boland about "Hard Times Are Relative," click here.

GOING ON

“Yellow House Revisited” song swap

Featuring: Jason Boland, Cody Canada and Mike McClure

When: June 22.

Where: Tower Theatre, 425 NW 23.

Information and tickets: www.towertheatreokc.com.

Medicine Stone 2018 music and camping festival

Featuring: Jason Boland & The Stragglers, Turnpike Troubadours, Randy Rogers Band, Cody Canada & The Departed, The Toadies, Kaitlin Butts, Wade Bowen, Shooter Jennings, John Fullbright, Mike McClure Band, Jamie Lin Wilson and more.

When: Sept. 20-22.

Where: Diamondhead Resort, Tahlequah.

Tickets: On sale 9 a.m. June 1.

Information: www.medicinestoneok.com.

-BAM