On 9 December 2020, Ministry of Health and Prevention (MOHAP) announced that it had officially registered the ‘Beijing Institute of Biological Products’ inactivated vaccine’, known as the ‘Sinopharm' vaccine which was developed jointly with Sinopharm - CNBG (China National Biotec Group).

A large multi-country Phase 3 trial has shown that 2 doses, administered at an interval of 21 days, have an efficacy of 79 per cent against symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection 14 or more days after the second dose. Vaccine efficacy against hospitalization was 79 per cent.

Who can get the vaccine?

Priority is given to citizens and residents above the age of 18, particularly, the elderly and those suffering from chronic diseases.

Sinopharm vaccine requires two doses. The first dose is taken following an assessment of the patient’s health and the second dose is taken after a period averaging between 21 to 28 days.

Where can I get the Sinopharm vaccine?

Sinopharm vaccine is available throughout the UAE.

Refer to the list of COVID-19 vaccination centres in:

Urdu (PDF, 3.26 MB)

Filipino (PDF, 2.05 MB)

Mandarin (1.80 MB).

The vaccine is also available at SEHA's drive-through centres and the following locations:

Abu Dhabi Cruise Terminal, Abu Dhabi City - from 7 am to 10 pm

Al Ain Convention Center, Al Ain City - from 7 am to 10 pm

Dubai Parks & Resort, Dubai - from 9 am to 5 pm

Madinat Zayed Wedding Hall, Al Dhafra - from 8 am to 7:30 pm.

Find more information on SEHA’s website.

View the list of DHA vaccination centres in Dubai.

The vaccine is also available at several private hospitals across the UAE, free of charge.

Earlier, in September 2020, the UAE authorised the emergency use of the Sinopharm vaccine for frontline workers, as they are the most at risk of getting COVID-19. The Sinopharm vaccine was used in the UAE’s ‘4Humanity’ campaign, which hosted the first global clinical Phase-III of an inactivated vaccine to combat COVID-19 back in July 2020.

Contact MoHaP for queries and appointments.