Mission Edge San Diego | Mid-City Community Advocacy Network

Community Health Worker-Canvasser

Mid-City Community Advocacy Network (Mid-City CAN), fiscally sponsored by Mission Edge San Diego, is a collaborative comprised of hundreds of partners and thousands of community members. Mid-City CAN’s mission is to build a safe, productive, and healthy community through collaboration, advocacy, and organizing. For over 30 years, Mid-City CAN plays an essential role in the community of City Heights and the San Diego Region by facilitating dialogue, spearheading advocacy efforts, building power, and training community members to take leadership roles in affecting change. Some of our campaign wins include $5.1 million towards two skate parks and a recreation center, the Halal school lunch program, and a reduction in youth transit fares.

Community Health Workers are formally titled Neighborhood Captains at Mid-City CAN and are commonly also known as Canvassers or Promotoras. Reporting to the Civic Engagement Director or their designee, Neighborhood Captains are part of a 15-22 person team who do direct home-to-home outreach through door-knocking, phone-banking, texting, and community events. The team’s current campaign is dedicated to increasing vaccination rates among people of color and populations with low vaccination rates. Neighborhood Captains work part-time and on a seasonal basis during engagement program periods. Hours are typically Sunday – Thursday 2:00pm to 8:30pm and Saturday 9:00 am to 2:00 pm but may be subject to change according to program needs. Program periods may range from a few days to several months, with 1 to 4 programs in a 12-month period. The COVID-19 vaccination outreach program is expected to continue at least through Dec. 31, 2021 followed by voter engagement outreach in 2022.

Key Duties and Responsibilities

Conduct outreach campaign with the goal of engaging community members in public opinion or participation with various programs and Mid-City CAN.

Conduct door-knocking, walking, phone-banking, tabling at community events, house meetings, and other hands-on activities as assigned.

Initiate contact with people in public areas and/or at their homes to solicit them to get vaccinated, utilize COVID-19 resources, vote, engage, take surveys, and/or sign petitions.

Maintain a positive, personable, outgoing, and enthusiastic attitude.

Arrive to work location on time and follow program script.

Collect and return contact responses to the program, survey, or script.

Meet the required number of contacts (phoning and/or canvassing).

Participate in daily reflections at the end of each shift.

Wear Mid-City CAN field uniform (provided), use mobile technology (provided), and ware PPE (provided) as required.

Attend staff meetings and trainings.

Other tasks as assigned across organization levels.

The duties listed above are intended as illustrations of the various types of work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the position.

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities

Under 18 must obtain work permit.

Experience canvassing or phone-banking and familiarity with community engagement or previous work as a canvasser/community health worker is a plus and not required.

Bilingual (Spanish, Somali, Swahili, Arabic, Vietnamese, or Other language) preferred.

Possess a passion for social justice that translates to daily interactions.

Ability to self-direct, take initiative, and work independently, while also being able to work as part of a team when assigned to do so.

Ability to work with and maintain positive relationships with diverse constituencies and sensitivity in dealing with diversity issues including race, gender, sexual orientation, economic status.

Flexible and ability to adapt to learning new ideas and concepts, responding to changes and last-minute requests.

Ability to work in-person (or at home if required by health orders), in accordance with California State Health Order and County of San Diego Health Orders, all worked is expected to be in-person.

Exude professionalism on the job and maintain emotional composure.

Excellent interpersonal skills, ability to maintain etiquette in a professional environment, and exude a positive attitude.

Access to reliable transportation and willing to use it for job-related tasks.

Access to cell phone and email account for work purposes.

COVID-19 Safety and In-person Work

Strictly comply with all applicable public health orders and organizational safety protocols.

Work as part of a team among colleagues to assist with unforeseen COVID-19-related projects.

Conduct work in person as health orders allow (PPE provided), in accordance with California State Health Order and County of San Diego Health Orders, all worked is expected to be in-person.

Willing to obtain COVID-19 vaccine unless qualified medical condition, unvaccinated staff are required to take a bi-weekly COVID-19 test.

Remain flexible in order to adjust to changing safety protocols and health orders as needed.

Physical Requirements and Work Environment: Work is performed in an office or community setting; employee regularly sits at a computer station and operates electronic equipment 6 to 8 hours per day; occasionally lifts, carries, and positions objects weighing up to 20 pounds. Position involves regular use of a computer and keyboard, telephone, and face-to-face communications; employee should be able to communicate clearly and professionally in all of these manners. Position works in community settings, may be standing at even table, and walks neighborhood for several hours on as needed basis. The employee may spend periods of time sitting, standing, or walking. Employee required to work in-person and adhere to health and safety protocols which may require wearing of facial mask covering nose and mouth for several hours and/or gloves or other PPE (provided). If required by health orders, employ may have to work virtually at home requiring use of virtual meeting technology for several hours requiring focus on a computer screen. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.