Aster has the perfect location. It’s inside the perimeter, so you get to enjoy all the advantages of feeling like you live in an urban setting while still having the natural setting you’ve been looking for.

It’s bounded by Anthony Henday, so it’s going to be incredibly easy for you to get from your home to the highway. Since this major road takes you anywhere in Edmonton, this is a big plus.

Cy Becker is located on Edmonton’s northeast side, offering convenient access to major commuter arteries (including Highway 15 and the new northern extension of Anthony Henday Drive) and is just moments from the Clareview LRT station. All the amenities and comforts of daily life are in close proximity as well, including the Clareview Recreation Centre, Empire Theatres, great schools, shopping, restaurants and more.

Nestled in by Lois Hole Centennial Provincial Park, just a short drive from the amenities of West Edmonton and St. Albert, lies a hidden gem. Kinglet by Big Lake: a new master planned community in growing northwest Edmonton. Defined by a rich and diverse natural backdrop that includes a wetland preserve, Kinglet gives you a place to plant your roots in an area full of life.

McConachie Heights already has everything you need: the shopping of Manning Town Centre, quick LRT, and to your favourite restaurants, all just minutes from your door. Bring the kids to the park at the corner of 60th St and play a game of catch after they finish their day at one of the neighbourhood schools.

On the edge of everything you need, with a variety of shopping, dining and grocery options a short drive away.Highlights of this community will include a storm pond, top of bank trails, district park, and school/park site. Its close proximity to the North Saskatchewan River and future Big Island Provincial Park allows for endless outdoor adventures.

The Uplands at Riverview – a thoughtfully planned community in west Edmonton that captures the contentment of a Sunday afternoon without sacrificing the energy and excitement of city life. The Uplands at Riverview is quiet and secluded. While only minutes away, the west leg of the Anthony Henday offers a convenient route to every activity within the four corners of the city.

Nestled in a heartland of beautiful park sites, McLaughlin offers everything your family has been looking for.Tree-lined walking trails, playgrounds and park spaces of McLaughlin will entice you to stay home. However, getting in and out of the community is a breeze, thanks to its ideal location.

A family friendly community, Sienna is affordably priced and located just far enough from Edmonton to escape the noise, yet close enough to easily commute. Take time to enjoy the things in life that add colour to your soul like backyard bird watching, sun soaked gardening and picnics on the deck.