Silver Berry is one of several neighbourhoods comprising Southeast Edmonton’s Meadows area. Established in the early 2000s, Silver Berry is the ultimate family-friendly community, known for its scenic ravine-side location, roomy detached homes and proximity to great amenities. Before its development, Silver Berry was used for agricultural development, with ample green space remaining to this day.

Did you know? Each of the seven communities in the Meadows is named after a tree or shrub. In this case, the Silver Berry shrub known for its white/grey berries. Other neighbourhoods include Aster, Larkspur, Laurel, Maple, Tamarack and Wild Rose. (Source: City of Edmonton)

Real Estate and Homes For Sale in Silver Berry

Single-family homes account for most real estate opportunities in Silver Berry. These include double front-attached homes and laned properties featuring an average of four bedrooms, three bathrooms and 1,500 square feet of living space. Floor plans include two-story, bi-level to 4-level splits, with standard features such as flex rooms, bonus rooms and finished basements.

Despite Silver Berry’s newer status, many of these roomy homes already have the latest upgrades. Here’s what to expect from a Silver Berry home:

Open floor plans

Eat-in islands

Modern laminate and hardwood flooring

Granite and quartz countertops

Walk-thru pantries

Stainless steel appliances

Tile backsplashes

King-sized master suites

Walk-in closets

Four- and five-piece ensuites

Formal dining and living areas

Wet bars

Gas fireplaces

Vaulted ceilings

Energy-efficient systems

Oversized windows

Entertainer’s decks and patios

Walkout basements

Mill Creek Ravine views

Heated double attached and detached garages

And more!

Several Silver Berry homes also come equipped with desirable income suites with separate entrances and plenty of passive income potential – an ideal situation for Edmonton real estate investors and first-time buyers looking to pay down their mortgage.

See also: The Top Reasons Why Your First Home Should Also be an Investment Property

Average Listing Price in Silver Berry: $403,000

See Homes For Sale in Silver Berry

Did you know? Silver Berry has a Livability Score of 70%, which is considered excellent. Crime rates, cost of living and real estate prices are lower than the Edmonton average. In addition, the community comes highly rated for its proximity to amenities.

Parks and Recreation

Silver Berry is incredibly nature-friendly, offering residents access to green space, parks, walking trails and more. A centrally located park space features a modern playground, sports fields, picnic areas, and a bike/skate park.

Silver Berry’s most notable feature, however, is the Meadows Recreation Centre. This 234,419 square-foot facility offers countless age-friendly amenities, including an aquatic centre, fitness centre, walking track, gymnasium, NHL-sized arenas, outdoor sports fields and childcare.

Silver Berry is represented by the Meadows Community League, one of the largest leagues in Edmonton. The league sponsors various local events and programs throughout the year, including youth activities, outdoor movie nights, art and crafts, sports, walking clubs and community gardens.

Other recreational amenities near Silver Berry include:

Country Side Golf Club

Jackie Parker Park

Mill Woods Golf Course

Did you know? Southeast Edmonton’s Jackie Parker Park is a popular recreation area. It has a playground, fire rings, picnic benches, a pavilion, an off-leash area, a small lake, a spray park, a climbing wall, and various other family-friendly amenities.

Amenities

Parks, green spaces and recreation amenities aren’t all Silver Berry has to offer. There area is also known for its many (brand new) commercial shopping hubs, with grocers, medical and professional services, restaurants, coffee shops and banking institutions. In addition, the neighbouring community of Tamarack houses a brand new 8-plex movie theatre with premier or full-recliner seating.

Additional shopping hubs, such as South Edmonton Common, Mill Woods Town Centre, and Southgate Centre, can all be reached in less than 15 minutes.

Other amenities:

Grey Nuns Community Hospital

Market at the Meadows – Save-on-Foods, medical centre, Shopper’s Drug Mart, banking institutions, etc.

Tamarack Common – CHALO! Fresh Co., various restaurants, retailers and services.

Did you know? One of North America’s biggest open-air retail developments, South Edmonton Common spans 320 acres and contains 2,300,000 square feet of retail space.

Silver Berry Schools

While there are no schools in Silver Berry, there are several options within walking distance. These include public and Catholic schools (elementary through junior high), daycares, preschools and out-of-school care programs.

Designated Public Schools:

Minchau School (Designated Grade K-6 School)

Kate Chegwin School (Designated Grade 7-9 School)

W.P. Wagner School (Designated Grade 10-12 School)

Designated Catholic Schools:

Mary Hanley School (Designated Grade K-6 School)

St. Clement School (Designated Grade K-9 School)

Father Michael Troy School (Designated Grade 7-9 School)

Holy Trinity School (Designated Grade 10-12 School)

Other:

Meadows Baptists Academy

Millwoods Christian School

Edmonton Khalsa School

Did you know? Edmonton’s Khalsa School prepares students for lifelong learning based on Sikh values and discipline. The school opened in 2001 with just 13 students but now has 300 ranging from preschool to grade six. (Source: Edmonton Khalsa School).

Commuting From Silver Berry

Silver Berry is defined by 34th Street to the west, the Mill Creek Ravine to the north, 17th Street to the east and 23rd Ave to the south. A commuter’s dream, the community is situated within a short distance of many major thoroughfares, such as Whitemud Drive and the south Anthony Henday. 23rd Ave provides swift access to additional shops and services (including the Grey Nuns Hospital and Mill Woods Town Centre). At the same time, the Anthony Henday offers an easy drive to the Edmonton International Airport.

The Meadows Transit Centre has created excellent transit opportunities in Silver Berry. In addition, most shops, services, and amenities in the neighbourhood are accessible by foot.

Did you know? The Southeast segment of the Edmonton Valley Line will run 27 kilometres between Mill Woods in Southeast Edmonton and Lewis Farms in West Edmonton.

Are you interested in homes for sale in Edmonton or Silver Berry? Contact us today! We also invite you to download any of our free buyer’s resources, including:

Your Ultimate Guide to Edmonton Real Estate – This all-in-one guide will tell you everything you need to know about the unique communities within our vibrant city.

Your All-in-One Guide to Choosing the Right Neighbourhood – We can help you find the right home in the right Edmonton community!

The Terry Paranych Real Estate Group Blog – From home buying tips to home selling advice (and everything in between), our blog has all the information you need.

Photo credits: shutterstock.com