WILL Arnett is famously known for his roles on Arrested Development and BoJack Horseman.

From 2003 to 2016, he was married to Amy Poehler and the former couple had two children together.

Who are Will Arnett and Amy Poehler's kids?

After tying the knot in 2003, Arnett, 51, and Poehler, 50, waited five years to start a family together.

In 2008, the couple welcomed their first child, Archie, 13, and later welcomed Abel, 11, in 2010.

“I love my boys so much I fear my heart will explode. I wonder if this love will crack open my chest and split me in half. It is scary, this love,” Poehler wrote in a 2014 essay published in The Globe and Mail.

“I should point out here that I have a picture of them wearing underwear on their heads while simultaneously pooping. Archie is on the toilet and Abel is on a potty and they are facing each other and smiling like crazy people. I plan on using it for blackmail when they are teenagers and won’t let me hug them in public anymore.”

Despite being the children of high-profile celebrities, the Arnett children are often kept out of the spotlight.

Why did Will and Amy get divorced?

Arnett and Poehler first met in 1996 and started dating shortly after.

Despite seeming like a happily married couple, they decided to split two years after the birth of Abel.

“They drifted apart, like a lot of couples do, but there’s no malice in the split, nor was anyone else involved,” a source told Radar Online at the time.

In Poehler's 2014 book, Yes Please!, she discussed her previous marriage and wrote about how "proud" she was of her ex and how she was "beyond grateful he is their father," however, Arnett had a harder time dealing with the separation.

In February 2022, Arnett opened up to The Guardian about his divorce and revealed just how hard it was back then.

"People talk about you like they know you and they talk about your relationship as if they know what’s going on," he told the media outlet.

"So imagine how weird that is. It’s brutal with any relationship, and we have kids, and without getting into specifics, you then see stuff online, like, this one journalist wrote: ‘I’m Team Amy.’ I’m like: ‘You’re a grown person. What are you talking about? This is a breakup. This is a family. This isn’t some game."

When Arnett returned to the set of Netflix's Arrested Development in 2013, he recalled that the experience was “almost excruciating … Just brutal, brutal, brutal. I was driving to the set one day and I pulled over to the side of the road and cried for an hour.”

Does Will Arnett have any other children?

Following his divorce from Poehler, he started a relationship with Alessandra Brawn.

Brawn, 34, works in marketing and PR in New York City and was once labeled one of the Hottest Socialites of 2017. She is also the former CEO of the clothing brand Chapel.

In May 2020, Arnett and Brawn welcomed their first child together Alexander Denison Arnett, 1, who often goes by the nickname "Denny."