Will Arnett is a Canadian actor known around the world for portraying the role of Gob Bluth in the 2003 sitcom Arrested Development. With the sitcom running for 5 seasons from 2003 to 2019, Arnett found himself married to Parks and Recreation actress Amy Poehler.

Advertisement

They got married in 2003, and the couple divorced in 2016. With the media frenzy behind the actor, Will Arnett revealed that he cried for an hour due to the intense spotlight that he received. Arnett stated that his family was going through a divorce but the media treated it as if it was a game.

Will Arnett Blames Media For Being Insensitive

Being married to Amy Poehler felt like a dream come true for Will Arnett when the couple hit it off in 2003. Having been married for 14 years, Arnett and Poehler announced their divorce in 2016. During their divorce proceedings, the media was all over the place which irked the Bojack Horseman actor to no end.

Advertisement

Also read: “He wanted to say no, but he didn’t want to be impolite”: Prince Harry Does Not Regret Begging and Forcing Batman Star Will Arnett at a Party

In an interview with The Guardian, Arnett let down his shield and talked about his personal life. Stating how the media had been really insensitive about his personal life, Arnett revealed a case where a reporter jokingly chose sides between the two while they were going through a divorce.

“People talk about you like they know you and they talk about your relationship as if they know what’s going on. So imagine how weird that is. It’s brutal with any relationship, and we have kids.”

He further continued,

Advertisement

“And without getting into specifics, you then see stuff online, like, this one journalist wrote: ‘I’m Team Amy.’ I’m like: ‘You’re a grown person. What are you talking about? This is a breakup. This is a family. This isn’t some game.’”

But with the split from his wife, Will Arnett was able to create one of the iconic shows on Netflix which resonated with people around the world. The pain and betrayal of himself forced Arnett to create Bojack Horseman.

Suggested: “Someone else would’ve played Walter White” If Another Bryan Cranston Show Hadn’t Ended After 7 Seasons

When Will Arnett Cried For An Hour

Related: “I was on the brink of that”: Steven Spielberg Laments Not Directing Kate Winslet’s Acclaimed Crime Drama Series After His $275M Oscar Nominated Movie Nearly Went to HBO

Advertisement

During his split, the actor was busy working on the fourth season of Arrested Development. In his interview with The Guardian, the actor revealed that he was going through a very tough time and he would go to the sets but pull over on the road and cry for an hour in his car!

“[The shoot was] almost excruciating … Just brutal, brutal, brutal. I was driving to the set one day and I pulled over to the side of the road and cried for an hour.”

The actor continued that the self-loathing and his narcissistic character led to the creation of the 2014 animated series Bojack Horseman.

“[Bojack Horseman is] an amalgamation of characteristics that I didn’t like about other people and other stuff about me that I didn’t like. Yeah, what a weird thing to do. But it was kind of the only thing I knew how to do. It was a painful couple of years, but I had to go through it, I guess.”

The actor never remarried and Bojack Horseman received a rating of 8.8/10 on IMDB and 93% on Rotten Tomatoes. Will Arnett’s magnum opus is available to stream on Netflix in the U.S.

Advertisement