Almere City have announced the signing of James Lawrence on a free. The 32-year-old Welsh defender has been without a club since leaving 1. FC Nürnberg at the end of …

After finishing third in the Eerste Divisie and winning a thrilling play-off against Emmen in 2022-23, Almere City debuted in the Eredivisie last season. They managed to stay up, despite …

VI are reporting that Yoann Cathline is set to return to the Eredivisie for the upcoming season. The winger will join FC Utrecht on loan, with the club having agreed …

Almere City have announced the signing of central midfielder Álex Balboa. The Equatorial Guinea international has signed a deal until 2026, with the club having the option to extend for …

Almere City have announced that Hedwiges Maduro has returned to the club to become the sides head coach for the 2024/2025 season. Maduro was part of the set up at …

Sam Lammers scored the second goal of his loan spell in the Eredivisie this weekend. The striker is currently on loan at FC Utrecht from Scottish side Rangers. He grabbed …

Almere City’s on loan defender Loïc Mbe Soh’s contract is due to expire at the end of this season. The 22-year-old central defender, who began his career in the PSG academy, …

Eredivisie newcomers Almere City suffered a third successive defeat on Saturday, losing 4-1 to AZ Alkmaar. Nottingham Forest loanee Loïc Mbe Soh scored the only goal for Almere, firing in …

Sunday’s action in the Eredivisie saw Heracles Almelo thrash Almere City 5-0 away from home. Mohamed Sankoh was the standout star in a dominant display from Heracles. The Stuttgart loanee …

The Eredivisie kicked off this weekend with PSV Eindhoven travelling to Heracles on Saturday with the league leaders hoping to make it 11 wins out of 11 against a mid-table …

Round 11 of the Eredivisie begins with Heracles playing host to unbeaten league leaders PSV Eindhoven at the Erve Asito stadium on Saturday evening. PSV will be hoping to make …

Round 10 of the Eredivisie saw league leaders PSV Eindhoven take on struggling Ajax at the Philips Stadium on Sunday afternoon. The visitors started the same well with goals from …