@brad

Spectrasonics Information|Fri, Sep 21, 4:31 PM (20 hours ago)||![]

Hi Adrian,

It sounds like a Cantabile issue – and this is the only report I’m getting of this issue.

I will submit your findings to our software dev team.

Thanks for your feedback!

Best,

Brian

Technical Support Specialist

info@spectrasonics.net

http://www.spectrasonics.net

A quick update.

I’ve spent some more time investigating this and I’m 99% sure this is an Omnisphere issue. It only happens on Windows 7 and it only happens if you open/close the plugin UI before unloading or deleting it.

Yesterday I sent a screen cast of a debug session to Spectrasonics detailing the problem and they’ve confirmed they can reproduce it, seem to agree on the problem and are looking into it.

I’ve tried a couple of things to work around it in Cantabile but no luck so I think we need to wait for a fix in the plugin itself.

Also, this problem isn’t exclusive to Cantabile. Forte also crashes and VstHost starts logging thousands of access violation exceptions but (dangerously) suppresses them.

Stay tuned…

Brad

The pre release version that @brad was supplied, and which has a CAN designation in its version number, is now showing as being ‘up to date’.

Can’t be sure that it is, but I may roll back, do the official update, if there is one, and see if it crashes.

This was a bit of a wake up call for Win 7 loyalists. There is now C3 functionality which W7 can’t use and an Omnisphere version which didn’t get attention prior to release. Maybe the writing’s on the wall - or the window.

I’m just not ready to go through migration headaches at this time - but I know I’ll need to bite the bullet soon enough.

You and I had the discussion awhile back about staying with Win 7 until it completely plays out. My main laptop is still Win 7, but I got a different backup that was Win 8. I can have C3 full functionality with it, and feel comfortable with it. But, now that the problem with Win 7 has been solved, it doesn’t matter as much. Just sayin’…