Jadranski Naftovod, Dionicko Drustvo Croatia tenders and business opportunities. Access latest Jadranski Naftovod, Dionicko Drustvo bids, market research and procurement analysis. Global tenders publishes domestic and international tenders, projects and contract awards for Jadranski Naftovod, Dionicko Drustvo and more than 2200 tendering authorities from Croatia.

The economy of Croatia is a developing high-income service based economy with the tertiary sector accounting for 60% of total gross domestic product (GDP). Croatia joined the World Trade Organization in 2000, NATO in 2009 and became a member of the European Union on 1 July 2013. The Croatian economy was badly affected by the financial crisis which, together with slow progress of economic reforms, resulted in six years of recession and a cumulative decline in GDP of 12.5%. Croatia formally emerged from the recession in the fourth quarter of 2014, and had a continuous GDP growth since. The Croatian economy reached pre crisis levels in 2019, but due to the Coronavirus pandemic its GDP decreased by 8.4% in 2020. However Croatia bounced back supported by strong private consumption, the better-than-expected performance of tourism industry and the boom merchandise exports, that in the first nine months of 2021 amounted to 13.3 billion euros, an annual increase of 24.6 per cent. This made 2021 Croatian export's record year as the score from 2019 was exceeded by 2 billion euros.

Global Tenders tracks thousands of websites, newspapers and journals from more than 200 countries and updates you with the latest information. More than 25000 notices are uploaded daily by researching through thousands of websites, newspapers and journals. The information gathered is cataloged by a team of researchers who classify it by date, country, CPV, sectors and keywords, presenting businesses with refined actionable data. Features like advanced filters, tailored alerts and market reports help save hundreds of hours making Global Tenders an indispensable source. Gain a competitive advantage with access to more opportunities.

Related links - Klinicki Bolnicki Centar Zagreb

Ina - Industrija Nafte

Hrvatske Vode, Pravna Osoba Za Upravljanje Vodama

Hrvatske Vode

Plinacro

Hrvatska Radiotelevizija Javna Ustanova

Hrvatski Zavod Za Transfuzijsku Medicinu

Opca Bolnica Varazdin

Klinicka Bolnica Dubrava

Hrvatski Zavod Za Zaposljavanje