Dale Brown Books In Order

Book links take you to Amazon. As an Amazon Associate I earn money from qualifying purchases.

Publication Order of Patrick McLanahan Books

Chronological Order of Patrick McLanahan Books

Publication Order of Act Of War/Jason Richter Books

Publication Order of Brad McLanahan Books

Publication Order of Dreamland Books

with Jim DeFelice

Publication Order of Independent Books

Publication Order of Nick Flynn Books

with Patrick Larkin

Publication Order of Puppet Master Books

with Jim DeFelice

Publication Order of Anthologies

Dale Brown is a famous American Author with a specialty in aviation thrillers. He was born on November 2nd 1956 and has written many books. He is very successful and has thirteen books listed on the bestsellers list. It seems that Brown brings his two loves together in his novels, writing and aviation. A native New Yorker, he attended Penn State University and graduated with a degree in Western European History. He then joined the US Air Force.

Air Force Career

He was a very successful navigator-bombardier in the Air Force and he was the rank of Captain. He flew many planes for the Air Force and left a highly decorated officer. He left the Air Force in 1986 and he never saw active duty in a war zone. It was during this time that he put pen to paper and started writing his first novel. It was ready for publish by time he left the Air Force. However, before that, he was paid to write a review for Compute!’s Gazette.

The Height of Success

His first novel was Flight of the Old Dog and it launched his career. The plot of the book surrounds the mission of Gen. Bradley Elliot. He is testing a unique bomber and the mission is brought forward to destroy a soviet weapon before it is deployed. The aircraft is called Old Dog and it has to get the team to safety. The book was met with widely positive reviews and it was on the bestsellers list.

Brown was congratulated with his use of prose to describe the plane and he managed to use his knowledge from the Air Force without alienating non-pilot readers. It is easy to tell that the author of the book is someone who is deeply in love with aviation. One reviewer described Brown’s ability to make him feel like he was actually sitting in the plane, instead of reading about it on the page. The descriptions of the battles and the planes were actually used as references in some video games.

It is important to note that the original hardcover release of the book did not make the best sellers list. It was only when the publisher sent Brown on a tour of military bases to coincide with the paperback release, that it made the list. The highest position was number 4 and it ended up selling over a million copies in the first two weeks.

Falls in Love with the Characters

Brown is an author who is thought to fall in love with the characters. He creates these characters in his books, that he intends to be stand alone stories, but they are all turned into series. Even characters from his very first novel are still seen in his most recent releases. Flight of the Old Dog ended up being book one in an 18 book series.

Some people call this series the Paul McLanahan series and others call them the Dreamland series, based on the base in which the books are set. He has been writing this series for over 25 years now. This series is not to be confused with his other series, which is officially titled the Dreamland series and is a collaboration with another author.

Made into a Movie?

Brown’s books have never been made into movies. The closest they have come is with some of the characters appearing in computer games. When asked the question on his website, he said it would be cool if his books could be made into movies, however he doesn’t have an agent in Hollywood so the chances are low.

He hopes to carry on writing books and maybe one will catch a director’s attention. He is working on writing some screenplays based on his books in the hope that he can get a Hollywood agent in the future.

Recent Works

Dale Brown is still at the forefront of publishing novels today. He most recent novel, Tiger’s Claw, was released in August 2013. The plot of this book surround President Phoenix, who has slashed the military budget when China begins to test it’s new domestic missile.

America calls upon retired Patrick McLanahan to save the day with the old bomber planes. It is a classic case of America Vs China, with the hope that World War can be prevented. This book has been very successful so far. Some critics are going so far as to call him one of the best military adventure writers in America.

Influences

For his books, he indicates that he has many influences. He says that he names some of his characters after family members and then he picks them out of the phone book. He may even be sitting at home and watching the news, when the name of the newsreader jumps out at him.

Brown has proved himself to be someone who is aware of the need to make money for charity because he has been known to offer a character up for auction. The winner of the charity will get to name the character. Some fans on his webpage asked him if he was the influence for many of the stories and he said no. Well, partly no. He indicates that the stories are his fantasies for what he would have like to happen to himself in his own career.

Personal Life

In his personal life, Brown is a member of Angel Flight West. He is one of the pilots who regularly fly patients to get the medical attention that they deserve. This is all done on a volunteer basis, so he spends a lot of time flying across the country. In his free time, he enjoys flying in his own personal plane and he is a soccer referee for youth games.

He does enjoy other things like scuba diving and tennis, but cherishes spending time with his wife, Diane and his son Hunter. They all live together in Nevada. It is clear that Dale Brown never expected to be as successful as he has been. This is clear by his killing off of some characters, only to be resurrected in subsequent novels. He originally only intended to write 3 novels for his publisher. Now, 24 books later, he is an accomplished author and his fans are eagerly awaiting his next novel.

Book Series In Order » Authors » Dale Brown

12 Responses to “Dale Brown”