GREENFIELD — Rays of Hope, a Walk Toward the Cure of Breast Cancer, invites individuals who knit, crochet, or weave to participate in the 2011 Pink Scarf Project for Greenfield’s third walk. The Pink Scarf Project was introduced in 2009 as a collaborative effort among women to foster a sense of community for breast-cancer survivors and their families. Knitters in the community contributed patches of pink scarves, which were joined together to create one long, continuous scarf.

In 2010, the popular Pink Scarf Project returned in a slightly different format. Rather than knitting one continuous scarf, people knit, crocheted, wove, or crafted individual pink scarves to donate to Rays of Hope. The scarves were given to survivors at Greenfield’s Rays of Hope walk last October. The goal was to have 100 scarves for distribution; the project was so successful that over 240 scarves were donated.

During the Rays of Hope event, the pink scarves were displayed in the Pink Hope Lounge, a tent specifically designated for breast-cancer survivors. Survivors could choose their own scarves from the many patterns, designs, and colors (all pink-based) available.

“Our Greenfield breast-cancer survivors were so touched by and appreciative of their special scarves,” said Sandy Thomas, 2011 chair of the Greenfield Rays of Hope Pink Scarf committee. “And we had such an overwhelming response from the crafting community — church groups, individuals, senior centers, not to mention friends from out of the area — that we decided to also share the scarves with our Springfield Rays of Hope breast cancer survivors this year.” The scarves will be distributed during the 2011 Rays of Hope Walk on Sunday, Oct. 23, both in Greenfield and Springfield.

Sandy Hubbard, Rays of Hope outreach coordinator and chairperson for the Pink Hope Lounge/Survivors’ Tent in Springfield is delighted to have the scarf project come south. “We usually have 300 to 400 breast-cancer survivors who stop at the Pink Hope Lounge. The scarves will be a great gift to the survivors, and we appreciate everyone’s support of this fun project,” she said. “The scarves will add a lovely array of color to the Pink Hope Lounge, too.”

Lynn Jones of Ambridge, Pa. has already sent a box of eight pink scarves. Her son, Kevin, participated in the 2010 Rays of Hope Walk and saw all the pink scarves. “Kevin knew I love to knit scarves, so he told me about the Pink Scarf Project,” she said. “I always want to help with women’s issues, so I was glad to start knitting pink scarves.”

To participate in the Pink Scarf Project, contact Phyllis Roy at BFMC at (413) 773-2573, or e-mail phyllis.roy@baystatehealth.org. Participants may also include a photograph of themselves creating a scarf and e-mail it to Roy, along with comments on why they chose to join the Pink Scarf Project.

Contributors are invited to be creative in choosing their patterns and lengths of the scarves, suitable for an adult woman. This project can be made in any style of knitting, crocheting, weaving, etc., with one stipulation: all scarves must use some shade of pink material.

As scarves are completed, deliver or mail them to the Development Office at Baystate Franklin Medical Center, Attn: Phyllis Roy, 164 High St., Greenfield, MA 0130. Scarves should be delivered by Friday, Oct. 14, so they can be divided up for the Greenfield and Springfield walks.

For more information on Rays of Hope, or to register for the walk, visit baystatehealth.org/raysofhope.