BORN. To Susan Saint James, 36, actress, best known as giddy Sally McMillan on TV’s McMillan and Wife, and her husband Dick Ebersol, 35, executive producer of Saturday Night Live: their first child, a son; in Torrington, Conn. Name: Charles Duncan. Weight: 9 Ibs. 2 oz.

BORN. To Chevy Chase, 38, preppie, pratfalling TV and film comedian (Modern Problems), and his wife Jayni Chase, 25, a film production associate: their first child, a daughter; in Los Angeles. Name: Cydney Cathalene. Weight: 7 Ibs. 7 oz.

MARRIED. Steve Van Zandt, 32, rock guitarist for the E Street Band, and Dancer Maureen Santoro, 32; both for the first time; in New York City. The minister was rock-‘n’-roll legend Little Richard (Evangelist Richard Penniman), the best man Van Zandt’s sometime boss Bruce Springsteen.

DIED. Benjamin Rosenthal, 59, liberal congressional gadfly, sworn in for his eleventh full term as a Democratic Representative from New York City only a day before his death; of cancer; in Washington, D.C. Rosenthal made his mark in Congress as a consumer advocate, launching investigations into businesses that he suspected of preying on the powerless and poor. Equally outspoken on foreign affairs, he alienated the Johnson Administration with his early and persistent opposition to the war in Viet Nam, and last March introduced a resolution to end U.S. involvement in El Salvador.

DIED. George Bond, 67, chief scientific investigator and senior medical officer for the Navy’s Sealab missions, which tested human capacity to live and work undersea; of heart disease; in Charlotte, N.C. Bond developed a process of saturating body tissues with a mix of helium and oxygen to withstand pressure. In the first two Sealab missions (1964-65), aquanauts spent nine days or more in a 57-ft.-long steel cylinder some 200 ft. below the ocean’s surface. Observing from above, “Papa Topside” found that the men could function but became susceptible to the “breakaway phenomenon,” suffering capricious fits of insubordination. The program ended after a fatality during a 1969 mission.

DIED. Tom McCall, 69, environment-minded Governor of Oregon from 1967 to 1975; of cancer; in Portland. A progressive Republican whose grandfather was a two-term Governor of Massachusetts, McCall pushed through tough laws regulating land use and pollution. Both patrician and folksy, the former journalist could be blunt: in 1971, he shooed prospective residents away from the state with the exhortation: “Visit—but for heaven’s sake, don’t stay.”

DIED. Harriet Parsons, 76, petite hard-headed producer who made six movies for RKO between 1945 and 1955, including Clash by Night and I Remember Mama; of cancer; in Santa Monica, Calif. The daughter of powerful Gossip Columnist Louella Parsons, Harriet went from writing for fan magazines and filming shorts to producing Hollywood films, one of a handful of women to do so. Her job often required, she said, “the combined qualities of Solomon and Simon Legree.”

DIED. Mildred Dilling, 88, virtuoso and zestful champion of the harp, who helped to popularize solo recitals on the instrument; in New York City. Casting herself as a wandering troubadour, Dilling toured constantly, playing seven times at the White House and once giving 17 concerts in London during a three-week period. She carefully cultivated calluses on her fingers and at times kept 65 harps in her Manhattan apartment. Dilling seasoned her recitals with spirited lectures on the harp’s history and anecdotes like the one about the stranger who pointed to a harp, said, “Lady, learn me that,” and became her most unorthodox and famous student. His name: Harpo Marx.