Review

"One Night at McCool's" with Liv Tyler, Matt Dillon, John Goodman, Paul Reiser, Michael Douglas. Directed by Harald Zwart. Written by Stan Seidel. Rated: R, for sex, violence, language. In Missoula (Wilma). * /2

It may be "One Night at McCool's," but it seems to last 3 Þ months. Granted, if you have the patience to sit through it, you are rewarded with a great punch-line of a finish. Then again, the marketing geniuses have lifted the scene and placed it in the trailer, so no one actually has to pay to see "One Night at McCool's" to see the best part. Although then you'd miss the 3 Þ month-long setup.

With an all-star cast and interesting (though hardly original) concept, the problem comes from the direction of Harald Zwart, a Dutchman making the jump from commercials and music videos to major motion pictures. I think, instead of rating movies PG-13 or R or whatever, we'd be better served if pictures warned us when another music video director was stepping up to the big screen. For his part, Zwart's chosen to take one of cinema's great genres (noir) and play it for broad laughs.

It doesn't work. Adding to the film's woes is that interesting setup, which has three men detailing their lust for the same femme fatale (Liv Tyler).

There's the bartender at the St. Louis tavern McCool's, Randy (Matt Dillon), who relates the murderous life into which Jewel's dragged him, to the hit man (Michael Douglas) he's hired to kill her. Randy's cousin Carl (Paul Reiser), a lawyer who's married, with kids, confesses to his psychiatrist (Reba McEntire) his leather-fantasied fling with Jewel. A cop (John Goodman) who's investigating some of the murders that happen wherever Jewel goes, confides to his priest (Richard Jenkins) that Jewel is the angelic re-creation of Goodman's dear departed wife.

While each man sees the Jewel of his fantasies, it's a device that isn't played up as much as it could be. The result: We see the same story three times, with minor changes. Pardon me while I yawn. Twice.

Tyler's D cups runneth over and she looks like she ought to be starring in one of those soft-core porn music videos, but beyond her looks there's nothing of interest about her. All she wants is a house to redecorate and a DVD player. That she'll kill to get them is neither especially funny nor intriguing.

Oh, and her partner in crime is played by an actor named Andrew Silverstein. You may know him better by his old stage name, Andrew "Dice" Clay. You may want to knock off a star just because he's in the movie.

Although they kill him off early.

Then they bring him back as his more evil twin brother. It's like everything else about "McCools": For everything they did right, they managed to do two things wrong.

You must be logged in to react.

Click any reaction to login.

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.