What can a textual artifact such as a journal’s table of contents tell us about a particular literary culture? Quite a lot, it turns out, when one begins to excavate the political and cultural networks and practices of a period that are revealed therein. In this tool we will take a closer look at a table of contents from the Haifa-based, Arabic-language journal, “al-Jadid [The New]: A cultural, social and political magazine,” first published in 1953 under the auspices of al-Ittihad [The Union], the local Communist Party newspaper. Al-Jadid’s table of contents provides us with a snapshot of a campaign aimed at reconstructing an anti-colonial Arabic literary and cultural scene among Palestinians, as well as some anti-Zionist Arab Jews, after the destruction of the Palestinian Nakba 1For information on anti-Zionist Iraqi Jews in the Israeli Communist Party (ICP) see Orit Bashkin, “Elements of Resistance” in Impossible Exodus: Iraqi Jews in Israel (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2017).. The contents reveal a largely unknown network of literary correspondence with the Arab World 2This connection has recently been examined in Maha Nassar, Brothers Apart: Palestinian Citizens of Israel and the Arab World (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2017)., internationalist communist and anti-colonial intellectuals and writers, as well as supportive events and forums established to encourage the growth of local literature during the 1950’s and early 60’s.

Al-Jadid was an anti-Zionist, Communist publication founded soon after the advent of Israeli statehood and the 1948-49 Palestinian Nakba, which destroyed Palestinian society, decimating its political parties, cultural institutions, intellectual milieu, and literary culture. It was launched with the mission of rebuilding this anti-colonial Arab literary landscape, or what in other colonial contexts has been described as a country’s “literary infrastructure.” 3For an in-depth discussion on literary infrastructure see Katerina Gonzalez Seligmann, “The Void, the Distance, Elsewhere: Literary Infrastructure and Empire in the Caribbean,” Small Axe: A Caribbean Journal of Criticism 24, no. 2 (62) (July 1, 2020), 1-2.

But in order to build a literary tradition, a country needs a publishing industry, gathering places, journals and the wide array of “institutions that provide literary training, facilitate and promote the circulation of literary texts, and consecrate literary value, including commercial, non-commercial and academic or state-supported cultural projects.” 4Ibid A “literary infrastructure” requires more than the ability to publish books—it includes the supportive edifice that makes possible the development of writers, readers, literature, public literacy and literary culture to begin with.

As we begin to trace the names and networks embedded in the journal’s table of contents, a textual map emerges, revealing clues to how al-Jadid organized itself around the daunting task of Arabic literary reconstruction after Nakba.