Professor Wangari Maathai today stands tall among Africa's finest sons and daughters – the first woman from the continent to win the Nobel Peace prize.

She is also the first Kenyan ever to become a Nobel laureate.

Prof Maathai joins a roll call of African greats that includes international icon Nelson Mandela, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, writer Wole Soyinka and UN secretary general Kofi Annan.

Green campaigner Maathai was announced this year's winner of the prize – worth Sh110 million – by the Nobel Peace Prize Institute in Oslo, Norway, in recognition of her efforts in environmental management and the fight for democracy in Kenya.

She was cited in particular for her work as leader of the Green Belt Movement that has planted more than 30 million trees across the country.

And among the first to congratulate her was President Kibaki, who feted her at State House, Nairobi, last night.

Prof Maathai, the first Kenyan to receive the award, appeared dazed when told by Nation journalists that she had been nominated for the world's most prestigious international honour.

She heard the news at Nyeri's Outspan Hotel, where she had just arrived before heading to her Tetu constituency for a meeting.

And her surprise turned to delight when the Norwegian ambassador to Kenya, Mr Harald Dalen, called to confirm her nomination moments later.

Then at exactly mid-day, came the call from the Nobel Institute in Oslo that announced she had won the coveted prize from a record field of 194 nominees.

With tears of joy coursing down her face, Prof Maathai threw up her arms and said:

"This is the biggest surprise in my life. And I could not have received it in a better place: at the foot of Mount Kenya, the mountain that has been my greatest inspiration in my work."

The assistant environment minister went on: "This was the best kept secret I have ever come across. I did not even have a clue that I had been nominated for the prize."

She added: "I now feel extremely humbled to join great men of this continent, Mr Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond Tutu, both of South Africa, who have won this prize before."

And Prof Maathai then immediately pledged that most of the Sh100 million prize money would be ploughed back into the country she loves . . . into the rehabilitation of the environment.

"I have never handled so much money in my life. Right now, I am emotionally overwhelmed and I need time to get over these emotions before I can plan how to use the money. I might have to ask Mr Mandela and Archbishop Tutu to assist me," she added, amid tears.

Announcing the award, the Nobel Committee cited Prof Maathai's "contribution to sustainable development, democracy and peace," and continued:

"Peace on earth depends on our ability to secure our living environment. Maathai stands at the front of the fight to promote ecologically viable social, economic and cultural development in Kenya and in Africa.

"She has taken a holistic approach to sustainable development that embraces democracy, human rights and women's rights in particular. She thinks globally and acts locally."

After receiving the news, Prof Maathai had to cut short interviews with the international media to join her constituents in celebrating her triumph.

The award comes at a time when Prof Maathai is said to be having a strained relationship with some of her constituents and colleagues because of her objections to the revival of the shamba system which would see increased cultivation in the forests.

About a fortnight ago, she announced that she was ready to quit rather than allow forests to be destroyed, after her constituents threatened to vote against her if she did not allow them to cultivate forests.

"I know my constituents are unhappy with my stand on forest cultivation. But I am still going to break the good news to them and hope they now realise the importance of forest conservation and join me in celebrating this award," she said.

Prof Maathai said the award was in recognition of her efforts over 30 years in environmental management, during which she has planted more than 30 million trees.

She added that the award would greatly inspire her in her work which, she said, was a sure way of promoting peace in the world.

"It is evident that many wars are fought over resources which are now becoming increasingly scarce. If we conserved our resources better, fighting over them would not then occur," she said.

Only seven Africans have won the prize since it was first awarded in 1901. In addition to Mr Mandela, Archbishop Tutu, Prof Soyinka and Mr Annan, the others were Mr Anwar Sadat, the assassinated President of Egypt, Mr Frederick de Klerk, the former South African President (jointly with Mr Mandela), and Mr Albert Luthuli, the leader of the African National Congress.

The peace prize is awarded in Oslo, and the other Nobel prizes are presented in the Swedish capital, Stockholm.