Prince Valdemar and the Glücksborg monarchy

Prince Valdemar (1858-1939) was the youngest son of King Christian IX and Queen Louise of Denmark, also known as the “parents-in-law of Europe”. While the royal couple managed to marry most of their children into the major royal houses of Europe and thus to strengthen Denmark’s position on the international stage, Valdemar stayed at home and became a particular “national darling”.

Trained in the prestigious Danish Sea Officers’ School (“Søofficersskolen”), Valdemar went on to become a career officer for life. He undertook several voyages within the Danish colonial empire: to Iceland and the Faroe Islands in 1874, to the Danish West Indies in 1879 and to Greenland in 1886. Most famously, he and his wife Princess Marie d’Orléans supported Danish turn-of-the-century business enterprises such as the East Asiatic Company (EAC). To reinforce Danish business relations with the Kingdom of Siam, Valdemar undertook a major cruise to East Asia on board HMS Valkyrie in 1899-1900, as well as a private EAC-cruise in 1906-07, together with his nephew Prince George of Greece.

Featured Blog posts

Regarding Prince Valdemar’s visit to the Danish West Indies in 1879/1880: A little Prince and a big Fireburn

Regarding the centennial anniversary of the sale of the Danish West Indies and Danish colonial history more generally: #Us too: How Europe‘s small players are discovering their colonial past: Nr. 1 Denmark

Further Reading:

In 1938, Hans Roger Madol published a small, but richly-illustrated biography of Prince Valdemar entitled “Kongernes Onkel: Prins Valdemars Erindringer“.

The most comprehensive scholarly study of Prince Valdemar’s life and popular role is my book “The “Sailor Prince” in the Age of Empire – Creating a monarchical brand in nineteenth-century Europe”.

Between 1863 and 1866, three of King Christian IX’s children came to occupy foreign thrones or to marry into the major royal families of Europe: Princess Alexandra wedded the British Prince of Wales, Princess Dagmar the Russian Tsarevich and Prince Vilhelm was elected King George of the Hellenes. Read about how the Danes took pride in the dynastic success of the Glücksborg dynasty in my Blog Post on the Heirs-to-the-throne project website: “Our four heirs to the throne”. Emotional identification with the success of the Glücksborg dynasty in 19th-century Danish family magazines.

***

If you want to find out more about Prince Valdemar’s family background and the Glücksborg monarchy, a must-read in Danish is:

Dynastiet Glücksborg: En Danmarkshistorie by Jes Fabricius Møller(You can find my review of this book on H-Soz-u-Kult.)

In English, you might want to read the short booklet

Christian IX and Queen Louise: Europe’s parents-in-law by Jens Gunni Busck