A24 has released the official poster for director Claire Denis’ upcoming sci-fi drama High Life, starring Robert Pattinson (Twilight, Good Time), Mia Goth (Suspiria) and Academy Award winning-actress Juliette Binoche (The English Patient, Certified Copy). Check out the full poster below and look for the first trailer for the film to be revealed tomorrow!

High Life tells the story of a group of criminals aboard a spaceship traveling to a black hole. They’ve been told they’ll be freed once they study a black hole, but undergo sexual experiments courtesy of the scientists on board. It will focus on a father and his daughter struggling to survive in deep space where they live in isolation.

RELATED: Indie Studio A24 to Produce Films for Apple

Rounding out the cast are André Benjamin (Jimi: All is by My Side, American Crime), Lars Eidinger (Clouds of Sils Maria, Personal Shopper), Agata Buzek (Redemption, The Reverse), Ewan Mitchell (The Last Kingdom, The Halcyon), Jessie Ross (The Frankenstein Chronicles), and Claire Tran (Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets, Lucy).

Writing credits go to Claire Denis, Jean-Pol Fargeau, Geoff Cox and Nick Laird. The movie is produced by Laurence Clerc, Oliver Dungey, Christoph Friedel, Andrew Lauren, DJ Gugenheim, Claudia Steffen, Olivier Thery-Lapiney and Klaudia Smeija. Production companies handling the film are Andrew Lauren Productions, Apocalypse Films, Alcatraz Films, Pandora Film Produktion and Madants.

RELATED: A24’s Under the Silver Lake Delayed Again

Denis is known for her films Chocolat, Beau Travail, White Material and 35 Shots of Run. Binoche and Tran recently collaborated with Denis on Let the Sun Shine In, which made its debut at the Cannes Film Festival in Director’s Fortnight where it won the SACD Prize. Binoche is known for her work in the film The English Patient, which won her the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in 1997. She was nominated for Best Actress for her role in 2000’s Chocolat (not to be confused with Denis’ Chocolat in 1988).