The Spanish Succession

King Fernando II of Aragon was the son of King Juan II of Aragon (whose family was a cadet branch of the House of Trastámara) by his second wife, Juana Enríquez, a daughter of Fadrique Enríquez and Mariana Fernández de Córdoba, 4th Lady of Casarrubios del Monte. Born in Torrelobatón, Juana Enríquez was a great-great-granddaughter of King Alfonso XI of Castile.

The marriage between Juana Enriquez and King Juan II of Aragon was arranged because King Juan II wished to ally himself with the powerful noble faction she belonged to, a faction which had major power in Castile at the time. They were engaged in 1443, but the marriage was delayed. The wedding finally took place in 1447.

King Fernando II of Aragon’s future wife, Infanta Isabella of Castile, was the daughter of King Juan II of Castile and his second wife, Infanta Isabella of Portugal, who was born as a scion of a collateral branch of the Aviz Dynasty that had ruled Portugal since 1385.

Infanta Isabella of Portugal’s parents were Infante João, Constable of Portugal, the youngest surviving son of King João I of Portugal and his wife Philippa of Lancaster, the eldest child of John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster, and Blanche of Lancaster.

Infanta Isabella of Portugal was married to King Juan II of Castile as his second wife. His first wife, Infanta Maria of Aragon, had given him four children, though only one, the future King Enrique IV of Castile, had survived into adulthood. Infanta Maria of Aragon was the daughter of King Fernando I of Aragon and Eleanor of Alburquerque.

Incidentally, to complicate this already complicated genealogy, Infanta Constance of Castile (1354 – 1394) was a claimant to the Crown of Castile. She was the daughter of King Pedro I of Castile and María de Padilla, who was deposed and killed by his half-brother, King Enrique II of Castile. Constance of Castile married the English prince, John of Gaunt, as his second wife, who fought to obtain the throne of Castile in her name, but ultimately failed.