John Primer and Bob Corritore

Crawlin Kingsnake

Vizztone Label Group

Bob Corritore was born in Chicago and got hooked on blues Harmonica when he was twelve years old. He studied and received playing tips from Carey Bell, Big Walter Horton, Junior Wells and others. At the age of twenty-five Corritore moved to Phoenix, Arizona. Ten years later he opened his own club there called The Rhythm Room. With his house band The Rhythm Room All-Stars, he backed musicians when they came to town. Since 2017 Corritore has been nominated for at least half a dozen Blues Music Awards. He won his first BMA in 2011 for Historical Album of The Year. This is Corritore’s 18 album although he appears on over seventy-five others.

Alfonso “John” Primer was born in Camden, Mississippi but moved to Chicago where he was a regular at Teresa’s Lounge located at 48th and South Indiana Avenue. He played guitar in Willie Dixon’s Chicago Blues All-Stars and in The Muddy Waters Band. Later Primer joined Magic Slim and The Teardrops. Primer was nominated multiple times for Traditional Blues Male Artist of The Year first winning it in 2016. Primer was also the lead vocalist,guitarist and featured artist on the Grammy nominated “Muddy Waters 100” project. This is Primer’s nineteenth album.

This album is the fourth collaboration for Primer and Corritore since they started working together in 2013. The band also includes Bob Stroger, bass; Jimi Primetime Smith, second guitar; Anthony Geraci, piano; and Wes Starr, drums. Primer was recently inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame. Highlights include the title track, “Take A Message”, “Down in The Bottom”, “Stuff You Gotta Watch”, “Rosalee Blues” and “Feel Like Going Home”.

The album is a testament to the purity of the blues and the best studio recording so far this year.

BUY NOW!!

Buy Us a Cup of Coffee!

Join the movement in supporting Making a Scene, the premier independent resource for both emerging musicians and the dedicated fans who champion them.

We showcase this vibrant community that celebrates the raw talent and creative spirit driving the music industry forward. From insightful articles and in-depth interviews to exclusive content and insider tips, Making a Scene empowers artists to thrive and fans to discover their next favorite sound.

Together, let’s amplify the voices of independent musicians and forge unforgettable connections through the power of music

You can donate directly through Paypal!