We didn’t get the chance to swing by Phoenix’s The Rhythm Room — the acclaimed blues club owned by harmonica ace Bob Corritore — during our most recent business trip to the city, but did make sure we took some … Continue reading →

Willie Buck may not have been born in Chicago, but he certainly sounds a lot like Chicago, at least the one made famous by the likes of fellow Mississippi natives such as Muddy Waters, Jimmy Reed, and Howlin’ Wolf. While … Continue reading →

We’ve talked here before about some of the terrific collaborations of which harmonica master Bob Corritore has been a part over the years, including recordings with the likes of piano great Henry Gray, guitarist John Primer, and Chicago bluesman Tail … Continue reading →

Nominations for the 2017 Blues Music Awards were announced earlier this week, with New England blues institution Sugar Ray & the Bluetones and its members earning an impressive – and probably unprecedented – two handfuls of nominations, including nods for … Continue reading →

We’ve heard him on joint projects with the likes of John Primer and Tail Dragger, and also as a guest on recordings from Diunna Greenleaf, Mud Morganfield, Louisiana Red, The Mannish Boys, and Dave Specter, to name just a few, not … Continue reading →

Earlier this year, we told you about the Lancaster Roots & Blues Festival, which is quickly gaining a reputation as one of the must-attend events for blues fans in the Mid-Atlantic region. Here are a few more festivals and shows … Continue reading →

With Old Man Winter biting and blowing here in the northeast U.S., we thought you might enjoy this double dose of blues to help keep you warm, featuring a talk-free edition of our BluesPowR Radio Hour as well as a … Continue reading →

It’s not every day that you get to see two former guitarists with Muddy Waters‘ band perform together on the same stage, backed by an all-star band of some of the top names in the blues music world. And while … Continue reading →

The late, great Muddy Waters once sang about a dream he had on his mind and when he woke up the next morning, not a thing could he find. Saturday night’s Project Blues Review was so good, we thought we … Continue reading →

Yesterday, we told you about the latest releases from second generation bluesmen Mud Morganfield and Kenny “Beedy Eyes” Smith – in Mud’s case, a tribute to his father McKinley Morganfield, a.k.a. Muddy Waters, on which he paired with esteemed harp player … Continue reading →