As the timeless classic Christmas romantic comedy "Love Actually" celebrates it's 20th anniversary we're taking a closer look at where the original cast are two decades after its theatrical release.

The beloved holiday film follows an intertwined tales of nine very different individuals during the holiday season as they share the common pursuit of true love in London. The dreamy tale follows David, an attractive British prime minister who falls head-over-feels for his younger employee Sarah, a graphic designer whose responsibility to care for her mentally ill brother complicates her love life, and Harry, a married man who is tempted to cheat with his new attractive secretary.

In celebration of the iconic rom-com's 20th anniversary, Studiocanal and Universal Pictures have teamed up to offer fans around the world a chance to experience the film in a whole new way as they are releasing the movie in incredible 4K clarity. The new 4K restoration will premiere on home video and digitally in the U.S. on November 21 and in France on December 6. The re-released will also debut in theaters but the date has yet to be announced.

Some of Hollywood's greatest actors starred in the hit Blockbuster that originally debuted in 2003, including the beloved Hugh Grant, Emma Thompson, Colin Firth, Liam Neeson, Keira Knightly, and Thomas Brodie-Sangster. Now many years later, we're checking in with the star-studded cast as they all paved their way to success.

READ MORE: Sydney Sweeney turns up heat in black jumpsuit in epic new Madame Web trailer

Hugh Grant

Hugh Grant starred as David in Love Actually playing the role of the newly elected Prime Minister of England. The handsome politician was the first to fall in love in the movie as he quickly fell for his co-worker named Natalie who worked under him in the office. After a slow burn and being snubbed by Natalie initially, she confesses her love for him in a Christmas card writing that she is his and only is. After receiving the card David frantically searched door-to-door trying to find Natalie's home to profess his love for her until they eventually reunite and kiss at the end of the movie.

Since Love Actually, Hugh has gone on to shoot to stardom in Hollywood landing roles in at least 50 movies often playing the role of the dashing male lead. Some of Hugh's most well-known performances outside of the rom-com include Notting Hill, Bridget Jone's Diary, Four Weddings and a Funeral, and The Gentlemen. Now, the 63-year-old actor is set to star in the highly anticipated prequel Wonka starring as an Oopma Loompa.

Last year in an interview with People, Hugh said that he sat down and drunkenly watched the old rom-com with his wife. Speaking on the movie's themes, Hugh said: "It comes from the heart — it's true," he continued: "And I did drunkenly watch a bit of Love Actually a few months ago with my wife, and she was the one who said, 'Oh look, it's all about pain; it's all about suffering.'"

Emma Thompson

Emma Thompson starred as Karen in Love Actually who was David's sister and Harry's wife. Karen was the loving stay-at-home mother who was being secretly cheated on by her husband with a woman he works with. She discovered her husband's infidelity in the most heart wrenching way as she indirectly caught him buying a necklace for another woman for Christmas instead of for her but kept her sadness to herself as to not ruin her children's holiday.

Speaking about the iconic heartbreaking scene from Love Actually and why it hits home for so many viewers, Emma told TODAY: "I think it’s to do with the fact that we’re required in our lives to repress the things that we’re feeling," she continued: "So, you can be hit right between the eyes with some terrible piece of news, but you can’t react immediately because you’ve got your children there. It’s that thing of not showing — that’s why it hurts. That’s why it moves us."

Since Love Actually, Emma has gone on to become an incredibly successful actress receiving numerous accolades throughout her career spanning more than four decades including two Academy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards and a Primetime Emmy Award. Some of Emma's most well-recognized films include Nanny McPhee, Stranger Than Fiction, multiple Harry Potter movies, Cruella, Sense and Sensibility, among many others.

Colin Firth

Colin Firth played Jamie Bennett in Love Actually who was a writer who heartbreakingly discovered that his girlfriend was cheating on him with his brother. After the devastating blow, Jamie goes on to fall in love with his housekeeper, Aurélia, and makes the grand decision to learn her home language of Portuguese. She also fell madly in love with Jamie and was secretly learning English for him. At the end of the film, Jamie tracks her down in her hometown and grandly professes his love and gets down on one knee to ask her to marry him which she happily accepts.

Since Love Actually, Colin has gone on to also find success in Hollywood as both an actor and a producer starring in at least 66 different movies. Some of Colin's most iconic performances include his roles in The King's Speech, Mama Mia!, What a Girl Wants, Bridget Jone's Diary, and many more.

Liam Neeson

Liam Neeson starred as Daniel in the hit movie Love Actually, who was a widower that was concerned about the mental health of his stepson Sam following the death of his mother Joanna. In the movie, Liam is an advocate for love as he pushes his son to confess his feelings for his crush before it's too late. Daniel also goes on to find renewed love for himself as he shares a mutual crush with his son's classmate's mother.

Liam has gone on to become a renounced actor starring in at least 105 movies throughout his nearly 50-year-long career. The 71-year-old actor has been awarded a number of honors throughout his run in Hollywood including nominations for an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, three Golden Globe Awards, and two Tony Awards. Some of Liam's most famous roles include his performances in Taken, Retribution, Schindler's List, Blacklight, and many more.

Keira Knightly

Keira Knightly played Juliet in Love Actually who was the newly wed wife of Peter. During their wedding, Peter's best man Mark filmed the ceremony and was secretly in love with Juliet. She discovers this when she looks back at the footage of the wedding night and discovers that all of the shots are focused on her instead of her husband. Mark then performs the grand gesture of showing up at Juliet and Peter's doorstep with cue cards confessing his love for her. She steps out and gives him a quick kiss and he tells himself that he will finally move on with his life.

After Love Actually Keira went on to find success in Hollywood starring in at least 46 movies. Some of Keira's most well-known roles include her iconic role as Elizabeth Swann in Pirates of the Caribbean as well as her movies Pride & Prejudice, The Intimidation Game, Begin Again, The Duchess, The Edge of Love, and many more.

Keria is currently taking some time away from acting as she announced that she didn't want to do any big-budget films anymore because she "couldn't handle" the same that was associated with them. She said that she had previously suffered a "mental breakdown" due to being overwhelmed by the attention of paparazzi.

Thomas Brodie-Sangster

Thomas Brodie-Sangster starred as Sam in Love Actually as Daniel's son who is riddled with anxiety over a crush he has on his classmate. After missing his chance to impress his crush during their school's Christmas pageant, his father convinces him catch up with her at the airport to make a bold gesture. The meeting went perfectly as she surprised him by already knowing his name and giving him a peck on the cheek.

Since Love Actually, Thomas has gone on to star in at least 25 movies. Some of his most famous roles have included his performances in Maze Runner, Nanny McPhee, Nowhere Boy, The Last Legion, Death of a Superhero, and many more. This year Thomas announced that he is engaged to Talulah Riley after first sparking romance together on set of the movie Pistol.