A trio of filmmakers have teamed up with former Westboro Baptist Church member Nathan Phelps to tell his story of escaping an abusive home and his journey to break away from the “most hated family in America.”

Phelps, 55, is one of 13 children of the late Fred Phelps Sr., founder of Westboro Baptist Church. A campaign to raise $55,000 to fund the documentary was launched on Kickstarter. The campaign ended Monday afternoon with 386 backers pledging $20,005. Since the goal wasn’t met, Phelps said the money will be given back to the donors, and he said they were “going to have to do something different.”

“They never take the money until the Kickstarter goal has been reached,” he said.

The Kickstarter campaign, seen at http://cjon.co/1n7W7W7, was launched at the beginning of June with the expectation of the film being released in December 2015.

The documentary, titled “Not My Father’s Son,” aims to chronicle Phelps’ early life in the church, including the alleged abuse he and his siblings endured, as well as “his journey toward healing to his subsequent and current fight for justice and equality for all people,” according to the Kickstarter page.

Phelps said the idea of the film is to show what happens when a person grows up in an extremely religious household. He said there have been 20 to 30 interviews conducted in the 15 months they have been working on the film, so a lot of the money being raised through the Kickstarter would have covered costs for travel, filming re-enactments, editing, sound and payment for the composer, Topeka native Sam Billen.

Since Phelps has spoken publicly many times about his growing-up years, he said it wasn’t difficult to retell his story on camera. Phelps said he knew he was going to have to relive parts of his childhood, but he knew it would be for the greater good.

“I want to have a positive impact,” Phelps said. “That’s the whole reason I decided to do this.”

Phelps, who said he now identifies as an atheist, said he only felt one spiritual experience as a child, but the rest of the time growing up, he felt like he was talking to the ceiling when praying.

“We accept we can know something without evidence,” he said.

When asked if he was concerned with reaction from his church family members, he said it doesn’t matter because he had already been condemned to hell by them.

“I gave up a long time ago,” Phelps said.

Phelps said he left his family’s home on the eve of his 18th birthday after buying a car in secret and packing his things when no one was watching. He said in the trailer for the documentary he sat and watched the clock until midnight, when he left.