Croatia’s public television is called HRT (Hrvatska radiotelevizija), and it is owned by the state. HRT covers 5 TV channels and 12 radio stations, with one international station each. TV programs can be watched in and outside Croatia – Europe, and globally.

We bring you the essentials on the topic of Croatian national television. We also plan to discuss the issues residents often deal with when paying the HRT monthly fee, so stay tuned for our next post in this series.

In this post, we cover:

HRT’s program offer

Watching HRT outside Croatia

TV show classics

Schedules and subtitles

HRT in numbers

Monthly fee

The facts are these…

HRT (HTV): Croatian public television and their TV channels

What is Croatian HRT, and what does it offer

Hrvatska radiotelevizija – HRT (Croatian Radiotelevision) is a Croatian national public broadcasting company that operates several television and radio channels.

The Republic of Croatia founded it, and ownership rights belong to the Croatian government. The radio section was founded in 1920, and the TV section in 1950.

HRT operates with:

4 terrestrial TV channels

Prvi program Hrvatske televizije – HRT – HTV 1

Drugi program Hrvatske televizije – HRT – HTV 2

Treći program Hrvatske televizije – HRT – HTV 3

Četvrti program Hrvatske televizije – HRT – HTV 4

1 international TV channel

HRT International – HRT Int.

3 national radio stations

Prvi program Hrvatskoga radija – HRT – HR 1

Drugi program Hrvatskoga radija – HRT – HR 2

Treći program Hrvatskoga radija – HRT – HR 3

1 international radio station

HRT – Glas Hrvatske (Voice of Croatia)

8 regional radio stations

HRT – Radio Dubrovnik

HRT – Radio Knin

HRT – Radio Osijek

HRT – Radio Pula

HRT – Radio Rijeka

HRT – Radio Sljeme

HRT – Radio Split

HRT – Radio Zadar

8 regional centers

HRT’s additional sections are:

Simfonijski orkestar (symphony orchestra)

Jazz orkestar (jazz orchestra)

Tamburaški orkestar (tamburitza orchestra)

Zbor Hrvatske radiotelevizije (HRT choir)

HRT International channel

HRT International (HRT Int.) is a channel for Croats outside Croatia and the international public. It broadcasts news translated into English, German, and Spanish. Their TV shows Hrvatska, moj izbor (Croatia, my choice), and Otkrivamo Hrvatsku (Discover Croatia) feature the lives of Croatian diaspora, returnees, and foreigners who live in Croatia.

View what the Croatian diaspora needs to know before returning to Croatia here and how they can apply for temporary residence without Croatian citizenship here.

[Read: Available visas and residence permits for Croatia]

HRT Int. also produces documentaries on Croatian history, tradition, and culture and their relations with the world.

Learn more about Croatian history here and culture here.

How to watch HRT programs outside of Croatia

HRT broadcasts 24 hours daily, including news, movies, TV shows, author’s shows, and sports programs. The program that is watched the most is HRT – HTV1. News is broadcast within HRT – HTV1 and HRT Int.

[Read: Where to get your Croatian news]

HRT’s national radio and TV programs are broadcast by satellite to the whole of Europe. Everyone who owns a satellite and lives in Europe can watch or listen to them.

HRT’s international programs HRT – Glas Hrvatske and HRT Int. – Program za Hrvate izvan RH can be viewed globally. You can track them by satellite in Europe or via HRT’s multimedia service HRTi, regardless of location.

What is HRTi

HRT has a streaming service called HRTi, which includes:

Watching 5 TV programs

Live listening to 12 radio stations

Content review with a time-lag

Expanded database of TV and radio broadcasts (on-demand)

Additional content

HRTi is free of charge for all HRT private users. You must have a proper receiving device and internet access to use it. HRTi can also be used outside of Croatia. However, certain content protected according to the author’s rights won’t be available.

More information on the HRTi service, including instructions on how to use it, is available here.

Croatian TV show classics on HRT

Some of the HRT’s TV shows have been around for a long time and are considered Croatian classics. Let’s introduce some of them.

#1 Dobro jutro, Hrvatska!

Dobro jutro, Hrvatska! (Good morning, Croatia!) is a daily morning show that covers reports and live broadcasts from Croatia. It is led by a couple of TV presenters who host guests in the studio. They also have a column with advice from all areas of life.

We are pleased to inform you that Sara was interviewed on Dobro jutro, Hrvatska! in July 2020. You can watch the full interview in Croatian and read the English transcription here.

Category: Entertainment, informative, mosaic show

Started: 1992

TV channel: HRT – HTV 1

Facebook | Instagram

#2 More

TV show More (Sea) covers stories about the Adriatic Sea’s richness and the Croatian coast. Their topics cover life at sea and are broadcast from HRT’s studios in Pula, Rijeka, Zadar, and Split.

Category: Informative mosaic show

Started: 1982

TV channel: HRT – HTV 1

Facebook

#3 Nedjeljom u 2

Nedjeljom u 2 (Sundays at 2) is the longest-running political talk show led by TV presenter Aleksandar Stanković.

Every Sunday, Stanković hosts a guest from the world of politics, science, culture, or economy in the HRT’s studio to discuss a specific topic. Everyone watching the show can participate by answering a question asked during the show.

Category: Politics

Started: 2000

TV channel: HRT – HTV 1

Facebook | Instagram

#4 TV Kalendar

TV Kalendar (TV calendar) is a short documentary show focused on essential events from Croatian and world history.

Category: History

Started: 1976

TV channel: HRT – HTV1

Where to find HTV program schedules and Croatian subtitles

Schedules for all HRT’s programs are available here.

HRT – HTV4 enables subtitles for deaf people within the following informative shows:

Dnevnik at 12:00

Vijesti at 17:00

Vijesti at 18:00

Dnevnik at 19:00

The titles for the deaf are in Croatian sign language. All shows broadcast with Croatian sign language have the label HZJ – hrvatski znakovni jezik (Croatian sign language) on the TV schedules.

Some shows also have belonging subtitles in the Croatian language. They are marked with the label T on the TV schedules and Teletext. Titles can be watched via the Teletext page 888.

Croatian HRT in numbers

HRT’s archive material includes:

250.000 hours of audiovisual recordings

100.000 hours of radio recordings

30.000 sheet music records

30.000 books

In one year, HRT broadcasts:

2.015.056 minutes (33.584 hours) of TV programs

553.054 minutes of informative programs

54.012 minutes of children’s program

91.390 minutes of scientific and educational programs

80.604 minutes of documentary programs

41.242 minutes of drama programs

99.137 minutes of cultural programs

22.419 minutes of religious programs

What is the HRT monthly fee

If you want to watch HRT TV programs or listen to their radio stations, you must pay a monthly fee. A monthly fee cannot be higher than 1.5% of the approximate monthly neto salary in Croatia. It has remained the same since 2012, costing 10,62 euros per month.

[Read: Minimum wage salaries in Croatia]

Other HRT’s price lists, including advertising, are available here.

There is some classic Croatian screwiness with how this fee is charged, but that necessitates its own post. Stay tuned for that… If you know what I’m talking about and have a story to tell about it, share it with us.

HRT contact information

Address: Hrvatska radiotelevizija, Prisavlje 3, 10 000 Zagreb – view map

Phone: +385 (0)1 634 2634

Email: hrt@hrt.hr

Monthly fee: pristojba@hrt.hr

Website | Facebook | Instagram

View more contact information here.

View our other Croatian media posts

Croatian National Theaters

Croatia’s mobile phone providers

e-Građani (e-Citizens) – Online portal for Croatian government services

Entrepreneur groups for women in Croatia

Hrvatska Pošta – Croatian Postal Office

What is a Tisak and how it may just save your life

What is Narodne Novine

Where to get your Croatian news

Sources:

Hrvatska radiotelevizija