Pencey Prep was an American punk rock band that is from Belleville, New Jersey.

Background[edit]

Prior to Pencey Prep several of the members played in local punk rock bands. Frank Iero was in the band Sector 12, and Neil Sabatino was in the band Stick Figure Suicide. While a student at Rutgers University, Iero was the guitarist and lead vocalist for Pencey Prep. Along with their label-mates, the emo band Thursday, Pencey Prep was considered part of New Jersey's growing post-hardcore and punk scene, and in 2001 they signed with Eyeball Records. They performed multiple times alongside the alternative rock band Nada Surf. Pencey Prep released their only full-length album, entitled Heartbreak in Stereo, in 2001, and it was reissued by Eyeball Records, in 2002. Low attendance during a three-week tour in the Midwest of the United States, and fighting within the band, led to the Pencey Prep's demise, and by May 2002 the members had parted ways.

According to the band's Myspace page, the name is taken from the book The Catcher In The Rye, by J.D. Salinger. Pencey Prep was the name of the school that the main character Holden got expelled from.

After Pencey Prep[edit]

Sabatino left Pencey Prep in 2001, and started Fairmont, which was originally a solo acoustic project; however, McGuire joined on bass shortly afterwards. Looking back at the early days of Fairmont, Sabatino notes he "wanted it to be my former band Pencey Prep, I built the band up to being a five-piece with two guitars, keyboards, bass, drums, vocals and a screamer. That lineup lasted very briefly[;] I had felt in a way that I was [...] trying to write heavy music just to fit in with the rest of the New Jersey scene of the time." In 2007, McGuire joined Iero to form the hardcore band Leathermouth.

Shortly after their 2002 release with Eyeball Records, Pencey Prep disbanded and Iero began playing with the bands I Am A Graveyard and Give Up The Ghost, before landing a spot as rhythm guitarist with My Chemical Romance. He signed with My Chemical Romance days before they began recording their 2002 debut album I Brought You My Bullets, You Brought Me Your Love, also released under Eyeball Records. The experience Iero gained from playing live with Pencey Prep, according to Laura La Bella's biography My Chemical Romance "bec[a]me invaluable when the band eventually booked live shows other than basement parties." Keyboardist Simon went on to tour with My Chemical Romance, as well as co-author the 2013 comic-book series The True Lives of the Fabulous Killjoys with Gerard Way.

Members[edit]

Tim Hagevik – drums

Frank Iero – lead vocals and guitars

John McGuire – bass and backing vocals

Neil Sabatino – guitars and backing vocals

Shaun Simon – keyboards

Discography[edit]

Albums

Heartbreak in Stereo (2001)

EPs

Long Walk to Forever (2000)

.trying to escape the inevitable... (2000)

Singles

"Trying to Escape the Inevitable" (2000)

References[edit]

Citations

Bibliography

[edit]