In November 1841, John Neely Bryan settled on the east bank of the Trinity River. The site he chose was the only spot to cross the river for miles and was an active route used by the Caddo, Creek, Shawnees, and other Native American tribes who lived in the area. When he first visited the site in 1839, Bryan had hopes of setting up a post to trade buffalo hides and other goods with the local tribes, but the Texas Rangers had burned down the tribal village by the time he returned in 1841 and removed half of Bryan’s intended clientele. Instead, Bryan founded the city of Dallas and set up a post office, general store, and a river ferry. He hoped to use the Trinity River as a navigable waterway to connect to the Gulf of Mexico. Unfortunately, those hopes proved impractical as initial attempts to navigate the river failed due to the high silt volume and unpredictable flooding of the river.

Dallas was surveyed and plotted in 1844, and became an official county with Dallas as the county seat on March 30, 1846. Bryan donated his own land for the county courthouse, which was a small log cabin that was located where the Old Red Courthouse stands today. Finally, on February 2, 1856, Dallas was granted a town charter by the Texas Legislature, enabling it to govern itself on most matters instead of being subject to the general laws of Texas.

Having made several failed attempts to make the Trinity River navigable over the years, Dallas found its fortune instead with railroads and became a major crossroads for the Houston and Texas Central (1872) and the Texas and Pacific (1873) lines. The rail lines were a major thoroughfare between northern, southern, and eastern manufacturing plants. Trade in cotton, leather, and buffalo hide proved lucrative early on. By 1880 the population of Dallas had tripled to over 10,000 residents and showed no signs of slowing as merchants, bankers, farmers, and others settled into the area, attracted to the growth.

By 1890, Dallas was the most populous city in Texas.

Featured Photo: 1892 map of Dallas, TX (Library of Congress)