LAS VEGAS — Tom Hardy’s mug — oversize, pouty-lipped, bedroom-eyed in the key of Paul Newman — was plastered all over the elevator banks at Caesars Palace here. But at a Starbucks on the casino floor, amid the hypnotic dings and blinkety lights, hundreds of people swirled around as he ordered coffee, barely giving him a second — or even a first — glance.

“Tom?” the barista called, not looking up. “Thanks, love,” replied Mr. Hardy, incognito in a shorn pate and fledgling ZZ Top beard.

Even if Mr. Hardy had been cognito, heads might still not have swiveled his way. Mr. Hardy, who is 37, is a big deal in Britain, his homeland, and his critically lauded work in two films from last year, “The Drop” — with James Gandolfini in his final film role — and “Locke,” won Mr. Hardy broader stateside acclaim. But he’s not yet a widely known entity in the United States — mention his name in some quarters and people might ask, “The Victorian novelist?” — not least because his biggest blockbuster turn so far, as the villainous Bane in “The Dark Knight Rises,” involved the wearing of a crablike mask over his decidedly telegenic face.

Now, however, Mr. Hardy is planted firmly on “that all is poised to change” terrain: He plays the title role in the probable summer blockbuster “Mad Max: Fury Road,” due May 15. (As it happens, he’s again relegated to wearing a mask — this one looks more like a gardening trowel — but only for the first third or so of the film.)

Written and directed by George Miller, the same Australian who brought all three Mad Max films to the screen (the first one 36 years ago), making a star out of a young Mel Gibson, “Fury Road” is not a remake but instead a new chapter in the franchise. Just as different actors slipped into the role of James Bond, we now have a new Max to face off doggedly against various wacko bad guys in the postapocalyptic, water- and fuel-starved, extremely dusty Australian Outback.

Mr. Hardy’s Max, haunted and feral, is captured and enslaved by a bellicose desert tribe, led again by Hugh Keays-Byrne, the baddie from the original film, before meeting up with Furiosa, a renegade on a mission played by Charlize Theron.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.