'10 Questions' seems less about Dalai Lama, more like a travelogue

You've got 45 minutes with the Dalai Lama, and you can ask him 10 questions. What's on your mind?

Rick Ray, the director of the documentary "10 Questions for the Dalai Lama" and the interviewer of the spiritual leader, came armed with several of the Big Questions of our time.

But the Dalai Lama's answers end up as bare snippets of wisdom, squeezed in between what is essentially a travelogue film showing Tibet and India locales.

What happened? How much of the Dalai Lama ended up on the cutting-room floor? Did the man only give brief answers, forcing Ray to fill in the blanks with information that plays like Travel Channel filler?

If you're curious enough to learn the answers to these questions or pose your own, Ray will appear at the Circle Cinema on Sunday, conducting a question-and-answer session at 3:30 p.m.

That will take place just after the 2 p.m. film showing and just before a 4:30 p.m. screening. The documentary is also screening at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday.

His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet speaks with an uncommon common sense that enables him to be "a uniter for peace," as Ray describes the man.

His undeniable charisma is on good display in the film, as the 71-year-old speaks with an energetic punctuation to every point he makes and amuses with his infectious laugh.

Ray narrates his own trek across India and the Himalayas, as this experienced filmmaker/explorer was able to supplement directing a travel video for a U.S. production company with being granted an audience with the Dalai Lama.

He illustrates the historical perspective behind several points, such as the long line of succession of Dalai Lamas and the selection process of these men the Tibetan people believe to be the divine reincarnation of Buddha.

Ray does well with the background information on China's overthrow and occupation of Tibet, forcing the spiritual leader into exile in India.

He also uncovers some unusual details, such as the Dalai Lama's penchant for taking things like watches and other devices apart to study them.

But while Ray delivers some quality open-ended questions for the man -- Why do the poor often appear happier than the wealthy? How do you reconcile a stand of non-violence when faced with violence? -- he undercuts the responses with his power of paraphrasing.

While the Dalai Lama offers uniquely thoughtful replies about how bad things can happen out of practices including religion, politics and more, Ray won't allow that food for thought any time to marinate for his audience.

Instead, each response elicits some framing of context for the answer, or some variation on the Dalai Lama's wording (his English is good, but subtitles are included also) to couple with accompanying video.

The Dalai Lama still emerges from the film as a contemplative man of reason, flexible enough to recognize multiple religious rituals and traditions of Buddhism as being out of date, showing an acceptance that makes him seem like an anti-pope.

But those looking for something more profound from the man should look to his writings for something both more inspirational and unfiltered than "10 Questions for the Dalai Lama."

10 QUESTIONS FOR THE DALAI LAMA

Stars:

Documentary includes Dalai Lama, interviewer Rick Ray

Theaters:

Circle Cinema, 10 S. Lewis Ave. (call 592-3456 for show times)

Running Time:

85 minutes

Rated:

unrated

Quality:

* 1/2

(on a scale of zero to four stars)

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.