10 Questions for the Dalai Lama

Directed and written by Rick Ray

Classification: G

Rating: **1/2

Leader in exile of the Tibetan people, honorary Canadian citizen and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize and, very recently, of the U.S. Congressional Gold Medal, His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama is the subject of this affectionate new documentary, which is part travelogue, part biography and part primer on Tibetan Buddhism.

The Dalai Lama, as he is commonly referred to in the West, has appeared sporadically on the silver screen over the years. His story is told in two well-known 1997 biopics: Martin Scorsese's Kundun and Seven Years In Tibet, in which Brad Pitt plays Austrian mountaineer Heinrich Harrer, who tutored the young spiritual leader before he fled Tibet. In 2004, the moving Canadian documentary What Remains of Us explored the realities of Tibetan life and showed the reactions of Tibetans as they watched a video message from their exiled leader. And this year, a documentary called Dalai Lama Renaissance travelled the festival circuit.

In 10 Questions, we travel thousands of miles with filmmaker Rick Ray, who turned an ill-fated assignment into a life-changing experience. Hired to film a travel video about India, Ray was promised an interview with the Dalai Lama by his producers. But upon arriving in India, he soon discovered that nothing had been done to set up this interview. For some reason, his driver had the Dalai Lama's e-mail address - the Dalai Lama doesn't answer his own e-mail, but he does have many monks who read and respond for him. Ray was granted an interview in three months' time in Dharamsala, India, where His Holiness lives when he's not on the road. Ray would have 45 minutes to ask 10 questions.

Ray begins the film with a look at the concepts and practices of Tibetan Buddhism, and then focuses on the modern history of Tibet, using black-and-white footage and photographs showing the Dalai Lama's interaction with Chinese leaders when he was still a teenager and before he fled Tibet.

The second section of the film weaves Ray's 10 questions and the Dalai Lama's replies - during which we learn about his attitude toward China and his comparison of Western and Eastern cultures - with beautiful footage Ray gathered during his weeks travelling around India.

Ray has clearly made the film for a general North American audience. Practising Buddhists and active supporters of Tibet will find most of the information familiar. But 10 Questions works extremely well as an introduction to the Dalai Lama and offers a tantalizing peek at the dynamic and even mischievous personality of this influential man.

10 Questions for the Dalai Lama opens Friday in Toronto at the Rainbow Market Square.

Special to The Globe and Mail