(CONTAINS MAJOR SPOILERS)

Robert Altman’s little discussed and underrated gem Brewster McCloud is a masterwork of 1970s American cinema, stand alone as an overall experience. Bud Cort stars as Brewster one year before he played Harold in Harold and Maude; Brewster like Harold has little dialogue and is often quite deadpan. To describe the plot is like trying to explain an episode of Curb Your Enthusiasm; quite intense, ridiculous and hilarious all at the time. The story concerns Brewster a young chauffeur (who drives a right hand drive on the right, much like Susannah York drives a left hand drive on the left in Altman’s later Images, there is probably an easy explanation for this; the cars’ owners were living abroad, but one can’t help thinking Altman enjoyed slightly jarring the viewer). Brewster chauffeurs an evil rich man (Stacey Keach) in heavy makeup to look about 90! Soon Brewster takes things into his own hands as Keach’s wheelchair flies down the highway with him in it! Renè Auberjonios (an Altman regular in M*A*S*H and Images) plays a lecturer discussing birds and their psychology for the duration of the film mainly in voiceover. Set in Houston, Texas in 1970 Brewster lives secretly in an unused maintenance room in the Houston Astrodome stadium; his life’s ambition is to build wings so that he can fly like a bird. Along the way blue eyed sensitive Michael Murphy plays a detective determined to solve the mysterious deaths of various people who the public think Brewster is responsible, it happens to be poisonous bird shit. Small talk gets in the way of the investigation as often happens in Altman films. You couldn’t make it up, as they say. Altman mentions smoking weed around that time, screenwriter Doran William Canon certainly shares Altman’s taste for farcical madness. Leonard Cohen told Altman he loved Brewster McCloud and so Altman got to use Cohen’s songs for the later McCabe and Mrs. Miller.

The women in the film are quite passive. Sally Kellerman plays Louise, Brewster’s sort of guardian angel, there for him at every turn, as Brewster sneaks into the stadium, steals a camera and a car (like Cort’s Harold). Kellerman is like Richard Bohringer’s guardian angel type in Jean-Jacques Beineix’s Diva, less stern and practical with a sexual prowess by merely standing the frame with confidence to rival any mysterious Altman characterisation, his characters’ motivations are often questioned by the audience most notably Philip Marlowe in The Long Goodbye. Shelley Duvall in her first film plays Suzanne a tour guide at the stadium, with her unusual eye lashes and quirky personality Duvall deeply fascinated Altman who later cast her in McCabe and Mrs. Miller, Thieves Like Us, Nashville, Buffalo Bill and the Indians, 3 Women and Popeye. Duvall like Elliott Gould is an unconventional lead by the nature of her personality and looks. Altman couldn’t care less about Hollywood story and star conventions; he was out to create something else in the New Hollywood cinema of the 70s, a generation older than Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, Brian De Palma, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg.

Cort’s character is dressed like Wally from Where’s Wally (Waldo in North America) in the trademark red and white, a wild card young man, loose in the state of Texas to cause havoc. The film has been described as experimental, that’s how stand alone it was in 1970. No doubt there is a fantasy as the 22 year old Cort is the sexual dream of his aid Hope (Jennifer Salt); she looks like Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz, the Wicked Witch of the West from that film Margaret Hamilton also features as a singer who wears red slippers. Altman’s can’t resist but to have a good look at them. Louise later tells Brewster a lullaby, their relationship is unclear (aunt/mother/girlfriend) but they are arguably oedipal overtones. The bed scene with Cort and Duvall can’t help but remind you of Harold and Maude as Cort lies on the bed satisfied. It is clear that Altman makes Cort look more like a young man in bed with Duvall and more like a boy with his glasses on with Kellerman. Duvall’s character is filled with naivety and passivity as she immediately accepts Brewster is stealing her car and tags along with him. If we compare the naïve Duvall of Brewster McCloud to the stubborn but caring Duvall of 3 Women and how Alman films them in cars, Suzanne is thin, vulnerable and sexualised through her use of driving gloves for the big chase. Her character of Millie in 3 Women is sterner squinting through the LA sun like a sort of demon with Spacek in the passenger seat as a bright angel, of course the roles reserve ala Bergman’s Persona.

Hope spurts mustard of a tub in a sexual reference by the mere sight of Brewster and his body who she treats like a God for no particular reason other than physical attraction. Suzanne who Brewster chooses over Louise (as if Hope had a chance), Brewster pays the price when Suzanne turns him over to the police for the suspected murderers. Louise practically locks him in the stadium for his doomed flying attempt. Of course all of the elements are of this fantasy world which Canon and Altman have created. A man child who plans to fly with wings and is of sexual interest to these three women, a nerd’s fantasy come true with all the harsh consequences of bitter irony in a narrative world which refuses to stay hovering in make-believe town.