Carine Roitfeld may be surrounded by models, celebrities, and fashion designers, but she definitely holds her own in the style department, which makes her perfect for this month’s “Woman of Style.”

Carine is a French fashion editor {ooh la la}. She is the former editor-in-chief of Vogue Paris, a position she held from 2001 to 2011. A former fashion model and writer, she announced her resignation on in December 2010. In 2012, she became founder and editor-in-chief of CR Fashion Book. {Source: Wikipedia}

When Carine was just 18, she began modeling. She was scouted on the streets in Paris by a British photographer’s assistant. Years later, she became a writer and then a stylist for French Elle, where she worked for fifteen years.

More Interesting Facts About Carine:

She worked as a consultant for and muse to Tom Ford at Gucci and Yves Saint-Laurent for six years.

She contributed to the images of Missoni, Versace, and Calvin Klein.

In 2001, she was approached by Condé Nast’s International Chairman Jonathan Newhouse to edit Vogue Paris.

In April 2006, there were rumors that Carine was being approached by the Hearst Corporation to take over Glenda Bailey’s editor-in-chief position at U.S. Harper’s Bazaar.

In January 2010, she was named to Tatler magazine’s top-10 best-dressed list.

She was listed as one of the fifty best-dressed over 50 by The Guardian in March 2013.

In December 2010, Carine resigned after ten years at Vogue Paris to concentrate on personal projects. She left the magazine at the end of January 2011, and was succeeded at Vogue Paris on February 1, 2011 by Emmanuelle Alt, who had served as fashion director under Carine.

Carine returned to freelance styling, working on both the Fall 2011 and Spring 2012 Chanel campaigns.

She took part in projects such as designing a window display for Barneys New York.

She compiled the large-format book Irreverent, published by Rizzoli in 2011.

She joined Harper’s Bazaar as global fashion director in 2012.

The 2013 documentary Mademoiselle C documents Carine’s launch of her magazine CR.

“I am blessed and thankful for having had the opportunity to work with Karl for so many years — we shared not only a professional relationship but a deep friendship. He will always be a legend, who redefined the notions of fashion, photography and celebrity. It is my honour to collaborate with his namesake brand as style advisor, carrying out his iconic vision for the upcoming three seasons.”

Carine Roitfeld, speaking of Karl Lagerfeld {Harper’s Bazaar}

The creator of CR Fashion Book, Carine sticks to a chic uniform of heels and pencil skirts to show off her ‘pretty’ legs, and never wears trainers or skinny jeans. Don’t even get her started on Uggs or flip-flops.

I’ve also read that she also has a shot of vodka every day and three cigarettes. She is one super stylish bad-ass boss babe! She is also a style icon in her own right, and I’d love to just follow her around for a couple of days just to watch her brilliant mind at work.

{Sidebar: Carine’s style reminds me a lot of Nina Garcia, editor-in-chief of Elle. Nina was also named a “Woman of Style” in September 2017.}

What do you think of Carine Roitfeld as a “Woman of Style”?

Yours Truly,

Vanessa

{Feature Image: Talk in French, via Pinterest}