Article from WWD

Carine Roitfeld Elaborates on Role at Harper's Bazaar

THE VIEW FROM CARINE: In early October, Hearst scored a splashy coup when it convinced Carine Roitfeld, who seemed elated to be free of corporate constraints after her decade at French Vogue, to join the company as the global fashion director of Harper’s Bazaar. The job has her styling four fashion stories a year that will appear simultaneously across all international editions. But upon the announcement, it was also somewhat vaguely defined. Would individual brand editors get veto power over Roitfeld’s shoots? What if Glenda Bailey found one of the stories too risque?

Roitfeld appeared Monday night for a Q&A at the French Institute Alliance Française in New York and made it clear she won’t be reporting to Bailey or any other editors in chief. “I’m not working with [Bailey],” she said, while noting that the long-time editor in chief is “a very important part of Bazaar.” Roitfeld said she’ll develop her stories and then they’ll be given to all the international magazines. “I’m always independent. No boss,” she said. She explained she’ll be mostly working with Duncan Edwards, president and chief executive officer of Hearst Magazines International.

Edwards said Roitfeld’s mandate is to create stories that can reverberate globally. “It’s an independent story that’s really for Bazaar rather than one individual edition,” he said. “You can’t have one editor editing that story.”

Even if the brand takes precedence over an individual creative vision, editors will reap the rewards, he said.

“Of course, the magazine belongs to Hearst, not to Glenda,” he said. “It’s a smart and clever thing for all of our editors to buy into because every edition of the magazine gets the benefit of this global story, and which magazine wouldn’t want a story styled by Carine?”

Edwards wanted Roitfeld to come to Hearst soon after she left Condé Nast in January 2011, and approached her that September.

It took a year of pursuit to get her to agree.

During the Q&A, Roitfeld made clear she did not appreciate the regular fights with Condé management over her magazine’s provocative spreads. She seems to relish her freedom, taking on new advertising campaigns and started her own magazine, CR Fashion Book, where she has wide latitude to do whatever she wants and embraces her reputation as the queen of p*rno chic. There wasn’t an immediate impulse to work with another behemoth publisher.

But Edwards won her over with the idea that the job seems to be the first of its kind, and gives her, also for the first time, a large readership spanning several countries. “Can you imagine for me to go from so small to have so many readers?” she said.

He also assured her she wouldn’t have to give up her lucrative consulting and freelance projects. At Hearst, Roitfeld is just another freelancer, Edwards said.

With such a broad portfolio, Roitfeld understands she has limitations. “When you’re talking to a wider scale of readers, you think a bit differently,” she said. But she’s convinced her personality can break through. “You will recognize me in the pictures,” she said. “My way, my castings, the way I put clothes together, it’s very me."

Carine's full editor's letter for the upcoming ballet-themed CR Fashion Book. I seriously can not wait to discover this issue! Does anyone know when it will be released?

The themes in CR are always very close to my heart. Last year, with my daughter pregnant and me becoming a new grandmother, I devoted my premiere issue to rebirth and filled the magazine with babies and mothers and concepts of renewal. This season, I'm exploring another personal obsession: dance. And specifically ballet.

I became attracted to ballet firstly because it is an art that requires elegance, faith, rigor, and refusal. Having taken up ballet in the last two years, I've experienced firsthand the pain and pleasure (but mostly pain) in every chassé and plié. Ballet is hard work, and it is one of the last art forms that is done with pure motives — ballet stars rarely sign huge endorsement deals or become world famous. More likely they are real people giving themselves fully to one passion. Quite simply, there is no other way. Because ballet is an art form that breaks the body and the soul. There is a fragility that I find inspiring. (I also think it's interesting that death is such a common theme in ballet... all of those exquisite dancers facing mortality each night, only to be reborn once the curtain falls.)

Ballet developed largely in France, so in a way this issue is also a subtle tribute to my home country. My current inspiration is Marie-Agnès Gillot, a 37-year-old french dancer with the Paris Opera Ballet who is brilliant, beautiful, and completely devoted to her craft. Yet what I find most intriguing about her is that she is not a dainty ballerina. You get the feeling she is a real person who is fully devoted to the sensual world. For her feature, Marie-Agnès conducts an interview with the legendary (and long-dead) dancer Vaslav Nijinksy, who speaks from beyond the grave about sex and seduction, life and death. A star of today paired with a mythic talent of the past... this is everything I love.

Elsewhere in the magazine we uncover a new generation of dancers who interpret tradition in wild and wonderful ways. like the young Ukrainian-born Sergei Polunin, who, with his ability to leap meters into the air, has been called the Nijinksy of today and is photographed for us by the director Gus Van Sant. Throughout the issue you'll find new works by Karen Kilimnik, one of my favorite artists and also a fan of ballet. It feels like a dream to find myself in her world, which is filled with fantasy and a certain sincere magic.

Of course you'll also find Spring fashion, dancing, jumping, gliding, and jetéing across every page. By the end, you yourself may be inspired to go en pointe. But even if you are not, I hope you close this issue with an admiration for those who do. Simply for the love of it.