2. Overview Gauhati University গুৱাহাটী বিশ্ববিদ্যালয় Motto Vidyana Sadhayeta Motto in English Achievement through Learning/Knowledge Established 1948 Type Public - Research Location Guwahati, Assam, India Campus Urban Nickname GU Affiliations UGC NAAC IAO AIU Website gauhati.ac.in Gauhati University is the first public university North-east India. It is the oldest and largest university of North-east India. Campus area- 600 acres Built up area- 1.2 lakh square metres 48 academic departments Satellite campus at Kokrajhar Current faculties- Arts, Science, Commerce, Medicine, Law & Engineering Gauhati University has 341 affiliated colleges

3. History • Gauhati University was established on 26 January, 1948. Professor Krishna Kanta Handique was founder Vice chancellor of the university. • The first public demand was made at the annual session of the Assam Association held at Sivasagar in 1917 when Satyanath Bora made a fervent plea in his Presidential speech for a separate University for Assam. • In 1940 the Government appointed S. K. Bhuyan as Special Officer with the task of collecting relevant information on the selection of site and related matters. • The university was established by an act of the State Legislature: the Gauhati University Act 1947 (Assam Act, XVI of 1947) of the government of Assam in 1948. • The first court meeting of the university was held on 26 January 1948, which is considered the foundation day, at the old Sudmerson Hall of Cotton College, Guwahati. • It had 18 affiliated colleges and eight Post Graduate Departments on its establishment.

4. Campus The emblem of the University, selected from among many submitted, was designed by T. Mukherjee, a textile designer of Ahmedabad. Two Sanskrit words inscribed on it – Vidyaya Sadhayeta (meaning achievement through learning) – indicate the motto of the University About the Campus: • The university is in Jalukbari in the Guwahati city area. • The campus area has been developed into a small township, now known as 'Gopinath Bardoloi Nagar‘. • It has about 5000 population including 3000 students residing in the hostels. • Apart from the residential quarters of teachers, officers and employees, there are 22 halls of residence for students. • The capital complex of Assam at Dispur is 22 km from the university. • The security arrangement for the university campus is two tier. The internal securty i.e. various departments, offices, and hostels are covered by our inhouse security staff (comprises of the Security Officer, Chowkidars, and Havildars). The blanket security of the campus i.e. the gates to the campus and to different department and offices are covered through an outsourced agency Sterling Security Services & Systems • You can obtain GU vehicle pass online

5. Administration Profiles

6. Key Information • The chancellor Shri Padmanabha Balakrishna Acharya did his Graduation - BA (Hons), B.Com and L.L.B. from Mumbai University. He was elected as Senate Member to the Mumbai University from Commerce Graduate Constituency. • Shri P.B. Acharya was a member of Academic Council (1988-1991) and Executive Council Member (1981-1991) of Mumbai University. He also took over additional charge of the Governor of Tripura from 21st July 2014. • Gauhati University receives Annual Financial Grants from the Government of Assam and Development Grants from the University Grants Commission apart from different funding agencies like CSIR, DST DBT, NEC, ICAR, ICHR, MAKAIAS, among others, who sponsor various research projects. • To automate their internal processes, Gauhati University has chosen Kalingasoft’s flagship Education ERP solution, Greycells. This implementation has resulted in the complete automation of the university's academic, administrative and financial processes. • The university's Krishna Kanta Handiqui Library is a designated 'Manuscript Conservation Centre' (MCC) under the National Mission for Manuscripts established in 2003. The library is the largest in Assam, holding about 850,000 books, magazines and journals in its collection. It also hosts about 5,000 valuable priceless manuscripts, some more than 300 years old. 1050 students received convocation from Gauhati University on 30th March 2015 at 25th Convocation (921 PG & UG, 123 PhD and 6 M Phil degrees)

8. Gauhati University Press • Established with 2/3rd expenditure borne by the UGC and remaining 1/3re by Gauhati University itself, in the year 1964, the Gauhati University Press has completed 41 years of its service to GU. • Started with meager 10 employees and a handful of letterpress machineries, the press has grown to a medium scale printing press in subsequent years and at present it has 50 employees • The press is housed in an Assam Type building of plinth area approx. 4500 sq. ft. • The GU press is managed by a Press Management Committee, Chaired by Prof. Srinath Baruah, Hon’ble Member of Executive Council, GU, with members of different other committees of the University and Experts from the Printing Industry and Financial Institutions.

9. Collaboration Recruitment of faculty members of Gauhati University is done by Freshersworld

10. Placement cell The best months for recruitment are March to May and September to November. However, if requested, recruitment camps can be arranged during the remaining months also by taking special care so as not to disrupt the scheduled academic activity of the university. Contact placement cell at placementgu@gmail.c om or placementgu@g auhati.ac.in Facilities for recruiters Hall with seating capacity of 350, audio-visual support & generator back up. The hall can be used for Pre-placement talks and conducting written tests. Additional room for holding GD & interview. University Guest house for boarding & lodging of the recruiter teams. Recruitment procedure Companies contact the Placement Officer Convey following details to college: Name of the Company Website, Nature/Field of Activity/Work/Business, Job Description, Job Designation, Place of Posting, Degree/Discipline of students required, Expected number of Vacancies, Pay package details, Accommodation Provided, Bond details, Selection Procedure Dates are allocated by the Placement Cell for campus recruitment. Pre-Placement talks and the subsequent selection process are ideally scheduled towards the second half (after 1PM) during week days and from 10AM on holidays..