Gauhati University Campus Facility

Gauhati University campus is in an area between the hillock on the southern end and mighty Brahmaputra River on the northern end. It is in the Jalukbari area of Guwahati city. A small township has been developed in the Gauhati University Campus known as the Gopinath Bardoloi Nagar.

The campus facilitates residential quarters for teachers and staff. Apart from this, it has 22 residential halls for students. The total population of the area is about 5,000 people, among which 3,000 are students. Initially, it has started functioning in the city centre but was later moved to the present campus in 1955-56.

The University of Gauhati is situated at a distance of 10 km from both Guwahati Railway Station and Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport. Dispur capital complex of Assam is about 22 km from the university campus. Gauhati University can be easily accessible and connected by rail, road and airways transportation. One can travel to different parts of Assam via the bus services available at Adabari bus stop, which is 2km from the university campus.

Gauhati University has selected the Kalingasoft’s flagship Education of ERP solution, Greycells that automate their internal processes. Different departments like finance, administration and academic operations are automated through the implementation of this software.

Gauhati University has few libraries within its campus. The Central Library of the university is the North Eastern Regional Centre (NERC) of the Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR). The Krishna Kanta Handique Library is a selected ‘Manuscript Conservation Centre’ (MCC) which works under the National Mission for Manuscripts.

It was inaugurated in the year 2003. This is the most extensive library in Assam, and it has a collection of 850,000 books, journals and magazines. Around 5,000 precious and ancient manuscripts of more than 300 years old are there in the university.

Around 326 colleges and institutions are affiliated under the Gauhati University. As it is mentioned before, there are 22 residential halls for both boys and girls. Boys have a total of 11 residential halls like Madhab Bezbaruah, Padmanath Gohain Baruah, Gopinath Bardoloi, V. Venkata Rao, Rupkonwar Jyotiprasad Agarwala, etc.

Girls have a total of 11 residential halls like Chandraprabha Saiki, Gandhi Bhawan, Indira Miri, Rani Gaidalu Law, etc. The University mainly functions through the executive council, academic council and G.U. court.

Other basic amenities and facilities that are offered by the University of Gauhati are water supply, street lighting, health services, guest house, post and telegraph, internal roads, a branch of State Bank of India, canteen, auditorium, market, playground, and many other things.