Gauhati University, the first University of North East India, located in Jalukbari area in the western part Guwahati city, Assam, India the university was established in the year 1948. It is a four star university rating by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council.It has 183 affiliated colleges

Gauhati University announces Admission to B.Tech Programs !yearGauhati University, the first University of North East India, located in Jalukbari area in the western part Guwahati city, Assam, India the university was established in the year 1948. It is a four star university rating by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council.It has 183 affiliated colleges

The University is located at Jalukbari within the Guwahati city area. The campus has got some hillock on the southern side and the mighty river Brahmaputra is flowing on the northern side of it. The campus areas has been developed to a small township, now known as 'Gopinath Bardoloi Nagar'. It has now about 5000 population including 15,000 including 3000 students residing in the hostels. Apart from the residential quarters of teachers, officers and employees of the University, there are 22 halls of residence for University students. The necessary civic amenities such as health service, water supply, street lighting, internal roads, guest house, Post and Telegraph office, a branch of State Bank of India, canteens, a market, parks, playgrounds, auditorium, indoor stadium etc. are provided in the campus. The University is 10 km from the Borjhar International Airport on National Highway No. 37; 5 km from Kamakhya Railway Station; and 10 km from Guwahati Railway Station as well as from the Bus stop near the Cachari (D. C. court) at the heart of the Guwahati City. The capital complex of Assam at Dispur is 22 km away from the University. The University is easily accessible from the Guwahati city, and Guwahati has road, rail and air links from all parts of the Country. A large number of bus services from various parts of Assam have their station at Adabari Bus Stand which is 2 km away from the campus.

Academics

Gauwahati University, is a member of the Indian Council of Historical Research. The institution is divided into following academic units: