As morning dawns, the doors are opened at the Green Line bus garage. Jonathan Horswell tells us that according to the 'Buses on Screen' website the line of eight Green Line T-class AEC Regals are at Watford in Hertfordshire, Leavesden Road garage'. (RL)

A father says farewell to his children. This and the next two shots appear to have been filmed in the same location.

As the crew and passengers sing their way towards London. a montage of various commuting methods is shown. Jonathan Horswell identifies thais as Waterloo Station. (RL)

A queue files onto a Metropolitan Electric Tramways tram. Andrew Emmerson identifies this as looking south on Finchley Road in Golders Green NW11 with the War Memorial Clock Tower dating from 1923 visible in the right distance.

Denis Hoare patiently waited for a tram but was told that they had been replaced some years back. Thanks for trying anyway. (RL)

Fred follows Jane from the store after she leaves him when he is fired. Outside Selfridges on Oxford Street.

Peter took this shot of Selfridges' main entrance, with revolving doors, showing the style of the doorways. The screen capture looks like it was a secondary entrance that has since been been replaced. Selfridges has seen a lot of remodelling over 83 years.

After losing his girl and his job, Fred walks despondently along the street. While researching the British Instructional Films studio at Welwyn recently, Richard Farmer found some publicity stills from 'Jack's the Boy' and 'Love on Wheels' which show this semi-permanent street set that had been built on the studio lot for shooting urban exteriors. Richard adds that producers working at both Gainsborough and Gaumont-British filmed exteriors at Welwyn because they had no proper lots to speak of.

Charles Philpotts (Edmund Gwenn) watches a commotion across the street caused by a spectacular window display created by Fred. Looking out onto the street set at Welwyn Studios, discovered by Richard Farmer who adds "A version of the street was in place by the end of 1928 and it was rebuilt over the following decade, so I imagine that other films might feature exteriors shot there too."

Philpotts re-engages Fred and gives him the job of advertising manager. More of the set at Welwyn Studios on Broadwater Road in Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire found by Richard Farmer.

Briggs talks to a colleague whilst waiting for departure time. This is Green Line's Poland Street coach station on Broad Street (now Broadwick Street) in Soho W1 which closed in October 1933.

The coach station was located between Lexington Street and Ingestre Place opposite Poland Street and this is a shot of the location now. With thanks to the staff at Veggie Pret on Broadwick Street. (PW)