When the Americans love something, they really love it. Expensive healthcare, guns and sports that nobody else understands are a case in point. But perhaps America’s greatest love affair is with the car. They love their cars so much that they don’t even have to get out of them when they go for a meal or to the cinema. Little wonder, then, that Hollywood has both reflected and encouraged this automotive obsession. Cars play a role in American film the way they don’t in any other nation’s. This list, for example, was never intended to be the most iconic cars in American film, just the most iconic cars in film. But you try thinking of a British example, or a European one.

The seven examples listed are all American films and only one of the cars is European. Interestingly, all but one of the US cars featured are of a certain vintage. This is, of course, partly because American cars are crap these days – you try looking cool behind the wheel of a Buick LaCrosse – but also because there is a pleasing nostalgia about the glory days of the good ol’ American gas guzzler, muscle cars produced in mid-America and driven by real men with boots and shades and a five o’clock shadow.

This list of iconic cars in films is far from comprehensive, entirely subjective, and has ruled out anything too obvious – anyone can jot down a few Bond cars or watch Cannonball Run and make a list. Start your engines...

American Graffiti, 1932 Ford Coupé

Let’s start with the oldest car on the list. OK, it wasn’t exactly as Henry Ford had intended it – it had been souped up like a hungry dog in a Heinz factory – but the marriage of the old and the new made for a heady combination. Harrison Ford’s character may have variously described it as “your momma’s car”, “a mixture of piss yellow and vomit green” and the kind of car that “has to stop to let funerals past”, but you only had to listen to the deep-throaty roar of that engine to know this was a piece of art. No wonder George Lucas spent so long working on the specifications of the car. And with Modesto’s drag-racing hero John Milner (Paul Le Mat) behind the wheel, that baby could shift.

The Blues Brothers, 1974 Dodge Monaco (The Bluesmobile)

In the film, Jake and Elwood’s wheels are a repurposed police cruiser from Mount Prospect, Illinois. In practice, it was an old Californian Highway Patrol car. Actually not “it”, “they”. Because it wasn’t one car, it was 13. That’s how many Bluesmobiles they trashed during filming. Each version of the car was specifically modified for speed and jumps, depending on the manoeuvre being filmed. The Bluesmobile makes the list not just because it was a cool car driven by cool dudes doing cool stunts, but because of the chaos left in its wake. The cars were so battered by all the stunts and crashes that there was a 24-hour body shop on set. By the end of the filming, 103 cars had been trashed, a record for any film, right up until a total of 104 was reached... by the sequel, Blues Brothers 2000.

Christine, 1958 Plymouth Fury

It’s always a bit of a lottery, buying a used car. Sometimes the mileage has been tweaked, sometimes there are unseen rust issues in the chassis, and sometimes the car is a mass-murdering psychopath. Stephen King’s story about a murderous, self-regenerating car is not, it is fair to say, a particularly plausible tale, but it is far more sinister than the concept would have you believe. The star of the show was the car itself – actually one of 17 built for the production, using 24 Plymouths bought by the team. Beautiful and sinister, like the best femme fatale, Christine was not a lady to be trifled with. Are they ever?

The Big Lebowski, 1973 Ford Gran Torino

The old adage about dogs and their owners can equally be applied to cars. Just look at Jeff Bridges’ character The Dude and his wheels. The Dude is past his prime, a bit battered, somewhat rough around the edges and unashamedly scruffy. He’s also cooler than cool. You could say the exact same for his car, an utterly bedraggled but fundamentally awesome piece of Seventies American engineering. At least, right up until the moment The Dude tries to chuck a burning roach out of a closed car window that lands in his lap, causing him to crash into a dumpster. (He’s not always cool). Interestingly, the car was originally meant to be a Chrysler, but Bridges’ costar John Goodman couldn’t fit into it, necessitating a quick change of plan.

John Wick, 1969 Ford Mustang Mach I

Recently widowed John Wick (Keanu Reeves) has only two pleasures in life: his beagle puppy, Daisy, and his vintage Ford Mustang. So when Russian gangsters kill his puppy and steal his car, he gets (not unreasonably) a tad miffed. Unfortunately for the Russian gangsters, John Wick is even more kickass than his car. A former assassin, he is hellbent on revenge – and recovering his car. Reeves did most of his own stunt driving in this film following a special course, which may explain why five Mustangs were destroyed during production. The car is referred to, in the film, as a Boss 429 Mustang, but as these often retail for half a million bucks, it seems more likely that the Mach I was used in filming. Either way, it’s a goddamn work of art.

Avengers: Endgame, Audi E-Tron GT

If there is any justice, then somewhere in Germany there is a marketing executive holed up in a penthouse flat counting piles of cash. Because whoever came up with the idea of supplying Audis to Iron Man created a dream partnership. Since the 2008 Audi R8 appeared in the first Iron Man of the franchise, Tony Stark (Robert Downey Jr) has driven a succession of the manufacturer’s top-of-the-range new releases. And considering Stark is a billionaire car enthusiast, that’s quite the endorsement. The best of the lot may be the latest, as witnessed in Avengers: Endgame: the electric Audi E-Tron GT. Fast, stylish, possessed of all the mod cons and now eco-friendly to boot, this is the choice of the modern, socially aware superhero. Incidentally, at the time if filming, the car wasn’t released so they used a prototype valued at $4 million.

Wayne’s World, 1976 AMC Pacer (The Mirthmobile)

Undoubtedly the crappest car on this list, in many ways it’s among the crappest cars ever to put rubber on tarmac. But that was entirely the point. Mike Myers and Dana Carvey knew what they were doing when they chose the Pacer to be Garth’s wheels. With its sea-blue spray job and flames painted on the wheel arches, plus its customised additions (far too few cars boast a liquorice dispenser on the ceiling), the Pacer, formerly the denizen of “ugliest car” lists, became ironically hip overnight. It also hosted one of the iconic moments in comic cinema history. All together now: “I see a little silhouetto of a man...”

Now read:

Steve McQueen’s best cars: from Bullitt’s Mustang to the Mini Cooper S

James May picks his favourite Bond cars

We tracked down the original Bullitt Mustang