TDOW slide

WELCOME!

After years of hard work, our documentary about Spielberg’s Duel is almost ready!

With this campaign we are trying to raise 25.000 euros,

the funds we need to be able to USE THE EXCERPTS FROM DUEL IN OUR DOCUMENTARY,

and to show it in film festivals.

We’ve been asked by fans to keep the campaign open, as they will be able to help in later date.

We decided to do so.

SO, YOU STILL CAN HELP!

Please, donate below, IN EXCHANGE WE OFFER YOU YOUR NAME IN THE TITLES OF THE MOVIE!

Thanks to everyone that has contributed so far!

DONATE AS MUCH OR AS LITTLE AS YOU WANT.

IF YOU CAN NOT AFFORD IT, JUST SHARE THIS IF YOU CAN.

Please, help make the film possible!

About the Movie

Feature Documentary on Film,

The Devil On Wheels

Production

2016-2021 Filmed in UK, USA

Time

77 minutes

Language

English, French

Country

UK, Spain

Company

The Devil On Wheels Productions, Wonder World Pictures

Los Angeles, October 1971. A small film, made for television, is being shot near LA under the direction of a young and unknown director. The movie tells the story of “a man, a truck and an open road”. It has attracted no attention at all. It's not based on a famous book. It has no film stars. It has a modest budget. It will be filmed in only 13 days. But film lovers all over the world will still show their admiration for it 50 years later.

The ﬁlm is called DUEL.

Present day. Fans from all over the world regularly visit the film locations in the desert next to Los Angeles. They know every angle of the ﬁlm. They go to visit the surviving truck of the movie. They can quote lines of dialogue from it. Steven Spielberg’s ﬁrst known work has become a top cinematic reference. How come this tiny ﬁlm, made cheaply and quickly for TV, has generated such a passionate, international and undying cult?

What makes DUEL so unique?

THE DEVIL ON WHEELS looks deeply into the DUEL phenomenon and, in doing so, it explores the power and fascination of films on people.

TDOW Trailer

TDOW trailer with Italian subtitles

TDOW trailer with Spanish subtitles

TDOW trailer with Catalan subtitles

THE FILMMAKERS

Enric Folch

Enric has been a director of TV series and a writer and director of five fiction feature films made for television, like El Mètode Grönholm and the multi-awarded Tempus Fugit, winner of a dozen prizes in international film and TV festivals. Enric's worked as a film teacher for many years. In 2018, he was the Director-On-Set in the Emmy-nominated Amazon doc series All or Nothing: Manchester City and Fernando, about racer Fernando Alonso, for Amazon Prime Video. He has a website on film, thescriptblog.com. Email contact: enric.folch@thedevilonwheelsmovie.com.

Writer / Director / Producer / Editor / Music Editor - Enric is a director of TV series and films. He was the Director-On-Set in the Emmy-nominated Amazon Prime Video doc series All or Nothing: Manchester City.Read More

Matthew Lynn

Matthew created the production company Bridge the Divide Media to tell LGBT stories on a larger scale. His work has been accepted into Cannes, Tribeca, Frameline, Outfest, receiving both Gotham and Queerty award nominations. After attending the American Film Institute Conservatory's MFA program, Matthew created feature and short films, documentaries, music videos, series, commercials and original shows for Himeros.TV, Dekkoo, and served as the cinematographer for Brian Jordan Alvarez from Will and Grace. Email: MattLynn@BridgeTheDivideMedia.com

Director of Photography - After attending the American Film Institute Conservatory's MFA program, Matthew has created feature and short films, documentaries, music videos, series, and commercials.Read More

Roger Allen

Roger Allen was the producer and researcher behind the documentary, though his passion is aerial photography. He has worked on several other features, shorts and commercials and runs a regular photo blog under his Skyrals brand and website. He has many years’ experience in both stabilised and the more recently popular FPV drones. Email contact: roger.allen@thedevilonwheelsmovie.com,

Producer / Aerial Photography / Researcher - Roger has worked on various features, shorts and commercials. All aspects of aerial photography are his passion.Read More

Co-Producer. - Wonder World Pictures.

Gabriele Stifani

Gabriele Stifani is an independent eclectic filmmaker. He worked in the Emmy-nominated Amazon Prime doc series All or Nothing: Manchester City as a camera-man with pivotal tasks on workflow post-production management and editing. Mostly collaborating with his twin brother Luca Stifani, recently Gabriele worked as Director of Photography in the Amazon doc series Fernando featuring car-racer Fernando Alonso.

Producer / Cameraman / Editor / Postproduction Supervisor - Gabriele Stifani, an independent filmmaker, was a cameraman in the Emmy-nominated Amazon Doc series All or Nothing: Manchester City.Read More

Co-Producer.

Luca Stifani

Luca Stifani, an independent eclectic filmmaker, worked in the Emmy-nominated Amazon doc series All or Nothing: Manchester City as a sound recordist with pivotal tasks on workflow. Mostly collaborating with his twin brother Gabriele Stifani, recently Luca worked as sound chief recordist on the Amazon doc series Fernando, featuring car-racer Fernando Alonso.

Producer / Sound Recordist / Editor / Assistant Director - Luca Stifani, an independent filmmaker, was a sound recordist in the Emmy-nominated Amazon Prime series on All or Nothing: Manchester City.Read More

Nick Light

Nick has worked in film and TV since 2004. Although primarily as a Documentary and Current Affairs editor for the BBC, Vice, and with Netflix, Nick also has a keen interest in working in documentary production having also been a Producer, Production Co-ordinator, and Production Manager on many shoots around the world.

Unit Production Manager. - Nick has worked in film and TV since 2004. Although primarily as an editor, Nick also has been a production person on many shoots around the world.Read More

THE TALENT

These are the Duel fans, experts, and filmmakers who took the ride with us

(in order of their appearance in the film)

Carol Kaye

Carol, who played in the Duel soundtrack, was a member of the very respected Wrecking Crew, “a loose collective of session musicians based in Los Angeles whose services were employed for thousands of studio recordings in the 1960s and 1970s, including several hundred Top 40 hits. The musicians were not publicly recognized in their era but were viewed with reverence by industry insiders” (Wikipedia). Carol's playing is easily recognisable in such hits as Mission Impossible, I’m a Believer, Good Vibrations or La Bamba.

Legendary Bass Player - Famous bass player who performed in such hits as Mission Impossible and La Bamba. She played in the Duel soundtrack.Read More

Andrew Gordon

Andrew Gordon is the author of Empire of Dreams: The Science Fiction and Fantasy Films of Steven Spielberg. He is a teacher at the University of Florida. Andrew is director of the Institute for the Psychological Study of the A. He is author of An American Dreamer, coauthor (with Hernán Vera) of Screen Saviours, and co-editor (with Peter L. Rudnytsky) of Psychoanalises/Feminisms.

Expert on Spielberg's fantasy films. - A professor at the University of Florida, Andrew is the renowned author of Empire of Dreams: The Science Fiction and Fantasy Films of Steven Spielberg.Read More

Dan Zito

Duel Location Hunter - Dan Zito watched Duel at the age of 10. Many years later, Dan was driving through Soledad Canyon Road, outside L.A., when he recognized the Duel tunnel. He then decided to track down every Duel location, taking pictures of them, creating Then and Now compared sets of images.

Duel Location Hunter - Dan Zito watched Duel at the age of 10. Many years later, Dan was driving through Soledad Canyon Road when he recognized the Duel tunnel. He then started tracking down every Duel location.Read More

Mike Medavoy

When Medavoy saw Spielberg’s short film Amblin, he signed him straight away. From then on, their relationship had its ups and downs, as Spielberg had a contract with Universal television and, in those days, TV was not the place to be in order to make films. Medavoy went to become one of the most distinguished producers in Hollywood.

Spielberg’s First Agent - When Medavoy saw Spielberg’s short film Amblin, he signed him straight away. From then on, their relationship had its ups and downs.Read More

Neil Losasso

Losasso, from Burbank, CA., claims that, when he watched Duel as a kid, the film mesmerized him, it changed his life, and made him love big trucks forever. Many years later, rumours reached him that one truck had survived the filming. He looked into it without success until he heard that George Sack, The Jackknife King, had it. He visited the truck in Sack’s yard and agreed to buy it. This way Neil became the second owner of the Surviving Duel Truck. Sometime later, he was forced to sell it. The car finally ended in North Carolina.

Second Owner of the Surviving Duel Truck - Losasso, from Burbank, CA., claims that, when he watched Duel as a kid, the film mesmerized him. Many years later, rumours reached him that one truck had survived the filming. Neil located the truck and became the second owner of the Surviving Duel Truck.Read More

Juan Alonso

When Juan Alonso bought his restaurant in Sierra Highway, outside L.A., he didn’t know it was a film location: Chuck’s Cafe, the set of one of the most admired scenes in Duel. But he found out soon enough, as he started noticing people from all over the world stopping by the place and taking pictures…

Actual Owner of Chuck’s Cafe, Duel Location, now Le Chene, French Cuisine Restaurant - When Juan Alonso bought his restaurant in Sierra Highway, outside L.A., he didn’t know it was a film location, but he found out soon enough.Read More

Steven Awalt

Steven Awalt, with a long track of Spielberg expertise in the form of a prestigious website, is the author of the book Steven Spielberg and Duel. The making of a Film Career, an account of the making of Spielberg’s iconic movie. Every aspect of its creation is in its pages. Steven is now in charge of the Amblin website.

Author of Steven Spielberg and Duel: The Making of a Film Career. DePaul University - His book is a thorough account of the making of Spielberg’s iconic movie. Steven is now in charge of the Amblin website.Read More

Derek Drinkwater

Derek Drinkwater, from Surrey, England, remembers watching first Duel as a kid, hiding behind the settee, as the first horror film he ever saw. When he grew up, he found a Peterbilt for sale on eBay, very similar to the truck in the movie, and bought it. He then had to go to the US to pick it up, cross the country with it and put it in a ship to Europe. Derek then decided to turn it into a food business.

Owner of a Duel truck replica - Derek Drinkwater, from Surrey, England, found a Peterbilt for sale on eBay, very similar to the truck in the movie, and bought it. He then had to go to the US to pick it up, cross the country with it and put it in a ship to Europe.Read More

Billy Goldenberg

4 times Emmy winner, TV composer Billy Goldenberg was Spielberg’s TV musician of choice. They worked together in series and Tv films like Columbo, Night Gallery (Eyes episode) and Duel, just to name a few. Goldenberg has created songs played by singers like Barbra Streisand. He is the author of the Michael Bennet-directed Broadway musical Ballroom.

Duel’s Soundtrack Composer - 4 times Emmy winner, TV composer Billy Goldenberg was Spielberg’s TV musician of choice.Read More

Brad Wike

Brad Wike is a Duel fan and a truck collector. He owns a replica of the Smoke and the Bandits truck. So it’s no surprise that the Surviving Duel truck ended up with him in North Carolina. He takes good care of him, even got him a red Plymouh valiant replica to chase around. He had to stop showing the truck to the fans that called him because it took him too much time. But still, if you want to see it, every year he celebrates the Southern Classic Truck Show in Lincolnton.

Actual Owner of the Surviving Duel Truck - Brad Wike is a Duel fan and a truck collector. So it’s no surprise that the Surviving Duel truck ended up with him in North Carolina.Read More

Steven Gaydos

Gaydos, as well as one of the chiefs of Variety Magazine, is a film writer. Variety, widely known as The Bible of Showbusiness, followed Spielberg’s career from the very beginning. Critic Tony Scott’s made a very favourable review of Duel when it came out on television as a Movie of the Weekend in 1971.

VP and Executive Editor, Variety Magazine - Variety followed Spielberg’s career from the very beginning.Read More

Joseph McBride

Joseph McBride, a teacher at San Francisco State University, is a very respected author of many film books -his works on Welles, Ford, Hawks and Capra are widely admired-, wrote a very thorough biography of Steven Spielberg, digging in every aspect of his private and professional life, a seminal work.

Spielberg’s biographer. San Francisco State University - McBride, a very respected author of many film books -his works on Welles, Ford, Hawks and Capra are widely admired-, wrote a very thorough biography of Steven Spielberg.Read More

Mario Roussel

Mario Roussel, Canadian Duel fan and model maker, has watched the film more than 1000 times. As there are not much Duel memorabilia available to buy -the film was made in 1971 for TV, so almost no Duel memorabilia exists- Mario decided to make it himself. A very skilful model maker, he has built a series of great dioramas based on scenes of his favourite film ever.

Canadian Duel Fan and model maker - As there are not much Duel memorabilia available to buy , Mario, a Canadian Duel fan, decided to make it himself. He has built a series of great dioramas based on scenes of his favourite film ever.Read More

Kenneth Johnson

Johnson created a string of successful TV series in the 70s, like The Six Million Dollar man, The Bionic Woman, V, and The Incredible Hulk. The unexpected link with Spielberg’s Duel has to do with one Hulk episode which reused material from Spielberg’s movie. The Duel makers were so appalled by this that Spielberg added a clause to all his subsequent contracts stating that no material of his could be used as stock footage. The Hulk episode, named Never Give a Truck an Even Break, has become cult material.

Cult TV Series Producer and Director - Johnson created a string of successful TV series in the 70s. The link with Spielberg’s Duel has to do with one Hulk episode which reused material from Spielberg’s movie.Read More

Jason Zinoman

Zinoman is the author of Shock Value, a first-class book about the evolution of horror films from the end of the 60s until the 70s. He writes about comedy in the New York Times. His latest book is Letterman: The Last Giant of Late Night, a biography of David Letterman.

Author of Shock Value & The New York Times columnist - Zinoman is the author of Shock Value, a first-class book about the evolution of horror films from the end of the 60s until the 70s.Read More

Billy Ingram

Ingram is a classic American TV expert. After many years in Los Angeles working in the entertainment industry (television and motion pictures), Billy Ingram created a website, TVParty.com, about premier television history. Together with the contributions of people far and wide, Ingram has made TVparty a celebration of man's electronic achievement.

American TV Expert - After many years in Los Angeles working in the entertainment industry, Billy Ingram created a website, TVParty.com, about premier television history.Read More

James Fargo

As A.D., Fargo organised the shooting of Duel, which was made only in 13 days, a great achievement given the fact that was a complex action movie. Fargo worked in The Sugarland Express and Jaws, Spielberg’s subsequent feature films. He then became a director in his own right, with films like Clint Eastwood’s The Enforcer and Every Which Way but Loose.

Duel’s First Assistant Director - Fargo was in charge of organising the filming of Duel, which was made only in 13 days, an amazing achievement.Read More

Sid Sheinberg

Sheinberg met Spielberg when, at 21, he was just an aspiring filmmaker who had made only amateur shorts. Sid somehow saw something in him and pushed his career forward as much as he could. He was behind Spielberg making Duel, The Sugarland Express and Jaws, the key movies in the beginning of his career.

Former Studio Chief Universal Pictures - Sheinberg met Spielberg when, at 21, he was just an aspiring filmmaker. Sid pushed his career forward: he was behind Spielberg making Duel, The Sugarland Express and Jaws.Read More

George Sack

A famous stuntman, George is known as the The Jackknife King. Jack Knife is a ``dangerous situation when a large 18 wheel truck and its trailer go into a skid and the trailer swings out and stops to form an angle of 90 degrees with each other.`` (Coachranfirm.com). George worked in Duel, being in charge of the back-up Duel truck, the surviving truck. He became its first owner for more than 20 years.

First Owner of the Surviving Duel Truck - A famous stuntman, George worked in Duel. He became the first owner of the surviving Duel truck.Read More