Silapathar Science College, a premier seat of higher education offering science education in the Northern Bank of the mighty Brahmaputra, is situated at Silapathar, – the gateway to Likabali, Along, Daporijo of Arunachal Pradesh, one of the picturesque states of the North-East – is a small township and a business hub of the Dhemaji District in Assam. Located at Amritpur, away from the din and bustle of busy urban life, the main campus of the institution, set amidst a picturesque rural setting with a hazy view of the Himalayan ranges towards the north, is in Amritpur, 2 km away from the Silapathar town. Campus No.2 and Campus No.3 of the college are located respectively at Gandhi Nagar, Silapathar comprising of 5 bighas of land with many varieties of valuable plants and at Milanpur, Likabali encompassing of a plot measuring 27 bighas, where multi-faceted plantations are done by our students for accumulation of first-hand practical knowledge regarding sustainable development.

The college was founded in 1996 by a group of zealous and farsighted educationists as well as social activists. While preference is shown to the educational and cultural needs of the tribal community, admission is open to all irrespective of caste, creed and nationality. Initially, the college began with 31 students and 5 staff members at Silapathar College. In 1998 it was moved to its present location where infrastructural expanse began to emerge, through the generosity of a cluster of patrons. The missionary zeal, unflinching endeavor and sacrifice of some prominent local people and whole hearted devotion of some teachers and the management has brought the college to its present state of dignity.

At present, we offer Bachelor of Science (BSc.) programmes (Honours and Non-honours) at the Under graduate level under Dibrugarh University and Master of Science (M.Sc.) programme (Botany and Zoology) at the Post Graduate level under Assam Science & Technology University (ASTU). It is permanently affiliated to Dibrugarh University for UG level and temporarily affiliated to ASTU for PG level Courses. It is recognised under Clauses 2(f) and 12(B) of the UGC Act 1956.

The college was established to act as a symbol of hope and change in this far-flung tribal, rural and Assam - Arunachal border region of the District. This premier institution took up the cudgels to convey the aspirations of a deprived society, particularly in the field of science education.

Since then, the College has continuously ventured to negotiate the path of vertical and horizontal expansion in its supreme goal of dissemination of knowledge and in so doing, has now even stepped in to the increasingly digitized and competitive world in an effort to raise the standards and to keep pace with the changing times.