Pooja Sharma’s Biography

Pooja Sharma is a ravishing face on television today known for her stunning beauty and admirable voice. The 27-year-old model-turned-actress has always had a passion for performing and is best known for her role as 'Draupadi' in the popular mythological television series Mahabharat on Star Plus.

While still in college she was chosen for a conversation program on Doordarshan from which she eventually received an audition for an anchoring position on ZoomTV. She moved on to modeling after anchoring and was one of the top ten finalists in Femina Miss India 2006. The Delhi native made her acting debut in the Star Plus serial Teri Meri Love Stories opposite Karan Kundra.

But it wasn't until she was cast as the lead in 'Draupadi' that she earned her big break. Finally she achieved her well-deserved fame and earned an award at the 2014 Star Parivaar Awards.

Book a Personalised message from your favourite celebrity. Click here to know more

Pooja Sharma’s Age

She was born in New Delhi on 12 July 1989 and is 33 years old. Pooja Sharma’s zodiac sign is Cancer.

Pooja Sharma's Education

Pooja Sharma Education N/A.

Pooja Sharma's Boyfriend

Pooja Sharma's boyfriend is N/A

Pooja Sharma's TV Shows

Teri Meri Love Stories

A collection of 16 heartfelt stories about challenging relationships centered on love loss trust and betrayal. Teri Meri Love Stories is a 90-minute anthology series marketed as a collection of diverse love stories that premiered on Star Plus on August 11 2012. The show ran on weekends and included a huge cast.

Mahabharat

The 2013 Indian drama television series Mahabharat is based on the Sanskrit epic Mahabharata. It was broadcast on Star Plus from September 16 2013 until August 16 2014. The entire series is available for free release on Disney+ Hotstar. Swastik Productions Pvt. Ltd. produced the television show.

The actors revealed that for almost a year they had to go through acting seminars and numerous pieces of training where they were told exactly what to do and how to execute it. Rajit Kapur instructed the performers through acting workshops.

Mahakaali — Anth Hi Aarambh Hai

The epic story of Goddess Parvati's transformation into Mahakali was told in the play. Pooja Sharma played Goddess Mahakali Sourabh Raj Jain played Lord Mahadev and Kanan Malhotra played Lord Vishnu in the film which was produced by Siddharth Kumar Tewary's Swastik Productions.

As the Kailash-Parivar encounters many social hurdles and deconstructs many primitive mental processes the show emphasizes the significance of families standing up for one another.

Pooja Sharma's Career Timeline

Year Pooja Sharma TV Show Pooja Sharma Character Name 2012 Teri Meri Love Stories Siya Behl 2013–2014 Mahabharat Draupadi 2014 Ajab Gajab Ghar Jamai Lakshmi 2015 Dosti... Yaariyan... Manmarziyan Pooja Sharma 2017–2018 Mahakali — Anth Hi Aarambh Hai Mahakali/Parvati 2018 Karmaphal Daata Shani Mahakali 2019 TV Ka Dum - India TV's Mega Conclave Panelist

Pooja Sharma's Networth

Pooja Sharma has a net worth of $5 million.

Pooja Sharma's Awards

In 2014 Pooja Sharma won STAR Parivaar Award for Pehel Nayi Soch Ki

4 Interesting facts about Pooja Sharma