Ray MacDonnell, best known for portraying the role of Dr Joe Martin in All My Children has died aged 93.

According to reports, he died from natural causes on June 10 at his home in Chappaqua, New York.

Confirming MacDonnell’s death, his daughter, Sarah, told Michael Fairman TV that there will be a private memorial with close relatives and family.

MacDonnell apppeared on ABC drama All My Children from its debut in 1970 and remained a cast member for 40 years until production moved from New York to Los Angeles.

Set in the fictional Pine Valley, Pennsylvania, the soap focused on the lives of several families while covering social issues and topics like abortion in the 1970s, Aids in the 1980s, and same-sex marriage in the 2000s.

He later returned to the show in 2011 for guest appearances alongside on-screen wife, Lee Meriwether (who played Ruth Martin), as well as for the final episode on ABC. In 2013 he returned a final time to make an appearance on Prospect Park’s online reboot of the series.

In 2004 the actor received a lifetime achievement award at the Daytime Emmys.

As well as his enduring career on All My Children, MacDonnell played Philip Capice for eight years on CBS soap The Edge of Night from 1961-1969, while he also starred as M. Lindsay Woolsey on Broadway in Mame with both Angela Lansbury and Ann Miller in the late 60s.

He retired from acting full-time in 2009.

Fans paid tribute to the actor on social media, with one writing on Twitter: ‘Oh, I am so sad. I loved Joe Martin! Ray MacDonnell seemed like he’d be a great dad, grandpa, neighbor, friend. May he rest in peace, and may all who love him find comfort in happy memories of him. (sic)’

Another added of his work: ‘Such a fine actor and lovely man. I was mesmerized by his work as Phil Capice on The Edge Of Night. (sic)’

Musing on the effect his character had on All My Children, one fan wrote: ‘When the word patriarch feels like not strong enough to describe his significance.’

MacDonnell is survived by his three children, Kyle, Daniel, and Sarah, and his wife, Patricia.

MORE : Harry Potter and the Cursed Child will reopen as one show on Broadway