“I am aware that in Portugal, an Artist becoming a writer is something new, which many may find strange; and this circumstance alone is enough to attract many censures upon me, all of which I despise in advance; because I do not expect them from those who are capable of surpassing me.” Joaquim Machado de Castro

This Colloquium is part of the program commemorating the bicentenary of the death of the sculptor Joaquim Machado de Castro, resulting from a partnership signed by the Department of History, Arts and Humanities of the Autonomous University of Lisbon, the National Academy of Fine Arts and the Institute of History of Art at the Faculty of Social and Human Sciences at Universidade Nova de Lisboa.

The elected title Machado de Castro: Artist – Writer, indicates the defining axis of the priorities established for the event, highlighting the importance of the sculptor's literary work as a characterizing – and differentiating – element of the respective intellectual and artistic itinerary, and as a militant in the causes of freedom of creation and in defense of the social status of the sculptor.

From the set of texts edited by the master of the equestrian statue to D. José I, the Analytical Description… is the title that stands out, bringing together the essentials about his thinking as a sculptor and, simultaneously, researcher in the artistic matters of his time, representing, in its approximately 400 pages as a whole, the most complete literary work on the subject.

Despite constituting a treatise of unique expression in contemporary artistic theory, its publication in 1810, by Imprensa Régia, had no impact on international literature, a situation largely due to the fact that it was never translated into languages of greater circulation.

This widespread lack of knowledge motivated us to promote its translation into English, within the scope of the line of research Urban Planning and Public Monuments (CICH-UAL).

THE Machado de Castro International Colloquium: Artist – Writer, is the right moment for the launch of the aforementioned translation, providing a new horizon of international recognition for the artist and his most significant literary work which, from now on, will be made available to a global audience, more suited to a complete critical understanding of the respective meaning in the specific context of the Enlightenment and the decline of Absolutism.

The colloquium celebrating the anniversary, however, sought to go further, bringing together more than two dozen experts, spread over two days, across the following modules:

- A Analytical Description: meaning in the context of the artistic culture of his time.

– Machado de Castro's sculptural work: conservation and restoration projects

– Genealogy and Social Context: family structure of Machado de Castro

– Wood sculpture: circuits, practices and survivals

– Teaching and practicing sculpture: the drawing collection from the Sculpture Classes in Mafra and Lisbon.

The Colloquium will close with a round table, bringing together artists, art historians and Heritage conservation specialists under the theme: Public Monuments: Present and Future.

The aforementioned commemorative program also includes an exhibition relating to the drawings of the Mafra and Lisbon Sculpture Classes and an edition plan that will be presented at the end of the Colloquium.

Natália Correia Guedes

President of the National Academy of Fine Arts

Vitor Serrão

Vice-president of the National Academy of Fine Arts, Professor Emeritus at the University of Lisbon and ARTIS – FLUL Researcher

Alexandra Curvelo

Full Professor at NOVA FCSH, Director of the Institute of History of Art (IHA-NOVA FCSH / IN2PAST)

Miguel Figueira de Faria

Full Professor at the Autonomous University of Lisbon and Researcher IHA-NOVA FCSH / IN2PAST

Lisbon, November 3, 2023