I did a leak down test on my dart today and it appears I have some leakage in some of my exhaust valves so I guess its time for a set of heads. I would like to install a set of magnum heads on my LA block. Can anyone who has done this setup recommend or tell me which pushrods they used? I read somewhere about a set from an AMC motor but can't seem to locate the article now.

If there are any other issues that I might need to be aware of , any info will be appreciated. I have read a couple of articles about the subject but have not spoken to anyone who has done it. Thanks.

P5007477, Hydraulic Pushrods &#8212; 7.625"

those are the ones the factory used to carry...but some people said they were a little short...if you go to summit and they have these...

http://www.summitracing.com/search/...l-Length-in/7-650-in/?keyword=summit+pushrods

the lifters need to be AMC style...feed oil to the pushrods...look for a hole in the top of the lifter...

or you can get a pushrod checker...and measure for the length...

you will also need a MAGNUM style intake as the mounting bolt angle is different

you will also require magnum head bolts and rocker assembly

magnum valve covers are also different, more square on the ends with ten bolts instead of five, although I have read that it is possible to use LA covers

http://www.dippy.org/forum2/index.php/topic,295.0.html

some people complained the mopar pushrods were a little short...so the summit pushrod is what a few of the builds recommended.

you really don't want to go through life with a pushrod that is too short...

How much are you asking mad dart? I am kinda at a loss on which way to go. Hot Rod and Mopar Muscle used the 7.625" with standard head gaskets and didn't seem to have a problem or at least never said that they did. Putting stock magnum heads on a mild built 360 that will rarely, if ever, see 5000rpm.

And yes 70aar, nobody wants a short pushrod, Lol!

How much are you asking mad dart? I am kinda at a loss on which way to go. Hot Rod and Mopar Muscle used the 7.625" with standard head gaskets and didn't seem to have a problem or at least never said that they did. Putting stock magnum heads on a mild built 360 that will rarely, if ever, see 5000rpm.

And yes 70aar, nobody wants a short pushrod, Lol!

They are Custom Pushrods, not off the shelf stuff. I order them and then drive to pick them up. I paid $140.00 for them. $80.00 Shipped.

Just want to throw in my 2 cents, IMO it's not worth going to the trouble to swap Magnum heads on an LA engine if you don't have zero-deck pistons to take advantage of the squish pad. You'll be spending extra money on a new intake, pushrods, lifters, etc. and you'll only get a teeny bit more performance than a regular set of J heads. I'm building a 360 with Magnum heads right now and if it wasn't a "ground-up" build I would probably be using J heads instead...