Alison Mirams. Image courtesy of Roberts Co.

The Roberts Co Group has acquired the remaining 50 per cent shareholding previously held by joint partner Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A., an Italian construction and civil engineering firm. The company will officially change its name to Roberts Co.

This ownership change consolidates Roberts Co as a global business under one name with established operations in Australia, the Middle East and Europe.

In Australia, Roberts Co has enjoyed significant success over the past four years delivering both private and public projects across the commercial, health, education and hospitality construction sectors.

Projects include the iconic Zurich Tower in North Sydney, North Shore Health Hub, redevelopment of Concord Hospital, upgrades throughout the Liverpool Hospital precinct and The Schools at Meadowbank Education and Employment Precinct for the New South Wales Government.

Australian CEO Alison Mirams said becoming a fully Australian-owned company will allow the company to direct its energy into further growth and expansion in Australia.

“We have over $650 million in current contract value on the books with a team exceeding 140 employees.”

Ms Mirams said Roberts Co will continue to drive change within the construction industry where it has already gained a reputation as a positive disruptor and innovator.

The organisation has, for example, introduced a series of industry-leading initiatives. Of note is the implementation of a 5-day working week and a concerted organisational drive towards higher female participation (32 per cent of the company’s employees are currently women, including 65 per cent of its executive team) and supporting a major focus on work/life balance among all construction personnel.

“People, relationships and a unique approach to business are at the heart of our organisation,” said Ms Mirams.

“We are a team of thinkers, continually developing innovations to improve and simplify how the industry operates, empowering our workforce, finding smarter ways to work and delivering enhanced value to our clients.”