GENERAL PRIVACY POLICY FOR THE USERS OF Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A.

Collection and use of information

Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. collects information and data that users choose to provide; Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. also collects information related to access of users in order to identify, solve problems and improve offered services.

The purpose of the collection and the use of information are those of the autonomous reporting by candidates towards clients and partners of Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A., which are interested in searching and recruiting human resources, through the information of curricula vitae and profiles voluntarily entered by the candidates themselves.

The information that users choose to insert on the Portal will be consulted, used and classified by other individuals/ organizations that can have access, as holders of rights guaranteed by the partnership or customer relationship with Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A..

Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. performs all necessary operations to ensure that the information are placed in a safe and protected environment, trying to restrict access to the database and distributing rights to users with adequate methods, but can not guarantee that unauthorized individuals/ organizations will not have access through an irregular method.

Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A., moreover, can not control the ways in which the authorized users catalog and transfer the information downloaded from the database, therefore it is user's responsibility to ensure that sensitive information are not inserted in Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. Portal.

Information provided by the Users are used by Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. to deliver offered products and services and to develop the Portal; some of our services may include the display of customized contents and advertising messages.

Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. may use the user's information to contact him/ her about Portal updates, to conduct surveys and for informative communications (with the possibility for the user to refuse the consent) and related to its services, including updates of the software used.

Communication of collected information

Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. may share information provided by users with third parties that support the delivery of its products and the performance of its services towards the users. These third parties may not use these information for purposes other than assistance and support in providing these products and services.

The information gathered can be shared if this is required by law. The information gathered on our web sites are cataloged in whole or in part in Italy and are subject to Italian law.

Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. may disclose or transfer information if its business is sold or acquired.

Management of his/ her own information by the user

The user can review, correct or delete its personal information at any time; to perform these operations, user can enter in his/ her private area, click on the Profile and/ or User Settings button and make all necessary changes.

The above information about the users will be deleted, but logs and other user demographic and statistical information could be kept, maintaining an archived copy of these information anonymously.

If the personal information of the users have been consulted by other individuals/ organizations before the revisions and deletions, Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. can not perform the deletion of previous information on their systems.i.

Other relevant information and insights

Please consult the full version of the Privacy Statement and the Privacy Policy for more information. Our sites are not suitable for persons aged under 18 years old.

Contacts