2017-07-28T15:12:10+03:00[Europe/Moscow] en true Military Bishopric of Argentina, Catholic Military Ordinariate of Australia, Diocese of the French Armed Forces, Military Ordinariate of Canada, Military Ordinariate of Chile, Military Ordinariate of Austria, Military Ordinariate of Germany, Military Ordinariate of Slovakia, Military Ordinariate of the Netherlands, Military Ordinariate of Peru, Military Ordinariate of Poland, Military Ordinariate of Uganda, Military Ordinariate of the South African Defence Force, Roman Catholic Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA, Military Ordinariate of Croatia, Military Ordinariate of Colombia, Military Ordinariate of El Salvador, Military Ordinariate of Ecuador, Military Ordinariate of Paraguay, Military Ordinariate of Kenya, Military ordinariate, Military Ordinariate of Lithuania, Military Ordinariate of Indonesia, Military Archbishopric of Spain, Military Ordinariate of New Zealand, Military Ordinariate of the Philippines, Military Ordinariate of Portugal, Military Ordinariate of Brazil, Military Ordinariate of Korea, Military Ordinariate of the Dominican Republic, Military Ordinariate of Italy, Military Ordinariate of Hungary, Military Ordinariate of Belgium, Military Ordinariate of Bolivia, Military Ordinariate of Venezuela flashcards

https://studylib.net

Roman Catholic Military Ordinariates

Show all Difficult Familiar Mastered Starred

Military Bishopric of Argentina

The Military Bishopric of Argentina (Spanish: Obispado Castrense de Argentina) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Catholic Military Ordinariate of Australia

The Catholic Military Ordinariate of Australia, is a Latin Church suffragan military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church immediately subject to the Holy See.

Military Ordinariate of Canada

The Military Ordinariate of Canada (French: Ordinariat militaire du Canada, Latin: Ordinariatus Militaris Canadensis) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Chile

The Military Bishopric of Chile (Spanish: Obispado Castrense de Chile) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Austria

The Military Ordinariate of Austria (German: Militärseelsorge Österreich, Latin: Ordinariatus Militaris Austriae) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Germany

The Military Ordinariate of Germany (German: Katholische Militärseelsorge; Deutsches Militärordinariat) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Slovakia

The Military Ordinariate of Slovakia (Slovak: Vojenský ordinariát) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of the Netherlands

The Military Ordinariate of the Netherlands is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Peru

The Military Bishopric of Peru (Spanish: Obispado Castrense del Perú) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Uganda

The Military Ordinariate of Uganda is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of the South African Defence Force

The Military Ordinariate of the South African (National) Defence Force (or of South Africa) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church to provides pastoral care to Roman Catholics serving in the South African National Defence Force and their families.

Roman Catholic Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA, provides the Roman Catholic Church's pastoral and spiritual services to those serving in the United States armed forces or other federal services overseas.

Military Ordinariate of Croatia

The Military Ordinariate of Croatia (Croatian: Vojni ordinarijat u Republici Hrvatskoj) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Ecuador

The Military Bishopric of Ecuador (Spanish: Obispado Castrense del Ecuador) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Paraguay

The Military Bishopric of Paraguay (Spanish: Obispado de las Fuerzas Armadas y la Policia Nacional del Paraguay) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Kenya

The Military Ordinariate of Kenya is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military ordinariate

A military ordinariate is an ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Roman Catholic Church, of the Latin or an Eastern Church, responsible for the pastoral care of Catholics serving in the armed forces of a nation.

Military Ordinariate of Lithuania

The Military Ordinariate of Lithuania (Lithuanian: Lietuvos kariuomenes ordinariatas) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Indonesia

The Military Ordinariate of Indonesia is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Archbishopric of Spain

The Military Archbishopric of Spain (Spanish: Arzobispado Castrense de España) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of New Zealand

The Military Ordinariate of New Zealand is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church located in Wellington.

Military Ordinariate of the Philippines

The Military Ordinariate of the Philippines or MOP is a personal diocese for the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Philippine National Police, and the Philippine Coast Guard.

Military Ordinariate of Portugal

The Military Ordinariate of Portugal (Portuguese: Ordinariato Castrense de Portugal) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Brazil

The Military Ordinariate of Brazil (Portuguese: Ordinariado Militar do Brasil) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Korea

The Military Ordinariate of Korea is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of the Dominican Republic

The Military Bishopric of the Dominican Republic (Spanish: Obispado Castrense de República Dominicana) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Italy

The Military Ordinariate in Italy (Italian: Ordinariato Militare in Italia) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Hungary

The Military Bishopric of Hungary (Hungarian: Tábori Püspökség, Latin: Ordinariatus Militaris Hungariae) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Belgium

The Military Ordinariate of Belgium (Dutch: Bisdom bij de Krijgsmacht; French: Diocèse aux Forces armées belges) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Bolivia

The Military Bishopric of Bolivia (Latin: Ordinariatus Militaris Boliviensis, Spanish: Obispado Castrense de Bolivia) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.

Military Ordinariate of Venezuela

The Military Ordinariate of Venezuela (Spanish: Ordinariato Militar de Venezuela) is a military ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church.