Pierce Brosnan is known for having one of the most successful and long-standing marriages in Hollywood - he recently celebrated his 27th anniversary to wife Keely Shaye Smith.

However fans may not know that the Navan-native has a dark and tragic past that saw both his wife and daughter succumb to ovarian cancer.

Brosnan, who moved to London at the age of 11, met his first wife, Australian actress Cassandra Harris in 1977 at the age of 24. At the time, she was still married to film producer Dermot Harris and they had two children, Christopher, then 15, and Charlotte, then 14.

Speaking of their first meeting, Brosnan said: "What a beautiful looking woman. I never for an instant thought she was someone I'd spend 17 years of my life with. I didn't think of wooing her, or attempting to woo her; I just wanted to enjoy her beauty and who she was."

The pair started dating, married in December 1980 and eventually had a son together, Sean, in September 1983. Pierce also lived with Harris children and adopted them after their father, Dermot, died in 1986, and they subsequently took his surname.

"We just clicked as a family," Pierce has said in the past. "To begin with I was Pierce, then I was Daddy Pierce, and then I just became Dad. Charlotte and Chris have just been amazing in my life."

Despite it being Pierce’s lifelong dream to appear in a Bond film, it was actually his wife Cassandra who got the first Bond break, and appeared in For Your Eyes only in 1981.

In 1987, Cassandra was diagnosed with ovarian cancer and passed away in December 1991 at the age of 43. Pierce said he struggled to cope with her death, and later admitted:

"When your partner gets cancer, then life changes. Your timetable and reference for your normal routines and the way you view life, all this changes. Because you're dealing with death. You're dealing with the possibility of death and dying. And it was that way through the chemotherapy, through the first-look operation, the second look, the third look, the fourth look, the fifth look.

Cassie was very positive about life. I mean, she had the most amazing energy and outlook on life. It was and is a terrible loss, and I see it reflected, from time to time, in my children."

Cassandra never got the chance to see Pierce fulfil his dream of paying James Bond, as he landed the role just four years later.

Tragically, his adopted daughter Charlotte died in June, 2013, of the same illness that killed her mother, ovarian cancer. She was 41. Her grandmother, Cassandra’s mother, also died of ovarian cancer.

Pierce had travelled home from set in Europe to be with his daughter before she passed, and released the following statement.

"On June 28 at 2 p.m. my darling daughter Charlotte Emily passed on to eternal life, having succumbed to ovarian cancer," he said in a statement at the time. "She was surrounded by her husband Alex, children Isabella and Lucas and brothers Christopher and Sean.

Pierce admitted that he fell into a dark depression following the death of his wife and daughter.

"I don't look at the cup as half full, believe me. The dark, melancholy Irish dog sits beside me from time to time," he told Esquire magazine. "To watch someone you love have his or her life eaten away bit by bit by this insidious disease, that kind of sorrow becomes an indelible part of your psyche."

Despite thinking he would never find love again, the actor met American journalist and former model Keely Shaye Smith at a Mexican bar in 1994.

The couple went on to welcome sons Dylan, in 1997, and Paris in 2001. Later that same year they had an Irish wedding in Ballintubber. The pair recently celebrated their 27th anniversary together, and Pierce has often credited Keely for helping him come to terms with his loss.

"I know what it is like to be a widower and what it is like to find love again. So I know there's hope and that you have to learn to get on with it," Brosnan previously told the Mirror.

"But the memory of Cassie and her fight against cancer is never forgotten."