As Pierce Brosnan's career was reaching new heights in the '90s, he was experiencing devastating lows in his private life.

The actor's wife Cassandra Harris passed away from cancer in 1991 four years after her diagnosis, leaving the actor a single dad of three.

Tragedy would strike again decades later when Brosnan's daughter Charlotte died the same way.

Here's a look at the devastating loss that left the James Bond star heartbroken and battling depression.

Who was Pierce Brosnan's wife Cassandra Harris?

Brosnan met his wife Cassandra Harris in 1977 at a mutual friend's house. At the time, she was still married to film producer Dermot Harris and they had two children, Christopher, then 15, and Charlotte, then 14.

Prior to that, Cassandra was married to William Firth for six years until their divorce in 1970.

Harris was born in Sydney in 1948 and in later years attended the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA). She had roles in films such as The Greek Tycoon, Rough Cut, and the James Bond film For Your Eyes Only.

READ MORE: What happened between Laura Dern and Billy Bob Thornton?

It's believed Brosnan, her third husband, met producer Albert R. Broccoli while she was filming the 007 movie in 1981, which reportedly led to his casting as James Bond in 1995.

Cassandra and Brosnan also worked on a few episodes together in the '80s TV series Remington Steele.

When Cassandra's first husband, Dermot, passed away in 1986, Brosnan officially adopted Charlotte and Christopher and they took his surname. The couple also welcomed a son together Sean Brosnan, now 37.

"We just clicked as a family," Pierce has said in the past. "To begin with I was Pierce, then I was Daddy Pierce, and then I just became Dad. Charlotte and Chris have just been amazing in my life."

READ MORE: How did Modern Family star Sofia Vergara's older brother die?

What happened to Pierce Brosnan wife, Cassandra Harris?

Four years before he was cast as James Bond, Brosnan lost his wife Cassandra Harris.

In 1987, the actress was diagnosed with an aggressive form of ovarian cancer — the same disease that killed her mother. The news hit hard as just one year prior, Cassandra lost her first husband, Dermot, the father of her two eldest children.

"From day one, we really had a fight on our hands," Brosnan told People magazine in 2017. "This wasn't a shadow or a small tumour — this had invaded Cassie's being."

Sadly, Cassandra died on December 28, 1991. She was 43. Brosnan recalled lying by her hospital bedside and described her passing as "the longest night of my life".

READ MORE: What happened to TV chef Nigella Lawson's family?

"There is an incredible cruelty in it all, losing a person you shared everything with," the actor told People in a 1992 interview, four months after Cassandra's death. "This is the first time in my life I've ever experienced bereavement, and it's overwhelming.

"She has made me the man I am, the actor I am, the father I am. She's forever embedded in every fibre of my being. She's there with me every day. I was so blessed to have met someone like that."

How old was Charlotte Brosnan when she died?

Tragedy hit again in 2013 when Brosnan lost his daughter Charlotte from the same illness that claimed Cassandra. Charlotte was just 41.

At the time, Brosnan was filming spy thriller November Man in Europe but he rushed home to be with his daughter before she passed.

"On June 28 at 2 p.m. my darling daughter Charlotte Emily passed on to eternal life, having succumbed to ovarian cancer," he said in a statement at the time. "She was surrounded by her husband Alex, children Isabella and Lucas and brothers Christopher and Sean.

"Charlotte fought her cancer with grace and humility, courage and dignity. Our hearts are heavy with the loss of our beautiful dear girl. We pray for her and that the cure for this wretched disease will be close at hand."

In a later interview with Esquire, Brosnan revealed he battled bouts of depression after losing the two women in his life.

"I don't look at the cup as half full, believe me. The dark, melancholy Irish dog sits beside me from time to time," he told the magazine. "To watch someone you love have his or her life eaten away bit by bit by this insidious disease, that kind of sorrow becomes an indelible part of your psyche."

What happened to Pierce Brosnan's son Christopher?

Brosnan's son Christopher spiralled into drug addiction following the death of his mother.

Things went from bad to worse, and in 1997 Christopher was handed a three-month prison sentence for drink-driving. Exercising tough love, the actor cut off his son after his many attempts to help were knocked back.

"Christopher is still very lost. Shockingly so. I know where he is, but he's having a hard life," Brosnan told Playboy magazine in a 2005 interview. "I can only have strong faith and believe he will recover. He has tested everybody in this family but none more so than himself. He knows how to get out. He doesn't want to.

"It's painful because you shut down. You never completely cut them off, but I have cut Christopher off. I had to say, 'Go. Get busy living, or get busy dying.' He has my prayers."

Who is Pierce Brosnan's wife Keely Shaye Smith?

Following Cassandra's death, Brosnan thought he would never find love again but then he met American journalist and former model Keely Shaye Smith at a Mexican bar in 1994.

The couple welcomed sons Dylan in 1997 and Paris in 2001. That same year, Brosnan married Smith in Ballintubber Abbey in Ireland, surrounded by close friends and family. The actor credits his wife for helping him come to terms with his loss.

"I know what it is like to be a widower and what it is like to find love again. So I know there's hope and that you have to learn to get on with it," Brosnan previously told the Mirror.

"But the memory of Cassie and her fight against cancer is never forgotten."

For a daily dose of 9Honey, sign up here to receive our top stories straight to your inbox