Pierce Brosnan has been married to his wife Keely Shaye for more than two decades.

The couple first met in 1994, three years after the death of Pierce's first wife Cassandra Harris.

They married in 2001 and welcomed two sons, Dylan, 26, and Paris, 22.

Here is everything you need to know about the actor's beloved wife and their two decades long marriage...

How did they meet?

Pierce and Keely have been married for 22 years after tying the knot at Ballintubber Abbey in Ireland in 2001.

The pair first met in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, in 1994, three years after Pierce's first wife, Cassandra Harris, died in 1991.

He has previously said of Keely: 'I found a great woman in Keely Shaye. Not if I searched a million times over would I find one as good.'

They live in Kauai, Hawaii.

Do they have any children?

Pierce, 70, and Keely, 60, have two sons, Dylan, 26, and Paris, 22, the youngest of the actor's five children.

Their father Pierce revealed in a September 2022 interview with GQ that he dissuaded his sons from pursuing acting, telling them, 'It's hard f***ing work. It’s a cross to bear. You’re constructing and destroying yourself.'

To their credit, both Dylan and Paris haven't followed in his footsteps, with Paris working as a model, walking runways for Moschino and Dolce & Gabbana, and Dylan working as a musician.

While attending the GQ Man of the Year party, the sons also opened up about the recent controversy of sort over 'nepo babies' in Hollywood.

'I think we need to just be grateful for our blessings,' Paris said in a red carpet interview with, with his brother Dylan acknowledging how they are 'very lucky.'

Who are Pierce's other children?

The Mamma Mia! star also has a son Sean, 38, and an adopted son Chris, 49, as well as his late adopted daughter, Charlotte with Cassandra.

Pierce adopted Cassandra's children, Chris and Charlotte, after their father, Dermot Harris, died in 1986.

Pierce's first wife Cassandra Harris at the age of 43 from ovarian cancer.

She had the illness for four years until her death on 28 December 1991. Charlotte also died from ovarian cancer on 28 June 2013, aged 41.

Keely's 60th birthday celebrations

Pierce picked up 60 roses to celebrate his wife Keely's 60th birthday in September.

Pierce wrote: 'Sixty roses for my brown eyed girl on her 60th birthday.

'Forever happy and blessed was I to be sitting there when you walked around the corner early one morning in Cabo San Lucas.

What is her career?

Keely appeared in the Huey Lewis MTV music video Stuck With You in 1986. It spent three weeks at number on.

She also had a brief role in General Hospital in 1990 as Valerie Freeman and an environmental correspondent for six years for ABC's The Home Show, which earned her two Genesis Аwards and Special Achievement Award at the 1991 Environmental Film Festival.

From 1995 to 1997 she worked as a correspondent for NBC's show Unsolved Mysteries.

Keely has also been a gardening expert and correspondent for ABC's Good Morning America and Mike and Maty and an entertainment correspondent for NBC's Today Show, CBS's Entertainment Tonight, and HBO's World Entertainment Report.

Smith made her directorial debut and produced the documentary film Poisoning Paradise in 2017, with follows communities in Hawaii surrounded by experimental test sites for genetically engineered seed corn and pesticides.