A wrestling legend has joined the Ace Comic Con lineup.

Hulk Hogan (real name Terry Bollea) is the latest addition to the celebrity-filled guest list at the new pop-culture event Jan. 13-15 at Gila River Arena in Glendale.

Many consider Bollea to be most well-known and recognized wrestling star in the world. His popularity hit an all-time high when he was the face of the World Wrestling Federation (now World Wrestling Entertainment) from 1984 to 1993.

Throughout his career, he won six WWF titles and six with World Championship Wrestling. He was known for his over-the-top, flamboyant personality and his fan base referred to him as Hulkamania.

Bollea has appeared in a number of movies and television shows, including "Rocky III," "Mr. Nanny," "Muppets from Space" and "Walker, Texas Ranger." He also lent his voice to roles on "Robot Chicken" and "American Dad!" He and his family were the subject of the VH1 reality show "Hogan Knows Best," which led to the spinoff "Brook Knows Best," centered around his daughter.

Things To Do app: Get the best in events, dining and travel right on your device

Bollea has been involved in a number of scandals throughout his career. In 2012, a sex tape of the wrestler was leaked online. Now-defunct blog Gawker posted a clip of the video on its site, and Bollea sued the parent company, Gawker Media, for $100 million. On the tape, Bollea can be heard using racial slurs and admitting he was a racist, leading the WWE to terminate his contract. In 2016, a settlement was reached, awarding Bollea $31 million.

The wrestler joins a number of celebrities announced for the event, including Marvel icon Stan Lee and actors Chris Evans, Tom Holland, Anthony Mackie, Hayley Atwell and Sebastian Stan.

Details: Noon-7 p.m. Saturday, Jan. 13; 10 a.m.-7 p.m. Sunday, Jan. 14. 11 a.m.-5 p.m. Monday, Jan. 15. Gila River Arena, 9400 W. Maryland Ave., Glendale. $45-$55 for one-day admission. $95 for three-day admission. aceuniverse.com.

MORE ACE COMIC CON:

Photo gallery: ACE Comic Con celebrity guests

Spawn creator, Spider-Man illustrator Todd McFarlane joins Ace Comic Con

Captain America and Spider-Man coming to Ace Comic Con

Ace Comic Con looks to compete with Phoenix Comicon