Film production played a decisive role in the Nicaraguan Revolution. During the preparation of the 1979 Ofensiva Final (Final Offensive), the Sandinistas clearly understood the need to produce audio-visual documents that would serve as testimony and political propaganda of this historic moment. To do so, they sought the support of internationalist filmmakers among whom a group of Mexicans were most prominent. This article focuses on materials on the Sandinista Revolution preserved at the film archive of the University Center for Cinematographic Studies (CUEC) of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM). It analyses them in relation to the role of left-wing film internationalism in political documentary in Latin America and builds an ‘other’ history of a Mexican film institution that in the 1970s was uniquely politicized as a result of the 1968 Mexican student movement and, later, the influence of Latin American exiles. As a particular case study, this article rescues one of the key figures of Mexican internationalism during the Sandinista Revolution, Adrián Carrasco Zanini Molina, and the role of Mexican filmmakers in the creation of institutions dedicated to film production in Nicaragua such as the Nicaraguan Film Institute (INCINE).

The photography, video, and installations of the artist Ernesto Salmerón have continually questioned the performance of memory in the context of post-war Nicaragua. Through highly mediated documentary works, the artist delves in the function of the media, the state, and individual bodies in the construction of a national memory, particularly in the form of the archive. An analysis of the intertwined relationships between identity and memory, nationalism and revolution, and forgetfulness and politics in the works of Salmerón and the Nicaraguan context allows for a critical reading of the instability of cultural memory and official historical narratives. Taking as their basis images of Sandino, graffiti marks, and celebratory gatherings in public spaces, these works propose contradictory ways of understanding the negotiations and omissions involved in the creation of a resistant memory in the midst of national reconciliation efforts. The use of pink paint for coloring the Modern Art O...

The University of Kansas has long historical connections with Central America and the many Central Americans who have earned graduate degrees at KU. This work is part of the Central American Theses and Dissertations collection in KU ScholarWorks and is being made freely available with permission of the author through the efforts of Professor Emeritus Charles Stansifer of the History department and the staff of the Scholarly Communications program at the University of Kansas Libraries’ Center for Digital Scholarship.

This article presents a case study of the Solentiname archipelago in Nicaragua theorised as a site for the construction of utopia, an idealised environment where an alternative community was formed during the 1960s and 1970s, in opposition to the Somoza dictatorship (1936–79). The leadership of Ernesto Cardenal led to the creation of an enduring cultural legacy, which was essential to the development of the Sandinista revolutionary movement as well as to sustaining the Sandinista government following the victory in July 1979, particularly during the Contra War (1981–90). Applying art historical analysis, the article investigates how photography contributes to the formation of revolutionary identities, by fulfilling both descriptive and ideological purposes. Despite the scarcity of the surviving visual record from the islands, I argue that photographs of the site were fundamental in establishing the role of the community as a strategic ally for the rising opposition against the Somoza dictatorship. Not only did photography help envision utopia, it equally contributed to situating these hopes in the context of daily realities, resisting the regime. Other forms of art and literature that developed in Solentiname in the years leading up to the Revolution of 1978–79 further shaped revolutionary identities, as grievances about poverty, inequality and political repression were expressed through egalitarian high–low aesthetics. The case of Solentiname thus serves to open a discussion concerning under-explored cultural alliances within Latin America and beyond, providing a close-up view of localised aesthetic practices seen in relation to transnational solidarity networks, framed by the context of the massive sociopolitical transformations underway during the Cold War.

Resumen: El huracán de revoluciones que pasó por varios países de Latinoamérica empezaba a ceder en la década de 1980, concentrándose en Centroamérica. Brasil vivía el final de un período contrarrevolucionario. De este modo, los cineastas tuvieron que utilizar la ficción o contextos “prestados”, como fue el caso de From the ashes... Nicaragua today (1982) y El pequeño ejército loco (1984). En este artículo, analizaremos estos dos documentales singulares dentro de la filmografía brasileña: uno por ir a filmar la revolución, otro por tener mujeres como protagonistas de este gesto. Consideraremos los siguientes aspectos: público objetivo, modo de producción, duración del rodaje y estrategias de lenguaje. Abstract: In the 1980s the hurricane of revolutions that passed through Latin America was losing power and concentrating in Central America. Such processes left a great deal of film where someone tried to register them. Brazil was living the end of a counterrevolutionary period. Because of that, filmmakers had to appeal to fiction or “borrowed” contexts, as in the case of From the ashes ... Nicaragua today (1982) and El pequeño ejército loco (1984). This article analyzes these two documentaries, unique within the Brazilian filmography, both for “filming the revolution” and for having women as protagonists of this gesture. It considers the following aspects: target audience, mode of production, duration of filmmaking and language strategies.