Fresh off of a round of dates opening for dance punk icons, Le Tigre, NYC-based synth rock duo Man On Man stopped by Asheville on July 20. Making their local debut at the tight, sweaty upstairs loft at Static Age Records, the combo of Joey Holman and Roddy Bottum (Faith No More; Imperial Teen) took advantage of the intimate confines to deliver a thrilling show to the few dozen devoted fans in attendance.

Combining unabashedly queer lyrics with crunchy, distorted guitars and danceable synths, Holman and Bottum made a strong first impression on their eponymous debut LP in 2021, which the duo managed to top with the excellent Provincetown. A bold celebration of gay love with a great sense of humor and the kind of big hooks to be expected from the former Imperial Teen frontman and his partner, it’s a solid contender for my favorite album of 2023. With the record in steady rotation in my headphones since its June release, I was thrilled to see them listed for the local show, and they did not disappoint.

Unphased by the lack of stage, the pair of lovers invited fans to gather closely, leaving just a couple of feet between the musicians and audience. Following a brief kiss, the duo launched into Provincetown highlight “Showgirls.” The attention-grabbing tune, featuring a loud twin guitar attack from Holman and Bottum, and immediately catchy vocals, set the foundation for an exhilarating set that never let up.

The duo sounded incredible, especially considering the venue’s humble sound system, and the likelihood that they were unable to hear themselves. Though the set was relatively brief, they packed in the best of the new tunes, including “Take It From Me,” “Piggy,” and “Haute Couture.” Fans were also treated to a pair of older favorites in “Stohner” and “Daddy.” The heavy stoner-shoegaze-sludge of “Stohner” was particularly thrilling to hear in that tiny space.

When I initially headed to the venue, I was feeling terribly drowsy and questioned if I could endure a late night. But by the time Man On Man was wrapping up their set, I felt as though I could watch them play for another hour. There’s just something special about catching a great band in such an intimate setting — so much more engaging than standing in a sea of hundreds or thousands of fans, struggling to catch a clear glimpse of the performer. Man On Man deserves to be playing in front of much larger crowds, but I’m thankful for getting to witness their greatness from such close proximity.