Khaya Xaba is a cool guy. That is the first thought that came to my mind when I first followed him on Instagram — seeing all the fascinating pictures on his grid of him and his friends at all these amazing places. I was an instant fan. From afar, you look at his social media and think you already have an idea of who he is and the kind of person he is, but soon discover that he is a very layered young man. He is the kind of person you would want to be friends with. You can imagine my excitement when he agreed to chat with me about the release of his short film, Bury the Hatchet.

Born and raised in Ladysmith, KwaZulu-Natal, Thulani Khaya Xaba is an actor, writer, producer, and director who has been in the industry for close to six years, having started his career as a theatre actor. Xaba went into the theatre space as a way to branch out and do his own thing as his brother, the actor-director Siya Xaba, was already in the television acting scene. He felt that he had to assume his own independence before he could dare mention his love for acting to his family, lest it appear like he was mimicking what his brother was doing.

After some time in theatre, the young actor felt like he needed to go back to the drawing board and rebrand — an experience he jokingly suggests being a totally different interview altogether. It was this, and to remedy the time when roles were not coming and the scourge of jobhunting, that inspired him to create his own opportunities and started writing his own material which he put together at venues like Hillbrow Theatre, Joburg Theatre, and the likes.

The pipeline from playwright to creating something for the screen was imminent for this dreamer, and that was when he reached out to his brother to collaborate with him in his writing endeavours. It was this collaboration that birthed their short film titled Carrots, starring Gomora’s Siphesihle Ndaba and Shaka Ilembe’s Lemogang Tsipa.

Speaking of his relationship with his brother and how their writing relationship started, I wondered what it was like for them to be these talented people who occupy various roles in their respective productions. Most of these roles are convoluted — they are both writers, directors, producers…

What is that working relationship like?

KHAYA XABA: It’s crazy. It’s very crazy because I don’t think I will ever make a film without Siya. And he will never make a film without me.

The partnership between the brothers is so fascinating because as much as Khaya feels like he has to be his own person, he already is; and the two of them complement each other’s strongest qualities. For instance, Khaya tells me that he wrote the script for Bury the Hatchet in its entirety and how, during rehearsals, much of the workshopping took place with Siya offering critique and suggestions for the introduction. It was during this brainstorming session that the brothers came up with what is, in my opinion, a scene that created gorgeous conflict for the film’s movement and a premise from which viewers can draw a lot of emotional connection. The personal and professional relationship the brothers have is commendable and is so balanced, no wonder they work well together.

Let’s talk about your favourite directors. Who do you look up to?

KX: Siya [Xaba] and Vincent Moloi.

What drives you creatively? What makes you want to write?

KX: My life experiences. My family has always been supportive, and they value [our] dreams. The problem begins when you and your siblings have similar dreams. You can’t do that, ha-ha. Dream bigger dreams and be original.

The actor-director-producer opens up to me about how his writing inspirations stem from his need to create a homely experience for his viewers. Most people do not know that he lost his Father at a very young age and did not get the opportunity to know him. He found a father figure in his uncle, so he always relays that in his writing. It is why he created that image of that father in Bury the Hatchet. As a writer, he sought to exhume him and paint a picture of the perfect father from his own experiences, and used the film to bring him back to life for the audience’s entertainment.

I can resonate with his impassioned discussion on his Father and the writing culture he has fostered around those experiences, which provides a perfect segue into what I initially called him to discuss: his film, Bury the Hatchet. He explains that while his Father was the driving force around what was on screen, the film has another agenda.

Can you tell us more about Bury the Hatchet, the story? Why was that the story you wanted to tell?

KX: The reason I decided to take it to the 90s was [to] provoke the idea that we’ve had enough of apartheid movies or struggle narratives. I wanted to show people that apartheid or protest stories can be told differently without centering whiteness or the violence and the trauma. The people had lives they were living. I wanted to question the lives the people we see in protest films lived — -who are they? What kind of homes do they come from?

Khaya wanted to highlight we never get to see the mundane experiences that make these people human, instead we dwell on the violence we’ve grown accustomed to from our history.

A film written during the first COVID lockdowns, Khaya laughs when he begins to tell me about the conception of this story and how it began as a conversation (or a debate, depending on where you’re sitting) on whether to vaccinate or not. It is when he explains this to me that the parallels between the conversation that inspired the script and the final product suddenly become apparent.

KX: It was a subtext thing because back in the day, speaking out against apartheid and addressing the issues wasn’t allowed. The artist had to find creative ways like theatre, music, and poetry to tell those stories and use subtext to evade censorship and being monitored. Bury the Hatchet was birthed from those questions.

Your film has quite a suggestive title: Bury the Hatchet. Taking the setting of the film into consideration, one would expect the film to be about forgiveness and moving on, about burying the hatchet. However, the content is very different.

(As though anticipating the question I’m leading towards, the writer laughs…)

Was the disconnect deliberate?

KX: As a filmmaker, this gives me a door into furthering the story, to writing a spinoff. But as a storyteller, it gives me a leeway into what the story is actually about. Bury the Hatchet is a film about family values. How a father shows up for the two sons he is raising on his own. It is about the relationship between two very different brothers, how it becomes so strained they almost throw hands.

I watch as he chews his brain and losing himself to his train of thought, allowing him the space to expound. He tells me about the brothers in the film, Yamkela and Qhawe, and how their relationship is moved by the expectations we foster as we grow up. Yamkela, played by Khaya Xaba, is the youngest and somehow perceived as the smart one with his education and his need to settle debates with discourse and reason. His brother Qhawe has street-smarts that are a result of his experiences growing up without a mother, with a sick father and having to grow up before his time to make sure their home ran well. They are further exacerbated by the harsh realities of apartheid and protest culture. One brother underestimates the other and sees what he wants, disregarding the fact that he is the person he is because his eldest brother relinquished his own childhood so he could sit on that high horse devoid of responsibilities and cannot see the truth of the life they live. This, a small thing as a disagreement about the colour of bread and going to protest, speaks to the lived experiences of many older siblings growing up in child-headed households.

KX: At the end of the day, everyone in that house is dealt their cards and must accept their fate. The father must accept that his sons are growing up and will make their own decisions to join the resistance. He does not know if they will return.

I appreciate it so much when Khaya touches on the brothers. It is a story that is biblical: two brothers at odds, one choosing to do something the other opposes. This is evident in the way the film is shot and framed. Yamkela is standing on one side while Qhawe is seated on the other, and their father is placed right in the middle. He is the middle ground. He is the center and all their squabbles will submit to him. It is a beautyful shot that makes me wonder how it came about and speaks to Siya’s talent as a director and visual storyteller, and the coordination he must have had with his cinematographer to bring such ideas to fruition.

Do you feel like Bury the Hatchet conveyed the message you wanted to send out?

KX: Yes and no. No, because people may look at it and dismiss it thinking that it is just another apartheid film. Yes, because I have faith. When you look at it and see the people and the life they are living, you’ll see a father allowing his sons to be themselves and make their own decisions. It feeds into the current conversation we’re having as the youth about being given space to be free. Whether or not they see the family values element in the film, I don’t know. I think the climax of the film is in how Yamkela, the one person who was against the riots, is seen going out and following Qhawe, not to protest but to simply be with his brother, to assist him and protect him. From brother at odds to his brother’s keeper.

The film shows that we are bigger than the arguments we have with each other as family members, and we can change our positions when our loves and relationships are put to the test.

Bury the Hatchet is a short film about two brothers at odds on the day of the Soweto Uprising. One is impatiently trying to get things done at home so he can go protest, while the other tries to convince him against it.

It is an emotional tale of the love we have for our family, the history that haunts us, and the expectations we place on ourselves and each other. A film written and directed by two brothers who are amazing at what they do, it invokes inside me a different kind of faith in South African independent filmmaking.