In order to expand its fluids business, Dover Corporation DOV has entered into an agreement with Tokheim Group S.A.S. to acquire the latter’s dispenser and system businesses. Dover made a binding offer of EUR 425 million (approximately $465 million) to buy the businesses which will become a part of its OPW line.

Headquartered in Paris, Tokheim is a leading manufacturer of fuel dispensers and one of the world’s largest providers of fuel retailing solutions. Tokheim’s products have been associated with exceptional quality and it has manufacturing operations in Europe, China, India and Brazil.

The acquisition of Tokheim`s dispenser and systems businesses is in line with Dover’s expansion strategy and will perfectly match OPW`s products and systems. OPW is a business unit within Dover`s Fluids segment which provides fluid handling solutions for the safe and efficient handling and distribution of fuels and critical fluids.

Through the acquisition, Dover will establish OPW as a leading retail fueling systems provider, featuring a full Station-in-a-Box offering with unrivaled products. Moreover, the acquired technology will further enhance OPW`s strong position in retail fueling equipment. The buyout will also help in Dover’s geographic expansion.

The transaction is subject to discussions with some of Tokheim`s works councils, certain customary regulatory filings and other customary conditions. The acquisition is expected to close in early 2016 and will be principally funded with existing international cash balances. The transaction does not include Tokheim`s sales and service divisions and will remain a standalone company continuing with its current owners.

Dover expects the deal to be accretive to earnings per share by about 7 cents in 2016 and 13 cents in 2017. Excluding normal transaction-related costs and purchase accounting amortization, the acquisition will be accretive to earnings per share by approximately 15 cents in 2016 and around 21 cents in 2017.

Dover has a long-standing history of making successful acquisitions in diverse end markets. In 2014, the company acquired MS Printing Solutions S.r.l., The WellMark Company and Liquip International. Also, in 2014, Dover took over Accelerated Companies to bolster its position in the U.S. shale market.

During 2015, the company acquired a product line in the Refrigeration & Food Equipment segment for $6.5 million. Dover’s acquisition pipeline developed nicely in the second quarter of 2015. The impact of completed acquisitions on earnings will be 2 cents to 4 cents per share in 2015. Additional acquisitions will drive long-term growth.

Illinois-based Dover is an industrial conglomerate producing a wide range of specialized industrial products and manufacturing equipment. It operates through four major operating segments: Energy, Engineered Systems, Fluids and Refrigeration & Food Equipment.

Dover currently carries a Zacks Rank #5 (Strong Sell). Some better-ranked stocks in the same sector are Atlas Copco AB ATLKY, Graco Inc. GGG and Luxfer Holdings PLC LXFR. All three stocks carry a Zacks Rank #2 (Buy).

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report >>

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report

DOVER CORP (DOV): Free Stock Analysis Report

GRACO INC (GGG): Free Stock Analysis Report

ATLAS COP-ADR A (ATLKY): Free Stock Analysis Report

LUXFER HOLDINGS (LXFR): Free Stock Analysis Report

To read this article on Zacks.com click here.

Zacks Investment Research