Partager :

Tokheim enters into an agreement with Dover related to the sale of its dispenser and system businesses

édité le 08/09/2015 - Plus de news de "TOKHEIM" - Voir la fiche entreprise de "TOKHEIM"

Tokheim announced that it has entered into an agreement with Dover Corporation, pursuant to which Dover has made a binding offer to acquire Tokheim’s Dispenser and System businesses. The Tokheim Sales and Service Divisions are not a part of this transaction and will become a stand-alone company remaining with its current owners. The transaction is subject to completion of information and consultation with certain of Tokheim’s employee representatives, certain regulatory filings and other customary conditions, and is expected to close in early 2016.

Headquartered in Paris, France, Tokheim is a global manufacturer of fuel dispensing and automation equipment, including a complete range of fuel dispensers and pumps, retail automation systems, payment terminals, media devices, as well as the leading Sales and Service organisation in the fuel retail industry. Tokheim’s majority shareholder is Motion Equity Partners, a European mid-market private equity firm.

Dover is a diversified global manufacturer delivering innovative equipment and components, specialty systems and support services through four major operating segments: Energy, Engineered Systems, Fluids, and Refrigeration & Food Equipment. The Tokheim Businesses would become part of OPW, a business unit within Dover’s Fluids segment, making it the premier global retail fueling systems provider, with unrivalled product breadth.

“We are excited about the strategic fit of Tokheim’s Dispenser and System businesses within Dover’s OPW business, as well as how a strong partnership with the merged entity will enhance the growth of our remaining Sales and Service businesses” said Baudouin de la Tour, CEO of Tokheim. “We strongly believe both our customers and employees will greatly benefit from this unique ability to provide full solutions on a global scale”.

“After years of sustained organic growth and geographical expansion, we found in Dover a great company to successfully pursue the global strategy of the Dispenser and System businesses” added Patrick Eisenchteter, Managing Partner of Motion Equity Partner.

About Tokheim

Tokheim is one of the world’s largest providers of fuel retailing solutions. Our breadth of offer aims to give you choice. This consists of four core elements: Dispensers, Systems & Payment, Service and Project Management. Tokheim products have been associated with exceptional quality for more than a century. Providing high quality solutions is embedded deep in the culture of our organisation. An experienced team of global product marketers and engineers continue the tradition of developing highly innovative, quality, equipment today and in preparation for tomorrow. At the heart of our business is our unrivalled service network. We have a direct presence and access to over 40,000 stations worldwide. This means we have access to a unique pool of real time, real life data that underpins everything we do. From new product developments to project management, after sales support and genuine service, our local presence, backed by the intelligence and security of our global operation allows Tokheim to position ourselves to be selected as your supplier of choice. Our local presence across more than thirty countries ensures we remain close to our customers at all times across the globe. We are there every step of the way from initial discussions, through to delivery and installation, after sales support and service in the future.

About Dover

Dover is a diversified global manufacturer with annual revenues in excess of $7 billion. We deliver innovative equipment and components, specialty systems and support services through four major operating segments: Energy, Engineered Systems, Fluids, and Refrigeration & Food Equipment. Dover combines global scale with operational agility to lead the markets we serve. Recognized for our entrepreneurial approach for 60 years, our team of over 26,000 employees takes an ownership mindset, collaborating with customers to redefine what’s possible. Headquartered in Downers Grove, Illinois, Dover trades on the New York Stock Exchange under “DOV.”

About Motion Equity Partners

Motion Equity Partners is a leading European private equity firm with €1.3 billion of assets under management. Its Fund I, raised in 2001, has been fully exited and delivered a first rate performance. Motion Equity Partners currently advises a second fund, raised in 2005 with a total equity value of €1.3 billion. It has a team of experienced private equity professionals in Paris and Milan focusing on mid-market buyouts (up to €300 million in value).

Origine : Communiqué TOKHEIM

Voir la fiche entreprise de "TOKHEIM"

Les dernières news de "TOKHEIM"

08/09/2015 - Tokheim enters into an agreement with Dover related to the sale of its dispenser and system businesses

Rechercher une news

française internationale

Les dernières news internationales

27/08 - Shearwater wins deepwater OBN extension in India after setting new industry benchmarks (lue 115 fois)

27/08 - SLB launches carbon storage well integrity assessment solution (lue 195 fois)

27/08 - Valeura : Nong Yao C Production Ramp Up (lue 147 fois)

27/08 - Harbour Energy - Wintershall Dea acquisition to complete in early September (lue 198 fois)

27/08 - Ocean Installer awarded a Subsea Tie-Back project from Anasuria Hibiscus UK Ltd. (lue 142 fois)

27/08 - QatarEnergy, KPC sign 15-year agreement for the supply of up to 3 MTPA of LNG to Kuwait (lue 194 fois)

27/08 - Wood is delivering carbon solutions for nearly half of Norway’s CCS licenses (lue 324 fois)

23/08 - Eni announces the approval of two Plans of Development and licences extension granted by the Indonesian Authorities (lue 634 fois)

23/08 - Vår Energi : Balder X project update (lue 472 fois)

23/08 - OMV announces gas discovery in the Norwegian Sea (lue 618 fois)

>> Toute l'actualité internationale >> RSS