This article is about the good half of Innocent Buu. For the original fat form of Buu, see Innocent Buu.

Good Buu (魔ま人じんブウ（善ぜん）, Majin Bū (Zen) , lit. "Demon Person Boo (Good)"),[4] also known mainly as Majin Buu, is the result of Innocent Buu using fission to split into good and evil halves. He would go on to become a member of the Z Fighters and live with Mr. Satan. After the battle against the pure Majin Buu, Buu is referred to as Buu instead of Majin Buu and to the world he becomes Mr. Buu.

Good Buu possesses the Grand Supreme Kai (大だい界かい王おう神しん, Dai Kaiōshin , lit. "Great God of the Kings of the Worlds") as part of his being and eventually temporarily awakened this part of himself.

Overview[]

Traits[]

Due to Innocent Buu splitting into Good Buu and Evil Buu, Good Buu became a "different life-form"[10] from the original Kid Buu and Innocent Buu forms and lost many of the unique capabilities of the original Majin.

He became an entity of pure good, due to Innocent Buu's evil manifesting as Evil Buu, he lost the ability to absorb using his body and needed to turn others into chocolate in order to accomplish an "absorption" and he no longer needed to hibernate for incredibly long periods of time - instead entering an unwaking sleep for a brief period of time. Upon his initial appearance he also lost his ability to power up through anger (as Evil Buu was the embodiment of Buu's wrath), but later regained it after being spat out by Kid Buu.

Good Buu possesses the Grand Supreme Kai and some of his godly power as part of his being. With assistance from the Galactic Patrol, he fully awakened this part of himself. However, after the defeat of Moro the Grand Supreme Kai became dormant once more, with Good Buu forgetting his time as the deity.

Personality[]

Good Buu is an entity of pure good, and is very kind, caring, and playful. Once he was absorbed by Evil Buu, his playful and childish traits manifest in Super Buu and Kid Buu respectively. During his second battle against Gotenks, Gotenks was preparing the Super Ghosts of his Super Ghost Kamikaze Attack for battle. Piccolo showed Gotenks that Buu had already regenerated from the last Super Ghost attack. Super Buu was also lying on his stomach, drinking a soda (though it looked like a milkshake) and reading a magazine, much to Gotenks' fury and embarrassment. Also, when Goku and Vegeta were preparing for battle, Kid Buu was sleeping (as Buu only needs a little time to rest), much to Goku's surprise. More importantly, due to his connection with Mr. Satan he had influence to stop him from killing the former as Super Buu and later Kid Buu. For this reason, he also responded to Videl's request to be patient due to being Mr. Satan's daughter; though it wasn't enough to stop him from killing her. While mildly annoying to Super Buu, it infuriated Kid Buu enough that he spat him out as soon as he was able to. Despite his good nature, it is shown in Dragon Ball Super that when he is hungry, Good Buu can be foul tempered and grumpy like when he interrupted Mr. Satan's press conference and is also shown to be quite gluttonous as he selfishly refused to share one of his pudding cups with Beerus. He also gets angry much like his original counterparts especially when loved ones are hurt or dead, such as Mr. Satan. However, these negative traits could be attributed to his childlike personality. Similarly, he also tends to do a lot more than is necessary for a given task largely due to his childlike personality. This is especially evident by his supplying an ice cream store a huge amount of Zeni (the store owner's reaction implied it was significantly more than needed to buy the ice cream) to walk off with a large ice cream cone.

Thanks to the Galactic Patrol, Good Buu regained the memories of his past life as Grand Supreme Kai, showing extreme anger at Moro killing the friends he had as Grand Supreme Kai.

In Dragon Ball Legends during the Tournament of Time, the evil within Innocent Buu falls under Zahha's influence who was controlling Babidi via the Dark Ki thus it is Evil Buu that triggers Innocent Buu's fission. Innocent Buu reforms with no idea that the fission has occurred and is determined to find Shallot after he had previously defeated Innocent Buu using his newly acquired Super Saiyan 3 form. Unfortunately, Evil Buu locates him first and under the influence of the Dark Ki, becomes focused on absorbing Good Buu in order to transform into Super Buu to get revenge on Shallot. Good Buu rejects Evil Buu's claim that he is Majin Buu and attempts to turn him into Candy like his main timeline counterpart did, only to have Evil Buu counter it with his breath, causing Good Buu to get turned into Candy instead which Evil Buu consumes and absorbs into order to transform into Super Buu who seeks to get revenge on Shallot.

Ultimately, Super Saiyan God Shallot defeats Super Buu, freeing the absorbed Ultimate Gohan and Piccolo in the process, though this only leads to him being forced to take down DRK Kid Buu who like the other incarnations of Buu, is obsessed with getting revenge on Shallot. While Good Buu remains within DRK Kid Buu, the Majin doesn't spit him out as both desire Shallot's defeat. However, DRK Kid Buu is ultimately destroyed by the Super Saiyan God, however Good Buu survives Kid Buu's destruction. Due to never having befriended Hercule, Good Buu remains fixated on getting revenge on Shallot though fortunately the Piccolo freed from Super Buu is able to keep him occupied, allowing Shallot to focus on dealing with the Mastermind, Zamasu, and Giblet.

Biography[]

Dragon Ball Z[]

Majin Buu Saga[]

After taming the Innocent Buu, it seemed that the world is saved by Mr. Satan. All is well until the two gunmen Van Zant and Smitty arrive with the goal of taking on Buu and shoot Bee as he is playing with Buu. This causes Buu to become more enraged than he has ever been, but this anger is quelled by Mr. Satan's disposing of the two gunmen and taking Bee back to Buu to be healed. The situation seems fixed as Buu rebuilds his house in the shape of Bee and Mr. Satan resumes his maid tasks. Buu now seems fully changed, playing with Bee and even asking Mr. Satan to sit and eat with him. Mr. Satan even destroys the fake pictures of Buu defeated that he had taken. This lasts until the gunman who shot Bee returns and shoots Mr. Satan in the chest. Buu is able to heal him but the pain of losing his best friend is so great that he struggles to control his anger. Finally, Buu loses control of his anger, and splits into Good Buu and Evil Buu. The evil leaves Buu in the form of a giant cloud taking most of his power with it, and Good Buu watches as the cloud takes form and becomes Evil Buu. A battle soon ensues between the two Buus, the Evil Buu dominates over the Good Buu. Good Buu is ultimately turned into chocolate, after Evil Buu reflects his Chocolate Beam, and devoured causing them to re-merge into one being, Super Buu.

Though Super Buu is almost pure evil, Good Buu is still able to affect his actions slightly, preventing him from attacking Mr. Satan, Bee, and Videl on multiple occasions. He is later removed from Super Buu by Vegeta, and once the power of the Kais was removed from him, Super Buu reverted to the insane creature "created" by Bibidi, Kid Buu (the original Majin Buu). Although Good Buu is no longer connected with Kid Buu, his presence alone prevents the other Buu from attacking Mr. Satan and Bee on the Sacred World of the Kai until he is spat out.

Good Buu is extremely pleased to see Bee and Mr. Satan are still alive, and then steps in the fight to defend Mr. Satan, and even though Kid Buu is far more powerful, he is able to land a few good hits on him due to his increased strength. He holds Kid Buu off while Goku and Vegeta ready the Super Spirit Bomb to defeat Kid Buu. Good Buu and Kid Buu battle ferociously, neither one of them backing down, with both Buus performing many techniques, such as the Multi-Form, Chocolate Beam, and more, but Kid Buu is clearly stronger, toying with Good Buu during the fight. After a hard battle, Good Buu is defeated by Kid Buu and presumed dead, so Vegeta battles Kid Buu while Goku readies the Spirit Bomb. The Spirit Bomb is finally formed after much delay, but Goku is unable to launch it due to Kid Buu holding Vegeta hostage.

Kid Buu prepares a final Planet Burst attack to kill Goku, when suddenly Good Buu appears again, not quite beaten yet. He and Mr. Satan rush into the battle, as Good Buu tackles Kid Buu, causing him to throw the attack without aim and misses, while Mr. Satan rescues Vegeta after Good Buu orders him to do so and gets him to safety. Goku throws the Spirit Bomb and after some struggle, the monster is finally defeated and the universe is saved. After the battle, Bee directs the heroes to the unconscious Buu and Mr. Satan begs Dende to heal him, despite protests from Vegeta.

Good Buu returned to Earth with the Z-fighters and his presence emitted fear from the others until Goku vouched for him. Mr. Satan also had Buu and Bee come to live with him and his daughter.

Sometime later, Goku uses the Dragon Balls and wishes for no earthling to remember the havoc wreaked on the world by Majin Buu. In addition, in order to ensure that Buu not unleash a similar horror to Kid Buu again, Mr. Satan also forbade Good Buu from either getting angry ever again or at the very least not unleash his anger. Soon after, Good Buu is given the name Mr. Buu, and joins in the celebration of his evil counterpart's defeat at Capsule Corporation.

Dragon Ball Super[]

God of Destruction Beerus Saga[]

Six months after Kid Buu's defeat and being erased from the Earthlings' minds, Buu interrupts Mr. Satan's press conference at the Satan House furiously stating he was hungry. Without having a clue who Buu is, Mr. Satan took advantage of this and told the world that Majin Buu is a space soldier that went to Earth to be trained by him. After storming out, Mr. Satan leaves his conference to calm Buu down and give him a massage.

Buu attends Bulma's birthday party on a cruise ship. Buu starts to eat all the food before the party starts and Bulma gets angry over this. Mr. Satan tells Buu that Bulma has a massive feast specifically for him and that he needs to wait. Buu continues to eat throughout the party. When Beerus is on Earth, he is interested to try pudding which Buu had enough of. Beerus asked for at least one to taste it but Buu refused to give him one, angering Beerus. Mr. Satan tries to tell Buu to give him one but Beerus and Buu blasted him away for interrupting. Buu and Beerus faced off: Buu gave hits to Beerus but they simply didn't have any effect on him. Buu was tossed around by Beerus' speed and was blasted into the ocean. Buu tries several times afterward to hit Beerus but continues to get taken out. Buu later watches the battle between Super Saiyan God Goku and Beerus.

Golden Frieza Saga[]

Main article: Golden Frieza Saga

After Frieza's revival, he states King Cold forbade Frieza from challenging two warriors, Lord Beerus and Majin Buu. Upon hearing from Sorbet that Goku beat Majin Buu, he decided to train to obtain his Golden Form. When Mr. Satan and Bee left the house to attend an emergency press conference, he passes by and says goodbye to Majin Buu, who, at the time, was reading a Nekomajin adaptation of the tale of Uroshima Taro. When Frieza arrives on Earth, Buu is sleeping when he is needed. While Goku and his friends were away, Buu and Mr. Satan were taking a nap in their mansion when they were unaware of the Earth exploding due to Frieza blowing it up. Mr. Satan, and presumably Buu, were killed until Whis undid the event with his Temporal Do-Over technique so that Goku can kill Frieza once more. Buu later attends the feast thrown by Bulma with her family and friends.

Universe 6 Saga[]

Main article: Universe 6 Saga

Buu is chosen by Goku to take part in the tournament between Beerus' team and Champa's team. The day of the tournament, Majin Buu is taken to the Nameless Planet along with his friends in Whis' box. After two hours and forty-five minutes, they arrive on the planet. As soon as they get there, the written test to participate in the tournament, requested by Vegeta, begins. In the manga, Majin Buu fails his test, even spelling his name wrong, because he has not done anything like that before. In the anime, he fell asleep during the exam, automatically failing it by default. Since he failed, he is not able to participate, so he sits with his friends and watches the first battle between Goku and Botamo.

Buu finally woke up after the tournament was over and after Zeno showed and left and apologized to Mr. Satan for not being able to grant his wish. He then stated that when he fell asleep, he believed that he found incredible talent in Monaka. Buu later went with everyone else in the Cube and got to see Super Shenron before Beerus made his wish to make Champa's Earth just as hospitable as his to make him owe him one.

Copy-Vegeta Saga[]

Main article: Copy-Vegeta Saga

Afterwards, Buu joins in on another party, this time, he is ensured by Bulma that not even he can finish all of the food by himself.

Universe Survival Saga[]

Main article: Universe Survival Saga

Good Buu participates in Zeno's Tournament of Power as part of Team Universe 7. Universe 7 is matched up against Universe 9 in a standard 3v3 tournament-style match in the first round, and Goku asks Buu to fight with him and Gohan. Buu, along with Mr. Satan, travel to Zeno's Palace with Supreme Kai, Kibito, Old Kai, Beerus, Whis, Goku, and Gohan, and the entire team meet with Universe 9's team. They are transported by the Grand Minister to a tournament ring in an unspecified location, and Buu is matched up first to fight Basil (though he fell asleep during the explanations and had to be woken up by a chocolate bar). When the match began, Basil immediately assaulted Buu with a variety of attacks. Buu lays on the ground but then proceeds to grin and laugh, getting back up unharmed. Saying he wants to play more, he takes several more attacks and gets a hole blown through him. Assuming Basil has won, Roh begins to gloat to the annoyance of Sidra when Buu jumps back up and regenerates himself.

After doing so, Buu learns Hercule was almost killed during Basil's last attack. Buu, now furious, stops playing and begins to fight seriously, dominating Basil, battering him around and throwing him clean out of the ring. The Zenos however, aren't happy with the fight ending so early and want it to continue until they're satisfied. Knowing Basil is outclassed, Roh throws him a drug which causes Basil to power up and appears to defeat Buu, bombarding him with dozens of Ki blasts. Buu immediately pops out of the rubble of the arena completely unharmed and claims to be stronger than Basil before unleashing a full power Kamehameha, winning the fight and nearly killing Basil. Having been declared the winner, Buu hurries over to Hercule and heals him. Proud of Buu, Hercule hugs him and calls him the best. Buu, having fulfilled his end of the deal, is now given his reward for fighting: tons of food.

Later, when heading to The Lookout to ask for Android 17's location, Goku finds Buu training, having even slimmed down. They decide to have a sparring match, which Buu easily wins. However, unfortunately for Goku and the others, Buu falls into a deep sleep and will not wake up for months. Desperate, Goku has no choice but to take drastic measures and ask Fortuneteller Baba to allow Frieza back into the world of the living for one day so he can compete in the tournament.

Galactic Patrol Prisoner Saga[]

Main article: Galactic Patrol Prisoner Saga

Having been taken in by the Galactic Patrol to access Grand Supreme Kai's memories for a way to stop Moro, a therapist is able to help Buu access Grand Supreme Kai's memories. After being dropped off on New Namek, Buu intervenes during the second battle between the still somewhat injured Goku and Vegeta vs Moro, who came out of hiding to stop the latter from grabbing the final Namekian Dragon Ball. Buu, now having Grand Supreme Kai's memories, recognizes Moro, becomes immediately enraged, and attacks the semi-rejuvenated Moro.

The battle ensues with Buu having a clear advantage over Moro. Goku and Vegeta both realize that Buu is immune to Moro's dark magic thanks to Buu having awakened Grand Supreme Kai's memories, which has also awakened the godly power of the Grand Supreme Kai which Buu retained from being split from Kid Buu. After Moro regains his magic powers and heads for Porunga, Buu uses his healing abilities to restore Esca though says it was too late for Moori. After restoring Goku and Vegeta's strength, the Grand Supreme Kai manifests his way through Buu and takes over control. When everyone retreats from New Namek upon its destruction, Buu is shown to be himself once more but has now fallen asleep again due to fighting hard against Moro.

Two months later, as he is returned to The Lookout on Earth, he is still shown to be asleep. Towards the conclusion of the battles with Moro, Buu is awoken by Jaco and the Grand Supreme Kai manifests once more, seeking out the child Uub so that he may share his power with Goku. Following this, the deity returns to the Lookout and transforms back into Buu who he has no memory of what has transpired.

A few days later, Good Buu along with Goku and Vegeta are taken to the Galactic Patrol Headquarters where they are given honors and medals for their assistance in the downfall of Moro.

Peaceful World Saga[]

Main article: Peaceful World Saga

Ten years after Kid Buu's defeat, Mr. Buu enters the 28th World Tournament at the end of the Dragon Ball Z series, and during the ten years, he lost to Mr. Satan on purpose, and was promised to have his chance at being champion eventually. During this time, he apparently also got his own fanbase, as Goku noted that Buu seemed to acquire a lot of adoring fangirls when going to the ring for selection. He also convinces Buu to use his magic to rig the selection so that Buu can fight Goten, and that Goku fights Uub. Goku also tells Vegeta and Buu in private that Uub is the pure good human reincarnation of Kid Buu, much to Buu's surprise. The tournament is later cancelled due to Goku and Uub's absence.

Dragon Ball GT[]

Baby Saga[]

Main article: Baby Saga

Over 15 years after Kid Buu's defeat, Mr. Buu is first seen at Mr. Satan's house where people under Baby's control are at. Due to his complete control over his body, Buu easily resists Baby's egg planted in him and ejects it out of his body. Mr. Buu blows a group of Baby's minions away. Later, they go to Goku's house where he and Pan are being attacked by Goten and Gohan, who are being controlled by Baby. Mr. Buu takes Mr. Satan and Pan to safety by Goku's request. Mr. Buu, Mr. Satan, and Pan decide to go to the Tuffle Planet to free some of Baby's minions. Uub comes to the rescue to help. Mr. Buu realizes that Uub is the reincarnation of Kid Buu.

Mr. Buu takes Mr. Satan and Pan to safety, far from Baby and Uub's location. He says to Mr. Satan that he is his best friend and that he will never forget him, but Uub is a part of him, and he has to help him out. Despite Mr. Satan's cries, Mr. Buu flies off to help Uub. Before Baby can decimate Uub with his Revenge Death Ball, Mr. Buu sucks in Baby's attack and expels it safely to save Uub. Mr. Buu explains that he and Uub were once one a long time ago, and if they fuse once more, their power will skyrocket, and hopefully be enough to destroy the parasite Baby. They fuse and become Majuub, essentially recreating Majin Buu himself.

Super 17 Saga[]

Main article: Super 17 Saga

Mr. Satan is upset about Mr. Buu being gone and decides to give up being the champion. During the final of the 31st World Martial Arts Tournament, even though he is not seen, Buu mentally implores Majuub to throw the fight, since the inhabitants of Earth will lose all hope of peace if Mr. Satan is defeated. Majuub reluctantly complies.

Super Dragon Ball Heroes[]

Demon Invader Saga[]

Main article: Demon Invader Saga

Good Buu is absorbed by Majin Ozotto when he eats the Earth.[11]

Film appearances[]

Battle of Gods[]

Four years after Kid Buu's defeat, Majin Buu is at Bulma's birthday party with Mr. Satan, enjoying the food. It is Buu who angers the God of Destruction Beerus when the latter interrupts the party.[12] When Beerus asks Buu for one or two of the custard puddings he has, Majin Buu eats all of them, angering Beerus. Buu is the first to challenge Beerus, and attempts to punch him, but he is blasted away into a lake by a kiai with little effort on Beerus' part. After the Z-Fighters try to help Buu, Beerus retrieves Buu back from the water and slams the Majin's head into Gohan's, knocking him out.[13] Buu then stays back and watches the battle between Goku and Beerus.

Super Hero[]

Good Buu makes an appearance sleeping and thus not a potential candidate for helping with fighting off the Red Ribbon Army resurgence.

Other Dragon Ball Stories[]

The Return of Son Goku and Friends![]

Two years after Kid Buu's defeat, Buu attends Mr. Satan's banquet along with the Z Fighters and their family and friends at Mr. Satan's newly made hotel for defeating Buu.[14] The celebration is then crashed by a brother duo, Abo and Kado, who are after Vegeta's brother, Tarble. The brothers are challenged by Goten and Trunks but they fail in defeating them. The brothers, fused as Aka, unleash a technique that destroyed the hotel. Aka is then defeated by Goku with a Kamehameha. After this encounter, they continue their feast.

Nekomajin[]

Main article: Nekomajin

Majin Buu has a cameo appearance in Nekomajin, a short series of one-shot manga chapters by Akira Toriyama which takes place during the time period between Dragon Ball Z and Dragon Ball GT. Neko Majin Z's friend finds Buu just wandering around while going to Satan City after mistaking him for Neko Majin Z. Buu is surprised that Neko Majin Z's friend does not know who he is and breaks the fourth wall by mentioning that he is from the Dragon Ball manga. Buu displays his strength while Neko Majin Z's friend remains unsurprised and responds by saying that Neko Majin Z does stuff like that all the time (he also mentions how Neko Majin Z looks and acts similar to Buu). Buu leaves and tells Neko Majin Z's friend to call him to fight Neko Majin Z when he comes around. Shortly later, when Usagi Majin steals the source of Neko Majin Z's power, his friend calls Buu and tells him that Usagi Majin is "Neko Majin Z". Buu easily beats Usagi Majin and leaves, disappointed that "Neko Majin Z" was so weak.

Online[]

Main article: Dragon Ball Online

It is explained in Dragon Ball Online that in Age 790, Mr. Buu finds and reads one of Mr. Satan's adult books, "Bob & Margaret", causing him to long for love. He creates a wife for himself called Miss Buu. The following year, Mr. Buu and his wife create a Baby Buu via the Love-Love Beam. It is implied that Buu's family continues to grow, and thus the formation of the Majin race on Earth in Dragon Ball Online.

Xenoverse[]

Main article: Dragon Ball Xenoverse

Though it is not explicitly stated, it is implied that the Majin race that exists in Toki Toki City in Age 850 are descendants of Mr. Buu and Miss Buu mentioned in Dragon Ball Online. However, it is unclear if this is true in Xenoverse as many are confused (including the Majin themselves) as to the actual origins of the Majin other than that they are descended from Good Buu.

Xenoverse 2[]

Main article: Dragon Ball Xenoverse 2

Majin Buu's house mysteriously becomes caught in a time rift and the Time Patrol is forced to investigate the anomaly that caused it. If the Future Warrior is a Majin, then at the beginning of the game they will be shown investigating Majin Buu's house and a cutscene showing Majin Buu reading Bob & Margaret will be shown. When Buu comes across a word he doesn't understand, he asks Mr. Satan (who was visiting) what it means, only for Mr. Satan to tell him he shouldn't be reading it and asks where he got it from. Majin Buu tells him he found it from Mr. Satan's room, causing Mr. Satan to request he give it back, but Buu stubbornly refuses, and Mr. Satan gives up. Later on, the Future Warrior learns that Majin Buu is lonely and inspired by Mr. Satan's relationship with his daughter, decides to create children of his own using fission. The Future Warrior can help by providing Majin Buu with food that will give Majin Buu the energy to create his offspring. If the Future Warrior is Majin, the size limit of Majin Buu's family increases to 10. The Future Warrior can also give food to Majin Buu's children in order to receive different items based on the Majin's color. When a Majin Future Warrior, helps Buu create three children Majin Buu will mention he senses they have a hidden power similar to his own when he was still one with Kid Buu. When Warrior asks Buu if he can help them access it, he is reluctant as he has a poor opinion of Kid Buu but decides to help as a way of thinking them, but warns that they may lose their heart in the process causing them to end up becoming like Kid Buu. This results in Majin Buu's House Quest: "Majin Awakening" where the Future Warrior faces off.

After the Future Warrior helps him create his family, Buu decides to show him a strange Egg he found and plans to eat it, but the Future Warrior dissuades him not to and tells the Warrior that a pale man left the egg near his house. Sensing the egg is tied to the time rift around Majin Buu's House, the Warrior convinces Buu to give them the egg as he trusts them. Though Miss Buu does not appear in this anomalous timeline, it does not preclude her from having existed in the original unaltered timeline as the anomalous timeline exists outside the recorded history (as Chronoa allows it and the other time rift anomalies to remain after all the Distorted Time Eggs are collected). Good Buu is shown reading Bob & Margaret like in the timeline mentioned in Dragon Ball Online in the anomalous timeline, so it is possible the same event occurred in the unaltered timeline of Xenoverse but with Miss Buu's creation instead of the Majin family (which itself was due to alterations in history created by the time rift anomaly itself). It should be noted that Good Buu is still considered the ancestor of the Majin race, and one female Majin notes that if Mr. Satan hadn't befriended Innocent Buu (which resulted in Good Buu's creation) the Majin might not have existed at all.

Another incarnation of Good Buu appears in Conton City as one of the Time Patrol Academy Instructors brought to Conton City by Chronoa and Elder Kai. He presumably comes from the same timeline as Mr. Satan who also appears as an instructor in Conton City however he is different from the Good Buu in the Majin Buu's House time rift anomaly. The Warrior manages to convince him to train them though Buu has trouble teaching due to his childlike mind, but still manages to teach the warrior his techniques. If the Warrior manages to achieve maximum friendship with Mr. Satan and Buu, a special event occurs where they both learn they have been training the Future Warrior. This unlocks the Friends Forever mark for the Future Warrior's Play Data profile. Several other Instructors will also wonder if Majin Buu is even capable of teaching if the Future Warrior speaks to them while training under Buu.

During the Hero Colosseum Saga, Trunks: Xeno decides to help get the Majin race interested in the Hero Colosseum by convincing the Instructor Majin Buu to take part in figure battles, but Good Buu misunderstands and ends up turning him into a ball. However, the Future Warrior manages to beat Buu in a figure battle which Buu finds to be more fun than the ball and turns ends up Xeno Trunks back to normal. As a result of his newfound interest in Hero Figures, his Majin descendants begin to take an interest in the Hero Colosseum.

In an altered timeline of the Tournament of Destroyers, a history change causes Majin Buu and Goku to be absent on the day of the tournament. When Xeno Trunks asks if he should search for Buu in addition to Goku, Elder Kai tells him not to bother as Buu never fought in the original timeline and decides that it would be better if the Future Warrior take his place instead in order to participate in the tournament to prevent further history changes.

FighterZ[]

In the Super Warrior Arc, the Good Buu is put to sleep due to the effects of the power suppressing waves created by a device invented by Dr. Gero that was activated by Android 21. He is later found by the Z Fighters who defeat some nearby clones and bring him to Bulma's ship where he wakes up. They try their best to explain the situation to Buu several times though he fails to understand even after Bulma explains it in simple terms, though Goku manages to convince him to help fight the clones and defeat Android 21 whom they discover was created using Majin Buu's cells. Majin Buu and the Z Fighters manage to destroy her with a combined attack during their final battle on the Sacred World of the Kai.

In the Enemy Warrior Arc, the Z Fighters team up with the revived Cell and the Frieza Force (which consists of Frieza, Nappa, and the Ginyu Force) in order to combat 21. They find Majin Buu asleep like in the previous arc. Frieza is surprised that the fat childish Majin is the one his father warned him about unaware he is the weaker pure good incarnation of Innocent Buu. Still the Z Fighters manage to convince Cell and Frieza that Majin Buu can be useful.

In the Android 21 arc, it is revealed that Android 21 was originally a gentle soul created from the human mother of Dr. Gero's human son (beyond being the mother of his child her exact relationship with Dr. Gero is never revealed) who rebuilt Android 16 due to him being modelled after her deceased human son (a Red Ribbon Army soldier who was killed by a bullet several years before the army itself was defeated by Goku). Though she intended to live with 16 in peace, the cells that made up her body went out of control which is implied to be due mainly to her Majin cells which are apparently dominant given her noticeable Majin traits in her true form. These cells are implied to be uncontrollable as the clones of Kid Buu are shown to possess the same personality as Kid Buu implying that they are the cause for 21 developing an insatiable desire to turn people into food and absorb them. This desire caused her psyche to develop a destructive evil split personality which took control and used Dr. Gero's technology and labs to create an army of clones and activate the power suppressing wave machine which had the side effect of weakening the evil 21 causing her original self to resurface and work with 16, 17, 18, and a human soul that had been linked to 18. However, like Innocent Buu, 21 eventually split into a Good and Evil half as a result of her guilt and grief over killing 16 during one of her feeding rampages. The Good 21 joins forces with 17, 18, and the Z Fighters who had managed to find Majin Buu while the Androids lead by 21 were hunting clones. There is a special event involving Good Buu and Good 21 in which he notes the resemblance between them unaware that 21 is part Majin. She admits they are kindred spirits and Majin Buu even offers to share some of his candy with her after they fight some clones. Having bonded with Good Buu and the Z Fighters, Good 21 decides to die with her evil counterpart due to her fear that her cravings will eventually cause her to turn on her friends, though Goku tells the others he will ask King Yemma to reincarnate her as he had done previously with Kid Buu's soul.

Power[]

Manga and Anime

Upon his initial appearance Good Buu is weaker than Evil Buu, with the majority of Innocent Buu's power having gone to his evil side. Evil Buu is a manifestation of Majin Buu's rage, thereby allowing him to focus his energy to even greater levels and rendering Good Buu unable to gain strength through rage as effectively as Innocent Buu could. Regardless, he is still recognized by his newfound allies as easily one of the strongest warriors in the universe.

After Good Buu is spit out of Kid Buu and proceeds to fight his evil self, he is shown to be capable of holding his own better than Super Saiyan 2 Vegeta did, managing to hold Kid Buu off for an extended period of time before eventually getting beaten. In the anime, after being split from Kid Buu, Good Buu once again becomes capable of powering up through anger like he could prior to Evil Buu being split from him.

In Akira Toriyama's script for Dragon Ball Z: Resurrection ‘F’, as well as the Resurrection ‘F’ manga and Dragon Ball Super anime, when first form Frieza arrives Earth to enact his revenge Krillin states that it's all right that Goku and Vegeta have not arrived, as they have Good Buu.

In Dragon Ball Super, Buu challenges Beerus, but even with his regeneration capabilities, he is easily defeated. In the Universe 6 Saga, Buu is chosen as the very first pick for Beerus' team by Goku in preparation for the Tournament of Destroyers, with Goku going as far as saying they absolutely could not leave him out of their team. In the anime, Vegeta asks why he would choose Buu since he had lost against Beerus and Goku notes that, while true, Buu could become very formidable once worked up enough.

During the Zeno Expo between Universe 7 and 9, Buu squares off against Basil of Universe 9. Despite Buu not taking the match nearly seriously and thinking of Basil as someone who is trying to merely play with him, Basil's best attacks prove completely ineffective in inflicting any damage or even faze Buu. After Basil ends up inadvertently hurting Mr. Satan, however, Buu gets angry and effortlessly beats Basil unconscious. In an effort to even the odds, Basil takes a drug to bulk-up and unnaturally increase his power beyond his limits. In this form, Basil is finally described by Buu as a strong enemy, but below Buu's own strength.

In-between the exhibition matches and the Tournament of Power, Buu trains and acquires a slimmed-downed body as a result. In this form he briefly spars with base Goku and quite easily knocks base Goku out of there ring, with Goku noting that Buu possesses considerable power and increased speed.

In the Galactic Patrol Prisoner Saga, Vegeta refers to Good Buu as being incredibly powerful. After unlocking the Grand Supreme Kai's power within him, Good Buu becomes much stronger and is capable of overwhelming the semi-rejuvenated Moro. Even more, he was immune to the genocidal wizard's magical abilities. Ultimately, Goku noted that Good Buu has become more powerful than anything they saw from him before, with Good Buu claims that Moro is a weakling compared to him power wise. He was ultimately primed to defeat Moro until a wish from Porunga granted him enough power to escape. Now restored to his peak, Moro is able to overwhelm Good Buu (as the Grand Supreme Kai), and even though the Grand Supreme Kai can mostly hold his own, he is unable to even damage Moro - due to Kid Buu having retained most of his godly power.

When matched up against Good Buu in the Peaceful World Saga, Goten believes he has no chance.

Nekomajin

It is stated that Good Buu is equal in power to Neko Majin Z, Good Buu also proves to be able to defeat Usa Majin with a single slap (despite him having obtained every Majin-Dama other than Z's).

Video games

It is shown in Dragon Ball Online through the Majin race that Good Buu still possess the potential of Kid Buu hidden inside him, though he is never shown using it and may be incapable of doing so.

In Xenoverse 2, he teaches the Majin Future Warrior how to unlock this power within themselves though explains that there is a risk that they will lose their "heart", indicating that Good Buu himself could unlock this hidden power within himself but chooses not to for fear of losing his good heart and turning into another Kid Buu.

Abilities[]

Video Game Appearances[]

Buu has appeared in the following Dragon Ball related video games:

Dragon Ball Z: Super Butōden 3

Dragon Ball Z: Ultimate Battle 22

Dragon Ball Z: Hyper Dimension

Dragon Ball Z: The Legend

Dragon Ball Z: Legendary Super Warriors

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai 2

Dragon Ball Z: Taiketsu

Dragon Ball Z: Buu's Fury

Dragon Ball GT: Transformation

Dragon Ball Z: Supersonic Warriors

Dragon Ball Z: Supersonic Warriors 2

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai 3

Data Carddass Dragon Ball Z

Super Dragon Ball Z

Data Carddass Dragon Ball Z 2

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi 2

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi 3

Battle Stadium D.O.N

Jump Ultimate Stars

Dragon Ball Z: Battle Taikan Kamehameha - Omee to Fusion

Dragon Ball Z: Scouter Battle Taikan Kamehameha - Ora to Omee to Scouter

Dragon Ball Z: Bakuretsu Impact

Dragon Ball Z: Shin Budokai - Another Road

Dragon Ball Z: W Bakuretsu Impact

Dragon Ball Z: Infinite World

Dragon Ball Z: Dragon Battlers

Dragon Ball: Raging Blast

Dragon Ball Z: Tenkaichi Tag Team

Dragon Ball: Raging Blast 2

Dragon Ball Heroes

Dragon Ball Kai: Ultimate Butōden

Dragon Ball Z: Ultimate Tenkaichi

Dragon Ball: Zenkai Battle

Dragon Ball Z For Kinect

Dragon Ball: Tap Battle

Dragon Ball Z: Battle of Z

Dragon Ball Xenoverse

Dragon Ball Discross

Dragon Ball Z: Extreme Butōden

Dragon Ball Z: Dokkan Battle

Dragon Ball Xenoverse 2

Dragon Ball Fusions

Dragon Ball FighterZ[16]

Jump Force (DLC)

Super Dragon Ball Heroes: World Mission

Dragon Ball Z: Kakarot

In Jump Force, Good Buu appears as a part of DLC.

In World Mission, Good Buu appears under the name Mr. Buu.

Voice Actors[]

Japanese: Kōzō Shioya

English:

Ocean Group dubs: Scott McNeil

Funimation dub: Josh Martin

Blue Water dub: Corby Proctor

Bang Zoom! dub: Spike Spencer

Spanish:

Latin American Spanish dub: Mario Sauret (DBZ, DBGT); Marcos Patiño (DBZ Kai, DBS)

Castilian Spanish dub: Daniel Palacios (most media), Jorge García Tomé (DBGT episode 41)

Italian dub: Riccardo Rovatti

Portuguese:

European Portuguese dub: António Semedo (DBZ, DBGT), Ricardo Spínola (DBS - episodes 1-104), Quimbé (DBS - episode 126)

Brazilian Portuguese dub: Wellington Lima

Polish dub: Sergiusz Żymełka (DBZ Kai, DBS)

Catalan dub: Jordi Vila

Greek dub: Themis Psihogios (DBZ eps. 240-275, 283-286, 289), Yiannis Papaioannou (DBZ eps. 232-239, 277, 282, 287-288, 290-291), Panagiotis Tsitsas (DBGT), Pimis Petrou (DBS)

Tagalog dub: Jhun Villamac

Hungarian dub: Csaba Csík, István Fazekas (DBGT)

Hebrew dub: Dor Zweigenbaum

Battles[]

Dragon Ball Z

Good Buu vs. Evil Buu

Good Buu vs. Kid Buu

Good Buu and Mr. Satan vs. Kid Buu

Good Buu vs. Kid Buu

Good Buu vs. Kid Buu (anime only)

Good Buu vs. Pit Bull Pete (anime only)

Dragon Ball Super

Anime

Good Buu vs. Beerus

Good Buu and Gohan vs. Beerus

Good Buu vs. Basil (Base/Danger Doping)

Good Buu (Shape-Up) vs. Goku

Manga

Good Buu vs. Beerus

Good Buu and Gohan vs. Beerus

Good Buu vs. Mr. Satan

Good Buu vs. Moro

Good Buu (Grand Supreme Kai), Goku (Super Saiyan Blue/Perfected Super Saiyan Blue), and Vegeta (Super Saiyan Blue/Perfected Super Saiyan Blue) vs. Moro

Good Buu (Grand Supreme Kai) vs. Moro

Good Buu (Grand Supreme Kai), Goku (Perfected Super Saiyan Blue), and Vegeta (Perfected Super Saiyan Blue) vs. Galactic Patrol Prisoners

Dragon Ball GT

Good Buu vs. Baby (Strongest Form 2)

Films

Good Buu and Gohan (Potential Unleashed) vs. Beerus

Nekomajin Z

Good Buu vs. Usagi Majin (Majin-Dama's eaten)

Gallery[]

Main article: Good Buu/Gallery

References[]

Site Navigation[]

v · MajinBuu's Majin subspeciesOther Majin race membersHybrid MajinMajin FusionsMajin TransformationsOther TransformationsOrganization of BabidiRelated articles

v · DeitiesKing of AllDragon GodsAngelGod of DestructionSupreme KaiKaiGuardianSuper Saiyan GodDemon GodFusion GodsAttendantOtherGodly formsRelated

v · Dragon TeamMembersSupportersAlliesFuture Counterparts

MembersSupporters & Allies

Fused Members

Fusion DancePotaraEX-Fusion

Related Articles

Affiliated GroupsBases

v · Galactic PatrolLeadersMembersFused MembersTemporary MembersSquadronsAlliesRelated Articles

v · Time PatrolLeadersMembers

Heroes MembersFused MembersXenoverse MembersOnline Members

SquadronsMasters/Instructors/PartnersAlliesConflicts

Main ConflictsAltered Timelines

Related Articles