♜ Majin Boo: A threat to the Universe itself. ♜

Updated 2017/04/11 with better wording and organization.

• Massive thanks to +ιllмaтιc . for helping me work on this.

◦ Introduction

All right. So, traditionally. Super Saiyan God Goku is usually the first character to be considered Universe Level by general consensus. (Although, there seems to be debate surrounding even that, despite the answer being clear from the beginning.)

However. An important argument left behind with continuation of Super’s story-line suggests that busting a space-time continuum had already been possible, long before Beerus even set foot on Earth. This argument revolves around Majin Boo.

There are quite literally pages upon pages of evidence that suggests, and gives outright confirmation of the conclusion that Dragon Ball characters have reached Universe Level by the time the Boo Arc reaches its conclusion. Entire works of fiction placed at Universe Level have far less evidence supporting their character than Boo does.

Any story-line which takes place after the defeat of Cell has a ton of character dialog and officially verified sources all of which point into the direction of characters being Universe Level. I’ll go down a list of the most important scans, and give analytical descriptions of each. Although keep in mind that there are far more scans beyond what I am covering here.

◦ = Major Point.

• = Minor Point.

⁃ = Character/Narrator Quote.

Paste any of the desired symbols in Ctrl+F to find specific portions of the post.

Anyway. Let’s begin.

◦ Majin Boo Saga

Miscellaneous evidence surrounding Majin Boo’s power.

• Genki-Dama against Boo

After losing all of his strength. Goku, no longer had the power to defeat Kid Boo like he originally intended to do. Vegeta suggests that he use a Genki-Dama instead.

Normally. It wouldn’t have nearly enough power to defeat Kid Boo. However, Instead of just a Planet, Stars; or even Solar Systems. They decide that he only way to defeat Boo would be to gather energy from the entire Mortal Universe. Including even the Afterlife.

https://goo.gl/zubRhP

⁃ King Kai:

“Good ol’ Vegeta! Counting on the Genki-Dama… Very nice! You’re talking not only with Earth, but all of space!”

• Now. Vegeta does make this statement later on once gaining communication with Earth:

“Do you hear me, people of Earth?”

This is contrary to the fact that he should now have full communication with all of the Universe, according to what King Kai previously stated. However; Later statements continue to support that Vegeta was indeed in-contact with people beyond Earth, such as King Yemma.

https://goo.gl/UT9UB9

• And even in a Boo Arc story-recap during Dragon Ball Super:

https://goo.gl/pq31mc

Now. You may say: “How much energy is absorbed by the Genki-Dama has no correlation to strength of the person or being it’s used against.” This would be wrong.

• When Goku uses Genki-Dama during his initial fight with Vegeta, he only gathers the energy of Earth:

And not even all of it. This was before he lost a huge portion of the energy he gathered after taking a beating from Oozaru Vegeta.

Yet, Vegeta, someone who should be able to effortlessly vaporize Planets, was brought quite close to death by it.

• Essentially. This establishes that a Genki-Dama with less than Earth’s energy >= Planetary Vegeta. T Genki-Dama with energy from the Universe would logically be around that area of power.

Kid Boo held back the Genki-Dama. The feat was more of a physical one. A test for Kid Boo’s physical lifting power and only somewhat for his energy output. As after Goku was get his strength back. He was able to physically overpower Boo and engulf him in the Genki-Dama.

Kid Boo’s power wasn’t necessarily confirmed to be higher than the Genki-Dama. I mean, it killed him. Nor was this inherently a Universal feat for him, but it would be logically around that level considering the energy output of the Genki-Dama itself. But regardless an extremely impressive feat nonetheless.

◦ Miscellaneous Statements

• Goku and Vegeta encounter Kid Boo:

⁃ Narrator:

“At last! The fight between Goku and Majin Boo, with the entire universe at stake, has begun!” In addition to the narrator. Vegeta himself reiterates that the battle between Goku and Boo will be the fate of the Universe in the Manga.

⁃ Vegeta:

“It finally begins … A battle on whose outcome …will determine the fate of the universe.”

• Under normal circumstances. This could very well be referring to destruction over a prolonged period of time. However, if re-observe this statement (And every statement mentioned afterwords,) with the context of this statement made by Goku in mind:

⁃ Goku:

“Alrii~~iight. I’d better go all out right from the start…! If we get done in, then the entire universe will go ‘poof’…”

“Poof”

EXCLAMATION

1. Used to describe a sudden disappearance.

‘once you’ve used it, poof—it’s gone’

https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/poof

• It would be clear that all of these statements refer to a sudden, and short time-period for the destruction of the Universe, rather than prolonged destruction.

This is why it’s important to look at the context of something, based on what has been stated previously and afterwards, it can change the entire interpretation of a statement or feat.

• Elder Kaioshin refers to Majin Boo as being Universal:

⁃ Elder Kaioshin:

“In that case, the entire universe is done for. Majin Boo will surely come here, too.”

• Piccolo states that Boo could wipe out all life in the Universe.

⁃ Piccolo:

“If we leave him alone like this, then without a doubt all life on not merely the Earth, but throughout the entire universe will be wiped out…”

Even the Manga chapter title and corresponding episode of the original Anime gave further implication that the Universe was at stake. Even if you don’t classify this as direct evidence due to the nature of it, it still gives general implications of what was intended.

http://www.kanzenshuu.com/manga/chp-509/

全宇宙を賭けた試合

Zen’uchū o Kaketa Shiai

A Match with the Whole Universe at Stake

“Chapter Information”

Premiered: 07 March 1995 (Weekly Shōnen Jump 1995 #14)

Corresponding: Dragon Ball Z (Original Broadcast)

Episode 278, “Boo’s Assault!! A Conclusion in the Kaiōshin Realm”

Episode 279, “Seize the Future!! A Decisive Battle With the Universe at Stake”

◦ El Manga Legendario

In addition to all of the aforementioned evidence. We also have an officially licensed guide backing up Majin Boo’s power.

₁ Full Spanish Context

“Dragon Ball – Resúmenes de los capítulos 446 a 459

¡Evitad que Bu vuelva a la vida!”

Dragon Ball – Summary of chapters 446 to 459.

Avoid (Prevent) that Boo comes back to life!

“Enfrentamiento con los subordinados de Babidí”

Encounter versus Babidi’s subordinates.

“Para evitar que Bu, un monstruo con el poder de destruir el universo, vuelva a la vida, Kaio Shin y el grupo de Goku irreumpen en la guarida de Babidí. Sin embargo. Dabra, el rey del mundo de los demonios, convertido en subordinado del Babidí, pretrifica a Krillin y a Piccolo. Para salvarlos, y aun sabiendo que es una trampa. Goku y el resto de los luchadores entran en la nave de Babidí, donde deberán enfrentarse a todos sus esbirros. Tras derrotarlos con facilidad, llegan ante Babidí, que afirma que Dabra los vencerá a todos.”

“Tan fuerte como Cell y temido por Kaio Shin, Dabra también es capaz de usar magia.”

“¿Será rival para Goku y los demás?”

₂ Full English Context

“To avoid that Boo, _a monster with the powers to destroy the universe, comes back to life. Kaio-Shin and Goku’s group burst into Babidi’s den. However. Dabura, king of the demon world, converted into subordinate by Babidi, petrifies Krillin and Piccolo. To save them, and although knowing it’s a trap, Goku and the rest of the fighters enter Babidi’s ship, where they wk have to face all his minions. After beating them with ease, they reach Babidi, that affirms that Dabura will beat them all.”

“Strong as Cell, and feared by the Kaio-Shin, Dabura also is able to use the magic.”

“Will he be a rival for Goku and the others?”

El Manga Legendario (Which was legally licensed and approved both Bird Studio.) gives further confirmation that Kid Boo did indeed have the energy necessary to destroy the Universe. This is an additional source outside of the Manga, stated by an authority, rather than a character; Making it even more valid than everything showcased thus far.

• I will move on to arguing the validity of statements within not only Dragon Ball, but fictional works as a whole.

I often refer back to the idea of author intention as the main reason as to why unless contradicted in some way by some other valid source, that statements be taken as mostly legitimate.

Being a statement, does not automatically make what’s said within the statement invalided, it only makes it more far more vulnerable to being potentially incorrect in to what may be stated or shown in the future.

We know why dialog is put within a fictional story, to convey an idea the author wants to achieve. Depending on the situation, they cannot always show what is intended. If Boo legitimately did up vaporizing the Universe, it would hinder the plot, and affect the future series of events negatively.

As a result of this. It was instead chosen that to best convey the idea that not only was Boo the strongest foe that they had faced up to that point; but also that he could be a threat to not Planets, Solar Systems or Galaxies, but the Universe itself; was to have it stated over and over again numerous times by numerous characters, the narrator; databooks, and so on.

• Like I mentioned before. Even the chapter at which they encounter Boo was named “The Whole Universe at Stake/全宇宙を賭けた試合” to convey this idea to the reader/viewer. A statement does not have to be supported by a feat or showing of any kind to be correct, and if it isn’t supported by feat or showing, it isn’t automatically incorrect ether.

Unless a statement has a concrete contradiction making it impossible or unlikely for it to be correct, It simply cannot be assumed to be incorrect.

A lack of a feat or showing, does not automatically invalidate a statement, as this thought process would lead us down a path, at which not a single portion of dialog within any fictional work would have any meaning. unless what the characters are talking about are always shown to be correct.

This is why the thought process of “Unless it’s supported by feats, it cannot be correct.” doesn’t work not only in Dragon Ball, but in any every fictional work I can think of.

• Boohan’s feats and statements.

• 1:

• 2:

• 3: https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-KjdgraeFhNA/WGoG2jSTkwI/AAAAAAACZxU/3KrYKK2tdD836ZK-PA8c7Zs87bnXxTyogCJoC/w424-h318-n-rw/7.png

• 4:

• After being beaten continually by Vegetto, Boohan becomes infuriated and as a result, he unleashes his Ki-ai, it being enough to open portals in space, allowing alternate dimensions to flow through said portals and would crush everything in the universe:

“Opening a Hole in the Dimension

First Appearance: Chapter 492

Category: special

People: Majin Buu (evil), Gotenks

Special Characteristics: A technique where they fire a great kiai yell, distorting the dimension and opening a hole in it. Only people with extremely high battle ratings can use this. They used it to escape from the sealed Room of Spirit and Time.”

• The feat that Boohan achieves would be considered what is called a “Ki-ai scream”: A form of invisible Ki that is under most circumstances below the full Battle Power of the fighter in question. The technique Boohan used is virtually the same as the one used in the Room of Spirit and Time, as stated by Daizenshuu within the scans linked above.

• Ki-ai screaming examples:

– Goku using a K-ai yell against Nappa:

• 1:

• 2:

• Anime version:

• Uub uses a Ki-ai scream strong enough to blow back suppressed Goku during the 26th Tenkaichi Budokai:

Furthermore. Vegetto states that Boohan should use that same power he had displayed when he was Ki-ai screaming to “hit” him:

• 1: https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-vPNg4xUMHvI/Vn1sfCSSB5I/AAAAAAABHSc/Jq5FhE9fbA0/w424-h318-n-rw/7.png

• 2: https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-q4lNjTmpD2s/Vn1sfOtgwQI/AAAAAAABHSg/EvSobygzEiA/w424-h318-n-rw/8.png

⁃ Vegetto:

“You sure do have awesome power, huh? In which case, use that power to come hit me!”

Looking at the context of the scene and the statement itself, It would be clear that Vegetto was referring to Boohan’s striking strength being equal to that of his previous Ki-Ai scream.

• And remember. Ki-ai nor striking aren’t representative of a characters actual Battle Power. Therefore, Boohan should be far higher than his Ki-ai yelling feat would imply.

◦ All in all. Boohan alone could be used as the backbone of this post. However, using him in addition to the evidence previously listed; It should be clear just how much supports the idea that Majin Boo is indeed Universal.

Common counter-points.

“The Anime isn’t canon.”

• No. What constitutes “canon” or “non-canon” material has been completely dictated by fans and viewers of the series.

Not a single representative, worker or member working under Bird Studio, or Toei Animation, has ever come forward confirming or denying any material related to, or of official relevance to the Dragon Ball franchise, Including Akira Toriyama himself.

Therefore, coming to the conclusion that any part of the franchise is to be considered non-canon, would be fallacious on the basis that we have no official confirmation on the standing of any material.

• The logic of the source material being the only official place at which you could obtain information, would not be correct.* As you should be aware, the primary continuation of Dragon Ball currently is the Dragon Ball Super Anime. During this Anime, when any reference back to Dragon Ball at any point is made, (Including flashbacks, general information, character designs and characters themselves,) the depiction within the Dragon Ball Z Anime are always used instead of the Manga.

•As an example. Bulma’s hair in Dragon Ball Super is drawn as blue, and official design sheets for the series gives further confirmation that this was intentional. Despite the fact that within that original Manga, aka source material, Bulma’s hair wasn’t blue at all, it was purple:

•1 https://goo.gl/wXbJD0

Whereas in the original Dragon Ball and Z Anime, it was always drawn as Blue:

•2 https://goo.gl/Sn74ZT

•3 https://goo.gl/jMRC0v

• If the Anime “isn’t canon”, why would by your logic, supposed “canon” material like Dragon Ball Super use it instead of the Manga? It’s simple. The Anime is official material. It was legally licensed for creation with Akira Toriyama and Bird Studio’s permission. Hell, Toriyama himself had heavy involvement in production of the Anime and created many characters for it, including Pikkon. You can read more about his contributions here:

http://www.kanzenshuu.com/production/toriyama/

• If Toriyama’s involvement is what defines “canon” to others. Then the Anime would fit those qualifications and more.

• But in all reality. Toriyama’s involvement has absolutely nothing to do with the canonicity of a portion of the franchise. Dragon Ball Z: Battle of Gods was once considered an official continuation of the Manga and Anime, until Dragon Ball Super replaced it. However, Battle of Gods wasn’t even written by Toriyama. It was written by Yûsuke Watanabe. Despite this, it was still for a good amount of time, considered the “true” continuation of Dragon Ball.

• In addition to that. Before the story was rewritten within Dragon Ball Minus, Bardock: The Father of Goku (Or, A Final, Solitary Battle The Father of Z-Warrior Kakarrot, Who Challenged Freeza.) was considered official within the franchise. Bardock even appeared in the Manga:

That Bardock had little to no involvement from Toriyama. It was all Toei Animations work. Yet, again. It managed to more than meet the requirements of what many constitute “canon.”

• The term “canon” isn’t used by anyone within Bird Studio or Toei, or by Toriyama or anyone with even a shred of credibility within the franchise. It’s used by fans, and only fans.

“Kid Boo would go from Planet to Planet.”

• No, again. You cannot destroy a Universe, by destroying matter within the Universe. Planetary bodies, Stars, Solar Systems and so on. The idea of destroying a Universe a by only obliterating its matter is utterly ridiculous.

• Because I know people will bring it up; Using the Super Saiyan Multipliers or any sort of linear multiplication to argue for inconsistency on the grounds that said character couldn’t reach a certain level due to the massive disparity between tiering would be completely invalid, and utter nonsense. Dragon Ball’s power scaling is based upon the exponential increase of Ki. The higher the Battle Power you have, the more of an increase in Battle Power you gain.

This is why the difference in strength between characters can seem so incredibly ridiculous, In contrast to that they are usually only within the double digit percentage of each other’s power.

E.g.

Gohan dominating Super Boo despite being only 30% stronger.

Goku being at Battle Power 150,000,000, and Frieza being at 120,000,000. In the Manga at least, Goku was dominating Frieza.

Super Saiyan 2 Gohan dominating Perfect Cell, who was less than 40% weaker than Gohan linearly, but far below him exponentially. And so on.

I could go far more in depth on exponential scaling in general. But I will leave it here for now.

◦ Final Conclusion:

Majin Boo, Evil Boo, Super Boo, Boohan. It doesn’t matter. All of them are at bare minimum, Multi-Galaxy level+, but the most consistent placement would be Universal, as this is the idea that the series itself supports. Boo being Multi-Solar System simply doesn’t work, given the amount of evidence that suggests otherwise.