This article is about the innocent Buu. For the current fission that is pure good, see Good Buu.

Innocent Buu (無む邪じゃ気きな魔ま人じんブウ, Mujakina Majin Bū , lit. "Innocent Demon Person Boo"), usually just called Buu, is the first form of Majin Buu (魔ま人じんブウ, Majin Bū , lit. "Demon Person Boo") seen in the Dragon Ball series. He is the result of Kid Buu absorbing Grand Supreme Kai.

He is the main antagonist for the Majin Buu Saga.

Appearance[]

Innocent Buu has pink skin, an antenna on top of his head with three "steam holes" on each side. He is clothed in a purple cape, and a black vest with golden trims. He wears yellow gloves and boots with white baggy pants. He also wears a black belt with a golden belt buckle with the "Demon mark". Innocent Buu's face is also distinctive. He is usually smiling with, what appears to be, shut eyes. His eyes open but only when he's very angry.

Personality[]

Although he is one of the most powerful entities in Dragon Ball Z, Innocent Buu is often playful and displays his childish personality, revealing he destroys things for fun simply from old instructions from his master, stopping once told what he was doing was wrong thanks to Grand Supreme Kai's personality showing in him. Though he is playful and silly, his evil side is readily apparent, especially shown when his eyes widen, and steam shoots out of the holes on his body. His extreme anger issues show themselves often, when he is even slightly made fun of, or starts to lose in a battle. He finds enjoyment in taking the lives of many and shows no remorse, though this is because he treats everything as a game due to his childlike innocence. In battle, he fights in a bullying manner, using his immense size to outflank his opponent.

While he follows the orders of Bibidi and Babidi, he mainly does so to avoid being punished by them by being sealed inside the Sealed Ball via a spell known only to Bibidi and Babidi (or in the case of Bibidi, in order to have cake if he does what he commands). Though he followed Bibidi's orders, in the past he is known to have occasionally misbehaved forcing Bibidi to seal him as punishment to get Buu to cooperate, again showing Buu's childlike nature. However, Buu is shown to like those who treat him respectfully such as Goku and Mr. Satan and even takes Goku's suggestion that a powerful fighter like him should not let himself be bossed around by a cowardly worm like Babidi to heart, leading him to strangle Babidi to prevent him from saying the sealing incantation before killing him with a punch. Though free of Bibidi and Babidi's control, he still continued to destroy cities for fun due to their influence.

Despite the pleasure he takes in mass-murder, it is later revealed that he only committed such acts because he was unaware of the moral implications of his actions, and because he had been commanded to do so by Babidi, and Bibidi before him. He later befriended Mr. Satan, who feigned being Majin Buu's servant while trying to kill Buu with dirty tricks and booby traps, all of which failed. While Majin Buu could commit evil actions, due to the good influence of Grand Supreme Kai, he was also capable of acts of kindness even before meeting Mr. Satan such as when he healed a boy named Tommy of his blindness, after befriending the boy who did not run away due to his blindness, although he initially healed him under the naïve belief that Tommy would fear him if he saw him.

He is also shown to have a slight interest in women as he uses his body manipulation to alter his face to resemble Barry Kahn in the hope a frightened girl would find him more attractive. However, she was still terrified of him and rejects his attempts to kiss her, causing him to turn her into food.

Mr. Satan later learned of Majin Buu's innocent nature when he brought an injured puppy who he heals and is named Bee by Mr. Satan. After learning Majin Buu did not known the difference between right and wrong, Mr. Satan manages to convince him to stop killing. However, he later becomes conflicted when Mr. Satan is hurt by the evil gunman Van Zant, becoming torn between keeping his promise and his desire to kill Van Zant for hurting Mr. Satan.

The Grand Supreme Kai's presence is more influential in this form than in Super Buu, who is mostly evil and is influenced very little by the Kai. After promising Mr. Satan to stop killing, he literally struggles with the evil inside himself, with the evil winning and usurping near complete control, Majin Buu becoming far more dangerous as a result. However Super Buu retains Innocent Buu's memories of Mr. Satan and Bee prevent him from killing them and made him willing to listen to Mr. Satan's daughter Videl, though it had not even prevented him from turning her into food after escaping from the Hyperbolic Time Chamber. This also prevented Kid Buu from killing Mr. Satan as well, though he simply expelled Good Buu from himself, freeing him of both Innocent Buu's memories and Grand Supreme Kai's influence which were inherited by Good Buu, who fought Kid Buu to protect Mr. Satan.

In addition to Innocent Buu's memories and friendship with Mr. Satan and Bee, Good Buu also apparently retained Innocent Buu's interest in women which later lead to Good Buu using fission to create the first female Majin Miss Buu after reading the adult book Bob & Margaret, which eventually lead to Good Buu and Miss Buu stating a family leading to the creation of the Majin race in Dragon Ball Online. Though Good Buu is essentially the pure good side of Innocent Buu, he can still misbehave in a childish fashion especially when it comes to food as he refuses to share his pudding with Beerus (it should be noted that Buu was unaware of Beerus' position nor did he know the danger of upsetting Beerus at the time) and interrupted Mr. Satan's press conference when he was hungry showing that he still retains certain negative aspects of Innocent Buu's personality, though none of these negative traits are inherently evil.

Buu also possesses an enormous appetite for sweets, shown to far exceed even Goku's eating habits, as Buu was still hungry after he once turned a whole city of people into candy and ate them. Majin Buu only has to sleep for about five seconds to get the results earthlings gets from hours of slumber. He is extremely naïve, as he was completely ignorant of Mr. Satan's (inept) attempts to kill him. Some of his good deeds were also the result of this naivete before his formal reformation, as his motive for healing the blind boy Tommy was because the boy, due to his lack of sight, obviously couldn't fear him, so he gave him sight specifically to allow him to face fear due to thinking he was supposed to be feared.

In Dragon Ball Legends during the Tournament of Time, Innocent Buu once again acts as an underling for Babidi who pretends to be the Mastermind behind the tournament when in reality he is unbeknownst to Babidi himself is nothing but the true Mastermind's puppet. After he is defeated by Super Saiyan 3 Shallot, Innocent Buu develops hatred towards the Saiyan for being stronger than him as both his childish nature and evil side cannot bare losing to anyone. However, after Super Saiyan 3 Shallot blows up Innocent Buu, instead of reforming normally, the evil within Innocent Buu falls under the Mastermind's influence resulting in it triggering the fission into Evil Buu and Good Buu. Due to Good Buu inheriting Innocent Buu's memories of Shallot, he also inherits Innocent Buu's desire for revenge, becoming focused on fighting him after he survives following the destruction of Kid Buu by Shallot.

Biography[]

Background[]

The fat version of Majin Buu is the result of Ultra Buu's absorption of Grand Supreme Kai, the supreme ruler of all Kais. The merging of the juvenile and immature Kid Buu with the benevolent and innocent Grand Supreme Kai resulted in a childlike carefree being who, despite his behavior, possesses power that far surpasses that of a Super Saiyan 2 and on par with a Super Saiyan 3. Of note, absorbing Grand Supreme Kai granted Majin Buu the ability to speak fluently, although he usually refers to himself in the third person. Buu became calmer and easier to control after absorbing the Grand Supreme Kai[7].

However, Buu would become disobedient at times, causing his master Bibidi to seal him inside a magic ball to control him and transport him from planet to planet. Bibidi brought the ball to Earth, which was intended to be his next target. The only remaining Supreme Kai, Shin, waited for this chance, and, before Buu's seal was released, he was able to kill Bibidi. The ball, in which Majin Buu is contained, remained sealed, without being destroyed. Shin and Kibito thought it best to not unnecessarily disturb it and moreover, the only one who could release the seal was the now-deceased Bibidi.

Though seemingly gone, the stories of Buu's rampage continued to spread throughout the universe, striking fear into even the likes of King Cold, who told his son Frieza never to cross Buu.

Dragon Ball Z[]

Majin Buu Saga[]

Majin Buu (in his fat form) is first introduced during the Babidi Saga. He was released from his Sealed Ball by Bibidi's son, Babidi, thanks to the energy collected from Majin Vegeta and Goku as they were fighting. Despite Babidi's involvement in freeing him, Buu for the most part ignored him, although he quickly accepted him as his master when Babidi reminds him that he can seal Buu back into the Sealed Ball. In addition, he gets angered at Dabura's claims of him being a "bumbling idiot" and proceeds to humiliate him in battle. He is then ordered by Babidi to execute Gohan and Shin.

Thinking quickly, Gohan grabs the Supreme Kai's hand and flies away, hoping he can outrun Buu until they can reach a safe spot. However, Buu swiftly appears right in front of Gohan and mocks him. The Majin swats the half-Saiyan out of the air and into the rocks. Shin looks in shock as Buu begins to menacingly approach him. Shin uses a Kiai to defend himself, but the attack barely pushes Buu back. In response, Buu pummels the Supreme Kai as an injured Gohan watch.

Babidi proceeds to mock Shin for the position he is in and decides to kill the Supreme Kai himself. Just before Babidi can deal the final blow, Gohan swiftly kicks Majin Buu in face, much to the wizard's surprise. Unimpressed, Buu gets back on his feet and proceeds to heal the dent in his face. The cowardly wizard quickly retreats and is frustrated at the delay of the Supreme Kai's death. Gohan looks onto Buu in fear, noticing the attack did not leave any lasting damage. Buu becomes annoyed with Gohan and exclaims that he will die now. Gohan is shocked, but quickly gets angry, preparing to punch the pink monster. Buu quickly fires a large sphere of energy that blasts Gohan into the sky, before eventually flying off too far to be visible to a naked eye. With the last of his strength, the weakened Shin uses his psychic powers to destroy the attack and a beaten Gohan falls down into a nearby forest, unconscious and near death. His sudden decrease in energy causes several characters, like Goku and Vegeta, to mistakenly believe that Gohan was killed by Innocent Buu.

Thinking Gohan is dead, Babidi tells Buu to finally finish off the Supreme Kai. A hungry Buu prepares to turn the Supreme Kai into food, but from the rubble, an injured Dabura returns and throws his spear through Buu's back. Babidi gasps in surprise, truly believing Dabura to be dead after Buu struck him. He then yells at Dabura for daring to attack his father's creation. Dabura informs Babidi that Majin Buu's unpredictable nature is it not to be taken lightly and he will eventually betray the wizard and become a true threat. Dabura says they should stop the creature now while they still have a chance, but Babidi ignores the demon's warnings and scolds him for daring to attack Buu to begin with. However, Buu grabs the spear with no concern and simply pulls it out of his stomach like it was nothing. Dabura is horrified by Buu's near immortality, while the creature heals the hole in his stomach. Majin Buu turns to Dabura with an unfriendly smile, happily exclaiming that Dabura shall be eaten. Dabura futilely attacks Majin Buu, but monster uses his Cookie Beam to turn the demon king into a cookie and devours him whole.

Astonished by the creature's power, Babidi praises Buu and orders him to eat the Supreme Kai as well. Before Buu can eat Shin, he is distracted when Vegeta arrives and destroys Babidi's Spaceship. Babidi begins to scream at the loss of his spaceship and scolds Vegeta for his actions. Vegeta turns to Buu and begins to question the Majin, calling him a repugnant blob and ordering him to answer if he was the one who killed Gohan. Not understanding what "repugnant" means, Buu asks his master what the meaning of the word is. Hearing Babidi's explanation, Buu turns his view to Vegeta and begins to anger, letting out bursts of steam from the holes in his head. Screaming that he will kill Vegeta, Babidi congratulates Buu's violent temper and orders him to teach Vegeta a lesson for betraying him. As Buu's ki increases even higher, Vegeta powers up as well. Believing that he will die, Vegeta claims that if he has to go to Hell for fighting this battle, he will be bringing Buu and Babidi with him.

The fallen Saiyan puts up a good fight, managing to cause a noticeable amount of damage to Buu, which leads Buu to realize that he would have to be serious against Vegeta, so he uses Angry Explosion which severely damages Vegeta. Buu tells Vegeta that it's over for him and rips out a chunk of his stomach and stretches it out like gum. While Vegeta is confused by this, Buu shoots an explosive blast from his mouth that the prince just barely dodges, and then throws the piece of his stomach out so that it wraps around Vegeta, immobilizing him. The helpless Vegeta is then tortured by the fat creature. Luckily, Vegeta is saved through the intervention of Trunks and Goten. Despite Trunks' attempts to convince his father that by fighting together, they would win, Vegeta knocks both Trunks and Goten out. After sharing one last conversation with Piccolo, Vegeta decides to sacrifice himself in order to defeat Majin Buu for good. He blows himself up in a last-ditch effort to kill the Majin, and the explosion leaves Buu reduced to tiny pieces.

Later, Piccolo returns to the aftermath of the explosion, and prepares to finish off an injured Babidi, only to discover Buu's regeneration is virtually limitless and he returns to life from the broken pieces. Piccolo quickly escapes before Buu can finish healing. Babidi, near death from Piccolo's earlier attempt to kill him orders Buu to heal his body. Buu then reluctantly heals Babidi, after the wizard again threatens him with sealing him back into the Sealed Ball. Together, he and Babidi go on a rampage throughout Earth searching for Goten, Trunks, and Piccolo for their individual parts in almost ruining Babidi's plan and telepathically threatening the people to give up them up. While Buu is content causing mass destruction, he is quietly annoyed with Babidi's constant complaining and insults.

Their rampage is later interrupted by Goku, who intends to halt Majin Buu from destroying West City, as Trunks needs to find the Dragon Radar there. Babidi shows his surprise, believing Vegeta had killed Goku in their battle and thanks him for his part in reviving Majin Buu. Goku compliments Buu on his unmatched power, admitting that both he and Vegeta were wrong to underestimate him. Babidi immediately changes the subject, demanding to know the whereabouts of Piccolo, Trunks and Goten. Goku naturally refuses but offers them both a firm warning: The three in question will show themselves, but only after completing their training to defeat Buu, so they both should wait until then. Buu and Babidi both laugh loudly at the idea. The wizard refuses to listen and once again demands their presence, or else they'll kill more people.

Anticipating this, Goku prepares to stall Buu. Babidi orders his minion to kill him like Vegeta. Buu, however, doesn't listen and laughs to himself. Babidi yells at him and Buu frustratingly complies. Goku takes notice of Babidi's cruel treatment toward his servant and asks Buu why he still obeys the weak wizard and listen to his constant, demeaning insults. Buu himself pauses and begins to ponder on Goku's point. Intimidated, Babidi threatens Buu with sealing him away back in his cocoon prison, but Buu retorts and says Babidi will not do that, because Goku could easily kill him without Buu in the way. Babidi feels threatened by Buu's growing intelligence, however, Buu wishes to kill Goku anyway and obeys Babidi's demand, but only for the enjoyment of killing good guys.

Goku takes his time by showing Majin Buu the Super Saiyan transformations. First, Super Saiyan 1, Super Saiyan 2, and then decides to finally reveal the latest form: Super Saiyan 3 transformation. As Goku manages to overpower Buu when they start their fight, Majin Buu still treats the battle as playing, healing every wound Goku gives him. Goku and Buu both manage to land decent attacks on each other, as Buu uses attacks he has learned from other Z Fighters, including Vegeta. Buu even learns the Kamehameha technique after watching Goku use it only once. As Buu and Goku continue their enormous struggle, Goku fires an attack towards Buu, but Buu manages to deflect it back to the nearby city, completely destroying it. Throughout the fight, whenever Goku manages to get the upper hand on Buu, either by throwing him into the city or evading one of his attacks, Babidi gives Buu a harsh scolding, calling him insulting names. Buu eventually orders Babidi to be quiet, and Goku realizes that despite obeying Babidi's orders, Buu completely hates his master. Goku halts their fight after Trunks successfully finds the Dragon Radar. When Buu asks Goku to fight again, Goku informs Buu that in two days there will be another strong fighter to face Buu and give him a challenge. Majin Buu remembers this throughout his transformations and awaits this fight. Before he leaves, Goku tells Majin Buu to stop taking orders from Babidi, considering their enormous difference in strength and power.

Right after Goku leaves, Babidi insults Buu for not finishing him off, calling him names, which pushes Buu over the edge. Majin Buu turns on Babidi, strangling him to ensure he can't say the incantation for the Sealing Spell, before murdering him by decapitating him with a punch. After this, he cheers in joy and dances to celebrate his freedom. Not knowing what to do now that Babidi is dead, Buu proceeds to continue his murderous rampage, this time out of fun, where he destroys city after city. During his rampage, Buu meets a girl he is interested in, but after she is unwilling to accept him, he turns her into candy and eats her. Later, Buu meets a blind boy named Tommy. Upset that Tommy does not run away scared, Buu heals the boy. However, the boy still treats Buu with kindness. In return, Buu brings a carton of milk (in fact, an old man he turned into a carton of milk) for Tommy.

A day later, he is challenged by Gotenks and quickly defeats him. He then builds a house made out of humans and animals he turned into clay, where he meets Mr. Satan who attempts numerous times to kill Buu through poison, explosives and even physical assault, all of which fail so miserably that Buu does not even realize that they are assassination attempts. Mr. Satan eventually gives up and begins performing maid services for Buu such as cooking for him and giving him baths. During this time, Gotenks returns as a Super Saiyan to challenge Buu to a rematch, however, the arrogant fusion wasted too much time prior to his arrival, and quickly defuses into Goten and Trunks, who hastily retreat.

While he is living with Mr. Satan, Buu finds a hurt dog by the side of the road and brings it to Mr. Satan, perplexed at why it was not running away from him. Mr. Satan tells him that the dog is hurt, so in response, Buu heals him with his magic. The dog, who he names Bee, becomes the first creature to show affection to Buu and the first creature Buu shows genuine love for, such as licking him. This causes Mr. Satan to stop trying to kill Buu and instead try to find out why he murders people. Buu tells him that he just does it because Bibidi and Babidi told him to destroy. Mr. Satan tells him that killing people is actually wrong, which surprisingly shocks Buu, who then promises never to do any harm again.

After taming Buu, it seemed that the world is saved by Mr. Satan. All is well until the two gunmen Van Zant and Smitty arrive with the goal of taking on Buu and shoot Bee as he is playing with Buu. This causes Buu to become more enraged than he has ever been, but this anger is quelled by Mr. Satan's disposing of the two gunmen and taking Bee back to Buu to be healed. The situation seems fixed as Buu rebuilds his house in the shape of Bee and Mr. Satan resumes his maid tasks. Buu now seems fully changed, playing with Bee and even asking Mr. Satan to sit and eat with him. Mr. Satan even destroys the fake pictures of Buu defeated that he had taken. This lasts until the gunman who shot Bee returns and shoots Mr. Satan in the chest. Buu is able to heal him but the pain of losing his best friend is so great that he struggles to control his anger. Buu weakly tells him to run far away with the puppy, or they'll die. Mr. Satan doesn't understand, and Buu yells at him to hurry. Mr. Satan runs off with the Bee, as an angry Buu releases steam that forms into a giant cloud overhead. Finally, Buu loses control of his anger, and splits into Good Buu and Evil Buu.

Dragon Ball Heroes[]

Supreme Kai of Time Saga[]

In the anime, Innocent Buu confronts Vegeta and is empowered by Demigra.[8]

In the manga, an iteration of Innocent Buu is released from the Scrolls of Eternity by Dark King Demigra as part of the latter's "game". Initially manifesting as pink smoke, he quickly materializes in front of Vegeta and Turles on Planet Vegeta.[9]

Demon Invader Saga[]

Main article: Demon Invader Saga

In one particular Space-Time, Innocent Buu is absorbed by Majin Ozotto.[10]

Film Appearances[]

Broly[]

Main article: Dragon Ball Super: Broly

Innocent Buu makes a cameo appearance in a flashback, when Goku mentions to Broly how a lot has happened on Earth.

Other Dragon Ball stories[]

Dragon Ball SD[]

Innocent Buu appears in chapter 4 of Dragon Ball SD, where he eats Babidi and Dabura, and soon becomes Kid Buu after befriending Mr. Satan. A special what-if chapter of Dragon Ball SD depicts what may have happened if Majin Buu never met Mr. Satan and features several what-if absorptions based off if he had absorbed several of the Z Fighters.

Power[]

Manga and Anime

When Kid Buu absorbed the Grand Supreme Kai and became Innocent Buu, he became more controllable, less troublesome and also lowered his power due to gaining a heart.

When preparing to unseal Innocent Buu, Babidi states that Gohan's energy pushed the amount of energy needed to revive Buu up to half full, meaning Innocent Buu possesses at least twice as much energy as Super Saiyan 2 Gohan, which he states is in turn equivalent to hundreds of humans, or the combined power of base Goku, base Vegeta and base Gohan. According to Goku, Majin Buu possesses a unique ability to confuse others' perception of his power - in Goku's own words, "his ki is like a lie". This was proven when he powered up several times before reaching his maximum, and even then Goku wasn't sure if Buu was going all out, which made him momentarily doubt whether he could even defeat him. Another example was that when he was revived, he was considered weaker than a Super Saiyan 2 however this was quickly proven wrong after he blew steam and greatly increased his power.

Innocent Buu shows his power when he effortlessly defeats Dabura (who possessed power above Super Perfect Cell), Shin, Super Saiyan 2 Gohan, and Super Saiyan 2 Majin Vegeta. He is capable of holding his own against Super Saiyan 3 Goku, though Goku largely holds the upper hand in the fight, partly because of Buu holding back and playing. In addition, Innocent Buu seems to have the ability to effectively absorb damage. An example of this is during his battle against Super Saiyan 3 Goku, Piccolo states that the prolonged fight against Innocent Buu seems to increase the latter's strength to no end as Goku utilizes a series of physical attacks on him. Later on, Goku expresses confidence that he could have destroyed Innocent Buu if he had fought with everything he had.

In the Galactic Patrol Prisoner Saga, both Merus and the Grand Supreme Kai realize that while Innocent Buu possessed Grand Supreme Kai's godly power, the majority of it went to his evil side when he split.

Statements by guidebooks and authors

Due to having absorbed the Grand Supreme Kai, Innocent Buu is somewhat weaker than his previous incarnation.[11]

He possesses power on par with that of Super Saiyan 3 Goku.[12]

Abilities[]

Video Game Appearances[]

Dragon Ball Z: Super Butōden 3

Dragon Ball Z: Ultimate Battle 22

Dragon Ball Z: Shin Butōden

Dragon Ball Z: Hyper Dimension

Dragon Ball Z: The Legend

Dragon Ball Z: Legendary Super Warriors

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai 2

Dragon Ball Z: Taiketsu

Dragon Ball Z: Buu's Fury

Dragon Ball GT: Transformation

Dragon Ball Z: Supersonic Warriors

Dragon Ball Z: Supersonic Warriors 2

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai 3

Data Carddass Dragon Ball Z

Super Dragon Ball Z

Data Carddass Dragon Ball Z 2

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi 2

Dragon Ball Z: Budokai Tenkaichi 3

Battle Stadium D.O.N

Jump Ultimate Stars

Dragon Ball Z: Battle Taikan Kamehameha - Omee to Fusion

Dragon Ball Z: Scouter Battle Taikan Kamehameha - Ora to Omee to Scouter

Dragon Ball Z: Bakuretsu Impact

Dragon Ball Z: Shin Budokai - Another Road

Dragon Ball Z: W Bakuretsu Impact

Dragon Ball Z: Infinite World

Dragon Ball Z: Dragon Battlers

Dragon Ball: Raging Blast

Dragon Ball Z: Tenkaichi Tag Team

Dragon Ball: Raging Blast 2

Dragon Ball Heroes

Dragon Ball Kai: Ultimate Butōden

Dragon Ball Z: Ultimate Tenkaichi

Dragon Ball: Zenkai Battle

Dragon Ball Z For Kinect

Dragon Ball: Tap Battle

Dragon Ball Z: Battle of Z

Dragon Ball Xenoverse

Dragon Ball Discross

Dragon Ball Z: Extreme Butōden

Dragon Ball Z: Dokkan Battle

Dragon Ball Fusions

Dragon Ball Xenoverse 2

Dragon Ball FighterZ

Dragon Ball Legends

Super Dragon Ball Heroes: World Mission

Dragon Ball Z: Kakarot

Dragon Ball: The Breakers

Voice Actors[]

Japanese: Kōzō Shioya

English:

Ocean Group dubs: Scott McNeil

Funimation dub: Josh Martin

Blue Water dub: Corby Proctor

Spanish:

Latin American Spanish dub: Mario Sauret (DBZ, DBGT), Marcos Patiño (DBZ Kai, DBS)

Castilian Spanish dub: Daniel Palacios

Portuguese:

European Portuguese dub: António Semedo

Brazilian Portuguese dub: Wellington Lima

French dub: Patrick Borg

Italian dub: Riccardo Rovatti

Philippines dub: Jhun Villamac

Catalan dub: Jordi Vila, Francesc Belda (Battle of Gods, DBZ Kai)

Greek dub: Themis Psihogios (DBZ eps. 240-275, 283-286, 289), Yiannis Papaioannou (DBZ eps. 232-239, 277, 282, 287-288, 290-291), Panagiotis Tsitsas (DBGT), Pimis Petrou (DBS)

Hebrew dub: Dor Zweigenbaum

Hungarian dub: Csaba Csík (DBZ), István Fazekas (DBGT, DBS)

German dub: Uwe Büschken

Vietnamese dub: Trần Vũ

Albanian dub: Denard Xhillari

Battles[]

Dragon Ball Z

Innocent Buu vs. Dabura

Innocent Buu vs. Gohan (Super Saiyan 2)

Innocent Buu vs. Shin

Innocent Buu vs. Gohan (Super Saiyan 2)

Innocent Buu vs. Dabura

Innocent Buu vs. Vegeta (Super Saiyan 2/Majin Vegeta)

Innocent Buu vs. Trunks (Super Saiyan)

Innocent Buu vs. Vegeta (Super Saiyan 2/Majin Vegeta)

Innocent Buu vs. Police (anime only)

Innocent Buu vs. Goku (Super Saiyan 3)

Innocent Buu vs. Gotenks (unseen in manga, seen in anime)

Trivia[]

Buu's along with Bibidi and Babidi's manga names are most likely references to the magic words the fairy godmother uses in the 1950 film , " ." In Japanese, "Majin Buu" is roughly translated to "mean chief magical being."

The "wrapping goo" attack Majin Buu uses on Majin Vegeta (which Goten and Trunks later get him out of) is similar to the Merry-Go-Round Gum attack that Giran used against Goku at the 21st World Martial Arts Tournament in the original Dragon Ball.

During Majin Buu's first encounter with Goku, Goku tells him that he is a Saiyan. In the English Dub, Majin Buu tries to say "Saiyan", but it comes out as "Saiya-jin", a reference to the Japanese pronunciation for the Saiyan race.

Despite his immature nature, he seems to be able to have a normal memory since he did remember certain things such as Bibidi telling him to destroy planets even though this was millions of years ago, and remembering the promise Goku made him for giving him a good fight.

The fat Majin Buu seems to be the only character in Dragon Ball Z who was eaten by one of Buu's various forms and survived as if he was absorbed. In the manga, it was stated by Super Buu that out of all the people he ate, Majin Buu was the only one to receive special treatment, and be absorbed instead of killed.

In Budokai 2, Majin Buu says "Die you dummy!" just before he kills Babidi; this quote is not in the series. However, it may be a rewording of "Die, you fool!", which Majin Buu said in the Japanese version of the episode in question.

Majin Buu's character design is later reused as the main protagonist in Akira Toriyama's children's book called Toccio the Angel.

Majin Buu's vest and pants look similar to the Metamoran style of clothing.

In the Toonami: Night of New Years Eve-il, Majin Buu was elected the best villain of the year with a total 46,276 votes.

When Majin Buu is in his "Fat" form and stands atop Shin after supposedly defeating him, It is similar to later on when Mr. Satan (Hercule) did this to Majin Buu in order to take a picture, showing to everyone later that he had single handily defeated Majin Buu.

In the Mandarin and Funimation dub, both Super Buu and Kid Buu are voiced by two different people whereas in almost every other dub the voice actor remains the same.

According to Daizenshuu 1, Innocent Buu was inspired by Akira Toriyama's third editor, Fuyuto Takeda.

Buu bears several similarities to a genie. Buu is a magical being that is trapped inside an object, and then freed. Buu's general appearance bears some similarities to a genie. However, unlike a genie Buu does not grant wishes, and only goes back in his egg if he is trapped inside of it.

In the first trailer of Dragon Ball Super: Super Hero, Majin Buu is shown on screen and his name is written in English with the Japanese spelling "Boo". In the Japanese home release version, it was changed to the localized anime English spelling "Buu".

Gallery[]

References[]

Site Navigation[]

v · MajinBuu's Majin subspeciesOther Majin race membersHybrid MajinMajin FusionsMajin TransformationsOther TransformationsOrganization of BabidiRelated articles