Toyo: Ever since the movie was announced, my head has been bursting with these incredible fantasies. But it betrayed all of them, in a good way! That’s how it feels. While building on the parts that are, in a way, typical for Dragon Ball movies — for instance, “a powerful foe appears, and they combine their strength to defeat him!” — it creates something different from there, I guess you could say… I was quite surprised.

Ooishi: In Dragon Ball, the ten years between the “Majin Boo arc” and the final chapter just go by, don’t they. During that time, there must have been a variety of things that went on with Goku & co.… I had figured as much, but just the fact that it’s showing us a piece of that, you could say it’s overwhelming!

Ooishi: Yes. In this movie, I feel like there’s a large amount of “affection” depicted, which is rare for Toriyama-sensei. Like, “so there’s that kind of setting, too!” Vegeta is especially irresistible. There’s a not-so-cool part shown as well, but he really is cool!

Toyo: And the Pilaf gang, which will bring back memories for the fans, appears too. Especially, to think Mai would have that happen…! (laughs)

Ooishi: I suppose it might be her “first love”…? This is also one of those rare instances of “affection”.

Toyo: The parts that touch on the finer aspects of Dragon Ball’s history are wonderful, too! For me in particular, I was moved at how they hadn’t forgotten about Vegeta’s younger brother “Tarble”. The feeling of, “That means it’s after that episode,” [i.e., the 2008 Jump Super Anime Tour special] it just gave me goosebumps. (laughs)

Ooishi: And to think “that” person would be the key. “Affection” is depicted here, too.

Toyo: It’s definitely a major point to watch out for.

DRAGON BALL HEROES: VICTORY MISSION in “BATTLE OF GODS”

Panel 1

BEAT: What? This isn’t the battlefield… Where are we?

NOTE: Heh heh heh… we’re inside the movie Battle of Gods! It’s the first movie in 17 years… so we’re going to appear too!

Panel 2

BEAT: WHAA?! You can’t do that, Note!! We’re not supposed to be in this Age!

NOTE: Don’t say such uptight things! Look, the battle’s started!

Panel 3

BEERUS: Before creation, there is destruction!

Panel 4

NOTE: Now’s our chance! We’ll participate in the battle and appear in the movie, Beat-kun!

SFX: *rustle*

Panel 5

SFX: *sneak*

Panel 6

BEAT: Go- Goku-san?!

Panel 7

GOKU: Shhh! This is just getting good!

Panel 8

VEGETA: HOW DARE YOU STRIKE MY WIFE…!!!

GOKU: Oho! Looking good, Vegeta!

BEAT & NOTE: …

Panel 9

GOKU: Go, Vegeta!

NOTE: Um… shouldn’t you go help him?

Panel 10

GOKU: Hm? Ah… But it’ll be more dramatic if I wait until it gets a little more dire, won’t it?

Panel 11

NOTE: *exasperated sigh*

BEAT: Dramatic?

GOKU: Aw… so close!

NARRATION: Thus Beat & co. missed their chance to appear in the movie…

The END

I want to rewatch the climactic battle right now, again and again…!! — by Toyotarō