Sreelekha Mitra Biography and Career

Actress Sreelekha Mitra is well-known mostly for her work in Bengali Cinema. The most recent films in which Sreelekha Mitra has appeared are Sweater, Bhalo Meye Kharap Meye, Nirbhaya, and Tritiyo Purush. In this article we are going to talk about the biography, career, notable works, films and family of Actress Sreelekha Mitra so read the article till the end.

Career

Sreelekha Mitra is a famous television and film celebrity and she worked in so many movies, this biography article is incomplete without talking about her films and shows. So here you will gain info about her films and projects.

Dulal Lahiri’s Bengali TV series Balikar Prem served as her debut acting role. She became well-known for playing Nabanita in the Anindya Sarkar-directed 1996 Bengali television series Trishna. Her breakout part came with Basu Chatterjee’s Hothat Brishti (1998), which was a significant box office hit after she made appearances in a number of movies.

Despite the film’s success, Mitra never experienced a meaningful professional advancement, which she blamed on the nepotism that pervades Bengali cinema.

Sreelekha Mitra received the BFJA Award and the Anandalok Award for her performance as Sudha, an illegal immigrant who switches from one man to another and from one faith to another in search of love, in Bappaditya Bandopadhyay’s Kantatar (2006).

She received the Big Bangla Movie Award in the category of Best Actress in a Supporting Role in 2011 from Suman Mukhopadhyay for her performance in Mahanagar@Kolkata (2010). She won the Zee Bangla Gourav Samman for Best Supporting Actress in 2012 for her work in Uro Chithi (2011).

She received nominations for the Zee Bangla Gourav Samman and the Filmfare Award for her performance in Ashchorjyo Prodeep (2013). She received more praise for her performance in Raja Dasgupta’s Bengali movie Choukaath (2016).

Sreelekha Mitra debuted in Bollywood with Reema Mukherjee’s first film as a filmmaker, Ardhangini Ek Ardhsatya (2016). Mitra has had a long career in television as well. Dwicharini, Raja Opera, Teen Satyi, Dui Purush, Teen Purush, and Ami Shey O Anu are just a few of her well-known telefilms.

Her well-known television programs include Bandhan, Trishna, Probahini Ei Samay, Bhanga Gorar Khela, Ei To Jiban, Pratibimba, and Bhanga Gorar Khela, to name a few. She also serves as a judge on the Mirakkel Bengali stand-up comedy program.

Short biography of Sreelekha Mitra

Originally from Kolkata, Mitra. Actor Santosh Mitra, her father, was a thespian. She graduated from Auxilium Convent School with ICSE honors. With English literature as the subject of her honors, she completed her undergraduate degree at Jaypuriya College.

She enrolled in Calcutta University’s master’s program in English literature but left when she was offered a position at the Taj Hotel in Kolkata.

She met Siladitya Sanyal, the telefilm’s assistant director while working on the Bengali telefilm Teen Satyi for ETV Bangla. Sanyal is employed with SRFTI as a lecturer. They got hitched on November 20, 2003. In 2013, they parted ways. On December 7, 2005, their daughter Oishi Sanyal was born.

The world is aware of actress Sreelekha Mitra’s love for animals. She has taken in a number of stray animals and cherishes them dearly. She does her share to safeguard them, give them some respite, and encourage others to show a little more consideration for them.

Also Read: Actress Supriya Karnik Biography and Career

Random biography facts about Sreelekha Mitra

She is an avid animal lover.

She shares her workout activities on Instagram.

She was previously in a relationship with a Bengali director.

She is quite popular on Instagram and has over 3 lakh followers on her official handle.

She shares her personal and professional life through images and videos.

She recently shared her workout photos. To reach her account one can go to sreelekhamitraofficial on Instagram.

We hope this biography article of Actress Sreelekha Mitra will be helpful for you to understand her journey and works.