Massachusetts, June 5, 2023: Quantela, an urban infrastructure and data analytics provider, announces the appointment of Bob McMullan as the company's new Chief Financial Officer (CFO). Bob brings a wealth of experience and a proven track record of success in strategic financial leadership. With a strong background in scaling businesses experiencing hyper-organic growth and integrating strategic acquisitions, Bob is well-equipped to guide Quantela through its next phase of expansion.

Throughout his career, he has successfully led companies through the IPO process, from preparation and banker due diligence to compelling investor presentations. Notably, Bob has partnered with management teams to create substantial shareholder value, exceeding billions for private equity firms such as TPG, WCAS, ABS Capital, JMI Equity, GAAS Labs, and Summit Partners, as well as public institutional investors.

Bob has extensive M&A, capital markets, and investor relations experience in addition to leading finance organizations. Bob's previous leadership positions as CFO include Silvaco Group, Inc, PharmScript LLC, MACOM Technology Solutions, and GlobeSpan.

“As the new CFO at Quantela, Bob will be leading the company’s global finance and operations. His exceptional leadership and wealth of experience will undoubtedly contribute to our continued success. We look forward to working closely with him as we drive our company forward.” Said Amr Salem, Quantela’s CEO

“Quantela has a unique industry-leading business model centered around delivering positive outcomes to the world, which truly sets it apart in the industry. I am thrilled to join Quantela, as this forward-thinking and future-oriented approach aligns perfectly with my own professional aspirations.” Said Bob McMullan, newly appointed CFO of Quantela.

About Quantela:

Quantela Inc., founded in 2015, is a technology company that offers end-to-end infrastructure digitization solutions leveraging our proprietary Data Platform. Quantela offers solutions for Smart Cities, Utilities, and large Public Venues, with an innovative outcomes-based business model reducing the risk for our customers. Our team of 300+ experts offers a vast array of solutions like smart lighting, smart traffic, location insights, digitized land records management, and digitized citizen services. We are supported by our key investors, Digital Alpha, a leading alternative asset manager focused on digital infrastructure; and Energy Impact Partners, a global investment platform leading the transition to a sustainable energy future. The Company is headquartered in Massachusetts with offices across Europe, the Middle East, and Asia.

Media Contact:

Quantela

Eman Mousa, Global Marketing Manager

Email: eman.mousa@quantela.com

Phone: +971 50 123 1782 (based in Abu Dhabi, UAE)