NEW YORK, June 23 /PRNewswire/ -- Partsearch Technologies, the leading platform for parts and accessories management solutions with a catalog of more than 11 million replacement parts for 1000 brands, announced the appointment of Bob McMullan as its chief financial officer.

McMullan brings more than 20 years of experience in executive leadership, operational and financial management as well as mergers and acquisitions to his new role as CFO of Partsearch Technologies. As a key leader of senior executive management teams, McMullan has delivered billion dollar returns for private equity investors and billions more for public investors and has exceeded virtually all operating performance, capital raising and growth objectives. In addition, he has helped transform small private equity owned companies into global businesses significantly enhancing shareholder value.

McMullan stated, "I am excited to join the Partsearch Technologies team as it continues to grow and expand its business. I look forward to helping the company achieve its operational goals as well as working toward maximizing financial performance and shareholder value."

Prior to Partsearch Technologies, McMullan was the Chief Executive Officer of Control Point Solutions. He led the sale of Control Point Solutions to HCL Technologies, Ltd. of Noida, India and transitioned the business into the $5 billion global IT company.

Earlier in his career, McMullan served as the Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer at Conexant Systems, CFO at GlobespanVirata and CFO of Globespan, Inc., where he led its initial public offering. Bob also served as the Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer at The BISYS Group where he was responsible for the execution of BISYS' initial public offering and its acquisition strategy.

"We welcome Bob to the Partsearch Technologies team. Bob brings significant financial management experiences to Partsearch and a strong track record of growing and scaling companies to the next level. He has the ideal background to help lead Partsearch Technologies through our next evolution of growth and Bob will be instrumental in executing our long-term strategic plan as we expand our services and solutions to our customers," says Ron Totaro, Chief Executive Officer, Partsearch Technologies.

About Partsearch Technologies

Partsearch Technologies is the leading replacement parts platform for consumer electronics and home appliances. Since 2001 Partsearch has been providing parts procurement services to major retail partners, warranty administrators and their customers. Partsearch also operates its own online store at www.partstore.com and offers web based solutions for independent contractors and small business at PartstorePro.com. Partsearch has created the only industry standard Master Parts Catalog with more than 11 million unique parts, and a parts-specific virtual supply chain across over 1000 major brands and multiple product categories. For more information visit Partsearch Technologies at http://www.partsearch.com.

.

SOURCE Partsearch Technologies