One of the safest Labor seats in the country is up for grabs after veteran MP Bob McMullan announced he won't be contesting the next federal election.

After more than 20 years in federal parliament, the member for the ACT electorate of Fraser says he wants a career change to help in the fight against global poverty.

Mr McMullan said the decision wasn't easy, but he denied being "tapped on the shoulder", despite recently declaring his intention to stick around for another term.

"I am absolutely confident that I have 100 per cent support to continue if I chose," he told reporters from his Canberra electorate office.

Prime Minister Kevin Rudd praised Mr McMullan, who is the parliamentary secretary for International Development Assistance, for his work ensuring aid funding went to people who needed it.

The veteran MP had pushed successfully for the ACT to govern itself back in 1988, and had served as a minister for arts and later for trade, Mr Rudd said.

"I wish Mr McMullan and his wife Robin all the very best in his future career, confident that his contribution to the nation will not end with his political resignation," he said in a statement.

"He leaves big shoes to fill in the electorate of Fraser."

Mr McMullan said he hope his announcement would give the party ample time to hold a rank-and-file preselection for a seat Labor holds with a 30 per cent margin.

Mr McMullan, a former national secretary of the Australian Labor Party, led three successful federal election campaigns before being elected to the upper house as one of the ACT's two senators in 1988.

He moved to the lower house at the 1996 election, when Labor lost power to the coalition.

Mr McMullan held ministerial responsibilities in the Keating government for the arts and administrative services, and trade.

But his current role, as parliamentary secretary for international development assistance, has been the most satisfying.

"(And now) my enthusiasm is moving more towards the issues of international development and global poverty," he said, adding that he won't look for a job until after the next election.

Reflecting on his career, Mr McMullan said he was lucky to be able to bow out of politics at a time of his own choosing.

"When I was originally approached to work for the Labor Party ... in 1973 I never really thought that I would finish here in 2010."

Mr McMullan also had some advice for Prime Minister Kevin Rudd about the upcoming federal election.

"I think winning it is a good idea," he said, adding that he didn't believe there would be an early poll.

Transport Minister Anthony Albanese, who counts Mr McMullan as a mentor, said he had made a great contribution to public debate over his time in politics.

"Bob has made a significant contribution to the government's efforts to reduce poverty within our region," Mr Albanese said.