Founded in 1960, Berkeley Preparatory School is a Pre-K - Grade 12 co-educational independent, Episcopal day school located in Tampa, Florida. Berkeley educates the whole child by nurturing students’ intellectual, emotional, spiritual and physical development so they may attain their highest potential. Our philosophy encompasses a balanced curriculum of academics and arts, clubs and activities, competitive sports and community service. An emphasis on academic excellence combined with a spirit of social responsibility engenders in students a newfound confidence and shared sense of purpose. Students exchange ideas, study virtues and explore ethics as they define their attitudes and values.

A diverse student population brings many cultures together, fostering the sharing of traditions in a safe forum. Through formal study of world religions, daily convocations and the rich and open discussion among peers, students learn to respect their heritage along with the customs of their neighbors. Students are better prepared to embrace this diversity in our global world.

To establish and maintain a coeducational school dedicated to providing the best possible environment within which to nurture the intellectual, emotional, spiritual and physical development of each student; to aid students attending the school to achieve academic excellence in preparation for higher education, and to instill in them a strong sense of morality, ethics and social responsibility so that they may eventually attain their highest potential as human beings; to offer a challenging and demanding curriculum which will stress the importance of religious values and will provide comprehensive programs in the sciences, fine arts and athletics; and to promote the moral and spiritual values of the Christian tradition as professed by the doctrines of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America.

Berkeley Preparatory School is committed to being an inclusive and diverse learning environment that encourages values that recognize we are all unique individuals who make positive contributions to the world. Guided by our identity as an independent Episcopal school and our core cultural norms where kindness and respect are placed in the highest regard, Berkeley represents a welcoming environment where people from all backgrounds will not only fit in but thrive. Our commitment to diversity is what makes us a top Tampa private school!

Berkeley is committed to attracting and retaining a culturally diverse faculty of demonstrated professional excellence with an unwavering commitment to delivering an education of unsurpassed quality and breadth. In fact, 25 percent of the Berkeley faculty identify as people of color, including faculty who hail from more than 10 countries. Our Tampa private school is committed to supporting a culturally diverse faculty and student body in an inclusive community.

We are delighted that you are considering Berkeley for your child’s education. We understand the importance of finding a school that is the right match for your child and your family. As educators, we want to ensure that your child will grow and thrive in our program. We encourage you to contact the Admissions Office to schedule a tour of our campus and look forward to learning more about you and your family.

A Berkeley education is about uncovering potential, kindling passion, creating opportunity and nurturing in children a love of learning. It’s about building intellect and character. With a dedication to academics, the arts, athletics, and service to others, our exceptional faculty strives to help young people learn about themselves and what they have to contribute to our world.

Common ground for the wide variety of activities that make up the rich and engaging curriculum at Berkeley is an uncompromising commitment across all grades to the highest standards of educational excellence. The cornerstones of a Berkeley education are the core college-preparatory subjects of language and literature, mathematics, science, social studies and history, world languages, and the arts. International themes are common, broadening students’ global awareness. As individual interests emerge, we add more choice to the structure.

Berkeley offers a vigorous, well-balanced course load at every grade level. Each division's curriculum is focused on educating our young people in a manner consistent with our mission: To nurture students' intellectual, emotional, spiritual, and physical development so that they may attain their highest potential.