Berkeley Preparatory School is more than an exceptional place to learn—it’s a community where students and families alike can grow, thrive, and excel. We depend on parents to help enrich our students’ experience at Berkeley, and that’s where theParents’ Association plays a crucial role.

TheParents’ Association enhances our sense of unity and community at Berkeley by offering a range of ways for families to get involved, both on and off campus. Our parents organize events, support the Berkeley Food Pantry, volunteer for classroom events and at the Treasure Cove Spirit Shop, and so much more—as you can see, there are endless opportunities to engage with our school in a way that is meaningful to you and that fits your schedule. No matter how you want to get involved, theParents’ Association is here to support your vision and make it easy to stay engaged. For a complete list of all volunteer opportunities, please scroll down to the list below. Current parents who are interested in getting involved can use SignUpGenius to volunteer for events (and will receive an email with the SignUpGenius link).

Every parent and guardian of a Berkeley student is automatically a member of the Parents’ Association. We feel that by working together, we can strengthen our bonds to one another and to the greater Berkeley community, thus elevating the Berkeley experience for everyone.

Current parents who are interested in learning more can go to the Berkeley Parents’ Association tile in myBerkeley.

Making an Impact

The impact of the Parents’ Association can be seen throughout our Berkeley community, and one of our proudest accomplishments is The Joseph A. Merluzzi Endowed Scholarship. The endowment provides one full scholarship and one partial scholarship to students with demonstrated financial need who have the potential for outstanding academic achievement and leadership. The endowment was initially established in 1997 and renamed in 2011 in honor of retiring Headmaster Joseph A. Merluzzi.

Buccaneer Ridge, Berkeley’s rock-climbing wall, is another example of how the Parents’ Association has enriched the student experience on campus. Money raised at BUC BASH 2022 fully funded renovations to the wall the following year. The improved rock-climbing wall promotes the physical development of Berkeley students by providing a fun and sustainable means of building strength and endurance.

Furthermore, BUC BASH 2024 funded a variety of projects across campus. These include updated sound equipment for All-School Convocations; new patio chairs and audio-visual equipment for the Berkeley Café; and new turf for the Seivold Center for Early Childhood Education’s Pirate Ship Playground (part of the Sneha and Vik Patel Playground Complex).