Final 1 In Stock - Buy it Now

$21.99

| /

✅ RareVinyl.com's 100% Guarantee

We guarantee you'll be delighted with your purchase, and its condition. If not, we'll quickly resolve the issue or refund your payment.

Be the first to know if it's back in stock

Checkmark icon Thank you. Your email has been registered.

A valid email address is required.

By entering your Email Address you agree to receive marketing emails from us.

CLIMIE FISHER Rise To The Occasion (1987 UK 4-track CD single by the British 80's pop duo featuring ex-Naked Eyes keyboard player Rob Fisher. Also includes Love Changes Everything, This Is Me & Never Let A Chance Go By, flipback card wallet picture sleeve CDEM33)

TRACKLISTING AND EXTRA INFORMATION

1. Rise To The Occasion mixed By Phil Harding of PWL

2. Love Changes Everything

3. This Is Me

4. Never Let The Chance Go By

Artist - Climie Fisher (click link for complete listing)

Title - Rise To The Occasion (click link for more of the same title)

Year of Release - 1987

Format - CD single (CD5 / 5")

Record Label - Emi

Catalogue No - CDEM33 (click link for more)

Country of Origin - United Kingdom (UK)

Language - Regardless of country of origin all tracks are sung in English, unless otherwise stated in our description.

Additional info - Wallet Sleeve, Deleted, Picture Sleeve

Barcode - 5099920218324

Condition - This item is in Excellent condition or better (unless it says otherwise in the above description). We buy items as close to Mint condition as possible and many will be unplayed and as close to new as you could hope to find. Irrespective of the source, all of our collectables meet our strict grading and are 100% guaranteed. Click here for more info.

RareVinyl.com Ref No - CLIC5RI35697

Related Artists - Simon Climie.

GENRES

80's Pop, POP.

ORDERING

Availability - In Stock - Buy Now for shipping today

Postage/Shipping Cost - Add item to your basket for a postage/shipping quote. For further delivery info click here

Email - sales@rarevinyl.com to contact our sales team.

To order by phone - Call (+44) 0147485010

RareVinyl.com Reference Number - CLIC5RI35697

SELL TO US

Got vinyl records, CDs or music memorabilia to sell? – Sell to us at our buying site https://vinyl-wanted.com