Princess María de las Mercedes of Orléans (June 24, 1860 – June 26, 1878) was Queen of Spain as the first wife of King Alfonso XII of Spain. She was born in Madrid, the daughter of Prince Antoine of Orléans, Duke of Montpensier, and Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain.

Her father, Prince Antoine of Orléans, Duke of Montpensier, was her first cousin once removed, and the youngest son of King Louis-Philippe of France and his wife Maria Amelia Teresa of the Two Sicilies, the tenth of eighteen children of King Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies and Archduchess Maria Carolina of Austria.

Her mother, Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain, was the younger daughter of King Fernando VII of Spain and his fourth wife and niece, Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies, the daughter of King Francis I of the Two Sicilies by his second wife, Infanta Maria Isabella of Spain, the youngest daughter of King Carlos IV of Spain and his wife Maria Luisa of Parma. Infanta Maria Isabella of Spain was the sister King Fernando VII of Spain, the father of Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain.

Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain elder sister was Queen Isabella II of Spain.

Born at the Palacio Real in Madrid on June 24, 1860, Mercedes was the sixth of her parents’ nine children. Her mother’s elder sister, Queen Isabella II, and brother-in-law, King Francisco, served as Mercedes’ godparents at her christening, when she was given the names: María de las Mercedes Isabel Francisca de Asís Antonia Luisa Fernanda Felipa Amalia Cristina Francisca de Paula Ramona Rita Cayetana Manuela Juana Josefa Joaquina Ana Rafaela Filomena Teresa Santísima Trinidad Gaspara Melchora Baltasara et omni sancti.

Although Mercedes was patrilineally a French Princess, she was also a Spanish infanta and spent the first eight years of her life in Spain. Her childhood was spent at the Palace of San Telmo in Andalusia, her father’s rumoured aspirations to obtain his sister-in-law’s crown periodically rendering him unwelcome at the royal court in Madrid.

Marriage and reign

When Queen Isabella II was deposed in 1868, Mercedes’ family left Spain for exile. It was reportedly during that banishment in 1872 that she met her first cousin Infante Alfonso, Prince of Asturias, also living in exile. Queen Isabella II opposed a marriage between the two due to the hostilities between Mercedes’ father and the former Queen.

Upon restoration, King Alfonso XII of Spain married María de las Mercedes at the church of Atocha in Madrid on January 23, 1878, following a huge ball in December 1877. Allegedly, the King’s choice dashed the hopes of his still-exiled mother Queen Isabella for Alfonso’s marriage to Infanta Blanca de Bourbon, daughter of his Carlist rival Infante Carlos, Duke of Madrid.

Infanta Blanca of Spain (1868 – 1949) was the eldest child of Infante Carlos, Duke of Madrid, Carlist claimant to the throne of Spain and his wife Princess Margherita of Bourbon-Parma. Blanca was a member of the House of Bourbon and – according to the Carlists – an Infanta of Spain by birth.

In 1889 she married Archduke Leopold Salvator of Austria. The couple had ten children. The family left Austria after the end of the Monarchy and finally settled in Barcelona. When the male line of Blanca’s family died out at the death of her uncle, Alfonso Carlos, Duke of San Jaime, some of the Carlists recognized her as the legitimate heiress to the Spanish throne.

Queen Mercedes helped build a new temple after the Church of Santa María de la Almudena was demolished in 1868.

Death

Shortly after their honeymoon, it became evident that Queen Mercedes suffered from typhoid fever. The marriage would last only six months, during which she reportedly had a miscarriage. She died due to the fever on June 26, 1878, just two days after her 18th birthday.

When the King’s minister Cánovas del Castillo suggested that he take a new wife, King Alfonso XII acquiesced, choosing Mercedes’ sister Infanta María Cristina. For a few months he courted Infanta María Cristina, who was willing to replace her late sister, but it soon became clear that she was suffering from tuberculosis. Maria Cristina died at the age of 26 on April 28, 1879 in her native Seville

In late 1879, the King married Archduchess Maria Christina of Austria-Teschen; a daughter of Archduke Charles Ferdinand of Austria (grandson of Emperor Leopold II) and his wife, Archduchess Elisabeth Franziska of Austria, the daughter of Palatine Joseph of Hungary, Archduke of Austria (1776–1847) and his third wife Maria Dorothea of Württemberg (1797–1855).

Palatine Joseph of Hungary, Archduke of Austria, was the ninth child and seventh son of Holy Roman Emperor Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany and Infanta Maria Luisa of Spain, daughter of parents, King Carlos III of Spain, King of Naples and Sicily, and Maria Amalia of Saxony.

The eldest child, of King Alfonso XII and Archduchess Maria Christina of Austria-Teschen was Infanta María de las Mercedes (1880 – 1904) was named in honour of Queen Mercedes. She was Princess of Asturias, the heir presumptive to the Crown of Spain, for all 24 years of her life.

Had her younger sibling, unborn at the death of King Alfonso XII, been a daughter, Mercedes would have been Queen of Spain. The sibling proved to be a boy, King Alfonso XIII, a King upon his birth in 1886, and Mercedes turned out not to be queen.

She resumed the position of heir presumptive, which she held until her own death, and was succeeded in it by her own infant son Prince Alfonso of the Two Sicilies, King Alfonso XIII having not yet married and fathered a legitimate child.

Mercedes married in Madrid on February 14, 1901, to her second cousin, Prince Carlo of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, a nephew of the King of the then-defunct Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, who was elevated to the rank of Infante of Spain. The marriage was highly controversial due to her father-in-law’s ties with the Carlists. She died three years later from complication while giving birth to her third child.

Prince Antoine of Orléans, Duke of Montpensier (July 31, 1824 – February 4, 1890), was a member of the French royal family from the House of Orléans.

HRH Prince Antoine Marie Philippe Louis d’Orléans was the youngest son of King Louis Philippe of France and his wife Maria Amelia Teresa of the Two Sicilies, the tenth of eighteen children of King Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies and Archduchess Maria Carolina of Austria.

Prince Antoine’s grandmother, Archduchess Maria Carolina of Austria, the thirteenth child of Holy Roman Emperor Franz I, former Duke of Lorraine and his wife Archduchess Maria Theresa of Austria, Queen of Bohemia, Hungary and Croatia in her own right.

Prince Antoine was styled as HRH The Duke of Montpensier. He was born on July 31, 1824 at the château de Neuilly and died February 4, 1890 at Sanlúcar de Barrameda, Spain.

On October 10, 1846 at Madrid, Spain, he married Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain, the daughter of King Fernando VII of Spain and his wife Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies, the daughter of King Francis I of the Two Sicilies by his second wife, Infanta Maria Isabella of Spain, the youngest daughter of King Carlos IV of Spain and his wife Maria Luisa of Bourbon-Parma.

Prince Antoine, Duke of Montpensier and Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain had ten children (one stillborn in 1857):

1. Maria Isabel (1848–1919), who married her first cousin Philippe, comte de Paris (1838–94), the French claimant, and became known as Marie Isabelle, comtesse de Paris. She had several children.

2. Maria Amelia (1851–1870)

3. Maria Cristina (1852–1879)

4. Maria de la Regla (1856–1861)

5. Fernando (1859–1873)

6. Mercedes (1860–1878), otherwise Princess Marie des Graces d’Orleans-Montpensier, who married her first cousin Alfonso XII and is historically known as Mercedes of Orleans, Queen of Spain. No children.

7. Felipe Raimundo Maria (1862–1864)

8. Antonio (1866–1930), became Duke of Galliera in Italy. He married his first cousin Infanta Eulalia of Spain (1864–1958), daughter of Queen Isabella II, and had two sons.

9. Luis Maria Felipe Antonio (1867–1874)

Candidate for the Spanish throne

Prince Antoine de Montpensier lived in Spain from 1848 when he and his family had to leave France after the Revolution of 1848. During the Spanish revolution of 1868, he supported the insurgents under Juan Prim against Queen Isabel II, his own sister-in-law.

In 1870 he fought a duel against Infante Enrique, Duke of Seville, the brother of King Francisco of Spain, and killed him.

Infante Enrique, Duke of Seville was the grandson of King Carlos IV of Spain and his wife, Princess Luisa Carlotta of the Two Sicilies (1804–1844), who was the daughter of Francis I of the Two Sicilies and Infanta Maria Isabella of Spain.

Infante Enrique of Spain became the first Duke of Seville in 1823. He was known for his progressive, even revolutionary, ideas during the reign of his double first cousin and sister-in-law, Queen Isabella II of Spain.

Between 1869 and 1870, Enrique published several pamphlets and articles hostile to his cousin, Antoine, Duke of Montpensier for the duke’s alleged aspirations on the Spanish throne. Enrique challenged Montpensier to a duel, which took place near La Fortuna in Leganés, Madrid, on March 12, 1870. Enrique was shot and killed, removing him as a public critic of the Duke of Montpensier.

Prince Antoine, Duke of Montpensier was convicted and sentenced to one month in prison.

Enrique’s eldest son, Enrique de Borbón y Castellví, 2nd Duke of Seville, refused to accept the 30,000 pesetas that the Duke of Montpensier offered as compensation.

Enrique, who was no longer an Infante of Spain, could not be buried in El Escorial, but was buried in the Saint Isidore Cemetery, in Madrid.

After the marriage of Queen Isabella II of Spain and his brother, Infante Francisco de Asís, Infante Enrique went into a self imposed exile into Belgium. While in France, Infante Enrique several times proclaimed himself a revolutionary, and was asked to join the International Workingmen’s Association.

On May 13, 1848 he was stripped of his Royal Rank and titles (his children, being born of a morganatic marriage to, Elena María de Castellví y Shelly, were untitled). In 1849 he asked the Queen’s forgiveness in order to return from exile. Enrique’s ducal title was restored, but not the title and style of HRH Infante of Spain.

On November 16, 1870 the Cortes voted for the next king and chose Prince Amadeo of Savoy, Duke of Aosta, with 191 votes.

Prince Amadeo of Savoy, Duke of Aosta was the third child and second son of King Victor Emmanuel II of Sardinia, who would later become the first King of a unified Italy, and of Archduchess Adelaide of Austria, daughter of Archduke Rainer of Austria and his wife Princess Elisabeth of Savoy. Prince Amadeo was granted the hereditary title of Duke of Aosta from birth.

Prince Antoine only received 27 votes, and left Spain, only to return in 1874. His ambitions were fulfilled by his daughter Princess Mercedes of Orléans, who became Queen of Spain after her marriage to King Alfonso XII, son of Queen Isabella II. However, she died at the age of 18 without issue.

Despite never reaching the throne, however, through cognates, he is an ancestor of all Spanish monarchs since Juan Carlos I. His great granddaughter Mercedes, Countess of Barcelona, was the mother of King Juan Carlos of Spain who assumed the throne in 1975 and later abdicated in favor of his son, King Felipe VI of Spain in 2014.

Early collector of photography

The Duke of Montpensier was an early collector of photography. His collection consisted of dozens of albums and hundreds of early photographs, mainly of Spanish, French and British photographers. The collection was dispersed after his death.

Maria Isabella of Spain (July 6, 1789 – September 13, 1848) was an infanta of Spain and queen consort of the Two Sicilies by marriage to King Francesco I of the Two Sicilies.

Infanta of Spain

She was the youngest daughter of King Carlos IV of Spain and his wife Maria Luisa of Parma, the youngest daughter of Philip, Duke of Parma, the fourth son of King Felipe V of Spain, and Louise Élisabeth of France, the eldest daughter of King Louis XV of France and his polish born wife, the popular Queen Marie Leczinska.

María Isabel’s birth coincided with the rise to power in Spain of her mother’s favorite, Manuel Godoy. Court rumour attributed María Isabel’s paternity not to the king, but to the young Godoy, who became Spain’s prime minister in 1792.

The Infanta’s childhood coincided with the events of the French revolution and political turbulence in Spain. The youngest surviving daughter in a large family, María Isabel was spoilt by both of her parents and her education was rudimentary. She and her family members were painted by Francisco Goya in his 1800–1801 portrait Carlos IV of Spain and His Family.

In December 1800, Lucien Bonaparte arrived in Spain as the new French ambassador. Through him, Queen Maria Luisa offered María Isabel in marriage to Napoleon Bonaparte in April 1801.

Then First Consul, Napoleon had been married to Joséphine de Beauharnais for two years, but it had been suggested that he should divorce her to marry a princess of royal blood. Napoleon had a low opinion of the House of Bourbon and commented privately, “If I would have to remarry, I wouldn’t look in a house in ruins for my descendants”

Marriage

Anxious to find a crown for Maria Isabel, in the spring 1801, her mother looked to marry her with her paternal first cousin the Duke of Calabria, Prince Francesco of Naples and Sicily, whose wife, Archduchess Maria Clementina of Austria, was then still alive, but died of consumption in November of that year.

The idea came from the French diplomat Alquier, who had been ambassador in Madrid and Naples. His plan was to bring the Kingdom of Naples, an ally of the United Kingdom and hostile to France, into the recently formed Spanish-French alliance, proposing a closer relationship between the two families through double marriages.

Infanta Maria Isabel and her eldest brother, Fernando, Prince of Asturias, would marry their first cousins: Maria Antonia of Naples and Francesco, Duke of Calabria. The Queen, Maria Carolina of Austria, who hated France and mistrusted Spain for its good will toward Napoleon, opposed the match. Infanta Maria Isabel was only twelve years old; even at a time when princesses married very young, her tender age was unusual for a bride.

But her early marriage was justified by the need to secure the hasty resumption of close relations between Spain and Naples at a particularly critical time for the European courts, struggling with the expansionist policy of Napoleon.

The contracts of the two marriages were signed in Aranjuez in April 1802. On July 6, 1802, her thirteenth birthday, María Isabel married in Madrid her 25-year-old cousin, Francesco by proxy, as his second wife. Her brother Fernando stood in the ceremony in place of the groom.

The Spanish royal family traveled to Barcelona on August 13. The two couples were married in person on October 4 at the arrival of Francesco and his sister. The festivities lasted until October 12 when María Isabel, in Italian Maria Isabella, left Barcelona towards Naples.

From the Emperor’s Desk: Due to technological difficulties I was unable to post this yesterday.

Carlos IV (November 11, 1748 – January 20, 1819) was King of Spain and the Spanish Empire from 14 December 14, 1788, until his abdication on March 19, 1808.

The Spain inherited by Carlos IV gave few indications of instability, but during his reign, Spain entered a series of disadvantageous alliances and his regime constantly sought cash to deal with the exigencies of war. He detested his son and heir Fernando, who led the unsuccessful El Escorial Conspiracy and later forced Carlos’s abdication after the Tumult of Aranjuez in March 1808, along with the ouster of his widely hated first minister Manuel de Godoy.

Summoned to Bayonne by Napoleon Bonaparte, who forced Fernando VII to abdicate, Carlos IV also abdicated, paving the way for Napoleon to place his older brother Joseph Bonaparte on the throne of Spain. The reign of Carlos IV turned out to be a major turning point in Spanish history.

Early life

Carlos was the second son of Carlos III and his wife, Maria Amalia of Saxony. He was born in Naples (November 11, 1748), while his father was King of Naples and Sicily. His elder brother, Don Felipe, was passed over for both thrones, due to his learning disabilities and epilepsy.

In Naples and Sicily, Carlos was referred to as the Prince of Taranto. He was called El Cazador (meaning “the Hunter”), due to his preference for sport and hunting, rather than dealing with affairs of the state. Carlos was considered by many to have been amiable, but simple-minded. In 1788, Carlos III died and Carlos IV succeeded to the throne, and ruled for the next two decades.

Even though he had a profound belief in the sanctity of the monarchy, and kept up the appearance of an absolute, powerful king Carlos IV never took more than a passive part in his own government. The affairs of government were left to his wife, Maria Luisa, and the man he appointed first minister, Manuel de Godoy.

Carlos occupied himself with hunting in the period that saw the outbreak of the French Revolution, the executions of his Bourbon relative Louis XVI of France and his queen, Marie Antoinette, and the rise of Napoleon Bonaparte. Ideas of the Age of Enlightenment had come to Spain with the accession of the first Spanish Bourbon, Felipe V.

Carlos IV’s father Carlos III had pursued an active policy of reform that sought to reinvigorate Spain politically and economically and make the Spanish Empire more closely an appendage of the metropole. Carlos III was an active, working monarch with experienced first ministers to help reach decisions. Carlos IV by contrast was a do-nothing king, with a domineering wife and an inexperienced but ambitious first minister, Godoy.

Well-meaning and pious, Carlos IV floundered in a series of international crises beyond his capacity to handle. He was painted by Francisco Goya in a number of official court portraits, which numerous art critics have seen as satires on the King’s stout vacuity.

Riots, and a popular revolt at the winter palace Aranjuez, in 1808 forced the king to abdicate on March 19, in favor of his son. Fernando took the throne as Fernando VII, but was mistrusted by Napoleon, who had 100,000 soldiers stationed in Spain by that time due to the ongoing War of the Third Coalition.

Marriage and children

Carlos IV married his first cousin Infanta Maria Louisa of Parma, the daughter of Philip, Duke of Parma, in 1765. The couple had fourteen children, six of whom survived into adulthood:

Infanta Maria Luisa of Parma (1751 – 1819) was Queen consort of Spain from 1788 to 1808 leading up to the Peninsular War. She was the youngest daughter of Philip, Duke of Parma, the fourth son of Felipe V of Spain and Louise Élisabeth of France, the eldest daughter of King Louis XV. In 1765 she married Carlos, Prince of Asturias who ascended the throne in 1788 and thus became queen.

Maria Luisa’s father, Philip (1720 – 1765) was Infante of Spain by birth, and Duke of Parma from 1748 to 1765. Born at the Royal Alcazar in Madrid as Felipe de Borbón y Farnesio, he was the third child and second son of Felipe V of Spain and his wife, Elisabeth Farnese. He founded the House of Bourbon-Parma, a cadet line of the Spanish branch of the Bourbon dynasty. He was a son-in-law of Louis XV.

Maria Luisa’s relationship with Manuel Godoy and influence over the King made her unpopular among the people and aristocrats. In total, Maria Luisa had twenty-four pregnancies of which fourteen children were born and ten miscarried.

She was rivals with the Duchess of Alba and the Duchess of Osuna attracting popular attention. The death of her daughter-in-law Princess Maria Antonia of Naples and Sicily, whom she disliked, was said to be the poisoning by the queen. When Carlos IV abdicated in 1808 he was accompanied by Maria Luisa.

Following Napoleon’s deposing of the Bourbon dynasty, the ex-King Carlos IV, his wife, Maria Luisa and former Prime Minister Godoy were held captive in France first at the château de Compiègne and three years in Marseille (where a neighborhood was named after him).

After the collapse of the regime installed by Napoleon, Fernando VII was restored to the Spanish throne. The former Carlos IV drifted about Europe until 1812, when he finally settled in Rome, in the Palazzo Barberini. His wife died on January 2, 1819, followed shortly by Carlos IV who died on January 20, of the same year.