Sentences Containing 'thespian'

"Sagina Mahato", a story written by him in remembrance of a colleague of his in his political activist past, was successfully adopted into movies in Hindi (Sagina) and Bengali (Sagina Mahato) by Tapan Sinha, with the famous thespian Dilip Kumar playing the part of the protagonist Sagina Mahato in both instances.

The late actor once described Sreenivas as his 'dhwani' (voice in Kannada) while he himself was a mere 'shareera' (body in Kannada), summing up how some of the best-known films of the thespian are unimaginable without Sreenivas lending his voice.

Elaine also once had a cat fight with the actress Tara Tyson and then claimed that the thespian had set her ablaze with a lit cigarette.

Although the football player turned thespian had a handful of film roles going back to the mid-60s, Slaughter represents his first real starring vehicle.

It depicts a similar dystopia to his 2002 short "Thespian X".

They were coached by John Stafford. More recently, Columbus East has produced state finalist choruses and a world-traveling thespian society as well as semi-state and state appearances by American football (2004, 2006), women's volleyball and track and field teams.

The High School host several clubs including, Ambassadors Club, Art Club, Cinema Appreciation Club, Creation Club, Entrepreneur Club, Foreign Language Club, Girls Bible Study: Time for Truth, International Students Club, Mock Trial Club, National Honor Society, Prefects, Robotics Club: The Iron Eagles, Student Council, and the Thespian Society and Drama Club

Here he has taken up the role of thespian in his free time playing parts in productions put on by many of the university's theatre companies.

To watch her succumb to the vast amounts of alcohol Claire ingests, folding and refolding her legs, slipping – no, oozing – onto the floor, her face crumpling like a paper bag, is to witness a different but equally winning kind of thespian expertise.

Neeta Shrikanth) His political play "Five" (Thespian en) was performed as supper theatre to a packed Chennai audience in November 2010 (dir.

The "Thespian Dictionary" says he gave in Birmingham in 1800 an entertainment of his own extracted from George Alexander Stevens's "Lecture on Heads, ", and entitled 'Whimsicalities.'

Along with those, representatives from their thespian troop competed at the State Thespian Conference in 2010 and won first place in their category of "Group Musical," with the performance of "Your Fault/Last Midnight" from Sondheim's "Into the Woods".

At 17, he became a member of the International Thespian Society and traveled to London to study at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.

Saratoga High School is also home of International Thespian Society Troupe #6354.