Machine learning (ML) is a subset of artificial intelligence that enables a system to autonomously learn and improve using neural networks and deep learning, without being explicitly programmed, by feeding it large amounts of data. It allows financial institutions to use the data to train models to solve specific problems with ML algorithms – and provide insights on how to improve them over time.

Make your content, such as financial news, and apps multilingual with fast, dynamic machine translation at scale to enhance customer interactions and reach more audiences wherever they are.

Delight your customers with human-like AI-powered contact center experiences, such as banking concierge or customer center, to lower costs, and free up your human agents' time. Transform personal finance and give customers more ways to manage their money by bringing smart, intuitive experiences to your apps, websites, digital platforms, and virtual tools.

Use data customer, risk, transaction, trading or other data insights to predict specific future outcomes with high degree of precision. These capabilities can be helpful in fraud detection, risk reduction, and customer future needs’ prediction.

Build new AI-powered search and conversational experiences by creating, recommending, synthesizing, analyzing, and engaging in a natural and responsible way. Watch this demo to see how a financial services firm is transforming the search experience for employees.

AI will help drive financial services growth. Many organizations have gone digital and learned new ways to sell, add efficiencies, and focus on their data. Going forward, they will need to personalize relationship-based customer engagement at scale. AI plays a key role in helping drive tailored customer responses, make safer and more accountable product and service recommendations, and earn trust by broadening concierge services that are available when customers need them the most.

In addition, financial institutions will need to build strong and unique permission-based digital customer profiles; however, the data they need may exist in silos. By breaking down these silos, applying an AI layer, and leveraging human engagement in a seamless way, financial institutions can create experiences that address the unique needs of their customers while scaling efficiently.