Neha Patil

(Editor)

Love my family & adore animals! Always try to have a positive mindset

Komoro, Nagano

Share on FacebookTweet on TwitterShare on LinkedInShare on Reddit

Sign in

Country

Japan

Phone number

0267-22-1700

Area

98.55 km²

Local time

Friday 11:14 AM

Region

Chūbu (Kōshin'etsu)

Website

www.city.komoro.lg.jp

Population

42,679 (Oct 2016)

Prefecture

Nagano Prefecture

Time zone

Japan Standard Time (UTC+9)

Address

3-3-3 Aioi-chō, Komoro-shi, Nagano-ken 384-8501

Weather

4°C, Wind NW at 14 km/h, 50% Humidity

Points of interest

Komoro Castle, Kurofuyama, Kaiko Shrine, Shakusonji, Otomeko Park

Komoro (小諸市, Komoro-shi) is a city located in eastern Nagano Prefecture, in the Chūbu region of Japan. As of 1 October 2016, the city had an estimated population of 42,679 and a population density of 433 persons per km². Its total area was 98.55 square kilometres (38.05 sq mi).

Contents

Map of Komoro Nagano Prefecture Japan

Geography

Surrounding municipalities

History

Education

Railway

Highway

Sister city relations

Local attractions

Notable residents

References

Map of Komoro, Nagano Prefecture, Japan

Geography

Komoro is located in eastern Nagano Prefecture.

Surrounding municipalities

Nagano Prefecture

Saku

Tōmi

Miyota

Gunma Prefecture

Tsumagoi

History

The area of present-day Komoro was part of ancient Shinano Province. The area was part of the holdings of Komoro Domain during the Edo period. The modern town of Komoro was established on April 1, 1889 with the establishment of the municipalities system. The town of Komoro annexed villages of Kawanabe, Kitaoi and Osato (all from Kitasaku District) on February 1, 1954. The city of Komoro was established on April 1, 1954 after absorbing the villages of Minamioi and Mioka (both from Kitasaku District). On April 1, 1959 parts of the town of Tobu (now part of the city of Tomi) was merged into Komoro and the city has been unchanged since.

Education

Komoro has six public elementary schools and two public middle schools operated by the city government. There are two public high schools operated by the Nagano Prefectural Board of Education.

Railway

JR East – Koumi Line

Misato - Mitsuoka - Otome - Higashi-Komoro - Komoro

Shinano Railway – Shinano Railway Line

Hirahara - Komoro

Highway

Jōshin-etsu Expressway

Chūbu-Ōdan Expressway

Japan National Route 18

Japan National Route 141

Japan National Route 142

Japan National Route 403

Sister city relations

Komoro is twinned with:

Nakatsugawa, Gifu, Japan (1973)

Ōiso, Kanagawa, Japan (1973)

Namerikawa, Toyama, Japan (1974)

Local attractions

Kaikoen, a park in the center of Komoro containing the foundations of Komoro Castle as well as a museum dedicated to Shimazaki Toson (see below) and a zoo.

Nunobikki, a temple dating from 1252 located at the top of a ravine. About a 5-minute drive outside of town, walking is possible if you know where to go.

Mountain hiking in Takamine, close to the active volcano Mt Asama, about a 30-minute drive uphill from Komoro.

Notable residents

Shimazaki Toson, poet and writer. Toson spent a period teaching in Komoro, and is featured in a dedicated museum located within Komoro's Kaikoen park.

Sodo Yokoyama, a leaf-flute Zen Master who lived as a hermit in Komoro's Kaikoen Park until 1980. Yokoyama was inspired by an earlier resident of Komoro, the poet and writer Shimazaki Toson. See Arthur Braverman's excellent article for some personal recollections of Yokoyama.

Tsuchiya, Keiichi, Japanese race car driver & D1 pioneer

References

Komoro, Nagano Wikipedia

(Text) CC BY-SA

Similar Topics