Affiliated with the Presbyterian Church (USA), Whitworth University (WU) is a privately-funded institution of higher education in Spokane city of Washington state. The institution was originally established as the Sumner Academy in 1883 that operated in Sumner, a small town located to the east of Tacoma. It became a college in the year 1890 under the name Whitworth College. The institution moved to Tacoma in 1899, which was followed by another relocation of the campus to its present-day site in 1914. In 2006, its name was changed again to the current name that became effective from 2007. It has accreditation from the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities.

Whitworth University maintains a beautiful 200-acre campus consisting of state-of-the-art buildings that feature academic, administrative, recreational and other support facilities. The campus also features parking areas, walkways and wide-open green spaces surrounded with pine trees. It has a huge library that holds a wide collection of books, research guides, journals, databases, newspapers, archives and documents that can be accessed by students and the faculty for research, learning and teaching purposes. Other facilities featured on the campus include a chapel, health and counseling centers, IT services and dining points. It also offers accommodation facilities to the students in one of the 10 on-campus residence halls. The Associated Students of Whitworth University runs various clubs on the campus and organizes several activities and events of personal, social and academic interests. With sports affiliation from National Collegiate Athletic Association, it maintains a total of 21 varsity teams (11 women’s and 10 men’s) that participate in the Northwest Conference as the Pirates.

WU has one college and three schools that offer over 110 programs in arts, business, education, sciences and human services at undergraduate and postgraduate levels. Apart from theoretical learning, the university offers abundant of opportunities to the students to get engaged in research, practicums, study abroad, internships and service to prepare for a successful career. At present, the university is home to about 3100 students from 30 states of the U.S. and 42 countries of the world. It has 156 full-time academic affiliates on the roll. With almost 86% of the classes having less than 30 learners, the student-to-faculty ratio at WU is 11:1.