Some of Hollywood’s top comedians are remembering the life and career of Bob Einstein, the comic actor known for his characters Super Dave Osborne and Marty Funkhouser on “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” who died Wednesday at 76.

“Never have I seen an actor enjoy a role the way Bob did playing ‘Marty Funkhouser’ on ‘Curb.’ It was an amazing, unforgettable experience knowing and working with him,” Larry David said in a statement. “There was no one like him, as he told us again and again. We’re all in a state of shock.”

Einstein’s brother, writer-director-actor Albert Brooks, called him “a great brother, father and husband,” but also a “brilliantly funny man.” In addition to his work on TV, several comedians also held up Einstein’s scene in the Brooks-directed comedy “Modern Romance” as a clerk at a running store calmly pressuring Brooks into spending a fortune on running gear...

Bob Einstein died Wednesday at the age of 76, leaving behind a comedic legacy that stretched across a half-century in film and TV. Starting as an Emmy-winning writer and frequent contributor on “The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour” opposite Steve Martin, Einstein came to prominence with the creation of the character Super Dave Osborne. The fictional stuntman went on to become a cultural touchstone, spawning multiple TV series, a feature film, and a number of commercial appearances.

With a career spanning decades, some of his best-known work came in recent years, most notably as Marty Funkhouser on “Curb Your Enthusiasm.” The show’s leading lady, Cheryl Hines, tweeted a photo of Einstein. “We lost a friend today. Thanks for all the laughs,” she wrote. “The comedy world will miss you.”

We lost a friend today. thanks for all of the laughs on Curb Your Enthusiasm. Our love to Bob’s family. #BobEinstein #SuperDave.

Tony Sokol Jan 2, 2019

Bob Einstein, Curb Your Enthusiam's Marty Funkhouser and Albert Brooks' older brother, was part of TV comedy history.

Comedy veteran Bob Einstein, who wrote for the controversial The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour but is best known for his turn as Marty Funkhouser on Curb Your Enthusiasm, died at age 76 following a recent cancer diagnosis, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

Einstein’s death was confirmed his younger brother, Albert Brooks. “R.I.P. My dear brother Bob Einstein. A great brother, father and husband. A brilliantly funny man. You will be missed forever,” posted on Twitter.

"Very sad," Curb Your Enthusiasm writer David Mandel tweeted. "Got to work with him on #Curb. Had heard he was sick. Will never forget him telling @jerryseinfeld the dirty joke about the newlyweds." Costar, actor and comedian Richard Lewis also eulogized on social media.

Since making his debut in season 4, Einstein...

Refresh for updates… Bob Einstein is being remembered by castmates, colleagues and his brother Albert Brooks as a comedian’s comedian — “excruciatingly brilliant,” as his friend and Curb Your Enthusiasm co-star Richard Lewis described him.

Series creator and star Larry David said in a statement: “Never have I seen an actor enjoy a role the way Bob did playing ‘Marty Funkhouser’ on Curb. It was an amazing, unforgettable experience knowing and working with him. There was no one like him, as he told us again and again. We’re all in a state of shock.”

Lewis and David were joined by Curb castmate Cheryl Hines and writer David Mandel in praising the “Super Dave” creator. “We lost a friend today,” tweeted Hines, “Thanks for all of the laughs on Curb Your Enthusiasm…The comedy world will miss you.”

Einstein’s longtime pal Lewis tweeted: “His long career is hard to match.

Bob Einstein, the gravelly-voiced actor best known for playing Curb Your Enthusiasm’s Marty Funkhouser and the spirited stuntman Super Dave Osborne, died Wednesday at the age of 76. New York Daily News reports that he had been battling cancer.

Although best known as an actor, Einstein, the older brother of Albert Brooks, got his start in the entertainment industry as a writer. He won two Emmys in the 1970s for his contributions to the Dick Van Dyke vehicle, Van Dyke and Company, and The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour. In addition...

Bob Einstein, best known for his recurring role on Curb Your Enthusiasm and for creating the stuntman character Super Dave Osborne, died Wednesday after a battle with cancer, our sister site Deadline reports. He was 76.

Einstein began his Hollywood career as a writer for several variety series, including The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour, The Sonny and Cher Comedy Hour and the short-lived Van Dyke and Company. His behind-the-scenes work earned him two Emmy Awards (in 1969 and 1977), as well as four more Emmy nominations.

In front of the camera, Einstein became known for his satirical character Super Dave Osborne, an optimistic...

Bob Einstein, the actor best known for his Super Dave Osborne character, has died at the age of 76, TheWrap has learned.

Einstein’s brother, actor and comedian Albert Brooks, also confirmed the news of Einstein’s passing on Twitter on Wednesday. “R.I.P. My dear brother Bob Einstein. A great brother, father and husband. A brilliantly funny man. You will be missed forever,” Brooks wrote.

An L.A.-born actor, writer and comedian, Einstein made first made his name as a writer for “The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour” alongside the likes of Steve Martin and Murray Roman before transitioning to performing as the bungling Super Dave Osborne character in the 1970s.

Also Read: 'Mean' Gene Okerlund, Legendary WWE Interviewer, Dies at 76

Einstein first debuted the character, a sunny, naive and frequently-injured parody of daredevil stuntmen like Evel Knievel, on John Byner’s variety show in 1972 and later recurred on...

Bob Einstein, a two-time Emmy winner who has recurred on HBO’s Curb Your Enthusiasm since its launch and created the wacky Super Dave Osborne character, died today in Indian Wells, CA. He was 76 and recently had been diagnosed with cancer.

Best known to today’s viewers for playing the serious, often surly but always hilarious Marty Funkhouser on Curb, Einstein was a foil for its creator-star Larry David. He appeared in nearly two dozen episodes of the series dating from 2004 to the most recent season.

Einstein’s younger brother, actor-director Albert Brooks, tweeted today, “R.I.P. My dear brother Bob Einstein. A great brother, father and husband. A brilliantly funny man. You will be missed forever.”

A comedian’s comedian, Einstein first made his name as a writer. His career dates to the 1960s, when he won his first Emmy as part of the writing team for The...

Everybody has a favorite "Arrested Development" guest star ... even the cast.

"I love Liza [Minnelli]. I just loved working with her. I love her as a person. She's just fantastic. She's just so great. She was up for anything and she's back in this season," Portia de Rossi told The Huffington Post in a phone interview. "She's just game for anything and has a great sense of humor and can laugh at herself. Just terrific."

Minnelli appeared in several episodes of "Arrested Development" as vertigo-suffering Lucille 2 -- Lucille Austero -- a neighbor to Lucille Bluth (Jessica Walter) and one-time lover of more than one Bluth boy.

Minnelli returns in the new season. "It was really strange, it was fun," Minnelli told The Huffington Post about returning to "Arrested Development." "That director [Mitch Hurwitz] is just extraordinary, and he writes it too. So we'd come in, and we've learned the script and he would have changed it completely.

This week on "Comedians In Cars Getting Coffee," Jerry Seinfeld sits down with Bob Einstein, the man you most likely know as either Super Dave, Marty Funkhouser or Larry Middleman, professional surrogate. But the real Bob is pretty funny on his own.

In this exclusive "Spare Part" outtake from Thursday's episode, Jerry Seinfeld proposes an odd, hypothetical situation -- and we're not even sure where he was going with it -- but Einstein interrupts him knowing exactly what to say to make things instantly uncomfortable. The waitress' timing makes it even better.

Watch the video above. The full episode is released on Thursday night on the Ccgc website.

Sundance is abuzz with the performance of Elizabeth Olsen, who apparently fell out of the same vagina that hatched the Olsen twins. Looks like she took all the talent with her too. But it got me thinking about other showbiz families and what I like to call the Roberts Dichotomy. Namely, Eric and Julia. Both actors, both born of the same genes, and yet, one opens wide her gaping maw and makes gabillions while the other's busy doing B-movies and birthing bigger child stars.

Thing is, I love Eric Roberts. I'll watch The Best of the Best pretty much every time it's on. It's like Rocky for sad lonely kickboxers. It's just strange that Julia gets all the accolades. And so started up a list of other semi-talented siblings overshadowed by the crazy successful brethren/sistern.

Fun Fact: Nicolas Cage, Sofia Coppola, and Jason Schwartzmann are all first cousins. Jason's mother is Talia Shire.

Super Dave Osborne, self-described as the greatest daredevil superstar entertainer of all time, makes his triumphant television return in Spike TV's "Super Dave's Spike-Tacular" premiering Saturday, November 14 at 11 p.m. The half-hour, four-week special event will air Tuesdays at 9 p.m., beginning on November 17 and stars Emmy award-winner, Bob Einstein, as Super Dave, as he prepares for a weekly death-defying stunt. "I was a little hesitant about coming back and risking my life each week, but the only other offer I had was 'Super & Kate Plus 8,'" said Einstein. Each week, Super Dave will tackle a terrifying stunt that puts his life on the line and pushes him to the limits. The stunts include attempting to break the Nascar speed record on a track loaded...

Stunt spoofer Bob Einstein is set to reprise his Super Dave Osborne character in a four-part half-hour series for Spike TV this summer. Mockumentary-style series will showcase Osborne's "preparation" and failed execution of various stunts. Einstein will pen the four shows; he'll exec produce along with Brillstein Entertainment's Lee Kernis. Also executive producing is Alan Blythe, who produced "Super Dave" for Showtime from 1980-1985. Below is a video from the show, featuring Super Dave Osbourne attempting a jump from Canada's Cn Tower. Video:...