Yosi Piamenta is a matchmaker with an electric guitar, marrying Woodstock to the Wailing Wall.

Don't call him the "Hasidic Hendrix," as the Village Voice once did. It's an honor to be compared to Jimi Hendrix, he recently told adoring fans at the nightclub Tramps, but he'd rather be called Yosi Piamenta.

Still, there's something about the Brooklyn rocker that encourages nicknames.

"The rabbi rocks. We call him the 'gefilte Garcia,' " sound engineer Rob Childs says. "I wish I had somebody like him when I was in church."

Piamenta, an Israeli discovered in Tel Aviv by jazzman Stan Getz, does resemble the Grateful Dead's late guitarist, Jerry Garcia. He's an Orthodox Jew, but not actually a rabbi. And he's not Hasidic.

For the 22 years he's been in New York, Piamenta's mainly been a headliner at Jewish weddings. Now, at 46, he's making the crossover from what some music writers have called Hasid rock to a hard-driving rock 'n' roll that could win him new listeners.

"Being original is a goal," says Piamenta, who has a graying Brillo-pad orgy of a beard, and wire-rimmed glasses. He wears a multicolored yarmulke and at his waist hang the traditional fringes worn by Orthodox men.

Expanding his audience beyond Orthodox Jews is another goal for the man recently crowned "the greatest ultra-Orthodox rock guitarist in the world" by the Jewish Forward newspaper.

A father of six, Piamenta not only rocks but plays klezmer, blues, jazz and fusion.

He grew up in a secular home and learned guitar from the radio. Even today he doesn't read music.

"I grew up on Jimi Hendrix. I grew up on Oriental music. I grew up on Arabic music from the Bedouin village," Piamenta says.

"Hendrix is for me the classiest guitar player in this century. ... If you were not influenced by him, then you're influenced by people who were influenced by him."

Other influences? Piamenta tosses in Led Zeppelin, The Beatles, Weather Report and B.B. King.

His career leaped beyond his homeland when Getz visited Israel in 1976 and Piamenta managed to woo him into his home. Since Getz had only one free night, he wasn't eager to meet strangers. But Piamenta called his hotel and promised the saxophonist the party of his life. So Getz went. Yosi played his guitar, brother Avi his flute.

"After six or seven of my own tunes, Stan Getz asked me to record with him," says Piamenta, raising his arms and almost lifting his round frame from a black leather sofa. "I told him that would be the peak and goal of my dreams."

On Piamenta's 25th birthday, in 1976, he arrived in New York as a guest of Getz. They cut an album, but it was never released because of technical and artistic problems.

"My first half year in America was from the top of the American dream," Piamenta says, his eyes lighting like sparklers. "To an anonymous poor musician in Israel, this was like in the fairy tales."

There were sold-out concerts. Along the way, Getz introduced him to Buddy Rich, Carlos Santana and others. Then Piamenta returned to Israel in 1977 on tour with Getz.

The next year, he came back to New York, toured with Getz and at the end of the tour Piamenta turned to Orthodoxy. The decadence of life as a road musician pushed him toward a religious life, he says.

In music, too. He made himself the Guy Lombardo of Jewish weddings, and recorded five albums of Jewish tunes, some 500 years old.

But always, the rock was rolling around Piamenta's soul.

"The music that gets me closer to God is the best music. If there's music that calls for hate, that's not the music for God," Piamenta says. "Music that melts the heart is good music."

Piamenta's heart-melting music -- not licks but full-jawed chomps that he coaxes from his Fender Stratocaster -- hit mainstream New York City in 1994 in concerts at Wetlands and the Knitting Factory.

That, says Piamenta, "put me on the map of secular New York."

Piamenta has hired a publicist, and he no longer has to paste posters on light poles with his sons in tow to advertise his concerts. He's also working on a U.S. tour for 1999 and a world tour to follow.

Next year, watch for Piamenta in a hall near you -- any night but Friday.

Photo by The Associated Press

Yosi Piamenta of Brooklyn, N.Y., was discovered in Israel by jazzman Stan Getz and has been playing mainstream rock gigs in Manhattan.