There are so many stories that make up the larger-than-life narrative of The Greatest. If you're looking to relive some of the champ's best moments or learn more about the man who was so much more than an athlete, here’s a look at some of the books about or by Muhammad Ali:

“The Greatest: My Own Story”

by Muhammad Ali, with Richard Durham, 1975, Random House, New York

Like the champ himself, this is a work that blurs the line between facts and fiction. Includes the legendary story about Ali throwing his Olympic gold medal into the Ohio River after a fight with a racist motorcycle gang. (Edited by Toni Morrison, the future Nobel Prize winner for literature.)

“The Fight"

by Norman Mailer, 1975, Vintage International, New York

The larger-than-life novelist — constantly referring to himself in the third person — covers Ali’s upset victory over George Foreman in Zaire. Mailer describes a Foreman sighting in a hotel: “He did not look like a man so much as a lion standing erectly as a man. He appeared sleepy but in the manner of a lion digesting a carcass.”

“Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times"

by Thomas Hauser, 1991, Touchstone, New York

A 543-page oral history with memories from Ali’s manager, his wives, his brother, his best friend, media heavyweights, doctors, politicians, fellow boxers and others who knew him when.

“King of the World"

by David Remnick, 1998, Vintage Books, New York

The New Yorker magazine editor takes a turn at explaining Ali. It includes a moving chapter on Floyd Patterson, the establishment’s champ, who fell twice to Ali.

You may like: The Louisville gym where Muhammad Ali's 'whole life' started now has a historical marker

“The Muhammad Ali Reader"

edited by Gerald Taylor, 1998, Ecco Press, Hopewell, N.J.

Writings on Ali from Tom Wolfe, George Plimpton, Jackie Robinson, Jose Torres, Hunter S. Thompson, Bob Greene, Joyce Carol Oates and others.

“Ghosts of Manila"

by Mark Kram, 2001, HarperCollins, New York

Kram, who covered boxing for Sports Illustrated for 11 years, argues that Ali’s social significance has been greatly overstated by wishful thinkers, adulators and idolators.

“Muhammad Ali Through the Eyes of the World"

edited by Mark Collings, 2001, Sanctuary Publishing, London

Fifty-two interviews, with views and verdicts from Leroy Neiman, B.B. King, James Earl Jones, Rod Steiger, Maya Angelou, Jimmy Ellis and others.

“Facing Ali"

by Stephen Brunt, 2002, Guilford Press, Guilford, Connecticut

Fifteen former boxers, including George Foreman, Joe Frazier, Larry Holmes, Ken Norton — and Chuck Wepner — tell what it was like to fight “The Greatest.”

You may like: Actor Michael J. Fox honored with 2019 Muhammad Ali Courage award

“The Lost Legacy of Muhammad Ali"

by Thomas Hauser, 2005, Sport Classic Books, Wilmington, Delaware

The author of the celebrated 1991 oral history finds the edge gone from the threatening figure of the 1960s — now deliberately distorted by Ali’s handlers to make him warm, free of controversy — and marketable.

“Sound and Fury: Two Powerful Lives, One Fearful Friendship"

by Dave Kindred 2006, Free Press, New York

The former Courier Journal columnist examines the strange and wonderful chemistry between Ali and Howard Cosell, the abrasive television journalist. Cosell was perhaps the first journalist to call Ali by his Muslim name and castigated boxing authorities for stripping him of his title.

“The Soul of a Butterfly: Reflections on Life’s Journey"

co-authored by Ali and daughter Hana Yasmeen Ali, Simon & Schuster, 2004

Memoirs and spiritual reflections, influenced by Ali’s interest in the Islamic mystical tradition of Sufism.

Picture: Muhammad Ali

The Courier Journal, Publisher: PSG. Price: $59.95

"Picture: Muhammad Ali" chronicles the life and times of Louisville's most famous son, through extraordinary access and behind-the-scenes photos from age 12 through his global boxing career to his 2016 death.