By a wide margin, he was the most remarkable and iconic athlete of any generation. Nobody comes close to boxing legend Muhammad Ali, who passed away Friday from complications of Parkinson's disease, for global impact.

You can argue Babe Ruth, Michael Jordan and Jack Nicklaus were more accomplished in their respective sports. But Ali touched people - often times in an angry way after being convicted of draft evasion in 1967 for refusing military service during the height of the Vietnam War - reaching them like no public figure of his time.

He riled up white America because it wasn't used to seeing a black man standing up for his beliefs. I remember my late World War II veteran father (who died 10 years ago today) rebuking a young Cassius Clay for not serving his country, but that's not what resonated with me as a kid about this boxer and anti-war Muslim.

It was his whole persona. Ali had a commanding presence like no other athlete. He totally seduced the media because he took turns being brash, playful, rebellious, kind, charming, loud, arrogant and soft-spoken. His witty pre-fight poetry was legendary.

Though Ali never received a Nobel Peace Prize, he might have deserved one as much as Martin Luther King, Mother Teresa and Nelson Mandela. His courage to stand up against the Vietnam War, at a time when that view was mostly unpopular, took a lot more courage than getting in a ring with Sonny Liston, Joe Frazier, Ken Norton or George Foreman.

What made Ali great was he didn't need the title of king or prince. He was royalty without it.

His mere presence, both during a controversial boxing career and after Parkinson's robbed the glib, three-time heavyweight champion of his speech, drew massive crowds wherever Ali went. He will be remembered as both the most polarizing and greatest athlete, though the self-proclaimed "greatest" part should be reserved for his legacy outside the ring.

Strictly as a boxer, Ali was legitimately among the greatest, but his place is subject to debate and comes with an asterisk. We'll never know how truly great Ali could have been because he lost three-plus years of his prime after boxing banned him for his draft evasion conviction (later overturned by a unanimous Supreme Court vote).

Put it in this context: imagine how diminished the careers of Ruth, Jordan, Nicklaus or Tiger Woods would have been had they been barred from competition from ages 25-28? Ali's ban cost him 12-15 fights -most of them as likely the reigning heavyweight champion - when the Louisville Lip was still an ascending boxer.

But since we can only compare each fighter's record and the era in which they fought, Ali (56-5, 37 knockouts) is not indisputably the greatest of all time. It's hard to put Ali above welterweight/middleweight Sugar Ray Robinson (128-1-2) and Joe Louis (66-3-1), who held the heavyweight title for 12 consecutive years.

However, in terms of overall legacy, Ali blows every athlete who ever lived away because of his societal influence. His was a life that never wavered from his true self. Who else could have stirred the same emotion when a disease-ravaged Ali lit the Olympic torch at the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta? Who else could make heads of state bow in his presence?

Yes, he lost the Fight of the Century on March 3, 1971 to Joe Frazier, but Ali is probably remembered most as a fighter for the "Rumble in the Jungle" upset of George Foreman and winning his third bout with Frazier, dubbed "Thrilla in Manilla."

Yet none of it compares to how Ali impacted people in every corner of the world. He made showmanship a cool thing.

Even Foreman came to realize the brilliance of Ali's effusive personality. When he came out of retirement to box again, and regained the heavyweight crown, Foreman had found religion and abandoned his previously surly disposition. People saw a different side of him, a charming commercial pitchman who made hundreds of millions of dollars selling George Foreman grills and other products.

Foreman's transformation was yet another example of how Muhammad Ali influenced people. He did what no athlete has done on a global scale - he shook up the world for the better.

There'll never be another like Ali. He was one of a kind.

gene.frenette@jacksonville.com, (904) 359-4540