If the Nobel Prize-givers up there in frozen Scandinavia had got their skates on they might have presented their award for literature to the most iconic figure of the 20th century.

He who not only put into words the hopes and torments of a generation but who actually lived his life and times to the limit.

Bob Dylan, popular music lyricist, is a controversial choice.

Muhammad Ali, world heavyweight champion poet, would have been The Greatest.

What an opportunity lost. What a moment in history missed.

Since they don't honour the Nobel dead, unless they nominate them before they expire, the panel needed to fire up its collective imagination a few weeks earlier. Before Ali passed away in June.

How the world would have saluted that choice, in the wake of Ali's Kentucky State funeral.

Dylan has divided the literati, as evidenced by two of its cult personalities.

Predictably Salman Rushdie, compiler of the unfathomable Satanic Verses, tweeted his approval: 'From Orpheus to Faiz, song and poetry have been closely linked. Dylan is the brilliant inheritor of the Bardic tradition.'

Quite what William Shakespeare would have made of that, we can only guess.

We do know that Irvine Welsh, Scottish author of Trainspotting, is incandescent: 'I'm a Dylan fan but this is an ill-conceived nostalgia award wrenched from the rancid prostates of senile, gibbering hippies.'

Ouch!

The Dylan druggies will be wincing at that, some of them in their pretentious idolatry of a man whose songs spoke to coffee-house intellectuals.

Ali was the poet for all people, as accessible as he was challenging, be his verse simple or profound.

True of his most quoted:

Float like a butterfly

Sting like a bee

The hands can't hit

What the eyes can't see.

Just as evident when more complex:

Champions aren't made in the gym

Champions are made deep inside

From a desire, a dream, a vision

They have last-minute stamina

They have to be a bit faster

They have the skill and the will

But the will must be stronger than the skill

His range extended far beyond the ring canvas on which he painted the beauty of his noble art.

I am America

The part you don't know

Get used to me

Black, confident, cocky

My name, not yours

My religion, not yours

My goals, my own

Get used to me.

Is this classic Dylan really superior?

How many roads must a man walk down

Before you call him a man?

The answer, my friend, is blowin' in the wind

The answer is blowin' in the wind

Dylan philosophised on politics and strife:

Come gather round people

Wherever you roam

And admit that the waters around you have grown…

You better start swimmin'

Or you'll sink like a stone

For the times they are a-changin'

Does that really strike as profound a chord as this couplet from Ali?

Wars of nations are fought to change maps

Wars of poverty are fought to map change

Or this defence of his refusal to be inducted into the Vietnam War:

They ain't done me no wrong

So I ain't got no quarrel

With them Viet Cong.

There are countless examples of each to pitch against the other but Ali was poetically two-fisted, to which the brilliant but one-dimensional Dylan provides no real answer.

First this left jab sent shuddering into Dylan's own strength:

Oxford, that's a great university

Wants me as professor of poetry.

The students at that august seat of learning did indeed propose that seat for Ali, a distinction never mooted for Dylan.

Then the knockout right from Muhammad as he fought the ravages of Parkinson's and contemplated his own death to come:

Better in the clutch of some disease

Wasting slowly by degrees

Better than of heart attack

Let me die by being black

Who's The Greatest?

Sorry, Bob.

The answer ain't blowin' in the wind.

It is fortunate for Tony Bellew that legislation to curb the Killer Clown craze was not enacted before he went on his rampaging attempt to put the frighteners on a fellow boxer after his latest fight.

Bellew's stoppage on Saturday night of an overweight, overage, under-motivated challenger for his world cruiserweight title was nothing like as threatening with menaces as his lunge through the ropes to try to browbeat David Haye into a real fight.

BJ Flores came to Liverpool from America seemingly more intent on picking up a generous purse than himself off the canvas, upon which he sought refuge four times in fewer than three rounds before being waved towards the exit.

That left Bellew still so full of fighting spirit that he lost the plot when challenging Haye to a more enriching heavyweight dust up.

Even in the circus that is professional boxing you can go too far when playing Barnum and Bailey.

Selling the next fight is one thing, acting up like a homicidal maniac something else altogether.

As Tyson Fury has been told in no uncertain terms, being a world champion carries responsibilities as well as rewards.

Bomber Bellew played the sporting role model in Creed, the movie, and it was good to see a Liverpool lad act some Hollywood stars off the screen.

Is it too much to ask that he conducts himself in similar fashion in the reality of the ring, now that he's made his name?