Adjust Text Size: A+ A-

HANS-DIETER KLOEPPEL On July 29, 2007 at 12:00 noon, Dieter, much loved husband of Dorothea and father to Ralph (girlfriend Tammy) and Yvonne (husband William) and grandfather to Sabrina, Emily and Pierce. Surviving and missing him also are his two sisters Marlise and Inkrit of Rheinlandpfalz, Germany; brother-and-sister-in-law Werner and Agnes of Rheinlandpfalz, Germany. Extended family members including nieces and nephews, Sabine (Rolf), Guido (Ulrike), Tobias, Rita (Wolfgang), Ursula, Peter (Rita). Also surviving cousins are Rita (Elmar) and children Dennis and Ingo. Godfather to Rita, Sabine and Jody. Dieter was born in Rheinlandpfalz, Germany on September 23, 1941. He grew up on a mixed grain farm in Polch, Germany. He received his degree in Business Economics and Masters Degree in Agriculture. Dieter served as a financial advisor to the conservative party of a district in Rheinlandpfalz, Germany. He also received several awards of excellence in the agriculture sector in Germany. In 1963, Dieter and Thea met; and in 1968 they married and have been together for 45 years; bearing two children Ralph and Yvonne. In 1975 they ventured into Canada and settled themselves in Manitoba. They worked extremely hard together as best friends, equal business partners and soul mates. Their successes far exceeded their wishes. He loved his family and took great pride and enjoyment in spending as much time with his grandchildren, Sabrina, Emily and Pierce. He was an extremely extroverted and charming man. When he danced, the crowd would stop still and watch in awe. Dieter was a worldly man, knowledgeable, with a great interest for the arts, history, music, philosophy, national geographic, dancing, business and farming. In his own right, he was a meteorologist, engineer, mechanic, chemist, accountant, advisor, comedian and teacher. For almost two years, Dieter battled lung cancer. Defeating the lung cancer, the liver had been taken over with cancer as well. His last wishes were to pass away in his home on the farm, with his family by his side. You are in our thoughts and a part of us always. Prayers Thursday, August 2, 2007 - 7:00 p.m. Catholic Parish of Our Lady of Mount Carmel 5 1st Ave. NW, Carman, Manitoba Funeral Mass Friday, August 3, 2007 - 2:00 p.m. Catholic Parish of Our Lady of Mount Carmel 35 1st Ave. NW, Carman, Manitoba Burial Carman Catholic Parish Cemetery Main Street South, Carman, Manitoba To follow burial, luncheon will be held at the Brunkild Community Hall, Brunkild, MB Adam's Funeral Home of Notre Dame, Manitoba in care of arrangements. Phone 248-2201 or 1-888-400-2326. www.afh.ca

As published in Winnipeg Free Press on Aug 02, 2007