Digital Collections

The library’s digital collections house primary sources celebrating the life and work of our student scholars, both past and present. Please send your research inquiries/questions to us via email, libraryarchives@franklincollege.edu.

NEW!!! Lasting Legacies: Franklin College “Spirit of Community”

This collection houses primary sources celebrating FC legacies, such as Arthur Henry Wilson 1902, Honorable Roger Douglas Branigin ’23, Robert Wise ’36, Ruth Ann Doub Callon ’52, Robert “Chip” Harrod ’70, Virginia “Jenny” Johnson-Kappes ’72, Joseph F. Beam ’76, Judi Warren ’80, and Pastor Douglas W. Gray, friend of the college. The Council of Independent Colleges (CIC) Humanities Research for the Public Good awarded funding for the initial digitization of this collection during the 2023 calendar year.

NEW!!! Franklin College Athletic Legacy

This online journey is a two-slide, narrated history of the Franklin College Athletic Legacy. Narrated by Susan Sutton ’82, history students Maxwell Johnson ’24, Josie Lyons ’24, and Jack Sells ’24 created the content. This Indiana Historical Society collaboration was made possible by The Council of Independent Colleges (CIC) Humanities Research for the Public Good.

Primary Pursuit & Hoosier History: The Honorable Roger Douglas Branigin Archives

This collection houses primary sources from the Honorable Roger D. Branigin Archives. Sources span his college, military, and political career. The Council of Independent Colleges (CIC) Humanities Research for the Public Good awarded funding for the initial digitization of this collection during the 2019-2020 academic year.

Primary Pursuit Field School Lesson Plans

Created as part of the CIC Humanities Research for the Public Good, these elementary lesson plans, aligned with Indiana State Standards, promote the use of primary source learning with The Honorable Roger Douglas Branigin Archives. Make a copy before adapting a lesson plan for your students.

Destination Indiana: Honorable Roger D. Branigin

Learn about Gov. Roger D. Branigin, his life and legacy, in this self-paced digital journey. Created by Mackenzie Taylor ’20, Samantha Loyd ’21, and Evan Graham ’21, this Indiana Historical Society collaboration was made possible by The Council of Independent Colleges (CIC) Humanities Research for the Public Good.

The Honorable Roger Douglas Branigin Archives

This collection is the gubernatorial papers of Roger D. Branigin, the governor of Indiana from 1965 to 1969. Branigin was also a surrogate for President Lyndon B. Johnson, in the 1968 Democratic Primary in Indiana. Branigin’s papers are one of the few papers of an Indiana governor that are not housed in the Indiana State Archives. The scope of these papers covers the years 1964–1969 and includes material such as correspondence, legislation, and daily journals. An online finding aid to this collection is available.

Undergraduate Research Collection, May 2015 – current

The Franklin College Undergraduate Research Collection houses campus scholarship and unique archival materials. Coverage began in May 2015.

Franklin College Yearbooks , 1898 – 1979

Digitized yearbooks, such as The Blue and Gold, The Flashlight, The Fracolind, The Almanack, Franklin’s Almanack, and The Franklin Almanack are available in PDF form. Online coverage ranges from 1898 – 1979.