SOME CONTEXT

significance

Early moving images are a form of time travel; they are a portal to the past that offers current audiences an opportunity to study and explore how generations before us experienced the wonder of moving images. What started as parlor entertainment evolved into a shared connection among groups of strangers gathered together in community oriented public spaces large and small. Silent movies offer variety, from the early documentation of ordinary human experience, all the way up to elaborately executed fantasies that stir excitement and intrigue—a timeline traced through four decades of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. This was a period that proved the endless possibilities that moving images could convey—from the interpretation of rural and cosmopolitan lifestyles, to confronting provocative and controversial subject matter—the many forms and functions silent movies embodied pointed the way to what is now a dominating and influential force of entertainment, knowledge, growth, and change.

statistics

“Only 14% of American silent feature films (1,575 of 10,919 titles) survive as originally released in complete 35mm copies. Another 11% (1,174) also survive in complete form, but in less-than-ideal editions - foreign-release versions or small-gauge formats such as 16mm.” – David Pierce, The Survival of American Silent Feature Films: 1912-1929, page 21

“Another 5% of American silent feature films (562 of 10,919 titles) survive in incomplete form, missing at least a reel of the original footage, in formats ranging from 35mm down to abridged 9.5mm home library prints.” – David Pierce, The Survival of American Silent Feature Films: 1912-1929, page 23

“According to [Pierce’s] study, many of the losses happened early on. Warner Bros. and Twentieth Century-Fox lost more or less the entirety of their silent film archives in a 1930s fire. Universal-International destroyed its remaining silent film copies in 1948. And those studios who opted to keep the material around usually did so cheaply — and poorly. Once the silent era gave way to sound, most studios put their silent film reels in storage.” – The Atlantic