We believe in serving the communities where we live and work through meaningful connections, trusted reporting, and principled journalism.​

The National Desk (TND) provides viewers with real-time national news and regional stories.

Full Measure is an award-winning, weekly national news program, focused on investigative, original, and accountability reporting.

With Tennis Channel and its related properties, Sinclair is the leader in courtside coverage and the ONLY multiplatform 24/7 destination dedicated to both the professional sport and tennis lifestyle.

Comet is the ONLY broadcast network for sci-fi fans. Programming includes Buffy the Vampire Slayer, The X-Files, SG-1, Outer Limits and Farscape.

TBD is the first multiscreen TV network to bring premium internet-first content to TV homes across America.

Launched in 2023, The Nest is Sinclair’s newest free over-the-air national TV network.

The Nest is a gathering place for comfort food TV, comprised of reality series and celebrity-driven family shows.

Drive Auto is the automotive marketing division of Sinclair, offering advertising tools, technology, and expert marketing guidance for auto dealers of all sizes.

Free State’s mission is to provide the federal government, along with state and local agencies, a full suite of targeted digital marketing and advertising solutions to help government agencies communicate with the American public effectively and efficiently.

Sinclair Broadcast Group’s Long Form Sales Division is designed to provide a one-stop solution to paid programming across all Sinclair television stations.

Sinclair National Sales provides advertisers the unique ability to reach viewers and potential customers on a single market, multiple market, and regional basis.

Sinclair Media Networks (SMN) is the division of Sinclair that reaches the company’s entire broadcast audience across its national footprint.

Dielectric is a designer and manufacturer of broadcast systems including all components from transmitter output to antenna.

NEXTGEN Broadcast, also known as ATSC 3.0, offers innovative new features to enhance and expand your broadcast viewing experience.

ONE Media Technologies is developing, building, and deploying the “Next Generation Broadcast Platform” that enables broadcasters to reimagine use of their television channels.