Synopsis

The Stoneman Murders is a fictitious tale based on the real life footpath stoning incidents that made headlines in the early 80s in Mumbai.

Director: Manish Gupta

Cast: Kay Kay Menon, Arbaaz Khan, Vikram Gokhale

Rating: ***

The Stoneman Murders is a fictitious tale based on the real life footpath stoning incidents that made headlines in the early 80s in Mumbai. While the mystery behind the case still remains unsolved, the appeal of the film lies in its smart storytelling that cinematically solves the mystery behind the murders and furthermore explains how the case still remains unsolved in police records and public eye till today.

Sub-inspector Sanjay Shelar (Kay Kay Menon) is suspended from his duty for his violent attitude. Under the backing of senior officer Satam (Vikram Gokhale) he is assigned to carry out parallel investigation on the mysterious murders happening on Mumbai footpaths where poor innocent people are ruthlessly slaughtered by a serial killer who smashes the victim's face with a stone. Sanjay sets out to track this Stoneman to redeem his tarnished image. Rival officer Kedar Phadke (Arbaaz Khan) comes as a barrier in his investigation.

Writer-director Manish Gupta uses some regular tricks of the trade to induce thrills. The viewer is smart enough not to presume those characters to be the culprit, towards whom the narrative is straightforwardly directing. The director's attempt at diverting attention shows off. Then there are those delusional thrills of the Darna Zaroori Hai (co-written and co-directed by Gupta) types where the background score blares up.

With the 80s setting perhaps the director overlooks the contemporary audience while attempting some scenes from the same era where the heroine ejects out bullets from the wounded hero or where the hero is mistaken to be the murderer since he's holding the stabbed dagger. A backless profile shot of the heroine is so unessential that a dance-bar item number appears comparatively more situational. The superstitious shade given to the Stoneman, though appears as the most obvious characterization, sounds more believable than the probable supernatural or psychotic insinuations.

Despite the liberties and loopholes, the film succeeds considerably in living up to its suspense-thriller genre. Most whodunit movies have good buildup to the suspense but the thrill dissipates somewhere towards the end with the film culminating to an average or anticipated climax. The Stoneman Murders primarily scores brownie points for its smart execution of the climax. The identity of the killer comes as a pleasant shock. Even after that director Manish Gupta ends the story on a smart note by making the narrative sound as a real-life allegory making you believe as if the Stoneman incident was actually solved but not revealed publicly for vested interests.

Though the setting doesn't demand extensive recreation of the 80s era since the locations are more confined to subways, station platforms and slum bylanes, art director (Satish Chipkar) sensibly restructures the bygone aura with Lifebuoy jingles, Panama cigarette butts, Shekhar Kapur in Digjam suiting hoardings and retro movie posters. The editing though crisp could have been more effective.

Kay Kay Menon is as dependable as always in giving a gem of a performance in his quest to unravel the Stoneman mystery. Vikram Gokhale suits the regular authoritative role. Arbaaz Khan has pretty less to do. Rukhsar looks good but has pretty less to show other than her nude back. Getting her voice dubbed could help.

The Stoneman Murders is a modest murder mystery that doesn't prematurely kill the thrill.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

Key challenges that will welcome CS Setty as he takes the corner office at SBI

Infy tossed it out as a wrong ANSR. It’s now helping Accenture make the right move.

Did Google fall behind in the AI race because of WFH? Patent filings tell a different story.

The forces at play slicing India’s big family business conglomerates

Change of heart at RBI? Can banks look forward to new lines of business?

Stock Radar: This Sensex IT stock with Rs 4.5 lakh crore m-cap is poised for new highs: time to buy?

1

2

3