David Rovics has been called the musical voice of the progressive movement in the US. Amy Goodman has called him “the musical version of Democracy Now!” Since the mid-1990s, Rovics has spent most of his time on the road, playing hundreds of shows every year throughout North America, Europe, Latin America, the Middle East and Japan. He and his songs have been featured on national radio programs in the US, Canada, Britain, Ireland, Italy, Sweden, Denmark, and elsewhere. He has shared the stage regularly with leading intellectuals (Noam Chomsky, Howard Zinn), activists (Medea Benjamin, Ralph Nader), politicians (Dennis Kucinich, George Galloway), musicians (Billy Bragg, the Indigo Girls), and celebrities (Martin Sheen, Susan Sarandon). He has performed at dozens of massive rallies throughout North America and Europe and at thousands of conferences, college campuses, and folk clubs throughout the world. He has loads of MP3s available for free download on his website, www.davidrovics.com, along with CDs, links, etc. More importantly, he’s really good. He will make you laugh, he will make you cry, and he will make the revolution irresistible.

Book events

Reviews

More from David

Praise

“David Rovics is the musical version of Democracy Now!”

—Amy Goodman, host, Democracy Now!

“David is a fine songwriter and a good activist.”

—Utah Phillips

Book Events

Reviews

The Explosion of Deferred Dreams: A Review

Sing for Your Supper in Folk Roots Magazine

Explosion of Deferred Dreams in Socialism and Democracy Journal

Interviews

Discussion with Mic Crenshaw, host of the podcast series, It Did Happen Here

Rebel Songs (2021): new album from David Rovics and friends

David Rovics and George Katsiaficas in Conversation

David Rovics and Peter Cole talk about Ben Fletcher on Fifth Estate Live

David Rovics on Get Your News On With Ron

ABC #93: Takin’ It To The Streets— David Rovics on A Brief Chat

Mentions

David Rovics Music Video— I’m a Better Anarchist Than You

David Rovics Music Video Occupy Wall Street

David Rovics Song for Bradley Manning

Blog