I'm a big Badfinger fan which, via singer/guitarist Joey Molland, was the link that led me to the short-lived Natural Gas.

In the wake of Badfinger's on-and-off existence, in 1975 Molland was getting ready to record a solo album. He happened to cross paths with ex-Colosseum and Uriah Heep bassist Mark Clarke who was also interested in a solo project. Finding mutual musical interests, the pair decided on a collaboration, bringing in ex-Humble Pie drummer Jerry Shirley and keyboardist David Kaffinetti. The quartet began rehearsing and playing small concerts and within a couple of months Kaffinetti was gone, replaced by former Sutherland Brothers and Quiver keyboard player Peter Wood.

Signed by Larry Uttal's Private Stock label, the band initially planned to use Bealtes roadie Mal Evans as producer, but in the end they ended up working with Mountain member/producer Felix Papallardi. Released in 1976, the cleverly-titled "Natural Gas" was a nice extension of Badfinger-styled power-pop. Molland's highly commercial voice underscored the comparison to Badfinger, as did the album's mixture of power ballads ('Once Again (A Love Song)' and 'I Believe It's Love'), and more up-tempo rockers ('Little Darlin'' and ''I've Been Waitin''). And that epitamized the album's strengths and weakness. Anyone who liked Badfinger, or other second generation Beatles-inspired bands was likely to enjoy the collection (I certainly did). On the other hand, with the possible exception of 'Dark Cloud', the album had a somewhat "seen it, done, it, have the tee-shirt" feel. Yeah, there really wasn't a great deal of originality to be heard in these grooves. The other thing I'd mention is that the album had a strange, sort of dead sound. I originally thought it had something to do with my stereo, but even when played on a upgraded system (Rega turntable with an Elys 2 cartridge) the mix sounded dull and flat. Blame producer Papalladi.

"Natural Gas" track listing:

(side 1)

1.) Little Darlin' (Joey Molland - Molland) - 3:08

Molland's instantly recognizable voice meant the opening rocker 'Little Darlin'' had a distinctive Badfinger power-pop feel and flavor. There wasn't anything particular original about the song (in fact it was fun to play spot-the-influence), but Molland and company brought an infectious energy to the song that made it fun. Ironically, former-Badfinger guitarist Tom Evans also recorded a cover of the song while a member of The Dodgers. rating: **** stars

2.) Once Again (A Love Song) (Joey Molland) - 3:55

Yes, it was incredibly saccharine, but the combination of Molland's gasping vocals, hyper-pretty melody, and a nice lead guitar solo made the ballad 'Once Again (A Love Song)' a guilty pleasure. One of the better songs on the album, it was easy to understand why the track was tapped as a single. rating: **** stars

3.) You Can Do It (Mark Clarke - Peter Wood) - 2:55

A mid-tempo rocker with some nice harmony vocals and quality drum work from Shirley, 'You Can Do I' may have been the album's most readily radio-friendly track which probably goes to explain why it wasn't released as a single. After all, why would a record label want to enjoy a hit? You can hear producer Papallardi on backing vocals. rating: **** stars

4.) I've Been Waitin' (Joey Molland) - 2:15

Penned by Molland, 'I've Been Waitin'' was a tasty rocker that echoed the best of his Badfinger catalog. Complete with catchy melody and some excellent slide guitar, this was one of the album's creative highpoints. rating: **** stars

5.) I Believe It's Love (Joey Molland - Jerry Shirley) - 4:02

I'm not sure who handled lead vocals on this one, but 'I Believe It's Love' was probably the album's best ballad. With a simple and straightforward melody, glistening 10 c.c. 'I'm Not In Love'-styled harmonies, and some great Mark Clarke bass, the results were charming. rating: **** stars

(side 2)

1.) Right Time (Mark Clarke) - 3:47

One of two tracks penned by Clarke, 'Right Time' was a bouncy pop tune that served to showcased Peter Wood's keyboards (Hammond B3?). The vocal arrangement was actually really good, almost Queen-like, though the rest of the song was slightly lacking. rating: *** stars

2.) Christmas Song (Joey Molland) - 4:58

Opening up with some of Wood's prettiest work, 'Christmas Song' was one of those songs that took a couple of spins to catch your attention. Molland sound at his most vulnerable on the track which for some reason has always reminded me of an early Billy Joel track. rating: *** stars

3.) Miracle Mile (Mark Clarke) - 2:43

'Miracle Mile' had a nifty, almost rockabilly rhythm to it. Fun, mindless bar band boogie tune. rating: *** stars

4.) Dark Cloud (Joey Molland) - 2:59

'Dark Cloud' was easily the album's stand out performance and one of the best things Molland's ever written. A shimmering mid-tempo rocker, the song had everything needed to be a hit - great melody that you found yourself humming along to, assured vocal, and plenty of jangle and fuzz guitar ... of course it wasn't tapped as a single. rating: ***** stars

5.) St. Louis Blues (Mark Clarke) - 2:39

To my ears 'St. Louis Blues' has always sounded like a Foghat slice of boogie rock. Clarke's voice even recalled the late Lonesome Dave Peverett, while his aggressive bass work recalled Foghat's Tony Stevens. I'm a big Foghat fan so I didn't have any problem with the track. rating: **** stars

The album spun off a series of three singles:

- 1976's 'Right Time' b/w 'Dark Cloud' (Private Stock catalog number PS45100)

- 1976's 'Right Time' b/w 'Miracle Man' (Private Stock catalog number PVT 71)

- 1976's 'Once Again (A Love Song)' b/w 'Once Again (A Love Song)' (Private Stock catalog number PS46116)

With a better mix the album would easily have warranted four stars which makes you wonder what the band could have achieved had things worked out slightly differently (a different, slightly less flatulent name might not have hurt them either). All those criticisms aside, the collection was still worth hearing.

The band actively toured in support of the album, scoring an opening slot on Peter Frampton's "Frampton Comes Alive" American tour. Unfortunately, artistic and personal differences arose during the tour and when the American leg was complete, Molland handed in his notice, effectively spelling the end of the band.