Ellis County is a medium-sized county in Texas with a population of about 192,000. Located south of the city of Dallas, it is one of the constituent counties of the broader Dallas-Ft. Worth metropolitan area. Nearby counties include Dallas, Henderson, Hill, Johnson, Kaufman, Navarro, and Tarrant. Significant employers include Georgia Pacific, Owens Corning, and James Hardie Industries.

Owing partially to the presence of numerous industrial employers and plentiful opportunities, Ellis County has experienced robust population growth in the last decade. Because of its proximity to the core of the Dallas-Ft. Worth metro area. Employers in this area are more likely to encounter applicants from other metro counties. Likewise, employers in the core of the metro could encounter individuals from Ellis County looking for work in the city.

Considering how people move throughout your metro is critical when designing a background check process. Looking at only one or two counties allows important information to slip through the cracks.

Employers today must take steps to ascertain that they know as much about an applicant’s suitability and trustworthiness. This begins with tools such as the cover letter, the job application, and of course, an interview process—but these things won’t always reveal the key facts you need to know, such as whether someone has ever been convicted of a violent felony. Using criminal background checks, you can dig deeper into a person’s record in and around the metro area and enhance confidence in your hiring decisions.

Adding steps of due diligence into the process doesn’t have to mean slowing everything down to a standstill. With solutions from backgroundchecks.com, conducting a rapid but thorough vetting process is possible for companies of any size. We compile records from systems nationwide and maintain this database to provide businesses with instant access to results. As useful and powerful as these tools are, you must use them in accordance with state and federal laws.

Texas as a whole is very hands-off when it comes to restricting employer prerogative when hiring. No fair chance or ban the box laws apply statewide, so employers in most counties may still ask questions about criminal history on job applications. Dallas County has a “ban the box” rule that requires a delayed background check, but there are no such rules in Ellis County. Remember that before you order a check, you must provide a standalone disclosure of your intent to do so and receive a signed consent from the applicant.

Additionally, there are currently no notable restrictions on how employers in Texas, Ellis County, or the Dallas metro may apply their drug testing policies to applicants or employees. Without state regulations, we encourage employers to review their responsibilities under federal law. These include the Fair Credit Reporting Act and others.

Beginning your background check process is simple once you’ve squared away compliance. With US OneSEARCH, you can instantly start vetting candidates when you’re ready. This reporting product includes criminal records from Ellis County and the entire Dallas-Ft. Worth metro area. For more information about our data sources, explore our coverage map. Because of the nature of the metro, exploring results from multiple counties can enhance your confidence. Use the county-level court search for information on recently closed or opened cases in places your applicant has lived.

Background reports generated by backgroundchecks.com include information from the following:

Texas Department of Public Safety – Felony and misdemeanor traffic records from 1975-present

Texas sex offender registry

These reports can include the subject’s:

Name

Offense/Charge

Sentence

Disposition

Take advantage of the diverse labor pool in the Dallas-Ft. Worth area with reliable reporting tools from backgroundchecks.com today.