Positioned in North Central Texas just south of Dallas County, Ellis County’s neighbors are Kaufman County to the east and Johnson County to the west. Hill and Navarro counties border Ellis County to the south. Ellis County was pulled from Navarro County and established by the Texas State legislature in 1849. The county was named for Richard Ellis, who was the president of the 1836 Constitutional Congress declaring the future state’s independence from Mexico. Ellis’ county seat is Waxahachie, TX. “Waxahachie” is a Tejas Native American word meaning “buffalo creek.” Ellis County has a total area of 952 square miles and is home to 22 cities and towns. The population of Ellis county (as of 2019) is 184,826. And, like every county in Texas, its residents have to come to grips with paying the Ellis County property tax. Read on to learn about Ellis County property taxes, from rates to due dates and more. And if you’re in danger of owing delinquent property taxes in Ellis County, Texas, find out how Tax Ease can help ease your mind – and financial situation – with a loan.

Who Pays Property Taxes in Ellis County?

Anyone who owns property – be it residential or commercial – must pay property taxes in Ellis County. This is true throughout the state of Texas, whether you live in Harris County, Denton County – or any other county in Texas. The one upside to living in Texas is that, unlike other states, Texans don’t pay income tax. And the property taxes collected stay in neighborhoods and pay for services like police and fire safety.

What is the Ellis County Property Tax Rate?

Personal property taxes in Ellis County will set residents back an average of $2,501 per household. The average Ellis County property tax rate is 1.84% of a home’s value. Ellis County residents should plan on spending about 3.49% of their yearly income in property taxes. Of all the counties in Texas, King County is the one that has the highest property tax, collecting an average of $5,066 each year. The far less affluent Terrell County has the lowest property tax in Texas. Residents there pay an average of just $285 annually.

Why Does The Ellis County Property Tax Rate Vary By City?

The final amount you pay will be calculated based on the Ellis County property tax rate plus the amount tacked on by your local municipality. Here are the cities that pay Ellis County, Texas property taxes:

Alma

Bardwell

Cedar Hill

Crisp

Ennis

Ferris

Garret

Grand Prairie

Glenn Heights

Ike

Italy

Mansfield

Maypearl

Midlothian

Milford

Oak Leaf

Ovilla

Pecan Hill

Red Oak

Rankin

Waxahachie

Alma has the lowest property tax rate in Ellis County and – as you might expect – Waxahachie, the county seat, has the highest. Calculating your property taxes in Ellis County can be confusing. The Ellis Appraisal District Chief does a decent job of explaining how property taxes are calculated. If you’re still not sure how this works, you may just want to wait until you get your tax bill.

How Is My Home Appraised for Ellis County Property Tax?

The market value of your home depends on what it would sell for on the open market. In each country’s appraisal district, it’s the tax assessor’s responsibility to determine this amount. The value is based on prior assessments of your property and what houses in your neighborhood are selling for. This is the taxable value of a residential property. Your taxing authority will multiply the value of your property by the tax rate for your district to determine how much you’ll be paying in Ellis County, Texas, property taxes. The Ellis Appraisal District is responsible for the amount at which your home is appraised. If you think your property has been appraised incorrectly, you may file a protest with them. It’s also possible that you may qualify for an exemption if you’re over 65 years old or disabled. A homestead exemption may also be available for some homeowners. You can find valuable resources for property tax assistance and find other tax information at the Texas Comptroller’s Office.

What Is The Ellis County Property Tax Due Date?

This is the official calendar with the dates you need to know about Ellis County property taxes:

January 1: Your taxable value and homestead exemption status are determined.

April 15: The final day for you to file renditions or request an extension.

May 31: Written protests to the Appraisal Review Board must be submitted. (Or by the 30th day after the Appraisal Review Board mails you a notice of appraisal value, whichever is later.)

October: You should get your tax bill this month.

January 31: The Ellis County property tax due date — your deadline for paying property taxes without incurring interest and penalties.

What Happens If I Don’t Make My Ellis County Property Tax Payment by January 31st?

January 31st is the property tax due date across Texas. You never want to wake up on February 1st and realize you haven’t paid your Ellis County property taxes. If this happens, your taxing authority will take the following action:

Slap you with penalties that could be as much as 20% of the amount you owe.

Increase your tax bill with up to 12% in interest charges per year.

Add fees, like mailing charges for late notices from the tax collector.

Place a tax lien on your home eventually, meaning you could lose it.

These penalties and fees begin February 1st and will continue to accrue until your Ellis County delinquent taxes have been paid. If you’ve already gotten behind on your property taxes, it’s time to contact Tax Ease for relief.

Tax Ease Has The Solution For Delinquent Property Taxes in Ellis County, Texas

A loan from Tax Ease will pay your delinquent property taxes in Ellis County, Texas and help you get a fresh start. Penalties and fees from delinquent property taxes can be debilitating. Don’t wait another day! We proudly offer residential property tax loans and have solutions for business owners with commercial property tax loans, too. Tax Ease has a quick and simple 5-step Texas property tax loan process to put your tax relief in motion. Contact Tax Ease today!

Apply Now