Cédric Aguillon

Je n’ai pas de graveur DVD (et pourtant je danse, si si)

France

A project centred on accident and chance, inherent to the life of the body.

Choreography Cédric Aguillon

Music Franz Schubert, Piano Trio N°2 op.100, Andante con moto (Trio Wanderer, Harmonia Mundi)

Dancers Cédric Aguillon, Cécile Angleraud, Henrique Furtado, Natalia Jaime-Cortez & Bleuène Madelaine

Born in 1974, Cédric Aguillon lives and works in Nice and Paris. Initially trained in mathematics and finance, his observations of the natural world led him to explore chaos theory, while mathematics took him to the limits of our perception of the universe, and the financial markets provided the ultimate theatre of random flux and risk. For the past decade, he has explored contemporary dance through courses and workshops in a variety of Paris venues (Micadanses, Ménagerie de Verre, Maison des pratiques artistiques amateurs…). He remains today an associate director of a firm of financial advisors and believes that if ‘sociology is a combat sport,’* contemporary dance is in the front line.

* Title of a film by Pierre Carles.

Philip Berlin, Jean Capeille, Tristan Ihne

I Might Steal Your Clothes

France-Sweden

In I might steal your clothes, audience and dancers all face the same way, in a single, unbroken line of perspective.

Choreography Philip Berlin

Idea & Concept Philip Berlin, Jean Capeille & Tristan Ihne

Performers Jean Capeille, Marc Galvez, Tristan Ihne, Vivien Ingrams, Lucile Moulin, Sakiko Oishi, Marion Rastouil & Elisa Ribes

Three artists – all dancers with CCN-Ballet de Lorraine – have come together to create this new piece. Born in Stockholm in 1991, Philip Berlin trained at the Swedish Royal Ballet before working with Ballet Cullberg and choroegraphers Mats Ek, Jo Strömgren and Örjan Andersson. Born in Paris in 1989, Jean Capeille studied contemporary dance at the Conservatoire National Supérieur de Musique et de Danse in Paris (contemporary dance stream). In addition to performing, he is a contributor to Versus, a new review dedicated to the world of dance. Born in Geneva in 1986, Tristan Ihne trained in classical dance at the Geneva Dance Center. He performed works from the classical repertory with the Ballet de Bordeaux, before joining the Ballet de Lorraine in 2007.

Carolina Castañeda, Marie De Testa

La Danse des étoiles, Éloge du mouvement

Belgium-France-Mexico

La Danse des étoiles… uses incandescent gesture to recreate the star-map of the night sky above the theatre, inside the auditorium.

Conception Carolina Castañeda & Marie de Testa

Participants Pablo Arellano, Betty Bayen, Carolina Castañeda, Raphaël Ceriez, Marion Clément, Taïeb Elie, Marcos Garcia, Stéphanie Garcia, Julien Goeffier, César Gourdon, Elsa Grzeszczak, Montserrat Guzmán, Laure Haulet, Paloma Hidalgo, Manon Jovenon, Thomas Junca, Carole Labouze, Christelle Lazareno, Zineb Loh, Flavia Lombardo, Helena Milbach, Fanny Moal, Marine Moal, Adrian Moreau, Marcela Moreau, Mario Nuñez, Catherine Radosa, Garance Rivoal, Triana Rodriguez, Lucía Serrano, Marie de Testa, Ellen Wolf (distribution en cours)

Carolina Castañeda and Marie de Testa were both born in 1987, both with dual nationality. Carolina Castañeda Van Waeyenberge is Belgian and Mexican. Trained and working as a communications professional in Mexico City and Montreal (specializing in digital graphics), she is fascinated by video, drawing, theatre, philosophy and astronomy. She is the author of video works and articles for cultural webzines, and collaborates with Orly Beigel, a Mexican agency specializing in concerts and cultural events. Marie de Testa is Franco-Mexican. She studied architecture and theatre in Mexico and Paris before settling in New York, where she lives and works today. She was part of the team representing Mexico at the Rotterdam architecture biennale, and also works as an actor, collaborating with Mexican director Arturo Jimenez and performing in New York at the West 45th Street Theater and the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Her personal artistic practice explores dramatic structure, and the dramatization of architecture through performance, photography and installations.

Chien-Hao Chang

The Next Three

Taiwan

The Next Three is a solo-turned trio: three bodies, three personalities, three brothers.

Choreography Chien-Hao Chang

Music Jun Miyake, Lillies Of The Valley

Dancers Chien-HaoChang, Chien-Chih Chang & Chien-Kuei Chang

With the support from the Ministry of Culture of Taiwan

Born in 1985, Chien-Hao Chang lives and works in Taipei (Taiwan). After graduating in dance at the Taipei National University of the Arts, he secured a grant to take part in the 2009 American Dance Festival, and subsequently collaborated with New York’s Nai-Ni Chen Dance Company. Back home in Taiwan, he performed in several pieces by choreographer Huang-Yi, and with Body Theatre and Meimage companies. After travelling in Europe for several months, he founded the Chang Dance Theater in 2011 with his brothers Chien-Chih and Chien-Kuei, born in 1986 and 1988. In 2012 he performed his solo work, The Next, in Hong Kong as the guest of the City Contemporary Dance Company. The Next Three turns the solo into a trio, premiered at Danse élargie.

Olga Dukhovnaya

Korowod

Ukraine

Korowod explores organized, collective movement, from synchronized swimming to military marches and the korowod itself – a traditional Russian dance performed by large groups.

Choreography Olga Dukhovnaya

Music Giorgos Apostolakos

Costume design Olga Dukhovnaya & Konstantin Lipatov

Artistic advisors Isabelle Launay & Konstantin Lipatov

Dancers Amalia Alba Vergara, Sonia Garcia, Milena Keller, Lisa Miramond & Annabelle Pirlot

Production CNDC Angers (réalisé dans le cadre du programme du master essais et en partenariat avec l’Université Paris 8)

Born in Ukraine in 1984, Olga Dukhovnaya trained in dance at P.A.R.T.S. Brussels, graduating in 2006. She has subsequently worked on a number of original new works: Monkey Production (2006) combines dance, video art and animation; and Kuleshov Effect (2010) explores the beginnings of cinema (the piece was developed as part of the international SKITE project). She danced with Boris Charmatz in Levée des conflits in 2010 and Enfant in 2011. She received a European danceWEB grant in 2009, and joined the Essais training programme at France’s Centre National de Danse Contemporaine, Angers, in 2012.

Arthur Eskenazi, Jennifer Lauro Mariani

Ipse

France

Ipse is a piece about returning home, the desert, and desire.

Script Arthur Eskenazi & Jennifer Lauro Mariani

Direction Jennifer Lauro Mariani

Direction VIDEO Arthur Eskenazi SOUNDTRACK Arthur Eskenazi, Jennifer Lauro Mariani & Loran Qui

Dancers Marcel Devillers, Arthur Eskenazi, Charles Lepine, Timothée Magot & Adrian Schindler

Born a day apart in 1986, Arthur Eskenazi and Jennifer Lauro Mariani met in 2005, when Arthur Eskenazi enrolled at the Beaux-Arts in Paris (he graduated in June 2012.) Eskenazi’s work explores the notion of territory and its representation in art, initially through the medium of painting and cartography, and more recently through performance, video and installations. Visual installations and documentary work relay the experience of his performances (mostly comprising extended walks through Paris). Jennifer Lauro Mariani entered the Beaux-Arts in Lyon in 2005, after early theatrical training with the Ecole du Spectacle in Sèvres. She interrupted her training at the Beaux-Arts to carry out research at the Centre d’Etudes en Histoire et Théorie des Arts at France’s Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS). She defended her thesis on the role of the spectator in contemporary documentary theatre in September 2011. She is a co-founder of Les Syllogomanes, a collective developing projects for performances and exhibitions, of which Arthur Eskenazi is also a member.

Chloé Fabre

Pinky&Killers

France

Based on a fragment of text by Murakami Ryû, Chloé Fabre presents a variation for several duos, drawing on the vocal and choreographic practices of karaoke.

Conception Chloé Fabre

Music Pinky & Killers, Koi no kisetsu

Citation extrait de Chansons populaires de l’ère Showa, texte de Murakami Ryû (traduction Sylvain Cardonnel, Éditions Picquier)

With Anne-Claire Boulard, João Fernando Cabral, Mikaël Chirinian, Julie Coutureau, Ninon Le Gall, Pierre Garcia, Tujiko Noriko, Laetitia Rouiller & Anne Steffens

Conversation (voiceover) Mikaël Chirinian, Tujiko Noriko, Laetitia Rouiller, Anne Steffens, Karine Yaniv & Kawamura Yuki

Born in Marseille in 1974, Chloé Fabre lives and works in Paris. She is a graduate of the Beaux-Arts in Marseille, where she specialized in audio-visual media before studying scenography at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Arts et Techniques du Théâtre (ENSATT). After graduating, she worked as a scenographer and costume designer, with a number of directors and choreographers (Judith Depaule, Fabrice Lambert…) and was a co-founder of the collective La Mobile Boutique in 1998, presenting projects in a variety of formats, notably at Mains d’oeuvres, the Gaîté Lyrique and the CICV in Belfort. She has also acted in films by the Japanese film-maker and musician Tujiko Noriko. In 2002, she created the music band Exchpoptrue, with Christian Bouyjou and Radha Valli. Exchpoptrue produced pastiches of mass-market pop music, combining music and performance art. They performed widely in France and abroad, until 2007. The group signed with numerous record labels including Space Factory and Kitsuné, scoring their biggest success at numero uno in the Italian charts with their song Discoteca. For the past three years, Chloé Fabre has produced photographs and videos exploring the concept of disappearance, dissemination and doubling, through the use of cliché and everyday objects from popular culture. She has exhibited at Le Magasin in Grenoble, and travels frequently in Asia, where she held residencies at the Taipei Artist Village in Taiwan, in 2008 and 2010.

Viviana Moin, David Tv, Héléna Villovitch

Inevivitable

Argentina-France

A piece combining dance and expanded cinema, filmed movement and arm’s-length projection.

Conception, direction & performance Viviana Moin, David TV & Héléna Villovitch (MTV)

Viviana Moin, David TV and Helena Villovitch have come together for the first time, to present a piece for Danse élargie. Viviana Moin began dancing in Buenos Aires, before moving to Paris to study improvisation with Simone Forti, Mark Tompkins and Steve Paxton, and collaborating with choreographers including Jérôme Bel, Christophe Haleb and Ayelen Parolin. Working alone or with other artists, she organizes improvised performances and dance shows, at venues including the Fondation Cartier pour l’art contemporain and the Centre Pompidou in Paris, and the Festival Faits d’Hiver. Born in Bourges, David TV lives in Paris, and works in Paris and Athens. He is a founder and member of the group MOLOKINO, with Agathe Gris, Cécile Bortoletti and Héléna Villovitch, devising expanded cinema performances (using non-traditional modes of projection), in France, Germany and Greece. His solo work includes cinema and video installations presented at venues including the Galerie des Galeries in Paris, Galerie Eliane Levy in Brussels, and Hbc in Berlin. Héléna Villovitch is another native of Bourges, now living and working in Paris. Since 1998, she has authored novels for children and young adults and short stories, published with École des Loisirs and Éditions de l’Olivier. In 2005, she co-produced a 35-mm full-length feature, Bye bye tiger. In 2007, she choreographed a production for Yves-Noël Genod, presented at the Avignon Festival, and devised a performance reading with dance (with Viviana Moin), as part of the Nouveau Festival at the Centre Pompidou in 2012.

Martin Darondeau, Julien Labigne, Fannie Outeiro

Clostrofolie

France

In Clostrofolie, two authors write a scene for the theatre, as their thoughts come to life on stage.

Authors Martin Darondeau, Julien Labigne & Fannie Outeiro

Direction Martin Darondeau & Julien Labigne

Performers Jordi Le Bolloc'h, Noémie Chicheportiche, Julien Labigne, Paola Lipzyc, Mehdi Mangal, Maud Marquet, Franck Muon, Fannie Outeiro, Pablo Pauly, Guillaume Ravoire, Arthur Romain, Guillaume Romain, Bertrand De Vathaire & Hyacinthe Ymayanga

Born in 1985, Fannie Outeiro trained in dance at the Conservatoire in Troyes before turning to theatre, initially at the Cours Florent, and finally at the Conservatoire National Supérieur d’Art Dramatique in Paris. Since graduating, she has worked in theatre (with Lisa Wurmser at the Théâtre de la Tempête and Clémentine Célarié and Alain Sachs at the Théâtre de Paris), as well as in radio, television and cinema (she dances in Philippe Garrel’s latest film Un été brûlant). She was a performer in Tatiana Julien’s La Mort & l’Extase, presented at Danse élargie in 2010. Born in 1981, Julien Labigne trained in management and acting before taking up a career as an illusionist. He appears in the show Magicien(s) tout est écrit, by Arthur Jugnot, at the Folies Bergères, the Splendid, and the Théâtre Hébertot. In 2008, he trained Jean Dujardin, Jean Réno and Alice Taglioni in sleight of hand techniques for the film Cash. In the same year, he created the special effects for Edouard Baer’s show Looking for Mister Castang. His book Astuces et manipulations mentales was published by Editions Alternatives in 2008. Born in 1990, Martin Darondeau trained as an actor at the Cour Simon and Acting International before studying as a movie director at the Ecole Supérieure de Réalisation Audiovisuelle, from 2009. He has made a number of short features, including Bref, j’ai voulu parodier bref, and directed a production of Pascal Elbé’s play, Pour ceux qui restent, starring Fannie Outeiro. He has recently finished co-writing a show, Mister Chance, with Julien Labigne.

Raffaele Pé

CITY scanner

Italy

In CITY scanner, scanner, a video link allows the flux of the city to shape the dancer’s movements on stage, in real time or shortly recorded broadcast.

Conception & Direction Raffaele Pé

In collaboration with Florencia Guerberof & Leticia Miramontes

Choreography & film Florencia Guerberof & Leticia Miramontes

Live video images Giulia Bonisoli, Giulia Lechi & Maria Elena Soriero

Lights & dispositif vidéo Alessandro Losi

Dancers Florencia Guerberof, Leticia Miramontes & Kosuke Yoshizaki

Raffaele Pé is an architect and musician, born in Italy in 1985. He studied vocal and instrumental music from age 7, and was a winner of the Monteverdi Young Artist Scheme (awarded by Sir John Eliot Gardner) in 2007. Today, in collaboration with a number of ensembles across Europe, he explores a vocal repertoire extending from the Renaissance to contemporary music. A graduate of the school of architecture and urban planning at Milan’s Scuola Politecnica di Design, he is currently researching a doctorate at the same school, and is a visiting researcher at the Royal College of Art in London. His research interests focus on the urban fabric through an examination of space in the context of urban planning, design and digital technology. He has collaborated with composer Martino Traversa and the electro-acoustic music workshop Promoteo de Parma in Italy, currently presided by Claudio Abbado. Recent publications relating to his research include: Hyper-Localism and Parametric Mapping for Collaborative Urbanism (2012), Organised Networks and the Image of the European Archipelago (2011), Difference beyond Metaphor for a Discriminatory Dialogue between Music and Architecture (2011), and Gli Strumenti dell’Analisi Morfologica e i Fondamenti della Contemporaneità (2009).

Mélanie Perrier

Imminence

France

The imminence of touch between two bodies, face to face, intimately illuminated.

Conception & choreography Mélanie Perrier

Musical creation Silvia Borzelli

Regards lumineux Philippe Gladieux & Valérie Sigward

Performers Doria Bélanger, Stéphanie Delpuch & Blandine Pinon

Thanks Matthieu Bajolet, Emmanuelle Dubois, Aurélie Gandit, Stéphane Graillot, Denis Lassiaille, Céline Médour, Sylvain Riéjou & Medhi Zouaoui

With the support from Théâtre de la Bastille

Partner Théâtre de l’Agora - Scène Nationale D’évry et de L'essonne

Born in 1976, Mélanie Perrier trained in the visual arts before turning to choreography, taking part in numerous workshops with Mark Tompkins, Deborah Hay, Lisa Nelson, Anna Halprin, Laurent Pichaud, Antonia Baehr and others. She founded her own company, 2Minimum, in 2010. She collaborates with dancer Julie Laporte, with whom she co-devised Partitions de promenade, an outdoor choreographic piece for a group or duo, presented at the Lyon Biennale in 2010, and in Montreal and Montpellier. She has collaborated and directed pieces with Catherine Contour, Véronique Albert and Jean-Paul Thibeau. As director of the not-forprofit association Laboratoire du geste, founded in 2005, she explores the aesthetics of gesture, and the aesthetics of artistic scores, manuals and protocols. In 2011-12 she was a participant on the Transforme programme at the Fondation Royaumont, near Paris.

Amélie Poirier

Hommage à la médecine chinoise (et à l’homéopathie sous réserve)

France

A tribute in the form of a classical dance competition.

Ballet master Amélie Poirier

Technical Claire Caput

Created in collaboration with & perform by Coralie Choffat, Lucien Fradin, Brune Gournay, Rémi Hollant, Mikaëla Ortola, Amélie Poirier & Audrey Robin

Amélie Poirier was born in 1984. She was a classical dancer for ten years, before turning to theatre, contemporary dance and butô. She trained in dramatic art at the Conservatoire de Lille, and studied puppetry at the Conservatoire d’Amiens and the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Arts de la Marionette in Charleville-Mézières. She has worked with Mathieu Jedrazak’s Brigitte Nielsen Society in Lille, including the solo performance La jeune fille et la morve, premiered at the Vivat la danse festival in Armentières in 2011. Her own collective, XXY, develops choreographic works centred on narrative forms exploring the concept of intimacy through artistic and sporting practice. Her show Cindy vs. Julie, based on the world of GRS (rhythmic gymnastics), was presented in April 2012 at Lille’s Maison Folie de Wazemmes for the Festival de l’Entorse and the Rencontres Féministes. She holds residencies for 2012-13 at the Oiseau-Mouche in Roubaix, Vivat in Armentières and La Chapelle in Montreal. She also participates in courses in video and electro-acoustic music at the Centre des Écritures Contemporaines Numériques, and with the Art Zoyd company.

Ilona Roth

The Hype

Kazakhstan-Austria

In The Hype, four female dancers form a strange, homogenous group, punctuated by astonishing attempts at escape.

Conception, choreography & staging Ilona Roth

Sond Bernhard Höchtel & Manuel Mitterhuber

Choreography & danse Eva Borrmann, Edith Buttingsrud Pedersen, Anna Majder & Olga Swietlicka

With the support from the Austrian Cultural Forum

Born in Kazakhstan in 1981, Ilona Roth settled in Germany at the age of seven. She has lived and worked in Linz, Austria, since 2003. After training in musical theatre, singing and contemporary dance, in Germany, Austria and the USA, she has turned to choreography, stage directing, teaching and acting. She is fascinated by physics and technology. In Linz, she is the co-founder (with Emmanuelle Vinh) of RedSapata, a contemporary dance venue providing spaces for contemporary artists, currently seeking to establish an international network for the presentation of their creations. Her own company Transitheart Productions creates stage productions, installations and films, including De_Forma (2006), a performance installation presented at the Ars Electronica Center in Austria, and the film The Hype (2011). The Hype received its stage premiere at the Posthof in Linz, in 2012.

With the support of

Pauline Simon

Exploit

France

Exploit: performance without a score.

Conception & choreography Pauline Simon

Audio editing Brice Pichard

With Jérôme Andrieu, Elodie Bergerault, Maëva Combescot, Éloïse Deschemins, Silvia Di Rienzo, Célia Gondol, Léa Lansade, Claire Laureau, Pauline Simon & Christina Towle

With the support from la Ménagerie de Verre in the context of Studiolabs, Mains d’Œuvres & the Arcadi network.

Thanks Éléonore Didier, Stéphane Graillot, Jérémie Mocquard & Julie Trouverie

Born on February 5, 1987, in Lyon, Pauline Simon studied dance at the Conservatoire National de Région in Lyon, and the Conservatoire National Supérieur de Musique et de Danse in Paris (contemporary dance stream) from 2000 to 2005. She was a production assistant for the premiere of the Peeping Tom company’s piece Le Sous-Sol in Brussels in 2006, and won the Talent Danse Adami competition the same year, with her solo performance Pays sage. She danced with choreographer Nathalie Pernette in three productions from 2007 to 2009: Le repas, La Maison, and Les Miniatures. She is currently working with Joanne Leighton at the Centre National Chorégraphique in Belfort, with Eléonore Didier for the solo piece IaiSSeRVenIR, and with Nina Santes and Kasper Toeplitz on Désastre, as part of the Transforme programme at the Fondation Royaumont. She has also taken part in Italian choreographer Ambra Senatore’s performance installation, Vente aux Enchères.

Claire Soubrier

Facing Landscapes

France

In Facing Landscapes, nine bodies are physically constrained to move together on stage.

Conception & direction Claire Soubrier

Sound Romain Louis Leroux

Assistant Camille Pomarède

Performers Johanna Aygalenq-Tomaschewski, Romain Louis Leroux, Élisa Le Merrer, Jeanne Moynot, Corinne Pelé, Louis Pierre-Lacouture, Céline Pujol, Claire Soubrier & Kevin Tourne

Born in Paris in 1982, Claire Soubrier lives and works in Brussels. She graduated from the Beaux-Arts in Nantes in 2007, and subsequently studied at the Ecole Cantonale d’Art in Lausanne, graduating in 2008. She has taken part in group exhibitions in Bordeaux, Geneva and Paris, and presented her first solo exhibition in Bordeaux in 2009, on the theme of portraiture. Since 2008, she has devised a series of photographic events under the title Star System, held at art venues including Tinbox in Bordeaux (2010) and Paris’s Gabriel & Gabriel gallery (2011). The shows feature choreographed ‘private views’ with guest artists, gallerists and collectors invited to pose for photographic portraits. In 2010, she became an associate of the Centre de Développement Chorégraphique du Cuvier in Artigues-près-Bordeaux, producing photographs to accompany the venue’s communications campaign. Since 2011, she has devised installations and videos featuring young children and lycée students experimenting with cardboard structures.

Yukio Suzuki

Accumulation of differential

Japan

Three women and one man confront their solitary bodies, on stage.

Choreography Yukio Suzuki

Soundtrack Alva Noto, T3 (for Dieter Rams) DANSEURS Haruka Akagi, Nao Ashimine, Taeko Horii & Yukio Suzuki

Born in 1972, Yukio Suzuki lives and works in Japan. He began his butô training in Asbestos-kan in 1997, and went on to dance in pieces by Ko Murobushi, Tuyoshi Shirai and Goro Namerikawa. In 2000, he founded the Yukio Suzuki Company KINGYO, and then choreographed a number of pieces, including Confronting silence, premiered at the Kyoto Art Center in 2007. The piece won the Toyota Choreography Award grand prix, and has been performed in Hong Kong, Romania and Korea. A subsequent work, etude, was premiered at Tokyo’s Setagaya Museum in 2009 and performed in May and June 2012 in the UK, Romania and Luxemburg. Suzuki’s works are notable for their documentary approach to choreography, with a focus on broken bodies and the gestural vocabulary of despair. He has choreographed works for other companies, too, notably the Tokyo City Ballet. He is also a teacher, conducting workshops for dancers, students and children.

Anne-Sophie Turion, Pia De Compiègne

Les Maîtres

Australia-France

Les Maîtres stages a random reality, perfectly animal yet strangely human.

Conception Pia de Compiègne & Anne-Sophie Turion

With William Adamiak & Ipkiss, Marc Ansel & Dude, Rodolphe Auté & Hermès, Patrice Babin & Doody, Chloé Bique & Gabin, Pascal Bisson & Ziggy, Alice Braitberg & Zya, Manuella Braun & Cassy, Carolyn Celestin & Marley, Madame Chamard & Bergam, Paula Chapuis-Rodriguez & Cookie, Corinne Delibes & Charlie, Baptiste Do & Danzô, Marie-Claude Dupont-Kollmann & Villette & Emma, Sabine Georges Coty & Glam (élève à l'École des chiens guides pour aveugles et malvoyants de Paris), Véronique Gohlen & Eole, André-Charles Idier & Topaze, Immanuel Ijiran & Timbo, Nathalie Leconte & Zaïka, Olivier Meynial & Gibusse, Jeanne Moynot & Casse-Noisette, Odile Roire & Paille, Henri Sendros-Mila & Sala, Franek Szabovic & Le Boy, Susana Villena & Leeloo

Thanks Nathalie Raoul & salon de toilettage Ma Toutou

Born in Paris in 1985, Anne-Sophie Turion trained in scenography at the Arts-Décoratifs in Paris. From 2008 to 2012, she premiered a number of theatrical and performance works, written, directed, staged and performed by her, including J’ai rencontré Michael Jackson, Perdues d’avance, Original soundtrack for a blank tape, and La mélodie de l’arrière-plan, notably performed at Paris’s 104 arts centre and Vancouver’s International Performance Biennale. As a scenographer, she has worked with artists including Clyde Chabot.

Born in 1986, Pia de Compiègne is a Franco-Australian scenographer, trained at the Arts-Décoratifs and the Beaux-Arts, in Paris. Her practices incorporate theatre, opera and exhibitions. In 2010, she joined the cross-disciplinary collective Agachon, with whom she develops exhibition projects. Most recently, she has worked with the Scène agency, designing exhibition spaces for venues including the Paris Cinémathèque and the new museum in Fromelles.

Together, Anne-Sophie Turion and Pia de Compiègne created the installation Le comble du vide, presented at the 104 in February 2009, and Sur cour ou sur rue, a performance-installation created in situ with the residents of a Paris square, describing the interior of their apartments to spectators, via Intercom.

Caro Tuut

Voir l’Invisible ////Performance Sensorielle Méditative

Belgium

Voir l’Invisible… will involve the entire theatre, audience included, in an internal, invisible movement.

Conception Caro Tuut

Leader Martha Rodezno

Technical support Héléna de Laurens

With Fabrice Baudart, Patrick Beauce, Nathalie Bentolila, Aya Berteaud, Elisabeth Celle, Christine Chardonnier, Lorette Cherel, Jean-Marc Chetrit, Célia Clayre, Rémi Constant, Nataliya Domina, Florence Durand, Manon Gignoux, Eve Girardot, Karine Grenier, Sara Hosxe, Judith Jallin, Anne-Claire Lafait, Jean Lionnet, Rita Marcher, Tamara Mila Vigo, Karima Ouadia, Marika Rizzi, Martha Rodezno, Pascale Salmon, Mathilde Sicot, Sanga Stuber Vandame, Sophie Topicol, Caro Tuut & Paeder Ua Maoilfinn

Born in 1985, in Belgium, Caro Tuut lives and works in Brussels, exploring theatre, writing, photography and video. Her own T(u)(u)(t)theater group premiered the performance work /// il faut en finir avec les chefs d’œuvre / ou / la liberté d’être nousmêmes / pièce documentaire fictionelle de / sur / et / avec Rémi Constant / Héléna de Laurens / Caroline Lionnet / Arthur Navellou / Elsa Pallarès Hugon / maintenant / nous entrons / vous entrez ///. She is in residence at the Théâtre de L’L in Brussels in May and June 2012, working on a new project. In April 2012, she assisted Tim Etchells on the premiere of La nuit suit le jour at the Musée de la danse, with a group of children from across Brittany.

Anatoli Vlassov

Tous

France-Russia

Nine dancers explore a near abroad territory.

Author choreographer Anatoli Vlassov

Specialized assistant Guénolé Lebrun

Project Assistant Matthias Herrmann

Performers Matthias Bloess, Aleksandar Boskovic, Thomas Dubois, Benjamin Lesieur, Dany Levy-Willard, Olivier Martin, Alexandre Miriel, Otto N'yap & André Pereira

Production Association Idcore

Coproduction E.S.A.T – SAS « TURBULENCES ! » sous la direction de Philippe Duban

Residency Micadanses

Born in Moscow in 1973, Franco-Russian artist Anatoli Vlassov pursues a ‘portfolio career’ matching his bi-cultural identity. After studying sociology in Moscow and management in Paris, he worked for the European Union on projects to dismantle Russian nuclear power plants and submarines, while training as a dancer on professional courses and workshops such as ex.e.r.ce-3rd module in Montpellier, Transforme in Royaumont and danceWEB in Vienna. As a performer, he has worked with choreographers Rosalind Crisp, Lance Gries, Christophe Haleb, Florence Augendre and David Hernandez, and director Judith Depaule. He founded his own company, IDCore, in 2001, and worked with Judith Salgues to devise new choreographic forms involving specific trades and professions: France’s éboueurs and Canada’s cols-bleus (drainage-workers), and shoe-shiners in Bolivia. Since 2009, he has been working with the endoscopic PillCam wireless capsule for his project L’envers du dehors, une conference dansée, presented in April 2012 at Tanzquartier in Vienna. For the past five years, he has conducted dance workshops for the artistic ESAT-SAS «Turbulences !» (Paris), working with a regular group of young adults with autism or related disorders aged 20 to 30 – the performers of TOUS.

Chien-Ying Wu

Dancing in Badminton

Taiwan

Dancing in Badminton presents a badminton match as a danced work.

Direction Chien-Ying Wu

Performance Precillia Vu Tu Khien (Supervisor), Romain Frank, Ophélie Mahe & Stéphane du Mesgnil d'Engente (Players), Laurent Frank (Arbiter), Rafael Cherkaski & Daniel Longhi (Préparateurs De Terrain)

Video demonstration Joran Love (Demonstrator)

Born in Taichung (Taiwan) in 1983, Chien-Ying Wu lives and works in Paris. After studying at Taiwan’s National University for the Arts, he settled in France in 2007, graduating from the Beaux-Arts, Paris, in 2011. While a student, he staged three solo exhibitions: La logique de consommation, 1 2 3 4, and Animaux du monde. His work featured in group exhibitions in Taipei in 2003 and 2009, and he has taken part in performance works with Beaux-Arts students in Paris, as part of the Nocturnes series at the Musée des Arts et Métiers, and the Festival Hors-Pistes 2011 at the Centre Pompidou. He is currently developing a film project based on the game of badminton, to be premiered in stages (workshops, shooting…), including the performance at Danse élargie.