Michael Bauer is a Germany painter born in 1973 in the city of Erkelenz. The artist employs a distinctive mix of painting styles cheek-by-jowl. Realistic steak, pointillist abstraction, serifed text, cartoon piano, and black-scratched-out void all co-habitate. However, besides variety and versatility, two of his cardinal strengths are line and color, and his new works continue to display these facets. An array of high-chroma colors shoot through his characteristic neutral ground, with particular emphasis on a certain acid green, while every permutation of line piles one on top of the other, weaving between and building upon automatic washy mark and impastoed blorp alike. The artist’s mastery of line manifests most dramatically in a new series of screen prints. They adopt the speed and activity of the paintings, transforming quick notes, doodles made while stuck in a phone tree, and throw-away scribbles into a body of work equal to the artist's sculpture, drawings, and paintings.

He holds a degree from the Hochschule fur Bildende Kunst in Braunschweig, Germany. Bauer’s sprawling canvases are rife with humor, the artist’s attempts to amuse himself in the studio take palpable form and always have. His works also concern memory and time, not only in the visual re-telling of remembered jokes, but also in the artist’s renderings of his earliest painted works, and the daunting amount of time required to unravel his arrangements. Finally, mistakes and the artist’s reverence for them permeate his practice. He transforms anything wrong, or dumb, or awkward into a strength. Bauer's work illuminates that which is sincere, powerful, weird, and above all, inexplicable.

His work has been seen in many solo and group exhibitions in Europe and America since 1999, including Villa Merkel in Esslingen am Neckar, Germany, Anthem, Kunsthaus Baselland, Basel, Stadtische Galerie, Delmenhorst, Germany, Bonner Kunstverein, Bonn, Germany, Alison Jacques Gallery, London and Lisa Cooley, New York, among many others.

A monograph on Bauer’s work, “Borwasser” was published by JRP Ringier Press in 2008, and includes an essay by Jennifer Higgie, co-editor of Frieze magazine. In the fall of 2014, he released a new monograph with essays by Carter and Dan Fox.

He currently lives in New York.