Frisk Dreemurr (known as Frisk Jane-Burrow until 2015) is the leader of the Jonish political party Green Party, and is the ambassador for monsters to Jonas and all member states of the UNIS. They were the last of 8 people to fall down Mt. Ebott.

Life[]

Frisk was born as Frisk Warren Jane-Burrow on the 4th of September, between 2000 to 2002. Their middle name, Warren, was related to their father, Warren Jane-Burrow, the author of the critically acclaimed book Haximavino, a story about a politician in post-1971 Jonas, that was released in 2011.

In 2015, Frisk, apparently scaling Mt. Ebott one day, took shelter in a cave after it started raining (the rain being the start of the September Rain Storm in the Thaines region). They discovered a cave. While looking into it, they fell in. Not much is known of what happened while Frisk was there.

It is claimed that Frisk broke the barrier in September 2015, however Frisk claims it was actually Asriel who broke it, though proof of this is actually pretty rare. When moving out of the Underground with her new adoptive parents Asgore and Toriel, complications arose and they, along with their siblings at the time, Chara and Asriel, had to stay with one of Asgore's friends for around three months. During this time, their mother Toriel actually had another son, Ralsei.

In recent years Frisk has slowly faded into the background, but information that they might have started to date someone has leaked.

Frisk lives somewhere in Yellow City with the Dreemurrs.

Trivia[]

Frisk is aware of the video game Undertale as well as the fandom and all it's AUs.

Their official gender is unknown, so it is possible that Frisk is agender, which is a person with no specific gender.

They have a Streame account, named FriskDreemurrST. They upload on a regular basis, but had taken a noticeable break in late 2023, however returned in early 2024.

Quotes[]

Quotes made by Frisk themselves[]

"Who's fault is it that monsters were banished underground? Hmm?" -Frisk Dreemurr, 14th March 2016.

"Mt. Ebott was a breeze to go through." -Frisk Dreemurr, 18th June 2018, to JCNews, and later The Guardian.

"What is a fandom." -Frisk Dreemurr, 17th December 2019, on Glitchtale.

"AH. YES." -Frisk Dreemurr, 9th January 2020, on the Jonish election.

"There is no way that they have done this." -Frisk Dreemurr, 6th February 2024 after the news that the Leaning Tower of Tirna was no longer leaning had reached her.

Quotes referring to Frisk made by other people[]

In television shows, movies, and YouTube series[]

"That puny human you call a "friend", Do you think I forced them to commit genocide? HA! Don't make me laugh. After doing the same "Pacifist" route over and over again, they eventually got bored. They did it on their own. The idiot just lacked the courage to finish at the very end. They were the ones who killed everyone by their own hand. (...) They were the ones who started the genocide. No one ever forced them to do it. I'm just trying to finish what they started. It makes me sick that they think they're above consequences. That they can just toy around with everyone and get away with whatever they want. (...) They reset'd in a part they weren't supposed to be able to. Creating all these "errors"." -Chara (Glitchtale)

"Could be worse. Could be a fallen human. Could even be the Jaydish navy." -Joseph, spotting something in the distance. (Determination)

"There's so many history books about people...Troy Markinson...Frisk Jane-Burrow...Chara Brown...Brian Albert...Adam Davidson...there's so many. Too bad they have to be burnt in this fire. *burns library* *quiet laugh* Who even cares about this stuff???" -Scarlett, before and during the library fire. (Eight-Seven)

"If you think you can escape, I'd like to see you find a blue and pink-striped shirt and a mountain you can hide in!" -Roy Majhien, talking to his younger brother, Cooper, who was plotting to run away from his parents. (Rolling Hills)

In real life[]

Clone Earth[]