For your reference we have provided links to get help with ordering your graduation cap and gown. In an effort to assist we have provided links to all schools websites and The American Counsel of Education, so you may find your graduation commencement and regalia requirements. If you place your order here with us we will carefully research the colors and requirements of your Regalia be certain it is correct. We apologize in advance for not being able to research everyone's schools color requirements without an order being placed with us especially during peak season.\nFind your school! Check your schools website for graduation ordering and details Regent University (VA) All schools are invited to register with our company. We custom manufacture fine quality academic regalia for advanced degrees and faculty gowns. We sell caps, gowns and accessories to all! Individuals, bookstores, schools and organizations and resellers while having the honor of serving the academic community Since 1956.

"American Council on Education" the website ref. "Academic Costume Code and Ceremony Guide"

All schools are invited to register with our company. We custom manufacture fine quality academic regalia for advanced degrees and faculty gowns. We sell caps, gowns and accessories to all! Individuals, bookstores, schools and organizations and resellers while having the honor of serving the academic community Since 1956.

We have all schools colors listed in our database and adhere to the strict standards of the American Council of Education, while using only the finest quality fabric and velvets. Rush Air delivery and plus-size Big and Tall our specialty and usually available from our inventory including hoods and faculty robes. Certain restriction of course do apply regarding "Rush Orders" and our "Returns Policy"

Try our easy online order system, select your school, your degree i.e.; Bachelors, Masters,Doctorate PhD and select the graduation date. Have your academic regalia shipped to your home or office.

If you are a school administrator, reseller or organization and would like to know more about our services bulk pricing , fill out our online form by clicking here to request a quote or call toll-free 888-4-GRADUATE (888.447.2382) local 718.823.9475.