•Download as PPTX, PDF•

1 like•163 views

This document summarizes information about Regent University, including its history, academics, student body, campus life, and career connections. It notes that Regent offers 39 undergraduate and 49 graduate degree programs online and on its Virginia campus. The document emphasizes that Regent focuses on developing servant leaders through vision, serving others, and helping students reach their full potential. It provides statistics about Regent's size, diversity, and safety to portray it as a supportive environment for students.

1 of 27

Editor's Notes

As if choosing the right degree track wasn’t hard enough, now I have to choose the right college? US News states: College Rankings Career Connections Size of School Campus (Lifestyle and Visit Opportunities) Dorm Life Cost/Financial Aid Packages Academic Programs Most important aspects to consider when choosing a university Here is how we measure up! We will take a closer look at how Regent fulfills these needs

Aside from the highly publicized goals achieved above, why else would one attend Regent University? An “A” ranking nationally for What will they learn which universities are making sure their students learn what they need to know. This free resource does tell you, focusing on seven key areas of knowledge: Composition, Literature, Foreign Language, U.S. History, Economics, Mathematics, and Science. It's designed to help you decide whether the colleges you're considering prepare their graduates to succeed after graduation.

History- Dr. M.G. "Pat" Robertson changed the university name from Christian Broadcasting Network to Regent University in 1990. Colors are green and blue- when I first heard this, I didn’t think anything particularly special about it. Then, as I started compiling my images of green and blue graphics for this presentation, it dawned on me, those are the colors of the most beautiful planet in the universe. I suddenly became more proud for the opportunity to represent those colors. History - Dr. M.G. "Pat" Robertson changed the university name from Christian Broadcasting Network to Regent University in 1990. Since “Regents” are called to serve, how is it we have such high rankings in our Law, Education, and Leadership and Management Educational Departments?

Regent prides itself on not being a Bible College, merely teach the Christian perspective. But incorporate it into what the cultural world perspective is taught and distinguish the two. Brining your knowledge of Christ into daily “worldy” situations. Spring 2016 Regent graduate states – I actually wasn’t looking for a Christian college. I came to town to learn about the wonderful communications department. Once I came, everyone was professional, helpful, the grounds are gorgeous and well maintained. The class sizes weren’t too big and I just felt a peace, like “home” and I wanted to be a part of it.

Regent prides itself in servicing the “whole student” combining faith and knowledge into practical situations. You will see how knowledge and faith, together, position you to make a positive, lasting difference in the world around you.

Every college student has a fear that they will not find employment after graduation, pay off tuition etc.

Class Size - < 20 = 61.9 20-49 = 38.1 50 = 0% It is considered a small school in comparison to it’s competition. But, it has just as many perks as a larger school. Personal Attention largest fall class in the university's history • largest new student group in the university’s history, with new student enrollment up 50 percent from the previous year • largest returning student group in the university’s history, up 14 percent from last year Regent’s undergraduate Moreno- Riañ o said, including these noteworthy enrollment increases: College of Arts & Sciences 3,131 students, with the largest first-year residential class of 435 students; 32 percent overall growth from fall 2014 School of Business & Leadership 875 graduate students, with 27 percent increase over 2014 School of Education 1,221 graduate students, with 25 percent growth from 2014 School of Divinity 832 graduate students, with 24 percent growth from 2014 Selectivity Selective Fall 2014 acceptance rate 80.3% Application deadline July 28 SAT/ACT scores must be received by 01-AUG-15

Before we get into HOW Regent is growing, while other universities seem to be struggling, let us take a look at the statistics that make up the student body. According to research conducted through College Factual and our very own Regent Website, Regent is ABOVE average in diversity Average age of Students is 34 Ethnic minorities represented 43% Number of denominations represented 40 Number of states represented 50 Number of countries represented 74

A commitment to making significant and strategic investments in marketing to acquire quality on campus and online students. • Transforming operations to focus on the student experience. • Expanding academic programs by nearly 50 percent over the last two years to provide more opportunities to prospective students. • Moving quickly to capitalize on significant market and industry shifts. College of Arts & Sciences and its seven graduate schools have all registered significant overall enrollment growth Moreno- Riañ o also noted that Regent is poised to continue posting enrollment gains for the spring 2016 semester, based on increases in inquiries and applications such as in Health sciences fields The Center for Student Happiness (CSH) exists to increase the quality of the student's experience at Regent University. The heart of CSH is to cultivate an environment that engenders student happiness through a biblical model. free success Success Coaching Workshops & Seminars 24/7 Support Through Regent C.A.R.E.S. Readiness Inventory This year, first ever “Honor’s Program” which provides the 14 selected students with an additional grant and books included

Now that you received a brief overview of the background information Let us discover the Lifestyle, Financial Aid, and Academic Programs 3rd Safest College Nationally by NICHE, 2015. 15th Most Beautiful Christian College and University Campus by Christian Universities Online, 2015.

The University Library, with more than 320,000 books, 14,000 AV items, and access to more than 870,000 electronic resources, including e-books, e-journals, and digital video, provides a nearly limitless research environment. The building also houses Regent's Law Library. Replica of famous bridge in Europe Fountain adds an ambience to the grounds, the site for many photo shoots as well as weddings. Many items DONATED, not costing students extra unnecessary funds or staff lower compensation Common areas Grill area Volleyball court

Students were greeted with a fun “theme” The halls were decorated to establish a sense of cohesiveness and comradery Choice of 3 dorm floor plans to meet economic needs Dorms have FULL kitchen with appliances Private bathroom Workout Gym in buildings Laundry Amenities included in price Residency Counselor for guidance

Discover Regent Discover Regent is a chance for traditional aged students (age 24 and younger) who are currently high school or transfer students who plan to study on campus to visit Regent University’s campus for a day to discover first-hand the academics, faculty, student life, simple financial aid process and housing options Regent has to offer. On-Campus Information Session The On – Campus Information Sessions offer all students who plan to pursue their education either on-campus or online a chance to visit Regent University’s campus to learn more about our 30+ programs available. The session includes a presentation covering admissions, financial aid, student support services, as well as an opportunity to speak with representatives of these offices. Snapshot Saturday Snapshot Saturday is a chance for prospective undergraduate and graduate students and their families to gain an initial glimpse at the various academic programs at Regent. Join us for a brief presentation by admissions staff and campus tour of our beautiful Regent Campus. Scholars Weekend Scholars Weekend is our distinguished event for high school seniors who want to study at Regent University. Students must submit their application to attend by December 31. The top applicants are then invited to visit Regent University’s campus in February for a weekend to compete for several full and partial scholarships through an interview and application review process. Online Information Session Regent’s College of Arts and Sciences (CAS) Online Information Session is a chance for prospective students who plan to complete their degree entirely online to join us for a live webinar where they can hear about Regent’s academics, faculty, simple financial aid process, online student support services and how our students learn online. Our admissions team will also be available to answer questions via chat or phone call during this event. Individual & Group Visits Individual visits are scheduled by our visit coordinator, who will help tailor your personal campus visit to meet your needs. You can join a student led tour group, meet with an admissions counselor, and even have an opportunity to apply on-site that same day. Group Visits from schools and other educational programs are welcomed and must be set up with our visit coordinator. Special Events Admitted Student Day for Accepted High School and Transfer Students The Admitted Student Day is for traditional aged students (age 22 and younger) who are high school or transfer students and who have already applied and been accepted to Regent. Students registering for this event should plan to study on campus at Regent. The event is designed to help admitted students experience life as a Regent student and gain any additional admissions information for Regent University that they may need to make a college decision. - See more at: https://www.regent.edu/acad/undergrad/admissions/events/#sthash.GNmbQp0s.dpuf

Military Rich City – we have additional support for military students Museums I-FLY Amusement Parks Atlantic Ocean Borders us brining in tourists and offering a multitude of adventures

18 million annually in institutional scholarships and aid 88% Regent students receive aid Top 7% most affordable tuition* Military friendly – Yellow Ribbon Program No additional fees for out of state students

Best ONLINE Programs Regent offers international study programs in England, France, Italy and Israel. Five university faculty members have been named Fulbright Scholars. Choose from more than 95 areas of study in the subject areas employers demand. Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP) American Bar Association (ABA) Association of Theological Schools (ATS) Commission on Accreditation (COA) of the American Psychological Association (APA)

The Regent Law faculty is ranked in the top 10 of all American law schools, by The Princeton Review, alongside schools such as Chicago, Virginia, Stanford, Duke, and Washington & Lee. At the close of the 2015-2016 Moot Court competition season, Regent University School of Law ranked fifth in the nation for Best Moot Court Program by the annual report of the University of Houston Law. Regent ranked above schools such as the University of Virginia, Baylor University Law School, Colombia University Law School, and Duke University Law School to qualify for the competition. Chief Counsel of the American Center for Law and Justice, Dr. Jay Sekulow '04 Representative of Virginia's 2nd District, Scott Rigell '90 Former Assistant Administrator (presidential appointment with Senate confirmation) under President George W. Bush, Paul J. Bonicelli, Ph.D., '87 Louisiana State Senator, Sharon Weston Broome '84 Nation's first Assistant Secretary of Labor for Communications by Presidential nomination and U.S. Senatorial confirmation, Lisa Kruska '89 Winner of American Bar Association's 2007 Negotiation Competition, succeeding Harvard Winner of American Bar Association's 2006 National Moot Court Championship, previously won by Yale

Healthcare Job Growth Set Records in 2015 John Commins, January 12, 2016 Healthcare jobs accounted for 18% of the 2.6 million new jobs created in the United States in 2015. Coincidentally, healthcare spending represents nearly 18% of the nation's gross domestic product. According to US NEWS- of the 11 BEST Jobs, 9 out of the 11, were computer, database, developer, related. Stem field of study jobs earn an average and needs increase by 20% more than competing positions To meet the needs of our working population, Regent University has added numerous degree options in Science, Technology, Math Department Academics A.S. — Health Sciences BAS — Information Systems Technology B.S. — Biophysical Sciences B.S. — Computer Science B.S. — Cybersecurity B.S. — Information Systems Technology B.S. — Mathematics B.S. — in Nursing Health Sciences A.S.On-Campus Healthcare Management (B.S.)B.S.Online Nursing (RN to B.S. in Nursing)RN to B.S. in NursingOnline Government - Healthcare Policy & Ethics (M.A.)M.A.Online, On-Campus Organizational Leadership (M.A.)M.A.Online Business Administration (MBA)MBAOnline, On-Campus Healthcare Policy & Ethics (MPA)MPAOnline, On-Campus Doctor of Strategic Leadership (DSL)DSLOnline with Campus Residencies Healthcare Policy & Ethics CertificateCert.Online, On-Campus

News & Announcements Regent University's Trauma Team Deploys to Trinidad SPC Professors Promote Healthy Marriages in China Regent is the only Christian institution to offer programs accredited by both the American Psychological Association (APA) and the Council for Accreditation of Counseling & Related Educational Programs (CACREP). “Best Buy- Get your moneys worth Joint Degree Program Activities SPC Team Works in Ukraine Regent Trauma Team Deploys to Trinidad Professor Appointed by Vatican to the Commission for the Protection of Minors Fourth-Year Psy.D. Cohort Granted Internships Master of Arts (M.A.) Licensure Track Counseling: M.A. in Clinical Mental Health Counseling — On-Campus/Online* M.A. in Marriage, Couple and Family Counseling — On-Campus/Online* M.A. in School Counseling — On-Campus/Online* Master of Arts (M.A.) Non-licensure Track Counseling: M.A. in Human Services Counseling — Online M.A. in Pastoral Counseling — Online Master of Science (M.S.) M.S. in General Psychology — Online Doctor of Psychology (Psy.D.) Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology — On-Campus** Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) Ph.D. in Counselor Education & Supervision — Online* Ph.D. in Counseling & Psychological Studies — Online Joint Degree Options Joint Degrees — Individuals may choose to pursue degrees from more than one graduate school at Regent University. Non-Degree Non-Degree — Individuals may take up to 12 credits on a non-degree basis. On-Campus/Online Certificates Certificate of Graduate Studies Programs — On-Campus/Online * Accredited by Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP). ** Accredited by Commission on Accreditation, American Psychological Association (APA). CACREP Quality Matters Program

Chief Counsel of the American Center for Law and Justice, Dr. Jay Sekulow '04 Emmy Award-Winner, Tony Hale '95 (Best Supporting Actor) Representative of Virginia's 2nd District, Scott Rigell '90 Former Assistant Administrator (presidential appointment with Senate confirmation) under President George W. Bush, Paul J. Bonicelli, Ph.D., '87 Louisiana State Senator, Sharon Weston Broome '84 New York Times Best-Selling Author and Lead Pastor of National Community Church, Mark Batterson '12 Tony-nominated Broadway producer, Bruce Long '98 Senior Founding Pastor of Calvary Revival Church and Presiding Bishop of Calvary Alliance Churches, B. Courtney McBath '98 National Middle School Principal of the Year, Sharon Byrdsong '08 National School Board Association Black Caucus's Educational Leadership Award and National Milken Award Winner, Doreatha White '01 Virginia's Preserve America History Teacher of the Year, Molly Gunsalus '02 Nation's first Assistant Secretary of Labor for Communications by Presidential nomination and U.S. Senatorial confirmation, Lisa Kruska '89 Screenplay writer for The Ultimate Gift released nationally, Cheryl McKay '95 Winner of American Bar Association's 2007 Negotiation Competition, succeeding Harvard Winner of American Bar Association's 2006 National Moot Court Championship, previously won by Yale Students in Free Enterprise (SIFE) team named SIFE USA Regional Champion Two SBL alums serving as university presidents Founder of the Asia Minor Research Center and the Seven Churches Network in Izmir, Turkey, Mark Wilson

Degrees awarded (2014-15) 1,435 Associate degrees 18 Bachelor's degrees 473 Master's degrees 599 Doctoral degrees 151 First Professional degrees 194

A Regent is a servant of Christ, Servants are humbled and focused, thus creating world leaders 1. Leaders have the attitude of a humble and selfless servant Servant Leadership Round Table – July 2007 3 Published by the School of Global Leadership & Entrepreneurship, Regent University 2. Leaders focus on retention and development of employees 3. Leaders are responsible for creating a safe and positive work environment that fosters innovation and enhances intrinsic motivation 4. Leaders humanize the workplace when they treat subordinates as human beings, worthy of unconditional dignity and respect 5. Leaders earn trust when they place the legitimate needs of their followers above self interests 6. Leaders earn respect when they place benefits to workers and society above the bottom line 7. Leaders listen to their employees with open-mindedness 8. Leaders develop and maintain good relationships through empathy, kindness, healing and emotional intelligence 9. Leaders gain support and cooperation by valuing team-building and involving others in decision making 10. Leaders seek to achieve organizational goals by developing and unleashing the creative potential of human resources

Earned awards and top Rankings in a variety of departments and programs. Tuition is less than the national average compared to the competition. Smaller more close nit school with numerous Networking opportunities for job placement upon graduation. Job market is constantly analyzed to add or amend degree programs to ensure students receive what employers need.

Online and On Campus awards

39 Undergraduate Degrees including high demand concentrations such as Business, IT, Law, Nursing, Psychology and Joint Degree Opportunities 49 Graduate Degree Programs including but not limited to: Divinity, Communications, Education, Law, and a Master’s/Doctorate Psychology Program