Road transport: Road transport is transporting goods, and people from one place to another place on the road. The road acts as a bridge to reach from one end to another end. Road transport can be grouped into two kinds- goods and people’s transportation. Many countries have the requirement of safety requirements and licensing for separating both groups. The movement taken by roads can be by cars, bikes, trucks, buses, or animals. People are transported with the help of roadways and a particular mode of transportation is also available for particular interests like ambulances.

Examples of road transport are buses, rickshaws, trucks, scooters, motorcycles, and cars.

Types of Transportation

Types of transportation can be grouped into the following types:

Road transportation

Rail transportation

Marine transportation

Air transportation

Road Transport

A road is a way from one end to another on earth that is used by vehicles like cars, bikes, autos, etc.

Types of roads

Gravel roads

Gravel roads are one of the types of roads. Gravel roads are low-quality roads that are better than earthen roads. Gravel roads are made of gravel itself. Gravel is defined as a combination of small rocks. Those small rocks that came from mountains are paved as a road for temporary use. This type of road is constructed or used in villages.

Earthen roads

Earthen roads are one of the types of roads. Earthen Road is also a low-cost constructed road that is used for temporary purposes. This is constructed as a pavement structure within the soil.

Kankar roads

Kankar is like a small stone made of limestone. The impure form of limestone is Kankar. These are low-quality roads and also have low performance.

Murrum roads

Murram roads are one of the types of roads. It is constructed by using igneous rocks.

Bituminous roads

Bituminous roads are one of the types of roads. They are the most used roads in this world which is low cost and also suitable for driving location.

Water Bound Macadam roads

This road is constructed using crushed stone. The spreader stone is settled by sprinkling water over it. This can be performed well when compared to gravel, earthen, and Kankar roads.

Concrete roads

Cement roads are also known as Cement roads. These types of roads are costlier when compared to the gravel, earthen, and Kankar roads. The time taken for concrete roads is more compared to gravel, earthen roads.

Highway roads

Highway roads are made with a mixture of sand and rock with asphalt cement.

Vehicles Which Move on Roads

The vehicles which move on roads include the following:

Cars

There are many types of cars. Carl Benz is the person who invented the first car on January 29, 1886. Cars are also designed to divide based on fuel.

Diesel cars

Petrol cars

Battery cars

Lorries

Lorries are also named heavy goods vehicles because they travel with heavy goods like cotton, vegetables, Iron, etc., Some of the types of Lorries are named below. Lorries uses mostly diesel as fuel.

Emergency vehicles: Fire engines required lorries as road transport.

Living things stock vehicles: Transport hens, pigs, cows, buffalos, sheep, goats, etc.

Trucks having refrigerators: Transport of food and drink.

Large load vehicles: Cement mixers, cars, bike transporters, etc.

Motor Vehicles

Motor vehicles are like bikes, scooters. In bikes, there are models like bullet and sports bikes. In scooters, there are models like bike and scooter combination scooters. Motor vehicles are of the following types.

Bikes: Uses diesel as fuel

Scooters: Uses diesel as fuel and also battery scooters are also available.

Tractors

Tractors are commonly used for load travels like cement bags, sand, bricks, and rocks. They are also used for agriculture purposes for lifting the dry black mud upwards. The tractor uses mostly diesel as fuel.

Cranes

Cranes need high power to lift heavy loads like cement roads etc., Cranes are also used to lift rocks which are having heavy weights. Cranes run on diesel as a fuel.

Road Rollers

Road rollers have very much weight used to settle the constructed road in a good way for the sake of vehicles to travel. Road roller runs on diesel as a fuel.

Autos

Autos are having three tires. Autos can take loads like kitchen accessories, tiles, and fertilizer like that. It is used to travel on roads only. It also takes people from one place to another place. Autos run on petrol as well as diesel.

Related Links

Roadways

Transport System in India

Transportation and Economic Development

FAQs On Road Transport

What are called road transport?

Road transport refers to the transportation of goods and personnel from one place to other on roads.

Why do we use road transport?

Road transport is used mostly for faster and less costly means of transportation of goods over short distances.

What is the percentage of road transport in India?

Road transport sector accounts for about 87 % of the passenger traffic and 60% of freight transport.

What is road transport in India?

Road transport in India is divided into 5 types which include:

National Highway

State Highway

Major district roads

Other district roads

Village roads

What are the different types of road transport systems?

Different types of road transport systems include:

Flatbed transportation

Temperature controlled transportation

Box truck transportation

What is the importance of road transport?

The importance of road transport includes a faster and also less costly means for transportation over a short distance.