Shahid

Cast: Raj Kumar, Prabhleen Sandhu, Tigmanshu Dhulia

Direction: Hansal Mehta

Rating:

Hansal Mehta's Shahid sets a gruesome note early on. The year is 1993, the setting Mumbai. A young boy walks out into riot-infested streets hearing cries, only to watch in ghastly daze as mobs set people ablaze.

The scene, disturbing as it is, can be misleading. This film is not about riots and violence. The boy Shahid Azmi grows up to be a human rights champion and lawyer who fights for those wrongly accused in terrorism cases. Mehta, you realise, was using savage imagery to instil in you a rage similar to what may spur popular fury against anyone accused in such cases, without waiting to reflect if the indicted man could perhaps be innocent.

For, these were the people Shahid Azmi defended till he was slain at the age of 32. The early violence, as well as human rights violation Shahid faced (he was jailed on charge of terrorism), is used to highlight what the film really tries showing - the experiences in life that shaped Shahid's passion for justice and guts to take up controversial cases.

Most of the drama builds up through Shahid's tribulation as his family is victimised during the Mumbai riots, as the disillusioned youngster heads for POK in a futile bid to become a terrorist and falls prey to human rights abuse while in jail. These portions could remind you of various other films of the theme, all starkly real but somewhat routine.

The film really gets interesting when the screenplay starts probing Shahid's mind. As physical action slows down and Shahid takes to practicing law, you get a peek into the protagonist's thought process amid superb courtroom drama.

Trust, fear and alienation are undercurrents as Mehta leaves a few questions on anti-terrorism procedure in this country, its investigation norms and the laws that govern.

Shahid should let Hansal Mehta exorcise the demons of Dil Pe Mat Le Yaar, Yeh Kya Ho Raha Hai and Woodstock Villa - past forays into Bollywood that were dismal duds and also critically panned. We get to see a new Mehta in form with this film, more assured of what he has to say, more in control of the craft of cinema.

The real-life account casts Raj Kumar as Shahid Azmi. It is a career-defining role that soundly announces the actor needs to be taken seriously. Raj Kumar makes every nuance of Shahid Azmi fascinating - as an angst-ridden youth without focus in life at one point, as a shy lover trying to woo the girl, or as a crusader out protecting the wrongly accused. He is the biggest reason you will love this unusual film.

Published By:

AtMigration

Published On:

Oct 17, 2013

--- ENDS ---