It was the staunch heat of the summer in Baghdad, Iraq, and I landed at the Baghdad International Airport. The year was 2009 and the departure section was full of American Army officers including men and women who were happy to wait for the boarding in order to fly back home.

The political situation in Iraq was quite disturbing. There were lots of terror attacks and sectarian violence was increasing day by day. I had already traveled to Iraq before but this time there was no group with me. I was all by myself.

Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jillani R.A. is regarded as a great spiritual and religious leader. His Qadriyyah sufi order is present in all the major countries of the Middle East as well as in Africa. By the number, Qadri Muslims are in majority both in India and Pakistan. Naqeeb of Baghdad is an official title given to the custodian of a mosque and tomb of Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jillani R.A. Iraq’s first Prime Minister 1920-21 was Naqeeb Al Ashraf Syed Abdul Rehman Gillani. He was the custodian of the tomb of Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Gillani R.A. Although, the British authorities, Sunni Tribes and Shia leaders want him to remain in power but he had said that “ I am an old man and I love my books and interested only in gaining knowledge”. He laid foundation of the Qadriya Library, which is one of the most historical libraries in the Middle East and is situated inside Roza Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jilani R.A.

It was the holy month of Ramadan, I first visited Roza Hazrat Imam Ali Razi Allah Anhu in Najaf Iraq. I stayed there for a few days and move forward to Karbala, Roza of Syedna Imam E Hussain Razi Allah Anhu and Hazrat Ghazi Abbas Razi Allah Anhu. After spending a few spiritually blessed nights at Roza of the beloved grandson of the Holy Prophet Muhammad Peace be upon him, I headed for Baghdad. I had visited Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jilani R.A. place before few times but never got a chance to stay inside Roza for a long period of time. Mostly reason was the security situation in Iraq and my residence was at Kazmain (Roza Hazrat Imam Mousa Kazim R.A.). There is a bit of distance between Kazmain and Central Baghdad.

This time, when I arrive at the Darbar of Sultan E Auliya Ghous E Azam R.A. there were few staff members of Auqaf E Qadriya. One of them was Haji Ahmed Khan who is also known as Ahmed Faqir. He told me that one Pakistani person is already staying in the rooms inside Darbar and you are also welcome to stay. I thank Allah for allowing such opportunity. My roommate was an elderly person from Karachi and he was a civil engineer working at Kurdistan region of Iraq. At iftar, Qadriya food was served on every day of Ramadan. Special Zikr, Darood Pak and Qadriya Halqa was performed everyday after Isha prayers. My urge for spiritual enlightenment increased day by day and I decided to join Qadriya order. Although famous Islamic scholar Syed Naseer Ud Din Naseer R.A. did engaged me into Silsila-e-Chishtia Nizamiyah but he himself told me that Head office for every seeker of truth is Baghdad and Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jillani R.A. is leader of all Aulia E Karam. With the prayers of Syed Naseer Ud Din Naseer Sb, I enquired with the staff of the Darbar about how to get officially enrolled in Silsala E Qadriya. After enquiring with various Sufi darvesh, One of the Khadim inside Roza Pak whose name is Abdul Rehman told me that today our Sajada Nasheen Naqeeb Ul Ashraf will come at Maghreb prayers and you can meet him and request him to enroll you inside Qadriya order.

It was the last Wednesday of Ramadan year 2009. After Maghrib prayers, I went from Mosque toward Darbar Sharif, and there I had seen a beautiful darvesh who was wearing a white Kurta. He got a very spiritually lighted face with beautiful blue eyes. This was my first meeting with the respected Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani Sb. Haji Amin Pardesi Giga and Ghulam Mustafa of Baghdadi travels Karachi were also present there. Everyone first requested Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani for prayers and then I expressed my interest to join Qadriya Al-Sharifa. He was delighted to meet me and inquired that am I traveling alone. Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani told me that tomorrow is Thursday and I have to read some portion of the Holy Quran and Qadriyah wazaif. So I will give you Qadriya Shajrah workbook on Friday after Jumma prayers. Because many people were standing, I was unable to speak that on Friday my flight is confirmed for Qum Iran. I was in a deep sorrowful state of mind that despite getting approval from Naqeeb of Baghdad, I will not get the Shajrah Shareef because of my travel plans.

On Friday morning, I had left Darbar Sharif with heavy heart. My driver dropped me at the last exit. Baghdad International Airport doesn’t allow civilian vehicles due to security reasons. Airport taxi let me through with various security measures and finally I got into the Depature Lounge. There were large number of passengers for Iran. Certainly there was an announcement that “Flight for Tehran has been canceled” we are sorry for the inconvenience. I thank Allah and immediately left for Darbar Sharif. There was a Jumma khutba going and I told Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani about how the plane never flew into the air. He gave a very sweet and mesmerizing smile. As the Friday prayers end, Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani gave me the SHAJRAH ALQADRIYA ALSHARIFA and he wrote my name on Shajrah Sharif as well also signed it. Later he also stamped it.

Syed Abdul Rehman Zaheer Ud Din Gilani was born into a very respectable and religious family in Baghdad. His grandfather Abd Al-Rahman Al-Gillani was Iraq’s first Prime Minister and his father Syed Abdullah Muyad Al-Gailani was an educated man with great emphasis on maths and science. Syed Abdul Rehman’s upbringing happened to be with great care and attention. His father transfer him the spiritual status which he got from his father. In Qadriya order, it is a must that a Darvaish take spiritual commitment from the person while alive.

Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani got his primary education from prestigious institutions in Baghdad and got a graduate degree from the University of Baghdad. His father Abdullah Muyad Al-Gailani also gave importance to religious education. So a Qadriya Sufi teacher originating from Kurdistan region was arranged to teach Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani religious studies including Quran, Hadith and fundamentals of Qadriya Sufi traditions. Syed Abdul Rehman got a law degree from Cairo and then later he moved to the United States for higher education. He got prestigious degrees from George town University and George Mason University in Washington, D.C.

For a long time, Syed Abdul Rehman Gailani did a job in the Insurance Company. While mentioning the former ruler of Iraq Saddam Hussein, there were tears in the eyes of Syed Abdul Rehman. He explained a little story about Saddam Hussein. He said that I had met Saddam when he was a young person living in exile in Cairo, Egypt and I was studying law there. So, we had orange juice together and chat a while. Later, I was not in touch with Saddam Hussein as he becomes President of Iraq. In those days, I use to spend my nighttime at Darbar Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jillani R.A. Certainly at late nighttime, it was announced that the President of Iraq is coming to Darbar Sharif so all people give way. There was a security protocol but when Saddam Hussein sees me, he told his security to give way and meet me with great love and respect. He remembered the Cairo meeting. The next day, a person came to my house and took me to the Presidential Palace. President Saddam Hussein meets me with dignity and pays huge respect to Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jilani R.A.

Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani was offered a ministry in almost every government of Iraq but he always insisted to stay away from politics and concentrate on the religious affairs of Auqaf Al-Qadriya. For most of his life, he did private jobs to run a household. Due to his higher education and strong credentials, he was selected by the United Nations-led committee to estimate Iraq- Kuwait war damages.

Syed Abdul Rehman first told me that you should pray namaz five times. Always keep Quran in your daily reading habit. Kanz Ul Iman with Urdu translation will help you understand Quran. He said you are young in your mid-twenties so no need to go for long Qadriyah Wazaif. You can just read the third kalma after every namaz. He said that our Holy Prophet Peace be upon him especially focused on Haram meaning forbidden in Islam. One of most evil is illegal income generation and involvement in extra marital affairs. Stay away from all such evils, otherwise practicing religion be of no good value. He recommended few books written by Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jillani R.A. to be read continuously. Such books include Ghunya Al-Talabeen, Al-Fateh Al Rabbani (Revelations of the Unseen), Secrets of Secret and Jila’ al-Khatir. Once I was in Makkah and Medina for Haj and I talked over phone with Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani inside Masjid E Nabvi. An Arabic gentleman came at Tahajad time at Bab E Jibraeel and he was reading Darood E Pak and placing perfume on every person sitting there. When he reached towards me, I mentioned Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani custodian Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jillani R.A. he gave me a small booklet of Darood Bashar Khairat and Kabirat Ul Ahmer both written by Hazrat Sheikh Abdul Qadir Jillani R.A.

Syed Abdul Rehman Gillani said in an interview given to anchor Tasleem Sabri of Qtv Pakistani Channel that my favorite personality in this world is of Holy Prophet Muhammad Peace be upon him. He also mentioned that often he sees dreams for which he got no answers so his heart condition felt very weak.

Syed Abdul Rehman Gillani never give priority to money or power. Whatever finances be given to him by the followers of Syedna Ghous E Azam R.A. were immediately given to manager Auqaf E Qadriya. Even cash that was given to him for his personal use, was distributed among the poor.

Syed Abdul Rehman Gilani was close with Haji Mian Muhammad Hanif resident of Faisalabad Pakistan and owner of 92 News Channel. Whenever he arrived in Pakistan, he always invite me for a meeting. He loved the Kingdom of Jordan and appreciate the Royal Hashemite ruler King Hussein. His journey toward Allah has made lots of Qadris sad. inalillahi wainailaihi rajiun