One man. One woman. Twelve children. Twenty-five years. Share the love, relive the adventure, as faithfully chronicled in the enjoyable, enlightening, and extraordinarily entertaining Flanders Family Christmas letters.

In addition to the annual newsletters, Glad Tidings also details several of our favorite family traditions, holiday recipes, checklists, famous quotes, and vintage clipart.

NOTE: This listing is for the digital files only (PDF format).If you would prefer to read the print version, follow one of the links given in the full description below to buy a paperback copy from your favorite bookseller.

Description

Glad Tidings is a bound collection of the first twenty-five years of Flanders family annual Christmas updates. As our family grew, my reasons for writing Christmas letters changed. I found myself writing not so much to inform, but to remember.

Although I continued to share what I’d written with our family and friends, I was really writing for myself. The letters allowed me to freeze those moments in time that I wished never to forget–significant milestones, everyday graces, hard-learned lessons, crazy mistakes, funny remarks. I wrote down the things that made me think or smile or laugh or cry, the things I wanted to treasure in my heart and to ponder for years to come.

It was a subtle shift, really, but it elicited an unexpected response. This willingness to share our foibles, to laugh at ourselves, to be sincerely vulnerable, allowed others to connect with us in a way that a brag sheet could never do. I guess it made our family more real and more accessible, because we began to get requests for extra copies of our updates.

Never mind that most of our letters were four pages long–people were passing them around the dinner table, forwarding them to friends, saving them in three-ring binders. I had one friend tell me that her husband insisted on reading the entire thing aloud at his office party one Christmas. We even received postcards from complete strangers, asking to be put on our mailing list.

It was really bizarre.

But it explains why, when I decided to publish our first twenty-five letters in a book to give our kids and grandkids, my husband urged me to make copies available to people outside our family, as well.

Product Details

Title: Glad Tidings: The First Twenty-Five Years of Flanders Family Christmas Letters

Author: Jennifer Flanders

Publisher: Prescott Publishing

Pages: 182

Publication Date: December 2011

ISBN: 978-0982626986

Format: eBook (PDF files)

Prefer to read a print copy? You can order one through the links below:

Buy from Amazon

Buy from Barnes & Noble

Buy from Bookshop

Related