Russian President Vladimir Putin spoke today by phone with Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić about the recent elections in Serbia, bilateral cooperation, and the course of Russian-Ukrainian negotiations, the Kremlin announced. The presidents confirmed their mutual desire for the further development of the Russian-Serbian strategic partnership, the expansion of trade and economic ties, including in the sphere of energy. After the European Union imposed sanctions on Russian companies due to the invasion of Ukraine, the Croatian company Jadranski naftovod (JANAF) announced that the transport of crude oil to the Oil Industry of Serbia (NIS) - majority owned by Russia's Gazprom Neft - will stop on May 15.

JANAF announced that it has a contract with NIS to transport a total of 3,2 million tons of crude oil this year.

"President Vučić informed President Putin about the difficulties that Serbia is facing in relation to the import of crude oil and expressed his belief that Gazprom Neft and EU partners will find a solution to this situation," Reuters reported a statement from Vučić's cabinet.

Vučić and Putin also discussed natural gas supplies and noted that Serbia's contract expires on May 31.

"Discussions on a new contract must be started as soon as possible," the statement said.

Serbia imports gas exclusively from Russia, while domestic production, according to data from the Energy Agency, covers about 13 percent of the necessary quantities of that energy source.

"Putin congratulated the Serbian leader on his convincing victory in the presidential elections on April 3, as well as on the successful results of the Serbian Progressive Party," the statement said, the Tass agency reported.

Vučić said that he will continue to lead a policy aimed at membership in the European Union, while preserving friendly relations with Russia.

As reported by Beta, the two presidents also exchanged opinions on regional problems and Kosovo. Putin informed Vučić, at his request, about the course of negotiations between the Russian and Ukrainian sides, the Kremlin said.