By finishing first in the Los Angeles Marathon seven months ago, Art Boileau of Canada and Zoya Ivanova of the Soviet Union each won $26,385 and a Mercedes-Benz worth more than $30,000. Those same prizes are available to the first-place finishers Sunday in the New York City Marathon, and if Boileau and Ivanova are first again, they would qualify for a $300,000 bonus for winning both races. Or so it seems. As a citizen of a market-economy nation, Boileau is entitled to any prize he wins. That is not yet the case for Ivanova.

For all the changes wrought by perestroika in the Soviet Union, the system has not evolved to the point that elite Soviet athletes competing outside of the country are entitled to all their spoils. In Los Angeles, Ivanova's official take was the car and the maximum cash award allowed by Soviet authorities, 500 rubles, which is about $800 at the current exchange rate. The same ceiling applies Sunday to Ivanova and the other Soviet athletes competing: Raisa Smekhnova, Eugeny Okorokov and Rustam Shagiev. A Question of Fairness

A victory by Ivanova would make Goscomsport, the national sports federation, the biggest potential winner, with Ivanova generating as much as $325,585 if she finishes first.

But is that fair? ''Not an easy question to answer,'' she said yesterday through a translator. ''It is not totally fair. But so far, perestroika is not yet complete.''

For years, Soviet athletes competing in Western nations were required to return all their winnings to the federation. Often, promoters would slip the athletes money under the table, whereupon the athletes would buy items unavailable to them in the Soviet Union, like quality stereos and tape players. But the official winnings always flowed to the state.

Over the last three years, the rules have been relaxed. ''According to agreements each athlete makes with the committee, the athlete gets a small percentage of the winnings,'' Ivanova said. Negotiating With Federation For some athletes, the arrangement has still been unsatisfactory enough to bring the issue into the open. Earlier this year, Natalya Zvereva, the Soviet Union's leading tennis player, announced that she intended to keep all her earnings. Since then, she has engaged a marketing firm to represent her; the firm, which also represents Andrei Chesnokov, the top Soviet male player, is negotiating with the Soviet authorities a financial arrangement acceptable to Zvereva and Chesnokov and the state.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.