(Crystal A. Proxmire, Sept. 19, 2017)

Lathrup Village, MI – Lathrup Village Councilperson Ian Ferguson is seeking re-election on Nov. 7, 2017. There are five candidates running for three seats. Also on the ballot are Frank M. Brock, Bruce Kantor, Marcus Raudszus and Salee R. Siddiqi.

Councilperson Ferguson has a Master’s Degree in Science and Management from Walsh College. He has served two years on Council and is co-founder of the Lathrup Village Summer Stroll. Professionally he works for an automotive supplier and he has served in the US Navy. He is passionate about re-purposing the Annie Lathrup School building, and promoting the arts.

“Lathrup is, whether people know it or not, is a focal point for a great many professional and nonprofessional musicians. And so, I spend a great deal of time with those individuals. Actually, I’m one of the co-founders of Lathrup Village Summer Stroll, which was sponsored by the Lathrop Village Time Bank. Basically it was a spin off from the Waterhill Concert series in Ann Arbor. So we basically took that idea, and we made it ours. Where we placed bands in front of designated houses, on a particularly weekend… It starts from 2 to 6 and then we have a jam session at the end,” Ferguson said. “I’ve always been in the arts. I’ve always supported artists. I’ve always been volunteering in my community, and in other communities as well.”

Hear more of what Ferguson had to say:

Check out our Elections Section for other candidate interviews, or use the search bar at the top to find stories for your community.

All candidates are invited to do an interview and we are doing our best to connect. If you are a candidate that needs information, please email us at editor@oc115.com.

The Oakland County Times is a nonpartisan news source and interviews are done to help voters get to meet their candidates. We do not endorse any candidates, and statements made in candidate interviews are not fact-checked, though if we know of any errors we will include them in our story.

More candidate interviews are at https://oaklandcounty115.com/2017/07/01/2017-candidate-interviews/

If you support independent journalism and local news coverage, please consider donating towards Oakland County Times operating expenses at https://oaklandcounty115.com/reader-support/.

Also help spread the word by sharing posts that you think are valuable, such as this one.

Learn more about this candidate’s campaign at: website not available.