As-Suwayda in English dictionary

As-Suwayda

Sample sentences with "As-Suwayda"

Declension Stem

Its capital and major town is As-Suwayda.

Yesterday we published a comment, on the Foreign Ministry website, on the tragic events in As-Suwayda.

Artyom Kozhin: I have already noted our position regarding the tragic events in As-Suwayda.

Eventually, the head of as-Suwayda's NDF intervened in order to ensure that they were released.

As-Suwayda Governor Amer al-Eshi reported that the city had been secured by evening.

Question: As-Suwayda has been subjected to a terrorist attack yesterday.

The Syrian Army is conducting successful combat operations in the Deir ez-Zor, Homs, as-Suwayda and Hama provinces.

Humanitarian terminals have been opened in Aleppo, As-Suwayda and Kamyshly in addition to those which already exist in Damascus, Homs and Tartus.

(d) Othamn Siraj, allegedly arrested on 25 May 2015 by Military Security Forces at a checkpoint on the main road in As Suwayda, south-west Syria;

On the same day, a suicide bomber attacked a military site in As-Suwayda town in the south of the country, which is mostly populated by Druzes.

In addition to the humanitarian terminal which operates in As-Suwayda (on the border with Jordan), a decision was made to organise similar terminals in Aleppo, Deraa and Kamyshly.

On 18 May, National Defense Forces, alongside the 5th and 7th Armored Divisions of the Syrian Army, advanced 35 kilometers into rebel-held areas in eastern As-Suwayda Governorate.

On March 4, 1922, it was proclaimed as the State of Souaida, after the capital As-Suwayda, but in 1927 it was renamed Jabal al-Druze or Jabal Druze State.

Moreover, the remaining ISIS fighters have found refuge in the 55-kilometre safe zone created by the US, and these fighters continue to stage wicked attacks toward Palmyra, Al-Sukhnah and As-Suwayda.

According to estimates from the Venezuelan Embassy in Damascus, almost 60% of the population of As-Suwayda was born in Venezuelan territory and possesses double nationality, making the city referred to by some as Little Venezuela.

Hussam Youssef, who was last seen in early April 2013, at the Beginners’ Training Centre under the control of Air Force Intelligence, close to Najhah, a village along the highway to Damascus International Airport (Damascus–As-Suwayda road).

The second production line of a bakery has been put into operation in the city of as-Suwayda, which helped increase its capacity to 20 tonnes of baked goods per day, which covers the requirements of the city.

On 19 June, the rebels shelled the city of As-Suwayda in response to the government's attacks on their positions, while the Syrian Army simultaneously had another offensive active against ISIL in the northeastern part of the Suwayda Governorate.

Al-Atrash won several battles against the French at the beginning of revolution, notably the Battle of al-Kafr on July 21, 1925, the Battle of al-Mazraa on August 2, 1925, and the battles of Salkhad, Msfirah and as-Suwayda.

25 July 2018 - Islamic State militants carried out suicide bombings and gun attacks in the city of As-Suwayda and a number of villages in the southern Syrian governorate of As-Suwayda, killing 255 people, including 142 civilians, and injuring 180 others.

In early April, the joint operative headquarters of Jabhat al-Nusra in Daraa urged the command of other militant groups in the provinces of As-Suwayda, Daraa and Quneitra to coordinate efforts to start a joint offensive against the Syrian government troops.

Authors