New protests were organized yesterday by the population of the region Jabal al Arab in the central square of Suwayda, the capital of the governorate of the same name in southern Syria, with a Druze majority. This was announced by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a non-governmental organization based in London, but with a dense network of contacts in the field, specifying that demonstrators in the region have been calling for the resignation of the president, Bashar al Assad, for over a month , the start of a process of political transition towards democracy, according to United Nations Security Council resolution number 2254, a more decentralized political order, the release of political prisoners and the truth about missing persons. Similar demonstrations were organized in various centers in the region, such as the city of Al Qurayya and the village of Al Majdal, in the countryside of Suwayda.

As the protests have entered their second consecutive month, therefore, political demands increasingly prevail over the economic ones, which had characterized the beginnings of the popular movement. Furthermore, yesterday, during the procession organized in Suwayda, the demonstrators headed towards the home of a prominent religious leader among the Druze community, Sheikh Al Aql Hamoud al Hanawi, who expressed his support for their demands last Friday. According to the newspaper "Al Modon", another important Druze religious leader, Sheikh Hikmat al Hijri, expressed solidarity with the demonstrators, rejecting "the occupation of the country" by Iranian militias. In addition to Assad, in fact, one of the privileged targets of the protesters' slogans is the Islamic Republic, which supports the government of Damascus.

The ever-increasing pre-eminence of political demands over economic ones, moreover, became more evident after last September 13, in Suwayda, the security guard of a building that houses the headquarters of the Baath party, to which Assad belongs, shot at the demonstrators , wounding three. Meanwhile, rumors have spread on social networks about attempts to interfere in the Suwayda demonstrations, primarily by the United States, which has expressed its support for Assad's resignation and the start of a political transition process, while the senator , French Hill, would have made contact with Al Hijri; secondly by Russia, which, on the other hand, would like to stem the movement. The ambassador of the Russian Federation to Israel, Anatoly Viktorov, reportedly held a meeting with a Druze religious leader, Sheikh Muwaffaq Tarif, at the latter's residence. At the same time, according to the pro-government Syrian newspaper "Al Watan", a "Jordanian diplomatic source" reported that Amman has established a "crisis unit" to follow the developments of the protests in the neighboring governorate of Suwayda, maintaining contacts with the authorities of Damascus, with the United States, with Iraq. Furthermore, the Hashemite Kingdom is also following the situation from a security point of view, monitoring movements along the borders.