Juliusz Słowacki Municipal Theatre was built in 1893 and was initially supposed to house various stage genres, however, with economy in mind, the city, which owned the building, preferred to see it stage drama rather than opera.

In 1914 the Krakow Opera Association was established on the initiative of Bolesław Wallek-Walewski, composer and conductor. Between 1915 and 1921 it staged operas and operettas in the Juliusz Słowacki Theatre building, and on 1 September 1921 it received a former riding school at ul. Rajska 12 (currently Małopolska Garden of Arts). Bolesław Wallek-Walewski was the first director of Municipal Theatre – Opera and Operetta. Despite difficult conditions in the theatre building, he sought to ensure a high level of repertoire. In December 1923, due to lack of funds for renovations of the building, the Opera and Operetta ceased to exist in Krakow. Enthusiasts of the genre had to settle for guest performances of opera ensembles from Lviv, Warsaw, Katowice or Olomouc. The opera ensemble renewed its operations in 1931 thanks to Eugeniusz Bujański, who served as administrative director of Juliusz Słowacki theatre, and Bolesław Wallek-Walewski. Rehearsals took place in the Teatr Stary building and performances were staged once more on the stage at Plac św. Ducha on Sundays and Mondays. Despite hardships, the opera ensemble produced 32 premieres in eight years. The last one before the outbreak of war in 1939 was Werther by Massenet, conducted by Walerian Bierdiajew.

Soon after the military actions ended, the authorities of Krakow resumed the activities of Juliusz Słowacki Theatre as a dramatic and opera theatre. The opera ensemble inaugurated the revival on 10 August 1945 with the premiere of The Countess by Stanisław Moniuszko. Other opera and operetta initiatives appeared as well. They did not last, however, due to financial problems. Walerian Bierdiajew established an opera ensemble (without a permanent place of residence) in 1946 under the aegis of Towarzystwo Przyjaciół Opery (Society of Friends of Opera) and in close cooperation with the Krakow Philharmonic. It performed twice a week on the Juliusz Słowacki Theatre stage and produced 10 premieres within two years of its operations. Unfortunately, financial issues once again resulted in the break-up of the ensemble.

The battle for the erection of a building for the homeless Opera was won as late as in the beginning of the 21st century. Bogusław Nowak, director of the Opera, supported by Marek Nawara – the then Marshal of the Krakow Province – initiated the construction.

In May 2002, architectural competition for the Krakow Opera building at ul. Lubicz 48, replacing the operetta seat, was announced. It was won by a well-known architect from Krakow, Romuald Loegler. Construction works were being carried out between 2004 and 2008. A modern theatre with 764 seats and stage of 443 sq. meters total area, chamber stage for 180 people, large backstage, rehearsal rooms and modern technological facilities emerged. The historic building with half round roof, which served as a riding school at the beginning of the previous century, was included in the modern shape of the theatre. The adapted part includes the main entrance to the Opera, the box office lounge, dressing room, and on the first floor also an exhibition and meeting hall, which serves as foyer, too, and a restaurant with a terrace.

The construction of the new Opera building was financed by the European Union with the support of the Krakow Province and the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage. After nearly 60 years of roaming around and almost 5 years of constructions, the ensemble moved into its own home. The first work presented on the stage on 13 December 2008 was the premiere of The Devils of Loudun by Krzysztof Penderecki, directed by Laco Adamik and conducted by Andrzej Straszyński. Artur Ruciński performed as Grandier.