LAS VEGAS, Nov. 19, 2002 — Today at COMDEX Fall 2002, Microsoft Corp. and National Semiconductor Corp. announced a strategic technology relationship to develop a new chip set to power a new Microsoft®

computing initiative. The Smart Personal Objects Technology (SPOT) initiative is designed to provide customizable information on a host of smart personal objects that consumers use every day.

Developers in Microsoft Research’s Smart Personal Objects group have worked with National Semiconductor for more than two years to plan, design and build this chip set. The chip set, comprising receiver and a central processing unit, and related Microsoft software will power an array of smart personal objects capable of receiving Web-based information such as weather reports, stock quotes and sports scores.

“Our technical leadership and long-standing relationship with Microsoft, and our shared vision for Smart Personal Objects, were the catalysts for this opportunity,”

said Joe Montalbo, vice president and general manager of the Custom Solutions Group at National.

“This chip set is the ‘Smart’ in SPOT devices and will bring an even higher level of personalization to consumers by giving people access to the information they care about most in an easy-to-view way.”

Incubated in Microsoft Research, the SPOT initiative has been under development for three years. By working with leading companies such as National Semiconductor, Microsoft is bringing together exciting hardware, software and innovative services that will enable a wide range of smart personal objects designed for consumers.

“Microsoft has invested heavily in this initiative to introduce software and hardware that will make everyday devices smarter and more useful for consumers,”

said Bill Mitchell, Ph.D., general manager of the SPOT Group at Microsoft.

“Together with National and our manufacturing partners, we’re poised to introduce some amazing devices in the coming months.”

About National Semiconductor

National Semiconductor (NYSE

“NSM”

) is the premier analog company driving the information age. Combining real-world analog and state-of-the-art digital technology, the company is focused on the fast-growing markets for wireless handsets, displays, information infrastructure and information appliances. With headquarters in Santa Clara, Calif., National reported sales of $1.5 billion for its most recent fiscal year and has about 10,000 employees worldwide. Additional company and product information is available on the World Wide Web at http://www.national.com/ .

About Microsoft

Founded in 1975, Microsoft (Nasdaq

“MSFT”

) is the worldwide leader in software, services and Internet technologies for personal and business computing. The company offers a wide range of products and services designed to empower people through great software — any time, any place and on any device.

Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. in the United States and/or other countries.

The names of actual companies and products mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners.