"That is the definition of faith - acceptance of that which we imagine to be true, that which we cannot prove." - Dan Brown

Dan Brown is one of the best-selling authors of modern times. A few of his best works have been made into blockbuster movies. Brown's novels are published in 54 languages around the world with 200 million copies in print.

The Da Vinci Code, written by Brown, triggered a lot of questions within the Christian faith which led to him featuring in the 100 Most Influential People in the World by TIME Magazine in the year 2005. The Da Vinci Code was also recorded as one of the top best-selling novels of all time.

He is the creator of the famous character Professor Robert Langdon, played by Academy Award winner Tom Hanks in the movies The Da Vinci Code and Angels and Demons. He has also authored the popular books The Lost Symbol and Inferno.

advertisement

As he turns 53 today, here are few facts about the Inferno author:

Dan Brown graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy and then attended Amherst College. After graduating from Amherst, Brown began his music career. He was the producer of a children's cassette entitled 'Synth Animals'

In 1991, he moved to Hollywood to pursue a career as a singer-songwriter and pianist

To support himself at Hollywood, he taught classes at Beverly Hills Preparatory School. He later became an English teacher at Philips Exeter Academy. He has also worked as a Spanish teacher at Lincoln Akerman School

Sidney Sheldon's novel The Doomsday Conspiracy inspired Brown to become a writer of thrillers

Brown has stated that he has ideas for about 12 future books featuring Robert Langdon

Every day, Brown gets up at 4 am to write

Dan Brown has also appeared as an extra in the 2005 film Be Cool featuring John Travolta and Uma Thurman

In 2004, all four of Dan Brown's novels featured in the New York Times Best Seller List in the same week

It is believed that Dan Brown has never taken a day off from his writing routine

The Da Vinci Code has sold more than 81 million copies worldwide

His novels have been translated into 54 languages

Despite being a novelist, Brown hates reading fiction because he can't get through them

Dan Brown calls his library the 'Fortress of Gratitude'

His first book was called 'The Giraffe, the Pig and the Pants on Fire'. He dedicated his first book to his mother. The book had a print run of one copy, he said in the 2014 Penguin Annual Lecture

At the age of 13, he realised that both science and scripture posed plenty of contradictions and he used to wonder which story is true.

Here's another quote from Dan Brown--

'Science and Religion are two languages trying to tell the same story. Science focuses on the answers while religion savours the questions.'

Interested in General Knowledge and Current Affairs? Click here to stay informed and know what is happening around the world with our G.K. and Current Affairs section.

To get more updates on Current Affairs, send in your query by mail to education.intoday@gmail.com

Published By:

AtMigration

Published On:

Jun 22, 2016

--- ENDS ---