The Dallas Mavericks have gotten above-average play from Darren Collison this season, but depth at point guard is still an issue.

According to Chicago Tribune reporter K.C. Johnson, the franchise has signed veteran Derek Fisher to try to alleviate that problem:

Mavs coach Rick Carlisle just announced team has signed Derek Fisher.

— K.C Johnson (@KCJHoop) November 29, 2012

UPDATE: Thursday, November 29 at 12:45 p.m. ET by Timothy Rapp

Fisher is in, Troy Murphy is out. From Tim MacMahon of ESPN Dallas:

The Mavericks will release power forward Troy Murphy to make room on the roster for point guard Derek Fisher, sources said.

The 32-year-old Murphy, who signed with the Mavs in early November, averaged 4.6 points and 3.5 rebounds in 14 games during his Dallas tenure. He shot 36.1 percent from the floor and 31.4 percent from 3-point range.

Such is life in the NBA. Fisher should certainly help the thin Dallas backcourt, and his veteran presence will only be a positive.

---End of Update---

Fisher averaged nearly five points in 20 games with the Oklahoma City Thunder last season, and is averaging 8.6 points for his career.

He's definitely not the player that he once was, but that doesn't mean that he carries no value. As a 16-year veteran and established winner, he brings leadership and veteran savvy to the table. Collison has been very good this season, but those are two qualities he doesn't have.

Fisher isn't going to lead the Mavs to an NBA title, but Beaubois has been inconsistent this year. Cunningham is talented, but raw, and the only other option is combo guard Dominique Jones.

He's lost a step on both ends of the floor, but he is still capable of knocking down an open jump shot and facilitating the offense in a reserve's role. As long as he's not expected to play a lot of minutes, this move makes sense.

Dallas needs stability right now, and Fisher provides that. He's almost a player-coach at this point and would provide mentor-like qualities to the Mavericks' younger players. That could prove invaluable to the team this season and in coming years.