THE VITALS:

Team: AS Roma

Brand: Adidas

Era: 1991-92 (Used for the 1991 Supercoppa Italiana Final and the 1991-92 Serie A season)

Name/Number: -

CONDITION: EXCELLENT

This shirt comes to you in excellent condition, bearing zero little wear at all; I would say this article is very much as good as new!

DIMENSIONS:

Size: Medium

Pit to Pit Measurement: 20.5 inches

Shirt Length: 29.5 inches

Made by Adidas as retro remake; the dimensions of this shirt suggest that the shirt might be better suited for someone who wears a size large.

DESCRIPTION:

Adidas would take over from Ennerre as Roma’s kit manufacturer ahead of the 1991-92 season and this home shirt remains a perennial classic; even amongst of the incredible pantheon of AS Roma home shirts! Rather than start afresh, Adidas would rather take the baton from their predecessor and the result was yet another beautiful and minimal expression of ‘giallorossi’ with Adidas using trademark 3-stripes down the sleeves and insignia to add more amber to the crimson backdrop, while the Barilla sponsorship was also coloured amber. The other key feature was that the club crest was replaced by the Coppa Italia winners crest following their triumph of the Italian Cup in 1991. On the field, Ottavio Bianchi’s side would finish in a respectable 5th place in Serie A, while also reaching the Coppa Italia and UEFA Cup Winners Cup quarter finals. This would also be the last home shirt to be worn by the club stalwarts: Rudi Voller and Sebastiano Nela!

THE SEASON:

The first full season of the 1990’s was a great season for Roma as a disappointing 9th place finish in Serie A was offset by finishing as runners-up in the UEFA Cup Final and winning the Coppa Italia; not to mention the fact that they were only 4 points worse off than Genoa who finished the season in 4th place.

Ottavio Bianchi’s side would now be without long term servants: Stefano Desideri, Bruno Conti and Manuel Gerolin, while Thomas Berthold also moved back to Germany after two seasons with the club and young goalkeeper Angelo Peruzzi would be acquired by Juventus. Conversely, the impressive Thomas Hassler would come to Roma from Juventus as did Marco De Marchi, and further arrivals also included: Valter Bonacina and Luigi Garzya.

Roma would kick-off the new campaign away against Hellas Verona on 1st September, and would collect a 1-0 win, before being on the receiving end of the same score-line in their next outing at home to Internazionale. This would set the tone for a very inconsistent end to 1991 where they won and lost 4 of their 14 league games, and drew the other 6 games to end the year in 12th place.

1992 would continue very much in the same vein, and after the match-day 23 1-1 draw with Lazio in the Derby della Capitale on 1st March; Roma had won just once in 1992 amidst 2 additional losses and 5 more draws! The spring months would galvanise ‘I Giallorossi’ as they picked up 7 wins from their remaining 11 games which included victories in each of their final 5 games of the season to secure a 5th place finish and a return to the UEFA Cup!

Roma would begin the season by contesting the Supercoppa Italiana against Sampdoria on 24th August, however, they would disappointingly fall 1-0 to the reigning Scudetto holders. Their defence of the Coppa Italia would end in the quarter final, where again, they would be fallen at the hands of Sampdoria.

In Europe, Roma would battle to win the UEFA Cup Winners Cup and after eliminations of CSKA Moscow and Ilves on Finland to reach the quarter final, they would be eliminated on 1-0 aggregate by AS Monaco when they lost the 2nd Leg in the Principality.

The notable players that season were: