Novavax, a clinical-stage vaccine company focused developing recombinant nanoparticle vaccines and adjuvants, has made three management promotions and has hired a new SVP of Quality Operations.

The US firm has named Gregory Glenn as President, Research & Development.

Glenn joined Novavax as Chief Scientific Officer in July 2010. Previously, he was Chief Scientific Officer and founder of IOMAI Corporation, acquired by Intercell in 2008.

He has 24 years of vaccine research development experience and has led the RSV programme since 2010. He completed training in paediatrics at Madigan Army Medical Center, a Medical Research Fellowship at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, and conducted basic and clinical vaccine research at WRAIR before the founding of IOMAI.

Novavax has also promoted Amy Fix to SVP, Regulatory Affairs and Louis Fries III to SVP and Chief Medical Officer.

Fix joined Novavax in April 2013 as Vice President, Regulatory Affairs. Prior to this, she was Senior Director of Global Regulatory Affairs at Emergent Biosolutions after serving in regulatory affairs positions of increasing responsibility at a number of pharmaceutical companies, including Human Genome Sciences, Shire, MedImmune and Baxter.

Fries joined Novavax in 2011 with more than 22 years of experience in clinical testing and development of human vaccines in academic, small biotech, and major biopharmaceutical environments.

Prior to Novavax, Fries was Director of Clinical Development from 2005 to 2011 of ID Biomedical (later acquired by GSK Biologicals). He has previously served in senior positions at Intellivax, Univax and Nabi and was a faculty member in the Department of International Health, at Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health and trained in internal medicine at Johns Hopkins and infectious disease at the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Disease.

Meanwhile, Bob Darius has joined the firm as SVP, Quality Operations.

Darius joins Novavax with more than 25 years of experience in Quality Assurance, Quality Control and strategic manufacturing. As VP Quality Operations at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) Biologicals, he provided oversight of the North American and German vaccine manufacturing operations for more than 10 years and most recently moved to Head Quality Advocacy Liaison.

He also held positions of increasing responsibility at the Food and Drug Administration, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, where he was a Senior Reviewer and Inspector, Advisor to the Deputy Center Director, Medicine, on counter-bioterrorism products.