BOCA RATON —

» China Direct, based in Boca Raton, began trading on the American Stock Exchange under the symbol CDS. The company is a consultant and investor in Chinese companies.

» Nabi Biopharmaceuticals is selling its Florida corporate offices and labs to Biotest, a German firm, for $185 million. Nabi’s headquarters will move to Rockville, Md., where the company will continue to produce its smoking cessation products.

» Florida Atlantic University’s board of trustees voted unanimously to approve a 30,000-seat, $62-million football stadium on its campus.

» The U.S. Green Building Council awarded FAU’s Christine E. Lynn School of Nursing LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Gold Certification, the first such recognition for FAU. The $12.7-million building was designed by Orlando-based TLC Architecture for Engineering and SchenkelShultz Architecture.

FORT LAUDERDALE —

» Aqua Marine Partners and Vertical Yacht Club Development will build Vertical Yacht Club Marina Mile, a dry storage facility designed for yachts up to 85 feet long. The indoor facility will hold 46 yachts.

» Levitt Corp. will lay off 200 employees in its home building subsidiary, Levitt and Sons, because of the housing slowdown.

» The Community Foundation of Broward, a philanthropy and non-profit clearinghouse, was awarded an Atlantic Philanthropies Community Experience Partnership grant of $25,000 in the first year and $300,000 for the following three years. The money is designed to encourage Baby Boomers to get involved in community projects and social causes.

FORT PIERCE —

» Harbortown Marina-Fort Pierce is planning a $1.3-million dredging to remove an estimated 60,000 cubic yards of sludge from the marina’s bottom. Harbortown has been certified by the state as a “clean marina,” a certification of “high environmental compliance.”

INDIAN RIVER COUNTY —

» County commissioners signed off on a deal that gives Piper Aircraft $16 million to stay in Vero Beach. The state is kicking in another $20 million.

JUNO BEACH —

» FPL Group announced plans to spend $2.4 billion on solar energy projects in Florida, including a solar-energy plant that will eventually produce 300 megawatts of power.

MELBOURNE —

» A Wichita grand jury has handed down a 24-count indictment charging PBS Global, its president and seven employees with fax-blasting fraudulent offers to purchase small businesses in Kansas and other regions. The company markets businesses that are for sale by owner, according to its website.