David Arthur Wilkinson, 57 of 1078 Rice Cross Road, Piney Flats, died Sunday, January 20, 2008 at his residence. He was a native of Cedar Grove, West Virginia, son of the late Luther Earl Wilkinson, Sr. and Thelma Walls Wilkinson. David was a sales representative of the L.P. Shanks Company in Bristol. He was a member of the Edgefield United Methodist Church. David loved to sing gospel songs, restore cars from the 70s and was a promising beginner at golf. In addition to his father, who died in 2004, he was preceded in death by his father-in-law, George Henry Mellons in 1980. Survivors include: his wife of 34 years, Pansy Mellons Wilkinson of the home; his mother, Thelma Walls Wilkinson of Bluff City; his mother-in-law, Carrie Mellons of Piney Flats; three brothers and sisters-in-law, Luther Earl Wilkinson, Jr. and Linda of Glasgow, WVA, Joe and Debbie Wilkinson of Bluff City, Gary and Debbie Wilkinson of Bristol, a sister and brother-in-law, Brenda and Jeff Hutchings of Elizabethton; two sister-in-laws and their husbands, Dolores and Rome Chapman and Janet and Sam Elliott, all of Piney Flats; a brother-in-Christ, Mike Chapman and his wife Kathy of Piney Flats, nephews, Brian, Adam, Earl and Chris; nieces, Christy, Lori, Gennie, Gretchen, Ginger, Meisha, Greta, Jessica and Melissa; several great nieces and nephews; a special cousin, Jean Wyer of New Smyrna Beach, Florida. A funeral service is scheduled for Monday, January 21, 2008 at 8:00 p.m. in the South Chapel of the Morris '' Baker Funeral Home under the direction of Rev. Estel Williams and Rev. Mack Houston. The family will receive friends from 6:00 p.m. until time of service at eight. A committal service will be conducted on Tuesday, January 22, 2008 in the Edgefield U.M.C. Cemetery at 1:00 p.m. Active pallbearers will be: Rome Chapman, Mike Chapman, Tom Hodge, Dewayne Wright, Brian Chapman and Adam Chapman. Honorary pallbearers will be: Sam Elliott, Dave Tester and Kelly Botts. Memorials may be made in the form of contributions to: the Edgefield U.M.C. '' Memorial Fund, c/o Carrie Mellons, 249 Warren Road, Piney Flats, TN 37686. Special thanks to the L.P. Shanks Company, Bristol, Dr. Thomas Johnson and staff, Adventa Hospice, Sunshine S.S. Class at Edgefield U.M.C. and the therapists at Quillen Outpatient Services.