A funeral service will be Thursday (3-27-08) for William Fernie Wilkinson, 1054 Memorial Blvd., Sharon. He passed away at 2 p.m. Saturday (3-22-08) in UPMC Presbyterian Hospital, Pittsburgh, following an extended illness. He was 71. Mr. Wilkinson was born March 13, 1937, in Oil City, a son of the late Charles Fernie and Genevieve Alegra Lynd Wilkinson. He was a 1955 graduate of Rocky Grove (Pa.) High School and attended Penn State University. Bill retired in 1985 from Erie Center for the Blind, where he was employed for 22 years. His enjoyments included spending time with his family; listening to blue grass music; and playing musical instruments such as the guitar, banjo, fiddle and harmonica. He also enjoyed NASCAR racing and was a fan of the late Dale Ernhart and of Jimmy Johnson. Surviving are: his wife, the former Jean Luella Cooper, whom he married Sept. 21, 1968, at home; his children, Susan Jean Wilkinson, Venus, Pa.; Edward Wilkinson and his wife Wanda, Chesnee, S.C.; Timothy Wilkinson and his wife Vicky, Kenton, Ohio; Melony Magargee and her husband Owen, Hermitage; Sandy Wilkinson, Sharon; and Matthew Wilkinson and Zachary Wilkinson, both at home; six grandchildren, Kyle and Jordan Wilkinson, both Chesnee; Renae Magargee, Hermitage; and Timothy, William and Robert Wilkinson, all Kenton; one brother, Bob Wilkinson and his wife Gail; one sister, Janice Roberts and her husband Arthur; and his aunt, Martha Confer, all Oil City. He will also be greatly missed by his golden retriever, Lily, and her friends. Besides his parents, Bill was preceded in death by a son, William Francis Wilkinson; and two infant sisters, Edna Louise Wilkinson and Linda Marie Wilkinson. In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions may be made to the Marines Toys for Tots Foundation, Box 131, Quantico, Va. WILKINSON William Fernie, 71, of 1054 Memorial Blvd., Sharon. Calling hours: 4 to 7 p.m. Wednesday (3-26-08) in J. BRADLEY McGONIGLE FUNERAL HOME and CREMATORY Inc., 1090 E. State St., Sharon. Friends may e-mail condolences to McGonigleFuneralHome@verizon.net Service: Funeral service at 1 p.m. Thursday (3-27-08) in the funeral home chapel with the Rev. Dr. Phillip Cooper, pastor of Shenango Valley Baptist Church, Hermitage, officiating.