Around Frinton-on-Sea

Frinton-on-Sea: A charming seaside town

Situated between Harwich and Clacton-on-Sea in the east of Essex, Frinton-on-Sea is a delightful seaside town offering a wealth of amenities and a real community feel that make it a perfect place to purchase a new build home.

The town’s high street offers traditional amenities including a bakery, butchers, fishmongers, and greengrocers, meaning you can support the local economy while eating well. The seafront is lined with colourful Victorian-style beach huts – a nod to the locale’s heyday as a seaside retreat for Londoners wanting a breath of fresh air from hustle and bustle of the city.

Well-rated schools for all ages can be found close by our new build Finches Park homes in Frinton-on-Sea too, so, whether you’re a growing family, commuter or even looking to downsize, this really is a wonderful place to call home.

What’s close to Frinton-on-Sea?

There’s plenty to do in the area. Walton-on-the-Naze is a small town with a fascinating history located just over two miles from our collection of homes for sale in Frinton-on-Sea.

Here, you will find some wonderful walks and nature reserves to explore. The Naze, as well as being a natural open space, is a Site of Special Scientific Interest, and famed for the fossils found in the Red Crag cliffs.

There are walking trails galore in this great location close to our Finches Park development in Frinton-on-Sea, with the option to take a guided walk to learn more about the history and wildlife in and around Walton. Of course, you might want to get active indoors too, so the town’s gym; with a 25m indoor pool – could be ideal for you.

If you’re after traditional seaside entertainment with a modern twist, Clacton-on-Sea is the perfect destination, and only five miles away from our new homes in Frinton-on-sea. The largest town on the Essex Sunshine Coast, Clacton-on-Sea boasts a wealth of entertainment options, from the pleasure pier, arcades and seafront walks to the West Cliff Theatre, golf course, and water sports.

For attractions on an even bigger scale, Colchester is just 20 miles away from our new build homes in Frinton-on-Sea. Boasting a rich history dating back over 2,000 years, today’s Colchester is also a thriving modern town with some fantastic visitor attractions.

Family favourites include Colchester Zoo and Colchester Castle, along with great places to eat, drink and shop. Explore the historic lanes or take in the town’s main attractions including Roman ruins, arts venues, and galleries.

Local schools and education

Our new build homes at Finches Park in Frinton-on-Sea are perfectly located for families with children of all ages, with the town offering a great choice of Ofsted rated ‘Good’ schools, all within easy reach.

For the younger ones, choose from Greenway Pre-School or Frinton Chapel Pre-School, rated ‘Good’ by Ofsted. For primary education, Kirby Primary Academy, also rated ‘Good’, is walking distance from Finches Park, with Frinton-on-Sea Primary School and Hamford Primary Academy just under two miles away from home.

There is also St. Philomena’s Catholic School - an independent day school for boys and girls – just two miles east of our Frinton-on-Sea new build development.

For secondary and further education, Clacton County High School (rated ‘Good’) and Tendring Technology College are close by. There is also a large choice of independent secondary education, including TLG Tendring (‘Good’), Felixstowe International College(‘Good’), and Royal Hospital School, Ipswich (rated ‘Excellence’ by the Independent Schools Inspectorate).

Transport and travel

For commuters choosing a new build property for sale in Frinton-on-Sea, getting out and about is simple, with connections to the A133 allowing for journeys to Clacton-on-Sea (5.7 miles), while the A120 will get you to Harwich (11.6 miles), Colchester (20 miles) and the A12 for Ipswich (23 miles) Chelmsford (42 miles) and East London.

Travelling by rail is easy from Kirby Cross station, which is within walking distance of our Finches Park new build development. From here, regular services run to Colchester (37 minutes), Walton-on-the-Naze (seven minutes) and Thorpe-le-Soken (six minutes). London Liverpool Street Station can also be reached by train in around two hours.

For local journeys, there is a convenient bus service that provides access to surrounding towns such as Walton-on-the-Naze, Colchester, Holland-on-Sea and Clacton-on-Sea. And to get away to several European destinations, Southend Airport is around 30 miles from home.

Read More

**Savings based on independent survey competed 2022 by Elmhurst Energy. Savings depend on type of property, size of property, energy usage and tariff.

*Terms and conditions apply. Please check with a Sales Consultant before reservation. Offers not available on shared ownership homes. Cash equivalent paid as an allowance upon completion. Maximum incentive varies dependent on development and plot. Offers are not available in conjunction with any other offer. Limited to one incentive per reservation. Please ask a sales consultant for more details. Purchaser will still be required to provide at least 5% deposit (subject to lender criteria). Purchaser will need funds to pay for solicitor fees, stamp duty (if applicable) and moving costs. Please speak to a sales consultant for more information. August 2024

The site plan which can be found on this page, has been produced for home identification purposes only and is not to scale. The development layout, landscaping and tenure of all dwellings may be subject to change throughout the course of the development. Finishes and materials may vary from those shown on the plan. Please check the details of your chosen plot and house type with the sales consultant. Development layout plan correct at time of production.

‡Smooth Move is available on selected new Linden homes only. Acceptance is at our sole discretion. We reserve the right to refuse to agree to Smooth Move and we are under no obligation to give reasons why. We will instruct local estate agents to undertake an independent valuation and marketing advice for your current home before we make you a proposal on a marketing price for your home. The realistic sale price may be lower than an initial marketing price and is based on a sale within a specified timescale fixed by us. You have the final say at the price at which the property is marketed, but Smooth Move will not be available if the price at which you wish to market your current home is higher than we think is realistic or the timescale is too long. You must agree: 1. No party is currently negotiating to purchase your current home 2. No introduction has already been made by another party 3. Not to instruct another estate agent to sell your current home. You may need to leave a full set of keys and agree to access accompanied viewings for potential buyers with the appointed estate agents. You agree that Linden Homes will determine which estate agent is instructed and the terms of that appointment. It is not guaranteed that a buyer will be found for your current home or that any buyer will be willing to pay the price you want. Linden Homes may continue to market your chosen Linden home and reserves the right to take a reservation on this home until the sale of your current home to a third party is agreed and you pay the reservation fee on your chosen Linden home. In this case, if available, an alternative home may be offered, but there is no obligation on either party to proceed with Smooth Move. Any sale of your current home to a third-party buyer is at a price approved by you. A reservation fee is payable to Linden Homes for the purchase of your chosen Linden home at the agreed price, when you agree a sale on your current home. You agree only to confirm agreement of sale with a purchaser who can achieve an exchange within 35 days and who has been financially qualified to proceed with the purchase of your current home. On the simultaneous legal completion of the sale of your current home and the purchase of your new Linden home, we will pay the estate agents fees. Please note your buyer could cancel prior to legal exchange of contracts for the sale of your current home. In this instance, Linden Homes retains the right to cancel the purchase of your chosen home and retain the agreed proportion of the reservation fee in accordance with your reservation agreement. We reserve the right to withdraw Smooth Move if an acceptable buyer is not found within the specified period. Should we secure a purchaser for your current home on your behalf and you do not proceed to purchase a Linden home, you may be liable to pay all Estate Agent fees. Reservation fees may vary dependent upon the location of your new Linden home. An upfront fee of £500 is required, all of which is refundable against the reservation fee and purchase price of your new Linden home. If you choose not to purchase, Linden Homes will retain up to fifty percent of the fee to cover reasonable administrative and other costs incurred in processing and holding the reservation. Smooth Move is available on selected plots only.

₸Own New Rate Reducer is only available on selected new build homes at participating developments. Speak to a Linden Homes local sales consultant for more information. The Own New Rate Reducer scheme cannot be combined with other offers or scheme. Participating lenders only. Own New Rate Reducer is available at the lender’s discretion. Mortgages up to a maximum value of £1,000,000 only. Rate reduction is for the fixed, introductory period of the mortgage only (usually 2, 3 or 5 years but this will depend on your individual mortgage). Your interest rate and mortgage payments will increase after the fixed, introductory period – please consult your independent financial advisor and/or your lender. See ownnew.co.uk for more information about the Own New Rate Reducer scheme. Linden Homes is not regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and cannot offer mortgage advice. Independent financial advice must be sought from a regulated mortgage broker to access this scheme. You should confirm with your independent financial advisor that the Own New Rate Reducer Scheme, and any mortgage deal available with the benefit of the scheme, is suitable for you, in your individual circumstances. The Own New Rate Reducer Scheme is an independent third party scheme. If you are eligible for the scheme, then Linden Homes will make a cash payment after completion of typically from 3% of the purchase price of the property to Own New, which will be passed onto the relevant participating lender (after deduction of Own New's commission) so that they can offer a mortgage product at a rate that is subsidised from their usual product range. Rate reductions, rates and savings are subject to availability of the Own New scheme. Any rates or savings quoted are examples provided for illustration only and you should not rely on them. The actual reduction, rate and saving you achieve will depend on your individual mortgage offer. References to reductions and any example rates and savings are as compared to the same mortgage without use of the Own New scheme over the fixed, introductory period of the mortgage. Mortgage offers will be made at the lender’s discretion and in line with lender’s criteria. YOUR HOME MAY BE REPOSSESSED IF YOU DO NOT KEEP UP WITH REPAYMENTS ON A MORTGAGE OR ANY OTHER DEBT SECURED ON IT. Terms and conditions apply https://ownnew.co.uk/terms-and-conditions/