Ken Gatward Close, Frinton-On-Sea

£375,000Knowing the purchase price means you can work out the total cost of buying the property.Read more about property price in our glossary page.

Reduced on 18/06/2024

PROPERTY TYPE

Detached

BEDROOMS

3

BATHROOMS

2

SIZE

1,163 sq ft

108 sq m

TENURE

Describes how you own a property. There are different types of tenure - freehold, leasehold, and commonhold.Read more about tenure in our glossary page.

Freehold

Key features

Three Bedrooms

En-Suite To master Bedroom

18'4" Integrated Kitchen/Dining Room

Utility & Cloakroom

Inside The Gates

Immaculately Presented Throughout

Built 2016

No Onward Chain

EPC Rating B

Council Tax Band - D

Description

Being offered with NO ONWARD CHAIN and situated inside Frinton's prestigious 'Gates', Sheen's Estate Agents have the pleasure in offering for sale this 2016 built, THREE BEDROOM DETACHED HOUSE. The property boasts from a light and airy feel throughout and benefits from a en-suite to Master Bedroom, utility room and cloakroom, 18'4" kitchen/dining area and a South Facing garden. The property is also conveniently located on the sought after 'Hamilton Gate' development which is situated approximately half a mile from the mainline railway station with links to London Liverpool Street, shopping amenities in Connaught Avenue and Seafront. It is the valuers opinion that an internal inspection is highly recommended to fully appreciate the accommodation on offer.

Accommodation comprises with approximate room sizes:-

Obscured sealed unit double glazed composite entrance door giving leading to:-

Hallway - Stair flight to first floor. Radiator. Door to:-

Lounge - 5.61m x 3.00m (18'5" x 9'10") - Radiator. Sealed unit double glazed window to front. Sealed unit double glazed French style doors giving access to garden.

Kitchen/Diner - 5.59m x 3.56m (18'4" x 11'8") - Fitted with a range of modern matching fronted units. Rolled edge worksurfaces. Inset one and a half bowl stainless steel sink drainer unit with mixer tap. Inset four ring gas hob with built in oven under and extractor hood above. Further selection of matching units at both eye and floor level. Integrated fridge/freezer and dishwasher. Two radiators. Built in storage cupboard. Two sealed unit double glazed window to side. Sealed unit double glazed window to front. Door to:-

Utility - 1.96m x 1.65m (6'5" x 5'5") - Rolled edge worksurface. Washing machine to remain. Tumble dryer to remain. Wall mounted combination boiler providing heat and hot water throughout. Extractor fan. Radiator. Obscured sealed unit double glazed door giving access to rear. Door to:-

Cloakroom - White suite comprises low level w/c. Pedestal wash hand basin with tiled splashback. Heated towel rail. Extractor fan.

First Floor Landing -

Bedroom 1 - 5.61m x 3.05m max (18'5" x 10' max) - Two radiators. Sealed unit double glazed window to side. Sealed unit double glazed window to front. Door to:-

En-Suite - White suite comprises low level w/c. Pedestal wash had basin with tiled splashback. Fitted shower cubicle with wall mounted integrated shower. Tiled splashback. Heated towel rail. Extractor fan.

Bedroom 2 - 3.23m x 2.74m (10'7" x 9') - Radiator. Sealed unit double glazed window to front. Sealed unit double glazed window to side.

Bedroom 3 - 2.74m x 2.26m (9' x 7'5") - Radiator. Sealed unit double glazed window to side.

Bathroom - White suite comprises low level w/c. Pedestal wash hand basin. Panelled bath with wall mounted electric shower and fitted shower screen. Tiled splashback. Heated towel rail. Extractor fan. Obscured sealed unit double glazed window to front.

Outside - Rear - Patio area. Majority laid to lawn. Borders well stocked with flowers, shrubs and bushes. Wooden potting shed to remain. Enclosed by part brick wall and part panelled fencing. Access to side via gate.

Outside - Side - Hard standing area providing off street parking. Open access to front.

Material Information - Freehold Property - Tenure: Freehold

Council Tax Band: D

Any Additional Property Charges: £296 approx for communal areas.

Services Connected:

(Gas): Yes

(Electricity): Yes

(Water): Yes

(Sewerage Type): Mains Drainage

(Telephone & Broadband): Yes

Non-Standard Property Features To Note:

Jaf/05.24 - ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING REGULATIONS 2017 - Prospective purchasers will be asked to produce photographic identification and proof of residence documentation once entering into negotiations for a property in order for us to comply with current Legislation.

REFERRAL FEES - Sheen’s reserve the right to recommend additional services. Sheen’s receive referral fees of; £50 per transaction when using a suggested solicitor. 10% referral fee on a nominated Surveying Company. 10% referral fee on their nominated independent mortgage broker service. Clients have the right to use whomever they choose and are not bound to use Sheen’s suggested providers.

These particulars do not constitute part of an offer or contract. They should not be relied on as statement of fact and interested parties must verify their accuracy personally. All internal photographs are taken with a wide angle lens, therefore before arranging a viewing, room sizes should be taken into consideration.

Brochures

Ken Gatward Close, Frinton-On-SeaBrochure

COUNCIL TAXA payment made to your local authority in order to pay for local services like schools, libraries, and refuse collection. The amount you pay depends on the value of the property.Read more about council Tax in our glossary page.

Ask agent

PARKINGDetails of how and where vehicles can be parked, and any associated costs.Read more about parking in our glossary page.

Yes

GARDENA property has access to an outdoor space, which could be private or shared.

Yes

ACCESSIBILITYHow a property has been adapted to meet the needs of vulnerable or disabled individuals.Read more about accessibility in our glossary page.

Ask agent

Energy performance certificate - ask agent

NEAREST STATIONS

Distances are straight line measurements from the centre of the postcode

Frinton Station0.2 miles

Kirby Cross Station1.0 miles

Walton-on-Naze Station1.4 miles

Check how much you can borrow

Get a Mortgage in Principle

You'll have a personalised result in just 20 minutes and you could get viewings faster when you find the home you want, with no impact on your credit score.Powered bynationwide

Recently sold & under offer

See similar nearby properties

About the agent

Sheen's, Frinton-On-Sea

149 Connaught Avenue, Frinton-On-Sea, CO13 9AH

Only by maintaining a thoroughly professional, efficient and friendly service can we preserve our reputation as one of Tendring's Leading Estate Agents.

Sheen's have been selling homes for almost 40 years in the Tendring Area and pride ourselves on being a modern innovative estate agency with traditional values.

We are open Seven Days a Week, until 6:30pm Weekdays enabling us to contact clients outside of normal work hours, we pride ourselves on going that extra mile. Our h

More properties from this agent

Industry affiliations