Frinton Residents' Association - About Our Town

Frinton is a residential town situated by the sea. As such we welcome summer visitors, but this means that there are two Frintons: a Summer Frinton of some 6-8 weeks where the day-time population can double and another, more tranquil Frinton which residents inhabit for the other 44-46 weeks of the year. A railway line runs through the middle of our town, and a level crossing has to be negotiated in order to visit the town centre or the seafront.

Frinton's Key Features

On the seaward side of the level crossing, Frinton's key features can be listed as its fine, safe beach and promenade, with the associated greensward and generous free car parking; its conservation areas; The Avenues; period properties at one end of The Esplanade and Art Deco buildings at the other; and the town centre located around Connaught Avenue where some traditional shops can still be found. Together they create a pleasant ambience with a yet persistent air of past times, but to ensure this environment is maintained and conserved, proper maintenance is required.

On the other side of the level crossing, the key features are smart, modern housing developments, the Triangle Centre which includes a pedestrianised shopping precinct, the Town Hall, a Community Centre, and plenty of free parking.

Frinton benefits from its railway connection meaning that the centre of London is only approximately an hour and a half away.

The Threat to Frinton

The threat to Frinton arises from expansion in size and population, increasing housing densities, and vastly increased car ownership and usage. There is also the threat to the independent shops in our high street (Connaught Avenue) if they are not supported by local residents. None of these threats are unique to Frinton. They are part of the conundrum confronting many small towns in England. However, in Frinton the Residents' Association is working towards ensuring that these threats have minimal impact on the environment.

The History of Frinton

A brief report on the town's history has been compiled by local historian, David Foster. Read David's Brief History of Frinton.

Local Facilities

Crime

Apparently, reported crime in this area is falling and Frinton-on-Sea is one of the safest places in the country. However, everyone should remain vigilant with regard to bogus callers and pickpockets, avoid providing ways in for opportunist burglars by not leaving windows open when you are out, or even opportunities for people to walk in unseen when you are at home. In other areas, pickpockets have targeted charity shops and taken things from bags of those who are browsing which proves that nowhere is completely safe.