As part of the Louisiana Cooperative Extension Service, our Extension faculty work with our research and teaching faculty to assist parish county agents in delivering the latest research-based information to Louisiana citizens in both rural and metropolitan settings. Educational opportunities for professional and consumer clientele include field days, variety trials, workshops, practical extension publications, news releases and personal advice.

Major SPESS events and services also include soil and irrigation water testing, LSU spring garden show and AgMagic tours for children. Extension efforts support sustainable agriculture production, environmental awareness and improved quality of life. A youth component provides career exploration and personal development through FFA contests and our 4-H programming. Our Louisiana Master Gardener program gives adults opportunities for personal development and leadership and enhances our community educational outreach in home horticulture.

Area of Specialization

Faculty Member

Consumer Horticulture

Heather Kirk-Ballard

Assistant Professor

Home/School/Community Gardens

Louisiana SARE

Kathryn (Kiki) Fontenot

Associate Professor

Water Quality Michael Hayes

Assistant Professor

Pasture & Forage Crops,

Small Grains

Edward K. Twidwell

Professor

Weed Management - Rice

Eric Webster

Associate Professor

Weed Management - Sugarcane

Albert Orgeron

Assistant Professor

Weed Management - Turf , Weed Management - Ornamentals

Ronald E. Strahan

Associate Professor

Louisiana Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education

The Louisiana Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) is a professional development program sponsored by Louisiana State University AgCenter and the Southern University Agricultural Research and Extension Center. We work together to implement programs that enhance the capabilities of Louisiana's ag professionals in the area of sustainable agriculture. Louisiana SARE partners with researchers, extension faculty, producers, and community organizations to research and implement the best science-based practices available in all aspects of Louisiana's agricultural system. In addition to research, SARE is dedicated to providing education in sustainable agriculture through various trainings offered each year. Educational initiatives include workshops and long-distance education training sessions, field trips, resource manuals and informational bulletins.

Find more about Louisiana SARE on the Southern SARE website or follow us on Facebook for news, events, and educational opportunities.

Contacts