Academics

Louisiana State University is heralded by its students for having “tons of different programs to choose from” and “stellar academics.” A few that students mention are the strong engineering and mass communications programs. Students also appreciate that they’re not just abandoned under a variety of classes and programs. “No matter what issue you’re having, there is [someone] whose entire job is to help you deal with it,” says a student. “The tutoring centers are beyond helpful,” if you need assistance with your studies, and faculty is “always available to help students” outside of class. This extra scaffolding keeps the rigor of academic programs “challenging but not unbearable.” Some students recall lectures that are “extremely boring,” and cite language barriers they’ve encountered with a few professors. But undergrads are impressed overall, stating, “Professors at LSU…are passionate about their fields of study” and are “accessible, accommodating, and well-informed.”

Student Body

“Southern hospitality shines through in most” here, as “many students are clearly Louisianans first and students second.” While many may be state natives, students frequently comment that “the student body at LSU is very diverse.” One adds, “I love being able to walk around campus and see people of all cultures speaking different languages and engaging with one another.” Along with cultures, interests vary too: “You have people that are party animals, Christian loyalists, sports enthusiasts, [and] academic maniacs.” While students appreciate the diversity, some note that the population “continues to be predominated by white, cisgender, and mostly heterosexual people.” Nonetheless, a community atmosphere prevails, allowing students to “really feel like they are a part of something bigger.” This camaraderie extends all across campus because “people here care about smiles and friendliness,” giving it “a smaller and more intimate atmosphere.” As one student puts it, as long as “you’re a Tiger, then you’re family.” As another student observes, “When you mix Louisiana culture with 30,000 students who love their school, you get an amazing combination.”

Campus Life

This “beautiful southern university” offers “the best of both worlds,” combining its academics with “so many clubs and groups…for students to join.” For fun and fitness, “the weather is beautiful here and [the] campus is located next to large lakes where a lot of people run or walk.” If you want to take it indoors, the recreation center is an “amazing facility” that “is great for group classes and working out during the day or relaxing at the pool.” Socially, “Greek life is prominent,” but if that’s not your thing, “there are so many different subgroups, and there’s really a place for everyone.” No matter where you fit in, “tailgating and football are central to the school.” As one student says, “It is [an] absolutely amazing environment [in which] everyone comes together to support the teams.” Another adds, “When ‘Calling Baton Rouge’ gets played at an event you end up singing it and dancing to it with someone new, whoever is next to you, no matter where they are from.” That love for Baton Rouge extends off-campus as well, to the city itself, which students call “underrated [and] cool.”