As Louisiana's Flagship University, LSU's spectacular campus environment, internationally renowned faculty, state-of-the-art research facilities, and supportive academic climate attracts highly qualified undergraduate and graduate students and challenges them to achieve the highest levels of intellectual and personal development.

LSU provides students with wide-ranging opportunities for unparalleled faculty instruction, hands-on research, community engagement, study abroad, student leadership, and national championship athletics. LSU provides an affordable, first-rate education that combines the advantages of a top-tier university with the student-focus of a smaller campus. Our broad array of academic studies accompanies extensive individual support services, reflecting LSU's commitment to student success.

As Louisiana's Flagship University, LSU's spectacular campus environment, internationally renowned faculty, state-of-the-art research facilities, and supportive academic climate attracts highly qualified undergraduate and graduate students and challenges them to achieve the highest levels of intellectual and personal development.

LSU provides students with wide-ranging opportunities for unparalleled faculty instruction, hands-on research, community engagement, study abroad, student leadership, and national championship athletics. LSU provides an affordable, first-rate education that combines the advantages of a top-tier university with the student-focus of a smaller campus. Our broad array of academic studies accompanies extensive individual support services, reflecting LSU's commitment to student success.

One of the important factors when considering a master's degree is the cost of study. Luckily, there are many options available to help students fund their master's programme. Download your copy of the Scholarship Guide to find out which scholarships from around the world could be available to you, and how to apply for them.

In this guide you will find:

Where to look for scholarship opportunities

How to apply to scholarships relevant to you

A list of available scholarships around the world

A scholarship application checklist

Download Scholarship Guide