The Penguins of Madagascar was an American CGI animated television series that has aired on Nickelodeon. It stars nine characters from the DreamWorks Animation animated film Madagascar: The penguins Skipper (Tom McGrath), Rico (John DiMaggio), Kowalski (Jeff Bennett), and Private (James Patrick Stuart); the lemurs King Julien (Danny Jacobs), Maurice (Kevin Michael Richardson), and Mort (Andy Richter); and Mason (Conrad Vernon) and Phil the chimpanzees. Characters new to the series include Marlene the otter (Nicole Sullivan) and a zookeeper named Alice (Mary Scheer). It is the first Nicktoon produced with DreamWorks Animation.

The pilot episode "Gone in a Flash", aired as part of "Superstuffed Nicktoons Weekend" on November 29, 2008, and The Penguins of Madagascar became a regular series on March 28, 2009. The series premiere drew 6.1 million viewers, setting a new record as the most-watched premiere.

Although the series occasionally alludes to the rest of the franchise, The Penguins of Madagascar does not take place at a precise time within it. McGrath, who is also the co-creator of the film characters, has said that the series takes place "not specifically before or after the movie, I just wanted them all back at the zoo. I think of it as taking place in a parallel universe."

The show finished 2010 as the number two animated program among kids age 2-11 and in basic cable total viewers.

Voice actor John DiMaggio stated that the show has ended production. A feature film starring the penguins (albeit with different voice actors, aside from Tom McGrath as Skipper) and featuring other characters voiced by Benedict Cumberbatch, Ken Jeong, and John Malkovich, among others, was released on November 26, 2014.

Characters[]

The series' new protagonists are Skipper, Kowalski, Rico, and Private. Characters who have returned are King Julien, Maurice, Mort, and Mason and Phil. New characters include Marlene the otter, Dr. Blowhole, Alice, and Blue Balls.

Plot[]

The series follows the adventures of the four penguin protagonists: Skipper, Kowalski, Rico, and Private, who perform various paramilitary missions to protect their home in the Central Park Zoo. The penguins often have to deal with problems caused (or made worse) by King Julien , Maurice, and Mort.

Voice cast[]

Main cast[]

Tom McGrath as Skipper

Jeff Bennett as Kowalski

John DiMaggio as Rico

James Patrick Stuart as Private

Danny Jacobs as King Julien XIII

Kevin Michael Richardson as Maurice

Andy Richter as Mort

Nicole Sullivan as Marlene

Conrad Vernon as Mason

Episode guide[]

Casting[]

Some of the actors who played the characters in the films didn't return for the series. Chris Miller is replaced by Jeff Bennett as Kowalski, Christopher Knights is replaced by James Patrick Stuart as Private, Sacha Baron Cohen is replaced by voice actor Danny Jacobs as King Julien, and Cedric the Entertainer's character is now voiced by the popular Kevin Michael Richardson.

Gallery[]

Navigation[]

Media Films: Madagascar • Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa • Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted • Penguins of Madagascar

Shows: The Penguins of Madagascar • All Hail King Julien • Madagascar: A Little Wild

TV Specials: The Madagascar Penguins in a Christmas Caper • Merry Madagascar • Madly Madagascar

Characters Zoosters: Alex • Marty • Melman • Gloria

Penguins: Skipper • Kowalski • Rico • Private

Lemurs: King Julien the 13th • Maurice • Mort • Clover

The Circus: Gia • Stefano • Vitaly • Sonya • Esmeralda, Esperanza and Ernestina • Manu and Maya • Dancing Dogs

The North Wind: Classified • Eva • Short Fuse • Corporal

Allies: Mason and Phil • Lemurs • Ted • Zuba • Florrie • Moto Moto • Marlene

Villains: Fossas • Nana • Makunga • Teetsi • Shark • Mr. Chew • Chantel DuBois • Dave • Octopuses • Karl • Chauncey

Music Madagascar: I Like To Move It • Stayin' Alive • What a Wonderful World

Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa: The Traveling Song • I Like To Move It • Alex On The Spot • Big & Chunky • Copacabana

Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted: Afro Circus • Afro Circus/I Like To Move It • Firework • Gonna Make You Sweat • What's New Pussycat?

The Penguins of Madagascar: Brand New Plan • Conga King • Drop Some Acorns on Em' • Penguin Chant • Porpoise Power Ballad • Thump Thump Thump • He's Doctor Blowhole

Others: Celebrate • Santa Claus is Coming to Madagascar • Who's da King

Cast Films: Ben Stiller (Alex) • Chris Rock (Marty) • Christopher Knights (Private) • Chris Miller (Kowalski) • Cedric the Entertainer (Maurice) • Andy Richter (Mort) • Conrad Vernon (Mason) • Bernie Mac (Zuba) • Alec Baldwin (Makunga) • Bryan Cranston (Vitaly) • Benedict Cumberbatch (Classified) • Annet Mahendru (Eva) • David Cowgill (Police Horse) • David P. Smith (additional voices) • Ariel Winter (additional voices) • Bob Saget (additional voices) • Chris Sanders (additional voices)

Shows: Ty Burrell (Parker) • Brian Stepanek (Dode) • Bill Fagerbakke (additional voices) • Dee Bradley Baker (additional voices) • Jeff Bennett (additional voices) • Sean Bishop (additional voices)

Video Games: Crispin Freeman (Alex) • André Sogliuzzo (additional voices)

See also Locations: Africa • Antarctica • Central Park Zoo • Circus Zaragoza • France • Madagascar • New York City • Vatican City