Toni Morrison was an American novelist, essayist, editor, and professor. Her contributions to literature were recognized worldwide when she received the 1993 Nobel Prize in Literature.

Born Chloe Ardelia Wofford in Lorain, Ohio, Morrison attended Howard University and Cornell University in the 1950s before becoming the first Black woman fiction editor at the publishing giant Random House. In 1970 she published her first novel, The Bluest Eye, and proceeded to publish a string of novels that garnered critical acclaim, along with the National Book Critics Circle Award and the Pulitzer Prize. In 2012, President Barack Obama presented her with the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

Morrison's writing was greatly influenced by her family. Her grandparents had relocated to Ohio during the national movement of Black Americans out of the South known as the Great Migration. After leaving their farm in Alabama, Morrison’s mother’s parents moved to Kentucky, and then to Ohio. They placed a high value on the education of their children and themselves. Morrison was a gifted student, learning to read at an early age and doing well at her studies at an integrated school. Morrison attended Hawthorne Elementary School, where she was the only African American in her first-grade classroom.

One of the most critically acclaimed American writers, Morrison is considered a major architect of a literary language for African Americans. Her work often features Black vernacular, Black settings, and is focused on Blackness—unusual for her time. Her writing is considered to have formed a distinctly Black literary sensibility, while drawing a reading audience that cut across racial boundaries.

Morrison's peers and critics have commended her not only for her creation of a literary language for African Americans, but also for the way her writing privileged and displayed the interiority of Black America. Angela Davis credits Morrison with teaching the world “to imagine enslaved women and men with full lives, with complex subjectivities, with interiority,” and essayist Rachel Kaadzi Ghansah says that Morrison gave Black America “a record of gesture and custom and being and belonging.” Morrison is also recognized for the work she did as an editor for Random House, where she worked closely with Black authors and published books by Muhammad Ali, Henry Dumas, Angela Davis, Huey P. Newton, Toni Cade Bambara, and Gail Jones. By highlighting the voices of other Black writers, Morrison paved the way for African-American studies and Black female literary criticism in the academy.

On August 5, 2019, Toni Morrison died at the age of 88 in the Bronx, New York City.