Thomas Kuhn Thomas Kuhn (1922–1996), the author of The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, is the best-known and most inﬂuential historian and philosopher of science of the past 50 years and has become something of a cultural icon. His concepts of paradigm, paradigm change, and incommensurability have changed the way we think about science. This volume offers an introduction to Kuhn’s life and work and then considers the implications of Kuhn’s work for philosophy, cognitive psychology, social studies of science, and feminism. The volume is more than a retrospective on Kuhn, exploring future developments of cognitive and information sciences along Kuhnian lines. Outside of philosophy, the volume will be of particular interest to professionals and students in cognitive science, history of science, science studies, and cultural studies. Thomas Nickles is Foundation Professor of Philosophy and Chair at the University of Nevada, Reno.

Contemporary Philosophy in Focus Contemporary Philosophy in Focus will offer a series of introductory volumes to many of the dominant philosophical thinkers of the current age. Each volume will consist of newly commissioned essays that cover major contributions of a preeminent philosopher in a systematic and accessible manner. Comparable in scope and rationale to the highly successful series Cambridge Companions to Philosophy, the volumes will not presuppose that readers are already intimately familiar with the details of each philosopher’s work. They will thus combine exposition and critical analysis in a manner that will appeal both to students of philosophy as well as to professionals and students across the humanities and social sciences. PUBLISHED VOLUMES:

Robert Nozick edited by David Schmidtz Daniel Dennett edited by Andrew Brook and Don Ross FORTHCOMING VOLUMES:

Stanley Cavell edited by Richard Eldridge Paul Churchland edited by Brian Keeley Donald Davidson edited by Kirk Ludwig Ronald Dworkin edited by Arthur Ripstein Jerry Fodor edited by Tim Crane David Lewis edited by Theodore Sider and Dean Zimmermann Alasdair MacIntyre edited by Mark C. Murphy Hilary Putnam edited by Yemima Ben-Menahem Richard Rorty edited by Charles Guignon and David Hiley John Searle edited by Barry Smith Charles Taylor edited by Ruth Abbey Bernard Williams edited by Alan Thomas

Thomas Kuhn Edited by

THOMAS NICKLES University of Nevada, Reno

   Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo Cambridge University Press The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge  , United Kingdom Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York www.cambridge.org Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521792066 © Cambridge University Press 2003 This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press. First published in print format 2002 - isbn-13 978-0-511-06724-2 eBook (NetLibrary) - isbn-10 0-511-06724-0 eBook (NetLibrary) - isbn-13 978-0-521-79206-6 hardback - isbn-10 0-521-79206-1 hardback - isbn-13 978-0-521-79648-4 paperback - isbn-10 0-521-79648-2 paperback Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of s for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this book, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Contents

Contributors Preface Introduction

page ix xiii

1

1 Kuhn and Logical Empiricism MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

19

2 Thomas Kuhn and French Philosophy of Science GARY GUTTING

45

3 Normal Science and Dogmatism, Paradigms and Progress: Kuhn ‘versus’ Popper and Lakatos JOHN WORRALL

65

4 Kuhn’s Philosophy of Scientific Practice JOSEPH ROUSE

101

5 Thomas Kuhn and the Problem of Social Order in Science BARRY BARNES

122

6 Normal Science: From Logic to Case-Based and Model-Based Reasoning THOMAS NICKLES

142

7 Kuhn, Conceptual Change, and Cognitive Science NANCY J. NERSESSIAN

178

8 Kuhn on Concepts and Categorization PETER BARKER, XIANG CHEN, AND HANNE ANDERSEN

212

9 Kuhn’s World Changes RICHARD E. GRANDY

246

vii

viii

Contents

10 Does The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions Permit a Feminist Revolution in Science? HELEN E. LONGINO

261

Selected References in English

282

Index

285

Contributors

is assistant professor in the Department of Medical Philosophy and Clinical Theory, University of Copenhagen. She previously worked as curator at the Danish National Museum for the History of Science and Medicine. Among her recent publications are several articles on Kuhn and categorization and her book On Kuhn (Wadsworth, 2001). Shortly before his death, she extensively interviewed Thomas Kuhn about his work, early and late.

HANNE ANDERSEN

is professor of history of science at the University of Oklahoma. His wide interests range from the history and historiography of the Scientiﬁc Revolution through nineteenth- and twentieth-century physics, psychology, and philosophy of science. He is the editor-translator (with Roger Ariew) of Pierre Duhem: Essays in the History and Philosophy of Science (Hackett, 1995) and author of numerous articles in the areas noted.

PETER BARKER

was a member of the Edinburgh group of sociologists who developed the Strong Programme in Sociology of Science in the 1970s and has continued to be one of the leading shapers of science studies. He is now professor of sociology at the University of Exeter. His many authored and edited books include T. S. Kuhn and Social Science (Columbia University Press, 1982), About Science (Blackwell, 1985), The Nature of Power (University of Illinois Press, 1988), Scientiﬁc Knowledge: A Sociological Analysis (University of Chicago Press, 1996), and Understanding Agency: Social Theory and Responsible Action (Sage, 2000).

BARRY BARNES

is an associate professor at California Lutheran University. He is the author of Instrumental Traditions and Theories of Light: The Uses of Instruments in the Optical Revolution (Kluwer, 2000) and a series of articles on Kuhn, including “Thomas Kuhn’s Latest Notion of Incommensurability” ( Journal for General Philosophy of Science, 1997).

XIANG CHEN

is Ruth N. Halls Professor of Arts and Humanities at Indiana University and Frederick P. Rehmus Family Professor of

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

ix

x

Contributors

Humanities at Stanford University. His publications include Foundations of Space-Time Theories (Princeton University Press, 1983), which won both the Matchette Prize and the Lakatos Award in Philosophy of Science, Kant and the Exact Sciences (Harvard University Press, 1992), Reconsidering Logical Positivism (Cambridge University Press, 1999), A Parting of the Ways (Open Court, 2000), and Dynamics of Reason (Stanford University, CSLI, 2001). He has served as president of the Philosophy of Science Association and as Central Division president of the American Philosophical Association. He is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. RICHARD E. GRANDY

is Carolyn and Fred McManis Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at Rice University. He is the author of Advanced Logic for Applications (Reidel, 1977) and editor or coeditor of Theories and Observation in Science (Prentice-Hall, 1973), Readings in the Philosophy of Science (Prentice-Hall, 1989), and Philosophical Grounds of Rationality: Intentions, Categories, Ends (Oxford University Press, 1986). Grandy is the author of numerous articles in philosophy of science, philosophy of language, logic, metaphysics, and cognitive science. He is currently working on a book tentatively titled Information, Semantics, and Ontology: Some Philosophical Implications of the Cognitive Sciences. is professor of philosophy at the University of Notre Dame. His books include Religious Belief and Religious Skepticism (University of Notre Dame Press, 1982), Foucault’s Archaeology of Scientiﬁc Knowledge (Cambridge University Press, 1989), Pragmatic Liberalism and the Critique of Modernity (Cambridge University Press, 1999), and French Philosophy in the Twentieth Century (Cambridge University Press, 2001). He has edited Paradigms and Revolutions: Applications and Appraisals of Thomas Kuhn’s Philosophy of Science (University of Notre Dame Press, 1980) and The Cambridge Companion to Foucault (Cambridge University Press, 1994). Gutting is a former editor of the American Philosophical Quarterly.

GARY GUTTING

HELEN E. LONGINO

is Professor of Philosophy and Women’s Studies at the University of Minnesota. She is author of Science as Social Knowledge (Princeton University Press, 1990) and of many articles in philosophy of science and feminist philosophy. She is a coeditor of Feminism and Science (Oxford University Press, 1996), Gender and Scientiﬁc Authority (University of Chicago Press, 1996), and Osiris 12: Women, Gender, and Science (History of Science Society) and is a member of numerous editorial boards, including those of Philosophy of Science and Perspectives on Science. Her most recent book is The Fate of Knowledge (Princeton University Press, 2002).

Contributors

xi

NANCY J. NERSESSIAN

is Professor of Cognitive Science and Coordinator of the Cognitive Science Program at Georgia Institute of Technology. Her research focuses on the nature and processes of conceptual innovation and change in science, speciﬁcally, the role of model-based reasoning in conceptual change. She is author of numerous publications in philosophy and history of science, including Faraday to Einstein: Constructing Meaning in Scientiﬁc Theories (Nijhoff, 1984). Nersessian is editor of The Process of Science (Nijhoff, 1987) and coeditor of Model-Based Reasoning in Scientiﬁc Discovery (Kluwer, 1999). She is also the editor of Kluwer’s “Science and Philosophy” series. She is currently ﬁnishing a book tentatively titled Creating Science: A Cognitive-Historical Approach to Conceptual Change.

is Foundation Professor and chair of philosophy at the University of Nevada, Reno. He is editor of Scientiﬁc Discovery, Logic, and Rationality and Scientiﬁc Discovery: Case Studies (both Reidel, 1980) and coeditor of PSA 1982. He has authored numerous articles on scientiﬁc explanation, theory and problem reduction, problem solving, and the relations of philosophy of science to history of science. He is currently working on problem solving by evolutionary computation and on the history and philosophy of the idea of scientiﬁc method.

THOMAS NICKLES

is professor of philosophy and chair of the Science in Society Program at Wesleyan University. In addition to his numerous articles, he is the author of Engaging Science: How to Understand Its Practices Philosophically (Cornell University Press, 1996) and Knowledge and Power: Toward a Political Philosophy of Science (Cornell University Press, 1987). His most recent book is How Scientiﬁc Practices Matter: Reclaiming Philosophical Naturalism (University of Chicago Press, 2002).

JOSEPH ROUSE

is professor of philosophy of science at the London School of Economics and codirector of the Centre for Philosophy of Natural and Social Science there. He was the editor of the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science from 1974 to 1983 and the managing editor of Imre Lakatos’s posthumous works. He is the author of numerous papers on general philosophy of science and the history and philosophy of nineteenth-century physics. Worrall is completing a book titled Reason in Revolution: A Study of Theory-Change in Science and is working on topics in the methodology of medicine.

JOHN WORRALL

Preface

Every essay in this book has been written especially for this volume. While the book is aimed at a general educated audience, each author aspires to say something sufﬁciently substantial about one or more dimensions of Kuhn’s work to interest experts. Moreover, this is more than a retrospective on Kuhn’s work. It is forward-looking as well, with an eye on ongoing developments in philosophy of science, epistemology, social studies of science, and especially the cognitive sciences. Given our space limitations, we focus on Kuhn the philosopher of science rather than Kuhn the historian, and we devote more attention to Kuhn’s relation to cognitive science than to social studies of science. I owe the idea for the project to Terry Moore, Publishing Director for Humanities at Cambridge University Press, New York. Terry conceived the timely new series Contemporary Philosophy in Focus, with this book being one of the ﬁrst offerings. I appreciate his guidance as to what sort of book it should be. Thanks to production editor Louise Calabro and to copyeditor Helen Greenberg, who gave the volume its ﬁnal form. Thanks also to my wife, Dr. Gaye McCollum-Nickles, for helpful comments on my own contributions to the volume. The decision of which authors to include in such a volume is always difﬁcult and somewhat arbitrary. Several outstanding expositors and/or critics of Kuhn had to be passed over in order to keep the volume to a manageable size and to achieve a wider diversity of perspectives on Kuhn’s work. Nonetheless, I am delighted that the particular authors represented here have joined me in the project, and I hope that you, the reader, ﬁnd their work as stimulating as I have. Thomas Nickles Philosophy Department University of Nevada, Reno

xiii

Introduction THOMAS NICKLES

Whether one is pro-Kuhn, anti-Kuhn, or neutral, no one can deny that the work of Thomas Kuhn has been a lightning rod for debates about science, culture, and policy across many academic ﬁelds – and even in the political arena and the business world. This is especially true of Kuhn’s best-known work, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, originally published in 1962 and expanded in 1970. By now the book has sold over a million copies in two dozen languages – numbers almost unheard of for an academic book about abstract philosophical topics. The wide reception of his work, which greatly surprised Kuhn himself, has elevated the terms “paradigm,” “paradigm change,” and “paradigm shift” to household phrases and the stuff of advertising slogans, corporate boardrooms, and Washington bureaucratese. Although diverse individuals and groups have read and used (or misused!) it very differently, each according to their own abilities and needs, Kuhn’s work has the merit, in these fragmented times, of serving as a common reference point and of generating cross-disciplinary discussion. When Kuhn began writing, philosophy of science, especially in England and the United States, was dominated by the logical positivists (Rudolf Carnap, Hans Reichenbach, Carl Hempel, and others) and by Karl Popper and his followers. In The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Structure hereafter), Kuhn gave us a very different picture of science.1 Kuhn contended that there are two types of mature physical science, “normal science” and “extraordinary” or “revolutionary science.” In a given scientiﬁc ﬁeld, long periods of conservative, tradition-bound normal science are punctuated by an occasional crisis and, still less frequently, by a revolution. Normal science is highly regimented work under a paradigm. It aims to extend and articulate the paradigm, not to test it, for the paradigm deﬁnes the research tradition, the scientiﬁc life, of a particular discipline and its practitioners. Normal research consists in attempting to solve research puzzles by modeling them and their solutions on exemplary problem solutions previously achieved. Good science is delimited not by rules such as Popper’s criterion 1

2

INTRODUCTION

of falsiﬁability, or positivist meaning postulates, or even by more contentladen rules speciﬁc to the discipline, but by how practitioners perceive and apply these “exemplars” (as Kuhn termed them). In fact, there is no scientiﬁc method in the sense of a set of rules that guide inquiry. Surprisingly, Kuhnian normal science does not aim at essential novelty and, in that respect, is convergent rather than divergent. Yet its very focus on esoteric detail makes it almost inevitable that normal research will eventually disclose difﬁculties for the reigning paradigm. If these difﬁculties persist and turn critical, a crisis results. During a crisis period the usual conservative strictures relax somewhat, and truly innovative ideas and practices may emerge as serious alternatives. The repeated failure of established normal scientists to handle the crisis situation, together with the emergence of a promising new approach, may trigger a revolution. What typically happens during the ﬁnal phase of a scientiﬁc revolution is that a group of mostly younger practitioners advocating a new paradigm succeeds in shoving aside the old paradigm and its supporters and subsequently rewriting the history of the ﬁeld to make their new paradigm appear to be the ﬁnal stage in the progressive development of the ﬁeld. Clearly, paradigm change is not a rational process as understood by the traditional canons of rationality. For in revolutionary science, normal modes of decision making are no longer available. There is no longer universal agreement about a common archive of exemplars and their signiﬁcance. Moreover, logic and empirical data alone are never sufﬁcient to resolve paradigm debates, said Kuhn. Indeed, there is often disagreement about the problems, standards, and goals of research and a failure of the vocabularies of the two paradigms to match. Therefore two competing paradigms are “incommensurable,” meaning, roughly, that they cannot be measured against the same standard. Yet in Kuhn’s own view, paradigm decisions need not be irrational. However, in the more radical passages of Structure, he spoke of paradigm changes as akin to perceptual Gestalt switches, religious conversions, and political revolutions, comparisons that he later dropped. In Structure (and to the end of his life), he struggled to make sense of the claim that scientists working under competing paradigms “live in different worlds.” Hence his conclusion that there is no point in saying that a paradigm change takes that scientiﬁc ﬁeld closer to the truth about a fully determinate real world, waiting out there to be discovered. While normal scientiﬁc results are largely cumulative, on Kuhn’s account, science, overall, does not accumulate either empirical facts or

Introduction

3

theories in a long, progressive ascent toward truth; for revolutions can undermine bodies of fact and their observational vocabularies as well as entrenched theories and research practices. A revolution carries a science off in a different direction. Near the end of Structure, Kuhn likened this process to biological speciation. In science no more than in biological evolution does it make sense to speak of overall progress toward a preordained goal, although we can still trace historical lineages and note signiﬁcant historical differences such as the increasing specialization and accuracy of latter-day science relative to its past. Thus Kuhn attempted to mesh the two great metaphors: science is evolutionary as well as revolutionary. All the key terms in this pr´ecis of Structure are problematic, and all are discussed in the following essays, some in great detail. Kuhn himself added a “Postscript” to the 1970 edition of Structure in which he provided some clariﬁcation of the highly ambiguous notion of paradigm, explained his “different worlds” position more fully, and defended himself against some prominent criticisms. A paradigm in the primary sense, Kuhn told us, is an “exemplar,” that is, an exemplary historical problem solution, an achievement that serves as a model for further work. But he admitted to using “paradigm” in a larger, more global, and more social sense that he now labeled “disciplinary matrix” (a term that he employed rarely thereafter). A disciplinary matrix consists of four kinds of shared commitments that together implicitly characterize a particular research discipline and community: (1) symbolic generalizations such as Newton’s laws, (2) metaphysical models of what the world is supposedly really like (e.g., gases as consisting of zillions of billiard-ball-like elastic molecules in random motion), (3) values and standards, and (4) exemplars. Early critics such as Israel Schefﬂer (1967) dubbed Kuhn a radical irrationalist, subjectivist, relativist, and irrealist for denying that science gives us the objective truth about reality, even at the perceptual-phenomenal level. More recent critics, such as Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont (1998, chap. 4), view Kuhn as a principal source of postmodern relativism and of culture-theoretical treatments of science generally – and hence as an instigator of the so-called Science Wars.2 Other critics view Kuhn as intellectually conservative in important ways. On their account, Kuhn (for good or ill) differed rather little from the logical positivists on crucial issues, especially assumptions about language and meaning. Dudley Shapere’s reviews of Structure are an early case in point.3 For Steve Fuller (2000), Kuhn’s work is also politically conservative and elitist, so much so that, owing to its great inﬂuence, it has destroyed any attempt to develop a more democratic science policy for the foreseeable future.

4

INTRODUCTION

WAS KUHN POSTMODERN? Since the relevance of Kuhn to postmodern culture studies is a topic that interests many readers, I offer a few suggestive remarks in that connection.4 One ironic answer to the question “Why consider Kuhn postmodern?” is that he is so difﬁcult to categorize. You simply cannot pin down Kuhn in your butterﬂy collection of intellectual positions. More seriously, postmodern is post what, exactly? What is commonly meant by the “modern era”? A simple answer is that there are at least two quite different referents. The modern period in philosophy runs, very roughly, from 1600 to 1800, from Bacon and Descartes at one end to Kant at the other. It includes the Enlightenment as well as post-Kantian thinkers such as John Stuart Mill. The twentieth-century logical positivists and Karl Popper and their followers have continued to embrace Enlightenment conceptions and ideals. It was during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that epistemology or theory of knowledge replaced metaphysics as “ﬁrst philosophy” on the ground that, before we can say what the world is really like, we must critically examine the nature and limits of knowledge itself. According to the modern philosophers and many of their successors, knowledge consists in individuals having correct mental representations (e.g., ideas, conceptions, theories) of the world, representations subject to rules or laws such as the association of ideas. Many moderns believed that there is a scientiﬁc method the discovery of which explains the seventeenth-century Scientiﬁc Revolution and subsequent progress as well as practically guaranteeing future scientiﬁc progress – and hence the social progress attendant upon the scientiﬁc banishment of ignorance and superstitious folk traditions. A quite distinct development was modernism in literature, music, painting, and architecture, a multifaceted international avant-garde movement that occurred a century after the Kantian era, roughly from the time of Nietzsche to World War II. Modernism in this sense is also too rich to be described brieﬂy, but it is characterized by free experimentation with alternative (nontraditional) forms – indeed, deliberate breaks with tradition and the discipline it imposes – yet also by the sometimes shameless and heterodox appropriation of traditional materials in ways that transgress artistic, gender, and cultural boundaries and by the desire to construct a future not dictated by the past. Some prominent examples of modernism are stream-of-conscious novels, Bauhaus architecture, atonal music, and cubist painting. Since by their very nature modernism and postmodernism (in this second sense) do not admit of precise deﬁnition, and since they vary from one artistic community to another, one is on safer (but never

Introduction

5

safe) ground in considering modernism one genre at a time, an endeavor obviously inappropriate here. Some tendencies in Kuhn’s work are postmodern in both senses of “postmodern,” others in neither sense. Since Kuhn is far more concerned with the philosophical tradition than with the arts, I shall conﬁne myself to that dimension of the postmodernist debate. Jean-Franc¸ois Lyotard (1984, p. xxiv) deﬁnes postmodern as “incredulity toward metanarratives.” Kuhn is best known for challenging the master narrative of modern science, a narrative that became a ﬁxture of the Enlightenment.5 This is the grand story of human progress toward the ultimate truth about the world and the resulting emancipation from ignorance and from the social problems that it engenders. This progress is to be achieved by the hard labor of our brightest citizens studying the natural world intensely. In some respects it is complementary to, or a secular parallel to, the grand Judeo-Christian religious narrative of the fall and redemption. Kuhn famously (or notoriously) denied that the history of science tells one linear, continuous, cumulative, uniﬁed story. Rather, like other cultural institutions, science (or, rather, the historical succession of sciences) is (are) beset by discontinuities, incommensurabilities, and disunities; and its products are as much constructed or invented as discovered. In this respect, Kuhn decentered the Enlightenment account. The history of science provides no master text of reality, nor is there any reason to think that there is one privileged language of nature. In some passages, Kuhn suggested that science is not so much a self-legitimating project as a diverse but overlapping cluster of alternative forms of life. In deconstructing deep modernist myths about the nature of science, he unintentionally opened the door to attacks upon science itself. Kuhn’s work challenges traditional epistemology in several ways. Clearly, his “historical Kantian” relativism and his rejection of strong realism and traditional conceptions of truth, rationality, objectivity, and justiﬁcation in science are relevant here. Kuhn dismissed all attempts to put knowledge on permanent foundations. He rejected both traditional rationalism and traditional empiricism, including the latter’s sharp distinction between a neutral observational language and a theoretical language. There is no “given” in either experience or thought. Every feature of scientiﬁc experience and thought is acquired and, in principle, contestable (albeit not within normal science). He denied that explicit rules and representations exhaust what scientists know and that they even constitute the most fundamental dimensions of that knowledge. On the contrary, the most

6

INTRODUCTION

important knowledge is embodied in expert experimental and theoretical practice and in the learned but tacit cognitive similarity metrics upon which skilled practices depend. Kuhn denied that there is any such thing as the “scientiﬁc method” or even methods (plural) construed as sets of timeless rules of inquiry. Kuhn posited communities of specialists rather than solitary individuals as the bearers of knowledge and insisted that there is no higher form of justiﬁcation than the assent of the relevant community of experts. Moreover, he noted that scientists, unlike most philosophers, are forward-looking problem solvers rather than backward-looking justiﬁers of claims about the world: justiﬁcation of present commitments can be more a matter of future promise than of past success. Kuhn can therefore be read as reversing some main tendencies of Enlightenment thought. There is no universal reason or intelligence distinct from the content of the speciﬁc disciplines. Here Kuhn was indebted to Quine’s challenge to the analytic–synthetic distinction and to Quine’s naturalism, fallibilism, and holism. However, Kuhn went on to reject Quine’s view (which Quine held in common with many positivists) that symbolic logic provides a canonical language for understanding scientiﬁc work. There is no privileged language or logic that provides a royal road to clarity or truth, that adequately captures the real world or even our experience of it. In the old debate between logic and rhetoric, Kuhn came down on the side of rhetoric in the sense that, for him, human cognition is governed at bottom by rhetorical relations of similarity, analogy, metaphor, and modeling rather than by logical relations and rules. Scientiﬁc thinking does not consist in applying purely logical rules so much as matching present perceptions and problems to domain-speciﬁc exemplars; and a great deal of scientiﬁc work consists in the construction and use of models. The early Kuhn stressed both direct modeling and the importance of historical patterns of development over static logical patterns, while the later Kuhn expanded his cognitive themes at the expense of the historical ones. In any case, the history of science discloses not steady progress toward a universal, canonical language of science but rather a collection of diverse local discourse communities, all of which eventually ﬁnd their linguistic and conceptual resources contested as anomalies begin to accumulate. In crisis and revolutionary periods, these irruptions produce the various linguistic and practical failures, failures of translation and of mutual intelligibility, that Kuhn labels incommensurability. These failures of what, previously, to its practitioners, seemed to be the language of nature can serve to open up new possibilities for description and action, new forms of intelligibility.

Introduction

7

While the Enlightenment thinkers championed the science of their day for its cosmopolitan character, Kuhn stressed the local aspects of scientiﬁc communities. Kuhn was not an expressive Romantic in the sense of the Romantic poets and artists in their reaction to the Enlightenment; but, like the Romantics, he prized the wisdom and intelligence (and intelligibility) of local, discipline-speciﬁc, historical traditions over the claims for pure reason. Contrary to the Cartesian tradition, pure reason does not issue in self-intelligible, clear, and distinct ideas with their allegedly self-evident applications in context. Rather, traditions (in a broad enough sense to include established community practices) are what constitute the basis for intelligibility. Furthermore, Kuhn portrayed scientiﬁc specialist communities as surprisingly like medieval guilds, with their masters and apprentices learning by example. In this sense he was postmodern because premodern. And despite being an internalist intellectual historian and philosopher in his own work, Kuhn’s religious and political metaphors in Structure challenged the traditionally sharp distinctions between fact and value, and between internal and external factors in science. While some of these tendencies were radical, especially for their day, Kuhn’s conception of science was also conservative in other ways. Unlike many contributors to present-day cultural studies, Kuhn was not at all antiscience. On the contrary, he considered modern science a good thing, something of great intellectual and social value; and he resisted any efforts to change it even with the intention of improving it. (This is one reason why Fuller charges Kuhn with cultural and political conservatism.) As for the new science studies that his work encouraged, Kuhn famously rejected the Strong Programme in Sociology of Knowledge as “deconstruction gone mad” (Kuhn 2000, p. 110). As indicated earlier, many critics have noted how close some of Kuhn’s views about language and meaning were to those of positivists such as Carnap, an observation that is sometimes reversed to demonstrate that the positivists themselves were not the “conservative heavies” that they are often portrayed to be. I have already mentioned the quasi-medieval, convergent, traditionbound, authoritarian nature of normal science. Many prominent critics have rejected Kuhn’s conception of paradigms themselves as dogmatic, totalizing centers of scientiﬁc thought and practice. In addition, Kuhn’s own perspective in Structure is not that of a committed normal scientist more or less imprisoned within his local Kantian world of experience. Rather, Kuhn pretends to stand outside the history of science as a godlike but skeptical observer and to declare that mature natural sciences must ﬁt one simple, repeating pattern: normal science → revolution → new normal science, a

8

INTRODUCTION

pattern that must employ arbitrary assumptions in every cycle and hence can never hope to ﬁnd the warranted truth about the world (Nickles 1998). So, in these particular respects, even Kuhn offers us a totalizing narrative. However, Kuhn’s narrative is nuanced. For Kuhnian paradigms are not dogmatic creeds so much as forms of practical life. Paradigms are not rigid, deductive, logical structures that all practitioners must believe in, articulate, and justify in the same way. Each subspecialty develops its own local paradigm as well as its own practical understanding of the global paradigm that characterizes the scientiﬁc ﬁeld as a whole.

KUHN’S LIFE AND CAREER Thomas Samuel Kuhn was born in 1922 in Cincinnati, Ohio, the ﬁrst child of a father who was a hydraulic engineer turned investment consultant and an educator mother who did professional editing.6 The family soon moved to New York City and later to a country town an hour away up the Hudson River. Young Tom Kuhn attended various politically progressive private schools in the eastern United States. In 1940 he was proud to be admitted to Harvard, his father’s college, as an undergraduate. Much later in life he was surprised and amused to learn that, in those days, nearly all qualiﬁed applicants were admitted to Harvard. Kuhn’s forte as a schoolboy had been mathematics and physical science, so he became a physics major. He also enjoyed literature and philosophy while having limited time to pursue them. He found Kant’s philosophy a “revelation,” a discovery that foreshadowed Kuhn’s later intellectual development. It was surely his editorials in the Harvard Crimson that brought him to the attention of James B. Conant, the chemist president of Harvard and a national leader in science policy circles and in academe’s response to the outbreak of World War II. Kuhn compressed his undergraduate work into three years in order to graduate and join the war effort. He worked in radar for the U.S. government in Boston and then in England, with bits on the Continent, work that he found increasingly tedious – certainly relative to the events unfolding around him. In 1945, with the war ending and having witnessed the liberation of Paris, he returned to enter Harvard Graduate School in physics. Kuhn’s academic career has been described in terms of “cumulative advantage” (Merton 1977, p. 89) and as “being there” (Fuller 2000), but it also had its rough side. Although Kuhn was a physics graduate student, he suspected that his heart was in philosophy; so he received permission to

Introduction

9

spend part of his ﬁrst year taking philosophy courses. However, ﬁnding his background in philosophy too thin to consider switching ﬁelds at that point, he decided to ﬁnish his degree in physics, writing a dissertation in solid state physics under James Van Vleck, later a Nobel laureate. But by this time Kuhn’s more important mentor had become Conant himself, who recruited Kuhn to teach his newly conceived undergraduate history of science course. This was the famous Harvard “case studies” course. Conant’s purpose in organizing it, apparently, was not only to increase scientiﬁc literacy among nonscientists but also to lure talented undergraduates into the ﬁelds of science and technology, especially as policy makers (Fuller 2000). During the dissertation stage of his graduate training, Kuhn ﬁnally decided to switch ﬁelds. He boldly persuaded Conant to support his appointment as a Junior Fellow of Harvard’s Society of Fellows in order to transform himself into a historian of science as a route to the philosophical issues he really wished to investigate. Kuhn, who had not liked the history course he took as an undergraduate and who would never relish careful archival research, thus became, in his own words, “a physicist turned historian for philosophical purposes” (Kuhn 2000, p. 320). A high-strung, rather nervous and impatient person, Kuhn was never completely comfortable in any professional ﬁeld any more than he had felt fully at home in any discipline as a student. Indeed, Kuhn was always something of an amateur, largely self-taught in philosophy and even in history of science. The latter is not surprising, however, since in those days history of science was only beginning to emerge as a professional discipline. After three years as a Fellow, Kuhn became an instructor and then an assistant professor at Harvard. But it was still not smooth sailing, for it eventually became clear that he would not be awarded tenure at Harvard. So Kuhn accepted an assistant professorship post on the opposite coast, at the University of California, Berkeley. The position was initially offered by the Philosophy Department but was then turned into a joint appointment with History. Kuhn’s job was to teach history of science and intellectual history from a scientiﬁc point of view. Not long after heading west, he spent a year at the Institute for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences in Palo Alto working on the material that would eventually become Structure. Then, some years later, it happened again. When he came up for promotion to full professor, having published The Copernican Revolution and Structure as well as numerous historical essays, the Philosophy Department supported his promotion only in History, not in Philosophy. This was a severe blow to a man who considered himself a philosopher ﬁrst and whose abiding interest was the philosophical consequences of the history of science.

10

INTRODUCTION

While spending a year in Copenhagen working on an archive for the history of quantum mechanics,7 Kuhn received an offer from Princeton to join the new Program in History and Philosophy of Science, a position that seemed ideally suited to his aspirations. He moved to Princeton in 1964 and remained there until 1979, when he returned to Cambridge – but now to MIT rather than Harvard, as the Laurence S. Rockefeller Professor of Philosophy. He retired from MIT in 1991. Thomas Kuhn died of cancer in 1996 at the age of seventy-three. While at Berkeley, Kuhn had published two books, The Copernican Revolution (1957) and The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (1962). The former emerged from Kuhn’s lectures and already challenged orthodox understandings of science in various ways. Among other things, this book was the ﬁrst major expression of Kuhn’s abiding interest in revolutionary cognitive shifts arising out of his own earlier epiphany in making sense of Aristotle8 and his still earlier encounter with Kant. Indeed, all of Kuhn’s work was deeply personal. Structure was solicited by none other than Rudolf Carnap, the leading positivist philosopher and logician, for the Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed Science, the large encyclopedia project of the logical positivists, originally conceived by Otto Neurath and published by The University of Chicago Press. The Press agreed to publish Structure also as a separate volume. A crucial event in Kuhn’s gaining a major reputation was the International Colloquium in the Philosophy of Science, held at Bedford College, London, in July 1965. Kuhn was invited as a rising young historian of science whose ideas had philosophical implications. He left as a major player among the competing “big systems” in methodology of science. Among the other players were Karl Popper, Imre Lakatos, Paul Feyerabend, Stephen Toulmin, and, of course, the positivists collectively, including Kuhn’s new colleague, Carl Hempel. The proceedings of this conference, with many of the contributions appearing in revised form in order to respond to Kuhn’s challenge, appeared in 1970 as Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, edited by Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. The Essential Tension, a collection of Kuhn’s more inﬂuential historical and methodological essays, appeared in 1977, followed a year later by Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity: 1894–1912, an unorthodox history of the emergence of the early quantum theory. Kuhn’s central thesis in that book was that, contrary to the received view, Max Planck was not the founder of quantum theory in 1900, for he was then still working in a well-established classical tradition. Rather, it was Einstein’s and Ehrenfest’s misreading of Planck’s work as an attempt to solve their problems that

Introduction

11

initiated the early quantum theory. Although Kuhn makes a plausible case for his contentions, and although more conﬁrming evidence has since come to light, physicists have strongly resisted his revisionist history, and historians of science have largely ignored it (Brush 2000). By 1978 Kuhn’s style of doing history was already professionally pass´e. For Kuhn was an intellectual historian, an “internalist” historian of ideas with idealist tendencies, whose goal was to “get inside the heads” of the major ﬁgures he studied. Yet, as Joseph Rouse brings out in his essay in this volume and in previous publications, Kuhn also attended to the practical skills of scientists. In studying major ﬁgures such as Aristotle, Copernicus, Carnot, Planck, and Bohr, Kuhn always devoted a great deal of attention to their problem situations, as they supposedly understood them, and to the tools and skills available to them from the research traditions and communities within which they worked.9 Surprised by the huge sales of Structure, but also perplexed and even stung by the philosophical critiques of it, Kuhn always intended to write a sequel containing the deﬁnitive statement of his position, a statement less inviting of critical misunderstanding.10 Unfortunately, he did not ﬁnish this project during his lifetime, and his conception of it gradually changed over the years, as will become apparent in some of the essays in this volume. Before his death, Kuhn arranged for John Haugeland and James Conant (philosopher grandson of James B. Conant) to prepare the unﬁnished manuscript for publication, with the tentative title Plurality of Worlds: An Evolutionary Theory of Scientiﬁc Discovery. Meanwhile, in 2000, The University of Chicago Press issued a second collection of Kuhn’s essays (also edited by Conant and Haugeland) entitled The Road Since Structure: Philosophical Essays 1970–1993, with an Autobiographical Interview. The interview is by three Greek philosophers, Aristides Baltas, Kostas Gavroglu, and Vassiliki Kindi. In this book the reader may also ﬁnd a complete list of Kuhn’s publications. In his obituary notice for Kuhn, former student and collaborator John Heilbron (1998, p. 515) aptly characterized Kuhn the philosopher-historian as follows: [H]e drew the portrait of science in the manner of the Impressionists. At a distance, where most viewers stand, the portrait appears illuminating, persuasive, and inspiring; close in, where historians and philosophers stare, it looks sketchy, puzzling, and richly challenging.

It is ironic that Kuhn, the internalist intellectual historian, should have done so much to stimulate contemporary social studies of science and that Kuhn

12

INTRODUCTION

the fervent seeker after philosophical and scientiﬁc truth should have done so much to encourage postmodern characterizations of science as based upon anything but the rational assessment of evidence and argument. For on both counts he insisted, in effect, “Je ne suis pas Kuhnien.”

THE INDIVIDUAL ESSAYS Our aim in this volume is to present the leading ideas, problems, and inﬂuences on, and of, Thomas Kuhn in a manner that is accessible to the general reader while also provoking discussion among specialists. We cannot, of course, pretend to provide complete coverage. The bias of this volume is toward Kuhn’s work in relation to the cognitive sciences. In this area, Kuhnian ideas would seem to have a future as well as a past. Although he explicitly limited the account of science in Structure to the “mature” sciences (principally the physical sciences), his account of normal scientiﬁc cognition and some of his examples therein, as well as a good deal of his later work, suggest a far wider application. The ten essays that follow can be read in any order, as each is a standalone essay. However, I have grouped them to begin with the more general “background” essays reporting inﬂuences on, or developments parallel to, Kuhn, namely, the logical positivists, French thinkers, and then Popper and Lakatos. Next, the reader will ﬁnd more specialized essays on scientiﬁc practices within communities of practitioners, on normal science, revolutionary science and incommensurability, on Kuhn’s relation to the cognitive sciences, and on his impact on the feminist movement. Michael Friedman, in “Kuhn and Logical Empiricism,” gives us an intellectual feast in his exploration of the intellectual background of both the logical empiricists and Kuhn. In the process he corrects popular misconceptions of positivism, brings out the striking commonalities of Kuhn’s view of paradigms and paradigm change with Schlick’s, Reichenbach’s, and Carnap’s logic of science, and traces both their commonalities and their differences to the debate between neo-Kantians and their critics (speciﬁcally, Cassirer, Meyerson, and Koyr´e) over the nature of scientiﬁc progress and the proper interpretation of non-Euclidean geometry and of Einstein’s relativity theory. Friedman’s essay features the philosophical debates underlying Kuhn’s approach to history of science and philosophy of science. In “Thomas Kuhn and French Philosophy of Science,” Gary Gutting explores parallels between Kuhn’s account of science and those of the prominent French historico-philosophical tradition, including Brunschwicg,

Introduction

13

Bachelard, and Canguilhem. The French took a historical approach to the intellectual appraisal of science long before Kuhn and post-Kuhnian historical philosophy of science. In several instances the French thinkers anticipated postmodern insights commonly attributed to Kuhn in the Anglophone world. Gutting suggests that the French tradition provides resources for solving Kuhnian problems concerning objectivity, rationality, and realism. Gutting edited a previous collection of essays about Kuhn’s work (Gutting 1980). John Worrall, in “Normal Science and Dogmatism, Paradigms and Progress: Kuhn ‘versus’ Popper and Lakatos,” deals with the clash of the titans. Worrall follows the issues arising out of the previously mentioned London conference of 1965, when Kuhn challenged Popper and Lakatos on their home ground, with Feyerabend, Toulmin, Watkins, and others participating as well. Worrall, himself one of Lakatos’s most distinguished students, evaluates the Kuhn–Popper debate, and Lakatos’s own methodology of scientiﬁc research programs as well, as a compromise between Popper and Kuhn. In his essay on normal science as a distinctive sort of practice, Joseph Rouse, in “Kuhn’s Philosophy of Scientiﬁc Practice,” provides an alternative, more pragmatic reading of Kuhn that subtly undermines and transforms the usual understandings of Kuhn given us by admirers and critics alike. Paradigms or exemplars are better conceived as sets of skills than as sets of propositions or beliefs or as idealist Weltanschauungen, contends Rouse. On this reading, gone are the old distinctions between theory and experiment, theory and application, theory and practice, realism and antirealism, and context of discovery and context of justiﬁcation. A standard technique of linguistic philosophers, including the logical positivists, has been “semantic ascent,” Willard Van Orman Quine’s term for reformulating substantive disagreements as disagreements over the use of language. Against this, Rouse, following Kuhn, says, in effect, that we must employ semantic “descent” if we are to understand scientiﬁc practice. Verbal agreement and disagreement (over how to state or interpret a theory) are not as important as scientists’ common identiﬁcation of which puzzles are important and accessible and their agreement about how to deal with them by means of the standard tools and practices of the workworld of that scientiﬁc specialty. As an example of how Kuhn’s account alters philosophy of science: for the positivists and Popper, there is little more to philosophy of science than study of the relations between ﬁnished theories and evidence. Kuhn almost totally rejects standard retrospective “theories of justiﬁcation”

14

INTRODUCTION

of this sort and instead focuses on how scientists choose puzzles, techniques, and so on, based on the future promise of extending the paradigm. Hence his remarks about how he blurs the traditional discovery–justiﬁcation distinction. Nowadays, science studies experts, including those philosophers (such as Rouse) who focus on scientiﬁc practice, often make the point that shared practices do not presuppose or require fully shared beliefs and/or norms. This was, in fact, one of Kuhn’s central points about normal science. But then we are left with the problem of understanding how it is possible that these shared practices can be constituted and maintained. This is the problem addressed by Barry Barnes, a leading sociologist of science and a founding member of the Edinburgh Strong Programme in the 1970s and 1980s, as well as the author of a well-known book on Kuhn (Barnes 1982). In “Thomas Kuhn and the Problem of Social Order in Science,” Barnes frames this challenge as the application to the sciences of the problem of social order, long a staple of the sociological tradition. Barnes credits the functionalist sociology of Robert Merton as ﬁrst seriously addressing this problem for the sciences. Kuhn then advanced the discussion a step further. But no one, Barnes says, has dealt at all adequately with this problem. Worse still, even sociologists have recently joined philosophers in retreating to an individualistic position. Yet understanding the sociology of expert communities is crucial to a wise and efﬁcient science policy in a democratic culture ambivalent about exclusionary communities of experts. Thomas Nickles, in “Normal Science: From Logic to Case-Based and Model-Based Reasoning,” presents the central features of normal science and their implications for methodology of science and for learning theory. Normal science is conservative and tradition bound yet has radical implications. Kuhnian normal science anticipated later developments in cognitive and social psychology and artiﬁcial intelligence. Speciﬁcally, Kuhn’s use of exemplars anticipates case-based and model-based versus rule-based reasoning; and schema theory in psychology is relevant to our assessment of Kuhn’s tantalizing remarks about what he called the “acquired [or learned] similarity relation.” Attention to these later developments, in turn, helps to bring out ambiguities and lacunae in Kuhn’s account. Kuhn’s publication and revision of Structure coincided with the revolution in cognitive science in the 1960s and early 1970s. Why, then, did Kuhn not take more notice of these developments? Nancy Nersessian, in “Kuhn, Conceptual Change, and Cognitive Science,” addresses this issue, based on her interviews of Kuhn and others and her interpretations of some of his latest work. She shows how work in cognitive science on

Introduction

15

mental models illuminates Kuhn’s account of scientiﬁc concept formation, meaning change, and incommensurability. These cognitive devices are social resources, not merely structures hidden in the heads of individuals. The role of the perceptual system in mental modeling somewhat rehabilitates the early Kuhn’s emphasis on perception. And research on revolutionary conceptual change in science seems to bring lessons both for science education and for human learning and problem solving in general. Kuhn was the ﬁrst major thinker since Wittgenstein to attack the traditional view that concepts are speciﬁed by sets of individually necessary and jointly sufﬁcient conditions or rules. Peter Barker, Xiang Chen, and Hanne Andersen, in “Kuhn on Concepts and Categorization,” explore the problem of concepts and concept learning in detail, arguing that a large body of empirical research in cognitive psychology, initiated by Eleanor Rosch, supports Kuhn’s intuitive account in Structure and later works, so much so that a currently adequate account of concepts is better grounded in cognitive psychology than in history of science. If true, this would justify Kuhn’s later turn away from history of science to linguistic studies of conceptual development as the main prop for his views about revolution and incommensurability. In fact, Barker, Chen, and Andersen maintain that Kuhn’s new account of concepts rehabilitates his long-disputed claims about incommensurability. A scientiﬁc revolution can display incommensurability and yet develop gradually and permit rational appraisal of competing positions. The authors conclude that, ironically, incommensurability – the very notion that always gave Kuhn the most trouble – not only exists but that an adequate account of it also provides “a complete answer to the sociological critique of philosophy of science.” In “Kuhn’s World Changes,” Richard Grandy addresses Kuhn’s most controversial claims about scientiﬁc revolutions and his ambivalence over whether to locate revolutionary change in the minds of practitioners or in the world. Grandy discusses Kuhn’s work in the context of the debate over the nature of scientiﬁc theories (the logical “statement” view of the positivists versus the “nonstatement” view of the semantic interpretation) and the old problems concerning the relation of theoretical terms to observation terms and the theory-ladenness of observation. From this point of view, Grandy says, Kuhn’s later attempts to understand incommensurability in linguistic terms is a bit retrograde. Grandy suggests that Kuhn could have focused on interpretive practices rather than rules for interpretation. Alternatively, he might have moved even further in the direction of embodiment of skills and employed physical motor metaphors such as the different gaits of a horse.

16

INTRODUCTION

Science was long held to be immune to the kinds of critical examination engaged in by sociologists of knowledge and feminist scholars. Given Kuhn’s own rejection of sociological and postmodern applications of his work, did he help or hinder feminist understandings of science? In her essay, “Does The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions Permit a Feminist Revolution in Science?,” Helen Longino shows how Kuhn’s early work on the intertwining of theory and observation and on the inseparability of scientiﬁc description, metaphysical commitments, values, and goals both demonstrated the possibility of a feminist treatment of science and, nevertheless, ultimately inhibited the positive development of feminist alternatives. For feminist critiques soon outran Kuhn’s conservative reluctance to make any changes in normal science as currently constituted. After discussing the work of feminists such as Ruth Hubbard, Donna Haraway, Kathyrn Addelson, and Evelyn Fox Keller, Longino sketches her own view of a pluralistic “contextual empiricism.” Notes 1. For a detailed account of the “received view” of the positivists and (to some extent) Popper and its critics, including Kuhn, see Suppe (1974). The authoritative scholarly account of Kuhn’s development is Hoyningen-Huene (1993), hammered out in close consultation with Kuhn himself. 2. For some notable “Science Wars” responses to post-Kuhnian science studies, including sociology of science and feminist philosophy of science, see Gross and Levitt (1994), Gross, Levitt, and Lewis (1996), Sokal and Bricmont (1998), and Koertge (1998). Sardar (2000) is an introduction to the issues, from the social constructionist side, with many references to the constructionist literature. See also the special journal issues of Social Text (Spring–Summer 1996) and Social Studies of Science 29 (1998), no. 2. 3. These reviews and related essays, such as “Meaning and Scientiﬁc Change,” are reprinted in Shapere (1984). Larry Laudan (1996 and elsewhere) is another who locates some of Kuhn’s difﬁculties in the linguistic assumptions he allegedly took over from the positivists. See also Michael Friedman’s essay in this volume. 4. My web browser returned over 4,000 items for the search string “kuhn+postmodern.” 5. Bruno Latour (1993) characterizes the modern as the mendacious conjunction of three projects: the domination of nature, the emancipation of humanity, and the rigid separation of nature and society. See also Rouse (1996). There is, of course, no characterization upon which scholars agree. 6. My biographical sketch draws upon Andersen (2000), Andresen (1999), Buchwald and Smith (1997), Caneva (2000), Heilbron (1998), Hoyningen-Huene (1997), Merton (1977), and the Greek autobiographical interview-discussion in Kuhn (2000), among other sources.

Introduction

17

7. This work eventuated in the publication of Kuhn et al. (1967). 8. Kuhn repeatedly stressed the importance of the Aristotle episode to his own understanding of history and scientiﬁc change – and to his own career. See, e.g., Kuhn (1977, Preface) and the interview by Aristides Baltas, Kostas Gavroglu, and Vassiliki Kindi, reprinted in Kuhn (2000, pp. 255–323). 9. See Buchwald and Smith (1997, 369ff.). See also the chapter by Barry Barnes. 10. I was a graduate student in the History and Philosophy of Science Program at Princeton from 1965 to 1969 and participated in the seminar in which Kuhn attempted to work out his ideas for the sequel to Structure as well as seminars more strictly on history of science. Although he developed few disciples, Kuhn was very accessible to students and helpful to them.

References Andersen, Hanne. 2000. On Kuhn. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. Andresen, Jensine. 1999. “Crisis and Kuhn.” Isis (supplement) 90: S43–S67. Barnes, Barry. 1982. T. S. Kuhn and Social Science. New York: Columbia University Press. Brush, Stephen. 2000. “Thomas Kuhn as a Historian of Science.” Science & Education 9: 39–58. Buchwald, Jed Z., and George Smith. 1997. “Thomas S. Kuhn, 1922–1996.” Philosophy of Science 64: 361–76. Caneva, Kenneth. 2000. “Possible Kuhns in the History of Science: Anomalies of Incommensurable Paradigms.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 31: 87–124. Fuller, Steve. 2000. Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for our Times. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Gross, Paul, and Norman Levitt. 1994. Higher Superstition: The Academic Left and Its Quarrels with Science. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Gross, Paul, Norman Levitt, and Martin Lewis, eds. 1996. The Flight from Science and Reason. New York: New York Academy of Sciences. Gutting, Gary, ed. 1980. Paradigms and Revolutions. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. Heilbron, John. 1998. “Thomas Samuel Kuhn, 18 July 1922–17 June 1996.” Isis 89: 505–15. Horwich, Paul, ed. 1993. World Changes: Thomas Kuhn and the Nature of Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hoyningen-Huene, Paul. 1993. Reconstructing Science: Thomas Kuhn’s Philosophy of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1997. “Thomas S. Kuhn.” Journal for General Philosophy of Science 28: 235– 56. Koertge, Noretta, ed. 1998. A House Built on Sand: Exposing Postmodernist Myths about Science. New York: Oxford University Press.

18

INTRODUCTION

Kuhn, Thomas. 1957. The Copernican Revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 1962. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. 2nd edition, enlarged, 1970. 3rd edition, 1996. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1977. The Essential Tension: Selected Essays in Scientiﬁc Tradition and Change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1978. Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity, 1894–1912. New York: Oxford University Press. Reprinted with an afterward, “Revisiting Planck” (a response to critics), in 1987. 2000. The Road Since Structure: Philosophical Essays, 1970–1993, with an Autobiographical Interview. Edited by James Conant and John Haugeland. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Kuhn, Thomas, John Heilbron, Paul Forman, and Lini Allen. 1967. Sources for the History of Quantum Physics: An Inventory and Report. Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society. Lakatos, Imre, and Alan Musgrave, eds. 1970. Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Latour, Bruno. 1993. We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. The original French edition was published in 1991. Laudan, Larry. 1996. Beyond Positivism and Relativism. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Lyotard, Jean-Franc¸ois. 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Translated by Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. The original French edition was published in 1979. Merton, Robert. 1977. Sociology of Science: An Episodic Memoir. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. Nickles, Thomas. 1998. “Kuhn, Historical Philosophy of Science, and Case-Based Reasoning.” Conﬁgurations 6: 51–85 (special issue on Thomas Kuhn). Rouse, Joseph. 1996. Engaging Science: How to Understand Its Practices Philosophically. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Sardar, Ziauddin. 2000. Thomas Kuhn and the Science Wars. New York: Totem. Schefﬂer, Israel. 1967. Science and Subjectivity. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. Shapere, Dudley. 1984. Reason and the Search for Knowledge. Dordrecht: Reidel. Sokal, Alan, and Jean Bricmont. 1998. Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals’ Abuse of Science. New York: Picador. Suppe, Frederick. 1974. “The Search for Philosophic Understanding of Scientiﬁc Theories.” In F. Suppe, ed., The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, pp. 3–241. Second edition, 1977.

1

Kuhn and Logical Empiricism MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

Conventional wisdom concerning twentieth-century philosophical approaches to scientiﬁc knowledge has held that Kuhn’s theory of scientiﬁc revolutions is diametrically opposed to the philosophical movement known as “logical positivism” or “logical empiricism.” Logical positivism has been portrayed as a naive version of empiricist foundationalism, according to which all knowledge is to be reduced to an epistemically certain basis in observational reports. And it follows, on this view, that there can be no genuine scientiﬁc revolutions in the Kuhnian sense: scientiﬁc progress must rather follow the “development-by-accumulation” model (in this case, development by accumulation of observable facts) that Kuhn explicitly rejects at the outset.1 If we accept Kuhn’s theory, by contrast, it follows that the progress of science is marked by radical discontinuities quite incompatible with such naive empiricism. So it is no wonder that Kuhn’s theory of scientiﬁc revolutions is standardly taken as a major factor in the demise of logical empiricism.2 Over the past twenty-ﬁve years, however, a growing body of active research has been devoted to detailed study of the rise and decline of the logical empiricist movement. And this research has shown, not surprisingly, that the accepted conventional wisdom concerning the relationship between Kuhn’s theory of scientiﬁc revolutions and logical empiricist philosophy of science is seriously oversimpliﬁed and fundamentally misleading. Perhaps the most striking results of this research appear in an article by George Reisch (1991) entitled “Did Kuhn Kill Logical Empiricism?” Beginning with the well-known fact that Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions ﬁrst appeared, in 1962, as a volume of the International Encyclopedia of Uniﬁed Science (the ofﬁcial monograph series of the logical empiricist movement in exile), Reisch presents two previously unpublished letters written to Kuhn by Rudolf Carnap in the latter’s capacity as editor of this series. There Carnap expresses enthusiastic approval of Kuhn’s ideas, which, he says, “will be very stimulating for all those who are interested in the nature of scientiﬁc theories and especially the causes and forms of their changes.” 19

20

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

Carnap also states, while admitting that his own “knowledge of the history of science is rather fragmentary,” that he especially “liked your [Kuhn’s] emphasis on the new conceptual frameworks which are proposed in revolutions in science, and, on their basis, the posing of new questions, not only answers to old problems.”3 These expressions of approval by Rudolf Carnap – the generally acknowledged leading representative of logical empiricism – are certainly striking, and they must give serious pause to expositors of the conventional wisdom. But even more striking, as Reisch also explains, are the deep afﬁnities between Carnap’s underlying philosophical perspective and Kuhn’s ideas. Natural science, for Carnap, is to be conceived as represented within a particular formal language or linguistic framework. And perhaps Carnap’s most fundamental thought is that there are a plurality of essentially different, nonintertranslatable such frameworks. Thus, for example, there are linguistic frameworks in which the rules of classical logic are taken to be valid, and there are also linguistic frameworks in which we instead adopt the rules of intuitionistic logic (wherein the law of the excluded middle is no longer universally valid). For Carnap, moreover, there is no sense in which one such framework can be “correct” while another is “incorrect.” Rather, all standards of logical correctness are relative or “internal” to a particular choice of linguistic framework. “External” questions concerning which linguistic framework to adopt are not similarly adjudicable by already established logical rules but rather require a “conventional” or “pragmatic” choice based on suitability or adaptedness for one or another given purpose.4 Such external questions, involving the change from one linguistic framework to a different one, are precisely what is at issue, for Carnap, in scientiﬁc revolutions.5 The afﬁnities between Carnap’s philosophy of linguistic frameworks and Kuhn’s theory of scientiﬁc revolutions are therefore pervasive indeed. According to Kuhn, there are two essentially different kinds of periods in the history of science: periods of normal science in which the relevant community operates unquestioningly within a generally accepted paradigm “committed to the same rules and standards for scientiﬁc practice” (1970, p. 11), and periods of revolutionary science in which precisely such an underlying consensus is then undercut. Similarly, for Carnap, there are two essentially different kinds of activities associated with the linguistic frameworks within which our theories in natural science are formulated: the adjudication of internal questions on the basis of the accepted logical rules of a single given linguistic framework and the adjudication of external questions that, by hypothesis, do not and cannot presuppose such logical rules.6 Just

Kuhn and Logical Empiricism

21

as, for Carnap, the logical rules of a linguistic framework are constitutive of the notion of correctness or validity relative to this framework, a particular paradigm governing a given episode of normal science, for Kuhn, yields generally agreed upon – although largely tacit – rules constitutive of what counts as a valid or correct solution to a problem within this episode of normal science. Just as, for Carnap, external questions concerning which linguistic framework to adopt are not similarly governed by logical rules but rather require a much less deﬁnite appeal to conventional and/or pragmatic considerations, changes of paradigm in revolutionary science, for Kuhn, do not proceed in accordance with generally agreed upon rules, as in normal science, but rather require something more akin to a conversion experience.7 It is especially noteworthy, then, that Kuhn, toward the end of his career, explicitly acknowledges these parallels. Kuhn expresses embarrassment, to begin with, that “[w]hen I received the kind letter in which Carnap told me of his pleasure in the manuscript [one of the letters concerning the initial publication of Structure cited by Reisch], I interpreted it as mere politeness, not as an indication that we might usefully talk.”8 But Kuhn then goes on to explain the “correspondingly deep difference” between Carnap and himself that he thinks survives the acknowledged parallels. This does not consist, as one might ﬁrst expect, in the circumstance that Carnap’s linguistic rules must always be explicitly formulated, whereas Kuhn’s “rules and standards for scientiﬁc practice” are largely tacit and are thus enforced by implicit convention rather than explicit formal legislation. Kuhn rather emphasizes that he, unlike Carnap, is concerned from the start with historical development, so that, in particular, “[l]anguage change is cognitively signiﬁcant for me as it was not for Carnap” (1993, p. 314). The point, I take it, is that change of language involves an external question for Carnap and is therefore merely pragmatic, and not cognitive or epistemic in the only sense of “epistemology” Carnap recognizes. For, although Carnap, as Reisch emphasizes, does connect his notion of change of language with scientiﬁc revolutions, he never discusses such revolutions in any serious way. Such a historical investigation could never be a part of what Carnap himself preserves of epistemology, namely, Wissenschaftslogik [the logic of science] – the formulation and examination of a variety of possible linguistic frameworks within which the results of the special sciences may be represented. What is crucial, for Carnap, is that the only remaining properly philosophical problems are purely formal – belonging to the application of logic to the language of the special sciences. Although many interesting empirical questions may arise in analyzing the historical transitions from one theory to

22

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

another during a scientiﬁc revolution (and Carnap expresses keen interest in such questions in his letters to Kuhn cited by Reisch), the only properly philosophical questions here concern the (purely timeless) articulation of the logical structures of the two different languages under consideration.9 For Kuhn, by contrast, as the very ﬁrst chapter of Structure makes clear, the point is precisely that historical examination of scientiﬁc change can, above all, be genuinely philosophical. We can deepen our appreciation of the parallels between Carnap and Kuhn – and also their important differences – by looking a bit more closely into the development of both views. I consider ﬁrst the development of logical empiricism. Conventional wisdom portrays logical empiricism as directly descended from the classical empiricism of Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, with a more recent boost from the scientiﬁc positivism articulated by Ernst Mach at the end of the nineteenth century.10 And it is true, of course, that the inﬂuence of Mach – and, more generally, of broadly empiricist currents of thought – is certainly important. (Indeed, as is well known, the logical positivism of the Vienna Circle was ﬁrst formulated as an ofﬁcial movement under the rubric of the Verein Ernst Mach.) Nevertheless, there are equally important inﬂuences on the development of logical empiricism that lie quite outside the classical empiricist tradition. Two such inﬂuences are especially important in the present context: developments in non-Euclidean geometry and its philosophy that formed the indispensable background to Albert Einstein’s formulation of the theory of relativity and developments in early-twentiethcentury neo-Kantian epistemology – especially within the tradition of the Marburg School represented by Hermann Cohen, Paul Natorp, and Ernst Cassirer.11 The crucial ﬁgures in the development of non-Euclidean geometry, for the logical empiricists, were Hermann von Helmholtz and Henri Poincar´e. And neither of these two thinkers defends a straightforwardly empiricist conception – such as was then standardly identiﬁed with John Stuart Mill – of either geometry in particular or scientiﬁc knowledge more generally. Whereas it is true, for example, that Helmholtz views the choice between Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries as empirical, he also suggests that the more general structure of space common to both Euclidean and nonEuclidean systems (that of constant curvature or what Helmholtz called “free mobility”) is a necessary presupposition of all spatial measurement and thus a “transcendental” form of our spatial intuition in the sense of Kant. Helmholtz’s own approach to scientiﬁc epistemology is therefore Kantian

Kuhn and Logical Empiricism

23

insofar as space indeed has a “necessary form” expressed in the condition of free mobility; his approach is empiricist, however, insofar as which of the geometries of constant curvature actually holds is then determined by experience. So what we ﬁnd here, in the end, is an attempt to combine Kantian and empiricist ideas so as to be as faithful as possible to the new scientiﬁc (and philosophical) situation.12 We ﬁnd an analogous attempt to adapt both Kantian and empiricist ideas to the new scientiﬁc situation in the thought of Henri Poincar´e, although here there is even less emphasis on traditional empiricism. According to Poincar´e, whereas no particular geometry – neither Euclidean nor non-Euclidean – is an a priori condition of our spatial intuition, it does not follow that the choice between them, as Helmholtz thought, is empirical. For there remains an irreducible gulf between our crude and approximate sensory experience and our precise mathematical descriptions of nature. Establishing one or another system of geometry, Poincar´e argues, therefore requires a free choice, a convention of our own – based, in the end, on the greater mathematical simplicity of the Euclidean system. And this notion of convention (which, as we shall see, is central to the development of logical empiricism) is explicitly adopted as a substitute for Kant’s original, necessarily ﬁxed notion of the a priori (represented by the laws of speciﬁcally Euclidean geometry), intended to respect Kant’s insight into the “experience-constituting” role of geometry while simultaneously accommodating the new scientiﬁc developments showing that Euclidean geometry, in particular, is in no way uniquely forced upon us.13 As I suggested, these mathematical and philosophical developments formed the indispensable background to Einstein’s formulation of the theory of relativity, and they were taken as such by Einstein himself and by the logical empiricists.14 Indeed, the earliest philosophizing of those thinkers later to be identiﬁed most closely with logical empiricism arose directly from an attempt to assimilate both Einstein’s new theory and the epistemological reﬂections of Helmholtz and Poincar´e. Moritz Schlick, the founder and guiding spirit of the Vienna Circle, began this process in his Space and Time in Contemporary Physics (Schlick 1917), which went through four editions between 1917 and 1922. (Indeed, it was on the basis of this work, enthusiastically endorsed by Einstein, that Schlick gained the Chair for the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences previously occupied by Mach and Ludwig Boltzmann at the University of Vienna in 1922.) Here Schlick argues that the lesson of the theory of relativity is not, as one might expect, that Euclidean geometry is a false description of physical space. It is rather, following Poincar´e, that there is no fact of the matter about the geometry

24

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

of physical space: choosing one or another physical geometry is not forced upon us by any observable facts but rather depends on a prior convention or stipulation without which the question of physical geometry is simply undeﬁned. In particular, we can, if we wish, retain Euclidean geometry in the context of Einstein’s theory, but this choice would result in formidable complications in our total system of geometry plus physics that make it pragmatically inexpedient (but not false).15 Carnap, in his doctoral dissertation (1922), explicitly follows Schlick in this Poincar´e-inspired interpretation of the status of physical geometry in Einstein’s theory. But here, in contrast to Schlick, there is a more positive estimation of the Kantian theory of space. Indeed, Carnap began his doctoral work under the guidance of the neo-Kantian philosopher Bruno Bauch at Jena, and, after taking a year-long seminar on the Critique of Pure Reason with Bauch, Carnap “was strongly impressed by Kant’s conception that the geometrical structure of space is determined by the form of our intuition” (Carnap 1963, p. 4). Of course, one cannot now maintain Kant’s original conception of the ﬁxed synthetic a priori status of speciﬁcally Euclidean geometry; so Carnap rather defends a generalization of Kant’s conception of spatial intuition according to which only the inﬁnitesimally Euclidean character of physical space is a priori determined by the form of our intuition. Only this merely “topological form,” for Carnap, is necessary, whereas the choice of speciﬁcally “metrical form” (whether Euclidean or non-Euclidean) is “optional [wahlfrei]” – and is in fact determined by convention (on the basis of the overall simplicity of our total system of geometry plus physics) in precisely the sense defended by Schlick.16 But the most fully developed attempt to reconcile the Kantian conception of scientiﬁc knowledge and Einstein’s theory of relativity within the logical empiricist tradition was undertaken by Hans Reichenbach in his ﬁrst book, The Theory of Relativity and A Priori Knowledge (1920). Reichenbach there draws a distinction between two meanings of the Kantian a priori: necessary and unrevisable, ﬁxed for all time, on the one hand, and “constitutive of the concept of the object of [scientiﬁc] knowledge,” on the other.17 Reichenbach argues, on this basis, that the lesson of the theory of relativity is that the former meaning must be dropped and the latter must be retained. Relativity theory involves a priori constitutive principles (which Reichenbach calls “axioms of coordination”) as necessary presuppositions of its properly empirical claims (“axioms of connection”), just as much as did Newtonian physics, but these principles have changed in the transition from the latter theory to the former: whereas Euclidean geometry is indeed constitutively a priori in the context of Newtonian physics, for

Kuhn and Logical Empiricism

25

example, only inﬁnitesimally Euclidean geometry is constitutively a priori in the context of general relativity. What Reichenbach ends up with is thus a relativized conception of a priori mathematical-physical principles (axioms of coordination), which change and develop along with the development of the mathematical and physical sciences but which nevertheless retain the characteristically Kantian constitutive function of making the empirical natural knowledge (axioms of connection) thereby structured and framed by such principles ﬁrst possible. Thus, as Reichenbach points out in a prepublication footnote added in proof, his ideas have much in common with contemporaneous attempts by neo-Kantian philosophers to develop an analogous reconciliation between the theory of relativity and Kantian philosophy.18 That logical empiricism was signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by recent developments within neo-Kantian epistemology – and especially by the Marburg School of neo-Kantianism represented by Cohen, Natorp, and Cassirer – is therefore evident (see notes 16 and 18). This inﬂuence is seen most clearly, however, in the ﬁrst work on epistemology produced within the Vienna Circle, Carnap’s Der logische Auf bau der Welt (1928). Although conventional wisdom has portrayed Carnap’s Auf bau as the epitome of the logical positivists’ supposed empiricist foundationalism,19 more recent historical research has shown that this picture, too, is seriously oversimpliﬁed and that the inﬂuence of Marburg neo-Kantianism, in particular, is perhaps even more signiﬁcant.20 For Carnap, the neo-Kantianism of the Marburg School had been given its most satisfactory and signiﬁcant formulation in Cassirer’s Substance and Function (1910). The burden of this work is to argue that modern developments in logic, the foundations of mathematics, and mathematical physics show that the traditional theory of the concept, based on Aristotelian syllogistic logic, is entirely inadequate – and, as a result, that the traditional epistemological conceptions of both rationalism and empiricism are entirely inadequate as well. On the one hand, Aristotelian subject-predicate logic mistakenly privileges the relation between substance and accident, and it is the attempt to develop an a priori ontology based on this privileged relation that is characteristic of traditional rationalism. On the other hand, however, traditional empiricism is equally dependent on Aristotelian logic in mistakenly privileging the procedure of concept formation by abstraction, whereby we inductively ascend from sensory particulars to ever higher superordinate concepts (genera and species) predicated of these particulars. Modern logic has shown the poverty of both views, according to Cassirer, by developing a new theory of the concept based on the mathematical

26

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

notion of function or relation – a theory of what we would now call “abstract relational structures” (the series of natural numbers, for example, or the abstract structure exempliﬁed by Euclidean space).21 In developing an alternative theory of knowledge and reality, Cassirer then rejects empiricist and inductivist accounts of scientiﬁc knowledge in favor of the so-called genetic conception of knowledge characteristic of the Marburg School. Empirical science proceeds by progressively embedding natural phenomena in an ordered sequence of relational structures as we successively articulate and reﬁne mathematical representations of these phenomena in the historical development of our theories. This procedure results in an inﬁnite, never-ending sequence of relational structures, but one that is nonetheless converging on a limit structure or limit theory representing the ideal completion of scientiﬁc progress. The object of scientiﬁc knowledge is thus never completely given: it is only successively approximated in the limit as the ideal X toward which our mathematical representations of nature are converging.22 Carnap, in the Auf bau, shares the ambition of replacing all forms of traditional epistemology – theories of knowledge and its relation to reality – with a new approach based on the modern logical theory of relations. Indeed, Carnap (1928, §3) initially characterizes the method to be followed as “the analysis of reality with the help of the theory of relations.” Moreover, when Carnap ﬁrst introduces the question of the basic or fundamental relations on which his “constitutional system of reality” is to be erected, he cites Cassirer (1910) as showing the necessity of formally deﬁned relational concepts for ordering the “undigested experiential given” favored by “positivism.”23 Carnap thus hopes to achieve a synthesis of empiricism and Kantianism – a synthesis that emphasizes, as does the Marburg School, the absolute indispensability of logico-mathematical formal structures for underwriting the clarity, precision, and intersubjective communicability of empirical scientiﬁc knowledge.24 Carnap also follows the Marburg School in representing empirical knowledge by a serial or stepwise sequence of formal logical structures, depicting, in an idealized fashion, how our scientiﬁc methods for acquiring knowledge actually play out in practice. This sequence does not represent the historical progression of mathematical-physical successor theories, however, but rather the epistemological progress of a single individual or cognitive subject as its knowledge extends from the initial subjective sensory data belonging to the autopsychological realm, through the world of public external objects constituting the physical realm, and ﬁnally to the intersubjective and cultural realities belonging to the heteropsychological realm. Carnap’s methodological series is thus a “rational reconstruction” of

Kuhn and Logical Empiricism

27

the actual present state of scientiﬁc knowledge intended formally to represent the “actual process of cognition.”25 For Carnap, moreover, this is not a series of successor theories in the historical progress of mathematical natural science, but rather a sequence of levels or ranks in the hierarchy of logical types of Whitehead’s and Russell’s Principia Mathematica (1910–13),26 a sequence of levels ordered by type-theoretic deﬁnitions. Objects on any level (other than the ﬁrst) are thus formally deﬁned as classes of objects (or relations between objects) from the preceding level. The “logicization” of empirical scientiﬁc knowledge undertaken by the Marburg School is thereby implemented in an even more radical fashion. For the historically oriented epistemology of the Marburg tradition – which proceeds largely by the methods of intellectual history – is here transformed into a purely formal exercise: the project of formally presenting the logical deﬁnitions of all objects of (current) scientiﬁc knowledge subsisting at the various levels of Carnap’s constitutional system. And, in the course of this formal exercise, Carnap is able, by means of the theory of types, to transcend the Marburg doctrine of the essentially incomplete character of the object of scientiﬁc knowledge – its character, that is, as a never to be completed X. For Carnap, all objects whatsoever are deﬁned or “constituted” at deﬁnite ﬁnite ranks within the hierarchy of logical types, and it is only the further empirical speciﬁcation of these objects that remains essentially incomplete. As a result, Carnap is also able to reject the Kantian conception of synthetic a priori principles, for objects are deﬁned or constituted by stipulation and then further investigated by experience: “[a]ccording to the conception of constitutional theory there are no other components in cognition than these two – the conventional and the empirical – and thus no synthetic a priori [components].”27 In a direct engagement with neo-Kantian epistemology, Carnap thereby arrives at the same point that was reached in the context of the logical empiricists’ earlier engagement with the foundations of geometry and relativity theory: Kant’s original conception of ﬁxed synthetic a priori principles governing our empirical scientiﬁc knowledge is to be replaced by Poincar´e’s notion of convention, so that, in particular, the principles in question are no longer necessarily ﬁxed but become “optional,” subject to choice, and relative or internal to a speciﬁc scientiﬁc context. Thus Carnap here stands on the brink of his mature philosophy of linguistic frameworks,28 which, as we saw at the outset, has deep afﬁnities with the Kuhnian theory of scientiﬁc revolutions. This philosophy, as we now see, can be viewed as a kind of generalization and logicization of the conception of relativized a priori principles developed by Reichenbach (1920),29 resulting from Carnap’s simultaneous engagement with both the details of neo-Kantian

28

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

epistemology and the most recent developments in modern mathematical logic.30 It is noteworthy, once again, that Kuhn, toward the end of his career, explicitly acknowledges the Kantian and neo-Kantian background to the development of logical empiricism and the resulting parallels with his own views. In particular, commenting on Reichenbach’s distinction between two meanings of the a priori (ﬁxed and unrevisable versus constitutive relative to a theory), Kuhn remarks that “[b]oth meanings make the world in some sense mind-dependent, but the ﬁrst disarms the apparent threat to objectivity by insisting on the absolute ﬁxity of the categories, while the second relativizes the categories (and the experienced world with them) to time, place, and culture.” And he continues in an important passage worth quoting in full: Though it is a more articulated source of constitutive categories, my structured lexicon [Kuhn’s late version of “paradigm”] resembles Kant’s a priori when the latter is taken in its second, relativized sense. Both are constitutive of possible experience of the world, but neither dictates what that experience must be. Rather, they are constitutive of the inﬁnite range of possible experiences that might conceivably occur in the actual world to which they give access. Which of these conceivable experiences occurs in that actual world is something that must be learned, both from everyday experience and from the more systematic and reﬁned experience that characterizes scientiﬁc practice. They are both stern teachers, ﬁrmly resisting the promulgation of beliefs unsuited to the form of life the lexicon permits. What results from respectful attention to them is knowledge of nature, and the criteria that serve to evaluate contributions to that knowledge are, correspondingly, epistemic. The fact that experience within another form of life – another time, place, or culture – might have constituted knowledge differently is irrelevant to its status as knowledge.31

Kuhn, like the logical empiricists, has thus adopted a relativized conception of Kantian a priori principles. However, since Kuhn’s perspective, unlike that of the logical empiricists, is essentially historical (their a priori is relativized to a theory or linguistic framework, not to a “time, place, or culture”), he also raises (and here rather abruptly dismisses) the central historicist problem concerning the social and cultural relativity of scientiﬁc knowledge that dominates post-Kuhnian work in science studies.32 Let us now take a brief look at the background to Kuhn’s theory of scientiﬁc revolutions. Although there has not yet been much study of the development of Kuhn’s views, Kuhn has left some intriguing hints.

Kuhn and Logical Empiricism

29

Thus, in the Preface to Structure, Kuhn portrays how he shifted his career plans from physics to the history of science, and, in explaining his initial intensive work in the subject, he states that he (1970, pp. v–vi) “continued to study the writings of Alexandre Koyr´e and ﬁrst encountered those of Emile Meyerson, H´el`ene Metzger, and Anneliese Maier [; more] clearly than most other recent scholars, this group has shown what it was like to think scientiﬁcally in a period when the canons of scientiﬁc thought were very different from those current today.” Then, in the introductory ﬁrst chapter on “A Role for History,” Kuhn explains the background to his rejection of the development-by-accumulation model: [H]istorians of science have begun to ask new sorts of questions and to trace different, and often less than cumulative, developmental lines for the sciences. Rather than seeking the permanent contributions of an older science to our present vantage, they attempt to display the historical integrity of that science in its own time. They ask, for example, not about the relation of Galileo’s views to those of modern science, but rather about the relationship between his views and those of his group, i.e., his teachers, contemporaries, and immediate successors in the sciences. Furthermore, they insist upon studying the opinions of that group and other similar ones from the viewpoint – usually very different from that of modern science – that gives those opinions the maximum internal coherence and the closest possible ﬁt to nature. Seen through the works that result, works perhaps best exempliﬁed in the writings of Alexandre Koyr´e, science does not seem altogether the same enterprise as the one discussed by writers in the older historiographic tradition.33

Kuhn, not surprisingly, thus places himself squarely within the historiographical tradition initiated by Koyr´e in his works on Galileo ﬁrst published in 1939 – a tradition that established the history of science as an independent discipline in the immediate postwar period.34 In a survey article on the development of the history of science, Kuhn (1968) again explains the initial break with the development-byaccumulation model, which began, according to Kuhn, with “the inﬂuence, beginning in the late nineteenth century, of the history of philosophy.” We here learned an “attitude towards past thinkers,” Kuhn explains, that came to the history of science from philosophy. Partly it was learned from men like Lange and Cassirer who dealt historically with people or ideas that were also important for scientiﬁc development. . . . And partly it was learned from a small group of neo-Kantian epistemologists, particularly Brunschvicg and Meyerson, whose search for quasi-absolute categories of thought in older scientiﬁc ideas produced brilliant genetic analyses of

30

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

concepts which the main tradition in the history of science had misunderstood or dismissed.35

Finally, in a “Historiographic/Philosophical Addendum,” concluding his response to criticisms of his work on Planck and black-body theory, Kuhn (1984) makes some further intriguing remarks. Responding to questions about the relationship between his work on Planck and the theory of scientiﬁc revolutions presented in Structure, Kuhn (1987, p. 361) explains that “[t]he concept of historical reconstruction that underlies [the Planck book] has from the start been fundamental to both my historical and my philosophical work[; it] is by no means original: I owe it primarily to Alexandre Koyr´e; its ultimate sources lie in neo-Kantian philosophy.” What does Kuhn mean here by “neo-Kantian epistemology” and “neo-Kantian philosophy”? It is not entirely clear. Whereas, as we have seen, Cassirer is certainly a leading ﬁgure in early-twentieth-century neoKantianism, and it is also very plausible to locate Maier, in particular, in the context of Kantian and neo-Kantian thought,36 the other ﬁgures on Kuhn’s list can be referred to as “neo-Kantians” only by making more or less of a stretch. To be sure, they agree in rejecting naive empiricist accounts of the development of modern science (and thus the developmentby-accumulation model) and emphasize instead the fundamental importance of mind sets, conceptual frameworks, or “mentalities” contributed by thought itself.37 At the same time, however, several of these ﬁgures make a point of taking issue with Kantian and neo-Kantian ideas, both philosophically and with reference to the interpretation of the history of science.38 But perhaps there is, nonetheless, something importantly right in Kuhn’s assertion that the “ultimate sources [of his concept of historical reconstruction] lie in neo-Kantian philosophy.” For all the ﬁgures on his list, in one way or another, are taking inspiration from, and reacting to, Cassirer’s seminal work on the history of modern science and philosophy, Das Erkenntnisproblem [The Problem of Knowledge] (1906–7).39 Das Erkenntnisproblem is the ﬁrst work of intellectual history to develop a detailed reading of the seventeenth-century scientiﬁc revolution in terms of the “Platonic” idea that the thoroughgoing application of mathematics to nature (the so-called mathematization of nature) is the central and overarching achievement of this revolution.40 Cassirer simultaneously articulates an interpretation of the history of modern philosophy as the development and eventual triumph of what he calls “modern philosophical idealism.” This tradition takes its inspiration from idealism in the Platonic sense, from an appreciation for the “ideal” formal structures paradigmatically studied in

Kuhn and Logical Empiricism

31

mathematics, and it is distinctively modern in recognizing the fundamental importance of the systematic application of such structures to empirically given nature in modern mathematical physics – a progressive and synthetic process wherein mathematical models of nature are successively reﬁned and corrected without limit. For Cassirer, it is Galileo, above all, in opposition to both sterile Aristotelian-Scholastic formal logic and sterile AristotelianScholastic empirical induction, who ﬁrst grasped the essential structure of this synthetic process; and the development of “modern philosophical idealism” in the work of Descartes, Spinoza, Gassendi, Hobbes, Leibniz, and Kant then consists in its increasingly self-conscious philosophical articulation and elaboration. Cassirer therefore interprets the development of modern thought as a whole from the point of view of the philosophical perspective of Marburg neo-Kantianism. In particular, he here anticipates his own systematic work in Substance and Function by interpreting the characteristically modern conception of nature as the triumph of the mathematical-relational concept of function – as expressed in the universal laws of mathematical physics – over the traditional Aristotelian concept of substance. Yet Meyerson, who is clearly the next most seminal ﬁgure on Kuhn’s list of inspirational precursors,41 takes a quite different view. He agrees with Kant and the neo-Kantians on the necessity for a priori requirements of the mind to give meaning and structure to the results of empirical science. But he is vehemently opposed to the attempt to assimilate scientiﬁc understanding to the formulation of universal laws governing phenomena. Indeed, the central thought of his Identity and Reality (1930, ﬁrst published in 1908) is that genuine scientiﬁc knowledge and understanding can never be the result of mere lawfulness (l´egalit´e ) but must instead answer to the mind’s a priori logical demand for identity (identit´e ). And the primary requirement resulting from this demand is precisely that some underlying substance be conserved as absolutely unchanging and self-identical in all sensible alterations of nature. Thus, the triumph of the scientiﬁc revolution, for Meyerson, is represented by the rise of mechanistic atomism, wherein elementary corpuscles preserve their sizes, shapes, and masses while merely changing their mutual positions in uniform and homogeneous space via motion; this same demand for transtemporal identity is also represented, in more recent times, by Lavoisier’s use of the principle of the conservation of matter in his new chemistry and by the discovery of the conservation of energy. However, in the even more recent discovery of what we now know as the second law of thermodynamics (“Carnot’s principle”), which governs the temporally irreversible process of “degradation” or “dissipation” of energy, we

32

MICHAEL FRIEDMAN

encounter nature’s complementary and unavoidable resistance to our a priori logical demands. In the end, therefore, Meyerson views the development of natural science as progressing via a perpetual dialectical opposition between the mind’s a priori demand for substantiality and thus absolute identity through time, on the one side, and nature’s “irrational” a posteriori resistance to this demand, on 