Brian Eno 1971-1977: The Man Who Fell To Earth

This documentary film - the first ever about Eno - explores his life, career and music between the years 1971 & 1977, the period that some view as his golden age. Featuring numerous e...Read More

Blitzed: The 80s Blitz Kids Story

Boy George was the coat check girl (admittedly stealing money from the purses) .... Bowie, synth beats, and a new freedom of sexual identity were in the air. The Blitz Club spell was ...Read More

Prince - Sign O' The Times

Punctuated with specially-filmed, dramatic vignettes, Prince and his band bring his Grammy nominated album `Sign 'o' the Times' to life in one of the greatest concert films ever made,...Read More

Nightclubbing: The Birth Of Punk Rock In NYC

Nightclubbing is the first ever documentary about the renowned New York City nightclub Max's Kansas City (1965-1981) which had an indelible impact on the world of music, fashion, art,...Read More

Angel

Mixing slasher-style scenes w/ the sweetness of an afterschool special, ANGEL is one of the seminal exploitation films of the 80s. Molly Stewart (Donna Wilkes; Jaws 2) is at the top o...Read More

Sleepaway Camp

After a terrible boating accident killed her family, shy Angela Baker (Felissa Rose, Return To Sleepaway Camp) went to live with her eccentric Aunt Martha and her cousin Ricky. This s...Read More

Night Flight Presents: Dr. Ruth Good Sex Special

In this "Best Of" compilation starring beloved sex therapist Dr. Ruth as she engages in late-night therapy sessions, hosts stimulating conversations with celebrity guest stars, and de...Read More

Desolation Center

Desolation Center is the previously untold story of a series of early 80s guerrilla music and art performance happenings in Southern California that are recognized to have inspired Bu...Read More

That's Sexploitation!

From director Frank Henenlotter (Frankenhooker, Brain Damage) and co-producer Mike Vraney (the late founder of Something Weird Video) comes the epic documentary critics call "fascinat...Read More

Messiah of Evil

A woman arrives in a sleepy seaside town after receiving unsettling letters from her father, only to discover the town is under the influence of a strange cult that weeps tears of blo...Read More

Tenebrae

American mystery author Peter Neal (Anthony Franciosa) comes to Italy to promote his newest novel, Tenebrae. Unfortunately, a razor-wielding serial killer is on the loose, taunting Ne...Read More

Uncle Sam

The Star-Spangled Shocker From The Creators Of MANIAC COP! It’s Fourth Of July Weekend, and the recently discovered corpse of Sgt. Sam Harper – killed by ‘friendly fire’ during the fi...Read More

The Love Witch

Elaine, a beautiful young witch, is determined to find a man to love her. In her gothic Victorian apartment she makes spells and potions, and then picks up men and seduces them. Howev...Read More

Jean-Michel Basquiat: The Radiant Child

In his short career, Jean-Michel Basquiat was a phenomenon. His dense, bebop-influenced neoexpressionist work emerged in the 1980s while minimalist art was the fad and as a successful...Read More

We Were Famous, You Don't Remember: The Embarrassment

Ignited by punk’s invasion of the Great Plains, America’s gawkiest and greatest lost rock band battles conformity in Reagan-era Kansas. The Embarrassment played Chicago, D.C., and New...Read More

Joe Strummer: The Future Is Unwritten

As the lead singer of The Clash from 1977 onward, Joe Strummer changed people's lives forever. Years after his death, his influence reaches out around the world, more strongly now tha...Read More

Malice in Wonderland

The infamous reimagining of Alice in Wonderland by surrealist animator Vince Collins. Restored by Mark Toscano at the Academy® Film Archive. NOTE: This video contains flashing images....Read More

Betty Davis - They Say I'm Different

Funk Queen Betty Davis changed the landscape for female artists in America. She "was the first..." as former husband Miles Davis said. "Madonna before Madonna, Prince before Prince". ...Read More

Cemetery Man

The magnum opus of director Michele Soavi (The Church, Stage Fright). Rupert Everett stars as cemetery watchman Francesco Dellamorte, tasked with dispatching the recently deceased whe...Read More

Sex Madness Revealed

Playfully exploring the outer reaches of cult film fandom, Sex Madness Revealed is both an ingenious twist on the audio commentary and a satire of the wisecrack track (featuring the v...Read More

Queens of the Qing Dynasty

n a remote small town, a neurodivergent teen forms an unlikely rapport with an international student from Shanghai volunteering at the hospital where they are a patient. Between the t...Read More

Who Took the Bomp? Le Tigre on Tour

Who Took the Bomp? Le Tigre on Tour follows iconic feminist electronic band Le Tigre on their 2004-2005 international tour. Le Tigre confronts sexism and homophobia in the music indus...Read More

Night Flight - Short Cuts: "Animation"

Night Flight takes you to the dazzling animation of contemporary music videos, from Herbie Hancock's computer-assisted imagery to the kaleidoscopic videos of Adrian Belew and the Tom Tom Club.

Mikey

Mikey Kelvin (Brian Bonsall, Blank Check, "Family Ties") has been a bad boy, only nobody knows exactly how bad. Tragic and Deadly "accidents" seem to happen all around Mikey. So, from...Read More

Witchboard

NEVER PLAY IT ALONE! It’s called a Ouija Board and it’s been used for thousands of years to communicate with the souls of the afterworld. For beautiful Linda Brewster (Tawny Kitaen, B...Read More

No Ordinary Man

American jazz musician Billy Tipton developed a reputable touring and recording career in the mid-twentieth century, along with his band The Billy Tipton Trio. After his death in the ...Read More

The Undertaker

For years Roscoe (Joe Spinell) has been the town undertaker. However, inside his funeral home, he's been amassing a bloody collection of human souvenirs, which he uses in unspeakable ...Read More

Heroic Times

“A crime is a crime, even if committed by kings,” intones the narrator of director József Gémes’s animated portrait of the supposedly “heroic” age of medieval knights and kings, a spr...Read More

Night Flight - Billy Idol Video Profile (1983)

Join us for an exclusive interview with Billy Idol on Night Flight during the show's 1983 season (he came back for a second interview in 1985, which is also streaming now!) Promoting ...Read More

A Poem for Stuart Samuels

RIP Stuart Samuels (March 8, 1940 - August 2, 2024), senior writer of the original Night Flight series. "A Poem for Stuart Samuels" is Night Flight creator Stuart Shapiro's tribute to...Read More

George Romero Interview

In this candid 20-minute long interview we’re exclusively sharing with you over on Night Flight Plus, Romero talks about his influences and gives a detailed account of origins of Nigh...Read More

Hashtag Vampires

One hundred years of Vampire movies in Stuart Samuel's #Vampires! The history of vampires as told thru the words and images of over 100 Vampire trailers from the beginning of film and...Read More

Night Flight - Rockin' Ronnie

Conceived by the creators of the successful USA cable program "NIGHT FLIGHT," this light-hearted, off-the-wall exposé includes the unlikely supporting cast of Queen Elizabeth, Richard...Read More

Night Flight - Atomic TV (1988)

Night Flight's Atomic TV is a classic featurette from the original series and fan favorite. This early, trend-setting 'video mashup' takes the pop music scene of 1986 and early public...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Film Directors in Music Video

Music Video's directed by feature filmmakers for The Cars, Lionel Richie, The Art of Noise, Bruce Springsteen and more

Night Flight On IFC - Episode 1

Heavy Metal and Punk. Classic Interviews featuring legends of heavy metal and punk rock. Late Night TV from the 80s never felt so good. Features animation, rock gods, pop culture icon...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Music Video Directors (1983)

“Millions have seen their work,” host Pat Prescott says, “but only a handful of people know who they are.” Tonight, we “Take Off” to Music Video Directors circa 1983 on Night Flight. ...Read More

Night Flight - Machine Medley (Video Essay)

Night Flight’s classic “Video Essays” were a completely unique programming concept for the era. Lead by Night Flight’s writer Stuart Samuels (an instructor at the Cannes Film Festival...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Music Video Directors (1985)

This week, Night Flight puts the focus on the visionaries behind some of the most experimental and interesting music videos of the 80s. This unique ‘Take Off’ takes music video direct...Read More

Night Flight Presents: Dr. Ruth Good Sex Special

In this "Best Of" compilation starring beloved sex therapist Dr. Ruth as she engages in late-night therapy sessions, hosts stimulating conversations with celebrity guest stars, and de...Read More

Night Flight - Michael Lang Interview

We lost a close member of the Night Flight family on January 8th, 2022. Michael Lang and NF creator Stuart Shapiro were twin counter-culture spirits. Best friends since 1970, Michael ...Read More

Samurai Cop

Amir Shervan’s so-bad-it's-good epic cult-classic has arrived on Night Flight Plus in a new remastered version! A deadly "Code of Silence" sweeps through Los Angeles as gang violence ...Read More

Mondo New York

From Night Flight creator Stuart S. Shapiro. Restored and remastered from a brand new transfer (from the original camera negative), Mondo New York is a cult classic celebration and pe...Read More

Arabella Black Angel

Arabella is an insatiable nymphomaniac with a crippled writer husband, Francesco, who is unable to pleasure her. So she searches for lovers in elicit dens of debauchery. However, when...Read More

a-ha: The Movie

a-ha -The Movie follows the band over their entire career, telling the full story of how three young men followed their impossible dream of becoming worldwide pop stars and what happe...Read More

Butcher, Baker, Nightmare Maker

It remains the most joltingly violent, psychosexual grindhouse shocker of the '80s, directed by a veteran of I Love Lucy and starring a frequently shirtless former teen idol with an e...Read More

In The Soup

Broke and desperate filmmaker Adolpho Rollo (Steve Buscemi) is a Manhattan wannabe in love with the mysterious woman next door, Angelica Peña (Jennifer Beals). He puts out an ad offer...Read More

Terror At Tenkiller

Leslie and Jana take off on a vacation and strange things start to happen at their remote cabin. Soon corpses begin turning up near the lake. One by one the locals disappear, but the ...Read More

Skateboard: The Movie

Skateboard was the first feature film to depict the height of the 70s skateboard craze. Many refer to it as the Bad News Bears of the sport. It’s star studded cast includes Alan Garfi...Read More

Weekend With Bob

You've seen him dance, host and perform "lightning lip-syncs" on national television on USA Network's "Dance Party USA" and WPHL-17's "Dancin' On Air". You've read about him and seen ...Read More

Alien From The Abyss

For one of the final films of his legendary career, director Antonio Margheriti (Castle of Blood) headed to the Philippines to deliver "the perfect '80s Italian popcorn flick" (Mondo ...Read More

Extra Terrestrial Visitors

From Juan Piquer Simón – the infamous writer/director of PIECES and SLUGS – comes The Restored Director’s Cut of the French/Spanish co-production that remains the most singularly scre...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Reggae (1983)

Night Flight covers the origins and politics of reggae music, featuring interviews and performances from artists such as Jimmy Cliff and Bob Marley. English musicians influenced by re...Read More

Humanoids from the Deep

Something evil is happening in the sleepy fishing village of Noyo. Fishlike humanoid creatures, spawned by mutant DNA, begin rising from the ocean looking to mate with the local women...Read More

Willard

Willard Stiles (Bruce Davison) is a young man with a big problem. He lives alone in a crumbling house with his ailing mother (Elsa Lanchester, Arnold, Bride Of Frankenstein). His boss...Read More

Silent Night, Deadly Night Part 2

IT'S GARBAGE DAY! Ricky is being released from a mental hospital. He takes with him the terrifying memory of his brother Billy's death and the memory of Mother Superior who brought ab...Read More

Cruel Jaws

He defied all laws of good taste and international copyright with Shocking Dark and Robowar. He reset the bar for batsh*t crazy ItaloHorror with Rats: Night of Terror and Hell of the ...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Politics (1984)

This 1984 episode of Night Flight focuses on the socially conscious side of rock music. From nuclear war to Latin America, these music videos run the gamut of political commentary fro...Read More

Ben

When detective sergeant Cliff Kirtland (Joseph Campanella, Meteor) investigates the horrifying murder of Willard Stiles by a band of rats, he discovers that the rats are now an organi...Read More

The Clones Of Bruce Lee

Minutes after his death, government scientists remove a syringe of blood from Bruce Lee's corpse to create three genetic clones (Bruce Le, Bruce Lai and Dragon Lee) of the martial art...Read More

Enter The Game Of Death

The legendary Bruce Le - "the greatest of all Bruce Lee imitators" (The Video Vacuum) - dons the iconic jumpsuit, flicks his nose and kicks ass in this "highly enjoyable and cheeky fu...Read More

The Dragon Lives Again

In "the most bizarre kung fu movie you'll ever see" (Rare Cult Cinema), Bruce Lee (Bruce Liang) is sent to Hell where he enlists Popeye The Sailor Man and The One-Armed Swordsman to b...Read More

Bruce And The Iron Finger

Bruce Li stars in this "classic old-school flick" (City On Fire) that combines explosive Bruceploitation action with a sleazy '70s crime thriller: A tough Singapore police detective (...Read More

The Dragon, The Hero

The incredible Dragon Lee (The Clones of Bruce Lee) teams with high-kicking John Liu (Snuff Bottle Connection) in this over-the-top Bruceploitation classic: The only two masters of St...Read More

Enter Three Dragons

Bruce Lai, Bruce Thai and Dragon Lee - in his show-stopping Hong Kong film debut - star in this "especially fun" (Joe Bob Briggs) Bruceploitation fan favorite "filled with non-stop ma...Read More

Goodbye, Bruce Lee: His Last Game Of Death

Bruce Li (ENTER THE CLONES OF BRUCE) stars in one of the most shamelessly/brilliantly meta of all Bruceploitation sagas: After the death of Bruce Lee, Hong Kong producers hire Li to c...Read More

Challenge Of The Tiger

Experience this "brain-melting kung fu classic featuring some of the wildest scenes of any film in the genre" (DVD Drive-In), co-written, directed by and starring the legendary Bruce ...Read More

Rage Of The Dragon

The incredible Dragon Lee (THE DRAGON, THE HERO) and the legendary Carter Wong (THE 18 BRONZEMEN) star in this undisputed classic from The Golden Age of Bruceploitation: A masked grav...Read More

The Dragon Lives

Bruce Li (BRUCE AND THE IRON FINGER) gives the performance of his career in this "realistic and hard-hitting" (City On Fire) Bruce Lee biopic that goes where few other Bruceploitation...Read More

The Black Dragon Vs. The Yellow Tiger

In one of the earliest and least-seen Bruceploitation epics, Tong Lung (THE FEROCIOUS BROTHERS) assumes the mannerisms to star in this very unofficial sequel to Bruce Lee's THE WAY OF...Read More

Cameroon Connection

Cameroon filmmaker Alphonse Beni was an icon of African cinema who would eventually co-star in Godfrey Ho action movies like TOP MISSION, POWER FORCE and NINJA: SILENT ASSASSIN. But i...Read More

Liquid Sky

The essential document of New York’s 1980s New Wave scene and the archetypal "Midnight Movie" from director Slava Tsukerman returns home to Night Flight. In what is one of the most de...Read More

Rude Boy

Merging documentary and fiction, Jack Hazan and David Mingay’s Rude Boy follows roughneck Ray Gange as he drops his Soho sex-shop job to roadie for The Clash—the most fiery, revolutio...Read More

Blood for Dracula

Following closely on the heels of 'Flesh for Frankenstein,' Paul Morrissey reimagined the timeless Transylvanian legend with a campy twist, again under the "Andy Warhol presents" bann...Read More

Prince - Sign O' The Times

Punctuated with specially-filmed, dramatic vignettes, Prince and his band bring his Grammy nominated album `Sign 'o' the Times' to life in one of the greatest concert films ever made,...Read More

Smithereens

SMITHEREENS is the story of Wren (Susan Berman), an 19 year old layabout from New Jersey who has come to Manhattan to promote herself to stardom in New York's waning punk music world....Read More

Arise! The SubGenius Movie

The Church of the SubGenius recruitment movie, "Arise!," was written and edited to work as a documentary feature film, or as twenty separate stand-alone two-to-ten-minute excerpts. Ni...Read More

Tunnel Vision

A vision of 1985 from 1976. A regular feature on Night Flight during the original series run is Tunnel Vision, the "unsightly" (NY Times) social-commentary satire that Night Flight cr...Read More

The Decline of Western Civilization

The first entry in the Decline series sheds a light on Los Angeles’ punk scene of the late 1970s. Featuring interviews and performances by some of the most seminal acts of the era lik...Read More

Best of New Wave Theatre

A special program containing the ultimate highlights from the critically acclaimed nationally broadcast music/comedy cable program that literally revolutionized rock & roll television...Read More

Jac Mac & Rad Boy, Go!

One of the more popular animated short films that aired during Night Flight’s '80s heyday was Wes Archer’s cult fave Jac Mac & Rad Boy, Go!, a wonderfully frenetic cartoon about two p...Read More

Night Flight - Interview with Slava Tsukerman

Night Flight creator Stuart S. Shapiro talks to the writer, producer and director of Liquid Sky, Slava Tsukerman. Originally aired at the Roxy Theatre in NYC for Night Flight's screen...Read More

Quasi at the Quackadero

This cult cartoon follows two ducks, Quasi and Anita, and a pet robot at an amusement park in the future where time travel is exploited. Hugely popular in the 1970s, it was named to t...Read More

Flesh For Frankenstein

Deranged scientist, Baron von Frankenstein, with the help of his bizarre assistant, Otto, is determined to create a new master race, of which he will be the leader. To achieve his obj...Read More

Night Flight - 1984 Anniversary Special

"In the past 3 years, Night Flight has kept pace with Music Video revolution in its own unique style." - Pat Prescott. Night Flight's 1984 Anniversary Special is a fine collection of ...Read More

J-Men Forever

A Night Flight classic returns! J-Men is the story of "The Secret World War," a war of cultures as Rock & Roll smashes Shmaltzy music. This outrageous comedy was created by Firesign T...Read More

The Kentucky Fried Movie

The original take-off cult classic from the highly successful team of David Zucker, Jim Abrahams and Jerry Zucker (Airplane, The Naked Gun), this “uproariously funny [film]” (TV Guide...Read More

A Boy and His Dog

World War IV has ravaged Earth, and its survivors must battle for food, shelter and companionship in a post-atomic wasteland. This classic sci-fi tale follows the exploits of a young ...Read More

Night Flight - Fourth Anniversary Show

New from the vaults: Night Flight's Fourth Anniversary show, featuring a Special Top Ten video countdown from NF’s panel of music experts. Focusing more on the artistry of the filmma...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 1 (Pilot )

"TV 2000's a different kind of video show: We've got everything!" The 1985 music series and Night Flight sister show hosted by John Kassir (voice of the Cryptkeeper) and Joe Gallo inc...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 2 (Boy George and Marilyn)

TV 2000 is Night Flight's spin on the top ten countdown format from 1985, hosted by comedian John Kassir & Joie Gallo. In Episode 2 of TV 2000, Bryan Adams takes us to heaven, the Eur...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 3 (Gene Simmons)

Hosts John Kassie and Joie Gallo take on the countdown format in Night Flight's TV 2000. Episode 3 features a revealing interview with Gene Simmons and legendary videos from The Power...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 4 (Tom Petty)

John Kassir and Joie Gallo return as hosts for TV 2000, counting down the best videos in music for 1985. Featuring interviews with Tom Petty and Duran Duran, the latter talking about ...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 5 (Go-Go Music)

Joie Gallo and John Kassir return for the fifth episode of TV 2000, Night Flight's countdown show! Including a special report on go-go music, and videos from Tears for Fears and Bruce...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 6 (Nile Rodgers)

On this episode of Night Flight's sister show, TV 2000, Lisa Robinson sits down with Nile Rodgers to discuss how his sound stays ahead of the curve and what it's like working with Dav...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 7 (Weird Al)

The seventh episode of Night Flight's countdown show TV 2000 features coverage of the tumultuous David Lee Roth/Van Halen split, and an exclusive interview with Weird Al. Music videos...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 8 (Garage Rock)

"Your favorite videos, coast to coast!" Hose Joie Gallo takes us to the top 10 music videos of the week in 1985. Beginning with Motley Crue's "Smoking in the Boy's Room," we visit Are...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 9 (Squeeze)

Welcome back to TV 2000, Night Flight's take on the countdown format. Lisa Robinson interviews British pop band Squeeze on their various lineup changes, while host Joie Gallo leads us...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 10 (Adam Ant)

In this edition of TV 2000, we run through videos from Madonna and Dire Straits. In addition, Lisa Robinson interviews Carly Simon, who discusses her famous love life, plus a special ...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 11 (Dee Snider)

Host Joie Gallo presents the top 10 best music videos in the country from artists like Mötley Crüe, Pat Benatar, and Chrissie Hynde, while Lisa Robinson presents a special report on t...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 12 (Paul Stanley)

Welcome to TV 2000, the show that counted down the best videos the music business had to offer. Featuring a special interview with Kiss's Paul Stanley, and music videos from Sting, Th...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 13 (Foreigner's Mick Jones)

In this edition of TV 2000, Lisa Robinson interviews Foreigner's guitarist Mick Jones, and presents and special report of controversial rock lyrics and the possibility of parental adv...Read More

Other Music

Other Music was an influential and uncompromising New York City record store that was vital to the city’s early 2000s indie music scene. But when the store is forced to close its door...Read More

Desolation Center

Desolation Center is the previously untold story of a series of early 80s guerrilla music and art performance happenings in Southern California that are recognized to have inspired Bu...Read More

Out of Time: The Material Issue Story

Out of Time: The Material Issue Story examines the tragic story of a rock band on the cusp of superstardom cut short by front man Jim Ellison’s suicide. The film tells the story of Ma...Read More

Rolling Stones - Under Review: 1962 - 1966

The Rolling Stones - Under Review 1962-1966 is a 90 minute film reviewing the music and career of one of rock music's true giants during their formative years. The Stones are unquest...Read More

Betty Davis - They Say I'm Different

Funk Queen Betty Davis changed the landscape for female artists in America. She "was the first..." as former husband Miles Davis said. "Madonna before Madonna, Prince before Prince". ...Read More

The Damned - Don't You Wish That We Were Dead

From "Lemmy" filmmaker Wes Orshoski comes the story of the long-ignored pioneers of punk: The Damned, the first U.K. punks on wax and the first to cross the Atlantic. "THE DAMNED: Don...Read More

Joe Strummer: The Future Is Unwritten

As the lead singer of The Clash from 1977 onward, Joe Strummer changed people's lives forever. Years after his death, his influence reaches out around the world, more strongly now tha...Read More

The Cure: Rock Case Studies '79-89

Featuring performance footage and commentary from musicians, fans and critics, this in-depth analysis of alternative rock band the Cure examines the influence of the unique group that...Read More

We Were Famous, You Don't Remember: The Embarrassment

Ignited by punk’s invasion of the Great Plains, America’s gawkiest and greatest lost rock band battles conformity in Reagan-era Kansas. The Embarrassment played Chicago, D.C., and New...Read More

DEATH by Metal

Here comes DEATH's probing and pulsing rock doc, DEATH BY METAL, pulling back the palm fronds of DEATH's origins in Altamonte Springs, Florida, and latching a narrative hook into the ...Read More

The Dicks From Texas

The Dicks started out as an Austin, Texas poster band in 1979 and once formed, took off like a hardcore rocket. The Dicks only released one 45 and two LP's and were the house band at ...Read More

Sun Ra - A Joyful Noise

Years ahead of his time, composer, keyboard player, bandleader, poet, and philosopher Sun Ra coupled images of outer space with those of ancient Egypt, acoustic instruments with elect...Read More

D.O.A.: A Right Of Passage

D.O.A.: A RIGHT OF PASSAGE is the ground-breaking classic "rockumentary" about the origin of punk rock. Centered around the Sex Pistols 1978 tour of the United States which ended with...Read More

Jan Terri: No Rules

A NIGHT FLIGHT PLUS STREAMING EXCLUSIVE: This is the story of Jan Terri, an irrepressible and delightfully perplexing musical personality. As a child, Jan would dance and sing for any...Read More

Joy Division - Under Review

This 70-minute documentary covers the entire career of Joy Division, one of Manchester and Post-Punks most respected bands. It charts the entire short lifespan of the group, from the...Read More

In a Silent Way: A Talk Talk Documentary

"Silence is the most powerful instrument I have. Spirit is everything, and technique is always secondary." Mark Hollis, Talk Talk Thirty years after the release of Talk Talk's fourth ...Read More

The Reverend

The Reverend is a raucous concert film as well as an intimate portrait of Reverend Vince Anderson's spiritual and musical journey. After coming to New York in the 90's to enter semina...Read More

Frank Zappa - The Freak Out List

Frank Zappa published a record of his most important influences on the inside cover of his debut album. This film explores the musical roots of Frank Zappa by putting The Freak Out Li...Read More

Slumber Party Massacre II

In this freaky follow-up to Slumber Party Massacre (written and directed by Deborah Brock), Courtney (Crystal Bernard) is tormented by dreams of the infamous Driller Killer returning ...Read More

Alligator

From director Lewis Teague (Cujo) and screenwriter John Sayles (The Howling) comes an unstoppable thriller with bite. A family returning from Florida decides their pet baby alligator ...Read More

Messiah of Evil

A woman arrives in a sleepy seaside town after receiving unsettling letters from her father, only to discover the town is under the influence of a strange cult that weeps tears of blo...Read More

City Of The Living Dead

The Seven Gates Of Hell have been torn open, and in three days the dead shall rise and walk the earth. As a reporter (Christopher George of PIECES) and a psychic (Catriona MacColl of ...Read More

Popcorn

A group of film students screen a bizarre short called The Possessor, whose creator, Lanyard Gates, killed his family and set the theater on fire after its first showing. Maggie (Jill...Read More

Ticks

TICKS (aka Infested, 1993) - Direct-to-video '90s gross-out classic, from horror sequel king Tony Randel. The film starts out innocently enough w/ well-meaning social workers taking a...Read More

Phenomena

From Italian master of the macabre Dario Argento (Suspiria, Tenebrae), comes Phenomena (1985, known as 'Creepers' in the US). The young Jennifer Corvino, played by Oscar-winning actre...Read More

Night of the Demons

It's Halloween night and Angela is throwing a party ... but this is no ordinary Halloween party. Everybody's headed to Hull House, a deserted funeral home, formerly the lair of a mass...Read More

Piranha

Lost river lake was a was a thriving resort - until they discovered... Piranha! Featuring a stellar group of talent in front of as well as behind the camera. With cult luminary Joe Da...Read More

Hello Mary Lou: Prom Night 2

If you're a fan of shamelessly vicious female movie villains, you need to take a ride on this Bitch Rocket horror sequel that will blast your ass to a whole new level of sass. Our (Pr...Read More

Butcher, Baker, Nightmare Maker

It remains the most joltingly violent, psychosexual grindhouse shocker of the '80s, directed by a veteran of I Love Lucy and starring a frequently shirtless former teen idol with an e...Read More

House on the Edge of the Park

For his follow-up to Cannibal Holocaust, director Ruggero Deodato delivered a shocker packed with even more cruelty and controversy. 40+ years later, it remains one of the most distur...Read More

Cannibal Apocalypse

Released from captivity in Vietnam, two American Army officers return to civilian life and discover they have acquired an insatiable taste for human flesh. A city is terrorized as the...Read More

Nightmare

Now “the most repulsive, degrading and horrifying movie ever made” (NY Daily News) can be experienced like never before: When a homicidal mental patient (an enduringly disturbing perf...Read More

Anthropophagous

It was seized by UK authorities as a ‘Video Nasty’ and accused of being an actual snuff film. Yet even by ‘80s Italian gore-spewing standards, this grueling shocker from sex & sleaze ...Read More

Driller Killer

In career that has encompassed such controversial classics as Ms. 45, Bad Lieutenant and Welcome to New York, none of Abel Ferrara's films have quite managed to match the shock, extre...Read More

Cannibal Holocaust

Banned and heavily censored throughout the world, here is a film that surpasses its reputation as a shotgun blast to the senses. CANNIBAL HOLOCAUST presents the ‘found footage’ of fou...Read More

Night Of The Demon

Amid the gush of early ‘80s low-budget backwoods horror, only one lost classic brought together softcore sex, hardcore violence, Satanic sex cults and a limb-tearing, gut-slinging, be...Read More

Flesh For Frankenstein

Deranged scientist, Baron von Frankenstein, with the help of his bizarre assistant, Otto, is determined to create a new master race, of which he will be the leader. To achieve his obj...Read More

Tenebrae

American mystery author Peter Neal (Anthony Franciosa) comes to Italy to promote his newest novel, Tenebrae. Unfortunately, a razor-wielding serial killer is on the loose, taunting Ne...Read More

Cannibal Ferox

Banned in 31 countries, “Cannibal Ferox” assaults your senses as a group of Americans lost in the jungles of Amazonia experience brutal retribution at the hands of savage cannibals. ...Read More

The Beyond

From legendary Italian horror master Lucio Fulci comes the ultimate classic of supernatural terror. A remote and cursed hotel, built over one of the seven gateways, becomes a yawning ...Read More

The Toolbox Murders

In a quiet apartment complex in Los Angeles, a deranged handyman goes on a killing spree, savagely murdering "immoral" women with the tools of his trade - claw hammers, power drills a...Read More

Mountain Of The Cannibal God

When her anthropologist husband disappears in New Guinea, Susan Stevenson (Ursula Andress of DR. NO) convinces her colleague Dr. Edward Foster (Stacy Keach of PRISON BREAK) to lead he...Read More

Bloody Moon

As the ‘body-count’ genre stabbed its way into audiences’ hearts in the early ‘80s, EuroTrash auteur Jess Franco (Sadomania, Mansion Of The Living Dead) was asked to create his own sa...Read More

Absurd

Joe D’Amato's infamous follow-up to ANTHROPOPHAGOUS like never before! D'Amato unleashes gut-spewing Greek boogeyman (screenwriter George Eastman) into suburban America for a "gruesom...Read More

Devil Hunter

King Of EuroSleaze Jess Franco (Bloody Moon, MacumbaSexual) takes on the ‘80s Cannibal genre and delivers a jungle sickie like no other! When a safari of sexy babes and violent bonehe...Read More

Inferno

A young woman stumbles upon a mysterious diary that reveals the secrets of "The Three Mothers" and unleashes a nightmare world of demonic evil. As the unstoppable horror spreads from ...Read More

The Love Witch

Elaine, a beautiful young witch, is determined to find a man to love her. In her gothic Victorian apartment she makes spells and potions, and then picks up men and seduces them. Howev...Read More

November

NOVEMBER is set in a pagan Estonian village where werewolves, the plague, and spirits roam. Rainer Sarnet’s third feature film is a bold, twisted fairy tale about unrequited love. In ...Read More

Tell Them Anything You Want: A Portrait of Maurice Sendak

From Lance Bangs and Spike Jonze comes a deeply moving tribute to Maurice Sendak, a seminal talent whose conflicts with success and lifelong obsession with death have subtly influence...Read More

The Cool School

The Cool School is the story of the Ferus Gallery, which nurtured Los Angeles’s first significant post-war artists between 1957 and 1966. In late 1956, medical-school dropout Walter H...Read More

Obscene: A Portrait of Barney Rosset and Grove Press

OBSCENE is the definitive film biography of Barney Rosset, the influential publisher of Grove Press and the Evergreen Review. He acquired the then fledgling Grove Press in 1951 and so...Read More

Jean-Michel Basquiat: The Radiant Child

In his short career, Jean-Michel Basquiat was a phenomenon. His dense, bebop-influenced neoexpressionist work emerged in the 1980s while minimalist art was the fad and as a successful...Read More

The Twentieth Century

Toronto, 1899. Aspiring young politician Mackenzie King (Dan Beirne) dreams of becoming the Prime Minister of Canada. But his romantic vacillation between a British soldier and a Fren...Read More

Pulp: A Film About Life, Death and Supermarkets

As much a testament to the band as it is to the city and inhabitants of Sheffield, PULP weaves exclusive concert footage with man-on-the-street interviews and dreamy staged sequences...Read More

William S. Burroughs: A Man Within

This engaging documentary profiles the beat generation legend, whose powerful way with words influenced the countercultural movement. Scored by Patti Smith and Sonic Youth. A Man With...Read More

Shortbus

PLEASE NOTE: This film contains graphic nudity and explicit sexual acts. John Cameron Mitchell’s Shortbus explores the lives of several emotionally challenged characters as they navig...Read More

Searching For Ingmar Bergman

On the 100th anniversary of his birth, internationally renowned director Margarethe von Trotta examines Ingmar Bergman’s life and work with a circle of his closest collaborators as we...Read More

Teenage

A hypnotic rumination on the genesis of youth culture from the end of the 19th century to the first half of the 20th, Matt Wolf's Teenage is a living collage of rare archival material...Read More

We Are Little Zombies

When four young orphans—Hikari, Ikuko, Ishi, and Takemura—first meet, their parents’ bodies are being turned into dust, like fine Parmesan atop a plate of spaghetti Bolognese, and yet...Read More

The Other F Word

This revealing and touching film asks what happens when a generation's ultimate anti-authoritarians – punk rockers – become society's ultimate authorities – dads. With a large chorus ...Read More

Martin Margiela: In His Own Words

One of the most revolutionary and influential fashion designers of his time, Martin Margiela has remained an elusive figure the entirety of his decades-long career. From Jean Paul Gau...Read More

The Hours And Times

Christopher Munch’s boldly original debut, THE HOURS AND TIMES (1992), is a fictional account of what might have happened in April 1963, when John Lennon and Beatles manager Brian Eps...Read More

Other Music

Other Music was an influential and uncompromising New York City record store that was vital to the city’s early 2000s indie music scene. But when the store is forced to close its door...Read More

The Oregonian

There is a place. A place where the skies are wide and the forests are thick—and strange. You can lose your­self for­ever in these woods. You’ll meet truck­ers with prob­lems and old ...Read More

Empty Metal

Empty Metal follows five groups of characters, each emblematic of a different extreme political ideology, as they attempt insurrection against the status quo: a queer noise band is co...Read More

Inspector Ike

Inspector Ike, New York City’s greatest police detective, finds himself in a high-stakes game of cat-and-mouse after the conniving understudy of an avant-garde theater group knocks of...Read More

Being Frank: The Chris Sievey Story

Frank Sidebottom was a performer who happened to wear a huge paper mâché head. Or he was a real person. It rather depended whom you asked. Being Frank: The Chris Sievey Story tells th...Read More

Apocalypse: A Bill Callahan Tour Film

This strikingly shot concert documentary follows enigmatic Drag City singer-songwriter Bill Callahan on a two-week tour from California to New York. For the past 25 years, under both ...Read More

Jobriath A.D.

Seventies glam rock musician Jobriath was known as “The American Bowie,” “The True Fairy of Rock & Roll,” and “Hype of the Year.” The first openly gay rock star, Jobriath’s reign was ...Read More

The Lost Arcade

Chinatown Fair opened as a penny arcade in Manhattan’s Chinatown in 1944. Over the decades, it became an institution, surviving turf wars, changing tastes and the growth of home gamin...Read More

Funny Ha Ha

Marnie is 23, and drifts through "Funny Ha Ha," Andrew Bujalski's critically acclaimed debut feature, in search of romance and employment. The film's conversations sound improvised an...Read More

The Family Jams

An evocative portrait of youthful possibility, The Family Jams follows Devendra Banhart, Joanna Newsom and Vetiver as they tour the USA in 2004 playing their unique music for a newly ...Read More

Until The Light Takes Us

Until The Light Takes Us tells the story of black metal. Part music scene and part cultural uprising, black metal rose to worldwide notoriety in the mid-nineties when a rash of suicid...Read More

Vacation!

Vacation! is an existential beach party movie about life, death, sex and drugs. When four college friends reunite for a girls’ week at the beach, it’s all bikinis, piña coladas and da...Read More

Stinking Heaven

"Compelling. Furiously combative." - Variety Married couple Jim and Lucy run a commune in the early 90's for sober living out of their suburban New Jersey home. The motley members ea...Read More

Videofilia (and Other Viral Syndromes)

Videofilia (and Other Viral Syndromes) begins with a teenage misfit spending her first days out of school slacking, experimenting with drugs and cyberspace. She meets Junior online. H...Read More

Almost There

For many, Peter Anton's house embodies an end-of-life nightmare: the utility companies long ago shut off the heat and electricity, the floorboards are rotting, and the detritus of a c...Read More

Hellaware

Hellaware gently satirizes the world of high-brow art through the eyes of a wannabe photographer who becomes consumed by the bright lights of mainstream success. Jaded by the “incestu...Read More

I Am Secretly An Important Man

I Am Secretly an Important Man is a portrait of writer and poet Steven J. Bernstein (aka Jesse Bernstein), one of Seattle's most celebrated and troubled voices. His angry, surprisingl...Read More

Out of Time: The Material Issue Story

Out of Time: The Material Issue Story examines the tragic story of a rock band on the cusp of superstardom cut short by front man Jim Ellison’s suicide. The film tells the story of Ma...Read More

The Acid Eaters

Buxom skin-goddess Pat Barrington (Mantis in Lace) is just one of The Acid Eaters a bunch of 9-to-5 working stiffs who become drug-crazed bikers on the weekend! After Miss Barrington ...Read More

The Rebel Set

"Are you beat?" asks coffee-shop impresario Mr. T. "Oh, sure, man," his sleazy friend Sid replies."Cool, way out, and long gone, dad!" Actually, although they’re right in the middle o...Read More

LSD: Insight or Insanity

Sal Mineo narrates the Psychedelic Truth about Acid in Classroom Scare-Film, LSD: Insight Or Insanity! Documentary about the potentially dangerous and unpredictable drug LSD. Various ...Read More

Reefer Madness

Reefer Madness is a 1936 American propaganda film revolving around the melodramatic events that ensue when high school students are lured by pushers to try marijuana—from a hit and ru...Read More

Narcotic

Of all the filmmakers who toiled in the world of exploitation, no one made films as consistently rude, offensive, and jaw-droppingly outrageous as roadshow pioneer DWAIN ESPER, the ma...Read More

It's A Revolution Mother

Here’s an odd but nonetheless fascinating time capsule of late- Sixties social unrest filtered through the mind of Florida-based sexploitation producer-director HARRY KERWIN. Yup, the...Read More

Teenage Mother

Before he became known for distributing such drive-­in epics as I Drink Your Blood, I Eat Your Skin, and I Spit on Your Grave, JERRY GROSS directed two fascinating little quickies - G...Read More

Aphrodisiac! The Sexual Secret of Marijuana!

Learn the true facts about Marijuana along with Fiorello La Guardia, Billy Curtis and Mr. John Holmes in this 1971 Featurette.

Varietease

Featuring America’s ultimate pin-up goddess, Bettie Page! The Queen of the Curves teams up with fellow bump-and-grind legends, Lily St. Cyr, Tempest Storm, Chris LaChris, and Trudy Wa...Read More

Alice in Acidland

In Alice in Acidland (1969), a wholesome college student succumbs to the temptations of marijuana and becomes a dope-crazed sexual omnivore until she hits rock bottom after taking the...Read More

Weed

In response to President Nixon's Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse, adult filmmaker Alex de Renzy weighs in with Weed his take on "The Great American Grass Problem" in which he i...Read More

The Beatniks

Beatniks? What beatniks? Two-bit punks, a closet rock-&-roll star, and an out-of-his-mind psycho: yes. Beatniks: no. Though The Beatniks was probably a last-minute title change to rep...Read More

She Should'a Said No!

“The Film That’s Scorchin’ The Nation’s Screens!” The She who Shoulda Said ‘No’! is honeypot LILA LEEDS (Lady in the Lake, Moonrise) who was busted for doing doobies with rugge...Read More

Bummer!

"A far-out trip thru a hard rock tunnel!" Take three hot-to-trot groupies, mix well with the seventies L.A. rock scene, add plenty of sex, drugs and violence and watch as it all explodes.

The Adult Version of Jeckyl & Hide

Jekyll and Hyde get a sex change! When slimy stud Dr. Chris Leeder (Jack Buddliner) takes possession of Dr. Jekyll's ancient notebook, he quickly becomes obsessed with the murderous s...Read More

Monsters Crash the Pajama Party

Join some terrified teens spending a night in a haunted house and get spooked by a mad doctor and his ghoulish gang when the Monsters Crash The Pajama Party, a 1965 spook show theatri...Read More

Malamondo

"War babies. They want to be different. They don't want to belong to any mass society. They have their own-type clubs, their own 'in' groups." Thus Malamondo, an elegant look at early...Read More

Tormented

Musician Richard Carlson is haunted by a ghostly girlfriend in director Bert I. Gordon's 72-Minute feature length Chiller-Diller from 1960.

Piranha

Lost river lake was a was a thriving resort - until they discovered... Piranha! Featuring a stellar group of talent in front of as well as behind the camera. With cult luminary Joe Da...Read More

Shock Waves

In the dark days of World War II, the Nazi High Command ordered its scientists to create a top secret race of indestructible zombie storm troopers - un-living, unfeeling, unstoppable ...Read More

Deep Blood

This long-unseen chum bucket from producer/director/EuroSleaze master Joe D'Amato was shot on location in Florida surf and Rome swimming pools. D'Amato combines '80s teen movie cliche...Read More

Humanoids from the Deep

Something evil is happening in the sleepy fishing village of Noyo. Fishlike humanoid creatures, spawned by mutant DNA, begin rising from the ocean looking to mate with the local women...Read More

Alligator

From director Lewis Teague (Cujo) and screenwriter John Sayles (The Howling) comes an unstoppable thriller with bite. A family returning from Florida decides their pet baby alligator ...Read More

Cruel Jaws

He defied all laws of good taste and international copyright with Shocking Dark and Robowar. He reset the bar for batsh*t crazy ItaloHorror with Rats: Night of Terror and Hell of the ...Read More

Octopus

An elite nuclear submarine, on a deadly mission to deliver an international terrorist to American authorities, travels through a mysterious ocean portal known as "The Devil's Eye." 27...Read More

Alligator 2: The Mutation

Deep in the sewers beneath the city of Regent Park, a baby alligator feeds on the experimental animals discarded by Future Chemicals Corporation. Nourished by the toxic growth hormone...Read More

The Mermaids Of Tiburon

Psychotronic classic. Beautifully photographed fantasy about mermaids who assist (and distract) a young scientist in his quest for sunken treasure, complete w/ the infamous Timothy Ca...Read More

Killer Crocodile

More than a decade after the Spielberg blockbuster, a dream team of shock maestros - including producer-turned-director Fabrizio De Angelis, screenwriter Dardano Sacchetti , gore guru...Read More

Killer Crocodile 2

In the 1990 low-budget sequel, the Caribbean swamps, which is to be made into a holiday resort, is terrorized again by a second monstrous crocodile which is killing off anyone unfortu...Read More

Monster from the Ocean Floor

B-movie maverick Roger Corman started his own production career with this entertaining sci-fi shocker! While vacationing in a coastal Mexican village, artist Julie Blair learns of a l...Read More

Creature From the Haunted Sea

Here's another Roger Corman classic from the golden age of Drive-In schlock! In this spoof of horror and spy thrillers, American gangster Renzo Capetto (Anthony Carbone) decides to ki...Read More

Shark

A swarthy, good looking American named Caine (Burt Reynlds ) arrives in a small dusty hole-in-the-ground town in the Sudan after having escaped government soldiers who nearly seized h...Read More

Dr. Ruth & UFO Experts

On this episode of "What's Up Dr. Ruth," the Dr. invites a former astronaut and leading UFO specialist onto the show with mostly skeptical teenage audience. Yes, Dr. Ruth is a sex th...Read More

Dr. Ruth & Anthrax

On this episode of the 1989 teen advice show "What's Up Dr. Ruth," the Dr. is in to talk about the Heavy Metal phenomenon with special guests, Anthrax, and their mothers!

Dr. Ruth & Charles Pierce

In this 1984 episode of "Good Sex," Dr. Ruth sits down with a couple trying to navigate a long distance relationship and interviews Charles Pierce, who is known as one of the 20th cen...Read More

Dr. Ruth & Jackie Mason

Dr Ruth talks to comedian Jackie Mason in this 1986 episode of The Dr Ruth Show and sits down to therapy with Rick whose Caribbean Singles Retreat didn't go as planned.

Dr. Ruth & Lee Grant

Dr Ruth sits down with actress and director Lee Grant, who talks about her forward thinking and controversial 1985 documentary "What Sex Am I?"

Dr. Ruth & LL Cool J

On this episode of the 1989 teen advice show "What's Up Dr. Ruth," the Dr. is in to talk about the politics and power of with special guest LL Cool J, featuring a special performance...Read More

Dr. Ruth & Gloria Steinem

In this 1985 episode of "Good Sex," Dr Ruth talks about the Politics of Sex with activist and journalist Gloria Steinem.

Dr. Ruth & What Turns Men On

"Is it big breasts, long legs, sexy underwear? Or is a Law Degree?" In this '90s spinoff "On The Air With Dr. Ruth," the Doctor holds a panel discussion with a group of men about what...Read More

Dr. Ruth & What Turns Women On

"Even Sigmund Freud himself did not know..." In this '90s spinoff "On The Air With Dr. Ruth," the Doctor holds a panel discussion with a group of women about what they want in a man.

Dr. Ruth & Jerry Seinfeld

Dr. Ruth is joined by Jerry Seinfeld in this special episode of "The Dr. Ruth Show," filmed in 1986 in New York.

Dr. Ruth & Burt Reynolds

"I have to tell you Burt... since you are the sexiest man in the country, it makes perfect sense for you to be on my show." In this 1984 episode of "Good Sex," Dr. Ruth interviews Bur...Read More

Dr. Ruth & Bianca Jagger

In this episode of Good Sex from 1985, Dr. Ruth has a therapy session with a woman considering an affair and then candidly interviews Bianca Jagger about fame, public life and what sh...Read More

Night Flight Presents: Dr. Ruth Good Sex Special

In this "Best Of" compilation starring beloved sex therapist Dr. Ruth as she engages in late-night therapy sessions, hosts stimulating conversations with celebrity guest stars, and de...Read More

Magic

This 1978 psychological thriller features a mesmerizing performance by a young Anthony Hopkins. Directed by Sir Richard Attenborough and based on William Goldman's (The Princess Bride...Read More

The Stepfather

Jerry Blake (Terry O'Quinn, ABC's Lost) is a man obsessed with having the perfect American Dream life - including the house with the white picket fence in the suburbs, complete with a...Read More

Identikit

In what remains the most obscure, bizarre and wildly misunderstood film of her entire career – and perhaps even ‘70s Italian cinema – Elizabeth Taylor stars as a disturbed woman who a...Read More

Bad Timing: A Sensual Obsession

An American psychiatrist (Art Garfunkel) working in Vienna is drawn to a beautiful but self-destructive married woman (Theresa Russell), but their torrid affair threatens to destroy t...Read More

Threads

In September 1984, it was aired on the BBC and shocked tens of millions of UK viewers. Four months later, it was broadcast in America on TBS and became the most watched basic cable pr...Read More

Deathdream

In this shattering variation on "The Monkey's Paw," grief-stricken suburban parents (Academy Award nominees John Marley of THE GODFATHER and Lynn Carlin of FACES) refuse to accept the...Read More

Brain Dead

The Eunice Corporation is on the ground floor of an exciting growth industry, utilizing a memory re-sculpting technique pioneered by eccentric neurosurgeon Rex Martin (Bill Pullman). ...Read More

Angst

“The rarest masterpiece of cinema” – Gaspar Noé (director of Enter the Void & Irreversible). ANGST, photographed by legendary Oscar-winning Polish animator/experimentalist Zbig Ry...Read More

Patrick

The original Ozploitation classic is back like you’ve never seen it before: Robert Thompson stars as a comatose killer seemingly unresponsive in a small private hospital. But when a h...Read More

Drowning By Numbers

Peter Greenaway – “one of the most distinctive, provocative talents of his generation” (The Guardian) – shocked/delighted international audiences with this slyly deranged black comedy...Read More

Final Countdown

The time is now. The place is aboard the U.S.S. Nimitz, America's mightiest nuclear-powered aircraft carrier on maneuvers in the Pacific Ocean. Suddenly, a freak electrical storm engu...Read More

In The Cold Of The Night

Dreams. They come from a place still unknown to science. It remains a mystery how their extraordinary power can excite you with visions of pleasure or overwhelm you with feelings of t...Read More

La Madre Muerta (The Dead Mother)

Ismael (Karra Elejalde, Timecrimes) breaks into the house of a fine art restorer and shoots the homeowner dead, leaving her daughter orphaned and traumatized for life. Years later Ism...Read More

Willard

Willard Stiles (Bruce Davison) is a young man with a big problem. He lives alone in a crumbling house with his ailing mother (Elsa Lanchester, Arnold, Bride Of Frankenstein). His boss...Read More

Nightwish

Your innermost fears lead you inexorably to a dream of death... your own death! Using sensory deprivation techniques, a doctor of parapsychology provokes his students to examine th...Read More

Short Night Of Glass Dolls

The corpse of reporter Gregory Moore (Jean Sorel of LIZARD IN A WOMAN'S SKIN) is found in a Prague plaza and brought to the local morgue. But Moore is actually alive, trapped inside h...Read More

Straight Jacket

Also known as Dark Sanity. A woman with psychic visions and an alcoholic past moves into a house where the previous occupant was mysteriously decapitated, and soon suspects the vision...Read More

The Black Cat

From Italy's own Godfather of Gore Lucio Fulci (Zombie, The Gates of Hell) comes The Black Cat - a gruesome reimagining of the classic Edgar Allan Poe tale starring Patrick Magee (A C...Read More

Punk the Capital: Building a Sound Movement

A monumental documentary about the rise of punk rock in the town that needed it most... Washington D.C. When punk rock erupted in Washington DC, it was a mighty convergence of powerfu...Read More

Nightclubbing: The Birth Of Punk Rock In NYC

Nightclubbing is the first ever documentary about the renowned New York City nightclub Max's Kansas City (1965-1981) which had an indelible impact on the world of music, fashion, art,...Read More

The Damned - Don't You Wish That We Were Dead

From "Lemmy" filmmaker Wes Orshoski comes the story of the long-ignored pioneers of punk: The Damned, the first U.K. punks on wax and the first to cross the Atlantic. "THE DAMNED: Don...Read More

D.O.A.: A Right Of Passage

D.O.A.: A RIGHT OF PASSAGE is the ground-breaking classic "rockumentary" about the origin of punk rock. Centered around the Sex Pistols 1978 tour of the United States which ended with...Read More

Salad Days: A Decade Of Punk In Washington, DC (1980-90)

"Salad Days: A Decade of Punk in Washington, DC (1980-90)" examines the early DIY punk scene in the Nation's Capital. It was a decade when seminal bands like Bad Brains, Minor Threat,...Read More

Minor Threat Live

Minor Threat played one of its last shows at Washington DC's 930 Club in June of 1983; they would only play once more in DC. Two years later, the tapes from the 930 show were edited t...Read More

New York Doll

Arthur "Killer" Kane, of the glam-punk rock band the New York Dolls, disappeared from the music scene after the band's break-up and found new life as a Mormon. Thirty years later, mus...Read More

Fugazi - Instrument

Instrument is a collaboration between filmmaker Jem Cohen and the Washington D.C. band Fugazi, covering the 10 year period of 1987-1996. Far from a traditional documentary, this is a ...Read More

Who Killed Nancy?

October 12th, 1978 – New York Police discover the lifeless body of 20 year-old Nancy Spungen. Ex-prostitute, sometime stripper, heroin addict and infamous girlfriend of Sex Pistols’ 2...Read More

Desolation Center

Desolation Center is the previously untold story of a series of early 80s guerrilla music and art performance happenings in Southern California that are recognized to have inspired Bu...Read More

The Icarus Line Must Die

The Icarus Line Must Die is a dramatic narrative feature set against the backdrop of the current LA music scene. The film tracks Joe Cardamone, front man of The Icarus Line, as he nav...Read More

American Hardcore: The History of Punk Rock 1980-1986

Fueled by a ferocious soundtrack, director Paul Rachman's American Hardcore gives fans an all-access pass to the rise and fall of the U.S. punk scene, an explosive musical and cultura...Read More

1984 Home Movie: The Gun Club on the Road

1984 Home Move: Gun Club On The Road includes never-before-seen footage of the band backstage and onstage during their legendary 1984 tour. This classic line-up only stayed together f...Read More

We Were Famous, You Don't Remember: The Embarrassment

Ignited by punk’s invasion of the Great Plains, America’s gawkiest and greatest lost rock band battles conformity in Reagan-era Kansas. The Embarrassment played Chicago, D.C., and New...Read More

The Dicks From Texas

The Dicks started out as an Austin, Texas poster band in 1979 and once formed, took off like a hardcore rocket. The Dicks only released one 45 and two LP's and were the house band at ...Read More

Anti-Nowhere League - We Are The League

Anti-Nowhere League: We Are The League tells the full uncensored story of how a biker, a skinhead, a grammar school boy and a Persian exile came together, with no musical talent or am...Read More

Black Flag - Live 1984

"Tonight I shall meditate upon that which I am." The fury of Black Flag is captured in full in their performance at Bierkellar in Leeds, UK on May 19, 1984. Henry Rollins leads the ba...Read More

The Queers Are Here

Welcome to the wild world of the Queers on their very first DVD! It features footage of all the live energy and behind-the-scenes craziness of the Queers on tour around the world circ...Read More

Tenebrae

American mystery author Peter Neal (Anthony Franciosa) comes to Italy to promote his newest novel, Tenebrae. Unfortunately, a razor-wielding serial killer is on the loose, taunting Ne...Read More

Curtains

A group of women gather for a weekend casting call at the secluded mansion of director Jonathan Stryker (Vernon). He’s searching for the perfect woman to play the role of the crazed c...Read More

Stage Fright

While a group of young actors rehearse a new musical about a mass murderer, a notorious psychopath escapes from a nearby insane asylum. But when the show's director locks his cast in ...Read More

Maniac Cop

You have the right to remain silent... forever. New York City is terrorized by a series of brutal mutilation murders. The public is outraged, because it's discovered that the killer i...Read More

Popcorn

A group of film students screen a bizarre short called The Possessor, whose creator, Lanyard Gates, killed his family and set the theater on fire after its first showing. Maggie (Jill...Read More

The Slumber Party Massacre

Put on your PJs and say your prayers ... it's time for one nightmare of an all-nighter! In The Slumber Party Massacre, Trish (Michele Michaels) invites her high school basketball team...Read More

Bloody Muscle Body Builder In Hell

Alternately known as "The Japanese Evil Dead," this legendary, sought after independent 1995 Japanese cult film will enjoy its first ever North American release! Trapped inside a haun...Read More

Black Christmas

The college town of Bedford is receiving an unwelcome guest this Christmas. As the residents of sorority house Pi Kappa Sigma prepare for the festive season, a stranger begins to stal...Read More

Sleepaway Camp

After a terrible boating accident killed her family, shy Angela Baker (Felissa Rose, Return To Sleepaway Camp) went to live with her eccentric Aunt Martha and her cousin Ricky. This s...Read More

Slumber Party Massacre II

In this freaky follow-up to Slumber Party Massacre (written and directed by Deborah Brock), Courtney (Crystal Bernard) is tormented by dreams of the infamous Driller Killer returning ...Read More

Night of the Demons

It's Halloween night and Angela is throwing a party ... but this is no ordinary Halloween party. Everybody's headed to Hull House, a deserted funeral home, formerly the lair of a mass...Read More

Shock Waves

In the dark days of World War II, the Nazi High Command ordered its scientists to create a top secret race of indestructible zombie storm troopers - un-living, unfeeling, unstoppable ...Read More

Mirror, Mirror

In this 1990 horror film, a new widow (Karen Black) and her daughter (Rainbow Harvest) have just moved into a new home. They don't discover until much later that the previous owner wa...Read More

The Evil

By the time you run, there is no escape. When you think you're free, you might be dead. By the time you learn the truth ... it may be too late. A psychologist (Richard Crenna) and his...Read More

The Brain

Imagine a pulsating mass of gray matter, expanding in size and strength as it takes control of human minds and devours human bodies. It could never happen, right? Just watch Independe...Read More

Cannibal Apocalypse

Released from captivity in Vietnam, two American Army officers return to civilian life and discover they have acquired an insatiable taste for human flesh. A city is terrorized as the...Read More

Maniac Cop 2

Here it is, the most painfully enjoyable sequel of all time! This NYC slasher is unapologetically nutzoid + will have you screaming, "WHUT!?" uncontrollably at your screen. Written by...Read More

Blood Harvest

Jill has just returned home from college to the rural farm community where she grew up, only to discover that her parents have mysteriously vanished. Learning that her father, a banke...Read More

Cathy's Curse

This first-ever restoration of the depraved Canadian shocker is being hailed as the genre re-discovery of the year: In 1947, a young girl is roasted alive in a car accident. Thirty ye...Read More

Night Of The Demon

Amid the gush of early ‘80s low-budget backwoods horror, only one lost classic brought together softcore sex, hardcore violence, Satanic sex cults and a limb-tearing, gut-slinging, be...Read More

Retribution

For his 1987 feature film debut, co-writer/director Guy Magar delivered what Bleeding Skull hails as "relentless, squishy joy that makes us angry we've lived this long without having ...Read More

Demonia

In what fans consider his last great film, Godfather of Gore Lucio Fulci returns to the startling imagery and bloody excesses of his '70s/'80s classics for an unholy saga of demonic n...Read More

Things (1989)

In 1989, it became the first Canadian shot-on-Super 8 gore shocker commercially released on VHS. Today, it remains perhaps the most bizarre, depraved and mind-boggling chunk of 'Canux...Read More

Skinned Deep

His mind-blowing work as an FX artist has included everything from Frank Henenlotter’s BRAIN DAMAGE and FRANKENHOOKER to Matthew Barney’s CREMASTER CYCLE. And for his 2004 debut as wr...Read More

Aenigma

For his final horror hit of the '80s, writer/director Lucio Fulci combined elements of CARRIE, PHENOMENA and SUSPIRIA with the grisly surrealism of his own past classics for one last ...Read More

Black Boots, Leather Whip

During one of the most insanely productive periods of his career, writer/director Jess Franco resurrected the character of seedy private eye Al Pereira -- portrayed here by key collab...Read More

The Return Of Captain Invincible

Alan Arkin and horror/fantasy icon Christopher Lee star in the long-unseen 1982 action-comedy from the director of The Beast Within and Howling II, with songs by Richard O'Brien (The ...Read More

Threads

In September 1984, it was aired on the BBC and shocked tens of millions of UK viewers. Four months later, it was broadcast in America on TBS and became the most watched basic cable pr...Read More

Zombie 3

Shortly before completing the sequel to his classic ZOMBIE, the legendary Lucio Fulci became ill and left the Philippines-based production. But when director Bruno Mattei (SHOCKING DA...Read More

Zombie 4

In between the celebrated insanities of ZOMBIE 3 and TROLL 2, director Claudio Fragasso (here under the name ‘Clyde Anderson’) and writer/collaborator Rossella Drudi put the penultima...Read More

Nosferatu in Venice

What was intended to be an unofficial sequel to Werner Herzog's NOSFERATU instead became one of the most notoriously fascinating productions in EuroCult history: Klaus Kinski - "now f...Read More

Strike Commando

Two years before the deranged genius of Robowar and Shocking Dark, writer/director Bruno Mattei and co-writers Claudio Fragasso & Rossella Drudi borrowed from RAMBO: FIRST BLOOD PART ...Read More

Strike Commando 2

Director Bruno Mattei and screenwriters Claudio Fragasso & Rossella Drudi return to the Philippine jungles with a higher budget, bigger action and Richard Harris (yes, that Richard Ha...Read More

Absurd

Joe D’Amato's infamous follow-up to ANTHROPOPHAGOUS like never before! D'Amato unleashes gut-spewing Greek boogeyman (screenwriter George Eastman) into suburban America for a "gruesom...Read More

An Angel For Satan

THE FIRST-EVER AUTHORIZED AMERICAN RELEASE In the final film of her Italian Gothic period, the legendary Barbara Steele (BLACK SUNDAY) stars in one of the most startling erotic shocke...Read More

Anthropophagous

It was seized by UK authorities as a ‘Video Nasty’ and accused of being an actual snuff film. Yet even by ‘80s Italian gore-spewing standards, this grueling shocker from sex & sleaze ...Read More

Pieces

Grindhouse Releasing is proud to present the first official U.S. release of the sickest and most violent of all the early ’80s slasher movies. A psychopathic killer stalks a Boston ca...Read More

Cannibal Holocaust

Banned and heavily censored throughout the world, here is a film that surpasses its reputation as a shotgun blast to the senses. CANNIBAL HOLOCAUST presents the ‘found footage’ of fou...Read More

I Drink Your Blood

After consuming rabies-infected meat pies, an LSD-crazed hippie cult goes on a vicious murdering rampage! Heavily censored since its original release, the infamous landmark of cinemat...Read More

Eaten Alive! The Rise and Fall of the Italian Cannibal Film

From Grindhouse Releasing: A documentary on the short-lived craze of Italian cannibal films in the ’70s and ’80s, (to which we are no strangers!) featuring interviews with Umberto Len...Read More

The Beyond

From legendary Italian horror master Lucio Fulci comes the ultimate classic of supernatural terror. A remote and cursed hotel, built over one of the seven gateways, becomes a yawning ...Read More

American Hippie In Israel

Machine gun wielding mimes, robots, blood thirsty sharks, free-loving debauchery and poignant anti-war monologues by raving mad hippies, all this and more is present in writer-directo...Read More

Massacre Mafia Style

After a New York City Mafia boss’s son decides to move the family hustle to Hollywood, the deaths pile up as he takes on new enemies in the streets. “Mind-bending…with [Duke Mitchell’...Read More

Gone With The Pope

The final work of filmmaker and performer, the late Duke Mitchell, spins the wild tale of a paroled gangster with a grand, unholy money-making scheme. “Of all the films I have been in...Read More

Cannibal Ferox

Banned in 31 countries, “Cannibal Ferox” assaults your senses as a group of Americans lost in the jungles of Amazonia experience brutal retribution at the hands of savage cannibals. ...Read More

Cat In The Brain

Acclaimed Italian horror maestro Lucio Fulci, director of ZOMBIE and THE BEYOND, stars in this blood-soaked epic as a director being driven insane by his own movies. Fulci is thrust i...Read More

Death Riders

THEY RODE THE HIGHWAY TO HELL! Reaper leads his gang of bikers on a treasure hunt through the desert with hot pursuit by an undercover cop.

42nd Street Memories: The Rise and Fall of America’s Most Notorious Street

The Rise and Fall of America's Most Notorious Street. The story behind the rise and fall of New York’s 42nd Street. The cinemas, the films, the people, the crime and the rebirth of th...Read More

Images of Apartheid: Filmmaking on the Fringe in the Old South Africa

From the creator of documentaries 42nd Street Memories and Eaten Alive, Images of Apartheid uncovers the likes of Joe Bullet (1973), Fishy Stones (1979) and Umbango (1986), blaxploita...Read More

Dolemite

The legendary classic…the pillar of the ‘blaxploitation’ genre….Rudy Ray Moore is DOLEMITE! Sent to prison on a frame-up by some crooked cops and his arch rival, the notorious Will...Read More

Blackenstein

Dr. Winifred Walker (Ivory Stone) and Nobel Prize-winner Dr. Stein (B-movie icon John Hart-The Fastest Guitar Alive, TV’s “The Lone Ranger”) believe they can restore dismembered Vietn...Read More

Disco Godfather

Rudy Ray Moore is Tucker Williams, the rapping owner and main attraction of the Blueberry Hill Disco. An ex-cop with a penchant for head-whacking martial arts, Tucker is called back ...Read More

Solomon King

A new restoration from cult label partner Deaf Crocodile of the long-lost, independently financed Blaxploitation film Solomon King is streaming now! In the vein of Shaft and Dolomite,...Read More

Boss

It's blaxploitation baby -- West of the Pecos! Boss (Fred Williamson), has "decided to hunt white folks for a change," by becoming a bounty hunter to click the hammer on fugitive outl...Read More

The Black Godfather

J.J. (Rod Perry-TV’s “S.W.A.T.”) is a hustler with a conscience. A small-time numbers runner who dabbles in prostitution, J.J. wants nothing to do with the drug trade, which he holds...Read More

The Human Tornado (Dolemite II)

In this sequel to the cult smash Dolemite, we find our hero on the run from a redneck sheriff who has caught Dolemite messin’ with his woman. He and his posse (including a young Ernie...Read More

Lord Shango

In this atmospheric blaxploitation classic, a young Christian mother turns away from her faith to a more ancient religion… and summons a tribal priest from the dead to avenge her teen...Read More

Petey Wheatstraw

Petey Wheatstraw (Rudy Ray Moore) was born during a tropical storm, and from the moment he took his first breath he could walk, talk and kick ass. He grows up to become a famous come...Read More

Abar: The First Black Superman

African-American scientist Dr. Kenneth Kincade moves his family into an affluent neighborhood, only to be greeted with threats and vandalism by their new white neighbors. Enter John A...Read More

Thunderground

ON THE ROAD... THERE ARE NO RULES. Life is violent and expendable at Hobo Junction, Tennessee. Only the strong or the street-smart survive. Here, Casey (Margaret Langrick) the con-art...Read More

Cops Vs Thugs

Considered by many to be director Kinji Fukasaku's greatest single-film achievement in the yakuza genre, Cops vs Thugs was made at the height of popularity of Toei Studios' jitsuroku ...Read More

Hollywood Cop

The mob kidnaps a young boy from his mother, Rebecca. The child is the son of a former gang member who stole six million dollars from this crime syndicate. The warning is deadly: “We ...Read More

The Search For Weng Weng

The Smallest Movie Star in Cinema History! The bizarre history of Filipino B-films, as told through filmmaker Andrew Leavold's personal quest to find the truth behind its dwarf James ...Read More

When Justice Fails

A hearing-impaired prosecutor (Marlee Matlin) is the suspect in a series of murders. The investigation becomes hampered when one of the detectives (Jeff Fahey) becomes intimately invo...Read More

High Voltage

A group of young adults decides to rob a bank, only to discover that the bank is just a front for a korean mob money laundering operation.

Coyote Run

When Clifton breaks up a drug deal and steals $15 million, helping to firm up his standing as a major player in the region’s organized crime, deputy Pershing vows to bring him to just...Read More

The Collectors

An anonymous tip causes a reporter to be eyewitness to a judge’s murder. Now the killer has set his sights on the reporter, whose only help is a beautiful female photographer.

Savage Dawn

The residents of a small border town find themselves under siege by a vicious biker gang who get their kicks from unfettered brutality. When Stryker, a hardened Vietnam veteran who's ...Read More

The Death Wheelers (Psychomania)

A gang of young people call themselves the Living Dead. They terrorize the population from their small town. After an agreement with the devil, if they kill themselves firmly believin...Read More

Stone

Five years before MAD MAX, producer/director/co-writer/star Sandy Harbutt - in his first and only feature film - ignited Australia's exploitation explosion, launched a global censorsh...Read More

Hell Riders

A spectacularly trashy and weird 80s biker film from the exploitation dream team of James Bryan (Don't Go in the Woods, Executioner Part 2) and Renee Harmon (Frozen Scream, Escape Fro...Read More

Vigilante

New York City factory worker Eddie Marino (Robert Forster, Oscar nominee for JACKIE BROWN) is a solid citizen and regular guy, until the day a sadistic street gang brutally assaults h...Read More

The Boys Next Door

Maxwell Caulfield and Charliee Sheen star as high-school outcasts who head to Los Angeles for a spree of petty crime, senseless violence and savage murder from the director of THE DEC...Read More

The Acid Eaters

Buxom skin-goddess Pat Barrington (Mantis in Lace) is just one of The Acid Eaters a bunch of 9-to-5 working stiffs who become drug-crazed bikers on the weekend! After Miss Barrington ...Read More

Black Rebels

Delinquents! Drugs! Interracial Violence! RITA MORENO! DYAN CANNON! And - yipes! - Topless Sex Scenes! Yes, kiddies, here's another excellent ·but­ forgotten B-movie, full of racial t...Read More

Suburbia

Suburbia is director Penelope Spheeris's study of the Los Angeles punk rock scene in the early 1980s. Evan and his younger brother leave their broken home in an attempt to escape thei...Read More

Pit Stop

RAW GUTS FOR GLORY! FLESH AGAINST STEEL! The most dangerous game ever devised, to pit man against man, flesh against steel - the figure-8 race! Jack Hill (Coffy, Foxy Brown) follows u...Read More

Black Angels

The same year that producer-director LAURENCE MERRICK made the oddball vampire film Guess What Happened to Count Dracula, he also unleashed Black Angels, a loopy yet cynical biker fli...Read More

Murdercycle

Its engine roars with a deafening thunder. The sleek, dark profile cuts through the night like a sword through flesh. Devoid of human emotion, it kills to live. It has torn into our d...Read More

It's A Revolution Mother

Here’s an odd but nonetheless fascinating time capsule of late- Sixties social unrest filtered through the mind of Florida-based sexploitation producer-director HARRY KERWIN. Yup, the...Read More

Savages From Hell

Bikers, beach parties, body painting, death by dune buggy, interracial lust, and a good old-fashioned catfight all gleefully collide in Savages from Hell, the manic followup to Shanty...Read More

Skate Witches

A gang of female Skate Boarders and their pet rats terrorize all the boy skate boarders in town. 1986. Starring: Jenny Parker, Karen Kibler, Dana Forrester.

She Should'a Said No!

“The Film That’s Scorchin’ The Nation’s Screens!” The She who Shoulda Said ‘No’! is honeypot LILA LEEDS (Lady in the Lake, Moonrise) who was busted for doing doobies with rugge...Read More

Teenage Mother

Before he became known for distributing such drive-­in epics as I Drink Your Blood, I Eat Your Skin, and I Spit on Your Grave, JERRY GROSS directed two fascinating little quickies - G...Read More

The Girls from Thunder Strip

Simply put, it's male bikers vs. female bootleggers. And if that ain’t a perfect example of drive-in-style High Concept, nothing is! With a cast that reads like a Who’s Who of Sixties...Read More

The Baby

A "twisted, psychedelic nightmare of suburban depravity." - Arrow Video. Social worker Ann Gentry (Anjanette Comer) becomes obsessed with the case of Baby, a 21-year-old man w/ the ap...Read More

A Boy and His Dog

World War IV has ravaged Earth, and its survivors must battle for food, shelter and companionship in a post-atomic wasteland. This classic sci-fi tale follows the exploits of a young ...Read More

Radio On

Christopher Petit's debut feature Radio On is the rare road movie from England. Since its 1979 release, it's become a cult classic. Robert (David Beames), the film's enigmatic protago...Read More

Street Trash

In the sleazy, foreboding world of winos, derelicts and drifters in lower Manhattan, two young runaways – eighteen-year-old Fred (Mike Lackey) and his younger brother, Kevin (Mark Sfe...Read More

Class Of 1984

Directed and co-written by Mark L. Lester (Class of 1999, Commando, Firestarter), Class of 1984 is one of the seminal cult movies of the early 1980s. While its vision of a decaying, v...Read More

Best of New Wave Theatre

A special program containing the ultimate highlights from the critically acclaimed nationally broadcast music/comedy cable program that literally revolutionized rock & roll television...Read More

Funeral Parade of Roses

Director Toshio Matsumoto’s shattering, kaleidoscopic masterpiece is one of the most subversive and intoxicating films of the late 1960s: a headlong dive into a dazzling, unseen Tokyo...Read More

Caged Heat

Thrown into the penal hell of Connorville, petty criminal Jacqueline (Erica Gavin, Beyond The Valley Of The Dolls) must fight against the ruthless inmates, a cruel warden (Barbara Ste...Read More

Putney Swope

A hallmark of 1960s radicalism and one of the first major underground films, Robert Downey Sr.'s seminal Putney Swope remains a classic of social satire. After the CEO croaks during a...Read More

Rock 'n' Roll High School

Vince Lombardi High School has quite a reputation: it's the wildest, most rockin' high school around! That is, until a thug of a principal, Miss Togar, comes along and tries to make t...Read More

Suburbia

Suburbia is director Penelope Spheeris's study of the Los Angeles punk rock scene in the early 1980s. Evan and his younger brother leave their broken home in an attempt to escape thei...Read More

Andy Warhol's BAD

Brimming with the sleazy glamour of 1970s New York and wildly dark humor,BAD is the story of Hazel Aiken (Oscar-nominated actress Carroll Baker), a housewife who runs a beauty salon a...Read More

Santa Sangre

It has been hailed as "extraordinary" (The Guardian), "visionary and haunting" (Rolling Stone) and "a grand work of art, full of symbols and imagery that reach beyond language to some...Read More

Dolemite

The legendary classic…the pillar of the ‘blaxploitation’ genre….Rudy Ray Moore is DOLEMITE! Sent to prison on a frame-up by some crooked cops and his arch rival, the notorious Will...Read More

Skate Witches

A gang of female Skate Boarders and their pet rats terrorize all the boy skate boarders in town. 1986. Starring: Jenny Parker, Karen Kibler, Dana Forrester.

Reefer Madness

Reefer Madness is a 1936 American propaganda film revolving around the melodramatic events that ensue when high school students are lured by pushers to try marijuana—from a hit and ru...Read More

Society

IT IS A MATTER OF GOOD BREEDING. REALLY. After producing Stuart Gordon's hit Re-Animator, Brian Yuzna (Bride of Re-Animator, Return of the Living Dead III) turned his hand to directin...Read More

The Human Tornado (Dolemite II)

In this sequel to the cult smash Dolemite, we find our hero on the run from a redneck sheriff who has caught Dolemite messin’ with his woman. He and his posse (including a young Ernie...Read More

The Prowler

Avalon Bay, 1945: On the night of her graduation dance, young Rosemary and her date are brutally murdered by a prowler thought to be a jilted soldier home from the war. The killer was...Read More

1990: The Bronx Warriors

It's 1990 and the Bronx has officially been declared a "No Man's Land." The authorities have given up all attempts to restore law and order. When a beautiful young woman runs away fro...Read More

Stage Fright

While a group of young actors rehearse a new musical about a mass murderer, a notorious psychopath escapes from a nearby insane asylum. But when the show's director locks his cast in ...Read More

Inferno

A young woman stumbles upon a mysterious diary that reveals the secrets of "The Three Mothers" and unleashes a nightmare world of demonic evil. As the unstoppable horror spreads from ...Read More

The Lift

There is something very wrong with the elevator in a stylish office high-rise. The passengers never end up on the floor of their choice. They end up dead! When Felix, an inquisitive r...Read More

Shock Waves

In the dark days of World War II, the Nazi High Command ordered its scientists to create a top secret race of indestructible zombie storm troopers - un-living, unfeeling, unstoppable ...Read More

City Of The Living Dead

The Seven Gates Of Hell have been torn open, and in three days the dead shall rise and walk the earth. As a reporter (Christopher George of PIECES) and a psychic (Catriona MacColl of ...Read More

Vigilante

New York City factory worker Eddie Marino (Robert Forster, Oscar nominee for JACKIE BROWN) is a solid citizen and regular guy, until the day a sadistic street gang brutally assaults h...Read More

Amsterdamned

Down in the murky depths of Amsterdam's famous canals lurks a murderous predator. Surfacing at night, he kills at random and disappears without a trace. As the bodies begin to pile up...Read More

Torso

A series of sex murders shock a college campus, and four beautiful young girlfriends head for the safety of an isolated country villa. But as they succumb to their own erotic desires,...Read More

Living Dead At The Manchester Morgue

Two traveling companions, George (Ray Lovelock of AUTOPSY) and Edna (Christine Galbo of THE KILLER MUST KILL AGAIN), come across a small town infested with the "living dead" that are ...Read More

Manhattan Baby

A young girl on vacation in Egypt is given a mysterious charm, causing her archeologist father to be struck blind inside an unexplored pyramid tomb. But when the family returns home t...Read More

Venom

It was supposed to be the perfect crime: the sexy maid (Susan George of STRAW DOGS), a psychotic chauffeur (Oliver Reed of REVOLVER) and an international terrorist (the legendary Klau...Read More

Final Countdown

The time is now. The place is aboard the U.S.S. Nimitz, America's mightiest nuclear-powered aircraft carrier on maneuvers in the Pacific Ocean. Suddenly, a freak electrical storm engu...Read More

Deathdream

In this shattering variation on "The Monkey's Paw," grief-stricken suburban parents (Academy Award nominees John Marley of THE GODFATHER and Lynn Carlin of FACES) refuse to accept the...Read More

The Stendahl Syndrome

When beautiful police detective Anna Manni follows the bloody trail of a sophisticated serial murderer/rapist through the streets of Italy, the young woman falls victim to the bizarre...Read More

Death Line (AKA Raw Meat)

When a prominent politician and a beautiful young woman vanish inside a London subway station, Scotland Yard's Inspector Calhoun (Donald Pleasence of HALLOWEEN) investigates and makes...Read More

Macabre

In this horrific tale of murder, madness and perverse passion, a New Orleans wife and mother carries on a torrid affair behind her family's back. But when a violent accident leaves he...Read More

Angel

Mixing slasher-style scenes w/ the sweetness of an afterschool special, ANGEL is one of the seminal exploitation films of the 80s. Molly Stewart (Donna Wilkes; Jaws 2) is at the top o...Read More

Avenging Angel

Years have gone by since Molly Stewart (Betsy Russell, Saw 3-7) worked as a teenage prostitute. Now a law student at UCLA, Molly is determined to leave her past behind. But after lear...Read More

Auntie Lee's Meat Pies

Auntie Lee and her quartet of voluptuous “nieces” are known for making the tastiest meat pies around, all from Auntie’s top secret recipe which calls for a most unusual type of meat: ...Read More

Flesh For Frankenstein

Deranged scientist, Baron von Frankenstein, with the help of his bizarre assistant, Otto, is determined to create a new master race, of which he will be the leader. To achieve his obj...Read More

Demon Wind

The strange and brutal deaths of Cory's grandparents has haunted him for years. Determined to discover the truth, he has returned to the desolate region where they lived, along with a...Read More

Hard Rock Zombies

A heavy metal band has been invited to appear in a conservative small town. What they don’t know is that their hosts are in fact a family of horrific and murderous mutants, whose patr...Read More

Blood for Dracula

Following closely on the heels of 'Flesh for Frankenstein,' Paul Morrissey reimagined the timeless Transylvanian legend with a campy twist, again under the "Andy Warhol presents" bann...Read More

Demonoid

At a dig in rural Mexico, a British industrialist accidentally unleashes an ancient evil: a severed hand, possessed by a vengeful demon, that attacks, kills and takes over the hand an...Read More

Primal Rage

The Science Department at a Florida university has been working on a wonder drug for brain injuries but has accidentally created something else: a rage virus capable of turning those ...Read More

Pledge Night

It's hazing season at Phi Up and the boys are up to all sorts of nasty pranks on their hapless pledges, in between regular bouts of 'wetting their whistles' at the campus watering hol...Read More

Spookies

Of all of the bizarre horror films made in the 1980s, SPOOKIES easily ranks among the weirdest. Produced by Michael Lee, founder of the adored UK home video distributor VIPCO, the fil...Read More

Punk Vacation

A peaceful California town is shaken after the brutal murder of diner owner by a gang of vicious punks. When the daughter of the slain man attempts to avenge her father's death, she's...Read More

The Muthers

Climb aboard THE MUTHERS, the meanest, toughest and most action packed pirate ship in the pacific. Join Jayne Kennedy, Rosanne Katon, Jeannie Bell and their all female crew on a darin...Read More

Tammy and the T-Rex

Tammy is a popular high school cheerleader whose new boyfriend, Michael, might be the love of her life. But Tammy’s jealous ex, Billy, won’t stand for anyone coming between him and ‘h...Read More

The Bees

Evil corporations have smuggled a deadly strain of South American killer bees into the United States and now the entire world may be on the brink of imminent destruction! As cities tu...Read More

Fatal Exam

A group of college students have been given a very unusual assignment: spend the night inside of a supposedly haunted house, as part of their studies into the supernatural and occult....Read More

Silent Madness

One of the few slashers produced during the short-lived, early 80s revival of 3D movies, Simon Nuchtern’s (Savage Dawn) SILENT MADNESS knows exactly what audiences want, and delivers....Read More

The Invisible Maniac

The randy horror-farce from Adam Rifkin based on the H.G. Wells classic, The Invisible Man. Physicist Kevin Dornwinkle (Noel Peters) didn't like it when his colleagues laughed off his...Read More

Rock 'n' Roll High School

Vince Lombardi High School has quite a reputation: it's the wildest, most rockin' high school around! That is, until a thug of a principal, Miss Togar, comes along and tries to make t...Read More

The Terror

The ghostly apparition of a young woman is witnessed by an 18th Century French Lieutenant in Napoleon's army. After two failed attempts to keep up with her, Lt. Andre Duvalier (Nichol...Read More

X: The Man with the X-Ray Eyes

Dr. James Xavier (Ray Milland) is a world renowned scientist experimenting with human eyesight. He devises a drug, that when applied to the eyes, enables the user to see beyond the no...Read More

Humanoids from the Deep

Something evil is happening in the sleepy fishing village of Noyo. Fishlike humanoid creatures, spawned by mutant DNA, begin rising from the ocean looking to mate with the local women...Read More

Suburbia

Suburbia is director Penelope Spheeris's study of the Los Angeles punk rock scene in the early 1980s. Evan and his younger brother leave their broken home in an attempt to escape thei...Read More

Slumber Party Massacre II

In this freaky follow-up to Slumber Party Massacre (written and directed by Deborah Brock), Courtney (Crystal Bernard) is tormented by dreams of the infamous Driller Killer returning ...Read More

Ski Troop Attack

In Ski Troop Attack, legendary B movie director Roger Corman brings his considerable talent to the war genre. The results are typical Corman: plenty of action and suspense, all on a s...Read More

Caged Heat

Thrown into the penal hell of Connorville, petty criminal Jacqueline (Erica Gavin, Beyond The Valley Of The Dolls) must fight against the ruthless inmates, a cruel warden (Barbara Ste...Read More

Creature From the Haunted Sea

Here's another Roger Corman classic from the golden age of Drive-In schlock! In this spoof of horror and spy thrillers, American gangster Renzo Capetto (Anthony Carbone) decides to ki...Read More

The Bees

Evil corporations have smuggled a deadly strain of South American killer bees into the United States and now the entire world may be on the brink of imminent destruction! As cities tu...Read More

Monster from the Ocean Floor

B-movie maverick Roger Corman started his own production career with this entertaining sci-fi shocker! While vacationing in a coastal Mexican village, artist Julie Blair learns of a l...Read More

Piranha

Lost river lake was a was a thriving resort - until they discovered... Piranha! Featuring a stellar group of talent in front of as well as behind the camera. With cult luminary Joe Da...Read More

Time Warp: The Greatest Cult Films of All Time (Vol. 2 - Horror & Sci-Fi)

The greatest cult horror and science fiction films of all-time are studied in vivid detail in the second volume of Time Warp. Includes groundbreaking classics like Night of the Living...Read More

Time Warp: The Greatest Cult Films of All Time (Vol. 3 - Comedy & Camp)

The final volume of Time Warp digs deep into what makes us laugh over and over again as we reveal the greatest cult comedies and campy classics of all-time. From Fast Time at Ridgemon...Read More

Lady Frankenstein

Co-produced by Roger Corman, "one of the most underrated horror movies of all time" (Classic Horror) features lurid direction by Mel Welles (Little Shop of Horrors) from a story by by...Read More

Night Flight - Millie Jackson Video Profile

During Night Flight’s second season, interviewer Al Banderio sat down with the “Queen of Sass” Millie Jackson for a ribald interview that is emblematic of Night Flight's unique approa...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Leather and Lace

The twin flames of '80s music video: Leather & Lace. “Leather suggests being wild, animalistic, masculine" Pat Prescott says, "while lace says soft, feminine, and sensual… and both co...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Duets

This '90s syndication episode of Night Flight is dedicated exclusively to duets featuring a match made in art-pop heaven: Peter Gabriel and Kate Bush, KLF and Tammy Wynette's idiosync...Read More

Night Flight - Julee Cruise, Twin Geeks and More (As Aired)

This two-hour 1990 broadcast features Julee Cruise’s performance for David Lynch's “Industrial Symphony No. 1,” a Night Flight original Twin Peaks parody called "Twin Geeks" and an in...Read More

Night Flight - Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis Video Profile

Tonight’s Video Profile looks at Minneapolis writers, performers, and legendary super producers: Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis. Bassist Terry Lewis met Keyboard player Jimmy Harris when t...Read More

Night Flight - The Video Artist (Herbert Wentscher)

Tonight’s Night Flight Original Episode is from our “Video Artist” series, focusing on the animation and film art of Herbert Wentscher. The German video artist sources a variety of me...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Animation

"Take Off To Animation" takes a colorful look at the use of animation in music video over the previous few years in styles ranging from experimental camera technique to 'Saturday morn...Read More

Night Flight - Koko Taylor Video Profile

"You can have my husband, but please don't mess with my man!" In tonight's Night Flight original episode from 1983, we treated to a vivid (and mostly unseen) performance from Chicago ...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Rock and Cult

Night Flight's take off to Rock and Cult films. This is A special preview of some of the films Night Flight showed in 1985 including Rude Boy (starring the Clash), Breaking Glass, Sm...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Ireland

Night Flight looks at the roots of Irish rock 'n' roll tonight in this original “Take Off” special from the mid-1980s. With Bodhrán, Fiddles, Uilleann pipes and Irish Harps in hand, w...Read More

Night Flight - International Bazaar Special

It’s an “International Bazaar” on Night Flight tonight! This new arrival from the archives, taken from our 1985 Anniversary Special, finds Cabaret Voltaire sharing the Peter Care-dire...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Art in Music Videos

"One of the sturdiest trends in rock videos," Pat Prescott says, "is the use of 'high art' to elevate down and dirty Rock 'n' Roll." Tonight's original episode of Night Flight from th...Read More

Night Flight - Kate Bush Video Profile

Welcome to Night Flight’s exclusive Video Profile of Kate Bush. “This multimedia performance artist has combined dance, music, literature and mime on her way to becoming Britain’s mos...Read More

Night Flight - Depeche Mode Video Profile

Tonight, we return to 1994 for a Night Flight syndication episode covering the rise of iconic synth band Depeche Mode. "Of all the synthesizer bands that rose in the 1980s, one band h...Read More

Night Flight - "Take Off" to Women In Rock

Night Flight salutes the Women of Rock in this original episode from June, 1988. "Today," Pat Prescott tells us, "women's voices are more powerful than ever in new music, neo-folk an...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 1 (Pilot )

"TV 2000's a different kind of video show: We've got everything!" The 1985 music series and Night Flight sister show hosted by John Kassir (voice of the Cryptkeeper) and Joe Gallo inc...Read More

TV 2000 - Episode 2 (Boy George and Marilyn)

TV 2000 is Night Flight's spin on the top ten countdown format from 1985, hosted by comedian John Kassir & Joie Gallo. In Episode 2 of TV 2000, Bryan Adams takes us to heaven, the Eur...Read More

Night Flight - Laurie Anderson Video Profile

Classic Night Flight profile of avant-garde experimentalist Laurie Anderson. Featuring an incredibly candid interview with Anderson about her background and work.

Hardcore Devo Live!

Devo, captured live in Oakland, performing early experimental tracks written between 1974 and 1977, prior to any label deal or public success. No matter how messy, beginnings are exci...Read More

Devo - Live 1980

This rare footage has been compiled from a full-length show at the Phoenix Theater in Petaluma, CA in 1980. Songs include Its Not Right, Pink Pussycat, Whip It, Girl U Want, (I Cant ...Read More

Night Flight - Devo Video Vault and New Age

Only Night Flight could find a way to program classic Devo cuts with soothing mystical New Age. Relive that original programming style tonight by climbing into Night Flight's video va...Read More

Devo - The Men Who Make The Music

The Men Who Make the Music combines concert footage from DEVO's 1978 tour with music videos and testimonials featuring a vague story about DEVO's rocky relationship with "Big Entertainment."

Devo - The Complete Truth About De-Evolution

Devo, the seminal concept band, made a career out of setting to music video their dada-gone-camp theory of De-Evolution and its rebuke of corporate culture. This is a comprehensive co...Read More

Devo - Live Butch Devo and The Sundance Gig

"In January of '96, we closed Sundance Film Festival. We wore 20s style prison suits and dished out classic DEVO songs to an unsuspecting audience of Hollywood elite," Devo's Jerry Ca...Read More

Night Flight - Devo Profile and New Metal

Welcome back its time to climb into the video vault for Devo, and follow the bands career through their experimental clips. Night Flight looks at the hottest metal in 1986 with new Tw...Read More

A Devolved New Year's Eve on Night Flight (Live Stream Highlights)

Relive highlights from Night Flight's live stream event from December 31st 2020. We bid adieu to a year from hell in complete Devolved style with Devo's Gerald Casale and guest hosts ...Read More

Devo - Live In The Land Of The Rising Sun, Japan 2003

"From a stage super-heated by over-the-top, rock 'n roll cliche lighting, DEVO faced a sea of Asian Gen X'ers in a 100 degree plus fahrenheit venue in the bowels of Tokyo, Japan. The ...Read More

Weird TV 101 - Hot Dog Hall of Fame

The premiere episode of the cult series Weird TV features a trip to the Hot Dog Hall of Fame, a tattoo convention in Anaheim, Hogman’s Pork and Beans Emporium, an art-rock tribute to ...Read More

Weird TV 102 - Cathedral Under the Stars

In this episode, Cirino himself checks in from a makeshift shrine in the desert, stuffed animals are shot to shreds in a “Drive By Shooting Range,” video art by Iimura Takahiko, the L...Read More

Weird TV 103 - Beatrice Wyatt's Yard

Episode 3 features Peoplehaters Fabrication Shop, a “tasteless toon” called Rudolph the Rabid Reindeer, a Mine tour in Nevada, a naked Queen Elizabeth in Australia and the mixed media...Read More

Weird TV 104 - Suicidal House Plants

Belladonna from Tattoo Magazine takes us on a tour of Melrose Ave’s Fetish Gallery, a short film subject covering suicidal house plants, demented hand puppets Francis & Buzz in “Trash...Read More

Weird TV 105 - Don Glut, Dinosaur Collector

This episode features the debut of Weird TV’s serial: “Möbius - Outsider in the World of the Living Dead.” We’re also on the scene of a “Prehistoric Party” with Don Glut: preeminent D...Read More

Weird TV 106 - Ken Fox, Family Dentist

This episode kicks off with super-powered Potato Cannons at Burning Man, followed by outsider artist and family dentist Kenneth Fox describing his monumental sculptures, strung out ha...Read More

Weird TV 107 - Saint Stupid’s Day Parade

This episode kicks off with man on the street style interviews with revelers celebrating Saint Stupid's Day in San Francisco, a Dr. Rhuel segment highlighting the Museum of Jurassic T...Read More

Weird TV 108 - The Eagle’s Nest

We’re back at Burning Man where “Bonsai Boy” shows us his flame spitting superkart. Plus, a very Night Flight-esque comedic overdub of Häxan (1922), a visit to the outsider art instal...Read More

Weird TV 109 - Hog Heaven

Weird TV visits a “shrine to swine,” aka the home of a woman who collects and creates signage related to pigs (“I’ve been crazy about pigs since I was four years old…” ). Plus, outrag...Read More

Weird TV 110 - Rudder

Explore a new species of big game hunting in Nevada: remote controlled cars from the ‘70s. Plus Spongearama!, a museum featuring the largest selection of natural sponges, microbots fr...Read More

Weird TV 111 - Viewers Choice Special

An audience-selected “Best Of” episode of Weird TV with the interactive first person CD ROM “game” Sparky! featuring a dog’s-eye view of Los Angeles, piesexual performance artist The ...Read More

Weird TV 112 - Fiction or Not Special

A compilation episode of Weird T