Marty Feldman, the wild-eyed British comedian who became known to American moviegoers for his antic performances in such films as ''Young Frankenstein,'' ''The Adventure of Sherlock Holmes's Smarter Brother'' and ''Silent Movie,'' died Thursday in his hotel room in Mexico City. He was 48 years old. The cause of death was ''a massive heart attack,'' according to his manager, Michael Maslansky.

Mr. Feldman had been in Mexico City since Oct. 19 for the filming of his starring role in the Orion Pictures production of ''Yellowbeard.'' The movie, which was written by Graham Chapman, a member of the Monty Python team, was nearly completed at the time of Mr. Feldman's death.

Mr. Feldman first became popular with American audiences in 1974 as the happy hunchback Igor (''Call me Eye-gore'') in Mel Brooks's film ''Young Frankenstein.'' That role was the start of a busy film career that included Gene Wilder's ''The Adventure of Sherlock Holmes's Smarter Brother'' and ''Silent Movie,'' another picture by Mel Brooks.

In 1977, Mr. Feldman turned to directing for the first time with ''The Last Remake of Beau Geste,'' a satire of Foreign Legion films. Mr. Feldman wrote the film with Chris Allen and also starred in it. He put together a stellar cast that included Ann-Margret, Michael York, Peter Ustinov, James Earl Jones and Trevor Howard. Monk and a Prostitute

In 1979 Mr. Feldman directed and starred in another film that he wrote with Mr. Allen, ''In God We Trust (or Gimme That Prime Time Religion''). Mr. Feldman played a monk who falls in love with a prostitute, played by Louise Lasser. Peter Boyle and Andy Kaufman were also in the movie.

Mr. Feldman began his career in show business as a comedy writer for British radio and televison. In 1967 David Frost, then a television producer for the BBC, asked Mr. Feldman to join the future Monty Python members Graham Chapman and John Cleese as a writer and performer in ''At Last, the 1948 Show.'' That program made Mr. Feldman a star, and he soon had his own weekly television series.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.