International Business Machines said on Monday it will buy Sequent Computer Systems for about US$810 million in cash, in a move to buttress weak spots in its computer hardware strategy.

IBM, the world's No. 1 computer maker, said the deal gives it access to Sequent technology that knits together Unix and Windows NT-based machines to make a single computer system.

Under terms of the deal, IBM would pay Sequent shareholders $18 in cash for each share of Sequent common stock, or about $810 million in total. The merger follows reports in late June that the companies were holding talks.

Read more in Infostructure- - - - - -

Sequent is known for its nonuniform memory access, or NUMA, technology, which can string together scores of mass-market, Intel-based computers into a high-performance system capable of running an organization's key operations.

IBM officials said the company plans to incorporate Sequent technology into a range of computers, starting with its RS/6000 Unix machines, and high-powered supercomputers used in scientific research.

"We think NUMA capabilities are going to be a defining technology for early 21st century Unix and NT servers," said Robert Stephenson, a senior vice president and group executive for the IBM Server Group.

Analysts said the move could help IBM shore up its position in the so-called "mid-range" computer hardware market, which in recent years has proved a weak spot as IBM has focused instead on higher-growth businesses like computer services, software, and its technology component supply businesses.

The deal signals that IBM is gearing up its Unix business, while also stepping up efforts to compete in the fast-growing market for high-powered computers running Windows NT software from Microsoft.

Merrill Lynch analyst Steve Milunovich said IBM could use Sequent server technology to manage a mix of NT and Unix computers on the same central machine.

"These 'hybrid' servers might be popular in coming years," he said in a research note to brokerage clients.

Sequent's operations will remain based in Beaverton, Oregon. No layoffs of the company's 2,500 employees are planned. Over time, IBM plans to move related IBM activities to Beaverton while relocating some Sequent researchers to related IBM facilities.

Existing Sequent management will remain in place, including chairman and chief executive Casey Powell, who founded the company in 1983. "I need the job because I think there is more to do here," Powell said in an interview following the deal.

Following news of the deal, Sequent (SQNT) shares fell 16 cents to close at $17.28. IBM (IBM) fell 31 cents to close at $137.06 on the New York Stock Exchange, just off its historic high set Friday.

The merger's terms represent a 29 percent premium to Sequent's stock price two weeks ago, before reports emerged that a deal was in the works, and marks a 125 percent rise from where shares stood just three months ago.