Early life

Akbar was born in Umarkot on October 15, 1542, to Emperor Humayun and his young wife, Hamida. Humayun had been on the run, therefore it seems likely that Akbar had a very unsettled early life. In 1553, at the age of ten, Akbar accompanied his father into battle, where he had been given the leadership of his dead uncle Hindal’s followers. In 1555, Akbar was with the advanced guard. However, perhaps Akbar’s early exposure to this violent side of royal life may have had a great impact upon his personality, making him stronger to face the numerous challenges that he would face in life.

Akbar’s world was shaken when in February 1556, Humayun slipped on the stairs and died. Two months prior to his death, Humayun had appointed Bairam Khan as the guardian of his twelve-year-old son, Akbar. Not yet thirteen, Akbar was thrust into the limelight and quickly proclaimed as the next Emperor of the Mughal throne. As a child emperor, Akbar faced many threats not just from three Afghan rulers but also from a Hindu named Hemu. Akbar found protection in the form of Bairam Khan, who guided him during this difficult time - especially when in October 1556, Hemu marched upon Delhi defeating the Mughal forces that had been stationed there. Despite Hemu’s superior forces, Akbar and Bairam Khan didn’t run; instead they decided to face off against their enemy.

Power

Both armies met on the field of Panipat, where years earlier Babur had won a victory against the Indian princes. 1556 would prove auspicious for the Mughal forces because they won when an arrow pierced Hemu’s eye causing him to faint bringing the battle to an end. Within eighteen months of his accession, the three most serious threats to his throne – Hemu, Sikander Shah and Adil Shah - had all been removed. A result of these constant fights was that he became someone who neglected his studies. Therefore, in a royal family which prized learning more than most, Akbar remained illiterate.

Bamber Gascoigne believes that the truth may have been different. He claims that “Akbar as a boy had learnt the rudiments of reading and writing, but preferred not to use them—perhaps originally from choice, and later because to read and write badly was worse than not doing so at all”.

As Akbar grew older, Bairam Khan had continued to run the affairs of state very efficiently. He kept firm control of the center and continually sent out expeditions to enlarge the frontiers of the kingdom. However, Bairam’s rule came to a halt in 1560 when Maham Anga (Akbar’s wet-nurse) and her son, Adham Khan, tricked Akbar into travelling to Delhi without his guardian, Bairam Khan. They took this opportunity to turn Akbar against his guardian. Akbar, who was now seventeen, felt he was ready to take more personal control of the empire’s affairs. Therefore, Akbar suggested Bairam Khan take a pilgrimage to Mecca — this was the Mughal way of ostracism.

Bairam could have gathered his forces and marched against the young ruler, but loyalty prevented him from taking any sort of action. Unfortunately, on the way, Bairam was murdered by an Afghan, who wanted to take revenge for the death of his father. Akbar believed that he had the power now, but the power held by Bairam had been passed to Maham Anga, who tried to manipulate the young monarch. She soon discovered that she couldn’t have the same amount of absolute control because Akbar now wanted to come into his own.

Betrayal

With Bairam Khan gone, Akbar needed another general to lead his army. He gave command to Adham Khan, who was sent to invade and capture Malwa, ruled by Baz Bahadur. The ruler of Malwa had a reputation as a musician and had a harem filled with beautiful women. Unfortunately, he proved to be less impressive as a general when he lost to the Mughal Army. Adham won a grand victory against the enemy; however, it was during this expedition that his behavior changed. It was tradition that the victorious general had to send the captives and treasures to the Emperor, but Adham only sent a few elephants while keeping the rest of the goods for himself.

Other offences were committed by Adham Khan and his fellow commander when they gathered the older women of Baz Bahadur’s harem and butchered them. When other Muslim companions protested their actions they too were massacred. When news of Adham’s actions reached Agra, Akbar was outraged. Taking matters into his own hands, he marched to Malwa with a small entourage. Akbar spent a few days clearing all the matters that had taken place, but the ultimate result was that Adham Khan was forgiven. This would prove to be troublesome later.

Upon returning to Agra, Akbar wanted to ensure that the power that was being held by Maham Anga and her party would be reduced. Thus, in 1561 Akbar appointed Atkah Khan, who had been summoned from Kabul, as chief minister. This change did not sit well with the opposition, who saw their power slipping through their fingers. Therefore, after a few months, Adham Khan burst into the offices of the chief minister, which were next to the harem. Adham and his men assassinated Atkah Khan and then set their sights on the harem. Fortunately, the eunuch guarding the harem locked the door.

As this was happening, Akbar made his way into the office of the minister, where he was met by the gruesome scene. Gascoigne writes: “… Akbar emerged from another door to confront the assassin. Adham laid his hand on Akbar’s arm in an ambiguous gesture, which might have been either supplication or assault, whereupon Akbar punched him in the face. It was boasted later that the mark looked as though it had been a blow from a mace; at any rate it knocked him unconscious.”

Akbar then ordered the unconscious Adham to be thrown off the parapet. He barely survived from the fall, so Akbar ordered that he be taken back up the stairs and dropped again. This time the fall proved to be fatal. Akbar took it upon himself to inform Maham Anga that her son was dead. Even though Akbar had pardoned Maham Anga, she died several weeks later from grief. Akbar was finally free of all influences, free of all the people who wanted to use him as a stepping-stone to power. Now nineteen years old, Akbar was coming into his own. In his rule he will prove why he was the greatest of the Mughal rulers.

What do you think of Akbar’s early life? Let us know below.