Agra is one of the most popular cities in Uttar Pradesh, famous for its Mughal-era architecture. Taj Mahal attracts tourists from all over the world, boosting the city’s tourism and making it one of the most populous cities in Uttar Pradesh.

Like every other major city in India, Agra has a Passport Seva Kendra to help its citizens complete their passport applications without needing to go to Ghaziabad’s Regional Passport office.

The PSK Agra serves major functions which aid in completing the application process with ease. So, if you reside in Agra and want to renew your passport or apply for a fresh one, this blog will guide you through its entire process, including online and offline form filling. Read to learn more about it.

Since the passport office in Agra comes under the jurisdiction of Ghaziabad city, the city does not have a regional passport office in Agra. The Passport Seva Kendra (PSK) is an extended arm of the Regional Passport Office (RPO) Ghaziabad and is responsible for providing passport related services for the citizens of Agra.

These are the following functions carried out by the PSK Agra:

Assisting Agra citizens with passport-related queries

Accepting and processing residents’ passport applications

Verifying applicant details

Issuing fresh or renewed passports

Conducting police verification

Dispatching printed passports

The Passport Seva in Agra adds convenience for its residents by making all passport-related services available within its jurisdiction.

A passport is one of the most important documents required by every Indian as an identity proof and proof of nationality. It is also one of the important documents needed to travel anywhere in the world for various reasons: travel, business, study, etc.

Following is the list of types of passports you can apply for at the Passport Seva in Agra, along with their eligibility criteria:

Passport Type Eligibility Criteria Colour Code Diplomatic Indian Foreign Services Officials Maroon Ordinary Ordinary citizens Blue Official Indian govt. officials White

The ECR passport, which had an orange colour code, is no longer available and has now been discontinued.

To ease the process of applying for passports and availing of passport-related services, the government has set up PSKs in almost all districts of India. Similarly, citizens of Agra can approach the city’s PSK for any of the services listed above.

To start the application process, you have to first fill up the application form, submit it along with the necessary documents, and book an Agra passport office appointment. Once you get an appointment, you can complete the application and submit the documents during the Agra passport office timings.

Depending on the type of application, fresh or renewal, and the number of pages to your passport, the fees for your application will change. Here is a breakdown of fees for your various types of applications:

For Normal Application Scheme:

Type of Service Age Group Fees (in ₹) for 36 Pages Fees (in ₹) for 60 Pages Fresh Passport Below 15 years ₹1,000 - Fresh Passport Between 15 and 18 years ₹1,000 ₹2,000 Fresh Passport Above 18 years ₹1,500 ₹2,000 Reissue Below 15 years ₹1,000 - Reissue Between 15 and 18 years ₹1,500 ₹2,000 Reissue Above 18 years ₹1,500 ₹2,000

For Tatkaal Application Scheme:

Type of Service Age Group Fees (in ₹) for 36 Pages Fees (in ₹) for 60 Pages Fresh Passport Below 15 years of age ₹3,000 - Fresh Passport Between 15 and 18 years ₹3,500 ₹4,000 Fresh Passport Above 18 years ₹3,500 ₹4,000 Reissue Below 15 years ₹3,000 - Reissue Between 15 and 18 years ₹3,500 ₹4,000 Reissue Above 18 years ₹3,500 ₹4,000

For both types of application schemes, the fee changes if the reason for reissue application is due to loss or damage of passport. To learn more about the passport fees, you can use the Fee Calculator tool on the official website.

Steps for Applying for a Passport Online in Agra

Visit the official Passport Seva Kendra website.

Register for a new account. The registration option can be found on the homepage.

Fill out all required details on the registration page.

Add a valid email address and phone number for verification.

Verify your email address via the verification link sent to your email address.

Next, log in to proceed with the application.

Proceed by clicking on “Apply for New Passport/Reissue of Passport.”

Fill out the form with the required details and documents. Submit the form on the website and upload the supporting documents.

Complete the payment using your preferred mode.

Download the receipt and keep a printed copy with you. Your receipt contains important details, so it is required for the appointment.

Next, schedule an Agra passport office appointment at the Agra PSK.

Go to the PSK Agra office on the appointment date, along with all the necessary documents and the application receipt.

For a minor applicant (under 4 years old), carry a passport-sized photograph with dimensions 4.5cm x 3.5 cm clicked against a white background.

Complete the process at the passport office as instructed. Next, a police verification will be conducted to complete the verification process.

After the verification goes through, you will receive your passport via courier services.

Steps for Applying for a Passport Offline in Agra

You can complete the application process by filling out the application form offline as well. These are the steps you need to follow to complete the process:

You will need to download the form from the official website.

Fill out the required information accurately and save the progress.

Next, upload the filled-out form via the appropriate link.

Complete the online payment with your preferred mode and schedule an appointment.

Collect all your necessary documents, visit the PSK Agra on the appointment date and complete the process.

Typically, a fresh passport application via the PSK in Agra takes approximately 30 days to come to your doorstep. On the other hand, a reissued passport takes around 7 days in case a police verification is not needed.

However, if you need your passport urgently for certain reasons, you can opt for the passport office’s Tatkal scheme. This allows you to receive your passport within 1-3 working days and can be used for both fresh and renewal passport applications. However, note that the fees for the Tatkal scheme are higher than the Normal scheme.

The passport application process in Agra has become more convenient since the PSK was established in the city. It has added convenience for its citizens and saved their trips to Ghaziabad to complete their passport formalities.

You can now apply for a passport via the online application portal and visit the PSK in Agra. The application fees vary depending on the type of application, booklet size, age and application scheme.

So, if you are applying for a passport, follow the steps listed in this blog and make the best of the services offered by the PSK in Agra.

Along with the passport, many countries require travel insurance as one of the mandatory documents during visa applications. Since a travel insurance policy safeguards your foreign trips, it serves to be one of the most essential elements in your trips.

At Tata AIG, you can opt for international travel medical insurance based on your budget constraints and required medical assistance. You can easily apply for one through our website and get insured instantly.

Moreover, since our services are available online, as a policyholder, you get to enjoy hassle-free claim processes and 24/7 customer assistance. So visit our website and get your travel insurance cover today and be assured of a safe trip with peace of mind.