Akbar International, Akbar Arts and Projects

About Us:

We, Akbar International and Akbar Arts & Projects, propose to be a part of this team as being experts in sandstone cladding and marble flooring inlay work. We are a company based in Agra, Uttar Pradesh with a legacy of 40 years (Est. 1979), growing steadily over the last 4 decades.

We specialize in marble and sandstone, flooring, inlay art work, cladding, carving, employing over a 150 permanent staff and 1000 artists, carvers and stone cutters.

Our management team consist of MBA and BBA graduates and personnel with a combined experience of over 130 years in the constructional stone industry and project management.

We have worked on several high profile and large construction projects such as the Oneness temple in Andhra Pradesh (2013-2014), Al-Falaj Hotel and Al-Zawawi Mosque in Oman where we undertook the responsibility of the entire marble cladding, jali work, stairs, flooring, balusters and figurines delivering the project on time and within the budget.

Our values include integrity and customer obsession making us focused on delivering the best to the customer in terms of quality, expectation and time.

Being a manufacturer, we deal in all kind of marble sourced from various regions such as (all Rajasthan Marble & Sand Stone). We also have reserves of stones namely beige sandstone and red sandstone. In additional we also have access to semi-precious stones such as lapis lazuli, malachite, coral, mother of pearl etc. Used for intricate inlay & flooring. We also make modern home décor artifacts like kitchen, bathroom and other. Home décor artifacts in different kind of marble including brass inlay work.

Vision & Mission:

Our vision and mission is to be the most trustworthy brand as honesty and loyalty are very important to us. Our mission is to provide the best quality products, price and services. Being the finest, means providing exnt quality, product and services by setting higher standards for ourselves and striving constantly to achieve them.

Us:

Akbar Arts & Projects is a segment of Akbar International which is one of the biggest marble handicrafts and home décor marble artifacts stores of North India

Our Head Office Address - 289, Fatehabad Road, Agra (Uttar Pradesh) – 282001 India

No. +9 Mr. Salim Uddin, +9 Mr. Anwar

E-mail : ,

Website - www.akbarinternational.com