Akbar was one of the mighty and powerful rulers of the Mughal dynasty. He was known for remunerating ability, devotion, and judgment, paying little mind to the ethnic foundation or religious practice. He was born as Abu'l-Fath Jalal-ud-din Muhammad and took the title ‘Akbar’ which means great. He never renounced Islam but talked about synthesis of different religious principles.

List of Important works of Mughal Emperor Akbar

Work

Year

Ended Slavery

1562

Free from the control of the Harem Party led by his foster mother Mahan Anaga.

1562

Annulled the Pilgrimage tax

1563

Abolished Jaziya Tax

1564

Establissed Fatehpur Sikri and transfer its capital from Agra to Fatehpur Sikri

1571

Founded Ibadat Khana (House of worship)

1575

Open Ibadat Khana (House of worship) for all religion

1578

Degree of Infallibility (Mazhar Nama)

1579

Founded Din-i-Illahi

1582

Started Illahi Era

1583

Transfer Capital to Lahore

1585

Cultural Development during Mughal Era

Literary works during Akbar Reign

1. He started a department for translation of works: Mahabharata, the Ramayana, the Atharva –Veda, the Bhagavad Gita and the Panchatantra were translated from Sanskrit to the Persian language.

2. Ramayana and Singhasan Batisi were translated by Mulla Abdul Qadir Badayuni into Persian.

3. Panchatantra was translated in Persian by Faizi.

4. Atharva Veda was translated by Ibrahim Sirhindi.

5. Rajataringini was translated by Maulana Shah Mohammad Shahabadi.

6. Abul Fazl wrote the Ain-i-Akbari and Akbar Nama.

During his rule, Akbar managed to crucify almost all parts of the Indian Subcontinent, with the remaining areas becoming tributary states. He introduced a number of military reforms like Mansabdari system accompanied by innovations in cannons, fortifications, and the use of elephants to consolidated Mughal rule in the Indian subcontinent. He also introduced a new fair system of taxation which was based on the estimation crop yield. He was a great patron of architecture, art, and literature. Hence, the Akbar period was popularly known as 'the renaissance of Persian literature'.

Medieval History: A Complete Study Material