Alexander Dawson Henderson III (March 26, 1924 - May 12, 2020), was a business leader, financier and Military Veteran of the United States Army Air Forces.

Early life[]

Alexander D. Henderson III was born on March 26, 1924, in New York City at the Fifth Avenue Hospital.[1] He is the son of Alexander D. Henderson Jr. and Mary Barnes Billings Anthony. His father and grandfather, Alexander D. Henderson, Sr., were vice presidents and directors of the California Perfume Company, which later became Avon Products; and great grandson to Captain Joseph Henderson.

Henderson spent his early life in Suffern and Tallman, New York. In 1934, he moved with his family to New York City and later to Englewood, New Jersey.[2]

Education[]

Henderson went to Englewood School for Boys in 1938 and high school at Williston Academy in 1941. Henderson was eligible for the G.I. Bill so in 1949, he enrolled into the Monterey Peninsula College (MPC). In 1952, Henderson graduated from San Jose State University with a Bachelor of Arts degree.

Marriage and children[]

On February 17, 1951, Henderson married his first wife, Miss Patricia Reid Ford at her parents home in Carmel Valley, California. She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Byington Ford.[3] They have five children: Alexander Dawson Henderson, Gregory Ford Henderson, David Girard Henderson, Scott Douglas Henderson, and Alexandra Holly Henderson-Fouladi.

Alex and Patricia were divorced in Broward, Florida in 1968. In 1970, he married his second wife, Madonna Marie Schaffner in Palm Beach, Florida.

Military[]

On August 4, 1943, Henderson was drafted into for United States Army during World War II at the Newark, New Jersey.[4] Henderson transferred to the United States Army Air Forces (AAF) in 1944 as Private first class as a photographer. He was stationed with the 52d Bombardment Squadron, one of the original squadrons of the 29th Bombardment Group. He was in a cadet program for flyers at Lafayette College in Easton, Pennsylvania. He attended the Army Airforce Technical School (AATS) in Sioux Falls, South Dakota in radio operations and mechanics and the Army Air Forces Gunnery School in Las Vegas, Nevada. He was stationed in Cuba, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, and Guam. Henderson was discharged from military service by honorable discharge on March 8, 1946 at Fort Dix, New Jersey.[5]

Awards[]

Unit awards American Campaign Medal Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal World War II Victory Medal

Professional life[]

Henderson worked from 1946 to 1948 selling fabrics at the Johnson and Faulkner Wholesale Fabric Company in New York City. In 1948 he drove a new 1948 Ford convertible out to California for his uncle Jerry Henderson. In California he worked for the California State Automobile Association selling new memberships. In 1953, he worked for Household Finance Corporation as assistant manager.

Gold Coast Finance[]

On July 5, 1957, Henderson moved his family to Hillsboro Beach, Florida to be close to his father who had retired there in 1954. Alex created the Gold Coast Finance Company to provide consumer loans. He sold this company in 1967. While working at Gold Coast Finance, Henderson took summer vacations with his family, which included in 1961, to Orchrios, Jamaica.[6]

Retirement[]

In 1973, Henderson moved to Aspen, Colorado where he enjoyed playing golf, tennis, hiking, and skiing. Some of the hiking trips included the Maroon Bells, and the Ashcroft Ghost Town.

Mr. and Mrs. Henderson owned one of the 12 most valuable homes in Hillsboro Beach, Florida.[7] The three-story home's unique design won several awards and appeared in the TV show Miami Vice.[8] While living in Florida, Henderson appeared at several social events, one being at the Pompano Beach Christmas Assembly's 21's annual holiday party.[9]

From 1976 through 1982, Henderson purchased farmland in Fresno, Madera, and Bakersfield, California. He grew almonds, apples, and kiwifruit.

Henderson was the owner of race horses, including "Kiwi Mint" that in 1992, won the Rockingham Breeders' Cup Handicap at Rockingham Park, a 1-mile (1.6 km) horse racing establishment.[10]

In 1997, Henderson moved with his wife to Carmel Valley, California where he lived until his death. In 2005, Henderson earned enough Masterpoints to win the title of “Life Master” from the American Contract Bridge League.

Death[]

Henderson, age 96, passed away peacefully in his home in Carmel Valley on May 12th, 2020. He was survived by his wife of 50 years, Madonna "Donna" Marie Schaffner, and his five children, Dawson (Sharon), Greg (Louise), David (Lindsey), Scott (Sandra), and daughter, Holly (Bijan) from a previous marriage to Patricia Ford Crass; and his brother A. Douglas Henderson. He is also survived by ten grandchildren and three great grandchildren, all living in the California bay area.

References[]

[]