Mr. Joseph "Joe" Henderson McKellar II, 78, of Tifton died Tuesday, Sept. 27, 2016 at his residence. The funeral service will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, Oct. 1, 2016 at New Hope Baptist Church with interment to follow in the church cemetery. The Rev. Danny Ray, the Rev. Mike Carter and Mr. Lee McKellar will officiate. Mr. McKellar was born on Jan. 15, 1938 in Worth County to the late Alander Lee and Lela Ethelle Webb McKellar. He was a United States Army veteran, and was a former commander with the Disabled American Veterans in Macon. Mr. McKellar was most recently a trucker and produce broker. He was formerly a farmer following his employment with Winn-Dixie. Mr. McKellar lived in Tifton for the past two years, previously living in Macon and Perry. He was a member of New Hope Baptist Church. Survivors include his children, Terri McKellar Luloff of Centerville, Joseph H. McKellar III of Perry and Donna M. Burnette of Tifton; grandchildren, Ryan Hayes (Amber), Ricky Hayes (Codi), Shawn Burnette, Jamie Burnette, Justin Pate, Joey McKellar (Brandi), Monika McKellar and Michael Pate; sisters, Lilly McKellar of Scooterville and Faye Holweger (Lamar) of Moultrie; brother, Stanley McKellar of Scooterville; and a host of nieces and nephews. In addition to his parents, Mr. McKellar was preceded in death by his wife, June T. McKellar in 2012; son, Richard Lee Roberts; daughter, Joni Lynn Roberts and a sister, Mary Lee Kincaid. The family will receive friends on Friday from 6 until 8 p.m. at Banks Funeral Home. Please sign our online guest registry at www.banksfh.com. Banks Funeral Home of Sylvester is in charge of arrangements.

Published on September 29, 2016

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of Joseph "Joe"How does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail