Emil Lauf, 93, passed away peacefully on Monday, October 4, 2021, at the Knife River Care Center, Beulah ND. Services will be held at 10:00 AM CDT, Monday Oct. 11, 2021, at St. Matthew Lutheran Church, Hazen, ND, with Pastor Kirk Peters officiating. Emil will be laid to rest with his wife at the North Dakota Veteran’s Cemetery, Mandan, ND at 2:00 PM CDT. Visitation will be one hour prior to the service.

Emil was born on the Lauf Homestead in Krem, ND on October 17, 1927, to Robert and Lea (Sailer) Lauf. He was baptized and confirmed at St Paul Lutheran Church just northeast of Hazen.

Emil attended country school and farmed with his father prior to being drafted in March of 1951. He served in the Korean Conflict and arrived in Korea on October 11, 1951, and 3 days later was placed on the front line of the 38th Parallel. He spent the winter in a bunker with a friend until June of 1952 when Emil was pulled from the front line and then became a truck driver for the Service Company until he was honorably discharged on December 30, 1952. Emil then returned home to attend the Dakota Business College in Fargo, ND before returning to the Hazen area.

In August of 1953 Emil purchased the Kitchen Bar & Café with Matt Auwinger and they operated the business until August 1963. On November 18, 1956, Emil married Delma Auwinger at St Matthew Lutheran Church in Hazen. In 1964 Emil and Matt purchased a farm together west of Hazen where they farmed and raised some cattle. His wife took sick in June of 1976, and he cared for her at home for 20 years with the help of her parents until she became a resident at the Knife River Care Center, passing away August of 2006.

Emil was proud to serve his country and supported several military organizations, which were close to his heart. He was a member of the German English Singing Group that sang at the Knife River Care Center in Beulah and for other community events around the area. Emil was blessed with many friends who he enjoyed traveling with on day trips to attend music and dance events. Anyone that knew Emil, knew he loved to fill his pockets with candy for the people he encountered, and later earned the name “the candy man.”

Emil is survived by his sister, Delora Kellar, Bismarck, ND; sisters-in-law, Naomi Lauf, Bismarck, ND and Lucille Lauf, Hazen, ND along with some nieces and nephews.

Emil was preceded in death by his wife, Delma; his parents; an infant brother, Edward Lauf; brothers, Iver and Elmer Lauf.

A special thank you to the staff who cared for Emil while he lived at Senior Suites, Hazen and Knife River Care Center, Beulah; and all his friends and relatives that stopped by to visit with Emil.

Arrangements conducted by Barbot Funeral Home, Hazen and Beulah.