Emil Sick and his father, managed their brewing empire out of Lethbridge, Alberta, and with the promise of Repeal, moved into the U.S. market. They first bought breweries in Great Falls and Missoula, Montana, then moved on to Washington state with Spokane, and Seattle. Now they had a presence in Oregon.

Floyd W. Shepard, of Lethbridge, received an offer from Emil to come to the U.S. and join them, which he did in November 1933. Floyd was then made co-manager of SeaBrew, and with the 1939 acquisition of the Horluck Brewery, manager of that plant as well.

With the 1943 purchase of the Oregon plant, Shepard moved his family to Salem and relieved Rene Besse as manager of the Sicks' Brewing Company. He occupied this position until December of 1951 when the company's board of directors promoted him to executive vice president of the firm. He was placed in charge of sales, with offices to be located in Portland.

Brewmaster, John A. Meyers was also involved in the initial phases of the Salem plant. Originally from Minneapolis, he moved to Canada as a boy. He later joined the Edmonton Brewery and worked there until 1942. That year he studied brewing at the Siebel Institute in Chicago, which was followed followed by a six month stint as asst. brewmaster at SeaBrew prior to assuming the duties of brewmaster in Salem.

In 1949, Steve A. Tabacchi replaced John A. Meyers as Salem's brewmaster. A native of Lethbridge, Steve had family connections with the Sicks' which enabled him to gain a position at SeaBrew when he emigrated in 1934. After completing the brewmaster course at the Wahl-Henius Institute in Chicago in 1938, Steve returned to Seabrew as an assistant brewmaster, and nine years later was elected president of the Northwestern District of the Master Brewers Association of America.

Steve Tabacchi's assistant, William Weiss, also transferred from SeaBrew's Century plant. William was the youngest son of Hans H. Weiss, Seabrew's brewmaster at the main plant.

The graphics on the label above had been used since April of 1944, and in 1949 Emil Sick decided to give the label a new look. He hired Walter Landor of San Francisco, who came up with the design shown on the label below. It was introduced in July of '49.

This was Landor's first work with a beer label and it earned him a design award in '49. The following year Landor re-designed the famous, red "R" on the Rainier label. Landor went on to work on other brewer's labels and in '57 he he updated Lucky Lager's distinctive red "X" logo with stylized hop leaves.

In early 1951, the formulation of a new product was perfected in the Century plant. It was test marketed in the Seattle area from March to June of '51, and touted as the "new taste of Sicks' Select."

In July of '51, Brew 66 was launched, and production commenced at both the Century Brewery and the Salem brewery.

A separate sales organization was formed for the new brand and it proved to be a marketing success.

Tabacchi's supervision of the plant was cut short when Emil Sick decided to close the brewery on June 1st of '53. At the time of closing, there had been 70 workers on the payroll of the plant, which produced 75,000 barrels - 27 million bottles - yearly. It was said that Salem lost a good industry and a good beer.

On 22 July, 1953, the Rainier Brewing Co. of SF was purchased by Emil Sick, who then sold the plant to the Theo. Hamm Brewing Co. of MN, retaining sole rights to the Rainier brand. He had been trying acquire rights to the brand since his 1935 licensing agreement with Rainier CEO, Louis Hemrich.

The 1935 agreement gave him the right to market Rainier Beer in Washington and Alaska, but not in Oregon. Sick later admitted that he would not have closed the Salem brewery had he foreseen the subsequent acquisition of the famous Rainier mark, and the ability to grow the brand in Oregon.

With the closing of the plant, Steve Tabacchi then established a Sicks' distributorship, marketing Brew 66, Rainier Beer, and the soon to be discontinued, Sicks' Select.

He was able to utilize the brewery buildings for his office and warehouse, however, in September 1955, a little more than two years after brewing was terminated, the four story Salem landmark was razed.