Select

A sporty set that you can´t miss in your basic wardrobe. A set made of compressive fabric ideal for high-impact workouts and more casual looks.

- Diardi, our best-selling crop top with halter neck and swim back provides the support and freedom of movement you need.

- Pair it with the Ica shorts, made from compressive fabric, slightly shorter than a traditional biker and with a flattering high V-waist.

Do not wait any longer and buy Black limba Diardi & Ica short set. For any other information about the characteristics of Black limba Diardi & Ica short set, you can get in contact with dressinn through our contact page. dressinn offers an exclusive collection of Women´s clothing for fashion and other leisure activity. Our Women´s clothing will ensure you enjoy your sport and daily activity and make your life more comfortable with our unique range of Sports bras articles.

Specifications

Manual

Size chart

Write a review and earn CoINNs

/ 5

1 Reviews

5 stars

%

4 stars

%

3 stars

%

2 stars

%

1 stars

%

Write your review

You need to sign into your account to leave a review. Sign in

Write a review about this product

Review headline

First Name

E-mail

Product rating

Write your review

Incorrect please try again Thank you for leaving your feedback!

Send

I have read and accept the conditions contained in the Privacy Policy on processing of my data to manage my query or request

Your feedback is important to us, your review about this product will be revised by our experts and will be published within 5 working days. Please make sure that your review focus on the product and your experience with it, this will help other customers make more confident decisions. For any issues with an order, please contact us.

Answer the question

Write your answer

Write your review

Thank you for answering the question and helping other customers, your CoINNs will be credited to your account once the answer is published. You can see the number of CoINNs accumulated on your account. Incorrect please try again

Send

The question has already been answered, thank you very much for trying to help another customer. We will count on you for future questions.

Tradeinn Retail Services as the data controller will process your data in order to respond to your query or request. You can access, rectify and delete your data, as well as exercise other rights by consulting the additional and detailed information on data protection in our Privacy Policy.