When scientists produced the first embryo in a Petri dish, no one was quite sure it wouldn't have two noses or an extra spleen. Some worried that it might be nothing short of the Creature from the Black Lagoon.

To make things more complicated, plenty of critics claimed it was immoral to mix sperm and eggs in the laboratory. The former movie star in the White House even refused to fund research into in-vitro fertilization.

Times change, as revealed in "Test Tube Babies,"a fascinating new PBS documentary that airs Monday night, Oct. 23, as part of the "American Experience" series.

Not even a quarter-century after the first test-tube baby was born in the U.S., some 400,000 other children have joined her in this country. Somehow, the rip-roaring debate over in-vitro fertilization -- almost acarbon-copy of today's battles over stem-cell research and cloning --

has completely vanished.

Through interviews with doctors, the parents of the first American test-tube baby and a couple who lost their chance at parenthood due to a freaked-out hospital administrator, "Test Tube Babies" sheds light on how American society came to accept the once-unthinkable.

Generative AI Has a 'Shoplifting' Problem. This Startup CEO Has a Plan to Fix It

Bill Gross’ ProRata, which has struck deals with partners like Time and Universal Music Group, has a strategy for making AI powerhouses pay for content.

Trump's Crypto Embrace Could Be a Disaster for Bitcoin

At the Bitcoin 2024 conference in Nashville, Donald Trump promised the crypto community the moon. They'd better hope they don't get it.

Judging Breaking at the Olympics Is an Art, Not a Science

Breaking debuts as an Olympic sport at the Paris Games. To get there, the breaking community had to figure a way to objectively judge the subjective, while letting the dance remain a dance.

The Physics of Cold Water May Have Jump-Started Complex Life

When seawater gets cold, it gets viscous. This fact could explain how single-celled ocean creatures became multicellular when the planet was frozen during “Snowball Earth,” according to experiments.

The 17 Top New Android 15 Features

Android 15 is creeping closer to its release date. Here are the notable features and upgrades Google has in store.

Inside the Dark World of Doxing for Profit

From tricking companies into handing over victims’ personal data to offering violence as a service, the online doxing ecosystem is not just still a problem—it’s getting more extreme.

No, the Seine Cleanup Wasn’t a Failure

The goal of the Seine-cleansing project is to produce swimmable conditions for the people of Paris for years to come—the Olympics was just a milestone in getting there.

The Best Chromebooks for Every Budget

Choosing the right Chromebook for your needs can be a tough decision. We can help with our favorite picks.