Paul Fredric Simon is an American musician who was born on October 13th, 1941 in Newark, New Jersey in the United States of America.

He was born to Louis Simon and Belle Simon. Both parents were Hungarian-Jewish. Simon shares the same parents with his brother, Eddie Simon.

Simon was raised as “a specific kind of New York Jew, almost a cliché, who values music and baseball highly,” according to musician Donald Fagen. I believe that the parents are to blame.

As a kid, Simon enjoyed playing stickball and baseball. Despite working late and not spending much time with his kids, he said his father was humorous and educated. At age 11, Simon and Art Garfunkel first crossed paths.

READ ALSO; Paul Simon Children: Meet Paul Simon’s Children

They started singing together when they were 13 years old, occasionally performing at school dances. They graduated from sixth grade by participating in a rendition of Alice in Wonderland.

The Everly Brothers were their idols, and they emulated them by using tight two-part harmony. In addition, Simon became interested in jazz, folk, and blues, particularly the music of Lead Belly and Woody Guthrie.

Simon penned his first song, “The Girl for Me,” f or himself and Art Garfunkel when he was 12 or 13 years old. It became the “local hit,” as Simon put it. For the boys to utilize, his father scribbled the lyrics and chords on paper. The song debuted at position 49 on the pop charts.

Simon majored in English at Queens College after graduating from Forest Hills High School, and he received his degree there in 1963, while Garfunkel studied mathematics education at Manhattan’s Columbia University.

Simon, an Alpha Epsilon Pi fraternity brother, then spent one semester in 1963 studying law at Brooklyn Law School.

Paul Simon net worth

Simon has a net worth estimated to be about $200 million.

Paul Simon age

Simon was born in 1941, hence he is currently 81 years old.

Paul Simon education

Simon attended the Forest Hills High School. He also majored in English when he furthered at the Queens College and received his degree in 1963.

Paul Simon career

Simon is one of the most well-known songwriters in popular music, both as a solo performer and as Art Garfunkel’s half in the folk-rock band Simon & Garfunkel. In 1956, when they were both still in their early teens and friends from school, he started performing with Art Garfunkel.

After having only modest success, the two came back together after “The Sound of Silence,” a song they wrote, became popular in an electrified form in 1966. Together, Simon & Garfunkel made five albums, including the classics “Mrs. Robinson,” “America,” “Bridge over Troubled Water,” and “The Boxer,” with the majority of the songs being penned by Simon.

Following the dissolution of Simon & Garfunkel in 1970, Simon produced three critically praised albums over the next five years, all of which peaked in the top five of the Billboard 200. The hit tracks “Mother and Child Reunion” and “Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard” were featured on his 1972 self-titled album.

READ ALSO: Paul Simon Wife: Meet Edie Arlisa Brickell

His debut solo album to reach the top spot was 1975’s Still Crazy After All These Years, which featured guest vocals by Art Garfunkel. Along with additional Top 40 songs like “Still Crazy After All These Years,” “Gone at Last,” and “My Little Town,” it included the number one hit single “50 Ways to Leave Your Lover.”

In 1981, Simon and Garfunkel reconnected for a concert in New York City’s Central Park that drew 500,000 spectators. This was followed by a world tour with Garfunkel. In 1986, Simon released Graceland, an album influenced by South African township music, following a career lull.

It is still his most well-known and praised solo work and has sold 14 million copies worldwide. The album featured the smash singles “You Can Call Me Al,” “The Boy in the Bubble,” and “Diamonds on the Soles of Her Shoes,” among others. In 1987, it took home the Album of the Year Grammy Award.

Simon kept on touring during the 1990s. Songs from The Capeman, a companion CD he made, was published in 1997. He composed the Broadway musical The Capeman. He received another nomination for Album of the Year for his 2000 release, You’re the One.

He toured for several years after that album, including a second time with Garfunkel. His final album of the decade, Surprise, was then released by him in 2006. Stranger to Stranger, his 2016 album, debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart and at number three on the Billboard Album Chart.

His biggest commercial and critical achievement in thirty years was represented by it. In the Blue Light, his most recent album, was released in 2018. It features interpretations of lesser-known songs from his earlier albums.

For his solo and group efforts, Simon has won sixteen Grammy Awards, including a Lifetime Achievement Award and three Album of the Year titles (Bridge Over Troubled Water, Still Crazy After All These Years, and Graceland).

The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice inducted him: first in 1990 for his work with Simon & Garfunkel and once in 2001 for his solo endeavors. He was chosen by Time magazine in 2006 as one of the “100 People Who Shaped the World.”

Simon was listed as one of the top 100 guitarists by Rolling Stone in 2011, and he was placed eighth on their list of the top 100 songwriters in 2015. In 2007, Simon became the inaugural winner of the Gershwin Prize for Popular Song presented by the Library of Congress.

Paul Simon parents

Simon was born to Louis Simon and Belle Simon.

Paul Simon siblings

Simon has a brother by the name of Eddie Simon.

Paul Simon wife

Simon is married to the American singer and songwriter, Edie Arlisa Brickell.

Paul Simon children

Simon is a father of four children; Harper Simon, Lulu Simon, Gabriel Elijah Simon, and Adrian Edward Simon.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qLTGqKqsoaBjsLC5jqmYrqRdqLauu81mmaKnXZa0pnnCmqmenaJiu6bAjLCmq6yYYsSqssRmmqGhnJm%2FprqO