Concert Review: Paul Simon At A Wet Forest Hills Stadium -A Triumphant Return Home to Queens

Paul Simon was born in Newark, New Jersey. His family moved to Kew Gardens Hills, Queens, while he was four years old. So he grew up living on 70th Rd. near Jewel Ave, Main St. & Flushing Meadow Park.

As a teen he attended Forest Hills High School where he met Art Garfunkel starting a brilliant career. Many of his early songs were written on 70th Rd.

Tonight just a mile away from his old high school Paul Simon put on a fantastic show (the second of two sell outs) that was only dampened by the weather.

There was a rain delayed late start, over an hour, followed with a brief shower during & then a heavy down pour lasting just to the end of Simon's set to his first encores.

The rain was heavy, lightning was crackling in the skies as everyone crowded into the ancient stadiums underbelly below the grand stands. It was a mess but everyone survived.

God forbid Forest Hills Tennis Stadium postponed the show earlier in the day, since there was even a tornado watch. I guess if it may snow the entire city shuts down, but here it was ok to risk thousands of lives in the dangerous weather conditions.

But Simon & his band did the best to play to the wet crowd. The show even played past the usual 10PM curfew, ending at 11:10PM due to the late start.

Tonight Paul Simon played a variety of songs from his rather eclectic career. Songs ranging from his Simon & Garfunkel sixties days (which seemed to be the most popular with the crowd) to his solo career right, covering all types of world music influences & cultures, right up to his latest album, which is selling very well.

His nine piece band added great support behind him, but when Simon was alone with his guitar it made for the best parts of the show.

Anytime one of his songs had a New York reference or Queens reference, the crowd gave a loud cheer of approval.

NY References: Dazzling Blue: "Sweet July we drove the Montauk Highway" / That Was Your Mother: "Well I'm standing on the corner of Lafayette, Across from the Public heading down to the Lone Star Cafe" / Me & Julio Down By Schoolyard: "Goodbye Rosie, the Queen of Corona" / The Boxer: "Going Home, Where the New York City winters aren't bleeding me" / The Sound of Silence: "the words of the prophets were written on the subway walls."

The lyrics "Girls out on the stoop" from Late In the Evening as well as "stepped outside to smoke myself a j" got surprisingly loud cheers as well. Simon also had them dancing in the isles on many of the more up beat songs ie: Mother & Child Reunion / Julio / Obvious Child/ Diamonds on Sole of Her Shoes / You Can Call Me Al / Late In Evening . Oh & if rain was mentioned in the lyrics the crowd jeered!

There was even a treat covering That's All Right Mama certainly in tribute to the passing of Elvis guitarist Scottie Moore.

Tonight was the last night of his American tour, fittingly ending in Forest Hills for the home town boy. Simon himself has recently suggested this may be his last tour as thinks about retirement.

In any event he gave the Queens crowd a real treat as he ended the show with two surprises, breaking away from this tour's customary set list.

He did the classics: Sound of Silence & Bridge Over Troubled Waters. With the latter he stated I don't sing this one too often but everyone seems to want to hear it. And in my opinion these may have been his best vocals of the evening.

Simon & Garfunkel at Simons 70th Rd. Queens Childhood home 1975

Simon looks good at 74 years of age, donning a grey Queens t-shirt changing his sports jackets to a variety of different colors throughout the show.

His voice still sounds great even if not still having all the elegance it once had. Simon still carried the tunes beautifully through the Queens night, drifting over the Forest Hills Tennis club & into the overcast skies. It was certainly an amazing performance & one hell of a concert.

thanks to these youtube posts from the forest hills concert:

set list Forest Hills Stadium 7/1/16

The Boy In the Bubble

50 Ways To Leave Your Lover

Dazzling Blue

That Was Your Mother

Rewrite

Honky Tonk

Slip Slidin' Away

Mother & Child Reunion

Me & Julio Down By The Schoolyard

Spirit Voices

The Obvious Child

Stranger to Stranger

Homeward Bound

El Condor Pasa (If I Could)

Duncan

The Werewolf

The Cool Cool River

Diamonds on the Soles of Her Shoes

You Can Call Me Al

encore1

Wristband

I Know What I Know

Late In the Evening

Still Crazy After All These Years

encore2

That's All Right Mama

The Boxer

The Sound of Silence

Bridge Over Troubled Water

thanks to these youtube posts from the forest hills concert:

Remembering Bobby Ojeda's Tragic Boating Accident (1993)

Steve Olin, Tim Crews & Bob Ojeda March 22 nd 1993: was an off day from Spring Training, for three Cleveland Indians pitchers; Former Mets 1986 World Champion pitcher; Bobby Ojeda, Tim Crews & Steve Olin. The three friends, took out an 18-foot open-air bass boat & went out fishing & gator hunting in the darkness of the evening on Lake Nellie in Clermont, Florida. Tragedy struck, when the boat rammed into a private dock that jutted out some 250 feet into the still waters. Two other Cleveland Indians personnel had arrived to meet the fishing party just as the horror took place. They heard Bob Ojeda saying they needed help. The two men jumped into the water and called out for someone to call 911. 27 year old pitcher; Steve Olin was killed instantly. 31 year old pitcher; Tim Crews was alive but was struggling to breathe suffering from massive head wounds. Bobby Ojeda was in & out of shock, he was suffering from head lacerations but was coherent. The

Fictional Mets Infielder Chico Escuela ( of SNL) Visits Mets Spring Training (1979)

Bill Murray interviews (Garrett Morris) Chico Escuela In March 1979, original Saturday Night Live cast member; Garrett Morris joined the Mets at Miller Huggins Field for Spring Training. At the time the Mets were still holding Spring Training in St. Petersburg Florida. Morris was filmed being interviewed by his SNL cast mate, Bill Murray as the fictional Mets player: Chico Escuela who wore uniform #5 (cinque). Escuela was famous for his spoof of the Latin players of the time, who did not speak much English. His famous quote "baseball been berry- berry good to me" began the previous year on SNL's weekend update. Bill Murray & Ed Kranepool It was said during the mock 1979 Spring Training interview, that Chico who was a nine time All Star second baseman, had given up his job at the Weekend Update Sports desk to make a comeback with the Mets at age 41. Chico had fictionally written a tell all baseball book; "Bad Stuff About the Mets" which tick

Remembering Vixen Founder / Guitarist; Jan Kuehnemund (1961-2013)

centerfieldmaz was shocked to learn of the sudden passing of Jan Kuehnemund, the founding member of the all female metal band Vixen. Jan was a fantastic guitarist, song writer & women pioneer in Heavy Metal. I am a huge fan of hard rock all girl bands & Vixen were one my long time favorites. Janice Lynn Kuehnemund was born November 18th, 1961 in St. Paul Minnesota. The female guitarist formed one of the first all female Metal bands in Minnesota with singer Janet Gardner while in high school in 1980. By 1985 they moved the band to Los Angles California, to be part of the Heavy Metal scene. In 1987 the classic Vixen line up of Jan Kuehnemund (lead guitar) Janet Gardner (vocals/ guitar) Share Pederson (bass) & Roxy Petrucci (drums) formed & released their debut album the following year. Vixen 1988 In a world of all male Heavy Metal bands during its heyday, Vixen were groundbreaking in being an all female metal band. The Runaways, with Joan Jett & Lita Ford

Remembering Mets History (1979) SNL's Chico Escuela Visits Mets Spring Training & Attempts a Career Comeback

Bill Murray interviews (Garrett Morris) Chico Escuela In March 1979, original Saturday Night Live cast member; Garrett Morris joined the Mets at Miller Huggins Field for Spring Training. At the time the Mets were still holding Spring Training in St. Petersburg Florida. Garrett Morris was posing as the fictional Mets player, Chico Escuela who wore uniform #5 (cinque). Escuela was doing his famous spoof of the Latin players of the time, posing as a popular infielder from the Dominican Republic that didn't speak much English. His legendary catch phrase was "baseball been berry- berry good to me". "baseball been berry-berry good... to me" The Chico Escuela character appeared nine times during on SNL's fourth & fifth seasons. He debuted on December 9th, 1978, in a Knight of Columbus sketch as a guest speaker. He then became the Weekend Update Sports reporter, where after being introduced by Jane Curtain, he would reply "tank you Hane". Chico woul

Remembering Mets History: (1977) The Felix Millan / Ed Ott Brawl In Pittsburgh

Friday August 12th, 1977: Joe Torre's last place Mets (47-66) traveled to Three Rivers Stadium in Pittsburgh for a double header with Chuck Tanner's second place Pirates (66-49). The bad times were underway for the late seventies Mets and tonight marked the end of another key player's career from the 1973 NL Champion team. In the first game of a double header, Jerry Koosman (8-13) took a 3-1 loss to Jim Rooker (10-6) & the Pirates. Both pitchers went the distance, with Koosman giving up three runs on six hits & Rooker giving up the lone Met run on nine hits. In the night cap Mets started Bob Myrick against Pittsburgh's Bruce Kison. In the 2nd inning Myrick himself added an RBI base hit making it 1-0 Mets. Lee Mazzilli added a two run HR in the 4th putting the Mets up 3-2. The Mets were battling, but the Pirates tied it up at 3-3 in the sixth inning. Met Manager; Joe Torre made a double switch bringing in Felix Millan to play second base, as Do