Finland is a parliamentary republic with a prime minister, who is the head of government, and a president, who is the head of state. The central government is based in Helsinki and the local governments in the 309 municipalities (towns and cities). The country is divided into 19 regions and 70 sub-regions. The smallest region, Åland, is an autonomous archipelago in the south-west. The northern Lapland region comprises the Sami Domicile Area, home to around half of Finland’s indigenous Sami people (also known as Lapps or Laplanders).

Finland ranks ninth in the European Union in terms of GDP per capita with €39 000, well above the EU average (€35 500). It accounts for 1.8% of the EU's total GDP.

(Source: Eurostat - figures for GDP per capita and GDP)

How much does Finland pay and receive from the EU?

The EU budget is the tool to ensure that Europe remains a democratic, peaceful, prosperous and competitive force. The EU uses it to finance its priorities and big projects that most individual EU countries could not finance on their own.

The benefits of EU membership significantly exceed the size of the EU budget contributions and the examples are many. All Member States benefit from being part of the Single Market, a shared approach to the common challenges of migration, terrorism and climate change, and concrete gains like better transport infrastructure, modernised and digitalised public services and cutting-edge medical treatment.

How much each EU country pays into the EU budget is calculated fairly. The larger your country's economy, the more it pays – and vice versa.

The EU budget is not about giving and taking – it’s about collectively contributing to making Europe and the world a better place for us all.

EU budget spending and revenue per country and per year

EU-funded projects in Finland

Money from the EU budget helps fund programmes and projects in all EU countries – for example to build roads, subsidise researchers and protect the environment.

Find out more about how Finland benefits from EU funding and recovery funds in your country or region.