Finland is a unitary, non-federal state organised on a decentralised basis. Finland is also a parliamentary republic. The Finnish Constitution (731/1999) lays out the rules for the system of government and the fundamental rights of citizens.

The head of state is the president of the republic. The president is elected by a direct vote for a term of six years. The governmental powers are exercised by the president and the government, which is led by the prime minister. The members of the government shall have the confidence of parliament.

The parliament (Eduskunta) exercises the legislative powers and decides on state finances. The parliament is unicameral, consisting of 200 representatives elected for a four-year term. All Finnish citizens above the age of 18 have a right to vote in the parliamentary and presidential elections.

Finland has three administrative levels: national, regional and local. However, the national level, i.e. the central state, is represented at all three levels. The national-level state administration or central government includes the ministries and public bodies subordinate to them.

The regional state administration authorities include six Regional State Administrative Agencies (Aluehallintovirasto) and 15 Centres for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment (Elinkeino-, liikenne- ja ympäristökeskus/ELY-keskus). The regional state administration agencies are responsible for enforcement tasks of the state relating to due process and constitutional rights, safety and environmental standards. Centres for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment promote regional development by managing the enforcement and development tasks of state administration in their own geographical areas. Their task is also to promote the development of a good living environment and the competitiveness of industries.

The state has also district-level administration authorities. They consist of 11 Police Departments (Poliisilaitos) and 15 Employment and Economic Development Offices (TE-toimistot).

Before the Second World War, planning was understood in Finland mainly in terms of detailed planning (Jääskeläinen & Syrjänen 2000). The steering of urban development was based on the Local Detailed Planning Act (145/1931) that came into power in 1932. Old cities established by the Swedish Crown were built on the land that the Crown had donated to the cities. Therefore, these cities could control urban development even without using planning instruments. This was not the case for the newer cities. Furthermore, the old cities expanded onto privately owned land during the 20th century, which meant that new land-use planning instruments were needed. Efforts were made throughout the first half of the 20th century to renew the legislation to provide tools for general planning and to enable municipalities to control the increasing suburbanisation which was taking place on privately owned land.

The Building Act (370/1958) of 1958 expanded the scope of regulation beyond detailed planning, establishing a firmer position for general planning and introducing regional plans into the planning system (Talvitie 2018, 11). The Act also strengthened the position of the municipalities in planning considerably (Jääskeläinen & Syrjänen 2000, 26). During the era of the Building Act, Finland urbanised rapidly: in 1950, 70% of Finns lived in rural areas, whereas in 1990, 60% of the population lived in cities. In practice, urbanisation mainly took the form of suburbanisation, and many of the suburbs, especially in the 1960s and 1970s, developed through exceptional processes, since the planning system and organisations could not respond efficiently to the pressures of urbanisation (Jääskeläinen & Syrjänen 2000, 27). The emergence of dispersed settlements outside planned areas was also common throughout the last decades of the 20th century (Littow 2006).

The Parliament of Finland initiated the renewal of planning law in 1969 to make planning more responsive to urbanisation and promote sustainable forms of urbanisation. However, the current Land Use and Building Act (132/1999) did not come to force until 2000. In the Land Use and Building Act, there is a strong emphasis not only on sustainability-related goals but also on public participation in planning. The main reason for this is that urban development – at least ideally – is no longer primarily greenfield development, but defragmentation-oriented planning based on urban infills (Jääskeläinen & Syrjänen 2000). When planning takes place in populated areas, interaction with existing stakeholders is needed to prevent planning conflicts.

Following the Nordic administrative tradition, Finland is a unitary state with strong local government (Sjöblom 2010). There are three tiers of statutory planning in Finland: national, regional and municipal.

At the national level, the Ministry of the Environment (Ympäristöministeriö) is the most important planning authority. The ministry is responsible for preparing planning legislation, specifically the Land Use and Building Act (132/1999), and for defining general planning goals and objectives in the ‘National Land Use Objectives’ (Valtakunnalliset alueidenkäyttötavoitteet, VAT). National land-use objectives must be taken into account in regional and other land-use planning in a way that promotes their implementation (Land Use and Building Act 132/199, Section 249). In addition to the Ministry of the Environment, other ministries also contribute to planning at a national level with regard to their specific sectoral focus, for example the Ministry of Transport and Communications (Liikenne- ja viestintäministeriö), the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (Maa- ja metsätalousministeriö), or the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment (Työ- ja elinkeinoministeriö).

At the regional level, the Regional Councils have the competence to draft and approve Regional Land Use Plans. Regional Land Use Plans are legally binding, but they leave plenty of scope for the municipalities to address local land use and development issues. Regional Councils are also responsible for creating Regional Development Programmes and Regional Development Strategies, and they play an important role in the implementation of EU Cohesion Policy. Regional Councils are joint municipal authorities, i.e. their political decision-making organs are not directly elected but consist of representatives of the municipalities in the region. In 2022, additional Wellbeing Services Counties were established, which are responsible for health, social and rescue services.

At the local level, municipalities have a ‘land-use monopoly’, meaning that they are solely responsible for drawing up plans and ensuring sustainability and favourable living conditions within their jurisdiction. Regional or national actors do not have the means to control or disapprove local plan, yet local plans must not contradict Regional Land Use Plans. Public authorities, organizations as well as private citizens can appeal to plans with the claim that there is a contradiction to higher level plans. The court then decides whether the plan needs to be amended or repealed. Municipalities prepare Local Master Plans and Local Detailed Plans, both of which are legally binding. The plans are approved by the Municipal Council, consisting of elected decisionmakers.

Municipalities are powerful actors in land-use planning also because they oftentimes own land. Municipalities are also able to purchase land for future development needs on reasonable terms and conditions because there are several statutory land-policy instruments available to them.

National Land Use Objectives (Valtakunnalliset alueidenkäyttötavoitteet, VAT)

The National Land Use Objectives aim to ensure that nationally significant issues, as well as international perspectives, are taken into account in regional and local planning. They are also meant to transpose the contents of international agreements into the Finnish planning system. The objectives are contained in a text document without a map or spatial vision. The National Land Use Objectives are renewed at irregular intervals.

Currently, the National Land Use Objectives, which were enacted in 2018, focus on five themes:

Functioning communities and sustainable transport

Efficient transport systems

Healthy and safe environment

Viable natural and cultural environment and natural resources

Renewable energy supply

Regional Land Use Plan (Maakuntakaava)

Regional Land Use Plans are drawn up and approved by the Regional Councils. Their aim is to set out principles of land use and designate areas for regional development. The level of detail and specificity of the Regional Land Use Plan should not go beyond what is necessary to achieve national and regional goals, or to harmonise the use of land between neighbouring municipalities. They are thus not strict zoning plans but strategic plans that leave room for local interpretation and implementation. The Regional Land Use Plan is typically drawn up at scales between 1:100,000 and 1:250,000 and is accompanied by a text document. Both the map and text are legally binding for local planning but they do not directly steer building.

Regional Land Use Plans usually have a time horizon of 10 to 20 years and are renewed after approximately 10 years, although some regions have adopted shorter intervals for renewing them in order incrementally tackle regional issues in planning (Purkarthofer, Humer and Mattila, 2021). The Regional Land Use Plan is intended to complement the Regional Development Strategy (time horizon 20 to 30 years) and the Regional Development Programme (time horizon three to five years), both of which are also enacted by the Regional Council.

Regional Land Use Plans do not necessarily cover the whole regional territory but are sometimes drawn up for sub-areas or for specific themes. Examples of the issues addressed in Regional Land Use Plans are infrastructure development (main roads, rail, energy), land use changes that affect the regional structure (retail, residential neighbourhoods, industry), developments serving wider areas (e.g. recreational facilities or water supply systems), the protection of regionally significant natural or cultural areas or issues involving competition between municipalities.

Local Master Plan (Yleiskaava)

The Local Master Plan is enacted by the municipality and provides general guidance on the spatial structure and land use. It can cover the whole municipal territory or a sub-area thereof. Two municipalities may also opt to draw up a Joint Municipal Master Plan, but this option is not frequently used in planning practice. Local Master Plans are usually drawn up at scales between 1:2000 and 1:50,000 and are accompanied by a text document. Both map and text are legally binding for local detailed planning. In areas where no detailed plan exists, the Local Master Plan might also directly steer building.

The Local Master Plan has an integrative function. It integrates national and regional objectives with the strategic goals of the municipality, it coordinates various local interests and integrates different goals related to society and the environment. The Local Master Plan needs to take into account different types of legislation: the Land Use and Building Act as primary planning law, as well as legislation related to the protection of the environment, built heritage, roads, water, forests, soil, mining, waste management and historical relics.

There are different types of Local Master Plan (Ympäristöministeriö 2013, 21). Strategic master plans typically cover the whole municipality and can be understood as a vision for the municipality. Master plans focusing on land use issues often cover only a particular area of the municipality. Phased master plans can also address a specific topical issue, such as commercial or energy services or recreational areas. Finally, master plans can also be used to guide building in some cases. The Local Master Plan is thus a relatively flexible planning instrument and municipalities can decide how they use it and for which purposes. In many municipalities Local Master Plans are renewed approximately every 10 years, but a growing number of municipalities have started to renew them more frequently in order to address planning issues continually and to better align the development of the plan with the municipal council’s term in office (Mäntysalo et al., 2019).

A broad range of issues should be taken into account when a Local Master Plan is drafted:

the functionality, economy and ecological sustainability of the municipal structure;

the utilisation of the existing municipal structure;

housing needs and availability of services;

opportunities to organise traffic and transport, especially public transport and non-motorised traffic, energy, water supply and drainage, and energy and waste management in an appropriate manner which is sustainable in terms of the environment, natural resources and economy;

opportunities for a safe, healthy living environment which takes different population groups into equal consideration;

business conditions within the municipality;

reduction of environmental hazards;

protection of the built environment, landscape and areas of natural value; and

a sufficient number of areas suitable for recreation.

Local Detailed Plan (Asemakaava)

Local Detailed Plans have historically been the most important instrument for steering urban development and land use. The Local Detailed Plan is drawn up to organise land use, building and development in detail in a specific area of the municipality. Local Detailed Plans indicate and prescribe the main functions of areas, building rights or building efficiency ratios, the number of floors or building heights, other functional issues and issues related to building quality and urban design.

The Local Detailed Plan is drafted by the municipality and approved by the municipal council. When the Local Detailed Plan is drafted, the Regional Land Use Plan and Local Master Plan must be taken into account. The Local Detailed Plan is legally binding and is the basis for issuing building permits. It is not renewed after a certain length of time, but must be kept up to date. Landowners can suggest that a plan is drafted or amended, but the decision to commence planning is up to the municipality. If drafting a Local Detailed Plan serves mainly the interest of a private actor, the municipality is entitled to charge them the costs of the planning process.

The Local Detailed Plan needs to create the preconditions for healthy, safe and pleasant living environments, local services and the organisation of traffic and transport. Elements of the built and natural environment which are of value shall be preserved and the plan must ensure that the area provides sufficient parks or other recreational areas. The Local Detailed Plan must not substantially weaken the quality of anyone’s living environment or impose unreasonable restrictions or harm on landowners.

Participation

Public participation must be ensured for all legally binding planning instruments (Regional Land Use Plan, Local Master Plan, Detailed Plan). Everybody who lives or works in the area, or is impacted by the plan for another reason, must be given the opportunity to participate in the preparation of the plan, review it and comment on it. This refers to individuals as well as public authorities and private companies insofar as they can be considered interested parties. When the preparation of a plan starts, a scheme outlining participation and communication procedures must be drawn up. The procedures for participation are thus designed on a case-by-case basis and their scope is decided together with the stakeholders.

The participation stages could take this format:

Commencement: The public is informed about the initiation of the planning process.

Preparation: The public can comment on the draft plan in public hearings and submit written opinions.

Proposal: The plan proposal is made available to the public for review. Opinions are collected and objections can be made.

Approval: After the plan is ratified, the public may seek an appeal. In the first instance, appeals go to the regional administrative court, and in the second instance to the supreme administrative court.

While the Finnish planning system is hierarchical, participation opportunities are most actively used in local detailed planning. Consequently, many strategic decisions have already been taken when detailed plans are being drafted, and thus comments in the participation process are not always accommodated. Moreover, participation is only mandatory for statutory planning instruments, leaving no opportunities to systematically involve the public in other planning processes, for instance the non-statutory city-regional planning and MAL agreements (Maankäytön, asumisen ja liikenteen sopimukset; Finnish for “land use, housing and transport contracts”, see below) (Bäcklund et al., 2018).

In recent years, Finland’s main policy debates in spatial planning have related to the global climate crisis. Sustainability, and more specifically sustainable urban development and mobility, are among the key objectives in all planning strategies. Due to the low population density, planning for a car-based lifestyle constitutes the reality in many parts of the country.

Since the 1960s, Finland has seen a continuous trend of urbanisation, leading to population growth in the biggest cities due to national and international migration. Rural areas and smaller cities in turn face population losses. In the bigger cities, affordable housing as well as the reduction of urban sprawl represent two of the most pressing challenges. As a consequence, the preservation of green and recreational areas in cities becomes increasingly challenging when municipalities are under pressure to dedicate more space to residential buildings and services. This problem is reinforced by the Finnish tax policy which gives municipalities the authority to collect taxes and thus entices municipalities to attract as many inhabitants as possible. Cooperation between municipalities is thus often a major challenge, in planning as well as in other policy areas. The MAL agreements (see above) are intended as an instrument to incentivise coordination of land-use planning, housing policy and transport policy in the biggest city regions.

In Finnish culture it has been typical to think that everyone should have a right to build a residential building on the land they own (Uudenmaan liitto, 2012, 8). This is often referred to as a ‘basic building right’. This, however, is not a constitutional right; the constitution only protects the rights to property, and requires that people are treated equally, for instance when public authorities make decisions concerning land use and building (Uudenmaan liitto 2012). The Land Use and Building Act (132/1999) gives municipalities the right to regulate land use and building. Yet, in many municipalities, especially in the fringes of growing urban regions, landowners are given permits to build single family houses outside the planned areas (Heinilä 2017).

In the rural and peripheral areas of the country, depopulation poses a serious challenge to the provision of services. This is amplified by the fact that the young and highly educated population tends to move to the bigger cities, while the elderly stay put. To date, few Finnish municipalities have found constructive policies to address shrinking and ageing, or have even started to accept this as the reality.

For several years, administrative reforms which directly or indirectly affect spatial planning have been discussed. The creation of more efficient governance structures remains an ongoing challenge. Municipal mergers were proposed, e.g. in the Law on Local Governance and Service Provision Structures (169/2007) (‘PARAS Act’). However, few mergers took place because municipalities in big city regions could avoid them by creating strategic structural schemes where they outlined the actions that they would take together to ensure sustainable spatial development (see above). The reform of the social and healthcare sector, including its spatial organisation, aimed to strengthen the regional level through directly elected regional councils. However, the reform concluded in 2022 and created new counties which are independent from the existing regions that are responsible for regional planning and development. Moreover, the renewal of the Land Use and Building Act as primary planning law has been ongoing for several years. In 2022, the reform was put on hold for the time being due to political disagreements.