Mindquarry’s founders, Alexander Klimetschek, Alexander Saar and Lars Trieloff, will now join the product development team of Day’s CQ Advanced Collaboration which it released in October this year. The software incorporates collaborative Web 2.0-like tools like Wiki, blog and calendaring and sits on top of a JSR (Java Content Repository).

Newport Beach, California-based Mindquarry is a Java-based open source software platform helps corporate IT users share documents, images and media files — something it refers to as social media. It effectively wraps task and project management, team-based collaboration and Wiki editing tools around this media environment, using Ajax and Web 2.0-style interfaces to front-end the system.

However Day will not integrate Mindquarry’s open source code into its core CQ ECM platform, explained Santi Pierini, senior vice president of marketing at Day. We’ve only hired the three founders…and haven’t bought the company, which will continue to live on as a separate open source project.

Pierini further explained that Mindquarry was on the verge of rolling out a commercial version of its social media software a couple on months ago. But that launch was halted after funding (from, among others, Hasso Plattner, the ex-CEO of SAP) ran out. The three founders of Mindquarry were students at the Hasso-Plattner Institute in Potsdam, Germany.

They basically ran out of runway and at the same time we had just released our own social media offering.

Perini said the trio will bring significant open source skills and experience into the company like Apache Jackrabbit that will be used to enhance its ECM platform.

But he dismissed suggestions that Day is evolving to an open source ECM provider. We’ll remain commercial and there are no plans as yet to incorporate Mindquarry’s open source code into our ECM product stack, Pierini said. What we’ve gained from [Mindquarry] is domain expertise in social media that will drive further development of our own offering in that space.

However it’s true that Day has always had an open source flavor…we work well in a Linux and Apache stack. Plus our chief scientist is Roy Fielding co-founded the Apache Software Foundation.

Perini also pointed out that Day had donated JCR reference specifications to the Apache Jackrabbit project. Jackrabbit is really the open source version of our own JCR offering.

However Perini believes that while customers are ready to entrust their infrastructure to open source, they’re still conservative when it comes to the applications layer. From an infrastructure perspective open source is great. But when it comes to apps, we’ve found that most customers want commercial software.

He cited the example of one customer, Leapfrog, which develops educational and learning technologies for children.

They were more or less an open source shop and a lot of their developers came from Wal-Mart. They were more than ready to go with Linux and JBoss for the operating system and app server. But when they evaluated content management apps, they went with Day for its high-availability and security…all the things you expect from commercial software.