The School of Electrical and Information Engineering began in 1953 with the introduction of electrical engineering courses in the school and the establishment of the Electrical Engineering Teaching and Research Group in 1958. At present, the College has enrolled in five undergraduate majors. In 1977, 2001 and 2002, it established the majors of Automation, Electrical Engineering and its Automation, and Computer Science and Technology, and in 2006, it abolished the department and established the College of Electrical and Information Engineering.

There are 72 teachers in the school, including 10 professors, 2 doctoral supervisors and 60% of teachers with doctoral degrees. After more than 60 years of construction, the school has a master's degree in Control Science and Engineering, and is recruiting PhDs and Postdoctoral in the discipline "Intelligent Construction Engineering". It has a complete talent training system of "undergraduate, master's degree, doctor's degree and postdoctoral degree". The school has “National Virtual Simulation Teaching Centre for Smart City”, “Beijing Key Laboratory for Robotics Bionics and Function Research”, “Beijing Key Laboratory for Research on Intelligent Processing Methods of Big Data in Construction”, and is shortlisted for the construction of Beijing Advanced Innovation Center of “Future Urban Design”, “Intelligent Robots and Systems” and “The future image”.

In recent years, the school has undertaken a series of key and surface projects of the National Natural Science Foundation of China, National Key R&D-Related (sub) Projects, and important projects in Beijing, involving research fields such as smart cities, national power grids, and the construction of the "Science and Technology Winter Olympics". The school has applied for more than 100 invention patents, and has received more than 10 awards for teaching and research achievements at provincial and ministerial level, including the Second Prize of National Science and Technology Progress and the Natural Science Prize of the Ministry of Education.

Automation

In the Department of Automation, there are 13 full-time academic staff members, including 3 professors and 8 associate professors, with over 260 undergraduate students and more than 100 graduate students.

In 1978, the major of electrified Automation of Urban Enterprises began to recruit students, and it was renamed as Automation in 1998.In 2006, it was approved as the second-level discipline master's program of Control Theory and Control engineering. In 2008, it was rated as the characteristic specialty construction point of Beijing. In 2010, it was approved as the first-level discipline master's program of Control Science and Engineering. Since 2012, it has participated in the National Special Needs Doctoral Talents Training Program of "Theory and Technology of Architectural Heritage Preservation". In 2020, Automation major has been rated as the first-class major construction point in Beijing.

In the future, Department of Automation will stick to the excellent spirits of BUCEA and adhere to fine traditions of its predecessors. Regarding discipline construction and development as principal line, the school will stick to the educational ideas of cultivating broad caliber inter-disciplinary talents with thick foundation, thus performing its own responsibility, and contributing its share to the country and social service with the joint efforts of teachers and students.

With the development of BUCEA, Department of Automation enjoys a high reputation in the fields of control, system engineering, pattern identification and system intelligence at home. Its scientific research mainly involves following fields, such as complex system control theories, decision-making analysis and decision support, intelligent control and robots, integrated control of computers and network technology, information detection and identification, artificial intelligent and so on. In recent ten years, the Department has undertaken and accomplished more than 30 scientific research projects of the nation and companies, with scientific research funds constantly increasing. It also has obtained dozens of national patent for invention.

Electrical Engineering and Automation

The major of Electrical Engineering and Automation has a team of 9 professional teachers. Most teachers have doctoral degrees and come from famous universities, Including six associate professors and three lecturers. The knowledge and age structure of the teaching team is reasonable. Ma Hongyan was awarded the title of Distinguished Teacher of BUCEA.

Teachers have high scientific research ability in this major. In recent years, they have presided over and participated in several projects, such as the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing Municipality, the Plan Project of Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission, and the General Project of Beijing Municipal Education Commission, Gained remarkable scientific research achievements.

“Automatic Control Principle” is State-level excellent course in Department of Electrical Engineering. There are several Beijing and university-level excellent courses, Gained national awards for “National Electronic Design Competition” and “Challenge Cup Competition” many times, teaching achievements are very good.

Computer Science and Technology

The major of computer science and technology was established in 1999. There are 24 full-time teachers, 19 of whom have senior titles, and 70% have doctor's degree. There are 377 students, including 327 undergraduates and 50 postgraduates. The major has successively carried out the "major enrollment", "double training plan" and "external training plan" in 2015, as well as the "artificial intelligence (AI) experimental class" enrollment reform in 2018, cultivating many outstanding graduates. In 2016, the major has made outstanding achievements in the evaluation of undergraduate computer science and technology in Beijing municipal colleges and universities, and won the first place in the evaluation of specialty characteristics in Beijing municipal colleges and universities. In 2019, it was approved to be the first-class major construction in Beijing municipal level.

The major has presided over more than 10 key projects, general projects, and youth projects of the National Natural Science Foundation of China. It has won the Second Prize of National Science and Technology Progress Award, the Second Prize of Natural Science of the Ministry of Education, and the Second Prize of Wu Wenjun Artificial Intelligence Natural Science Award, etc.

The major has undertaken several national, provincial and university level teaching and research projects, and has been approved by many Beijing Outstanding Teaching Team, High-level Innovation Team and Beijing Teaching Achievement Awards.

Building Electrical and Intelligent

The Department of Building Electricity and Intelligence has 9 full-time teachers, including 2 professors, 2 associate professors, 5 lecturers and the proportion of doctoral degree is 100%. The department is mainly responsible for teaching the undergraduate courses of this major and the platform courses of the whole university. In addition, the department also undertakes the task of training master's degree in control science and engineering and mechanical disciplines.

In recent years, teachers of the Department of Electrical and Mechanical Engineering have presided over and completed several vertical and horizontal research projects, such as sub-projects of the National Key Research and Development Program, national funds, and municipal funds, etc. They have also presided over or participated in the formulation (revision) of 6 national and local standards, won the Second Prize of Beijing Science and Technology Progress, published more than 140 papers, published more than 10 monographs and textbooks, and obtained more than 20 patents.

The teachers of the Department of Building and Electricity are actively involved in teaching reform and research, and have won the First Prize of Beijing Teaching Achievement, the Second Prize of the University Teaching Excellence Award, the Second Prize, and the Third Prize of the University Basic Teaching Skills Competition, etc. They have guided students to participate in the joint graduation design of building electrical and intelligent schools, the Building Information Modeling (BIM) Application Skills Competition and the National Student Intelligent Building Engineering Practical Skills Competition, and have won many awards.

Artificial Intelligence

The major of artificial intelligence is oriented to the national major strategic development and the needs of smart city construction. It aims to cultivate students to master the basic theory, basic methods, and application technology of artificial intelligence, to be familiar with the interdisciplinary knowledge related to artificial intelligence, to understand the frontier development status and trend of artificial intelligence major, and to have outstanding scientific literacy, innovation ability, good engineering practice ability, systematic thinking ability and international vision. After graduation, students can become "practical and compound" AI high-level professionals engaged in AI related work in government governance, life science, health care, teaching and education, business management and other technical fields.

In the aspect of scientific research, our faculty mainly carry out the research of intelligent information processing based on computer vision and pattern recognition, combined with the frontier of artificial intelligence, our faculty focus on machine vision information deep neural network modeling, human-computer natural interaction methods and technologies, biometrics and various image processing methods and technologies. Our faculty have been undertaking multiple national scientific research projects and enterprise entrusted projects，publishing more than 50 papers in international journals and international conferences, being authorized more than 10 national invention patents.

The Department of artificial intelligence continuously optimizes the course offered and content of courses, and actively explores the talent training mode. The main measures include: implementing the "tutorial system" to provide professional guidance to students; using online and offline mixed teaching to improve the teaching effect; strengthening the training of students’ innovation, practice and learning ability in after-school classes; adhering to the project-driven and problem-oriented, Scientific research nurtures Teaching to train students’ comprehensive ability to analyze and solve problems. These measures will help students to be competent for future AI related work and students’ sustainable development.

Experimental Teaching Center

The Building Electrical and Intelligence Experimental Teaching Center of the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Beijing University of Civil Engineering and Architecture is integrated by the school’s electrical and information professional basic laboratory and related professional laboratories. In 2007, it became the school’s first Beijing Experimental Teaching Demonstration Center. The center adheres to the experimental teaching concept of "improving student quality, taking professional knowledge education as the basis, focusing on practical ability training, and taking the cultivation of innovative spirit as the core", and establishes the main line of "basic-innovation-engineering practice" Experimental teaching system.

The center has an area of 2252 square meters and a total equipment value of 32.62 million yuan; it undertakes the experimental teaching of 4 majors of the School of Electrical and Information Engineering and the other 22 professional electrical and information courses of the school. It has opened 348 experimental projects and taught 123,900 people each year ·class hours.