1. UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN - MADISON DISTINCTIVE CURRICULA Mónica Urigüen Educational Administration 880 Professor: Clifton Conrad Spring, 2001

2. UW-Madison: History since 1849 “ It is impossible to develop excellence in the professional schools without excellence in the liberal arts.” David Ward, 1999 Liberal Arts origin Seven artes liberales that originated with the Egyptians and Greeks: three language arts—grammar, rhetoric, logic; and four mathematical arts—arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy.

3. UW-Madison first Departments The original character of the university provided for the erection of four departments: Science, Literature, and the Liberal Arts Law (1867) Medicine (1855) Theory and Practice of Elementary Instruction UW-Madison Medicine (1855) Normal Instruction (1856) Agriculture (1856) Law (1857) Engineering (1857) Physics and Astronomy (1857) Normal Department (1863) 119 women out of 162 In 1865, six women graduated In 1863-64 were 180 women out f a total enrollment of 361 The first degree was conferred in 1858

4. UW-Madison first Professors Professor Sterling gave all the instruction to the preparatory (1850) Earned only $500 during his first year The first tutor, Obadiah M. Conover (Ancient Languages and Literatures) S.P. Lathrop of Beloit (Chemistry) John P. Fuchs (Modern Languages) Daniel Read (Mental Philosophy, Logic, English Literature, and Rhetoric Butler (Classic Literature) Ezra S. Carr, M.D. Succeed Professor Lathrop

5. Classical Courses 1858-59 Carr Carr Carr Chancellor Chancellor Chancellor Organic Chemistry Geology Botany Constitutional Law Political Economy History of Civilization Carr Carr Chancellor Chancellor Chancellor Read Read Chemical Philosophy Inorganic Chemistry Ethics International Law Civil Polity History of Philosophy Christian Evidences Senior Sterling Sterling Sterling Butler Butler Read Read Spherical Trigonometry Astronomy General Physics Juvenal Plato—Gorgias Mental Philosophy Logic Sterling Sterling Butler Butler Read Read Read Mechanical Philosophy General Physics Tacitus—Germania and Agricola Demosthenes—De Corona Rhetoric English Literature Mental Philosophy Junior Sterling Sterling Butler Butler Kursteiner Differential Calculus Integral Calculus Tacitus—History Eschylus—Prometheus French Sterling Butler Butler Kursteiner Analytical Geometry Horace—Satires Homer—Iliad French Sophomore Sterling Sterling Butler Butler Read Plane Geometry Mensuration, Surveying, Navigation Horace—Odes Homer– Iliad English Language Sterling Sterling Butler Butler Read Algebra Solid Geometry Livy Xenophon-Memorabilia History of US Freshman Instructor Second Term Instructor First Term

6. Current Degree Credits, General Education, Interdisciplinary courses Total Degree Credits Bachelor´s degree, a minimum of 120 credits. General Education Requirements Communication, 3 to 5/6 credits Quantitative Reasoning, 3 to 6 credits Natural Science, 4 to 6 credits Humanities/Literature/Arts, 6 credits Social Studies, 3 credits Ethic Studies, 3 credits Interdisciplinary courses Multidisciplinary interaction in education and research Students obtain credits from other departments that cross lists the courses Gain knowledge applicable to several areas of the major field of study

7. UW-Madison: Liberal Arts Over the 150 years L&A have provided the core of instruction and research L&S traditional teaches 95 percent of all freshman-sophomore credits and awards about 55 percent of the masters and 50 percent of all undergraduate degrees. UW-Madison as any other public university: Commitment to general education derived from New England liberal arts college. Rooted in the land grant tradition. Commitment to research based upon German universities.

8. UW-Madison first Presidents and Chancellors Chancellor Lathrop President Twombly President John Bascom President Chamberlin (Agricultural extension) President Van Hise and the Wisconsin Idea (The University Extension and direct utilitarian service to the state) President Birge 1910, First Vocational Courses: Journalism and Library Sciences Chemistry Training Teachers

9. The Wisconsin Idea The objective in the 20 th century has been to make university resources more available to Wisconsin citizen; the 21 st century will see an increase in organizational interaction and the growth of resources and technology. ...University faculty and staff and their partners in external organizations will make up the “outreach leaders” of tomorrow . Alan B. Knox and Joe Corry The Wisconsin Idea for the 21 st Century Visionary Leadership . The commitment to university outreach, which dates back to the land grant tradition of the 1800s, is still supported by national, state, and local public policy. The Wisconsin Idea in the 21st century depend s in t wo key factors: the effectiveness of leadership demonstrated by outreach proponents, political leadership that combines university, private, and state agencies efforts.

10. The Wisconsin Idea At the core of the Wisconsin Idea is the concept of partnership, “extension” and “public service” 1860, lecture service for teachers 1885, farmer institutes 1888, mechanic institutes 1915, 22 directors of university extension from around the country met in Madison to found the National University Continuing Education Association After World War II, 2,000 students were served at over 30 locations. Correspondence study grew to over 400 courses enrolling 10,000 students 1954, WHA-TV began broadcasting (educational radio service)

11. Reputation of UW-Madison Access, affordability, and the quality of its teaching, research, and outreach. Recruit, develop, and retain the best faculty, staff, and students. Undergraduate and Graduate education. Excel in research. Commitment to public service.

12. Reputation of UW-Madison Equity and diversity. Integrate d academic planning and budgeting. Assessment and accountability. Campus community. External relations.

13. UW-Madison Mission, Vision, Priorities Mission To create, integrate, transfer and apply knowledge Learning Environment Learning Community Vision Learning Experience

14. Interconnectiveness Renewing the campus physical environment Using technology wisely Ecouraging collaboration Rethinking the organization Maximizing the human resources Priorities Systems Updating the Wisconsin Idea Joining the global community Reconceptualizing undergraduate education Maintaining the research preeminence Priorities

15. Academic Departments The academic departments within the College of Letters and Science are grouped into three main areas of study traditionally found in the Liberal Arts. Humanities - Dean Jane Tylus Natural Sciences - Dean Herb Wang Social Studies - Dean Mary Anne Fitzpatrick

16. UW- Academic Organization Departments Professional schools Other Instructional Programs Area Studies Programs Undergraduate degrees Undergraduate Certificate Programs L&S Special Resources Masters and doctorate degrees Foreign languages Study abroad Honors General education

17. Professional Schools are part of the College of L&S School of Journalism and Mass Communications School of Library & Information Studies School of Music School of Social Work

18. Skills from L&A education The skills that students should attain from a liberal education include: competency in communication; competency in using the modes of thought characteristic of the major areas of knowledge; knowledge of our basic cultural heritage; and a thorough understanding of at least one subject area.

19. Innovations Chadbourn Residential College Programs based in residence halls Improvement in the honors program Cross College Advising The International Institute and the World Affair and the Global Economy (WAGE) The Teaching Academy Instructional technology in teaching Campus Master Plan The Biotechnology Building is a new model Healthstar, interdisciplinary clinical research-learning center University-Industry Relations / University Research Park

20. Research Findings Methodology : I applied a 10 question survey to 28 UW-Madison current students. Six of the questions were open, and the other four were open-ended. 22 out of 28 were undergraduates , and the other six were graduated. Undergraduate majors varied as follow: 2 in Marketing, 2 in Natural Sciences, 3 in medical sciences, 2 in literature, 1 in philosophy, 2 in journalism, 2 in history and geography, 1 in Chemical Engineering, 2 in business and economics, 1 in rural sociology 2 in English, 1 in education, 1 undecided. The six graduated were:, 1 in German, 1 Architect, 1 in Education, 2 in Spanish Literature, and 1 in Plant Breeding and Plant Genetics. Purposes: Among the aims of the survey were to argument the accomplishment of the UW-Madison distinctive curriculum viewed through its mission and vision. Then, I wanted to know if this university is being centered around “teaching and learning communities.” Finally, I wanted to discern students view of UW-Madison promoting cross-departmental and cross-college connections while preparing for growth in academic field that extend beyond traditional areas of study, as well as their sense of global education. Findings: Remarkably interesting is to find that all students agreed that UW-Madison provides multiple learning opportunities and they are being educated for a productive life as well; 27 agreed that UW-Madison is promoting ways of engaging in global education; 24 agreed that the university is encouraging students intellectual innovation. One of the undergraduates says that: “the education at UW-Madison should be more challenging at the undergrad level. The general education and major requirements should work together to challenge our intellect and teach us to critically think.”

21. Research Findings Table # 1 1 NA 27 5. Are you being educated for a productive life at UW-Madison? You learn to interact with many kind of people It encourage me to get involved in the community People do not always become better citizen here The liberal nature of Madison promotes active citizenship if you choose 2 4 somewhat 22 4. Do you think that the education at UW-Madison instructs you for citizenship? Register for classes Answer questions Good deal of one-on-one instruction 5 15 NA 8 3. Has the Cross-College Advising Service been helpful to you? Seven of them mentioned that interactions are mainly with TAs 10 4 NA 14 2. Do you think that UW-Madison promotes learning interactions between students and professors Seminars and conferences 2 Cultural events 7 Doit courses 7 Studies abroad 4 28 1. Does UW-Madison provide you with multiple learning opportunities and contexts? Comments No Yes Question

22. Foreign languages 20 English 5 Literature 5 Social sciences 14 History 6 Breath requirements 3 Ethics 3 Math 8 6 NA 6. What Courses do you receive as part of general education? Studies abroad opportunities 8 Visiting professors 3 International and cultural events 3 Travel opportunities 2 History and Spanish classes 2 Professors from other countries 2 Broadcast 1 2 26 10. Is UW-Madison promoting ways of engaging global education? 4 24 9. Do you feel that UW-Madison is encouraging your intellectual innovation 6 22 8. Do you agree that UW-Madison promotes interdisciplinary cross-departmental and cross-college connections? 1 3 somewhat 6 NA 18 7. Do you freely choose your elective courses? Comments No Yes Question

23. Conclusion This study has provided me with more knowledge about academic programs in general and the curricula at UW-Madison in particular. Also, I learned why this university has a distinctive curriculum because i t is clear that UW-Madison has a curriculum based on a combination of multiple organizing principles; it is a system made up of various elements with interactionships. In addition, UW-Madison promotes community interactions due to its Wisconsin Idea – University Extension. In fact, it is promoting a learning environment, learning experience, and learning community system. Students agree that UW-Madison encourages them intellectual innovations. The curricula is moving toward experimental learning opportunities, including work-learning and service learning programs, cross-cultural experiences, individual growth experiences , and global understanding . Curricula is developed in breath and depth. Changes can be seen from the fist Liberal Education Curricula to the current one ; nonetheless , courses maintain the theoretical, practical, and productive ideas based on what Aristotle promoted . All in all, UW-Madison keeps a good balance among structural, political, cultural, and nonfoundational curriclum design.