Ready to ride! Jemima Khan makes a style statement in leather biker jacket and skinny jeans as she steps out for film screening

She had all eyes on her as she hosted a question and answer session with the director of a fashion film on Tuesday night.

And Jemima Khan certainly made sure to make a sartorial statement of her very own as she attended a special screening of The Director: An Evolution In Three Acts at the Curzon Theatre at London's Mayfair.

Chanelling her inner wild child, the 40-year-old heiress opted for a punk-rock inspired look in a sexy leather ensemble.

All alone: Jemima Khan was noticeably without a date on Tuesday night when she attended a film premiere in London

The British journalist kept her outfit understated but chic in a pair of skintight leather-panelled black jeans and a matching black silk vest.

Jemima added height to her frame in a pair of racy black sandals, and completed her look with straight her and a slick of candy pink lipgloss.

The Director: An Evolution In Three Acts, follows a year in the life of Frida Giannini, the high-powered creative director of Gucci.

The 40-year-old, who has been dating comedian Russell Brand, cut a lonesome figure as she slipped out of the screening of new flick The Director: An Evolution In Three Acts

Social activist: Jemima recently joined a long list women who have been posting self-portraits without make-up on social media

It shows Giannini chatting with Anna Wintour, the infamous Vogue editor and has been billed as a juicy look at an iconic fashion-world diva.

Jemima was preparing for a Q&A with the film’s Brooklyn based director, Christina Voros, on Tuesday evening.

Voros gained unprecedented access to the Gucci Empire through her close friendship with actor and former NYU classmate James Franco, whose working relationship with the fashion house dates back to 2008, when he signed up to be the face of Gucci fragrances – amongst them Made To Measure.

The film, which premiered at Tribeca in 2013, places the spotlight squarely on Giannini, the usually media shy designer who admits she yearned for a simple life before embarking on a career in the cut-throat world of haute couture.

‘The project came to me through James (Franco),’ Voros told The Huffington Post. ‘He and I had been working together for a number of years and, actually, he had been working with Gucci for the same period of time, looking back.

Black was the order of the night: Sporting a pair of skin-tight leather-panelled black jeans and a black silk vest, Jemima stepped out in a pair of high black sandals and a cool leather jacket

‘And he had been at an event in Rome with Frida (Giannini). Gucci and Frida helped restore a print of ‘La Dolce Vita,’ and he was at that event.

‘He was coming to Paris to direct the first feature that I shot for him called ‘The Broken Tower,’ and he showed up on set and was like, ‘I think we should do a movie on Frida.’’

On Tuesday night, Jemima was without her boyfriend, comedian Russell Brand, choosing to go it alone for the evening instead.

Speaking on the Jonathan Ross Show about the couple's relationship earlier this year, Russell said: ‘I'm going to be really kind in this relationship. I haven't been out there trying to nail everyone.’

He continued: ‘I'm very, very happy in a relationship that feels very different from anything I’ve experience before. I feel like its grounded in friendship and a sort of love and it’s all well cool and exciting and stuff, but it feels different for me.

‘She’s a gorgeous, beautiful woman. I’m still superficial. I’ll still only go out with top crumpet,’ he joked.

Incognito: As the journalist walked away from the cinema she kept her head straight and away from the cameras, trying not to garner any attention