He's famously secretive about his love life, having recently been linked to actresses Ashley Benson and Emilia Clarke.

And James Franco was spotted getting close to a beautiful blonde while shopping in New York City on Tuesday.

The pair were spotted holding hands but quickly let go once they noticed the attention they were getting from nearby photographers.

Are they or aren't they? James Franco played coy as he held hands with a blonde woman while shopping in New York City on Tuesday

The 35-year-old actor dressed in his usual casual attire, twinning a Miami Beach T-shirt with a pair of jeans and black combat boots as he stepped inside the Star Stuck Vintage Clothing shop in the West Village.

The Planet of the Apes Star shaded his visage with a blue baseball cap and sunglasses, which he refrained from removing even while inside the store.

The former Oscars host looked to take a phone call while perusing the racks, slipping in ear buds and clasping tightly to his smart phone.

Research: The actor-writer-filmaker-artist recently collaborated with clothing designer Gucci

Just James: The 35-year-old seemed to be keeping to himself, plugging into his cell phone during the outing

The Spring Breakers actor left the store with only a grey jumper in hand, while his female companion carried her swag in a large plastic bag.

The mysterious love affair is nothing new for James, who has a reputation for being unpredictable with his public persona.

After their shopping excursion the pair continued their jaunt around the West Village, stopping off their his old stomping college grounds of New York University's Washington Square.

James shared a snap of a pair of friends handing out by a fountain with the caption: #Wash sq prk.'

Steps ahead: After spending time inside the shop, James left his female companion inside

The actor moved to New York several years ago to study at New York University, earning a master's degree in filmmaking while being simultaneously enrolled in graduate programs at Columbia University and Brooklyn College.

James is known for his studious ways, continuing his education with a PhD in English at Yale and moving on to teach courses at NYU and the University of California at Los Angeles and University of Southern California.

Shopping trips aside the multi-hyphenate is keeping himself busy as usual, with an upcoming guest role on The Mindy Project and the release of his writer-director effort Child of God.

Secretive: The Pineapple Express star rarely parades his private life in public

This is all on top of Franco's massive list of side projects, including curating art galleries and moderating a Chekov-inspired performance at MoMA PS1 in New York City.

He'll also be the subject of his own Comedy Central Roast special on September 2, which will be hosted by his This Is The End and Pineapple Express co-star Seth Rogen.

'I will be "Roasmaster" at the #FrancoRoast on @ComedyCentral. It's to help promote the Russian release of "This Is The End,"' Seth Tweeted on Friday.

'Roast this shiz, please,' Franco responded.

On Wednesday evening the actor attended a screening for his movie Tar in the Big Apple - a poetic road trip through Pulitzer prize winning author Ck Williams' life.

Party scene: James Franco hung out with his friends Omar Cuniga, Shruti Ganguly, Pedro Gomez Millan and Alexis Gambis at the Tar after party in New York last night

Star: James Franco attended a screening for his movie Tar in New York on Wednesday night