Percy the Small Engine is a four-wheeled tank engine and one of the smallest on Sodor. He is often known as a nervous engine, but is also very brave. But one of his most well-known qualities was his cheekiness. He even played tricks on bigger engines, like the time that he told James to stay in the shed to wait for an important train.

The other engines do not like it when Percy plays his cheeky tricks and often want to pay him back.

(Thomas and Emily can be seen looking unamused.)

One morning, Percy was shunting the Troublesome Trucks for Nia's goods train.

The trucks don't normally try to trick Nia as she knows how to have fun with them like the trucks she used to shunt with in Kenya. Salty also taught her that the trucks like working to musical rhythms.

"Har, har, nothing like a tune to sing with trucks, Nia," said Salty, "and nothing beats a sea shanty!"

"Oh, I'm sure, Salty, I'm sure," smiled Nia.

(Cranky, Carly and Big Mickey can be seen with them.)

Percy never found it easy to handle trucks, even with singing. But today, they were relaxed as they were looking forward to singing with Nia.

Soon all the trucks were arranged and Nia arrived to back down onto the train.

"Thank you, Percy," she said.

"You're welcome, Nia, see you later," called Percy.

As Nia puffed away, Percy spotted Stephen and Bridget Hatt creeping along the platform, giggling quietly to themselves.

"I wonder what they're up to," he murmured.

Then he saw.

(Albert has a huge sign on his back placed by Stephen, saying 'Laugh at me!' on it. Troy the Teacher's Son, his father and even Albert's wife and Little Thomas are seen trying not to laugh.)

Percy chuckled too as the trick was discovered and the children giggled and fled.

"Hehehe!"

"Heehee!"

"That was funny," chuckled Percy, "I wish I could play tricks like that."

Later, Percy was arranging some coaches for James' next train.

James arrived to take on coal and water before the journey. He was looking very snooty as usual.

"I hope my coaches are ready, Percy," he sneered, "an important engine such as I needs to be on perfect time!"

Percy was cross. He found James to be very rude and was never grateful that Percy shunted his trains for him. Then he had an idea.

(Thomas can be seen in the yard.)

"I'll show James," he chuckled, "just like Stephen and Bridget, I can play tricks too, especially on laughable engines like him."

So Percy shunted the coaches, but just before he coupled them to James, he added a truck to the back. It was some rubbish from the station and the yard. It was smelly and made James' train look silly.

"That'll teach James," he said to himself and he puffed cheekily away.

James pulled away with his passengers and his smelly truck. He had no idea that he was pulling the rubbish truck and was enjoying himself enormously, showing off his paintwork and trying to go as fast as the Express.

Thinking about the Express, he saw Rebecca pulling such a train further up the Main line. He rolled up to her to boast about how fast and splendid he was.

Rebecca sniffed as James rolled up.

"Hello, James," she peeped, "um, can you smell something?"

"Nothing at all," said James, "other than the smell of success! A splendid engine such as myself is always shining with success!"

"No, this smells of...rubbish and waste."

"Oh, um, no?"

As James sped on, Rebecca noticed his truck attached to his coaches.

"James! You have a rubbish truck on the back of your coaches!"

"WHAT?!"

James came to a stop in the next station and was horrified to see that Rebecca was right.

"Ohhh! Phew! WHERE'S PERCY?!"

"Uh oh," murmured Rebecca as she sped on ahead to Vicarstown.

James had hoped that nobody would find out about his smelly incident caused by Percy, but Rebecca began to spread the news.

(She is seen telling Henry, Caitlin and Rosie at Vicarstown. The Small Controller can be seen on the platform.)

Soon, James was being laughed at by everybody.

"I hear you've been given a smelly tail," chuckled Whiff as James delivered the truck.

"Yes," fumed James, "thanks to a smelly green rat."

Later, as James took on more water, Nia came by with some more trucks.

"I heard about Percy's trick he played on you, James," she said softly.

"And I suppose you want to laugh about it as well," huffed James.

"No, but perhaps we can teach young Percy a lesson," said Nia, "when engines played tricks on me and my friends in Kenya, we returned the favour. I think I can help you with that."

James listened.

Later, Percy was getting ready to shunt some more trucks, but Nia had already spoken to some of them. They were promised a big chorus with her if they helped her. Nia trusted these trucks and they respected her, and were delighted to help play a trick on Percy.

As Percy was shunting, the trucks kept very quiet. At last, he began to shunt some coal trucks together for a long train to deliver to the bunkers.

And as he approached with the last truck, it happened!

"BOOOOOOOOO!" sang the trucks at the top of their voices.

"WHOA!"

Percy shot forwards in surprise and banged his trucks, causing him to get covered in a big cloud of coal dust.

"GOT YOU!" laughed James and Nia.

The trucks laughed too.

"That'll teach you to give me a rubbish truck," snorted James.

"Maybe that should show you shouldn't cause trouble for your friends, Percy. And maybe, James, you shouldn't boast and boss so much in case of engines paying you out."

Percy and James agreed with Nia, but the teasing they both received made them agree on one thing: that those teasing them were being very silly!

(The End!)