The Second Mother

<!--[CDATA[

DIRECTED BY Anna Muylaert

The Brazilian entry, written and directed by Muylaert, is making waves worldwide for touching on subjects such as social barriers and sexism. Earlier this year, the feature film won a special jury award for best actress at the Sundance Film Festival for its two stars, Regina Case and Camila Mardila, and also took home the Panorama audience award at the Berlin Film Festival. Muylaert spoke to THR about the origins of her drama, which focuses on a live-in housekeeper (Case) who works for a middle-class family in Sao Paulo, and her estranged daughter (Mardila), who comes to the big city and moves in.

How did the idea come to you?

Two decades ago, when I had my son, I stopped working to be a full-time mother without a nanny. I knew that raising a child is very important, and I started to reflect that this job isn't recognized properly. The idea changed a couple of times in the years following the social changes in Brazil. [In 2013, a new law was passed to protect housekeepers' rights.]

What is the struggle like, being a female director working on the international stage?

I didn't think about this in the beginning, but besides the fact that we have the two women in the main lead roles, we have a lot of women working behind the cameras, too. I started to feel a bit bullied after the movie got recognition interna­tionally. It's like people were wondering how I got there and that "I must have gotten there with the help of a man." And that is not true.

Written by Paula Zulian

Labyrinth of Lies

<!--[CDATA[

DIRECTED BY Giulio Ricciarelli

Premiering in September at the Toronto Film Festival, where Sony Pictures Classics acquired North American rights, the drama from first-time feature director Ricciarelli follows a public prosecutor (Homeland's Alexander Fehling) in 1950s Germany who defied government pressure and public opinion to bring Nazi war criminals to justice. The Munich-based 50-year-old talked to THR about making a film about a mostly forgotten period of German history.

Did you feel it was easier or more challenging to make a film about a true story and historical events?

In a way it's both. It is a very big challenge, especially with the theme, because you have to be accurate. Historians read every draft, they saw a couple of rough cuts. We knew we had a very great responsibility, historically. It's really hard to make a cinematic experience out of a historical film because a lot of times history doesn't follow a classical dramatic structure. So you have to kind of find that dramatic arc. At the same time, you don't want to go against history. You don't want to lie. You don't want to stretch the truth.

What kind of reception and reaction did the film get in Germany?

Today, Germany is really ready to make and receive these films. There was a very positive reaction in the press, and it did very good box office for this kind of film. There was no backlash in the sense of, "Oh, you shouldn't do a movie about that time."

Ever been to the Oscars?

No, I have not been. You have to be invited, and I was never invited. We'll see. I'm really very happy about the way the film travels and the way people react to it, and I try not to think about it too much.

Written by Georg Szalai

100 Yen Love

DIRECTED BY Masaharu Take

A surprisingly indie selection from Japan, which has a history of going with safer films, 100 Yen Love is the story of a 30-something female slacker who takes up boxing. The title comes from the 100 yen shop (dollar store) where Ichiko (Sakura Ando) takes a job. The script by Shin Adachi won the inaugural Yusaku Matsuda Screenplay Award in 2012, giving the project momentum and helping director Masaharu Take get financing and a cast together.

Can you remember your first impression when you read the script?

It was the first really interesting script I’d read for a long while. I thought straightaway that this would make a good film. We met in a coffee shop, and I read it in about two hours while he waited.

What grabbed you?

I was looking for a script with a really engaging main character, and Ichiko was definitely that. More than an interesting story, I wanted the main character to draw you in and [make you] wonder what they were going to do. As I was reading it, I found myself wondering what she would do next, though I never thought she was going to start boxing.

I heard 700 people auditioned for Ichiko. Is that true, even though you’d set your heart on Sakura Ando?

Seven hundred people applied; we auditioned the ones we wanted to try out. Ando-san didn’t apply at first, but her mother saw an article about it and recommended she try out. I think that was fate.

How did you approach the film’s rape scene?

It’s the hardest thing Ichiko faces, and it was the most difficult scene to present, though I think both Ando and the actor who played her co-worker made it work. I thought we’d got it right, though not everyone will accept it.

Written by Gavin J. Blair

600 Miles

<!--[CDATA[

DIRECTED BY Gabriel Ripstein

Mexican film-maker Ripstein has spent much of his life around the movie business — his father is veteran director Arturo Ripstein. But nothing prepared the freshman helmer for that first day, when lead actor Tim Roth walked on to the set. "It was very intimi­dating," recalls Ripstein. "He's got a powerful energy, and when he arrived that first day, everyone was saying, 'Holy shit, it's Tim Roth.' "

But once the two got to talking about the day's shoot, the nervousness subsided. "He has also directed a film [The War Zone], so his director's eye was very helpful," says Ripstein. "His input on certain shots definitely made a difference."

In 600 Miles — a fictional story inspired by the Fast and Furious scandal, a disgraced ATF gunrunning operation that allowed for the sale of some 2,000 firearms to criminals with ties to Mexican drug gangs — Roth plays an ATF agent who is kidnapped by a young arms trafficker (Kristyan Ferrer).

Most of the scenes in the road movie unfold within the confines of an SUV driven by Ferrer's character and were supposed to feature a more fluid dialogue between the two leads, but in real life, Roth speaks very little Spanish, and Ferrer has a limited grasp of English. So Ripstein worked the language barrier into the script: "And I think it works because when Tim's character doesn't understand what's being said, it raises the level of tension."

It seems to have worked: 600 Miles won best first feature at the Berlin Film Festival and was subsequently selected as Mexico's foreign-language Oscar submission.

Written by John Hecht

The Assassin

DIRECTED BY Hou Hsiao-hsien

Four months after its award-winning world premiere at Cannes, Hou Hsiao-hsien’s The Assassin finally lands in North America. Based on a short story by ninth century Chinese writer Pei Ying, the film revolves around an assassin (Shu Qi) struggling to kill her tyrannous warlord cousin (Chang Chen). The veteran Taiwanese director opened up to THR about the necessity for Taiwanese filmmakers to engage with mainland China (which financed The Assassin):

"It doesn’t work if a Taiwanese filmmaker is making films aimed at just Taiwan," says Hou. "It’s just too small a market. When the mainland Chinese market hadn’t risen yet, we had Hong Kong and Southeast Asia. It’s quite a remote notion to aim for international prominence — how many filmmakers could really achieve that? But of course you need to abide with their rules while you’re there — send in your screenplays for censorship, that kind of thing. … There are always restrictions everywhere. Unless you have a very powerful topic you need to address, why would you want to clash with these restrictions?"

"If you’re determined about not having your films censored, you shouldn’t touch political issues. There are a lot of things you could make a film about. Can we not move people with something else?"

Written by Clarence Tsui