REVIEW OS i^NTS IN 1933,

I - * I R A

SECTION I - PO LITICAL AND SOCIAL,

HOME POLITICS .

i. Two outstanding events, the Assyrian affair

in August followed ty the League of Nations 1 enquiry,

and the most unexpected death of King Eaisal which took

place in September between the Assyrian affair and the

enquiry, overshadowed all other happenings in 1 1RAQ

during 1933i

2* The General election, held in February in

accordance with His Majesty’s wishes, resulted, as had

been expected, in an easy victory for the existing

cabinet of Naji Shawkat. The Elections were carefully

controlled and only the King* s nominees were elected

to the Chamber of Deputies. King Faisal was virtually

dictator in a country which was only nominally constit

utional. The King had many interests; he kept alive

the pan-Arab movement, intrigues for the throne of

SYRIA, and was active in fostering amongst the Arab

leaders enmity to Ibn Sa f ud the present holder of the

former Hashimite throne of HEJAZ. In ’IRAQ too, the

King had a number of schemes which included the con

struction of new palaces and bridges, new irrigation

works, and the BAGHDAD-HAIFA Railway. To cope with

these many interests, the Palace contained a busy Diwan

or Secretariat, capable of handling a heavy correspond

ence. The Palace was a hive of political activity and

no contractor or seeker of concessions from EUROPE or

SYRIA could afford to neglect the Royal Diwan. By

adroit manoeuvres the King had almost complete control

•ver the Cabinet which comprised, for the most part,

^ivil officials who were quite amenable but entirely

lacking in initiative.

This Cabinet was not, however, entirely to

the King’s liking since their negative attitude made it

obvious to everyone that the policy of the Government

was being dictated from the Palace. Consequently, in

March, he appointed as Premier Rashid Ali Gailani,

whose Cabinet included two most influential politicians

in ’IRAQ - Nuri Pasha An Ottoman title used after the names of certain provincial governors, high-ranking officials and military commanders. as Sa’id as Minister of Foreign

Affairs, and Yasin Pasha An Ottoman title used after the names of certain provincial governors, high-ranking officials and military commanders. al Hashimi, the leader of the

Opposition Party, as Minister of Finance. The in

clusion of the latter in the Gailani Cabinet was an

astute move as Yasin’s previous position as leader of

the Ultra-Nationalist Party, in favour of drastic

revision of the Treaty and anti-British in sentiment,

now proved invaluable to the King whenever his own

interests ran counter to the British. As a convenient

medium for the introduction of modified Nationalist

measures in which the King had a personal interest, the

Minister of Finance soon became the most important

person in the Cabinet.