Naji Name Meaning in English

What does the name Naji mean? What is the meaning of the name Naji, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

Word/name. Arabic. Meaning. Survivor. Naji (also transliterated as Naci (Turkish), Arabic: ناجي‎‎, Nājī) is an Arabic male given name, which is derived from the Arabic verb to survive.

If you want to read all details about Naji in urdu. Please read Naji details in urdu here

Naji Name Meaning in Urdu →

Naji Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning:

Saved, liberated, Safe, survivor

Details Meaning:

Saved

Gender:

Boy

Origin:

Religion:

Suitable for :

Boys / Male / Guys

Speak hardness:

Easy to pronounce, Naji is a short name

Unique Name:

It is a common name

Short name:

Yes

Name length:

4 Letters and 1 Words

Need Sibling Names For Naji?

Brothers sibling names for Naji can be chosen from the list below.

How People Search Naji

Najish

Ayesha najiha

Najim khan

Najibun

Najika

Najim

Najil

Najillah mustaqim

Najibul

Naji ullah

Najibullah

Najiya name meaning

Najiullah meaning in urdu

Najiullah name menig

Stylish name urdu najir

Najiullah words means in arabi

Najima name urdu

Najib ullah detail

Najib lucky things

Geetanjali chauhan najibabad

How do you write your name Naji in Urdu, Hindi, Arabic, Bangla ?

(Naji pronunciation in different languages)

How to write Naji in Urdu ?نجی

How to write Naji in Hindi ?नजी

How to write Naji in Arabic ?ناجی,ناجي

How to write Naji in Bangla ?নাজি

Naji Name Lucky Number

8

Practical endeavors, status-oriented, power-seeking, high-material goals

More polite and sweet people group. More attractive to opposite gender, self believe, more desires about home and luxuries about livings.

How to speak Naji in English, French, German, Spanish and 20 other languages?

Naji name pronunciation

Each letter meanings in Naji Name.

N Nurturing, the care you provide to all

A Adaptable, whenever things change

J Joyful, the spirit you spread.

I Intense, your zest of living.

You don't have visited any name yet. 😢

What Does Name Naji Mean?

Naji is baby boy name mainly popular in Muslim religion and its main origin is Arabic. Naji name meanings is Saved, liberated, safe, survivor.

People search this name as Najish, Ayesha najiha, Najim khan, Najibun, Najika, Najim, Najil, Najillah mustaqim, Najibul, Naji ullah, Najibullah, Najiya name meaning, Najiullah meaning in urdu, Najiullah name menig, Stylish name urdu najir, Najiullah words means in arabi, Najima name urdu, Najib ullah detail, Najib lucky things, Geetanjali chauhan najibabad.

Naji is written in Urdu, Hindi, Arabic, Bangla as نجی, नजी, ناجی,ناجي, নাজি. Other similar sounding names can be Najaat, Najah, Najair, Najam, Najat, Najee, Najeeb, Najeed, Najeeh, Najib, Najib ud din, Najib ullah, Najid, Najih, Najillah, Najiullah, Najjar, Najji, Najm, Najm al din.

Naji Ethnicity Distribution.

Naji Name Numerology And Personality

Naji has the numerology 8. The gender of this name Naji is Boy. They are also thought to be practical endeavors. These people do not keep themselves in fascinating things rather they keep a practical approach towards everything.

Those who have the numerology 8 are not thought to be extremely positive because of some of their qualities. The meaning of this name is Saved, liberated, safe, survivor. These people are always seeking power, and they also have some really high goals but all are related to materialistic things.

These are the people who are very status-oriented and they also do not believe in coming out of that bubble for anyone. The religion is Muslim. These people look at the status of the other person before knowing their personalities because that is how they are built.

Popular personalities with Naji Name.

Naji Name Wallpaper

Naji name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Naji name on photo online, Naji name writing style online, Write Naji name on image online, Write Naji name pic & wallpaper, Naji 3D name wallpapers editing, Naji new wallpaper, Naji 3d name creator online, Naji name background maker, Create my name in style for Naji

Frequently Asked Questions About Name Naji