RAY MUSTO HEADSHOT.jpg

Former state Sen. Raphael J. Musto (Citizens-Voice photo)

Good Tuesday Morning, Fellow Vortexers.

So you think you have it bad? The stresses of a criminal trial on federal corruption charges could kill former state

Sen. Ray Musto, D-Luzerne

, who's suffering from worsening liver disease, one of his physicians told a judge this week.

"There is no

"

Mr. Musto

would die,"

Doria

said if he goes to trial, adding that it was clear to him that

"He was more confused. He was less aware of his surroundings. He was much slower in his speech. At times, he was not focusing on our conversation," Doria said during a teleconference in open court.

The subject of Musto's health has been central to his trial. His lawyers have argued that the ex-lawmaker is far too ill to go to court. But late last year, Musto gave an interview to two Citizens-Voice reporters in which he railed against the tone of the newspaper's coverage of his case.

(UPDATE: 4:12 p.m.: The AP has just reported that "a US judge orders former state Sen. Musto into treatment center, says he's mentally incompetent to stand trial."

The rest of the day's news starts now.

Veteran U.S. Rep. Jim Gerlach, R-6th, has announced he won't run for re-election, giving Democrats a shot at a swing district in suburban Philly and opening a seat on the House Ways & Means Committee. That slobbering sound you hear is politicos panting at the prospect of an actually interesting Congressional election next year.

In case you were wondering, U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey, R-Pa., is a big, fat "No" on a bill that would offer a three-month extension on long-term jobless benefits. The Lehigh Valley lawmaker says he wants to focus on job-creation, which should come as comfort to his constituents who won't be able to pay for groceries.

And here's some video on that story ... courtesy of The Chicago Tribune.

Schools in the state System of Higher Education are mulling a ban on guns in "sensitive" areas of university campuses, The Post-Gazette reports. This story was first broken by PennLive's ace Capitol Bureau Chief Jan Murphy.

State lawmakers will have more issues than The New Yorker when they return to work later this month, The Tribune-Review reports, though we admit we're paraphrasing here.

And for that guy who e-mailed us yesterday, yes, Hillary Clinton told us to write the item above during the daily conference call with Beijing in which the Socialist/Communist/Anarcho-Syndicalist cabal plots to take over the world through artfully scripted episodes of "The Big Bang Theory."

Keystone Politics says it's too hard to take back Philly street space for pedestrians. Push that boulder, lads. Push it!

An internal poll shows a Tea Party closing the gap with U.S. Rep. Bill Shuster, R-Pa., PoliticsPA reports.

You Say It's Your Birthday Dept.

Best wishes go out to former Doylestown Intelligencer reporter and longtime Friend O'The Blog Annie Tasker this morning. Congratulations.

Heavy Rotation.

In which we fulfill a reader request. Here's Black Uhuru and "Party in Session."

Tuesday's Gratuitous Hockey Link.

A late goal lifted the Calgary Flames -- a team dear to Mrs. Capitol Notebook -- past the Colorado Avalanche last night to wrap up a 4-3 in the Mile High City. Our beloved Carolina Hurricanes face the Buffalo Sabres tonight.

And now you're up to date. See you all back here in a bit.