Sunday, May 01, 1994 Page: 10B QUICK WORDS: IN DEMOCRATIC PRIMARY,

RE-ELECT STATE SEN. MUSTO

Editor’s note: Today The Times Leader begins its series of editorial

endorsements for the May 10 primary. This morning’s endorsement is for the

Democratic nomination for state senator in the 14th District. (The Republican

candidate, John Ford of Hazleton, is running unopposed.)

Monday’s Times Leader will carry the endorsement for the Republican nominee

for governor. The Democratic gubernatorial endorsement will run on Tuesday.

In making these endorsements, The Times Leader’s editorial board is not

telling you what to think about the candidates. We’re telling you what we

think of them. And in doing so, we invite your response: We’ll publish as many

election-related letters as we can between now and Election Day.

* * *

He’s the Wyoming Valley’s Tip O’Neill, a politician from the old school, an

unapologetic glad-hander and baby-kisser who’s also plenty careful about keep

ing his constituents happy.

He’s good at it, too.

After all, today State Sen. Ray Musto gets The Times Leader’s support to

hang with the many other groups’ endorsements that he’s won for his wall.

Where were you in 1971, the year Charles Manson got convicted and “The

French Connection” won Best Picture of the Year? Raphael J. Musto went to

Harrisburg in 1971. He has been there or in Washington just about ever since.

That 23-years-and-still-counting political career is both Musto’s biggest

liability and greatest asset. Ray Musto probably has stayed in politics too

long. Lengthy careers such as his are one reason voters approved term limits

in 14 out of 14 states in 1992.

Americans are rightly suspicious of investing too much power in one person

for too many years, even when that person is Franklin Roosevelt.

Voters also worry about “endless campaigns.” Most voters clearly suspect

politicians spend their hours trying to get reelected when they should be

weighing the public’s best long-term interests .

In fact, if a candidate had surfaced this year who offered a dynamic

alternative to Ray Musto, we might be suggesting that voters give their

support to him or her.

But that didn’t happen.

And so we come to Musto’s experience also being his greatest asset.

With Ray Musto, 14th District voters know what they will get. They’ll get a

senator who takes constituent complaints very, very seriously. Not many voters

hang up disappointed after a call to Sen. Musto’s office.

They’ll get an outspoken supporter of libraries, fraternal groups,

volunteer fire companies and other cornerstones of Wyoming Valley life. Say

what you will against WAMs, or Walking Around Money — and we have said plenty

against them. The fact remains that Ray Musto uses this perfectly legal

technique effectively. He has funneled state grants to many local projects

that needed and deserved the support.

(True, a statue on Wilkes-Barre’s Public Square stretches anyone’s

definition of charity. But Musto can be forgiven the Christopher Columbus

statue, especially since he has pledged not to pay for such a project again.)

And voters know that, with Musto, they’ll be getting a senior state senator

with a background remarkably untouched by scandal.

Both of Musto’s opponents, Neil O’Donnell and Frank Trinisewski, deserve

congratulations for running honorable and very strong campaigns. This senate

race has been one of the best and most informative in years. The voters have

been well served.

However, neither candidate impresses enough to overcome Musto’s advantages

of incumbency. Neil O’Donnell claims to be an outsider who’d bring an

outsider’s voice to Harrisburg. But he’s from an insider family; the O’Donnell

name carries almost as much weight in these parts as the name Musto.

More telling, he has enjoyed an insider’s career, and ran an old-fashioned,

insider’s political campaign. Neil O’Donnell has a fine future ahead. But

we’re not so sure he’d bring some new or dramatically reformist vision to the

state capital.

As for Frank Trinisewski — well, the three-term county commissioner and

two-term Wilkes-Barre City Council member has clocked as much government time

as Ray Musto has. But absent strong evidence that he’d make a better senator,

we see no reason to change warhorses in the middle of this stream.

It’s easy to scorn career pols such as Ray Musto in the abstract. In

person, though, Musto charms. He’s as blunt and as forceful as an old

coal-powered locomotive, and inspires some of the same affection, too. After

all, coal-powered locomotives are antiques.

In any event, this classic style has served the anthracite region well. We

suggest Democratic voters would do well by giving Ray Musto their support on

May 10.