For Sen. Musto, service is key

State Sen. Raphael J. Musto is pictured in 1980 with Raymond Colley, former deputy clerk of the House of Representatives in front of the Capitol in Washington.

times leader file photos

Pennslyvannia state Sen. Ray Musto was honored Monday by the Jewish Family Service of Greater Wilkes-Barre annual award for his devotion to children’s causes, especially family services’ Kids Care Club.

Don Carey/the times leader

Musto announces his candidacy for state senator at the Nanticoke American Legion Hall in this 1982 photo.

times leader file photo

Musto, a Pittston native, was elected to the state Senate 14th District in 1982. Here he is seen with Congressman Dan Flood, behind and to the left, and former Vice President Walter Mondale.

times leader file photo

Musto’s mother, Rose, gives him a hug in 1982 after he received election results.

times leader file photo

Musto celebrates a victory.

times leader file photo

Then state Sen. Charles Lemmond and Musto listen at a hearing on solid waste in 1986.

times leader file photo

HE has 250,000 constituents in the 14th state Senatorial District to look after, but children have a special place in the heart of Sen. Raphael J. “Ray” Musto.

On Monday, the veteran state senator was recognized for his latest efforts to make the world a better place for children and their families.

Musto was honored with the Jewish Family Service of Greater Wilkes-Barre annual award for his devotion to children’s causes, especially family services’ Kids Care Club. Howard Grossman, executive director of Jewish Family Services, said Musto arranged for $21,000 in grant money for Kids Care Club, a service organization involving children as young as kindergarten age who undertake projects to help other children and senior citizens. They work on tasks such as filling backpacks for foster children, care packages for victims of natural disasters and emergency kits for the elderly, to introduce them to community service.

“Through the senator’s efforts, we have what I call sustainable funding for the first time,” Grossman said. “Before this, we had to rely on $500 here and $1,000 there from private donors.”

Grossman said Musto was also instrumental in the set-up of the NEPA Intergenerational Coalition, a coordinated effort of more than 15 local agencies to help grandparents and other non-parent family caregivers raise children. “The coalition provides valuable resources to these children and their caregivers,” he said. “We couldn’t have done it without the senator’s deep commitment.”

Musto also was honored for the work he has done at Holiday House, part of the Jewish Community Center camp near Harveys Lake. Grossman said overnight accommodations will be built at the camp and Musto is pursuing funding for the project.

Grossman said that in his 35 years of involvement with organizations, he’s come to see Musto as “one of the finest public servants I’ve ever had the pleasure of running into or working with. He’s a great humanitarian, caring and compassionate.”

Musto is modest about his part in the efforts but passionate about the reason for them. “They are a great agency and they’ve provided a lot of service and done a tremendous amount of good.”

And while children have a special place in his heart, Musto said service to anyone who needs it is his mission. “It’s a great satisfaction to help people that need help,” he said. “I enjoy the work that I do. I’m a hands-on guy, not a senator who just sits in his office. When I’m not in Harrisburg I’m available for calls and meetings to help. One telephone call can change the whole day.”

He attributes his desire to serve to his father, the late state Rep. James Musto. “My father was in the House just about 20 years when he passed away in 1971,” Musto said. It happened the same year Musto graduated from King’s College, and serving in public office wasn’t on his list of things to do. “I never had any intention of serving, and here I am 37 years later, still serving in office,” Musto said.

A family tradition

He ran for his father’s seat in a special election and was re-elected to four consecutive terms. “I learned a lot from my father about service,” Musto said.

“I learned about helping people. While he was serving in the House, his focus was on serving the unfortunate. My father was the author of the Pennsylvania Black Lung bill. (Congressman) Dan Flood carried it through the federal system, but the state bill was my father’s legislation.”

There is pride in his voice as Musto talks about the miners and their families helped by that legislation. It’s a legacy Musto has worked to carry on. “It’s so difficult for families when one or two people in the family are having a problem,” he said. “When you are able to help one person, the spin-off is that you help the family.”

Proud of progress

During his 37 years in office, Musto has taken an active role in several key causes. He’s been the Democratic chairman of the Senate Environmental Resources and Energy Committee and the Senate Education Committee.

He sees progress on both fronts and improvement in the area’s economy.

“Education is dear to my heart and we keep hearing from business people that our educators need to prepare our young people for the work force and that’s now happening. And when we are able to develop what they call brown fields — mine-scarred lands that were non-productive — when we are able to improve them and put them on the tax rolls, we’re improving the economy.”

Musto said the development now going on in Pittston and Jenkins Township on reclaimed mine land as well as diversified businesses such as the drug and vaccine manufacturer Sanofi Pasteur in the Poconos, the new medical school in Luzerne County and the proposed law school at Wilkes University are all signs of significant progress. “We have the diversified industry, the finest hospitals, colleges and universities that are second to none, so we’re becoming whole as a community,” Musto said. Musto said he seeks more progress on environmental fronts. “I’d like to see our river cleaned up,” he said, and noted he is working intently to pass a billion-dollar bond issue to fund work on combined sewer overflows that impact the area’s water supply. “It would improve our environment and would be a great economic stimulus,” he said.

Grants and bond issues are just some of the things Musto deals with during the three to four days he spends each week in Harrisburg while the Senate is in session. A typical Monday begins with travel to Harrisburg followed by a session with his staff to distribute work he’s brought with him from his constituents in the home district and confer about pending legislation. They also discuss the input from the hundreds of e-mails and phone calls he receives each week. “There’s great communication back and forth, with all the e-mails,” Musto said.

There are committee meetings sandwiched in between the meetings with staff and the actual Senate sessions.

The work week is supposed to end on Wednesday, when Musto returns to his local office and meetings with constituents, but sometimes the work load requires Thursday sessions.

Family front and center

Despite all the demands of his public life, Musto said he always makes time for his wife, Frances, and his four children, seven grandchildren and one great-grandchild.

“I’m a firm believer that we live by example,” he said, “I’m aware that my grandchildren don’t miss anything I do.”

He tries not to miss anything that they do, either, and said he puts a premium on time with his family.And when he does have time to relax, Musto said he enjoys a little old-fashioned entertainment.

“I have a television channel that is 24-hour westerns and I really enjoy watching the old western movies. They are my favorite and for a couple of reasons,” Musto said.

“First, the good guy always wins and second, no matter how far back you go, the problem was always about land and water, even back to the turn of the century it was land and water. And guess what—it never went away! That’s still our problem today.”

That’s just the observation one might expect from a man who spends much of his professional life looking out for the land and water in his district. What does he hope people observe about him?

“What I would hope,” Musto said, “is that they would feel I’m doing my job effectively and the best way that I can.” And what does he think his dad would think of the job he’s done filling his shoes for the last 37 years? Musto laughed. “I’m not sure. He must be up there saying, ‘What the hell is that kid doing?’”

About Senator Raphael J. Musto

• Born March 30, 1929, in Pittston, oldest of eight children of the late state Rep. James Musto and Rose Frushon Musto

• Graduated from Pittston Township schools in 1946

• Served in the U.S. Army from 1951-53 and is a Korean War veteran

• Graduated from King’s College in 1971

• Elected to the Pennsylvania House of Representatives in 1971 to fill his father’s unexpired term after his father’s death; was re-elected to four consecutive terms

• Won a special election to the 11th U.S. Congressional District in 1980

• Was elected to the state Senate 14th District in 1982; won re-election in 1986, 1990, 1994, 1998, 2002 and 2006

• Served as Senate Democratic Caucus Secretary from 1997 to 2004

• Serves as Democratic chairman of the Senate Environmental Resources and Energy Committee and Senate Education Committee

• Resides in Pittston Township with his wife, the former Frances Panzetta.

• Father of four; James, Raphael Jr., Michael and Frances Ann; has seven grandchildren and one great-grandchild

“It’s so difficult for families when one or two people in the

family are having a problem. When you are able to help one

person, the spin-off is that you help the family.”

Ray Musto