Has it really been five years since "Married to Jonas" went off the air? The series starring Kevin Jonas (who was once a member of the wildly popular boy band The Jonas Brothers) and his wife, Danielle, ran for two seasons before officially ending on May 26, 2013, just five months before his music group parted ways. Since then, we've heard very little from Kevin. But to mark the anniversary of his show's finale, Wonderwall.com is checking up on Kevin and more teen idols who quietly stepped away from the limelight. Keep reading for more…

RELATED: What happened to the cast of "The Facts of Life"?

Even though they couldn't make their music group work any longer, The Jonas Brothers — Kevin Jonas, Nick Jonas and Joe Jonas (seen here in 2018) — are still as close as ever. Kevin, in particular, has remained low-key since his reality series "Married to Jonas" ended in 2013. The married father of two did appear on the small screen in 2015 when he competed on Season 14 of "The Apprentice," although he didn't manage to win the show. In between working as an entrepreneur for The BLU Market — a digital influencer company he co-founded with Steven Forkosh — Kevin's been keeping his music skills fresh. In 2017, he appeared on stage with Lady Antebellum, much to the delight of his fans. And although a rumor spread in early 2018 that The Jonas Brothers might be reuniting, little brother Nick told Wonderwall.com that's not happening anytime soon.

RELATED: Stars you forgot were on "The Celebrity Apprentice"

Amanda Bynes (seen here in 2004) was a popular child actress on shows like "All That," "The Amanda Show" and "What I Like About You." By 2003, she was also a certified movie star, appearing in films like "What A Girl Wants" and "Hairspray." In 2010, Amanda starred in her last film to date, "Easy A," before getting herself in trouble with the law with numerous hit and runs, a DUI charge and, later, charges of reckless endangerment and drug possession. By 2014, after a series of bizarre social media posts as well as multiple hospitalizations and psychiatric evaluations, Amanda retreated from Hollywood to get her life back on track.

RELATED: Child stars: Where are they now?

Happily, Amanda Bynes seems to have made a full recovery and is now living a life she loves. Amanda (see here in 2016) is now more social-media shy but will graduate from Los Angeles's Fashion Institute of Design and Merchandising in the summer of 2018. She's made a few rare public appearances, most recently in April 2018 to support 2020 Democratic presidential hopeful Pat Harris. According to reports, Amanda hopes to launch her own fashion line in the coming year.

The music group Hanson — brothers Isaac Hanson, Zac Hanson and Taylor Hanson — first took hold of the airwaves in 1997 with the release of their third studio album, "Middle of Nowhere," which featured the hit single "MMMBop." The three boys were instant teen idols. Although they experienced major initial success, their follow-up albums weren't able to match sales and eventually, the trio of brothers faded into obscurity.

Hanson's Isaac Hanson, Zac Hanson and Taylor Hanson might not be belting out No. 1 radio hits these days, but the guys haven't stepped away from music at all. In fact, since "Middle of Nowhere," the brothers have released seven more albums and 11 EPs including 2017's "Finally it's Christmas" and "In Color." They've also all gotten married (Taylor got hitched first in 2002, followed by Isaac and Zac both in 2006). Between them all, they have 12 children. They also launched a lucrative beer brand, Hanson Brothers Beer Co., which sells an IPA called MMMHops (genius).

Remember when Willow Smith, daughter of Will Smith and Jada Pinkett Smith, ruled the world with her hit single "Whip My Hair" in 2010? The jam had everyone dancing while it spent 12 weeks on the charts (peaking at No. 13). Willow, who was later cast as a lead in the remake of "Annie" (a role she later dropped), seemed destined for superstardom. Then she disappeared from the music spotlight. According to her dad, it was because Willow just wanted the chance to be a regular kid.

After spending nearly five years out of the spotlight, Willow Smith (who once called having a famous family "excruciatingly terrible") reemerged in 2015 on a new professional path as a model with Society Management, the same agency that represents Kendall Jenner. Within a year, she was walking the runway for brands like Chanel (she later became the face of one of their campaigns). Though she did release a few followup singles after the success of "Whip My Hair," none dominated the charts the way her debut single did. In 2017, Willow took another stab at music with the release of her sophomore album, "The 1st," which to date hasn't produced any hits. Between modeling and music, Willow's also making time to work as a voice artist for animated shows like "Neo Yokio" and 2018's "Menen." In May 2018, Willow explained why she took time away from the spotlight. "It was after that whole 'Whip My Hair' thing and I had just stopped doing singing lessons and I was kind of just in this gray area of, 'Who am I? Do I have a purpose? Is there anything I can do besides this?'" Willow said on her and her mom's Facebook show, "Red Table Talk." "After the tour and the promotion and all of that, they wanted me to finish my album, and I was like, I'm not gonna do that. And after all of that kinda settled down and it was like a kind of lull, I was just listening to a lot of dark music. It was just so crazy and I was plunged into this black hole, and I was cutting myself." Willow added, "[I] totally lost my sanity for a moment there. I never talk about it because it was such a short weird point in my life. But you have to pull yourself out of it." Thankfully, she did.

Hunky Taylor Lautner was the smoldering co-star of 2008's "Twilight" (and its sequels) who caught all our attention. If starring as sexy shirtless werewolf Jacob didn't make him popular, then his four-month romance with singer Taylor Swift in 2009 certainly did the trick. After the final film in the "Twilight" franchise premiered in 2012, Taylor didn't find as much luck landing roles on the big screen. From 2014 to 2016, he made regular appearances on the TV comedy "Cuckoo" and later starred on several episodes of "Scream Queen." In 2016, he starred in the indie drama "Run the Tide," which was panned by critics, perhaps leading Taylor to take a step away from Hollywood that year.

While we haven't seen much of Taylor Lautner since he ended his run on "Scream Queens" in 2016, we did find out he won't be out of the spotlight for long since he's returning to the small screen to reprise his role as Dale on the BBC/Netflix comedy "Cuckoo." The fourth season of the series doesn't yet have a release date but in March 2018, Taylor shared a cast pic on his Instagram account along with the message, "That's a wrap! I'll miss you my London fam. Love you all #cuckoo," leaving us hopeful the show will air sooner rather than later. Just a few days after that, Taylor was spotted leaving a church service in Beverly Hills with his rumored girlfriend, Olivia Holt.

Britney Spears' little sister, Jamie Lynn Spears, was a star in her own right in the early 2000s. After starring on "All That" from 2002 to 2004, Jamie Lynn landed the lead role in the Nickelodeon comedy "Zoey 101" in 2005. A surprise pregnancy in 2007 when Jamie Lynn was only 16 years old forced her to step back from Hollywood to focus on her new role as a mother.

It's been 10 years since Jamie Lynn Spears worked as an actress. In that time, she's shifted her focus to country music. She released her debut EP, "The Journey," in 2014 — the same year she married businessman Jamie Watson. It only managed to make it to No. 193 on the Billboard 200. But living a quiet life away from Hollywood doesn't mean she's stayed out of the tabloids. In 2017, news broke that daughter Maddie Aldridge was in a near-fatal ATV accident. Thankfully, Maddie survived and completely recovered. In April 2018, Jamie Lynn welcomed her second child, daughter Ivey Joan Watson.

From 1991 to 1998, Jonathan Taylor Thomas was a tween and teen heartthrob while on the primetime comedy "Home Improvement." After the series ended, Jonathan spent the next seven years in Hollywood appearing on the small screen on shows like "Smallville" and "8 Simple Rules" and in films like "Walking Across Egypt" and "An American Town." Then in 2006, Jonathan did the unthinkable and walked away from Hollywood to go to school and have a normal life.

It took seven years out of the spotlight before Jonathan Taylor Thomas (seen here in 2013) would return to the small screen as a guest character on his old TV dad Tim Allen's latest sitcom, "Last Man Standing" (he also directed three episodes). He appeared on the series on and off for two years, finally leaving the role in 2015. Although JTT never really sunk his teeth back into acting, he doesn't regret it. Now working primarily behind the scenes as a screenwriter, Jonathan has said he spends his time watching TV, going to the theater, hiking and generally enjoying his life after spending years "going nonstop" as a child star.

Kyla Pratt began acting when she was just 7 years old, but her claim to fame came in 1998 at the age of 12 when she starred in the big-screen comedy "Dr. Doolittle" alongside Eddie Murphy. From 2001 to 2005, Kyla was the voice of Penny on "The Proud Family" and had recurring roles on "One on One" and "Let's Stay Together." In 2016, Kyla appeared in the series "Recovery Road" and the TV movie "The Secret She Kept" before giving her acting career a break to focus on raising her two children.

Now all grown up, the lovely Kyla Pratt is a full-time mom of two (with partner Danny Kirkpatrick, a songwriter and tattoo artist) who's also reinventing herself as a stage actress. In 2018, Kyla joined the cast of "Set It Off Live" — a theater production based on the film of the same name. In addition to working in the theater, Kyla's worked at being a social media influencer, partnering with several brands to share product endorsements with her followers.

Erik Von Detten was another Hollywood heartthrob who many thought was destined to become a leading man. Acting since he was just 9, the handsome star landed numerous roles on the big and small screens including in the films "The Princess Diaries" and "American Girl" as well as the sitcoms "So Weird" and "Complete Savages." Erik also famously voiced the character Sid in all three "Toy Story" films. Then in 2010, he packed his good looks and took a trip straight out of Tinseltown without so much as a kiss goodbye.

It's been 10 long years since Erik Von Detten, the former teenage idol of our dreams, took his final bow in Hollywood. He's dropped so far off the radar, the last time anyone saw him was in 2016 (seen here) when he attended the Disney Channel's "Adventures in Babysitting" TV film premiere (still looking like a total babe) with his niece and nephew in tow. Wherever Erik is today, we hope he's happy and reconsidering a return to the big or small screens.

If the early 2000s had an anthem, it was undoubtedly Ashlee Simpson's "Pieces of Me." The little sister of Jessica Simpson burst onto the scene in 2004 with the release of her debut album, "Autobiography," which quickly landed at the No. 1 spot on the Billboard 200. Her sudden rise was so powerful, even her "Saturday Night Live" scandal (she was caught lip-syncing on stage) and a much publicized nose job didn't hinder her success. Ashlee later released her sophomore album, "I Am Me," in 2005, which also went to No.1. Over the next few years, Ashlee released a third album and branched out into acting with roles on "Melrose Place" and "Pawn Shop Chronicles."

It's crazy to think that it's been a decade since Ashlee Simpson's last album dropped. After divorcing rocker Pete Wentz in 2011, Ashlee moved on with her life and eventually found love with actor and musician Evan Ross. The two married in 2014 and the following year welcomed their first child together, daughter Jagger Snow Ross. Along with Ashlee's son, Bronx Mowgli Wentz, Ashlee seems to be enjoying family life more than anything, only stepping out in the spotlight for the occasional awards ceremony, like the 2017 American Music Awards. But fans will soon see a lot more of her: In May 2018, E! announced that it had ordered a new docu-series dubbed "Ashlee and Evan" that will show the couple parenting and recording a duet album.

First known as Lil' Bow Wow and later as just Bow Wow, singer and actor Shad Moss dropped his debut album, "Beware of Dog," in 2000 at age 13 and quickly had our hearts. It wasn't long before the child rap star began appearing on-screen in films such as "Like Mike" and TV shows like "Entourage." His last album, "New Jack City II," debuted in 2009 before he put his music aspirations on the sideline. In 2015, Shad landed the role of Brody Nelson on "CSI: Cyber," which was ultimately canceled in 2016. Since then, we've heard little from this former teen idol (unless we count his controversial "I'm not black" and "I'm not voting" remarks on Twitter in 2016).

It's been two years since we've seen Shad Moss (aka Bow Wow) on the small screen and more than five years since he's released a studio album. In 2017, he became the punchline of an internet joke known as the #BowWowChallenge when he was caught misleading fans about traveling on a private jet, leading creative social media users to post phony pictures of their own "lavish" lifestyles. In 2018, the former teen idol returned to the airwaves with the release of his newest single, "Yeaahh," off his forthcoming "Greenlight 6" project. The actor and music star is also planning to make a comeback on the big screen with the upcoming thriller "Superstition: The Rule of 3's." Since early 2018, Shad has been happily dating model Kiyomi Leslie, whom he credits with helping him get his life on track.

Tobey Maguire was possibly the most famous actor of all in 2002 when he made his debut as the titular web slinger in "Spider-Man." Although known for his work in earlier films like "Pleasantville" and "Cider House Rules," Tobey's status as an action hero catapulted his fame to new heights. After co-starring in "The Great Gatsby" in 2013 and appearing as a recurring cast member on 2014's "The Spoils of Babylon," Tobey's last on-screen role would come in 2014's "Pawn Sacrifice." Since then, he hasn't appeared on-screen in film or television, although he did voice the character of Tim in the 2017 animated movie "The Boss Baby."

Tobey Maguire went from A-list teen idol to near recluse. It's been four years since the notoriously private actor has taken an on-screen role, although that doesn't mean he hasn't been actively working in the industry. Instead of acting, Tobey's found a new home behind the scenes as a producer working on films like "Good People" and "The 5th Wave." In 2017, his divorce from jewelry designer Jennifer Meyer was finalized. While co-parenting his two children, Tobey's also gearing up for the release of two new films he's produced, "The Best of Enemies" and "Brittany Runs a Marathon."