For every David Cassidy, there was a Shaun; for every Jessica Simpson, an Ashlee. Hollywood was peppered with celebrities who broke out of their older siblings' shadows to become a star in his or her own right. Frankie Jonas was no exception. He gained popularity by being the youngest brother of pop stars The Jonas Brothers, even being given the nickname "the Bonus Jonas" by millions of fans. He soon became a fixture in the band's family-based entourage, appearing in the 2009 film "Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience" and getting rave reviews for his adorable performance in the sitcom "Jonas" (Disney Channel, 2009-10). Jonas may have grown up a rocker-in-training, but with each appearance and project, there was no denying he, himself, also had the makings of a star.

Franklin Nathaniel Jonas was born on Sept. 28, 2000 in Wyckoff, NJ. His parents were Kevin Jonas, Sr., a former Assembly of God pastor, and Denise Jonas, who was a housewife and music teacher. Jonas was the youngest brother of Kevin, Joseph and Nicholas Jonas, who would later form the successful pop group, the Jonas Brothers. The chubby-cheeked and curly-haired Jonas grew up emulating his rock star brothers - from dressing head-to-toe in mod-style suits and designer loafers, to walking down the red carpet at various events.

And like his brothers, music was Jonas' favorite hobby. He formed a band called Hollywood Shakeup, which he joked his brothers would open for someday. Jonas, who was often called "Frank the Tank" by his brothers, also loved rooting for his favorite team the New York Yankees and playing center field for a football team called the Jr. Hornets.

The youngest Jonas' first taste of the spotlight was appearing on the reality series "Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream" (Disney Channel, 2008). The 10-part series followed the Jonas Brothers during their "When You Look Me In The Eyes" tour, from spending family time on the tour bus to getting mobbed by an army of screaming fans backstage. He again appeared as himself in the 2009 concert film "Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience." Both the TV series and the concert film exposed "the Bonus Jonas" - another nickname his brothers coined - to millions of fans who embraced him as the unofficial fourth member of the band.

Jonas began his acting career in a television commercial for Breakfast Breaks meal products. The spot featured the Jonas family, with the three eldest boys rushing out the door until their mother reminds them to grab their Breakfast Breaks packages. Jonas attempts to follow his brothers but is asked to stay inside the house. The brothers have said this was very similar to a real-life scenario, with their baby brother eager to grow up alongside his heartthrob siblings.

Proving he could work well on his own, Jonas lent his voice for the character of Sosuke, a five-year-old boy who befriends a goldfish princess, in the English version of the animated film, "Gake no ue no Ponyo" ("Ponyo on the Cliff by the Sea," 2008). Helmed by the legendary Japanese filmmaker Hayao Miyazaki, the movie also featured the voices of Liam Neeson, Tina Fey, Cate Blanchett, Matt Damon, and another celebrity sibling, Noah Lindsey Cyrus (sister of Miley Cyrus).

In 2009, Jonas co-starred with his brothers on "Jonas." The Disney Channel original series followed the fictional Lucas brothers, a pop group balancing stardom while trying to live normal teenage lives. Critics compared the series to a cross between "The Monkees" (NBC, 1966-68) and "The Flight of the Conchords" (HBO, 2007-09). Not straying far from real-life, Jonas was cast as youngest brother Frankie Lucas, a role which was written with him in mind. His performance earned Jonas a Choice TV: Breakout Star Male nomination at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards. Jonas was reported to appear alongside his brothers once again in "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" (Disney Channel, 2009) a sequel to the hit 2008 TV movie. He was also cast in the 2010 film "Walter the Farting Dog."