Borrowing from the famous line of a 1970s Grateful Dead song, the prolonged and expensive custody battle over Portsmouth Regional Hospital has been a long, strange legal trip with plenty of twists and turns.

In what could be one of the final acts in the battle between the Foundation for Seacoast Health and Hospital Corporation of America, the Rockingham Superior Court judge overseeing the case since 2006 ruled the hospital will remain under the control and ownership of HCA.

The Foundation for Seacoast Health was created to protect and oversee community interests with HCA after the former nonprofit community hospital was purchased by the for-profit HCA in 1983. The foundation claimed it has the right to repurchase the facility due to what it called a breach of the purchase agreement in 1999. But Judge Kenneth R. McHugh strongly rejected that claim in his 24-page ruling dated Sept. 15. McHugh ruled that while the contract was breached, repurchasing the hospital was not a proper remedy since the breach had not impacted hospital operations or management and no harm was done. He also called into question the foundation's competence to even attempt such a purchase and whether it has wasted millions of dollars in legal fees in the process.

"The court finds that the plaintiff would not have elected to purchase the hospital in 1999 if it had the option to do so," McHugh wrote. He also ordered that the foundation would only receive "a fraction of the legal costs incurred" from HCA.

Dan Hoefle, board chairman for Foundation for Seacoast Health, said he was "disappointed" by the ruling and said no decision has been made to appeal it to the state Supreme Court. He had no comment when asked about McHugh's assertion that "since its formation after the sale in 1983, the foundation has exhibited no expertise in the management of its finances."

McHugh did find HCA responsible for a breach of contract stemming from the original purchase agreement in 1983, which allowed the foundation the right of first refusal to buy back the hospital if there were a change in corporate structure, assets or a degradation of health care quality at the hospital. "The defendant (HCA) is ordered to take whatever steps are necessary to put the hospital back in the same direct corporate chain that it was before the 1999 transfer," McHugh said.

The following is a look back at the David-versus-Goliath legal struggle that pitted a local nonprofit against one of the top health care companies in the country.

2006

The case has always centered on a legally contentious and broad "right-of-first-refusal" clause in the 1983 sales agreement that requires Tennessee-headquartered HCA to give a right of first refusal to the foundation in case of an ownership change. The Foundation for Seacoast Health, originally called the Portsmouth Hospital Foundation, filed suit in 2006 after the $33 billion private equity purchase of HCA in 2006. While the hospital, one of Portsmouth's largest employers, was not being sold as an individual facility, the foundation asserted the 1983 contract grants it a broad right-of-first-refusal option to repurchase the hospital and its assets if HCA should be sold or acquired through merger.

"We are looking forward to our day in court," said Hoefle, then vice chairman of the foundation. An HCA spokesman told the Herald that "Portsmouth Regional Hospital is not for sale" and the foundation has no right of first refusal.

2007

In June, Judge McHugh ruled in favor of HCA. He agreed with HCA's contention that the 2006 $33 billion private equity purchase was a stock transfer and the assets of Portsmouth Regional Hospital were not for sale — hence, the right-of-first-refusal clause was not triggered.

The foundation appealed to the state Supreme Court. Hoefle, who had become foundation chairman, said he believed McHugh "erred" in his ruling by making a too-narrow interpretation of the original 1983 agreement, which Hoefle believes was intentionally broad to protect the community from the hospital being hurt by corporate maneuvering far away from Portsmouth. In September, the state Supreme Court agreed to hear the appeal.

2008

In July, the state Supreme Court issued a decision that framed the legal road map for the next three years. The court both ruled against the appeal by the Foundation of Seacoast Health, which had long passed the million dollar mark in legal fees. But the ruling came with a legal lifeline. The court ruled while a 2006 leveraged buyout of HCA did not violate the 1983 agreement that would have allowed the foundation to buy back the local hospital, a lesser transaction that was not reported to the foundation in 1999 may have.

The 1999 transaction transferred the local hospital and its assets to Healthtrust Inc., without notifying the foundation. The high court interpreted that transfer as a possible violation of the right of first refusal. The case was sent back to Rockingham Superior Court for adjudication.

"This is definitely good news for the Seacoast," Hoefle said at the time. "If we're right (about being entitled to the right of first refusal based on the 1999 transaction) and HCA should have given us notice in 1999, the damages we could recover would be significant...; We have the resources, and our goal remains the same; to wrest control of the hospital from HCA."

Mark Foust, vice president of communications for HCA, had a different take on the decision. "We're very pleased with the ruling," he said. "It affirms that the leveraged buyout does not trigger the foundation's right of first refusal." He called the 1999 transfer a "limited issue." "Meanwhile," he added, "it's business as usual for us. The $63 million (hospital renovation and) expansion is moving forward."

2009

In a stunning development, McHugh ruled the HCA reorganization in 1999 triggered a right-of-first-refusal provision in the original sales agreement. That agreement included the 1983 ROFR clause that allowed the Foundation for Seacoast Health the right to potentially buy back the hospital.

HCA appealed the ruling within days to the state Supreme Court. "We're disappointed in the judge's ruling, but grateful that he provided the means for immediate appeal and we mean to do so," Foust said. "We certainly believe our appeal will have merit."

If it prevails on appeal, the foundation said it will begin due-diligence proceedings to buy the hospital back. Former foundation chairman and lawsuit advisor William Henson said the foundation was determined to protect community interests by regaining control of the hospital — and to ask the court for damages from HCA.

"Theoretically, we could have owned the hospital for the past decade," Henson said. "We have no concerns about the quality of care at the hospital, but we see less of a reinvestment into physical plant and financial resources being diverted."

Foust said the ongoing legal battle changes nothing about the hospital's commitment to care inside the hospital and to the community. "We're on the two parallel paths," he said. "The first is the legal appeal but the second is business as usual for the care we provide at the hospital including our ongoing commitment to be a strong and supportive community partner."

2010

The case entered the next significant phase when the state Supreme Court returned it to Rockingham Superior Court for a final resolution and effectively denying HCA's appeal.

The decision allowed the trial that would determine the remedy for the Foundation for Seacoast Health and what HCA's penalty would be for the 1999 violation that Judge McHugh found in his December 2009 ruling. "We're very pleased," Hoefle said. "This allows us to go forward with the remedy phase."

"HCA is disappointed by the New Hampshire Supreme Court's decision to delay hearing our appeal until the trial court has considered all the issues," Foust said in a statement.

Both sides expect the case ultimately will be decided in the Supreme Court.

In April, Judge McHugh delays the trial until May 2011 at the request of HCA lawyers.

2011

In January, Judge McHugh set a May trial date and told parties "The remedy portion of this case shall be broad enough to include all types of possible resolutions to include both the right to repurchase and the right of rescission."

A possible settlement between HCA and the foundation fell through in April. An HCA spokesman said the company was "disappointed" that no settlement was reached because the costly lawsuit takes focus away from patient and community care.

During three weeks of testimony in May and June, it was revealed the foundation's legal fees had topped $7 million as both sides presented their cases for a remedy. When final arguments were made in July, the lead lawyer for HCA, Everett "Kip" Johnson, claimed a clause in the agreement that would have allowed repurchase was stricken in a 1994 revision. Johnson also said there was no injury to the foundation or the community as a result of the violation, and that the appropriate penalty would be to simply rescind the action that caused the violation.

Peter Resnik, lead attorney for the foundation, argued the organization should be allowed to repurchase the hospital from HCA as a penalty for violating the 1983 agreement — and to allow the foundation to continue its oversight to enforce any of the operational covenants of the purchase agreement, such as providing a first-class health facility to the community and caring for the indigent, in the future.

"If the court lets HCA walk away for this breach, the asset purchase agreement is worthless," Resnik said. "The trustees (of the foundation) are willing to spend millions of dollars to litigate (this case because) it was their fiduciary responsibility."

McHugh issued his final ruling on Sept. 15. "For all practical purposes, that is the end of this case," he wrote. He added that "Hopefully now that this litigation is concluded, at least at the trial level, the parties can constructively address whatever negative feelings they may have towards one another, and work together to continue to provide excellent health care for the Portsmouth community."

Correspondent Shir Haberman contributed to this story.