PORTSMOUTH — Portsmouth will soon be listed as the home port of a new tall ship.

And it's the city's nautical past as well as the state's income-tax-free status that persuaded the ship's owner to register it here.

"We're very proud to be able to have the registry of Portsmouth N.H., particularly because of its maritime history," Woodson K. Woods, owner of the Privateer Lynx, said in a telephone interview Monday from his home in Newport, Calif. "Plus, your state is a tax-free state."

The Privateer Lynx, is currently under construction in Rockport, Maine.

The vessel is set to be launched in mid-July and will be coming to Portsmouth for a visit in late September of this year.

As a tribute to Portsmouth's privateer past, Woods is planning a ceremony to name Portsmouth officially as the Lynx's home port.

The Privateer Lynx will read, "Portsmouth, N.H." in paint along its transom, a spot on a ship reserved for the listing of a vessel's home port.

"Portsmouth was a very famous port during the Golden Age of privateering," Woods said. "I really do love the town and have been in and out many times, just visiting and stopping by, like a privateer."

Woods is set to make another trip to Portsmouth soon.

He will speak at a Ranger Foundation membership meeting on May 22.

The meeting is to be held at Yoken's Restaurant and Conference Center on Route — from 7 p.m. to 9 p.m.

The Ranger Foundation is the nonprofit group based in Portsmouth working to build a replica of the Revolutionary War-era ship skippered by John Paul Jones.

Once constructed, the Privateer Lynx will make its first public appearance in Portsmouth in September.

The Lynx will be a square-rigged topsail schooner built to represent the privateer vessels from the War of 1812.

The original Lynx was captured in 1813 by the British and served in the Royal Navy until 1820.

The new Lynx will have period-style guns and fly historic pennants from the 1812-era.

The crew will also wear period clothing.

The height of the main mast will measure about 94 feet. The vessel will have 4,669 square feet of sail.

The ship is designed by well-known marine architect Melbourne Smith.

The vessel will be used to provide sail training opportunities for youth and young adults.

"The main theme of the boat is sail training and history," Woods said.

Though the boat will list Portsmouth as its home port, he said, it will be out in the water almost all the time.

"We're going to be keeping very busy," Woods said.