Voted #1 for Foundation Repair – Portsmouth, VA

Our award-winning team of foundation repair experts have hundreds of years of experience in crawl space and foundation repair. Here are a few reasons why our customers love us:

Over 2500 ★★★★★ reviews

Photos included with free inspections

Flexible and customized options

Great Discounts and financing

Excellent long-term warranties

Great communication

Crawl Space Repair Experts in Portsmouth, VA

BAY Crawl Space & Foundation Repair is the #1 rated crawl space & foundation repair company serving Portsmouth. We specialize in crawl space repair & foundation repair solutions.

Our Specialties Include:

Crawl Space Moisture Control

Crawl Space Flooding

Mold Remediation

Structural Repairs

Subfloor Replacement

Termite Remediation

Vapor Barriers

Crawl Space Encapsulation

Crawl Space Insulation

Basement Waterproofing

Sloping Uneven Floors

Sticking Doors

Foundation Jacks

Foundation Stabilizers

We Offer Free Inspections & Affordable Repair Options.

Concerned about your home’s crawl space or foundation? We’ll send an expert to inspect your concerns, take photos, and provide guaranteed solutions, with a free inspection. Call 757-460-0444 or book your free inspection online.

#1 Rated Locally for Crawl Space Repair, Foundation Repair, & Crawl Space Encapsulation.

Our reviews show our constant commitment to taking great care of our customers, over many years. We pride ourselves on giving great customer experiences & delivering excellent value. Our experience & efficiency allow us to do more, for less.

Google – 4.9 Rating with 1,100+ Reviews

Angi – 4.9 Rating with 450+ Reviews

Facebook – 5.0 Rating with 400+ Reviews

HomeAdvisor – 4.9 Rating with 200+ Reviews

Better Business Bureau – 4.9 Rating with 300+ Reviews

Also, see Crawl Space & Foundation Repair in Prince George, VA

Experts Focused on Delivering Great Customer Experiences.

With over 5,000 happy customers & over 300 years of collective experience, we are Portsmouth VA’s preferred crawl space & foundation repair contractor. Our team of crawl space & foundation repair specialists have special methods, materials, tools, and experts to make any project a success.

Also, see

Crawl Space Encapsulation & Waterproofing in Portsmouth, VA

We Help Provide Safe, Strong, & Healthy Homes.

Helping provide safe, strong, and healthy homes, is our passion. After a thorough inspection of your concerns, we’ll show you photos, explain what’s happening, and customize your solutions to your unique wants and needs.

We Offer Discounts, Financing, & A Great Deposit Policy.

At BAY, you always get great value for your investment in your home. We have competitive + flexible pricing. We only collect a $500 flat-rate deposit on any size project. And 100% project cost financing is available.

Guaranteed Solutions for Foundation Issues in Portsmouth, VA.

Crawl Space Moisture

Crawl Space Mold

Standing Water

Musty Smells

Sloping Uneven Floors

Sticking Doors

Cracked Bricks

Drywall Cracks

Crawl Space Wood Rot

Foundation Settlement

Basement Flooding

Cold Floors

Money Saving Discounts & Coupons

We offer exclusive discounts to our valued military personnel, seniors, and public servants. We also understand everyone loves saving money, so we’re also extending discounts to ALL payment methods on credit card, check or cash payments.

Voted #1 for Crawl Space Repair Near Me in Portsmouth, VA

Our award-winning team of experts have hundreds of years of collective experience in crawl space and foundation repair. Here are a few reasons why our customers love us:

Excellent long-term warranties

Great communication

Special methods

Professional

Efficient

and More

Full-Service Foundation Repair Near Me: Portsmouth, VA

At BAY Crawl Space and Foundation Repair, we offer all the services you need to protect your home from foundation damage while preventing mold and water damage. Learn more about the services we offer.

Foundation Crack Repair

Foundation cracks can be a severe problem leading to further damage if left untreated. These cracks can also allow water and pests to enter your home. Our team can repair any cracks in your foundation and ensure your structure is secure.

Foundation Jacks and Stabilizers

If your foundation is sinking or settling, we can install foundation jacks and stabilizers to provide the support it needs to remain stable. At BAY Crawl Space and Foundation Repair, we use innovative foundation jack systems to safely and permanently lift your home.

Basement & Crawl Space Repair

A damaged basement or crawl space can cause a host of problems, from mold and mildew to structural and water damage. Our team can repair any damage and ensure that your basement or crawl space is stable.

Crawl Space & Basement Waterproofing

If you’re experiencing water damage or moisture problems in your basement or crawl space, we can install a moisture control system to keep water out. This can include a sump pump system, vapor barrier, crawl space encapsulation, and more.

Mold Remediation

The water around your foundation can lead to both foundation damage and mold. We offer mold inspections, remediation, and cleanup to protect your home’s air quality and prevent respiratory illness.

Crawl Space and Foundation Repair Company in Portsmouth

Protect Your Investment by Partnering With a Professional Crawl Space and Foundation Repair Company.

Protect Your Home With Foundation and Crawl Space Repair

Homes of any age can run into foundational problems depending on the soil they’re sitting on. This is especially true for houses that are in Portsmouth. Being close to the shoreline can cause increased issues with your home’s foundation and crawl space.

BAY Crawl Space and Foundation Repair specialize in fixing homes in Portsmouth. Our services include crawl space repair, crawl space encapsulation, and foundation repair. We’re proud to be a leading foundation & crawl space repair company in Portsmouth, Virginia.

Learn why our company has over 1,500 five-star reviews and a 4.9/5 average rating. Connect with us to schedule your free foundation and crawl space inspection in Portsmouth.

Our Team Are Experts in Many Repair Services

No matter what problem you’re encountering with your crawl space or foundation, our team can help. We’re highly trained in a range of services that’ll address your home’s issues.

Crawl Space Moisture Control

Crawl Space Flooding

Mold Remediation

Structural Repair

Vapor Barriers

Crawl Space Dehumidifiers

Crawl Space Insulation

Sloping Uneven Floors

Sticking Doors

Foundation Jacks

Foundation Stabilizers

Basement Waterproofing

Basement Wall Stabilization

We Have Guaranteed Solutions for Common Crawl Space and Foundation Problems

There are many signs you might encounter that indicate you have a problem with your foundation or crawl space. Below is more information about the most frequent symptoms of these issues and what steps we can take to remedy them.

Crawl Space Moisture and Mold

Standing Water in the Crawl Space

Musty Smells from Crawl Space

Sticking Doors

Cracked Bricks

Sinking and Uneven Floors

House Settling with Drywall Cracks

Crawl Space Wood Rot

Settlement Cracks

Cold Floors

How Our Process Works

Step One: Give Us a Call

You can schedule your free home inspection by filling out our online contact form or by calling 757-460-0444.

Step Two: Review Your Repair Options

Our detailed inspection report will include our recommended plan for repairs. The report will also include photos of what we discovered.

Step Three: The Work Starts

Our team of experienced contractors will work fast to get your home secure again.

Step Four: Don’t Worry

You’ll feel confident that your home is safe and free of hazardous materials after BAY Crawl Space and Foundation Repair has completed the project.

BAY Crawl Space and Foundation Repair Is Here to Help

We understand how challenging it can be to find a reliable foundation and crawl space repair company in Portsmouth. You want to find a partner that you can trust to provide you with expert advice and solutions.

At BAY Crawl Space and Foundation Repair, our team is the best in the business. With over 400 years of combined experience, we work with leaders in the industry. Each team member receives training and stays up to date on the latest in the field.

Experience the Best Financing Options Available

Many crawl space and foundation repair companies require you to make hefty deposits before they start working on your project. Not with us. You only have to make a $500 deposit on projects you aren’t financing with us.

We’re happy to offer our customers 100% financing options that will fit every budget. You can break down your project cost over 12 or even 120 months.

On top of that, we price our services competitively and affordably. We understand that getting your foundation or crawl space fixed isn’t a cosmetic or optional option. You won’t encounter overinflated prices when you partner with us.

Our Award-Winning Company Is Here to Help

Our foundation repair and crawl space team members are highly-trained individuals in their respective fields. We use advanced methods and the latest equipment in the field to provide you with exceptional solutions.

Our company has been the recipient of many awards from Angi and CoVA Biz. You’re guaranteed to work with the best of the best when you hire us.

How Much Does Foundation Repair in Portsmouth Cost?

The cost of our foundation and crawl space repair services in Northern Virginia varies. Multiple factors can affect the final cost. The main contributing thing is what’s causing your problems and how extensive it is.

Other items that can alter the price include how many team members we have working on your project and what type of foundation you have. We’ll provide a detailed quote so you won’t encounter any unexpected costs.

Reach Out to Our Team Today to Learn More

BAY Crawl Space and Foundation Repair are on standby and ready to assist you with your foundation and crawl space problems. If you’ve been searching for a foundation repair company in Portsmouth without any luck, we’re here to help. Fill out our online contact form to schedule a free inspection.