The Northeast Credit Union Foundation hosted its inaugural event, Nourish Portsmouth, at Cisco Brewers on May 18th; an evening celebrating the spirit of doing well by doing good. Over 250 guests had the opportunity to connect with over 20 local nonprofits who were on site to share their missions and build relationships with each other.

Welcoming remarks were given by Northeast Credit Union CEO and Chairman of the Foundation, Chris Parker, who shared how the Foundation was born out of the belief that Northeast Credit Union’s purpose is more significant than just offering a great banking experience. While listening to wonderful music performances by local musicians, Kris Hype and the New Hampshire Fiddle Ensemble, guests visited with mission-aligned organizations like The Monarch School of New England, I Got Bridged, and Gather to name a few, and shared how working together they are making an impact on our communities.

The culmination of the event came when The Northeast Credit Union Foundation honored Will Arvelo, Executive Director of Cross Roads House with the first-ever Nourish Award. The Nourish Award is bestowed upon an organization that reflects Northeast’s mission to enrich and nourish the lives of others. Cross Roads House provides homeless families and individuals with shelter, basic necessities, and the tools and guidance they need to return to permanent housing.

Dan Raposa, Executive Director of The Northeast Credit Union Foundation shared, “For four decades, the work of the Cross Roads House has been nothing less than remarkable. Their services are vital for the unsheltered in the Seacoast area. Theirs is a cause we’re happy to support, is tightly aligned with our mission, and we see them as a valuable community resource and a cornerstone of our evolving Nourish Network.”

The spirit of the evening was not lost on the attendees nor the nonprofits, with many sharing their appreciation for Northeast bringing the community together in this way. “I was so energized and inspired when I got home last night – Northeast has an incredible community and it seems like there are even more great things ahead to explore. We’re so grateful to be a part of it!” stated Amanda Martineau of The Monarch School of New England.