PORTSMOUTH — When was the last time you got to visit a brand new museum? Most museums are long-established institutions with revered halls, and a visit to their well-traveled galleries is a step back in time.

The Museum of New Art-Portsmouth, called MONA-Portsmouth, is a fresh step into the present surrounded by vibrant color and inspiring space, and it's opening its doors for the first time this week.

Located inside the new Jimmy’s Jazz and Blues Club, the museum will celebrate its Grand Opening for the public on Saturday, Oct. 23 from 6 to 9 p.m. The opening night will include a gallery talk by Markus Linnenbrink, the artist and curator of the museum’s inaugural exhibit, and the unveiling of a video documenting Linnenbrink’s preparations for this exhibit. It just happens to be the same night legend Mavis Staples is playing the club upstairs.

'Ideas and dreams become reality': Jimmy's on Congress offers jazz, blues and fine cuisine

Before the museum opens to the public Saturday, the museum will celebrate its opening with a gala on Wednesday, Oct. 20. The gala will include a meet and greet with Linnenbrink, the first viewing of his exhibit, a first look at the new museum space, and a reception upstairs at Jimmy's Jazz and Blues Club featuring a salsa dance performance by Fleure Dance Troupe, followed by dancing, food and cash bar. More information and tickets are available at EventBrite.com.

The new museum’s inaugural exhibit features the color-saturated work of Linnenbrink, a Brooklyn-based artist whose paintings, sculptures, three-dimensional works on canvas and paper as well as a unique room-sized installation with rainbows of color covering each and every surface await museum visitors. Linnenbrink’s works are included in the permanent collections of the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, UCLA Hammer Museum, the Hood Museum of Art at Dartmouth College, and others.

What to expect at the exhibit

The museum features three galleries and an atrium with a 17-foot-high ceiling that spills light into the new exhibit space. Linnenbrink’s exhibit, “THEREARESPACESTHATBREATHE,” fills the 6,800-square-foot space on the first floor of the newly renovated historic former YMCA building with vibrant color.

"Colors are about emotion, and they trigger them," Linnenbrink said of the foundation of his art. "It's really interesting."

Linnenbrink talked as he stood behind a table of jars filled with paint, maybe a hundred or so, against a backdrop of paintings where he records the palette he's using for this specific installation, which will themselves become works of art.

“The interaction of people experiencing color is a big part of this show,” Linnenbrink said, noting the elements incorporated into the exhibit to draw viewers in. There’ll be a short documentary film playing on a video screen in one part of the gallery, and Linnenbrink has painted chairs that can be moved around the gallery by people who want to sit in front of different works to take them in for a little while.

In many museums, Linnenbrink noted, “There's the bench in the middle of the room, that ‘don’t touch anything’ feel. These chairs are painted with the same kind of material that I use on my paintings ... so you are allowed to interact with something that has a tactile surface. You can take the chair and carry it around." He also has created child-sized chairs for young visitors.

Linnenbrink explained the difference between a museum and a gallery. “For an artist, it's always great to have your work being shown in a museum because it, like there's more freedom to figure things out. There's no real competition, like there's no real monetary pressure so you have like this freedom to present your work, especially when you have a solo show," he said. "You can present your work in a way that you feel no pressure on you except your own. ... The chair might not happen in a gallery."

Upon seeing the Museum of New Art-Portsmouth for the first time, he said, “It's a really nice sized museum for a town of this size, and then the front room (the exhibit space that faces Congress Street). It was clear that it's going to be really beautiful with all those windows and the high ceiling.“

Once the board chose him as the museum's inaugural artist, he said, “I proposed to create this room that I would paint as something that's also really exciting for the inaugural show for this museum to bring something to town where people are like, ‘Oh, you gotta go see that,’ and .... has that kind of unusual touch to it. And so we worked together with everybody here, the museum team and builders because the space is just filled out. ... We have a really cool flow of spacing here. Once it's open, it's going to be amazing.”

Of the 900-square-foot full-room installation he has painted, Linnenbrink said, "“I started with an idea and I kept the diagonal. I spread out the tape and kind of like set the room in motion."

"So, it's gonna be really interesting,” he said observing the half-painted room around him, pointing to a corner where two already painted walls meet. “Like here is 100% the Instagram corner, where all these lines come together, all these colors mean you're gonna see things popping up on Instagram that people take with their cell phone here.”

On why he doesn’t worry about a mistake or a drop of paint while painting the room, “It's like life. You have to deal with mistakes, it's kind of an analogy. ... When you make a plan and you try to follow through. Yeah, life happens, you know, always have to constantly adjust.“

“Everything that I want people to take away when thinking about and talking about this - I want to try to work with any color given, so you can find every color in here,” Linnenbrink said. “As of now I think we have like about 80 colors, they're all individual colors. I did not repeat any colors, they're similar colors, but they're not the same. ... It's like all the colors that are next to the other colors bring out something in the color next to it, absolutely.” he said.

“It's also a little bit like my philosophy. I can use basically any color, there's no bad colors, or good colors, there's any color I can use and make it shine and sing with other colors so it's almost like music, something like this should be alive. You know everybody has the same right, has the same value, and should live in an environment and neighborhood that kind of brings out the best I can. That's my idealistic utopia."

Linnenbrink described what he hopes people take a way from his exhibit.

“What I create is opportunities to enter a dialogue ... Everybody brings their own life with them all the time. It's like if you're missing a limb, it doesn't matter where you are, you're missing a limb,” Linnenbrink said. “What I hope is that that I can create this dialogue between the world and people that come to visit a museum that initiates a little bit of reflection on how we move through the world and what we see and how we see it, and especially what colors do to us and how they really change behavior and move us.”

Impressions of Portsmouth

Having had his work exhibited the world over, what does Linnenbrink think of Portsmouth?

“It's very sweet, like people are super nice and welcoming. So it's a nice experience. ... Everybody's really super nice and we have been treated well.

About the opening of the new museum next Saturday, "I'm excited for everybody that's involved, you know it's not just about me," he said. "Especially as it's the inaugural show, you have so much weight on that, and I'm happy that people trust me to do this opening show."

Featuring three exhibitions a year, MONA will focus on presenting new evolutions of contemporary art and engaging the community with immersive experiences, art education, and public dialogue about today’s art. The art museum will put a special focus on local artists.

“MONA will create dynamic and exciting cultural experiences for the Seacoast,” said Suzanne Bresette, chair of the museum's board of directors. “The board hopes that the museum, a relaunch of the original museum, The New Museum of Portsmouth, will be a trailblazing art space connecting culturally diverse, globally influenced, and technologically advanced artists with our community.”

What to know before you go