Respected foundation repair contractor in West Portsmouth, OH

When you think about the structure and stability of your home, you can't forget the most important aspect – your foundation. As the literal groundwork that holds up the rest of your home, the quality, and condition of your foundation is essential to the overall security and sturdiness of your home's structure. This means that any foundation damage could threaten the structural integrity of your entire home, so it's important to call in an experienced foundation repair company as soon as possible if you've noticed any signs of structural damage or other foundation issues. With over 50 years of experience in the West Portsmouth, OH area, Alford Foundation and Crawl Space Repair has the skill and expertise to deliver permanent, high-quality foundation repair solutions, no matter how large or small the problem!

We value the safety and comfort of our customers above all else and will do everything we can to make your home safe and secure. Our dedication to customer satisfaction has earned us an A+ rating with the Better Business Bureau, and we have received the Angie's List Super Service Award an unprecedented four years in a row. Our highly trained foundation repair technicians can fix all of the following common foundation problems:

Uneven floors

Sticking windows and doors

Foundation cracks or interior wall cracks

Sloping or bowing walls

Foundation settlement

Foundation heave

And more!

We use the best products and technology in the industry, from wall repair to crawl space supports

At Alford Foundation and Crawl Space Repair, we pride ourselves on using industry-leading foundation repair materials to guarantee the permanent stability your home deserves. Our Helical Piers are perfect for a foundation that has been exposed to too much moisture for a long amount of time, or one that was constructed on unstable soil, providing the support that will fix any structural damage. We also provide Push Piers for sinking and settling foundations that will lift the sunken structure with a fast, efficient installation process. All of our foundation support products come with a fully transferable lifetime warranty, so you can stay stress-free throughout the process.

If you have bowing walls, Alford Foundation and Crawl Space Repair has the wall repair services you need for a permanent solution. Our wall beams will correct and stabilize any inward wall movement, and the system can be easily re-adjusted in the future if necessary. We also provide carbon fiber wall reinforcement, a popular wall strengthening system that is one of the most technologically advanced products in the industry. Carbon fiber will permanently stabilize your basement walls, and is guaranteed to last for the lifetime of your home!

Alford Foundation and Crawl Space Repair is your West Portsmouth, OH expert in foundation repair and structural repair solutions. We provide free, no-obligation cost estimates and professional consultations throughout the West Portsmouth area, so contact us today to see what we can do for you!