Learn what industry analysts are saying about Oracle’s products and services.

Learn how to engage with Oracle and do business with us.

Learn about Oracle’s philanthropic efforts in the areas of sustainability, education, giving, volunteering, and more.

Learn about Oracle’s security policies and practices across the various ways Oracle engages with our customers.

Discover how our customers are delighting their customers with cloud applications and cloud infrastructure.

Learn how Oracle believes that innovation starts with inclusion, and that to create the future we need people with diverse backgrounds to help us get there.

Learn about Oracle investor relations, and find information for stockholders, potential investors, and financial analysts.

Learn about Oracle’s commitment to our community, customers, employees, and partners during the COVID-19 crisis.

Birth of a Silicon Valley startup

Engineers Larry Ellison, Bob Miner, and Ed Oates found Software Development Laboratories. Their first office is 900-square-feet in Santa Clara, California.

Oracle sees the future

The company changes its name to Oracle Corporation from Relational Software Inc. (formerly SDL).

Oracle goes public

Oracle becomes a publicly traded company on the NASDAQ exchange. Quotation symbol is ORCL.

World’s largest database management company

Oracle ranked as the world’s largest database management company with US$100M in sales and 4,500 end users in 55 countries.

Moving on up

Oracle debuts on the S&P 500; outgrows old headquarters and moves to its current location in Redwood Shores, California.

Oracle celebrates 15 years and Oracle7 release

There’s lots to celebrate with the release of game-changer Oracle7 database and the company’s 15th anniversary.

Oracle Database sets the standard

InformationWeek names Oracle Database one of the most influential products of the 1990s.

Oracle saves a billion—using Oracle

Oracle saves US$1B dollars consolidating its own systems using Oracle E-Business Suite 11i, the first fully integrated enterprise apps suite.

Oracle acquires PeopleSoft

Oracle kicks off a Silicon Valley high-tech acquisition trend by buying a leader in HR and ERP apps.

Oracle at 30 continues to grow and innovate

Oracle turns 30 with revenues of US$18B, 65,000 employees, and 275,000 customers in more than 145 countries.

Hardware and software, engineered to work together

Oracle acquires Sun Microsystems, cementing its strategy to engineer hardware and software together. Becomes the steward of Java.