★★★

An all-star cast play to their strengths in a strained slapstick (and true story) about an attempt to steal the Crown Jewels from King Charles II. Comedian Al Murray has plenty of crowd work opportunities; ex-Bake Off host Mel Giedroyc embraces a few eccentric roles; Joe Thomas, known to many as the awkward Simon off The Inbetweeners, plays another socially inept character; and when it often feels like the play is slowing down, magnificent musical theatre star Carrie Hope Fletcher is on hand to deliver another jubilant cry of “praise him” to push things along.

A company of actors doing what they do best normally sounds like what you would hope to get from a worthwhile production, yet that only goes so far when the plot can very simply boil down to three anti-royalists (comprising Aidan McArdle’s Colonel Blood, Thomas’s Tom Jr. and Neil Morrissey’s Captain Perrot) trying to steal the golden objects and Murray’s Charles deciding what to do in response. It’s a historical event worn thin (the heist is only just carried out before the interval), which fails to justify its running time of just over two hours, or its pushing back of press reviews by a few extra weeks.

The main issue, which soon becomes apparent, is that there is a lack of motivation behind the majority of the characters. Yes, the treasonous trio have an obvious dislike of the monarchy (mostly to “avenge Ireland” and out of a greater allegiance to Jesus Christ), but besides the clear statement of intent in their first scene, there’s little which establishes Blood as a seething or cunning antagonist living up to some nominative determinism. Tom Jr. is permanently wide-eyed and flustered at the unfolding pantomime and crude humour he’s subjected to – that’s it. Morrissey’s character is a foolish, oafish individual there for weak gags (screeching chalkboards and drunkenness, mainly), and Giedroyc spends most of her time playing Mrs Edwards, part of the family looking after the Crown Jewels who’s keen to make some money flogging bizarre merchandise.

At least Fletcher’s Elizabeth has some development. Slagged off by her parents behind her back – for they much prefer their pretentious son Wythe (Adonis Siddique) instead – and devoid of a romantic interest, she has a whole song in which she outlines “all I want”. It couldn’t be any plainer than that as to what Elizabeth’s intentions are, even if her dialogue in the play is almost completely limited to musical numbers. It’s familiar territory for Fletcher (and she, naturally, excels), but while the outlandish characters feel more at home in the farce, a young woman primarily there to sing about looking to be swept off her feet by a young gentleman strikes me as unnecessary – and dare I say, cliché – filler to offer some stylistic variety and flair to the show. It only goes so far.

In the absence of ambition, Murray’s frivolous and carefree monarch gets away with not really having much of a goal plot-wise, being the king and all. Indeed, if you’re of a certain age, you’ll know of King Charles II as “the king who brought back partying” after Oliver Cromwell’s death, thanks to Mathew Baynton’s portrayal in CBBC’s Horrible Histories. In The Crown Jewels, Murray is certainly a spiritual successor, flamboyant and unfiltered in his interactions with his footman and – most brilliantly – in conversation with audience members. He stutters, procrastinates from speechwriting to chat to us about banal subjects instead, and carries a strong, almost Etonian-like accent. Sound familiar? Not to mention they both have a thing for parties…

I’d even go as far as to argue Murray’s performance is the standout because in roasting those sat in the royal box and first few rows of the stalls, he is able to improvise and deviate from Simon Nye’s (Men Behaving Badly) forced, crude humour. There’s phallic pastry and instances of actors sitting on others’ laps which soon become tiresome. Cromwell’s head is on a spike above Westminster Hall is mentioned on at least three separate occasions, and the fact that Charles calmly pointing out when things are “so funny” after laughing received no bonus chuckles from the audience no matter how many times it was used demonstrates just how ineffective a lot of the comedy is in this production.

It isn’t helped by director Sean Foley (artistic director of Birmingham Rep and director of The Upstart Crow) opting to stage the comedy as some borderline am-dram pantomime. Michael Taylor’s set design comprises a number of painted, cardboard cut-out style backdrops, and together with all the audience participation, only strengthens the case that it’s a rather sub-par production. Murray’s Charles, with all his smugness, is just a few steps away from becoming a full-on pantomime dame.

Perhaps, I did wonder, it’s stylised as such as a mockery of royal hyperbole. While it could be argued Murray’s unpredictable and fanciful Charles delivers on that objective, one final, enthusiastic rendition of “praise him” before the curtain falls suggests it’s more a celebration of British quirkiness. There’s only one brief mention of Charles III amid all the antics, so it’s hardly an attempt to satirise or draw parallels to the modern day.

Again, it’s a thin plot, and that doesn’t give much room to make one central witticism. The play is neither royalist nor republican in nature, as a result of presenting every character on either side of the debate as utterly hapless. It would be a lot funnier if they did so while firmly detailing the wants and desires of its characters (so as to create the comedy of disaster-prone individuals pursuing such objectives only to fail miserably), but like the Crown Jewels themselves in this production, that goes missing for a moment.

The Crown Jewels is now playing at the Garrick Theatre until 16 September. It will then go on tour to Salford, Canterbury and Cardiff, finishing in Milton Keynes on 14 October.

A British Sign Language-interpreted and captioned performance will take place at the Garrick on 8 August, with an audio described performance in Canterbury taking place on 28 September.

No access performances are currently scheduled for Salford, Cardiff or Milton Keynes.

Production Images: Hugo Glendinning.