Al Murray is a busy man. The comedian has donned his famous burgundy blazer to run for ‘guv’norment’ as his comic alter ego the Pub Landlord in May’s General Election, taking on UKIP’s Nigel Farage for a South Thanet seat with his ‘commons sense’ campaign.

But did you know Al’s also a drummer with a serious passion for helping others to find the same joy from playing a musical instrument?

The 46-year-old is the leading ambassador of Learn To Play Day on Saturday, March 21, organised by Music For All and designed to encourage people of all ages to take up a musical instrument.

The premise is simple: would-be musicians simply need to turn up at one of the participating venues to have a go at their instrument of choice, free of charge.

“Across the country, there’s a chance for you to come in and get your hands on an instrument and find out if you have got it, basically,” says Al.

He has been involved as a tutor himself over the past few years, teaching people “a few simple beats” at the shop Yamaha Music London on London’s Wardour Street.

“Yeah, it’s really, really good fun. Drumming is waking up the street and having a heartbeat,” he says enthusiastically.

“We’ve all got those inside us. If I say it’s easy I’ll get loads of drummers moaning, but you can do it. It’s instrument number one, the drums.”

Even if you’re not going to be the next Keith Moon, Al advises the curious to get down to one of three dedicated events in Kent on Saturday.

“They all give the same advice, which is practise,” he warns.

“Which is always great to be told that you need to practise and you need to work harder! That’s the one thing you really want to hear! The thing is Learn To Play Day is about people learning for themselves, having a go.

"Lots of people go through life regretting that they didn’t pick up an instrument or pursue it. Also, drumming is a really good way to work out. You get to whack stuff: it’s brilliant.”

Al has played the drums since childhood and currently plays in two amateur bands.

“It’s something that has enriched my life. The thing is, I’m still learning,” said Al.

“A lot of people play sport, but one of the problems with sport is that the older you get, you get slower, you get fatter, you get more prone to injury or whatever, but that’s not the case with music. It’s something you can take with you all through your life, and have an appreciation of. ”

National Learn to Play Day is on Saturday, March 21.

Visit www.musicforall.org.uk/learntoplayday

Where in Kent?

There are three Kent venues where you can get involved with Learn To Play Day. At music specialists in Ashford, Medway and Tunbridge Wells you can book a free music lesson or turn up for demos, the chance to handle instruments and get advice on Saturday, March 21.

GUITAR

G4 Guitar School, at Regency House, Elwick Road, Ashford, will be open from 9am to 5pm, giving free guitar lessons to ages from four years.

Book by emailing ashford@g4guitarschools.co.uk or call 01233 804080.

DRUMS

Medway Drum Studio in Swallow Rise, Walderslade, will run sessions from 9am to 6pm. Contact Phil Wilson to book a free 30-minute taster lesson with a professional drummer. Visit www.medwaydrumstudio.co.uk or call 01634 304399.

CLASSICAL

Brittens Music, Grove Hill Road, Tunbridge Wells, will be open from 9am to 5pm. It specialises in classical instruments such as piano and flute. Kim Thornewell said: “We will be giving demos, letting people try instruments and giving advice.”

Book taster lessons at 01892 526659 or email www.school@brittensmusic.co.uk

Medway-based Jools Holland is the patron of Music For All, the charity behind Learn To Play Day.

“This is the day when we offer the general public free musical instrument lessons throughout the whole kingdom. I am delighted to help Music for All in their quest to inspire more people to participate in music making,” said the 57-year-old, who lives in Cooling Castle.

“Whether you used to play, or whether you’ve always wanted to, this is the day for you. I hope my involvement will help the charity get more people having a go.”