MINNEAPOLIS – Shane Battier enjoys talking basketball. Discussing box scores? Not so much.

“Yeah,” the veteran Miami Heat forward said with a grin following Wednesday’s victory over the Charlotte Bobcats, “if you look at them, you’re going to think I’m the worst player in the NBA and I probably shouldn’t be in the NBA.”

He’s probably right. Wednesday, he missed both his shots against the Bobcats, grabbed two rebounds in his 20 minutes, and did not have an assist.

It was typical of the statistical start he is experiencing since signing with the Heat as a free agent in the offseason. Through the Heat’s 3-0 start, he is 1 for 5 from the field, with two rebounds and one assist, being outscored this season by – gulp! – Joel Anthony and Juwan Howard.

And yet there stood coach Erik Spoelstra, following Wednesday’s 96-95 escape act, extolling the virtues of his scoreless sixth man.

“A perfect example,” Spoelstra called Battier of a player whose contributions get lost in the statistics, equating him to Heat hustle mainstay Udonis Haslem.

“The numbers don’t necessarily ever tell the true story,” Spoelstra said. “But with a guy like Shane and often guys like U.D., they do so many intangibles that don’t show in the box score.”

Wednesday, that meant Battier not only showing his versatility by defending multiple positions, but also taking the second-half challenge against awkwardly efficient Bobcats center Boris Diaw, who scored only two of his 16 points after the intermission.

Battier, who has built a mental dossier of just about every opponent over his 11 seasons, knew exactly what he wanted to accomplish.

“Well you know with Diaw he’s coming back over his left shoulder,” he said. “You try to take one thing from the guy.”

Battier finished with three blocks and a steal against the Bobcats.

“Already, four of our top defensive five-man units, coincidentally or not-so-coincidentally, he’s in them,” Spoelstra said. “And he happens to find a way to make your defense better, sharper, stronger, more intelligent, one way or another.”

That intellectual, team-oriented approach had several teams courting Battier in the offseason, all looking beyond the box score.

Among the suitors were the Oklahoma City Thunder, with Kevin Durant lamenting Battier as one that got away in free agency.

“I was telling a few of the guys, ’Shane would be a good fit here for us,’ ” Durant told the Oklahoman. “He was a guy I was looking forward to playing with, but Miami jumped in and took him.

“Let’s be real, guys like LeBron (James) and D-Wade and (Chris) Bosh, they’re lobbying for you as well. … Shane’s an unbelievable player, a great teammate from what I’ve heard. I wish him the best. If he would have come here it would have been perfect for us.”

Instead, he is fitting in quite nicely with the Heat.

Friday the challenges continue, where Battier could find himself matched up with everyone from No. 2 overall NBA Draft pick Derrick Williams to former Heat forward Michael Beasley to All-Star forward Kevin Love or perhaps even one of the Timberwolves’ feisty guards.

Battier’s positional versatility affords Spoelstra greater maneuverability to “to mix and match when needed.”

At times that has Battier playing guard, at other times forward, or even center against Diaw.

“He gives us a lot of communication, a lot of veteran savvy, understanding and discipline on that side of the floor,” Spoelstra said. “He can guard multiple positions.”

Against the Bobcats, that allowed Spoelstra to go a stretch with neither Bosh nor Haslem on the court.

“He was guarding some of their fours and some of their threes and some of their twos,” Spoelstra said, a rare example of putting numbers and Battier’s contribution into perspective.

That had Battier not only prepared for Diaw, but also Corey Maggette’s propensity to draw fouls, Gerald Henderson’s ability to drain jumpers.

“Playing in this league long enough, you catch everybody at least once,” he said with a smile. “I prepare in a way that is such that I’m ready for everybody, from centers to point guards, especially with this lineup.”

He paused. With the Heat’s depth of talent there is no option but to be a jack of all trades as a reserve.

“We can throw out some funky lineups,” he said.

Funky time ultimately became Battier time Wednesday. As it often will be this season, he could wind up touching the ball more on defense than offense.

“I made a nice little career off doing those things,” he said. “It’s nice to be appreciated for that here.”