LEBRON-JAMES-MASK-HEAT.JPG

Miami Heat's LeBron James, center, slides through Charlotte Bobcats players Michael Kidd-Gilchrist (14), Josh McRoberts (11) and Al Jefferson (25) for two points during the first half of an NBA basketball game in Miami, Monday, March 3, 2014.

(AP Photo/J Pat Carter)

By Kami Mattioli, Sporting News

LeBron James surpassed his career high in scoring Monday night against the Charlotte Bobcats, finishing with a franchise-record 61 points as the Miami Heat beat Charlotte, 124-107.

James' previous mark was 56 points. He notched his 57th point of the night with about five minutes left in the fourth quarter after starting his night 8-for-8 from beyond the arc.

His 61 points also shattered Miami's single-game franchise record of 56 previously held by Glen Rice.

You can watch every bucket he scored on Monday night in this handy video:

"The man above has given me some unbelievable abilities to play the game of basketball," James said. "I just try to take advantage of it every night. I got the trust of my teammates and my coaching staff to go in there and let it go."

"The rim looked like an ocean for him," Heat coach Erik Spoelstra said.

Spoelstra walked into his postgame news conference with a confession: He nearly took James out after the third quarter. He thought better of it.

"He was in a great groove, obviously," Spoelstra said.

"Once he sniffed 60, we knew he was going for it," Heat forward Shane Battier said. "And the amazing part is the efficiency. Good Lord. Sixty-one on 33 shots, that's Wilt Chamberlain-esque. That's pretty amazing. Incredible performance."

When James checked out with 1:24 left, the entire Heat roster met him near midcourt for high-fives and hugs, and the sellout crowd gave him a standing ovation. A second huge roar followed when he waved to the crowd, as "M-V-P" chants rained down.

"Every night I go on the floor I want to be the MVP, of this league, MVP of this team, MVP for me, myself and my family," James said. "I've set a high standard and I have to live by that."

The Bobcats have now suffered a player's 55-point scoring barrage the past three times it has happened.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.