A hugely popular science museum from Canberra is headed to Sydney with an immersive travelling exhibition as part of South Eveleigh's Winter Series.

Visitors to Questacon, The National Science and Technology center in Canberra, know and love it for its immersive science exhibitions.

Blending education and entertainment, the museum features interactive exhibits and puppet shows all about technology and science.

Nostalgic Sydneysiders might remember visits to the science museum as part of school excursions - and now they have a chance to relive the fun.

Questacon will visit South Eveleigh for three days from the 7th - 10th August and brings 24 exhibits as part of it's Byte-Wise experience - and they're all designed to boggle the mind.

The exhibition is inspired by the thinking that goes on behind everyday technology.

Tim Crowther, manager of Questacon's travelling exhibitions, promises the experience will be fun, exciting and hands on - with the aim of inspiring curiosity and confidence in technology.

'Byte Wise explores key themes of computational thinking including programming, algorithms, patterns, irrational numbers, measurement, geometry, logic, and problem-solving,' Mr Crowther said.

Questacon's exhibition is a part of Australian National Science Week which is happening from the 10th - 18th of August.

Visitors to the Canberra museum rave about the unique learning experience.

'Can’t fault Questacon, it really is an amazingly fun and interactive experience for kids and adults alike,' one man said.

'A lovely experience of science and wonder.' another woman agreed.

Those visiting Questacon in Sydney can also taking advantage of the other exciting activities available as part of South Eveleigh's Winter Series.

In addition to various food and drink stalls there is a silent cinema that will feature a kids-only film and a family friendly film - all with popcorn and beanbags.

The Winter Series also offers a three day brick work and play zone with larger than life displays - and an interactive play area full of Lego that is open to people of all ages.

The organisers have described it as a playground of pure imagination.

South Eveleigh's rooftop garden will also host various talks from inspirational speakers such as Ren Fernando, co-founder of the charity ReLove and Yasmin London - a communications guru.

The South Eveleigh Winter Series is on from the 5th - 31st of August.