Jayanna is a renowned Indian film producer, who has managed the production of several Kannada blockbuster movies. He has a production company in Kannada names Jayanna Combines. He founded the company in 1995, with its headquarter at Bangalore, Karnataka. In his childhood, he never thought that one day, he would be a part of the film industry. He was aspiring to become an engineer. But in the year 1994, due to severe health issues, his father expired. Since Jayanna was too young at that time and could have not able to take care of his living, his father requested Jayanna’s uncle to take care of him. So, after his father’s death, Jayanna lived with his uncle Keshava Murty, who worked as a Manager in a movie theatre. Jayanna also joined the theatre, and this is how he came to the film background. Perhaps the Kannada film industry was all set to get a blockbuster producer.

After a few years, the theatre where he worked got sold. So Jayanna thought to drop his studies and take up his part-time work of selling movies, and make it his all-time work. So, he opened his own film distribution office in the city. A few days later, he found a partner Bhogendra, and both of them started working together, and there was no turn back from then.

In the year 2008, they became regular producers. Their first movie was Arjun, directed by Shahuraj Shinde , starring Darshan, and Meera Chopra . In 2011 they made Johny Mera Naam Preethi Mera Naam, directed by Preetham Gubi, starring Duniya Vijay , and Ramya. In the same year, they also signed Paramathma. In 2012, they did Jaanu, featuring Yash. In 2013 they also did Googly with Yash, which was nominated in the SIIMA Award function for the best film award.

In 2014 they made Gajakeshari, and Mr. And Mrs. Ramachari. Mr. And Mrs.Ramachari got them huge recognition as it won the best film award in the Filmfare award, SIIMA award, and IIFA. Rana Vikram, Boxer, Saheba, Mufti, and Rustum are few other masterpieces created by Jayanna. Rudraprayaga, Shiva 143, Bhajarangi 2, and Lets Breakup are going to hit the big screen in the year 2020.