Beyond the Farthest Star

Bodie and Brock Thoene. Zondervan, $14.99 trade paper (400p) ISBN 978-0-310-33610-5

The megaseller Thoene team shift from historical to contemporary as they turn a screenplay into a novel that accompanies the forthcoming Pathlight Entertainment film by the same name. The tear-jerking, heartwarming tale pits troubled teenager Anne Wells against her father, Adam, a former preaching prodigy now desperate to lead a small Texas church and, perhaps, revive his career. Throw in more ingredients—peacemaking mom Maurene, caught in the middle; 16-year-old Stephen Miller, who sees more than Anne’s angry exterior; a former senator with national aspirations; a mysterious stranger from the past; a troubled boy whose anger turns deadly—and readers will find a novel that’s entertaining and challenging. When tragedy occurs, all the characters must examine their hearts for true motives and new understanding. Predictably—it’s a holiday film, after all—long-buried secrets are revealed, and hearts are broken and remolded to become whole again. The Thoenes have created a tale sure to draw readers eager for drama and escape. (Jan.)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 11/07/2011

Genre: Fiction

Compact Disc - 978-1-5012-1256-7

MP3 CD - 978-1-5012-1319-9

Other - 400 pages - 978-0-310-33612-9

Paperback - 327 pages - 978-1-4104-4971-9

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

Bodie Thoene

The Thoenes continue their Zion Legacy series (Jerusalem Vigil; Thunder from Jerusalem; Continue reading »

Bodie Thoene, Brock Thoene

Although Jerusalem's Hope, book six in the Zion Legacy series with Viking, was supposedly the conclusion, this new offering from Tyndale picks up the same Continue reading »

Bodie Thoene

In this pulpy sequel to Jerusalem Vigil, the Thoenes provide a bit more intrigue and a bit less bathos, but continue to serve up the same jaw-dropping anti-Arab, pro-Israeli bias as before. This Continue reading »

Bodie Thoene, Brock Thoene

This third installment in the Zion's Legacy series continues the Thoenes' tradition of strong characters and fine historical research without succumbing to the embarrassing anti-Muslim stereotypes Continue reading »

Bodie Thoene

In their first attempt at crossing over to mainstream audiences, these award-winning evangelical Christian novelists (the Zion Chronicles series) fashion a rather formulaic tale of bloody battle in Continue reading »

Bodie Thoene, Brock Thoene

In a well-known scene in the Gospels, Jesus raises Lazarus from the dead, and, famously, Lazarus is the only person in the Gospels for whom Jesus wept. This first book of the award-winning Thoenes’ Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS