Historic Newspapers

Originally published in print on April 29, 1988

Burt Reynolds and Loni Anderson are expected to be married this afternoon in a closely guarded ceremony on the actor’s 160-acre horse ranch west of the city.

Several people said the couple will wed today between 1 p.m. and 2 p.m., exchanging vows before about 20 guests inside a white chapel built for the wedding.

“They’re getting married – they’re definitely getting married (Friday),” said Bob Davidoff, a Palm Beach photographer who took the official pictures of Reynolds’ first marriage, to actress Judy Carne in June 1963. “They’re trying to camouflage it by saying it’s one of his students at the playhouse . . . He’s getting married, and it’s not a matter of conjecture.”

Palm Beach County Clerk of Court John Dunkle said Thursday that Reynolds had applied for a marriage license in Palm Beach County recently. Dunkle would not say when Reynolds applied for the license or what it said. “Probably they’re scheduled to get married,” he said.

David Gershenson, Reynolds’ personal manager, refused to confirm or deny the rumors. Gershenson stressed that no wedding information would be released in advance.

“It’s Burt’s personal life,” he said by phone from Hollywood, Calif. “Over the last six years there have been rumors that they were getting married, that they had broken up. One of these days it’s going to be true.”

The couple will leave by helicopter after the ceremony, destined for a honeymoon in the Bahamas, according to a source close to Reynolds’ pilot, Logan Fleming.

A reception, meanwhile, was planned for the guests as Reynolds’ second Palm Beach County home, located on the Intracoastal Waterway in Jupiter.

>>RELATED: Burt Reynolds first girlfriend says ‘they never forgot each other’

By Thursday afternoon, champagne, ice, flowers and party supplies had been delivered to Reynolds’ ranch, which is about two miles south of Indiantown Road behind a barrier of 10-foot-high metal gates at 16133 Jupiter Farms Road.

A deliveryman for Jupiter Lighthouse Florists said he had been delivering elaborate congratulatory flower arrangements to the ranch all day. Perry Como and Larry King, among others, had sent the flowers he said.

A sign outside Reynolds’ feed store at the ranch Thursday read, “Closed April 29. Sorry for the inconvenience.”

A list of guests was as jealously guarded as news of the ceremony itself.

The 42-year-old bride, best known for her role as a secretary in the television series WKRP in Cincinnati, reportedly was staying at the home of Reynolds’ sister, Nancy Brown, in a condominium on U.S. 1 across from Harpoon Louie’s in Jupiter. Members of her family were staying nearby in the Hilton of Jupiter Beach, and employees there said Anderson was seen at the hotel about 6 p.m. Thursday.

Among the expected guests, sources said, are actors Martin Sheen and Dom DeLuise. Others expected to attend include Watson B. Duncan III, Reynolds’ first acting teacher at Palm Beach Junior College; talk-show host Bert Convy; and singer Jerry Reed.

A bartender at the Hilton of Jupiter Beach said actor Tim Reid had arrived for the event.

Actor Charles Nelson Reilly will not attend because he is having surgery on his hip, a spokesman in Hollywood, Calif., said Reilly also teaches and directs at the Burt Reynolds Institute for Theater Training in Jupiter.

Duncan laughed heartily when asked whether he was going to Reynolds’ ranch this weekend.

“I can’t comment on that right now,” said Duncan, who introduced Reynolds to acting in PBJC in the mid-1950s.

Reynolds, 52, mentioned his intentions two months ago in a magazine article that quotes him as saying he expected to be married within a year. He also offered to make a $10,000 bet with a skeptical Johnny Carson.

At the same time, however, Reynolds said the wedding would not take place until Anderson finishes filming two made-for-television productions – Whisper Kill and Leave Her to Heaven. Filming is not yet completed.

>>RELATED: Burt Reynolds on marriage, regrets and why he’s not dating Sally Field

Renewed rumors of the impending marriage of Reynolds and Anderson began circulating earlier this month. One rumor involved a wedding in mid-April at the Sailfish Club in Palm Beach.

Dozens of inquiries “from Europe and everywhere” were handled by Gershenson, who has fielded questions in the past about Reynolds’ relationships with such girlfriends as Dinah Shore and Sally Field.

“A lot of calls I’ve gotten had heard that they got married last week,” he added.

Reynolds has been dogged for years by rumors about his personal life. For example, in 1984, after he lost a considerable amount of weight while suffering a serious infection rumors spread that Reynolds was suffering from AIDS.

By Thursday, some details of the wedding plans had been made public by New York-based gossip columnist Suzy, who reported that they would marry today. Other reports appeared in the Chicago Sun-Times and Daily Variety.

A pre-wedding party reportedly was held Thursday afternoon at the ranch, home to Reynolds and members of his family. An employee of Reynolds had ordered six cases of Moet & Chandon White Star Extra Dry Champagne, which were delivered Thursday afternoon to the Backstage, a restaurant-lounge next to the Burt Reynolds Jupiter Theatre at 1001 E. Indiantown Road.

A 23-person party reportedly dined last night at the Backstage, where Reynolds has a private room.

Reynolds “some time ago” selected a seven-carat diamond ring for his bride, sources said.

Michael Duff, musical director at the Jupiter theater, reportedly will handle the musical arrangements for the wedding while his three young daughters – Kimberly, Jennifer and Chrissie Michelle – serve as flower girls.

More mundane details include keeping food and beverages on ice in Florida’s stultifying heat.

A Palm Beach County ice supplier said he used every available trailer to cart ice to the Reynolds ranch, to the dinner theater and to the actor’s waterfront home. The ice order: 15,000 pounds worth $1,500.

He said his employees will begin icing down food and beverages about 11 a.m. today.

Earlier in the day, Aldrich Party Rental, a West Palm Beach firm, set up supplies in a small hangar next to the ranch offices, underscoring the festive occasion with two white bridal gazebos and moderating the 90-degree temperatures with six upright fans.

>>RELATED: 5 Celebrities who got married in Palm Beach County

An employee of Aldrich, who asked that his name not be used, said employees “were sworn to silence.”

Reynolds’ organization, according to reports, attempted to camouflage the wedding plans by spreading a false story that workers were preparing the ranch for a wedding of apprentices in the Institute for Theater Training.