OGDEN, Utah – Three games against in-state rivals, a trip to a national powerhouse, and a full 20-game Big Sky slate, highlight the 2013-14 Weber State men's basketball schedule, released Thursday by WSU head coach Randy Rahe.

“Every year we look to put together the toughest and most challenging schedule we can and we feel we did that again this year,” Rahe said. “We are excited about the challenge of the teams we have scheduled and always try to play as tough a non-conference schedule as possible. This will be great preparation for the rigors of the always difficult Big Sky season.”

After an exhibition game against Adams State on Nov. 2, the Wildcats begin the regular season Nov. 9 in Provo when they take on the BYU Cougars.

They will then play three straight games against Mountain West Conference opponents, two of which will be at home. The 'Cats will travel to Fort Collins, Colo., on Nov. 16 to play Colorado State. The home opener will be Tuesday, Nov. 26 against in-state rival Utah State, a new member of the Mountain West. On Nov. 30, the 'Cats will host San Jose State.

The next game will be Dec. 7 at UT Arlington, a return game after the 'Cats hosted the Mavericks in an ESPN Bracketbusters game during the 2011-12 season.

WSU will also visit Utah Valley on Dec. 11 and will play at national powerhouse UCLA in Pauley Pavilion on Sunday, Dec. 22. It will mark WSU's third meeting ever with the Bruins.

Weber State will also play home games against Saint Katherine College on Dec. 17 and Northern New Mexico on Dec. 28.

The 20-game Big Sky season will begin Jan. 2, 2014, when the 'Cats host Eastern Washington at the Dee Events Center. Weber State will begin the conference slate with six of the first eight games at home, including home contests with Southern Utah, Idaho State and Montana.

WSU will conclude the Big Sky schedule with six of the final eight conference games on the road. The final regular season game will be March 8 at Eastern Washington.

The Big Sky Conference Tournament will be held March 13-15 at the site of the regular season champion.

The Wildcats are coming off a record-setting 30-7 record in 2012-13. WSU was 18-2 in Big Sky play and advanced to the championship game of the Collegeinsider.com Postseason Tournament.