Season tickets for the 2013-14 season are available. Buy them now through seats3d.com and BYUtickets.com #GoCougars

PROVO, Utah – BYU basketball coach Dave Rose announced the nonconference schedule for the 2013-14 season on Thursday. The slate includes three instate games, matchups with Big 12 and Pac-12 foes and trips to Kansas City and Springfield, Mass.

In all, the Cougars will play six home games, three road games and four neutral site games during the non conference season.

"This is a terrific non-conference schedule that will really help prepare our team for league play," Rose said. "It's a compliment to our program to be invited to play in the College Basketball Experience Tournament. We will face many tests and teams from coast to coast. We are excited about the opportunities we have to play and look forward to preparing our team for the challenge."

The 2013-14 regular season will open at home on Friday, Nov. 8, with instate opponent Weber State. Three days later, BYU will play at Pac-12 foe Stanford in the opener of the sixth-annual ESPN Tip-Off Marathon at 8 p.m. PT on ESPN2. The Tip-Off Marathon includes 24-consecutive hours of college basketball on ESPN and ESPN2.

Following the trip to Palo Alto, Calif., BYU will host a pair of games in the College Basketball Experience Hall of Fame Classic on Nov. 14 and 16. The Cougars will remain at home for a matchup with 2013 NCAA Tournament participant and Big 12 member Iowa State on Nov. 20.

On Nov. 25 and 26 BYU will play in the championship round of the CBE Hall of Fame Classic at Sprint Center in Kansas City, Mo. The Cougars will face Texas of the Big 12 and then either Wichita State or DePaul. Wichita State advanced to the Final Four of the 2013 NCAA Tournament. Past CBE Hall of Fame Classic champions include Kansas, Missouri, Duke, Texas, Syracuse, UCLA and Marquette.

The College Basketball Experience is a world-class entertainment facility connected to Sprint Center that gives fans an opportunity to experience the game of college basketball. For more information, visit www.collegebasketballexperience.com.

November will close out with a game against Utah State at EnergySolutions Arena on the 30th. The Cougars and Aggies last played at ESA on Dec. 6, 2008, with BYU winning 68-63.

The December slate will include home games against North Texas (Dec. 3) and Prairie View A&M (Dec. 11) with a contest against UMass in Springfield, Mass., at the MassMutual Center in between on Dec. 7.

BYU will close the nonconference with games at two Pac-12 schools. The Cougars will take on rival Utah on Dec. 14 and play at Oregon one week later on Dec. 21. Oregon played in the 2013 NCAA Tournament and advanced to the Sweet 16.

After returning from Oregon, the Cougars will begin West Coast Conference play on Dec. 28. The conference schedule will be announced at a later date.

BYU will be led in 2013-14 by returning guards Tyler Haws, Matt Carlino and Kyle Collinsworth. Haws, a junior from Alpine, Utah, averaged 21.7 points per game to lead the WCC in scoring and rank seventh in the nation. A junior from Arcadia, Ariz., Carlino averaged 11.5 points, 4.8 assists and 1.8 steals in his second year as a starter. Collinsworth, a starter on BYU's 2011 Sweet 16 team as a freshman, returned in May from a two-year mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Russia. He proved to be an athletic and versatile player in 2010-11 as he averaged 5.8 points, 5.1 rebounds, 2.1 assists and 1.1 steals.

The preseason starts on Oct. 23 with the Cougar Tipoff and includes home exhibitions against Colorado College on Oct. 26 and Alaska Anchorage on Nov. 2. All game times and broadcast plans will be announced at a later date.