Movie finder Release calendar New releases Coming soon Reviews User reviews Search

Directed by Oscar Dufau

The Dukes 1983

Not rated

Overview Releases Reviews Cast crew Movie Codes Products News Forum

Comedy

Animation

Adventure

StudioHanna-Barbera Productions

Warner Bros. Television

TV Network/ServiceCBS

TV series2 seasonsEpisode runtime30 minFirst aired Feb 05, 1983Country US LanguageEnglish RatedNot ratedTechnical details 1.33:1

Movie plot tags

In this fondly remembered animated series produced by Hanna-Barbera Studios, Bo, Luke and Daisy Duke take their high-wheelin’ country cruisin’ around the world in a race against Boss Hogg for the family farm. No joshin’ – the Dukes speed through France, Italy, Austria, Greece, England – you name it, the General Lee made tracks there! En route, Boss Hogg pulls the nastiest tricks ever, like blinding the boys with a fog machine, having them kidnapped and tricking them into a jewel heist. Why, that Hogg’s as crooked as a dog’s hind leg! But that won’t stop the Dukes from fighting a fair fight ...(more)

In this fondly remembered animated series produced by Hanna-Barbera Studios, Bo, Luke and Daisy Duke take their high-wheelin’ country cruisin’ around the world in a race against Boss Hogg for the family farm. No joshin’ – the Dukes speed through France, Italy, Austria, Greece, England – you name it, the General Lee made tracks there! En route, Boss Hogg pulls the nastiest tricks ever, like blinding the boys with a fog machine, having them kidnapped and tricking them into a jewel heist. Why, that Hogg’s as crooked as a dog’s hind leg! But that won’t stop the Dukes from fighting a fair fight and teaching that cheat a few tricks along the way. (less)

Directors: Oscar Dufau, Ray Patterson, George Gordon, Carl Urbano, John Walker, Rudy Zamora

Writers: John Bradford, Clive Ferman, Benny Ferman, John T. Graham, Orville H. Hampton, Tom Ruegger

Starring: Catherine Bach, James Best, Sorrell Booke, Denver Pyle, Jack Angel, Philip L. Clarke

Producers: Joseph Barbera, William Hanna, Kay Wright, Doug Paterson, Iwao Takamoto

» See full cast & crew

2

fans

58

DVD

collections

1

iTunes

collections

Similar titles you might also like

What is this?

Use the thumbs up and thumbs down icons to agree or disagree that the title is similar to The Dukes. You can also suggest completely new similar titles to The Dukes in the search box below.

Show more titles »« Show less titles

Similar titles suggested by members