Shares in TiVo Inc. fell by as much as 16 percent Thursday, a day after program guide company Gemstar International Group said one of its subsidiaries was suing the personal television services provider for patent infringement.

TiVo (TIVO) opened at 50-1/2 and dropped as much as 8-1/4 before regaining some of its losses to trade around 43-3/4, down 6-1/4 or about 12 percent, in early afternoon trading on the Nasdaq.

TiVo, based in Sunnyvale, California, sells a VCR-like box that uses a computer hard drive to record television programs.

Users pay a monthly fee for its service that gives details about TV shows and also learns what a viewer likes, automatically records favorite programs, and recommends other shows based on a user's likes and dislikes.

Gemstar unit StarSight Telecast filed a lawsuit on Tuesday claiming TiVo's service infringes on one of its programming guide patents.

StarSight is seeking unspecified monetary damages and an injunction to force TiVo to stop using the allegedly violated technology. Gemstar has not revealed exactly what patent it claims has been violated.

Gemstar is a major supplier of electronic guides to cable and satellite television providers. The guides contain program details for hundreds of channels.

A TiVo spokeswoman declined to comment on the details of the litigation, saying, "We are evaluating the paperwork with our lawyers and so we can't really comment at this point."

While the litigation was a thorn in TiVo's side, it would be unlikely to affect its aggressive roll-out, analysts said. "Any lawsuit like this is a small black cloud over TiVo's head, but whether there's any traction to it, we'll just have to wait and see," said Sean Badding, vice president of business development for media and telecommunications research firm The Carmel Group.

"It won't prevent them from going out and making strong partnerships," Badding said. "It's not going to be detrimental to TiVo's business plan."

TiVo counts media and communications heavyweights like The Walt Disney, broadcaster CBS, and and cable network operator Cox Communications among its investors. Electronics giants Philips NV and Sony make its hardware recorder.

This month, TiVo struck partnerships with Liberate Technologies to use some of its program guide software, and video rental chain Blockbuster to explore providing video-on-demand through the TiVo service.

"They have a dream team of partners, they've got a solid amount of backing supporting this technology," Badding said.

The company went public at the end of September and its shares have climbed as high as US$78. Its chief rival is Replay Networks, a privately held company that offers similar hardware and services.

YouTube’s Rulings on Gaza War Videos Spark Internal Backlash

Insiders have shared YouTube’s playbook for handling the Gaza crisis. They argue that it shows inconsistent enforcement.

Activists Disrupt Amazon Conference Over $1.2 Billion Contract With Israel

Members of the activist group No Tech for Apartheid interrupted a senior Amazon executive's speech at a conference in Washington, DC, on Wednesday over the company's Project Nimbus cloud contract.

OpenAI Wants AI to Help Humans Train AI

Having humans rate a language model’s outputs produced clever chatbots. OpenAI says adding AI to the loop could help make them even smarter and more reliable.

The EU Is Coming for X’s Paid Blue Checks

Elon Musk’s paid blue-check system on X deceives users and can be abused by malicious actors, the European Union said today.

Amazon Ramps Up Security to Head Off Project Nimbus Protests

Former Big Tech workers intended to disrupt Wednesday’s AWS Summit in New York to protest the company’s $1.2 billion contract with Israel.

The Architect of Russia’s Google Is Back

Yandex cofounder Arkady Volozh fought off sanctions and kicked anti-war squatters out of his Amsterdam townhouse. Now he is ready to reveal his new AI company in the Netherlands. But can Europe forget his past?

Craig Wright Faces Perjury Investigation Over Claims He Created Bitcoin

By order of a UK judge, Craig Wright can no longer claim he is the creator of bitcoin and now faces the prospect of criminal charges.

Tiny Texas Village Seeks Billion-Dollar Bitcoin Miner to Pave Potholes, Scare Dogs Away

In a roundabout bid to win public opinion (and a juicy tax abatement,) Riot Platforms is preparing for its prized bitcoin mine to be annexed by a minuscule village in rural Texas.