Stefanie Heinzmann, one of Switzerland’s best-known contemporary pop stars, is to become an ambassador for the Committee for UNICEF Switzerland and Liechtenstein. The 34-year-old from Valais has already been supporting the United Nations Children’s Fund for many years, for example at the Sternenwochen Award Ceremony, the long-standing fundraising campaign by children in Switzerland and Liechtenstein for children in need. An exceptionally talented performer with a powerful voice, Stefanie Heinzmann has released six albums in the past 15 years and won numerous national and international prizes including the Echo, enchanting audiences young and old not just with her voice but also with her wholly unique charisma. Her appointment today as an ambassador for UNICEF Switzerland and Liechtenstein marks the fulfilment of a long-held wish.

“I feel incredibly honored to be able to stand among the other wonderful ambassadors in support of probably the most important cause there is: a peaceful and just future for all the children of this world. Each and every one of us can play our part, and I’m immensely happy to be able to motivate people in any way that I can to help children on behalf of UNICEF Switzerland and Liechtenstein. Thank you, UNICEF, for your trust, and I look forward to everything that lies ahead!”

A strong voice, and not only when it comes to singing

In addition to her musical work, Stefanie Heinzmann’s social commitment is particularly noteworthy. “Stefanie is a role model for many children and young people”, says Bettina Junker, Chief Executive of UNICEF Switzerland and Liechtenstein. “Her natural and approachable manner enables her to captivate even the youngest audience. People listen to her”, says Bettina Junker. And that is exactly what UNICEF is hoping for from its new ambassador. “Stefanie Heinzmann has a strong voice, not only when it comes to singing, but also when bringing more serious issues such as bullying and young people’s mental health into the public eye. That’s why we are very much looking forward to working with her.”

All over the world, a host of international stars such as Orlando Bloom, Millie Bobby Brown, Lionel Messi, David Beckham and Priyanka Chopra Jonas appear in public as UNICEF Goodwill Ambassadors. With her appointment, Stefanie Heinzmann joins Kurt Aeschbacher, Anatole Taubman and Tina Weirather as the fourth well-known public figure to act as an ambassador for UNICEF Switzerland and Liechtenstein and promote a better world for children. In her role, Stefanie Heinzmann will also be standing up for the values and principles laid down in the UN Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.