WORLD WAR II HONOR ROLL WORLD WAR II HONOR ROLL

Town of Manlius and Adjacent Postal Areas

Part III of III

Submitted by Kathy Crowell

Madison, Robert. Fayetteville. (Town of Dewitt) "On the SS Costa Rica Victory due in New York city last Friday...Pfc. Robert Madison, 106 Kittle rd., Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 10/7/1945.

Mallott, Charles. Fayetteville. "Pfc. Charles W. Mallott of Fayetteville will be graduated today from the army administration school at Huntsville, Tex., after an eight weeks' course. He will be assigned to administrative duty with some branch of the army air corps," The Post-Standard, 12/24/1943. "Miss Shirley Seymour, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Frank Bessee, of 119 LaFayette avenue, Syracuse, and Corp. Edwin Weeks, son of Mr. and Mrs. Edwin Weeks of Warren street this village, were married Monday morning, Aug. 7...Miss Madeline Thornton and Cpl. Charles Mallott attended the bridal couple...The bridegroom and Corp. Mallott, whose home is in Fayetteville, are stationed at MacDill Field near Tampa," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/11/1944. "Cpl. and Mrs. Charles Mallott, of Tampa, Fla., are visiting Mrs. Mallott's parents, Mr. and Mrs. James B. Havill," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/11/1944. "Sgt. and Mrs. Charles Malott, of Tampa, Fla., are spending a few days with Mrs. Malott's parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/29/1945. "Sgt. Charles Mallott has gone to Utah for assignment, after spending a few days with relatives here. Mrs. Mallott will remain for the present with her parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/6/1945.

Mann, William H. Formerly town of Manlius. "Lt. William H. Mann of Buffalo is spending a few days at the Manlius School, on furlo from Ft. Knox, Ky. Mt. Mann was graduated from the Manlius School in June, and received his commission at that time," The Post-Standard, 9/19/1942.

Manton, David. Fayetteville. "Lt. David Manton has received an honorable discharge from the U. S. Army, and with his wife, is spending some time at the home of his parents, Mr. and Mrs. M. T. Manton, East Genesee street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/28/1944.

Manworren, Ida L. Kirkville. "Corp. Ida L. Manworren, assigned to the military personnel section at headquarters, Camp Upton, is spending a 10-day furlo with his mother, Mrs. Jessie M. Manworren of Kirkville. Corp. Manworren reported at Fort Des Moines, Ia., last August for basic training and was sent with some of the first groups graduating to Daytona Beach, Fla., to open the second WAAC training center," The Post-Standard, 6/16/1943. Kirkville P.O., according to World War II list provided by Ella Dunn from Kirkville records, spelled Ida Gainor Manwarren.

?Maphey, John. Manlius. "Pvt. John H. Maphey, husband of Mrs. Licha Anne Maphey, 710 Pond st., has been wounded in action in the Mediterranean area, the war department announced yesterday through The Associated Press, The Post-Standard, 7/20/1944. "Sgt. Eva Albanese, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Michael Albanese of 126 W. Seneca st., is the ninth member of her family to serve in the armed forces...a brother-in-law, Pvt. John Mophey, was killed on the Anzio beachhead..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/13/1944. "Pvt. John Maphey died June 14 of wounds suffered in action during the fighting in Italy, according to a War Department telegram received by his wife, Mrs. John Maphey of 710 Pond Street. Pvt. Maphey entered the service Sept. 23, 1943 and received his basic training at Camp Wheeler, Ga. He last visited home on furlough Feb. 3. At that time he reported back to Fort Meade and was then sent to Italy. He was wounded in action May 27. Besides his wife, the former Miss Licha Albanese, he is survived by a daughter, Anne, a year and a half old," The Herald-Journal, 7/11/1944. Wife born in, and later settled in, Manlius.

Mapstone, Carl C. Manlius. "Among those sworn in at the induction center on Tuesday for military service were six local men. They were...Carl C. Mapstone...of Manlius will go into...the Army," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/6/1943. "Edwin Hawkins, Carl Mapstone and Edward Shanahan left Syracuse early Tuesday morning for Camp Upton, L. I., having recently been called for service," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/27/1943. "Pvt. Carl Mapstone, who was called home by the death of his father, has returned to his base in Oregon. Mrs. Mapstone, who had been spending some time in Oregon, will remain at her home on the Manlius-Jamesville road," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/18/1944. "Carl Mapstone has received an honorable discharge from service and returned Monday night to his home on the Manlius-Fayetteville Road," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/23/1945. "Pvt. Carl Mapstone (photo). Some time ago we printed a photo of Carl 'Red' Mapstone one-time News-Caster photographer. It wasn't so good, and rather than offend Red's taste as a lens snapper, we give you his latest. Looks pretty chipper in his uniform, eh?, Bond scrapbook, n.d.

Mapstone, Franklin Adelbert. Fayetteville. "The list of inductees from board 473...Army...Franklin Adelbert Mapstone, Fayetteville RD 1," The Post-Standard, 7/3/1943. "Pvt. Franklin A. Mapstone...has been assigned for training as a radio operator-mechanic at the army air forces training command, Sioux Falls, S.D. He was graduated in 1943 from Fayetteville high school where he played football and hockey. He entered the service June 9 and was formerly at Keesler Field, Miss.," The Post-Standard, 11/11/1943. "Military rites will be conducted at the grave, following services at the home at 2 p.m. today for Aviation Cadet John E. Mapstone, son of Mr. and Mrs. John B. Mapstone of Highbridge, who was killed in a crash of a combat training plane near Faceville, Ga., Sunday night...Surviving besides his parents, is a brother, Franklin, who is training with the radio division of the Army Air Corps at Sioux Falls, S. D., and several aunts and uncles," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/17/1944, age 21. "Pvt. Franklin A. Mapstone...has been promoted to private first class at Bergstrom Field, Tex.," The Post-Standard, 9/27/1944. "Bergstrom Field, Texas.--Corporal Franklin A. Mapstone...was recently presented the good conduct medal at the monthly review by Colonel Samuel J. Davis, base commanding officer of Bergstrom Field, the First Troop Carrier Command's combat crew training replacement station in Austin, Texas. Cpl. Mapstone's fidelity through faithful and exact performance of duty, efficiency through capacity to produce results has been such as to deserve emulation..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/10/1944. "The following officers and enlisted men were discharged from the army of the United States at Fort Dix, N.J.,..S/Sgt. Franklin A. Mapstone, Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 1/22/1946.

Mapstone, John E. Fayetteville. "John E. Mapstone is taking a five months' course of instruction at Williamsport-Dickinson Jr. College, Williamsport, Pa., prior to being appointed aviation cadet in the army air forces," The Post-Standard, 7/19/1943. "Two youths from Fayetteville, N. Y. have reported to the Army Air Forces Pre-Flight School for Pilots at Maxwell Field, Alabama, to begin the third phase of their training as pilots in the U. S. Army Air Forces' expanding program. These aviation cadets are receiving nine weeks of intensive physical, military and academic instruction at Maxwell Field, Ala., preparatory to beginning their actual flight training at one of the many primary flying schools located in the Army Air Forces Eastern Flying Training Command. These men are Aviation Cadets Carlyle B. Doupe...and John E. Mapstone, son of Mr. and Mrs. John B. Mapstone," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/22/1943. "In service since February of last year, Aviation Cadet John Mapstone, 21...was killed Sunday night...Parents of the youthful pilot were informed of the death of their son by telegram that night...No details were given other than the accident happened during night flight training...Cadet Mapstone...was employed by Bell Aircraft Corporation at Buffalo when he entered the service. He trained at Williamsport, Pa., and Ocala, Fla., before going to Bainbridge...A brother, Franklin Mapstone, is serving with an Army radio division at Sioux Falls, S.D" Herald Journal, 3/14/1944. "Military rites will be conducted at the grave, following services at the home at 2 p.m. today for Aviation Cadet John E. Mapstone, son of Mr. and Mrs. John B. Mapstone of Highbridge, who was killed in a crash of a combat training plane near Faceville, Ga., Sunday night...Cadet Mapstone's body arrived in Fayetteville Wednesday night. Aviation Cadet William Martinkie, a close friend of Mapstone, who had been in training with him since he entered service, accompanied the body from the Bainbridge air base. Stationed at the Bainbridge flying field, Cadet Mapstone would have completed advanced flight training and received his pilot's wings and commission in July. He had been at Bainbridge about a month. John was born in this village 21 years ago, and attended Fayetteville High School from which he was graduated in 1942. During his school career he was active in athletics. He was employed by the Bell Aircraft Corp. before enlisting in the service in February, 1943. Appointed an aviation cadet, Cadet Mapstone trained at Williamsport, Pa., and Ocala, Fla., before being sent to Bainbridge. Surviving besides his parents, is a brother, Franklin...and several aunts and uncles," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/17/1944. "It is with deep sorrow that we place the first gold star on our honor roll opposite the name of John E. Mapstone. He was 20 years old and worked as a machine operator before entering the air force. Soon to be graduated and receive his commission, he crashed to his death while on a routine training flight. Sympathy of the entire organization is extended to his father, John B. Mapstone, and uncles Lynn and Henry Mapstone, who are employed at Precision; and also the rest of the family who are life-long residents of Fayetteville," Bond scrapbook, n.d., Precision Castings Co. newsletter.

Marcellus, Clyde D. Fayetteville. "Among Syracuse men in the army reserve who will receive orders starting Saturday are the following...Clyde D. Marcellus, Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 2/23/1943. "Scott Field, Ill.--Pvt. Clyde D. Marcellus, son of Mr. and Mrs. Clyde S. Marcellus, of Fayetteville, N. Y., has just been graduated from the radio school of the Army Air Forces Training Command here. His intensive training at Scott Field saw him complete a course in radio operator-mechanic. Now qualified for further duty as a skilled radio technician on the world wide battle fronts of the AAF, he may become one of the many Scott Field graduates serving as members of American bomber crews. In civilian life Pvt. Marcellus was a student at Syracuse university," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/29/1944.

Marcellus, Donald C. Fayetteville. "Among Syracuse men in the army reserve who will receive orders starting Saturday are the following...Donald C. Marcellus, Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 2/23/1943. "Corp. Donald C. Marcellus, son of Mr. and Mrs. Clyde S. Marcellus of Fayetteville RD 3, has been assigned to Westminster college near Pittsburgh, Pa., in the army specialized training program. He received his rating at Aberdeen proving grounds and was graduated from the advanced training school on July 17. While there he received the expert marksmanship medal. A graduate of Fayetteville high school, he attended Syracuse university, leaving March 9 with the army reserves," The Post-Standard, 8/17/1943.

Marko, Joseph. Minoa. "Veterans of more than two years in the European theater, Pvt. Frank Ducar...and Pvt. Joseph Marko, son of Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Marko of Minoa are home on furlo and aren't envying the boys still over there...Joseph Marko, after 31 months overseas, has no qualms as to the numbers 'three' and 'one,' in any combination, be it 13 or 31. He enlisted on his birthday, March 13, 1941, was sent overseas a year later to the day, March 13, 1942, and after 31 months, arrived back home on Friday the 13th last week. A former employee at Halcomb steel plant, Pvt. Marko was sent to Ascension island between South America and Africa with the engineers in September, 1942, and after 14 months his outfit was sent 400 miles inland in Africa to the Congo to construct landing fields. Transferred to the air transport command, Pvt. Marko will report in Delaware...Pvt. Marko's brother, Staff Sgt. William Marko, is in Texas in the medical corps," The Post-Standard, 10/17/1944.

Marko, William. Minoa. ...Pvt. Marko's brother, Staff Sgt. William Marko, is in Texas in the medical corps," The Post-Standard, 10/17/1944.

Marquisee, Aden. Fayetteville. "During the month of January, seventeen young men from this village have been inducted into service and many more have had their physical examinations and are awaiting the word that will make them a member of the armed forces. Among those who left earlier in the month were Aden Marquisee..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/5/1943. "Corp. Aden Marquisee, US air forces...was inducted Jan. 4 and received his basic training at Atlantic City, N. J., has been transferred to Camp Crowder, Mo., where he is a member of the signal training regiment," The Post-Standard, 3/9/1943. "Mr. and Mrs. A. F. Hopstein have returned from a trip to Texas, where they visited their son A/C Burt Hopstein at Bruce Field, Ballinger, Texas. While in Texas they also visited Pvt. Francis Woessner at Camp Maxie, and enroute home stopped to see corp. Aden Marquisee at Camp Crowder, Mo., both local boys, who are in service," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/30/1943. "Corp. Aden Marquisee of Camp Pinedale, Fresno, Calif., is on a 15-day furlough and is visiting his parents, Mr. and Mrs. James Marquisee at their home in West Genesee street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/29/1943. "The Fayetteville high school band, outstanding in years before the war in State and Legion competition, has gone to war, according to reports, it's fighting as well as it played. Almost to the man...Army fliers who were formerly in the uniform of the band include...Aden Marquisee..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/9/1944. "Nine service men from Fayetteville and vicinity had an unexpected reunion last Friday night (or rather Saturday morning) when they dropped into the Chef's diner for a before-going-to-bed-snack. Who was there first doesn't matter, but one by one or two by two they came in, greeting with each with 'Hi you old son of a gun' or 'What's cooking in Honolulu?' Looking them over, I saw Cpl. (Pete) George Bacel, A. T. (Billy) Goebel, Cpl. (Goody) George Goodfellow, Cpl. (Davey) David Volles, Cpl. (Bud) Collin Armstrong, Lt. Burt Hopstein, Cpl. Aden Marquisee, Pfc. (Lindy) Edward Lindenmayer, and Lt. (Joe) Joseph McGraw of Dewitt. The boys were enjoying reminiscing over the good old days at school and swapping 'big ones' about recent experiences. Bacel, Goodfellow, Lindenmayer and McGraw have seen service in the Pacific area," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/19/1945. "MaM 2/c Walter Lyman, Jr., and Cpl. Aden Marquisee met for a few hours a couple of weeks ago on Okinawa, shared a K ration supper and had a wonderful time talking about the old home town, according to letters received by Mrs. Lyman and Cpl. Marquisee's mother. Lyman was one of the survivors of the typhoon which struck the island of Okinawa, being stationed at the point where it struck, and the meeting which was effected by Cpl. Marquisee's mother took place a few days later," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/2/1945. "Corp. Aden R. Marquisee, stationed on Okinawa with the 374th signal company wing...Corp. Marquisee entered service in January, 1942 and trained for radio repairman at Camp Crowder, Mo., Hammer Field, Calif., and Camp Pinedale, Calif. In June, 1945, he went overseas. Before entering service he was employed by the electrical contractor at work on the GE plant building on Thompson rd..." The Post-Standard, 11/4/1945. "Aden Marquisee was honorably discharged from the Army last Friday at the separation center at Fort Dix, N.J. A sergeant with the 1374th Signal Company Wing, Marquisee was in the service for 38 months, nine of which was spent on Okinawa," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/15/1946. "Adam Marquisee left last Friday night to attend Coyune Electrical School in Chicago, Ill.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/28/1946. Brother of Rose Marquisee.

Marquisee, Rose. Fayetteville. "Miss Rose Marquisee, 20, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. James Marquisee of 205 W. Genesee St., Fayetteville, has been sworn into the WAVES. She attended Fayetteville high school and Powelson institute and was employed at Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. She will report to Hunt college for training. A brother, Aden Marquisee, is with the air corps in California," The Post-Standard, 2/4/1945. "Miss Rose Marquisee, who recently enlisted in the WAVES is receiving her initial training at Hunter College, New York City. She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. James Marquisee of West Genesee street, and has a brother in the service," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/30/1945. "Rose Marquisee, Seaman 1/c (MaM), USNR (WR) stationed at the fleet postoffice in New York city...she received boot training at the naval training school at Hunter college, Bronx. She also attended specialized training school for mailmen there. After graduation, she was in a ship's company at Hunter as mail clerk. Prior to entering service, she was employed by Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co.," The Post-Standard, 11/4/1945. Sister of Aden Marquisee.

Marsh, Alton J. Formerly Fayetteville. "Alton J. Marsh, pilot of a combat-cargo plane in the China-Burma theater, has been promoted to captain from first lieutenant, according to word received by his sister, Mrs. Ralph Downes of Center street. Captain Marsh was a resident of this village (Fayetteville) for some time prior to his enlistment in service in January, 1942. He worked for Mr. Downes in the grocery business and his wife is the former Mabel Shearer. He has been in active service in Asia since he went overseas last August. In a recent letter home he stated that he had been stationed in Sylket and Tulehal (Imphal), in Assam, India, at Hathazan and was at the present time in Myitkyina, Burma. Captain Marsh was at Kunming, China, for a while and was also in Yunnanyi, Linchow, Chanyi, Tuliang, Tai-Keh, Mentszu and Nanking plus a few other places. He further said 'We helped in the evacuation of Kweilien and Linchow. In India and Burma we were in the midst of things all the way from the defense of the Imphal Valley when it was completely surrounded and the Japs had machine guns right off the runway, down to Rangoon. Have flown all over Burma and India. Right now we've been spending our time flying 'the hump to the Chinese coast,' " The Eagle Bulletin, 8/10/1945. "Capt. and Mrs. Alton Marsh are spending the holidays with Capt. Marsh's brother-in-law and sister, Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Downes. Capt. Marsh is on terminal leave from Randolph Field..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/20/1946.

Martin, John. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "John Martin, son of Mr. and Mrs. Emmett Martin of Chapel street has enlisted in the U. S. Navy and left Wednesday for Norfolk, Va., where he will train," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/14/1942. "Shipfitter 3/c John Martin of the U. S. Seabees is passing a three-week furlough with his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Emmett Martin, after an absence of 15 months during which time he had been serving in the Pacific area. After his furlough he will return to California," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/28/1944. "Mr. and Mrs. William H. Goodfellow of Mechanic street announce the engagement of their daughter, Dorothy A. Goodfellow to John Martin SF 3/c...Mr. Martin, serving with Navy, has just returned to duty after spending a 21-day leave at his home here," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/3/1944. "John Martin SF 3/c, U. S. N., is on leave and visiting his parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/2/1944. "The Fayetteville high school band, outstanding in years before the war in State and Legion competition, has gone to war, according to reports, it's fighting as well as it played. Almost to the man...the boys who made the local organization a prize winning band before the war, are serving in some branch of the armed forces...Other navy men now include...John Martin, Seabees..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/9/1944.

Mateson, Howard J. Kirkville. "Board 473, East Syracuse, sent 19 into the army...Howard J. Mateson, Kirkville," The Post-Standard, 4/29/1945. Kirkville P.O., according to list provided by Ella Dunn from Kirkville records, spelled Matteson.

Mathers, Gordon. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "First Sgt. Gordon E. Mathers, formerly of Fayetteville and Syracuse, is home on a 20-day furlo visiting his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Fred Mathers of 106 New Scotland ave., Albany, formerly of Fayetteville, and his sister, Mrs. E. J. Dumas, Jr., of Albany. This is Sgt. Mathers' first visit home in three and a half years as he had been stationed in Panama. He recently was transferred to Fort Tyson, Tenn., with the balloon barrage battalion. Sgt. Mathers, now 30, has been in the army eight and one-half years. He is visiting friends and relatives in Syracuse this week," The Post-Standard, 3/12/1943.

Matthes, Raymond A. Minoa. "1952 Minoa Village Board minutes: World War II Honor Roll - Village of Minoa Only...Matthes, Raymond A., 136 Osborne St., Minoa, N.Y."

Matzel, Albert. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "Local Draft Board 473 called up 19 men for induction this week. They will be examined by the board of which Jesse W. Clarke is chairman and Collin Armstrong and Matthew F. O'Brien. The group called from this vicinity are as follows: ...Albert W. Matzel, 105 Warren street, Fayetteville...," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/27/1941. "S/Sgt. Albert Matzel of the Army Quartermaster Corps, is passing a 20-day furlough with his family, and getting acquainted with his 14-month-old son whom he had never seen. His arrival home came as a complete surprise to his family. They had not heard from him since last December. According to reports, Sgt. Matzel, who has seen action in numerous countries, embarked for his home trip at Irian, and was three months reaching the States. At the conclusion of his furlough he will report to Ft. Devens, Mass., for reassignment. Mrs. Matzel was the former Harriet Case, and with her little son, is residing on Kimber road, DeWitt," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/25/1944. "M/Sgt. Albert Matzell, who has been spending a three-day leave with his wife and children at the home of his parents in Perryville, N.Y., and friends in Fayetteville, has returned to his camp in Maryland. He has 96 points to his credit and has applied for a discharge from service," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/1/1945.

Matzel, Frank. Manlius. "Color guard of the Legion post (at Memorial Day services) was four discharged veterans of this war who are members of the Legion, Glenn Trinder and Joseph Pezzati, both wearing the uniform of the army; Frank Matzell, formerly in the navy, and Robert Goodfellow, a former Marine corpsman," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/2/1944.

Mawson, Sidney. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. "Pvt. Sidney Mawson has been at home for a brief furlough and returned to Fort Niagara," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/12/1942. "Mr. and Mrs. Burris E. Prest of Arlington, Mass., announce the marriage of their daughter, Gertrude Elizabeth, to Sidney Millard Mawson, son of Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Mawson of West Seneca street, Manlius, which occurred February 14th of this year...Sidney Mawson has been a mail carrier in Manlius for the past twelve years. At present he is in U. S. Army, stationed at Fort McClennan, Ala.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/10/1942. "Mrs. Sidney Mawson, of Newfoundland, Pa., arrived Thursday to pass the week end with her parents-in-law..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/30/1945. "A Letter from a Soldier / Dear Mrs. Anderson: I'll bet you have forgotten that you have a mail man 'way over here in London. In case you have, here is a reminder! Something happened here today that I think will make good copy for the Eagle-Bulletin: I was out in front of the postoffice unloading mail bags from a truck when I noticed an air force officer pass by. The slight notice I gave that usual happening led me to believe that I knew that person. The brain worked, and I called to him. He looked around and a big smile lit up the face of Lt. Burns Neveldine. He came back, and the usual greetings took place. He confessed to knowing that I was in London, but its such a big city that its hard to find one particular person. We stood there on Oxford street with streams of people passing by, and talked of nothing but home and all the fellows we knew, 'way back when! As you know, I was over here before Burns ever got into the Army. He slugged out 23 missions with bombs while I have thrown all kinds of mail at those cases and bags, both very necessary to the war effort, I agree, but direct contrasts, too. It was a very pleasant few minutes we spent there and he is stopping in again tomorrow. I hope to see him again before either one of us leave the U. K. Yes, it was old home day right in the middle of London, England! Old neighbors met, and how pleasant it was. I hope to see you again soon, the sooner the better! Best wishes 'Sid,' " The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/15/1945. "Word has been received by the family of Sgt. Sidney Mawson, former mail carrier in Manlius, that he has been promoted to staff sergeant. Sgt. Mawson went overseas in September, 1942, and worked in a London Base P.O. until June, 1945, when he was sent to Paris where he is now stationed," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/31/1945. "Sgt. Sidney M. Mawson was honorably discharged from the U. S. Army at Fort Dix on Dec. 3 and has returned to his home here. He was in the service 42 months, 38 of which were spent overseas in the U. S. Army postal service. For the present Sidney and his wife will make their home with Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Mawson, and after a much needed rest will return to his work at the post office," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/14/1945. "Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Mawson entertained at a family dinner on Christmas Day. This was a special occasion, honoring their son, Sidney, who had recently returned from service," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/28/1945.

Maxwell, Frank P. Minoa. "Second Lt. Frank P. Maxwell...has been appointed weather officer at Altus Army Air Field, Altus, Okla. Lt. Maxwell was employed in the quality control laboratory of the U. S. Gypsum Co. prior to enlistment. He received his B. A. degree in ceramic engineering from Alfred university in 1941. He was commissioned after training at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology," The Post-Standard, 9/29/1943. "Second Lt. Frank P. Maxwell, 24, son of Frank S. Maxwell of N. Manlius rd,. Minoa, received the silver wings of an aerial navigator Saturday at San Marcos, Tex. He was a student officer," The Post-Standard, 3/22/1944. Honorably discharged, First Lt. Frank P. Maxwell, N. Manlius Rd., Minoa, The Post-Standard, 10/30/1945.

May, Lawrence. Formerly Manlius, Mill St. In naval air corps. Born in Manlius, moved to Bolivar, Madison Co.

Maynard, Edwin Bruce. Minoa. "The list of inductees from board 473...Navy...Edwin Bruce Maynard, 407 East ave., Minoa," The Post-Standard, 7/3/1943."Edwin B Maynard of Minoa, formerly of Manlius, was one of 26 accepted for the Navy," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/19/1943. "1952 Minoa Village Board minutes: World War II Honor Roll - Village of Minoa Only...Maynard, Edwin B., 407 East Ave., Minoa, N.Y."

Maynard, William C. Minoa. "William Maynard has been accepted in the Army Air Corps," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/27/1942. "On the Cumberland Sound, due at Seattle Thursday...Sgt. William C. Maynard, 407 East ave., Minoa," The Post-Standard, 12/8/1945. "1952 Minoa Village Board minutes: World War II Honor Roll - Village of Minoa Only...Maynard, William C., 407 East Ave, Minoa, N.Y."

?McAlteer, John. Manlius. "S/C John McAlteer, who is at home on furlough, has been visiting his brother William McAlteer and family on Hillside Drive and will leave Sunday to report for duty," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/6/1945.

McCarthy, Parnell J. Manlius. (Town of Pompey). Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. "Air Cadet Parnell J. McCarthy and Mrs. McCarthy of Avon Park, Fla., spent Wednesday with their parents, Postmaster and Mrs. Chas. O'Brien. They departed Wednesday evening for the Air Base at Greenville, Miss.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/8/1842. "Five aviation cadets of the Syracuse-Onondaga area have reported for basic flight instruction at the army flying school at Greenville, Miss. They are...Parnell McCarthy, R.D. Manlius," The Post-Standard, 5/19/1942. "Parnell James McCarthy...received his wings and rank of second lieutenant at Columbus, Miss., a week ago today. He has been sent to Fort Meyer, Fla., for advanced training. Lt. McCarthy attended the district school at Pompey Center, Manlius high school and Dwight Preparatory school in New York. Following his graduation from Cornell university, he enlisted in the army air corps last December and was sent to Montgomery, Ala. and later to Avon Park, Fla.," The Post-Standard, 9/13/1942. His parents resided in Pompey Center; wife's parents were postmaster and Mrs. Chas. O'Brien of Fayetteville, Eagle-Bulletin, 10/23/1942. "First Lt. Parnell J. McCarthy, 23, bomber pilot in the Latin-America area, has been killed on duty, according to a telegram from the secretary of war received by his wife, Mrs. Parnell J. McCarthy of 405 Walnut st., Fayetteville. Lt. McCarthy...joined the air force Jan. 2, 1942, at Columbia, Miss. He went overseas last Christmas day. He was promoted to first lieutenant about three weeks ago. Born in Fairport, he was graduated from Manlius high school and attended Cornell university and Dwight Preparatory school in New York. He married Miss Genevieve Reilly at Christmas time, 1941. Besides his wife and parents, he is survived by a sister, Miss Anne McCarthy, Intermont college, Bristol, Va..." Bottrill scrapbook, n.d. "Mrs. Genevieve O'Brien McCarthy was notified Wednesday night of the death of her husband, Lt. Parnell McCarthy on Sept. 11, somewhere in the South American area. She had received a letter from him last week, stating that he expected to undergo an operation. Lt. McCarthy, a member of the U. S. Air corps, had received his present rank only two weeks ago. He entered service in January, 1942, and received his basic training in Texas, where Mrs. McCarthy spent some time with him. He is a son of Mr. and Mrs. Parnell J. McCarthy of Pompey Center, who with his wife, and sister, Anne, survive. Mrs. McCarthy is the daughter of Postmaster and Mrs. Charles O'Brien, with whom she has resided since she returned from Texas," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/17/1943. "...commissioned a second lieutenant Sept. 6, 1942, at Columbus, Miss. He went overseas last Christmas Day. He was born 23 years ago at Fairport...At Christmas time, 1941, he married Miss Genevieve Reilly, who survives him. He leaves also his parents...and one sister, Miss Anne McCarthy of Intermont College, Bristol, Va....he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant about three weeks ago," Vail scrapbook, n.d.

McCollough, William J. Fayetteville. (Town of Dewitt) "William J. McCollough of Lyndon Farms, Fayetteville, has been promoted to technical sergeant at the Fifth Ferrying group, Love Field, Texas., his commanding officer, Col. Thomas D. Ferguson, announces. Prior to entering the service on may 6, 1942, T/Sgt. McCollough was employed as horse trainer and stable manager for Lyndon Farms. Under his training many thoroughbred horses have won championships in the show ring. T/Sgt. McCollough has two brothers serving with the armed forces. His father, William, is a resident of Camlough, Ireland," The Post-Standard, 9/6/1943.

McCombie, Alexander. Kirkville. "Among soldiers from Upstate New York fighting in infantry and artillery units of the Fifth army in Italy are...PFC Alexander M'Combie, Kirkville, ammunition handler..." The Post-Standard, 10/17/1944. "Arrival on the Admiral Capps, due in Newport News last Saturday...T/5 Alexander McCombie, Kirkville," The Post-Standard, 12/18/1945.

McCoy, John E. Fayetteville. "Arrivals on George Washington, due in New York today...Pvt. John E. McCoy, Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 12/22/1945.

McCutchin, Cecil. Fayetteville. "Strutting their stuff before an estimated crowd of 10,000 spectators, the Fayetteville Legion Drill Team was awarded 1st prize for marching and showmanship at Chittenango Field Day...With their present roster composed of 12 veterans including...Cecil McCutchin...More veterans are needed to round out this team," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/9/1946.

McDonald, George A. Manlius. To arrive on the USSR Victory at Newport News Friday, George A. McDonald, The Post-Standard, 1/13/1946.

McGann, Raymond. Manlius. "Those accepted are...Navy...Raymond R. McGann, 106 Moulter st., Manlius," The Post-Standard, 4/17/1943."Raymond McGann, who is expecting to leave April 23 to enter the armed services, was honored at a dinner on Wednesday night given by co-workers at the Easy Washer Co. Mr. McGann was presented with a billfold and a gift of money," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/16/1943. "Among inductees from Board 473 for the month of April, are...Raymond McGann...from Manlius...Philo, McGann, Harter and Decker will see service in the U. S. navy and the other draftees in the Army," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/23/1943. "Mr. and Mrs. Durwood Hickox of Eastwood, gave a dinner on Sunday in honor of their brother, Raymond McGann, who leaves Friday to enter service in the Navy," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/23/1943. "Raymond McGann of the U. S. Navy has written this week, telling of his safe arrival at Camp Peary, Williamsburg, Va.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/30/1943. "Raymond McGann, F. C. F. of the construction regiments Seabees, U. S. Navy, stationed at Camp Peary, Williamsburg, Va., arrived in Manlius last Saturday for a brief visit with his wife and infant daughter, returning to his base at midnight the same day," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/11/1943. "Raymond McGann, F. I. C., has been transferred from Camp Perry, Va. to Camp Davisville, R. I., The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/18/1843. "Mrs. Raymond McGann has returned from Providence, R. I., where she visited Mr. McGann of the Navy, who was having a brief furlough," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/25/1943. "Raymond McGann of the navy, is expecting to pass a brief furlough this week-end at his home in Moulter street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/9/1943. "Raymond McGann of the Seabees, has returned to camp in Mississippi after spending a ten-day furlough at his home," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/30/1943. "Mrs. Raymond McGann returned Tuesday night from providence, R. I., where she visited Mr. McGann U. S. N., who is now stationed at Camp Endicott, Rhode Island," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/13/1943. "Raymond McGann, F.I.C., and friend, Ernest C. King, M.M. 2/c, both Seabees, now stationed in Rhode Island, spent Sunday with Mrs. McGann and their little daughter, Ruth Elaine, at their home in Moulter street...," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/3/1943. "Mrs.. Raymond McGann returned Monday morning from Albany, where she spent the week-end with her husband, who was having a brief furlough," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/24/1943. "Mrs. Raymond McGann entertained at a family party last Sunday in honor of her husband, F.I.C. McGann of Ft. Davis, R. I., who was home on a 35-hour leave," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/8/1943. "Mrs. Raymond McGann spent Wednesday and Thursday of last week in Providence, R. I., visiting F 1/c McGann," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/22/1943. "Raymond McGann F/1c, U. S. Navy is spending this week at his home in Moulter street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/5/1943. "Mr. and Mrs. Howard McGann entertained at dinner last Sunday in honor of their son, Raymond, who was returning to Camp Davis, R. I. following a five-day leave," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/12/1943. "Raymond McGann, F 1/c of the Navy, will spend Sunday with his wife and daughter, and will combine Christmas and their daughter's first birthday, as this will be his last leave of absence this year," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/10/1943. "Raymond McGann, M.M. 3/c stationed at Rhode Island, spent Sunday with Mrs. McGann and their daughter, Ruth, of Moulter street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/21/1944. "Raymond McGann mm 3/c was at home Saturday on a 40-hour leave," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/4/1944. "Mr. and Mrs. Howard McGann entertained last Saturday night at their home in Smith street in honor of their son, Raymond McGann, of Camp Thomas, Davisville, R. I., and their son-in-law, Durward Hickox, stationed at Sampson Naval base," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/4/1944. "Raymond McGann m.m. 3/c of Camp Thomas, R.I., is at home on a leave, on account of the illness of his little daughter," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/18/1944. "Mrs. Raymond McGann received word on Tuesday of the safe arrival of her husband, M.M. 3/c R. R. McGann in England," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/5/1944. "Raymond McGann, MM 3/c, has written this week from France where he is serving with the Seabees, having crossed the English Channel with our forces on D-Day," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/25/1944. "Raymond McGann M.M. 3/c Seabee, has written from France that he is expecting to return to the States in November," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/27/1944. "Raymond McGann MM 3/c, who has been overseas serving with the Seabees in France and England, has returned to the United States and will arrive this week to visit his wife and little daughter in Moulter street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/1/1944. "Mr. and Mrs. Howard McGann entertained on Sunday in honor of their son Raymond McGann MM 3/c who recently returned from France and England," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/8/1944. "Raymond McGann, MM 2/c, a Seabee who has been stationed for 10 months in the South Pacific, has written stating that he expects to set sail on Oct. 26 for the States and that he is eligible for an honorable discharge," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/9/1945. "Raymond McGann MM 2/c has received an honorable discharge and returned Saturday evening to his home at 106 Moulter street. He has served nearly three years as a Seabee, taking active part in the European invasion, returning to the States for a 30-day furlough before leaving for the South Pacific where he was stationed for nearly 11 months until his discharge," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/30/1945. "Raymond McGann, who recently returned from Service in the South Pacific area, has accepted a position with the Easy Washer Co., Syracuse, where he was formerly employed," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/14/1945.

McGraw, Joseph. Fayetteville. (Town of Dewitt) "The Fayetteville high school band, outstanding in years before the war in State and Legion competition, has gone to war, according to reports, it's fighting as well as it played. Almost to the man...the boys who made the local organization a prize winning band before the war, are serving in some branch of the armed forces...Joseph McGraw in the air forces..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/9/1944. "Recommended for the navy cross after shooting down his fourth and fifth Japanese planes during 11 1/2 hours of almost continuous combat flight when his ship, escort carrier Gambier Bay, was sunk off Leyte in a sea and air battle Oct. 24, Lt. (j.g.) Joseph D. McGraw, son of Mr. and Mrs. James L. McGraw, Dewitt, is home on a 30-day leave. McGraw, who took off from the Gambier Bay just as the battle opened, flew to another carrier after his own ship was lost. During the three extra hops that he made from the second carrier, he and three other pursuit pilots were credited with breaking up a formation of 18 Japanese dive bombers and 12 Zero fighters. His personal possessions, including a Samurai sword that he had picked up on Saipan, were lost when the Gambier Bay went down. After transferring ships, he said, he continued to fly with another group, almost missing his scheduled leave. The Syracuse navy flier, who is credited with three probable planes in addition to the five credited, is slated to report to Jacksonville, Fla., for a new station after completing his leave. In June, he was forced to bail out of his Wildcat fighter when mechanical difficulties made the plane unfit for flying while he was on patrol. He was picked up immediately by an American destroyer. Coming into San Francisco on his leave, McGraw said that he and other pilots 'almost got pneumonia' standing in a rainstorm to watch the shore line come in sight. After the war, the 21-year-old officer declared that he plans to go to college," The Post-Standard, 12/17/1944. "Roger William Hoag, son of Stanley Hoag of Center street, left Monday night for the Army induction center at Fort Dix. 'Bill' enlisted in the army air corps last summer, prior to his 18th birthday and only recently received his summons to report for service. Some of the 'boys' home on furloughs dropped in for a little surprise on Bill last Thursday night and tendered him a farewell, they were Pfc. Ed Lindenmayer, Lt. Burt Hopstein, Lt. (j.g.) Joseph McGraw, Pvt. George Phillips, Pfc. Eddie O'Donnell, East Syracuse, Milton Kepler and Bob Sims," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/19/1945. "Nine service men from Fayetteville and vicinity had an unexpected reunion last Friday night (or rather Saturday morning) when they dropped into the Chef's diner for a before-going-to-bed-snack. Who was there first doesn't matter, but one by one or two by two they came in, greeting with each with 'Hi you old son of a gun' or 'What's cooking in Honolulu?' Looking them over, I saw Cpl. (Pete) George Bacel, A. T. (Billy) Goebel, Cpl. (Goody) George Goodfellow, Cpl. (Davey) David Volles, Cpl. (Bud) Collin Armstrong, Lt. Burt Hopstein, Cpl. Aden Marquisee, Pfc. (Lindy) Edward Lindenmayer, and Lt. (Joe) Joseph McGraw of Dewitt. The boys were enjoying reminiscing over the good old days at school and swapping 'big ones' about recent experiences. Bacel, Goodfellow, Lindenmayer and McGraw have seen service in the Pacific area," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/19/1945.

McIntyre, Clarence E. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "The following young men from this area were accepted for army duty at the induction station in Syracuse Wednesday, and in two weeks will go to the reception center at Fort Niagara: Clarence McIntyre...from Fayetteville..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/7/1942. "Pvt. Clarence McIntyre of Camp Miles Standish, Mass., spent Christmas and the week-end with his mother, Mrs. Charles McIntyre," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/1/1943. "Pvt. Clarence McIntyre...is reported to be 'missing in action' since Feb. 3, according to a telegram received by his mother last Saturday morning from the U. S. War Department. 'Mac' as he was known to most Fayetteville people, entered service August 15, 1942. At the reception center in Fort Niagara he was assigned to the Medical Corps and sent to Camp Pickett, Va. After training at Camp Pickett, his unit was transferred to Camp Miles Standish, Mass. His last visit at the home of his mother was at Christmas time," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/19/1943. "Mrs. Chas. McIntyre has received confirmation from the War Department of the death of her son, Pvt. Clarence McIntyre on Feb. 3, 1943. He was one of the many who went down to sea when their ship was torpedoed in the North Atlantic area. Lt.. McIntyre's death occurred on his 37th birthday," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/30/1943. "Mrs. Charles McIntyre has received from the War Department, the Purple Heart decoration, which, by the direction of the president of the United States, was awarded posthumously, to her son, Pvt. Clarence E. McIntyre of the Medical Corps, who sacrificed his life in defense of his country, Feb. 3, 1943. The Purple Heart was originally established by General George Washington at Newburg on Aug. 7, 1782, during the War of the Revolution. The decoration was revived by the War Department of Feb. 22, 1932, the 200th anniversary of Washington's birth, thus paying respect to his memory and recognizing his military achievements. An excerpt from a letter received by Mrs. McIntyre from the Adjutant General's office stated that 'As evidence of the Nation's recognition of military merit and courage, this award is made to honor the memory of a brave soldier who died as a result of enemy action," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/28/1943.

McIntyre, John. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "A surprise party in the nature of a farewell, was tendered John McIntyre on Tuesday night at the camp of his mother-in-law, Mrs. Thomas Nolan, on Cazenovia Lake. Mr. McIntyre has enlisted for army service, and leaves June 18 for officers' training camp," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/12/1942. "Mrs. Charles McIntyre has received word that her son, John McIntyre, has been transferred from Fort Niagara to Fort Monmouth, Red Bank, N. J., and is training in the signal corps," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/24/1942. "John McIntyre, home on a short furlough last week from Fort Monmouth, N. J. visited his mother, Mrs. Charles McIntyre," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/23/1942. "John McIntyre, a trainee in the Signal Corps at Fort Monmouth, N. J., was home on a 72-hour furlough spent with his wife at their home in Oran and his mother, Mrs. Charles McIntyre of Brooklea Dr.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/4/1942. "Corp. John McIntyre of Fort Monmouth, N. J., spent Sunday and Monday with his mother..., and his wife at their home in Oran," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/26/1943. "Lt. and Mrs. John McIntyre of Fort Monmouth, N. J. spent Sunday with their mothers..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/27/1943. "Lt. and Mrs. John McIntyre are home from Fort Monmouth, N. J., and have been visiting their mothers.... After a week's furlough Lt. McIntyre will report to Ft. Belvoir, Va. Mrs. McIntyre will remain at her home in Oran for the present," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/29/1943. "Lt. and Mrs. John McIntyre have been passing a few days with their mothers...enroute to Wisconsin, where Mr. McIntyre will receive further training in engineering," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/17/1943. "Mrs. Kenneth Rapp of Binghamton, N. Y., spent the week-end with her mother, Mrs. Charles McIntyre, coming to see her brother, Lt. John McIntyre before he left for his new post in Wisconsin," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/24/1943. "A son was born July 15 to Lt. and Mrs. John McIntyre (Katherine Nolan) at Memorial hospital in Syracuse. Mrs. McIntyre has been living with her mother, Mrs. Thos. Nolan at Oran, and Lt. McIntyre is serving with the 275th Engineers at Camp Breckinridge, Ky..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/21/1944. "Lt. John McIntyre of Camp Breckenridge, Ky. has been spending a few days with his wife and son...in Oran...and his mother..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/25/1944. "lst Lt. John McIntyre, who served overseas for 15 months with the 275th Engineers as Adjutant, has been honorably discharged from service and has joined his wife and son...and has also been visiting his mother, Mrs. Charles McIntyre, in Clinton street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/30/1945.

McIntyre, Winfield Edward, Jr. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "Edward McIntyre, son of Mr. and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre of this village, has been accepted as a flying cadet, and has enlisted for three years in the United States Flying Corps. He left Sunday night for Lakeland, Fla., where he will train for the ensuing ten weeks. After this period he will spend several months in advanced fields. Mr. McIntyre gave a family dinner at the Fayetteville hotel Sunday in honor of his son....Following the dinner the group went to the McIntyre home and later all accompanied the recruit to the station, where he entrained," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/20/1941. "W. Edward McIntyre, son of Mr. and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre of 106 South Park Court, Fayetteville, is scheduled to receive the silver 'wings' of a flying officer today at the Air Corps Advanced Flying School, Maxwell Field, Montgomery, Ala. 'Chubby,' as he is familiarly known to his many friends here, has been home on furlough since last Saturday, and he started back Wednesday night to be present for the military graduation exercises. His commission is that of lieutenant and the ceremonies take place on the ramp at the flying school. Praise for the good record made by McIntyre is given by Maj. Clinton W. Davis, director of training. He enlisted March 19 and during the seven and one-half months he has completed 200 hours of flying training at the regular army school. This included practice in gunnery, formation, night flying, time and distance flights, ground instruction in military organization, combat orders and pistol practice. He will remain at Maxwell Field until ordered to an Air Corps tactical unit or to a flying school as instructor. While home the McIntyre family held a get-together Sunday to greet the enthusiastic aviator and wish him success," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/31/1941. "Mr. and Mrs. Leon Lindenmayer of Huntleigh drive have made known the engagement of their daughter, Miss Kathryn E. Lindenmayer to Lieut. Winfield E. McIntyre, Jr....Lieut. McIntyre, a flying officer at the Air Corps Advanced Flying School, Maxwell Field, Montgomery, Ala., was recently home on a furlough. No date has been set for the wedding," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/21/1941. "A telegram received by W. E. McIntyre Monday night, stated that his son Lt. W. Edward McIntyre had been seriously injured in action. No details were given. Enlisting in service in March, 1941, McIntyre received his wings seven months later at the Air Corps Advanced Flying School at Maxwell Field, Ala. He visited his parents here last October prior to receiving his commission, and shortly after was sent to Alaska. Lt. McIntyre is known as a solo fighter--shooting and piloting his plane at the same time," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/12/1942. "The Order of the Purple Heart for 'extraordinary initiative and devotion to duty' has been awarded to Second Lt. Winfield Edward McIntyre, Jr...who was wounded June 4 during the Jap raid on Dutch Harbor, Alaska, when his fighter plane was shot down by an enemy ship. The Alaska defense command, in citing the young flying officer yesterday for outstanding performance of duty in action in the Aleutian area, said that McIntyre while 'in his first combat with an armed enemy and flying on routine patrol, was attacked, shot down and wounded, but safely beached his plane.' His parents...were notified on June 10 that their son had been injured seriously in the Jap raid, but the telegram gave no details of the affair. Lt. McIntyre was graduated from Fayetteville high school, where he played football, lacrosse and hockey, and attended Cook academy at Montour Falls prior to matriculating in the College of Forestry at Syracuse university. He enlisted in the army air corps more than a year ago, after completing his first year of college work. He received his wings and commission as a second lieutenant last October at Maxwell field, Ala. Transferred to Detroit, Lt. McIntyre was later sent to the west coast and went to Alaska in January of this year," The Post-Standard, 9/5/1942. "Second Lieut. W. Edward McIntyre has been awarded the Order of the Purple Heart for 'extraordinary initiative and devotion to duty' according to reports made several days ago. Lt. McIntyre was cited by the Alaskan defense command for his brilliant performance in his first combat with an armed enemy. The citation included the fact that he 'was attacked, shot down and wounded, but safely beached his plane.' McIntyre was injured during the initial Jap attack on Dutch Harbor on June 4," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/11/1942. "On Saturday morning, Oct. 24 at the Church of the Immaculate Conception, Miss Kathryn Elizabeth Lindenmayer...became the bride of Lt. Winfield Edward McIntyre...the couple left late in the afternoon by train for Everett, Wash., where Lt. McIntyre expects to be stationed for a time. Lt. McIntyre has seen service in Alaska and the Aleutian Islands, and was home last week for the first time in nearly a year," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/30/1942. "Lt. and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre of Westover Field, Mass., have been spending a few days with their parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/1/1943. "Lt. and Mrs. W. Edward McIntyre visited their parents...a few days last week enroute to Dayton, Oh., where Lt. McIntyre has been transferred," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/29/1943. "Lt. Winfield Edward McIntyre, Jr., 23,...has been promoted to captain in the army air corps, and is in Syracuse with his parents on a short leave. A former Fayetteville high school athlete, Capt. McIntyre received the Order of the Purple Heart when wounded in action in June during a Japanese raid on Dutch Harbor. He will report to duty at New Haven, Conn.," The Post-Standard, 2/26/1943. "Passing over Fayetteville Monday afternoon a flight of twelve planes, led by Capt. W. Edward McIntyre, thrilled the people of the village with an exhibition of plane maneuvers, which made them think that the Germans or Japs had arrived to bomb us. Taking the village unaware, the graceful P-40s swooped low, barely missing chimneys and trees. Men, women and children rushed to the streets to watch the performance and all were awed by the demonstration. Citizens were left to wonder what it was all about until 'Chubby Mac' called Ed Willet on the phone, asking him how he liked the show he had just staged over Fayetteville. The call was made from the Syracuse Air Base where the planes had stopped to refuel on a routine flight from LaGuardia Field. They later flew over in formation enroute to their home base. Capt. McIntyre made good his promise that if he ever had the opportunity to do so, he would give Fayetteville a demonstration that they would long remember," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/30/1943. "Capt. Winfield E. McIntyre of this village who won the Purple Heart in the Aleutians fighting, is credited with bagging one of the five Nazi planes which beset a Flying Fortress on the way back to its English base after bombing Bremen. According to an Associated Press report, Thunderbolt pilots spotted the crippled B-17 full of holes, its rudders and one stabilizer shot away just as three Messerschmitts and two Focke-Wulfs were preparing to attack the ship. The Thunderbolts were enroute home from their part in the escort job. Captain McIntyre and four other Thunderbolt pilots barged in and bagged all five enemy planes, saving the battered bomber from destruction...His wife and small son resides with her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Leon Lindenmayer in Huntleigh avenue. He has been in the service over two years," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/24/1943. "...an Associated Press dispatch from London...gave an account of the brilliant action by the American fighter pilots. The dispatch listed Capt. McIntyre as one of those in the thick of the aerial fight and one of the pilots who bagged a Nazi plane. The Fortress under attack was on its ways back to an English base after bombing Bremen. Riddled by German guns, it had fallen behind its formation when pounced upon by the Nazis. The dispatch said the Thunderbolts streaked out of the sun and picked off the German fighter planes one by one. The fight was over in a matter of minutes, the account read, and the Fortress made its home base. Capt. McIntyre won the Purple Heart for injuries suffered June 4, 1942, when the Japanese raided Dutch Harbor, Alaska. He has been in the Army Air Forces three years, receiving his commission and wings at Maxwell Field, Ala., Oct. 15, 1940," Vail scrapbook, n.d.. "Capt. W. Edward McIntyre, husband of Katherine Lindenmayer McIntyre of Redfield avenue, and son of Mr. and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre of South Park street is reported as missing in action somewhere over France since December 30 of last year at which time he was piloting his P-47 Thunderbolt fighter plane on a bombing mission. Capt. McIntyre was only recently cited for bagging one of five Nazi planes which had beset a Flying Fortress on its way back to its English base after bombing Bremen. For this accomplishment, he was awarded the Oak Leaf Cluster. 'Chub' as he was known here before going into service, was also awarded the order of the Purple Heart for outstanding achievement when the Japs bombed Dutch Harbor in June, 1942. His wife, and an infant son, whom he has never seen, reside with her parents..." "Capt. Winfield Edward McIntyre, Jr., Army flier...has been reported by the War Department as missing in action somewhere in France since Dec. 30. His father was called from the American Legion dinner at the Hotel Onondaga last night to receive the information. His parents assume that Capt. McIntyre was forced down while piloting his P-47 Thunderbolt fighter, which he had named 'Kay' after his wife, Mrs. Katherine L. McIntyre of Huntleigh Drive, Fayetteville. In June, 1942, McIntyre, then a lieutenant, was seriously injured when the Japs bombed Dutch Harbor, Alaska. Capt. McIntyre has been cited for bagging one of five Nazi planes that attacked a Flying Fortress on its way back to its base after bombing Bremen. The other four Nazis were shot down by companion fighters. A graduate of Fayetteville High School, Capt. McIntyre won his pilot's wings in October, 1940..." Vail scrapbook, 1/25/1944. The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/28/1944. "Word has been received by Mrs. Katherine L. McIntyre that her husband Capt. W. E. McIntyre, Jr., is a prisoner of war in Germany. Two weeks ago she received a telegram from the war department stating that her husband was missing in action since last December. Relatives of Capt. McIntyre did not give up hope that he was alive. The telegram, confirming their belief was received here Tuesday," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/11/1944. "Mrs. W. E. McIntyre, Jr., received a cablegram from the American Red Cross on Tuesday night at the request of her husband, Capt. Winfield E. McIntyre, stating that he had been liberated from German Prison Camp Stalagluft I and was awaiting to be transported to the States. Capt. McIntyre has been confined to the camp for about 16 months, having been reported as missing on Dec. 30, 1943. He entered the service in March, 1941 and after training was sent to Alaska and the Aleutians. He was injured in air action in that area and was awarded the Purple Heart and also cited for bravery. After a furlough home, he was assigned to Westover Field, Mass., from where he went overseas two years ago. Capt. McIntyre has never seen his year-and-half old son who with his mother resides with her parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/25/1945. "After two years overseas, 16 months of which were spent in a German prison camp, Capt. W. E. McIntyre is home for 60 days, and is getting acquainted with is little son, now 1 1 /2 years old, whom he had never seen. Capt. McIntyre stated to a representative of the Eagle-Bulletin that he cannot say enough for the American Red Cross, for any bright spot in their weary hours as POWs came through this organization. He was shot down over German territory on Dec. 30, 1943 while piloting a P-47 Thunderbolt on a bombing mission. Ed also saw service in the Aleutians and was awarded the Purple Heart for outstanding achievement when the Japs bombed Dutch Harbor in June, 1942. After being hospitalized for several months he returned to the States and visited at his home here. Shortly before he was taken prisoner, Capt. McIntyre was cited for bagging one of five Nazi planes which had attacked a Flying Fortress on its way back to an English base after bombing Bremen. For this accomplishment he was awarded the Oak Leaf Cluster," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/6/1945. "Mrs. W. Edward McIntyre has returned from Detroit, Mich., where she visited her husband, Capt. W. E. McIntyre, who is based at Selfridge Field. In addition to flying Capt. McIntyre is working in the personal equipment. Mrs. McIntyre and son Winfield, Jr., expect to join Capt. McIntyre in Detroit in about three weeks to take up residence," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/23/1945. "Mrs. Winfield E. McIntyre and little son Winfield, left last Saturday by plane for Selfridge Field, Detroit, Mich., where she will join her husband, Capt. McIntyre who is stationed there. This will be the first Christmas they have had together since their marriage more than three years ago," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/7/1945. "Pfc. Edward Lindenmayer will leave Monday for California to resume duties in the U. S. marine Corps in which he has served for the past three and one-half years. Enroute he will visit his brother-in-law and sister, Capt. and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre at Selfridge Field, Detroit. Mrs. McIntyre recently underwent an appendectomy," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/11/1946. "Captain and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre and little son, of Detroit, Mi., are vacationing with their parents, Mr. and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre and Mr. and Mrs. Leon Lindenmayer," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/26/1946 "Mr. and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre have received word from their son Winfield E., Jr. that he has been promoted from the rank of captain to major in the Army Air Force at Selfridge Field, Mt. Clemens, Mich. Major and Mrs. McIntyre and their little son reside at Mt. Clemens..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/18/1946. "Major and Mrs. W. E. McIntyre and children of Chicago, are spending the holidays with their parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/27/1946.

McKinley, John H. Minoa. "The following men...have been honorably discharged from the U.S. army thru the separation center at Fort Dix, N.J...S/Sgt. John H. McKinley, 200 Edgerton st., Minoa," The Post-Standard, 8/22/1945. "1952 Minoa Village Board minutes: World War II Honor Roll - Village of Minoa Only...200 Edgerton St., Minoa, N.Y."

McLean, Robert. Manlius. "Mr. and Mrs. Arley Gingold will visit their son, Robert McLean, who is in camp in North Carolina, over the week-end," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/10/1942. "At least one German aviator is minus his flying emblem today. It is now in the possession of Mr. and Mrs. Harry Gingold of Manlius, whose son, Corp. Robert McLean, 21, picked it up on an African battlefield. Corp. McLean sent home the Flying Eagle with a suspended swastika, which once adorned the breast of a Nazi pilot and a special emblem, which was taken from the German plane. He also sent home a five-cent note on the Bank of Algiers...which denomination, he said, is used mostly for buying beers. Corp. McLean has 1,800 hours of anti-tank fighting to his credit in two and one-half years of service. He saw action in the battles of Tunisia, Carthage and Bizerte. This month completes one year that young McLean has been in service overseas. McLean attended Manlius High School and later graduated from Nottingham High. He went into service with Troop K of the National Guard and reported first to Fort Benning, Ga. He was later transferred to Camp Sutton, N. C. and Fort Bragg. He sailed for England a year ago and was shipped into Africa at the time of the invasion," Bond scrapbook, n.d. "On SS Timothy Dwight due in Boston August 16...T/4 Robert F. McLean, 101 E. Seneca st., Manlius," The Post-Standard, 8/17/1945.

McManus, Melvin. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. "Pvt. Melvin McManus spent the week-end with his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Fred McManus," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/27/1941. "Private Melvin McManus arrived in Syracuse on Thursday afternoon where he was met by his sister Mildred McManus. Melvin spent the remainder of the week at home, returning Monday to Fort Hancock, N. J.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/29/1941. "Private Melvin McManus has been at home for the holiday and week-end, arriving last Thursday, and left Monday night. He was accompanied on his return by motor to Ft. Hancock, N. J., by his sister, Mildred, and Miss Janet Gay, who returned Wednesday," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/10/1941. "Miss Mildred McManus returned Wednesday from Fort Hancock, N. J. where she has been visiting her brother, Private Melvin McManus. Miss McManus was accompanied by Mrs. Gerald Jones, who visited her husband at Fort Hancock," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/14/1941. "Private Melvin McManus of Fort Hancock, N. J., spent last week-end with his parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/18/1941. "Corp. Melvin McManus, Battery L, 245th Coast Artillery, Fort Hancock, N.J. spent last week-end at home," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/5/1941. Name appears on the Manlius Methodist Church service flag, The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/3/1942. "Melvin McManus has been passing a ten-day furlough with Mrs. McManus in Syracuse and his parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/1/ 1943. "Sgt. Melvin McManus has returned to his base at Norton Point, Brooklyn, after passing a ten-day leave at his home in Smith street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/14/1941. "Sgt. Melvin McManus has returned to camp after spending 14 days with his family," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/18/19/44. "Mrs. Melvin McManus, who has been spending some time with Mr. McManus' parents...has moved to the Smith apartment, Brooklea Drive, Fayetteville," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/14/1944. "Sgt. Melvin McManus, stationed in Brooklyn, spent three days this week with his wife and son Ross at their home in Brooklea Drive," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/15/1944. "Mrs. Melvin McManus of Brooklea Drive is spending the week with her husband in New York City," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/6/1945.

McNally, Claire Eugena. Fayetteville. (Town of Dewitt). "Miss Jean McNally, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Edward McNally, has left to undergo training in the SPARS, the ladies' auxiliary to the U.S. Coast Guard," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/23/1943. "Miss Jean McNally, training with the Spars at Hunter College, spent the week-end with her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Edward McNally of Leverett Lane," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/28/1943. "Fayetteville has five women serving their country ...Jean McNally in the WAVES..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/21/1944. "The following girls and women from this vicinity have entered the Women's Reserve of the armed forces... SPARS--Jean McNally, Fayetteville..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/5/1944. "In addition to the 13 names listed in the May 5 issue of the Eagle-Bulletin, the following girls from this area are also serving...Nurse: ...Joan McNally, Fayetteville" The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/19/1944. "Roy A. Johnson and daughter, Rose Elaine, have returned from a trip south. They visited Miss Joan McNally, a cadet nurse at John Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, and joined another daughter, Miss Arlene Johnson, in Washington on their return trip," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/19/1944. "Claire E. McNally has been released from the coast guard in which she served 33 months, and has returned home to Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 2/3/1946.

McTiernan, John J. Manlius. "Lieut. John J. McTiernan, an instructor at Manlius School has been assigned to active military duty. A graduate of Syracuse University, Lieut. McTiernan is assistant professor of military science and tactics and English teacher at Manlius," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/20/1942. "Capt. John J. McTiernan, Jr., 25, graduate of Syracuse university in 1940 and instructor at Manlius school in 1941, died Sept. 17 of wounds suffered in the Italian campaign. Capt. McTiernan, native of Bridgeport, Conn. studied business administration and journalism at the university. Following his graduation he began teaching English at Manlius and assisted in coaching football, basketball and baseball. He was called into service as a second lieutenant in the fall of 1942 and was an instructor at Oswego military police barracks before going overseas. The captain served thru the African, Sicilian and Italian campaigns. His wife resides at Mineola," The Post-Standard, 10/31/1944.

McVinney, Clifford A. Manlius/Fayetteville. Listed as Clifford A. McVinney, RD 1, Manlius in The Post-Standard, 10/6/1943. "Local men were among the 56 accepted for services in the armed forces this week. Army...Clifford A. McKinney, R. D. l, Manlius..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/8/1943. "Pvt. Clifford McVinney, son of Mr. and Mrs. R. J. McVinney of Fayetteville, N. Y., formerly of Nyack, has been promoted to private first class in the 110th SCSU, special Training Unit, at Pine Camp. Prior to his induction into the armed forces, Pfc. McVinney was a member of the Nyack Public Schools faculty. He is a graduate of Syracuse University and of Albany States Teachers College," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/17/1944.

McWalters, John P. Fayetteville. "The following are scheduled to arrive in the States after service overseas, according to lists prepared by The Associated Press...Sgt. John P. McWalters, 105 W. Genesee st., Fayetteville," The Post-Standard 11/19/1945.

Mead, Gilbert. Kirkville. Name appears in "Military Discharges, Onondaga Co.," Onondaga Co. Courthouse. Kirkville P.O., according to World War II veteran list provided by Ella Dunn from Kirkville records.

Meadler, John W. Fayetteville. Navy release, S 1/c, 300 Clinton st., Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 2/7/1946.

Meagher, J. Merle. Fayetteville. "Miss Irene W. Lackin, daughter of Mrs. Winifred Lackin of South Wilbur avenue, Syracuse, became the bride of J. Merle Meagher of this village (Fayetteville) on Saturday, Nov. 14...Mr. Meagher is a son of the late Mr. and Mrs. Frank Meagher of Mycenae...Mr. Meagher, recently inducted into the Army, left Wednesday for the reception center at Fort Niagara," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/27/1942.

"Mrs. Margaret O'Shea Sheedy, widow of Michael Sheedy, died Sunday afternoon, Nov. 5, at her home in Warren street after a long illness. Mrs. Sheedy was born in Canada 85 years ago but had spent most of her life in this vicinity. Surviving are three grandsons, Merle Meagher, with the U. S. Army overseas; LeRoy Meagher, in the U. S. Navy; and Thomas Meagher, of Sonyea, N.Y.; also one niece, Miss Mary Gorman, of Rochester; and a nephew, Thomas Gorman, of Rome," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/10/1944. "Cpl. and Mrs. Merle Meagher are the parents of a son, John Joseph, born at the Memorial hospital in Syracuse Jan. 13. Corporal Meagher is serving with the armed forces overseas," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/2/1945. "Sgt. Merle Meagher, who was recently discharged from the service, and his wife and little son are residing with Mrs. Meagher's parents in Syracuse and have been visiting relatives here. Mr. Meagher served overseas with the 193rd C.L.M. for 18 months," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/30/1945.

Meagher, J. W. Fayetteville/Manlius. "The first 1944 draftees from this area were inducted at Syracuse on Wednesday. From Fayetteville are...J. W. (Bud) Meagher, picked for the Navy..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/7/1944. "Seaman 2/c John W. Meagher, stationed at Sampson, has been visiting his sister, Mrs. Stanley Collins of North street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/18/1944. "Mrs. George Williams of Manlius announce the marriage of her daughter, Alice, to Seaman 2/c John Meagher, son of Edward Meagher, of 602 Walnut street, Fayetteville on Saturday, Feb. 19...Mr. Meagher will return to his base at Sampson on March 2nd," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/25/1944. "Seaman 1/c John Meagher and Mrs. Meagher, of Orange, Texas, have been visiting Mr. Meagher's sister, Mrs. Stanley Collins of North street. Mr. Meagher is on a 15-day furlough. They will return Friday to Texas," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/11/1944. "S 2/c John Meagher and Mrs. Meagher have returned to Orange, Texas, where Seaman Meagher is stationed, having spent a 11-day furlough with relatives and friends in Manlius," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/8/1944 (l/c then 2/c?) "Mrs. John Meagher has returned from Orange, Texas, where she has been visiting her husband, Seaman 1/c John Meagher, who has been transferred to Shoemaker, Calif.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/19/1945. "S 1/c Walter Meagher, who has been stationed in San Francisco, Calif., is passing a furlough with his wife and baby in Manlius and at the home of his father here," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/13/1945. "Seaman 1/c John Meagher and Mrs. Meagher are the proud parents of a son, born March 25 in Crouse-Irving hospital. The boy has been named John Edward. Seaman Meagher is spending a 23-day furlough at home, and will return to his base at San Francisco," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/13/1945.

Meagher, LeRoy. Fayetteville. "Mrs. Margaret O'Shea Sheedy, widow of Michael Sheedy, died Sunday afternoon, Nov. 5, at her home in Warren street after a long illness. Mrs. Sheedy was born in Canada 85 years ago but had spent most of her life in this vicinity. Surviving are three grandsons, Merle Meagher, with the U. S. Army overseas; LeRoy Meagher, in the U. S. Navy; and Thomas Meagher, of Sonyea, N.Y.; also one niece, Miss Mary Gorman, of Rochester; and a nephew, Thomas Gorman, of Rome," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/10/1944. "Leroy Meagher of Salt Lake City, Utah, formerly of this village (Fayetteville), was honorably discharged from the navy June 17 at Bainbridge, Md. after 3 1/2 years in service, the last two years was spent in the Southwest Pacific as yeoman 1/c on the U.S.S.. Nashville. Mr. Meagher is visiting relatives in this vicinity and is at present staying with his aunts, Mrs. Walter Sawsaw and Miss Gertrude Meagher," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/12/1946.

Meehan, John A. Minoa. "1952 Minoa Village Board minutes: World War II Honor Roll - Village of Minoa Only...Meehan, John A., 121 N. Main St., Minoa, N.Y."

Meehan, Robert S. Fayetteville. "The following officers and enlisted men were discharged from the army of the United States at Fort Dix, N.J...S/Sgt. Robert S. Meehan, Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 1/22/1946.

Meigs, Carl W. Formerly town of Manlius. "Lt. Col. Carl W. Meigs of East Syracuse, a graduate of Manlius School, was killed Dec. 31, 1944, while being transferred as a prisoner of war from the Philippines to Japan, according to a Navy Department telegram. The telegram, which was addressed to his mother, Mrs. Mabel E. Meigs of 109 Kinne st., East Syracuse, who died two years ago, was received by her niece, who lives at the same address. Lt. Col. Meigs was born in East Syracuse and attended Tech High School, where he was a star fullback on the old Tech High School football team. Later he entered Manlius School, from which he was graduated in June, 1917. Three months after graduation he entered the Marine Corps as a provisional lieutenant in the reserves and later was appointed a second lieutenant of regular Marine. He rose grade by grade, serving in Santo Domingo, Haiti, Nicaraugua and in many other places. He was sent to the Philippines from Quantico in April, 1941, where he served for a time in the Marine Corps School. Lt. Col. Meigs was engaged in the campaign that ended in the fall of Corregidor at the time he was taken a prisoner in May, 1942. The last word received by his family from him was in December, 1943. He wore the Victory Medal, the Expeditionary Medal, the Dominican Republic Medal and the Second Nicarauguan Campaign Ribbon. There are no immediate survivors," The Herald-Journal, 8/5/1945.

Mercer, Claude. Manlius. "Sergeant Claude Mercer of New Mexico, arrived Thursday morning Jan. 12 to pass a ten-day furlough with Mrs. Mercer and family at their home in Pleasant street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/22/1943.

Mercer, Francis E. Manlius. "Contingents of selectees from East Syracuse local board 473 and Adams local board 421 were enlisted into the armed forces yesterday at the Syracuse induction station...Army...Francis E. Mercer, Garrett dr., Manlius," The Post-Standard, 4/7/1943.

Merriam, Eugene. Fayetteville. "Eugene Merriam has reported for duty at Camp Upton. His wife and infant daughter, Nancy, will make their home with Mr. Merriam's parents, Mr. and Mrs. Harry A. Merriam at Lyndon, for the duration," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/6/1943. "Pvt. Howard (Gene) Merriam spent 15 days with his wife and infant daughter at the home of his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Harry S. Merriam at Lyndon. Gene was enroute to Pennsylvania from Camp Shelby, Miss., after completing a 13-week course in railroad transportation," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/7/1944.

Merritt, Estes W. Fayetteville. "Estes Merritt, son of Mrs. David Ellis of 200 Warren street, has enlisted as a ground crew mechanic in the Army Air Corps and left Batavia last Thursday for training," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/11/1942. "Pvt. Estus (Red) Merritt...is attending radio technical school at Sioux Falls, S. D. Pvt. Merritt entered the air corps on Dec. 3 and was stationed at Miami Beach, Fla., after leaving Fort Niagara. He is a graduate of Fayetteville high school and a former employee of the Doehler Die Casting company in Batavia," The Post-Standard, 1/28/1943. "Pvt. Estes Merritt has been spending a few days with his mother...having been called home by the death of his grandfather in Bridgeport, N. Y.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/2/1943. "Pfc. Estes Merritt, who graduated from Radio Technical School at Sioux Falls, South Dakota, May 28, and assigned to the 90th Ardrm. Sq., Hunter Field, Savannah, Ga., in June has received his permit for driving ambulances, trucks, jeeps, etc., according to word received by his mother," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/13/1943. "Estes Merritt, U. S. A., spent a few days last week with his mother, Mrs. David Ellis of Warren street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/3/1943. "Air Transport Command Base, India--Pfc. Estes W. Merritt, aerial radio operator, of 200 Warren street...has been awarded an Air medal, it was announced by Brig. Gen. William H. Tunner, commanding general of the India-China division, Air Transport Command. The award was made upon completion of 150 hours of operational flight in transport aircraft over the dangerous and difficult air routes, where enemy interception and attack was probable and expected. The citation accompanying the award adds: 'Flying at night as well as by day, at high altitudes over impassable, mountainous terrain through areas characterized by extremely treacherous weather conditions, necessitating long periods of operation on instruments...requiring courageous and superior performance of his duties to overcome, he accomplished his mission with distinction." Pfc. Merritt is the son of Mrs. David Ellis," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/13/1945. "Pfc. Estes W. Merritt, aerial radio operator in Army Transport Command, landed in Miami Beach by ATC and is at his home at 200 Warren street on a 31-day furlough after 20 months in the China-Burma-India theater. He was awarded the air medal and also the Distinguished Flying Cross upon completion of 300 hours of operational flight in transport aircraft over the dangerous and difficult India-China air routes where interception and attack was probable and expected. The air trail over the 'Hump,' famed route through the towering peaks of the Himalayan mountains, blazed by the ATC, is recognized by airmen as the world's toughest flying by night as well as by day at high altitudes over impossible mountain terrain through treacherous weather conditions. Pfc. Merritt is the son of Mrs. David Ellis of the Warren street address," The Eagle-Bulletin, 9/7/1945. "Estes Merritt has been honorably discharged from the army air forces and is spending some time with his parents..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/9/1945. Class of 1942 Fayetteville High School shows "Estus Merritt."

Mertes, Michael T. Formerly Fayetteville. "Word has been received by Mrs. Richard Brown, of Syracuse, from her brother Michael T. Mertes, of his promotion to the rank of corporal. He has been in service in the Medical Corps for the past 27 months, of which 24 have been spent in the South Pacific area. Both Mrs. Brown and Corporal Mertes are former residents of Fayetteville," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/15/1944.

Messinger, Henry. Kirkville P.O., according to World War II veteran list provided by Ella Dunn from Kirkville records.

Messinger, Henry E. Kirkville. Name appears in Minoa Boys with the Colors, The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/29/1942. "Corp. Henry E. Messinger, husband of Mrs. Dorothy B. Messinger and son of Mr. and Mrs. Ashert E. Messinger, Sr., of Kirkville, has been missing in action in Luxembourg since Dec. 20, according to a telegram received from the war department by his wife. Corp. Messinger, serving with the medical corps, has been overseas since October, 1943. He entered service in March, 1942, and received training at Camp Livingston, La., Camp Gordon Johnson, Fla., and Camp Pickett, Va. Before entering service he was employed by the New York Central railroad," The Post-Standard, 1/28/1945. Kirkville P.O., according to World War II veteran list provided by Ella Dunn, from Kirkville records.

Metrick, Anthony. Minoa. Name appears on the Minoa Honor Roll. Name appears in Minoa Boys with the Colors, The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/29/1942. "Pvt. Anthony Metrick of Mississippi is visiting his family," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/23/1942.

Metrick, John. Kirkville. Name appears on the Minoa Honor Roll. "...Onondaga County men accepted yesterday were...John Metrick, R.D. 1, Kirkville ..." Post-Standard, 11/19/1942. "John Shedd, Willis Kippley and John Metrick left for army service last Saturday," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/27/1942.

Metz, Ordway. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. "Pvt. Ordway Metz is now at Camp Croft, S. C. He was transferred to the states after having been wounded in action overseas. Pvt. Metz joined the armed forces last June," The Post-Standard, 7/15/1943.

Metzel, Albert W. Formerly Fayetteville. "Staff Sgt. Albert W. Metzel, Perryville, formerly of Fayetteville, was promoted to his present rank June 15. He entered the service in February, 1941, and is stationed with the armed forces somewhere in Iran. He has been overseas since June, 1942. Staff Sgt. Metzel has a son, named for him, born in December," The Post-Standard, 7/21/1943.

Meyer, Harrison G. O. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "Master Sgt. Harrison Meyer, son of Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Meyer, Jr., of 300 S. Manlius st., Fayetteville, was recently promoted from first sergeant at Camp White, Ore. where he is with an engineers unit. Meyer enlisted Aug. 8, 1940, at Syracuse and was transferred to Camp White Sept. 15, 1942, from Fort Bragg, N.C. He is a graduate of Fayetteville high school and was employed by the Precision Die Castings Inc., in a clerical capacity," Post-Standard, 11/9/1942. "Other sons (besides Nelson) of Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Meyer of South Manlius street, in service are M/Sgt. Harrison Meyer, U. S. Army, and Pvt. Warren Meyer," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/28/1943. "The Fayetteville high school band, outstanding in years before the war in State and Legion competition, has gone to war, according to reports, it's fighting as well as it played. Almost to the man...the boys who made the local organization a prize winning band before the war, are serving in some branch of the armed forces...Among those serving in the army are...Harrison Meyer, New Caledonia..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/9/1944. Master Sgt. Harrison G. O. Meyer is with a headquarters and service company of construction engineers in the Southwest Pacific. He was employed by Precision Die Casting office, Fayetteville, before entering service about four years. ago. Both Warren and Harrison are graduates of Fayetteville high school," The Post-Standard, 8/4/1944. Mr. and Mrs. Meyer have two other sons in service, M/Sgt. Harrison Meyer with the Engineers, and Cpl. Nelson Meyer with the Marine Air Warning Corp., Radar Division, both in the Southwest Pacific. Cpl. Nelson Meyer's wife and son reside in Thompson street in this village," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/16/1945. "The following soldiers were discharged from service at the separation center at Fort Lewis, Wash....M/Sgt. Harrison G. O. Meyer, 8 Huntleigh ave,. Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 11/25/1945.

Meyer, Nelson C. Fayetteville. "Nelson Meyer, third son of Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Meyer of South Manlius street to join the colors, has enlisted in the Marines, and left Monday for Paris Island, S. C. here he will receive his boot training. Formerly a corporal in the New York State Guard, he was put in charge of the nine others who left Syracuse for Paris Island in the same contingent. Before his enlistment, Mr. Meyer was employed by the U.S.F.&G. Company in Syracuse. His wife, who is employed at the General Electric plant, and little son, Nelson, Jr., will live with her sister and brother-in-law, Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Meyer, 3rd, of Thompson street, for the duration. Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Meyer 3rd entertained at a farewell party for the new enlisted prior to his departure, inviting relatives and friends to share the occasion. Other sons of Mr. and Mrs. Meyer in service are M/Sgt. Harrison Meyer, U. S. Army, and Pvt. Warren Meyer," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/28/1943. "PFC Nelson A. Meyer, son of Mrs. C. C. Meyer, Jr., of 218 Huntleigh ave., Fayetteville, is with a marine airborne radar division in the Southwest Pacific. He has been overseas a year. While in boot training at Parris Island, he received one point less than the highest score in sharpshooting. He is a graduate of Jamaica high school, Long Island. Before entering service he was employed by the U.S. Fidelity and Guaranty Co. He has two brothers in service. Corp. Warren George Meyer is with the air engineers in India and has been overseas a year. His unit received the presidential citation. Master Sgt. Harrison G. O. Meyer is with a headquarters and service company of construction engineers in the Southwest Pacific. He was employed by Precision Die Casting office, Fayetteville, before entering service about four years. ago. Both Warren and Harrison are graduates of Fayetteville high school," The Post-Standard, 8/4/1944. "...Mr. and Mrs. Meyer have two other sons in service, M/Sgt. Harrison Meyer with the Engineers, and Cpl. Nelson Meyer with the Marine Air Warning Corp., Radar Division, both in the Southwest Pacific. Cpl. Nelson Meyer's wife and son reside in Thompson street in this village," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/16/1945.

Meyer, Warren George. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll. "The following young men from this area were accepted for army duty at the induction station in Syracuse Wednesday, and in two weeks will go to the reception center at Fort Niagara...Warren George Meyer...from Fayetteville..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/7/1942. "A church wedding solemnized Monday night at 8 o'clock united Miss Betty Goodfellow, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. William C. Goodfellow of Mechanic street, and Pvt. Warren Meyer, son of Mr. and Mrs. Christian C. Meyer, Jr., of Huntleigh avenue...The bridegroom, serving in the U. S. Army, will return to his post at Savannah, Ga., this week-end and Mrs. Meyer will resume her work at the Carrier Corporation in Syracuse for the present," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/11/1943. "Warren G. Meyer, Jr., 23, ...has been promoted to corporal at an air transport base in India. His wife lives at 108 Mechanic St., Fayetteville. Meyer has been in the China-Burma-India theater more than six months. He is an aerial engineer," Post-Standard, 3/4/1944. "The Fayetteville high school band, outstanding in years before the war in State and Legion competition, has gone to war, according to reports, it's fighting as well as it played. Almost to the man...the boys who made the local organization a prize winning band before the war, are serving in some branch of the armed forces...Among those serving in the army are...Warren Meyer, India..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/9/1944. Corp. Warren George Meyer is with the air engineers in India and has been overseas a year. His unit received the presidential citation. Master Sgt. Harrison G. O. Meyer is with a headquarters and service company of construction engineers in the Southwest Pacific. He was employed by Precision Die Casting office, Fayetteville, before entering service about four years. ago. Both Warren and Harrison are graduates of Fayetteville high school," The Post-Standard, 8/4/1944. "Warren G. Meyer, son of Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Meyer, Jr., and husband of Betty Goodfellow Meyer, has been promoted to the rank of sergeant, according to word received by his mother. Sgt. Meyer has been with the Air Transport Command in India for the past two and a half years. Mr. and Mrs. Meyer have two other sons in service, M/Sgt. Harrison Meyer with the Engineers, and Cpl. Nelson Meyer with the Marine Air Warning Corp., Radar Division, both in the Southwest Pacific. Cpl. Nelson Meyer's wife and son reside in Thompson street in this village," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/16/1945.

Mezzalingua, Stephen. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. "Private Stephen Mezzalingua was home for the week-end and returned Monday to Fort Niagara," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/15/1942. "Pvt. Stephen D. Mezzalingua is now located at Camp Shelby, Miss.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 6/12/1942. "Pvt. Stephen Mezzalingua, stationed in Mississippi, is home on a 15-day furlough. Mrs. Mezzalingua entertained at a family dinner on Sunday in honor of her son. Mrs. Stephen Mezzalingua has resigned her position in Syracuse and will return with her husband to Mississippi. A farewell party was given in her honor at the Mezzalingua home, Thursday night," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/16/1942. "Mrs. Stephen Mezzalingua arrived Thursday of last week from Harrisburg, Miss. Corp. Mezzalingua is expected to arrive from California to pass a brief furlough at home," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/9/1943. "Mrs. Daniel Mezzalingua has received word of the safe arrival of her son, Corp. Stephen Mezzalingua, in Italy," The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/28/1944.

Miller, Carl N. Manlius. (Oran, town of Pompey). Name appears on both the Manlius Honor Roll and Oran Honor Roll. Name appears on the Manlius Methodist Church service flag, The Eagle-Bulletin, 4/3/1942.

Miller, Eugene. Kirkville. "Inducted into selective service by Draft Board 473 last week were...Eugene Miller of Kirkville," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/11/1942. Honorably discharged Monday, Pfc. Eugene Miller, Kirkville, RD 2, The Post-Standard, 10/24/1945. Kirkville P.O., according to World War II veteran list provided by Ella Dunn, from Kirkville records.

Miller, Howard. Manlius. (Oran, town of Pompey). Name appears on the Oran Honor Roll.

Miller, James Albert. Manlius. Navy, 1944-45.

Miller, Joseph. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll.

Miller, Richard C. Manlius. Navy release, Sampson...Richard C. Miller, F 1/c, Manlius RD 1, The Post-Standard, 4/4/1946.

Miller, William. Minoa. Name appears on the Minoa Honor Roll. Name appears in Minoa Boys with the Colors, The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/29/1942.

Mills, Frank. Fayetteville. "During the month of January, seventeen young men from this village have been inducted into service and many more have had their physical examinations and are awaiting the word that will make them a member of the armed forces. Among those who left earlier in the month were...Frank Mills..." The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/5/1943.

Mills, John, Jr. Fayetteville. Name appears on the Fayetteville Honor Roll.

Mills, Rodney C. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. "Rodney C. Mills, son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Mills of Manlius, leaves today for MacDill Field, Tampa, Fla., after spending a 30-day furlo with his parents. Mills, who has been in the service 18 months, is a graduate of the air corps technical school at Keesler Field, miss., and upon his return to camp, he will be transferred to a training school for flying cadets," The Post-Standard, 5/29/1942. "Mrs. Edna M. Gustafson of Kansas City, Mo., announces the marriage of her daughter, Miss Virginia Marie Gustafson to Lt. Rodney Charles Mills, U.S.A.A.C., son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Mills of Manlius...on Sept. 18...the couple will live in Kansas City, near Lt. Mill's station," The Post-Standard, 11/20/1943. "Rodney C. Mills, son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Mills, has recently been promoted to first lieutenant. Lieut. Mills is now air transport pilot over the 'Hump' between India and China," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/23/1945. "Lt. Rodney C. Mills, son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles N. Mills, Manlius, was presented the Air Medal by Maj. N. D. Patterson in India for services rendered the Air Transport Command in flights over the Himalayan 'Hump.' He has completed 50 millions in the China-Burma-India theater and is now visiting his parents, wife and small son before reporting to New York City for reassignment, Bond scrapbook, n.d. "Lt. Rodney C. Mills, son of Mr. and Mrs. Charles N. Mills of R. D. 1, Manlius, has been honorably discharged from the Rome Separation Center. He entered service in November, 1940, and served overseas 10 months. He wears the Asiatic-Pacific theater ribbon with three battle stars, the Air Medal and the Distinguished Flying Cross," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/16/1945.

Minor, Randall K. Kirkville. Navy release, Lido Beach, L.I., Randall K. Minor, McMM 3/c, Kirkville, The Post-Standard, 2/20/1946.

Mitchell, William Harry. Kirkville. Name appears on the Minoa Honor Roll. Kirkville P.O., according to World War II veteran list provided by Ella Dunn from Kirkville records.

Mitterhofer, George W. Fayetteville. "Corp. George W. Mitterhofer is spending a seven-day furlo from Camp Pickett, Va., with his brother-in-law and sister, Mr. and Mrs. Benedict Schupp of Fayetteville rd., Fayetteville. Corp. Mitterhofer entered the army April 3, 1942, and is in a medical training battalion. Before entering the army he was employed by A. G. Chase, Fayetteville," The Post-Standard, 4/25/1943.

Monroe, Lloyd. Fayetteville. Inducted, Lloyd S. Munroe (sic) RFD 1, Fayetteville, The Post-Standard, 6/4/1943. "Petty Officer 2/c Lloyd Monroe of the Navy, has been spending five days with Mrs. Monroe at their home on the Syracuse Road," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/3/1944. "Mr. and Mrs. Lloyd Monroe arrived in Fayetteville this week from California, and after visiting relatives in Albany will return to their apartment on the Syracuse Road. Mr. Monroe has been discharged from the service. His wife, a teacher at Fayetteville school was given leave of absence, and she has been in California for the past year and a half with her husband," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/11/1946.

Moon, Donald. Formerly Fayetteville. "First Lt. Donald Moon, 26, an infantry officer, was killed Sept. 29 on Palau island, according to word received by his mother, Mrs. Kathryn Moon of Thompson rd. He went to Hawaii in May, 1944, and was fighting in the Southwest Pacific area before his death. A native of Syracuse, he attended Nottingham high school and was graduated from Fayetteville high school and Cornell university. He entered service in February 1941, from Rochester. In December, 1942, he won his commission on graduation from officer candidate school at Fort Benning, Ga. Before going overseas he was stationed at Camp Rucker, Ala., and in California. He leaves his mother; his wife, Mrs. Donald Moon of Newfield and a son, Donald Moon, Jr., who was a year old last Friday; three sisters, Mrs. Constas Kazacos, Mrs. Harry Brinkerhoff, both of Syracuse, and Madeline Moon, Seaman 1/c, WAVES, stationed in Washington, a brother, Ronald Moon, 12," The Post-Standard, 10/27/1944." "...He entered service in February 1941 from Rochester. In December, 1942, he won his commission on graduation from officer candidate school at Fort Benning, Ga. Before going overseas he was stationed at Camp Rucker, Ala., and in California..." The Post Standard, 10/27/1944.

Moore, Ray Francis. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. 601 E. Seneca St., Manlius. Inducted, Syracuse Board, 473, The Post-Standard, 10/7/1942.

Morey, G. Martin. Manlius. Name appears on the Manlius Honor Roll. "Martin Morey, son of Rev. and Mrs. A. E. Morey of Manlius, reports to his Draft Board Friday morning at 8:30 to be sent to a camp at Royalston, Mass., where he will engage in what the government speaks of as 'work of national importance' under civilian auspices. This work will consist of such things as are necessary to the care of forest and the conservation of the country's natural resources. At the time members of the camp will study, in preparation for reconstruction work after the war is over. Martin registered as a conscientious objector in the draft, and the camp to which he goes is under the direction of the American Friends Service Committee. Work done is without salary or other compensation," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/7/1941. "Rev. and Mrs. Arthur E. Morey expect to leave Friday by automobile to visit their son, Martin Morey, at Camp Roylston, Mass.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/21/1941. "Martin Morey...came home on a week's furlough, and while here motored to Iroquois for his mother, who had been passing the week with her mother. Martin returned to camp Sunday," The Eagle-Bulletin, 10/31/1941. "Martin Morey of Camp Roylston, Mass., arrived Monday night for a two-day vacation," The Eagle-Bulletin, 11/21/1941. "Martin Morey...having been released from the Civilian Public Service camp...because of a physical disability, last week accepted a position with the Adirondack Daily Enterprise at Saranac Lake, N. Y.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/12/1941. "Martin Morey, son of Rev. and Mrs. A. E. Morey has joined the U. S. Army and is now stationed at Fort Niagara. He is a graduate of Fine Arts College, Syracuse U. and had been employed as editor of an Adirondack daily for several months," The Eagle-Bulletin, 7/17/1942. "Lt. G. Martin Morey, who recently graduated from the Officers' candidate school at Grinnell, Ia., visited his parents...last week. Leaving Sunday, Lt. Morey, with several other officers, boarded an Eastern Air Lines plane in New York for the first assignment in New Orleans, La.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 3/5/1943. "The marriage of Miss Carolyn Grant, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Herbert Grant of Mansfield, Pa., to Lieut. Martin Morey...was solemnized Thursday afternoon, May 20, in the Methodist Church in Mansfield...Lieut. Morey is a graduate of Cazenovia Seminary, 1937, and Syracuse University, 1941. Before entering the armed forces he was city editor of the Adirondack Daily Enterprise, Saranac Lake. After completing a course at the officer Candidate School at Grinnell College, Ia., he was commissioned Feb. 17, 1943. Since that time he has been stationed at New Orleans, La.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 5/28/1943. "Lt. and Mrs. Martin Morey spent last week-end with the former's parents...Lt. Morey returns this week to New Orleans, where he has been stationed since last March. Mrs. Morey will resume her work with the Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/10/1943. "Lt. G. Martin Morey, son of Rev. and Mrs. A. E. Morey, has been assigned to Fort Belvoir, Va., for additional study and training in a Basic Officers' Course over a period of eight weeks, after which he will return to his original assignment at the New Orleans staging area as personnel adjutant," The Eagle-Bulletin, 1/21/1944. "Lst Lieut. Martin Morey and Mrs. Morey have been visiting Lieut. Morey's parents...leaving to visit Mrs. Morey's parents in Mansfield, Pa. They will return to Manlius for a brief visit before leaving for New Orleans, La.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/18/1944. "Mr. and Mrs. Willard S. Cole observed their golden wedding anniversary on Sunday, Aug 20, at their home in Fayette street...Guests from out of town included...lst Lieut. Martin Morey and Mrs. Morey, of New Orleans, La.," The Eagle-Bulletin, 8/25/1944.

Morgan, Arley. Kirkville P.O., according to World War II veteran list provided by Ella Dunn from Kirkville records.

Morgan, DeForest. Manlius. "Keith Morgan, a recent inductee, is now stationed at the Sampson Naval Base. DeForest Morgan, a brother who is also in the U. S. Navy, is located in New Guinea. They are sons of Mr. and Mrs. E. E. Morgan of Washington street," The Eagle-Bulletin, 12/1/1944. "DeForest Morgan of the Navy has returned from the South Pacific. He has received an honorable discharge and returned to his home in McConnellsville. Mr. Morgan visited his parents, Mr. and Mrs. E. E. Morgan on Tuesday," The Eagle-Bulletin, 2/1/1946.

Morgan, Keith. Manlius. "Keith Morgan, a recent inductee, is now stationed at the Sampson Naval Base. DeForest Morgan, a brother who is also in the U. S. Navy, is located in New Guinea. They are sons of Mr. an