The mountainous region of Sphakia in Crete strongly evokes notions of ruggedness, masculinity, and “tradition,” both in Greece and internationally. Recent anthropological studies of power and imagination (particularly in Greek society) have argued that local claims to tradition as well as stereotypes about the ruggedness of those who dwell in hinterlands necessarily reflect and promote the cultural domination by centers of peripheries. In critically responding to these studies, I offer a comprehensive exploration of the volatile field of subjectifications and cultural dynamics produced by and between Sphakians and spectators of the region. In doing so, I turn to the visual as a particularly rich field of practices that rupture concepts of structural subjugation. In examining such spheres as Sphakians’ photographic reappropriation and indigenous critique, I elucidate the dynamics of dominance but also capture other productive possibilities unleashed in the context of an “exoticized” society.

The years following the 2010 bailout by the EU entailed a reactivation in Greece of mistrust of “Germany” as an executor of austerity measures that descends from the executioners of the 1940s. This chapter sheds light on political imagination, particularly perceptions of alterity and coexistence, by exploring practices of display and looking at photographs in two case studies. On the one hand, images of “traditional” old men and women gifted back to their descendants by grateful German tourists who first visited the rocky Cretan area of Sfakia in the 1960s. On the other, black-and-white photographs of survivors of atrocities perpetrated by German troops in the 1940s, held up today as reminders of victimhood in the towns of Kalavryta and Distomo. By unpacking the experiences afforded with these photographic frames, the chapter revisits classic themes, such as hospitality, while theorizing the limits of “citizenship” between those who see themselves as inhabiting Europe’s center and Europe’s periphery.

Crisis recontextualized numerous visual projects, regardless of their authors' intentions or their initial context of production. Eventually framing our perception of visual production, including the photographic, crisis can now be detected even within pictures and visual narratives which diligently avoid depicting it, or reflect it at a tangent. Expanding on this perception, in this visual essay I will discuss a mode of photographic documentation and interpretation of the Greek crisis in which urban space engages with the recent sociopolitical situation, albeit not always in a straightforward manner. In the first part, I briefly discuss the current context of photography output in Greece, focusing on photographers who made urban space central to their exploration of recent conditions. What many of them share, I argue, is an interest in the commonplace, an aspect of urban landscape which used to be dismissed as insignificant and without interest. . I then focus on Nikos Panayotopoulos’ research project ‘Terra Cognita’, which I examine as a trailblazing example of this trend. in the course of thoroughly documenting Athens from early 2000 until the end of 2008, namely the period before, during and after the so-called ‘glory days’ of the 2004 Olympics. Portraying a landscape already in decline, this project came to suggest that crisis was here long before we recognized it as such. https://www.ingentaconnect.com/contentone/intellect/jgmc/2019/00000005/00000002/art00008

In Tradition in the Frame: Photography, Power and Imagination in Sfakia, Crete, Konstantinos Kalantzis explores the experiences of Sfakians in Crete to reflect on how tradition is made meaningful today and what this can tell us about the dynamics of localisation, globalisation, modernity and belonging in our contemporary world. This is a rich and enjoyable read that will be of interest to scholars and students looking for new, generative approaches to visual culture at the intersection of the local and the global, writes Kristina Gedgaudaitė.

The article explores cinematic and photographic images of the ‘Greek crisis’ in order to show how the visual can render the crisis both visible and invisible, clear and opaque, normalized and contested. Greek new wave cinema, iconic repetitive images of suffering in the center of Athens, and the group of visual artists Depression Era are discussed in this context. I argue that the images in focus articulate the crisis and render it visible. At the same time, however, they challenge one's expectations of what the crisis is and how normalized it has become. I argue that these images can encourage civic responsibility and a dialogue about freedom and democracy in the current predicament.

This paper aims to establish the grounds for a postcolonial reading of both Greece and its representation. It attempts to take a deeper look at the framework in which the image of Greece is constructed, interpreted and finally represented by examining how Greek photography has evaluated and represented its domestic environment, and the degree to which such an operation has been determined or influenced by dominant western culture. In order to frame my topic of interest, I have taken into consideration the photographic work of Nelly (Elli Seraidari). Overall, Nelly illustrates a good deal about thedesired identity of the new state, an image of how Greece’s new middle class desired both their country and themselves to appear, that is, how they sought to constitute their social, cultural and national identity.

As Therasiotes – residents of Therasia, a sparsely populated island sitting to the west of the globally iconic tourist destination of Santorini – engage with their landscape, they are haunted by a sense of stillness, which contrasts with Santorini’s reverberating modernity. By combining text with photographic imagery, this essay explores how Therasiotes experience quietness and its perceived antithesis, modernity, as well as the ways in which both are entangled in conflicting dynamics of pleasure and aversion, a condition invoking Derrida’s discussion of Plato’s pharmakon, with its inherent vacillation between the categories of cure and poison. The article examines peoples’ material practices and modes of looking in order to understand how they experience time and place and how they rework the island’s position in national and global hierarchies of value. It also proposes a peripatetic narrative structure that mirrors my own physical movements on the island in pursuit of photos and thus explores the ethnographic role of photography as a narrative strategy, an object of study and a research method. [keywords: modernity, ethnography, photography, tourism, material culture, landscape]

Drawing upon ethnographical research carried out in Greek cities, this article discusses the use of political graffiti as a creative, playful response to the economic depression, social upheavals and precariousness surrounding the writers and as an act of civil disobedience and political protest in the context of the Greek economic crisis. The graffiti creation releases a flood of cultural responses to the crisis and gives an insight into the lived experience endured by the Greek people faced with the gloomy conditions of a society in crisis. The analysis traces the ways in which activists and unaligned writers turn their attention to the creative and expressive potential of graffiti and articulate cultural heterotopias on the visual landscape of Greek cities. Spatial politics allow distinctive political voices to transform the material dimensions of urban life in meaningful visual expression. The act of doing graffiti in the dystopia of crisis shows the desire of grassroots artists and cultural activists to use their creative capacities to overcome the unfavourable material conditions of their existence and to build alternative counter-hegemonic spaces of representation in the urban landscapes, challenging austerity policies and the existing social order.