In Tradition in the Frame: Photography, Power and Imagination in Sfakia, Crete, Konstantinos Kalantzis explores the experiences of Sfakians in Crete to reflect on how tradition is made meaningful today and what this can tell us about the dynamics of localisation, globalisation, modernity and belonging in our contemporary world. This is a rich and enjoyable read that will be of interest to scholars and students looking for new, generative approaches to visual culture at the intersection of the local and the global, writes Kristina Gedgaudaitė.

This paper aims to establish the grounds for a postcolonial reading of both Greece and its representation. It attempts to take a deeper look at the framework in which the image of Greece is constructed, interpreted and finally represented by examining how Greek photography has evaluated and represented its domestic environment, and the degree to which such an operation has been determined or influenced by dominant western culture. In order to frame my topic of interest, I have taken into consideration the photographic work of Nelly (Elli Seraidari). Overall, Nelly illustrates a good deal about thedesired identity of the new state, an image of how Greece’s new middle class desired both their country and themselves to appear, that is, how they sought to constitute their social, cultural and national identity.

As Therasiotes – residents of Therasia, a sparsely populated island sitting to the west of the globally iconic tourist destination of Santorini – engage with their landscape, they are haunted by a sense of stillness, which contrasts with Santorini’s reverberating modernity. By combining text with photographic imagery, this essay explores how Therasiotes experience quietness and its perceived antithesis, modernity, as well as the ways in which both are entangled in conflicting dynamics of pleasure and aversion, a condition invoking Derrida’s discussion of Plato’s pharmakon, with its inherent vacillation between the categories of cure and poison. The article examines peoples’ material practices and modes of looking in order to understand how they experience time and place and how they rework the island’s position in national and global hierarchies of value. It also proposes a peripatetic narrative structure that mirrors my own physical movements on the island in pursuit of photos and thus explores the ethnographic role of photography as a narrative strategy, an object of study and a research method. [keywords: modernity, ethnography, photography, tourism, material culture, landscape]

Final Year Dissertation: Contemporary photography theory tells us that photographs always emerge out of a context and an ideology, and are never neutral reproductions of reality. The first photographic renderings of Greece in the 19th century by Europeans were dominated by an idealised perception of classical antiquity and had little to do with the contemporaneous social scenery. In the mode of ‘self-colonisation’, some Greek photographers imitated this gaze and adopted it as the one true view of their world. These representational strategies then reverberated through domestic photographic production, illustrating the pervasiveness of hegemonic narratives and the influence the countries of the West have had on the modern Greek nation, ever since its early years. Following the wide establishment of these image- making tactics, Greek photographic production in the 1970s (after the restitution of democracy and the emergence of radical theoretical texts on photography) is thereon shaped as an oppositional force to such reductive representations, excluding notions of the ‘mythical Greece’ trope from its discourse. This essay’s focus is the 21st century and it unravels in a linear mode, employing three case studies – from 2000 to 2004 to 2011. Omonia 2000 (2000) by Stratos Kalafatis, the first case study, consists of such a rejection of the aforementioned monumentality that usually ran through representations of Greece, instead elevating everyday occurrences in the Athenian ‘underbelly’. Next, Gerasimos Domenikos’ Olympiad photographs (2004) return to monumental moments, in a double-coded documentation of the Athenian Olympic spectacle. Finally, Panos Kokkinias’ “Leave Your Myth in Greece” (2011) series converses with the archetypal representations of Greece, to deliver a parody of Greek tourism discourses and strategies. All three photographers interrogate Greece’s relationship with the overarching presence of the West, which some scholars have come to call crypto-colonial.