Index of Contents

Introduction

Customized Google Maps

Google Map of 1000+ Narasimha Temples

Famous Narasimha Temples in Karnataka

4.1 Sri Lakshmi Narasimhaswaami Gudi – Saavanadurga

4.2 Sri Guddada Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple, Teppasandra

4.3 Sri Bettahalli Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Gudi

4.4 Yoga Narasimha Temple, Melkote

4.5 Ramanujar Temple ,Thondanur,(Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple)

4.6 Manikarnike Sri Gunja Lakshmi Narasimha Gudi, Mandya

4.7 Shree Lakshmi Narasimha Kshetram, Belagola

4.8 Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Mysuru

4.9 Sri Yoganarsimha Swamy Devastana, Saligrama

4.10 Shree Lakshmi Narashima swamy Temple, Arakalagud

4.11 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Javagal

4.12 Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple (Trikutaachala), Belavadi

4.13 Channakeshava Temple, Arakere, (Trikuta)

4.14 Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy Temple, Vignasanthe

4.15 Sri Hatyalu Narasimha Swami Gudi, Karekurchi

4.16 Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy Temple, MH Patna

4.17 Sri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Temple, Kamsandra

4.18 Bhoga & Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple Devarayana Durga

4.19 Shri Narsimha Jharna Mandir, Bidar

4.20 Mudigere Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple

4.21 Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Nagamangala

4.22 Sri Ugra Narasimha Swamy Temple, Maddur

4.23 Nuggehalli Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Temple

4.24 Srirangapattana – Narasimha Temple

4.25 Lakshminarayana Temple, Hosaholalu – Trikuta

4.26 Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Gorur

4.27 Sri Vardha Yoga Bhoga Narasimha swamy devasthana, Shanti Grama

4.28 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Bhadravathi

4.29 Shri Lakshmi Narasimha Temple, Hampi

4.30 Shri Kanakachala Lakshmi Narasimha Temple,Kanakagiri

4.31 Narasimhaswamy temple, Holenarasipur

4.32 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Nonavinakere

4.33 Gandi Narasimhaswamy Temple, Swamymalai Block

4.34 Sri Soumyakeshava Swamy Temple, Nagamangala, Trikuta Temple

4.35 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Haranhalli

4.36 Shri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Devasthana, Sondalagere

4.37 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swami Gudi, Sugganahalli

4.38 Sri Seebi Narasimhaswami temple

4.39 Sri Stambha Lakshmi Narasimha, Billur

NOTE Since the Blog is lengthy, If you Click on any Title, you will be taken to the concerned paragragh by the link provided. Also you can return to the Index of Contents for which links have been provided at several places in the Blog.

1. Introduction

There are several Important famous and ancient Shree Narasimhaswamy temples in Karnataka. In this Blog, details of 35 such temples are given. Had darshan in half of the list in March 2023 and the rest in different periods of time.

2.Customized Google Maps

I have created Customized Google Maps giving location of various temples in each category :

Google Map of 2500+ Sri Rama Temples, . Web link

1000 Murugan / Subhramanya with 30 Famous Temples web link

Map of Sri Parashurama Prathishta Shiva , Bhagavathy and Dharma Sastha Temples and Parashurama Kshetrams (650). Web Link

Google Map of 300+ Thevara Vaippu Sthalangal . Web Link

1000+ Sri Narasimha / Narasingh temples, web link

1500 + Saraswati Temples with 20 Famous Templesweb link NEW

4000+ Krishna Kshetrams with 30 Famous Temples – Part 1 Part 2 NEW

3.Google Map of 1000+ Narasimha Temples

Google Interactive Map of 1000+ Narasimha Temples is given below. For each temple, weblink for more details are given wherever available.

4. Famous Narasimha Temples in Karnataka

There are more than 150 Shree Narasimha temples in Karnataka as may be seen in the map above. In this Blog, details of a few of them where I had darshan have been given. Half of the temples, we had darshan in March 2023. Other half in different periods of time. Since their detils have already been covered in earlier blogs, I have not repeated them here. Instead I have given the web link for their details. See my New Blog : Pancha Vishnu Kshetrams -3 (Pancha Narasimha Kshetrams of Andhra Pradesh and Pancha Narasimha Kshetrams of Tamilnadu) To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here. Otherwise Continue

4.1 Sri Lakshmi Narasimhaswaami Gudi – Saavanadurga

Sri Lakshmi Narasimhaswaami Gudi – Saavanadurga, W78X+F6H, Magadi – Ramanagara Rd, Bengaluru, Karnataka 562201 Sri Lakshmi Narasimhaswaami Gudi is located in Saavanadurga, Karnataka at a distance of 60 Kms from Bangalore and 40 kms from Nelamangala. This temple is believed to be about 500 years old. It is one of the 1000 Lord Narasimha Temples in India . See weblink : https://kalyangeetha.wordpress.com/2018/03/23/map-of-narasimha-narasingh-temples/

Savandurga is a hill 60 km west of Bengaluru off the Magadi road It is one of the largest monolith hills in India.The hill rises to 1226 m above mean sea level and forms a part of the Deccan plateau. It consists of peninsular gneiss, granites, basic dykes, and laterites. The Arkavathi river passes nearby through the Thippagondanahalli reservoir and towards Manchanabele dam.

The Savandurga hills are frequented by pilgrims who come to visit the Savandi Veerabhadreshwara Swamy and Narasimha Swamy temple situated at the foothills. Rock climbers, cave explorers, and adventurers are among others who frequent the locale. Nearby Manchanabele Dam is often visited by water-sports enthusiasts.

The Narasimha temple is about 1 km from Saavanadurga VeeraBhadra Swamy temple. Main sanctum has the idol of Narasimha Swamy ( form of Lord Vishnu ) . This unique idol seem to formed of a rock and is about 3-4 feet showing only the face of the idol .

Other sanctums include idols of Lakshmi (Swayambu – self manifested) & Navagraha. Visitors trekking the hill pass through this temple. There is a park opposite to this temple where medical herbs , plants , trees are cultivated. Temple is open from morning between 7 AM to 1 PM and in evening between 5.30 PM to 7 PM. Contact phone numbers : 9480220929, 9480221002

4.2 Sri Guddada Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple, Teppasandra

Sri Guddada Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple, XXPQ+MHV, of, Teppasandra, Karnataka 572130 Sri Guddada Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple, is located on a hilltop in Teppasandra, Karnataka at a distance of 85 Kms from Bangalore and 50 Kms from Nelamangala .It is one of the 1000 Narasimha Temples in India.

If you are looking for a serene and scenic place to visit in Karnataka, you might want to check out Sri Guddada Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple of Teppasandra. This temple is dedicated to Lord Narasimha, the fourth avatar of Lord Vishnu, who is depicted as a half-man and half-lion. The temple is located on a hilltop, surrounded by lush greenery and panoramic views. It is believed to have been built in the 12th century. The temple is situated on a hilltop and offers stunning views of the surrounding area.

One of the unique features of this temple is the idol of Lord Narasimha, which is made of granite and is believed to be self-manifested. The idol is said to be very powerful and is known for fulfilling the wishes of the devotees. Recently – 25 years ago, a Kavacha of Lakshmi Narasimha has been added on the Pillar .

It is said that LOrd Narasimha came in the dream of an archaka in Teppasandra and intimated him that He is present in the Hilltop and so come and do the archanas here. A small temple was built around the swayambu pillar of Lord Narasimha. Initially water was brought from the hill bottom – presentlly there is a borewell to supply water.

The temple has a simple and elegant architecture, with a stone tower (gopuram) at the entrance.

The temple also has a beautiful pond, known as Gudda Kere, which is said to have healing properties. The water from the pond is used for various religious ceremonies and is believed to have the power to cure illnesses.

The temple attracts many devotees and tourists throughout the year, especially during festivals such as Narasimha Jayanti, Vaikuntha Ekadashi, and Brahmotsavam. The temple also conducts daily rituals and poojas for the welfare of the devotees. The temple offers free prasadam (food) to all the visitors.

Overall, Sri Guddada Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple is a must-visit for anyone interested in Hindu mythology and ancient temple architecture. arch.

The archakar stays in the Teppasandra village and comes daily to the temple located in Hilltop. For nearly 2 kms. the road is kachha .The temple timings are : 10 am – 2 pm; 5-8 pm; Contact phone numbers : Srinivas Murthy Archakar: 6364168515 Shyamanna Archakar: 9902776395 .Saturdays, many devotees visit the temple.

Sri Guddada Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple of Teppasandra is a perfect destination for those who seek peace, spirituality, and nature. It is a place where you can experience the divine grace of Lord Narasimha and enjoy the scenic beauty of the hill. It is a place where you can feel closer to God and yourself.

4.3 Sri Bettahalli Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Gudi

Sri Bettahalli Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Gudi ,VWP9+R5W, SH84, Bettahalli, Karnataka 572111 Sri Bettahalli Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Gudi is located in Bettahalli, Karnataka at a distance of 100 Kms from Bangalore and 60 Kms from Nelamangala. It is one of the 1000 Narasimha Temples in India.

If you are looking for a serene and scenic place to visit in Karnataka, you might want to check out Sri Bettahalli Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Gudi, a temple dedicated to Lord Narasimha, an avatar of Lord Vishnu. Located on a hilltop in Bettahalli village, this temple is one of the oldest and most beautiful temples in the region. It is believed to be over 500 years old.

The temple is situated on a hillock surrounded by lush greenery and offers a panoramic view of the countryside. The temple was built by the Hoysala kings in the 13th century and is an example of their exquisite architecture and craftsmanship.

The idol is believed to have self-manifested and is in a pillar form. Recently, a Narasimha idol is made of black stone and added to the pillar and is considered to be very powerful.

The temple is also known for its miraculous powers and attracts devotees from far and wide. It is believed that Lord Narasimha fulfils the wishes of his devotees who pray with sincerity and devotion. Many people have reported experiencing peace and bliss after visiting the temple. The temple also celebrates various festivals throughout the year, such as Narasimha Jayanti, Vaikuntha Ekadashi, and Brahmotsavam.

If you are planning to visit Sri Bettahalli Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Gudi, you can reach there by road from Bengaluru or Tumkur. The nearest railway station is Tumkur and the nearest airport is Kempegowda International Airport.. The best time to visit the temple is during the early morning or evening hours when you can enjoy the scenic beauty and the divine atmosphere.

Every year, the temple celebrates the Narasimha Jayanti festival with great pomp and fervor. The festival is celebrated during the month of May or June and attracts a large number of devotees from all over the region.

Sri Bettahalli Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Gudi is a hidden gem of Karnataka that deserves more attention and appreciation. It is a place where you can experience the ancient culture and heritage of India and also connect with your inner self. If you are looking for a spiritual and relaxing getaway from the hustle and bustle of city life, this temple is a perfect destination for you.

Temple timings are : 11 am to 2 pm; Priest Phone Number :Vinay – 9686451027 ; +91 87929 39293;

4.4 Yoga Narasimha Temple, Melkote

Yoga Narasimha Temple, Melkote Main Road, District Mandya, Melukote, Karnataka 571431 Yoga Narasimha Temple, is located at District Mandya, Melukote, Karnataka at a distance of 150 kmd from Bangalore and 50 km from Mysore..The impressive temple stands on top of a hill at a height of 1777 metres above the sea level. The historic temple attracts devotees due to its architectural beauty, serene surroundings and religious significance. It is one of the 800 Narasimha temples in India.

The majestic temple is dedicated to Lord, Narasimha. The temple houses an idol of Narasimha in a seated position with the Yogapatta. The temple is considered to be one of the seven holy centres devoted to the worship of Narasimha. Apart from the regular pujas carried out on a daily basis, the temple holds special pujas to celebrate the Narasimha Jayanthi festival every year.

The temple was built during the Hoysala kingdom. The beauty and religious significance of the temple has always fascinated the common people and the royalty alike. The temple has a huge drum that was donated by Tipu Sultan. It has a beautiful bell that was donated by the Mysore Parakalamatha. During the rule of the erstwhile Wodeyar Kings of Mysore, Krishnaraja Wodeyar III had donated a gold crown to the temple deity.

Yoga Narasimha Temple boasts of an impressive architecture. There are around 365 steps that lead to the temple situated high up on the hill. The intricate carvings on the pillars and the overall structure of the temple offer a glimpse into the architectural style of the bygone era. The top of the temple is visible from afar due to its height but the full glory of the detailed work of the craftsmen is visible only when one reaches near the entrance.

As per the legend, after the death of his father Hiranyakasipu, Prahlad Maharaj was a bit upset that he was the cause of his fathers death. It is said that Prahalad visited Melkote and found a lot of spiritual vibration on top of the hillock. He placed his shaligrama that he used to regularly worship and after a dip in Varaha kund came to his cave for worship. Suddenly he was astonished as the shaligrama took the form of Yoga Narasimha. The body of Narasimha has Shaligrama Chakras all over. MelkoteThis is visible during Abhisheka. Prahalad was ordained to worship Yoga Narasimha and Prahalad maharaj stayed in Melkote for 12 years and that all his sins associated with the demise of is father would be cleansed.

Yoga Narasimha sits on top of Nava Narasimhas. Each of the 9 steps represent individual Narasimhas. The third eye of Narasimha is visible for those who have done a lot of tapas. There are a total of 365 steps representing one year in days from the bottom of the hillock to Yoga Narasimha. There are Pancha Kalyanis in the main kalyani tank. Lord Rama also worshipped Yoga Narasimha on Melkote.

Prahalad also installed a Yoga Narasimha Diety at Kere Tonnur behind Nambi Narayana Temple. The uniqueness of this place is that there is a danda or a stick which is always kept on right hand side of the diety, and is used to beat the bad out of people. MelkoteIt is said that in the very same place, the jain king Bittideva’s daughter was possessed by a Brahmarakshashi. When 1000 Jain priests could not remove the ghost, Ramanuja said that he can. Ramanuja put a mantra and hit on the head of the daughter and immediately the ghost left her. Then all the Jain Priests had to convert to Sri Vaishnavism. They still protested. They challenged Ramanuja with 1000 questions and asked him to answer all the 1000 questions in one answer covering all questions. Ramanuja took his adishesha form with 1000 heads and answered all questions. Inquisitive Jain Priests then pulled out the cloth towel which was screening Ramanujacharya and when they saw the snake many of them died, and the of the rest of them many of them suffered shock and the remaining converted to Sri Vaishnavism. The original sack that Ramanujacharya used at the very place and is enclosed in a glass case.

Yoga Narasimha Temple Timingx are 9.00 am to 1.00 pm. and from 5.30 pm to 8.00 pm..

4.5 Ramanujar Temple ,Thondanur,(Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple)

Ramanujar Temple ,Thondanur, HJ5R+H8P, Mandya, Karnataka 571434 (Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple,) Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple is located at kere thonnur, (Thodanur) pandavapura , Karnataka at a distance of 150 kms from Bangalore..Since Sri Ramanujar idol is installed here, it is also called as Ramanujar temple. Moolavar : Yoga Narasimha East facing Sitting Posture

Thondanur or more familiarly known as ‘Kere Thonnur’ is an abhimana sthalam. There are 3 temples in thondanur, all close together – Sri Nambinarayana, Sri Parthasarathy and Sri Narasimha/Sri Ramanuja temples.There is Padma theertham or Ramanuja theertham near the temples. Acharya Sri Ramanujacharya took refuge here in the 11th Century when he fled from the King, Krimikanta Raja. It is from here that Sri Yathiraja continued propagating Sri Vishista Advaitha Siddantha.

Yoga Narasimha Perumal temple is just North of the Nambi Narayana Temple in Thondanur, one whose idol is believed to have been installed by Prahalada in the Kretha Yuga. Hence, the idol here is said to date back about 5500years. One has to climb about 15steps to reach the temple. This temple is seen as a special Abhimana Sthalam of Ramanuja. After his exile from Srirangam, Ramanuja came first, here to Thondanur, before proceeding to Melkote.

Here at Thondanur, Ramanuja’s disciple Thondanur Nambi, who also built the famous Thonnur kere (the huge dam North of this temple) brought the Hoysala King Bitta Deva and his daughter to Ramanuja.

The King’s daughter had been afflicted with Brahma Rakshasha and was not in a proper state of mind. Ramanuja directed the king to take his daughter to the huge Eri (Sarovar) known as ‘Pancha Apsara Thataka’. He asked the king’s daughter to bathe there and then invoke the blessings of Yoga Narasimha at the temple South of the dam. At the temple, the Archaka placed the Narasimha Dhanda on the daughter and to the king’s surprise she was instantly liberated from the illness. To this day, one sees Yoga Narasimha holding this magical Dhanda in his right hand.

Belief is that Lord Yoga Narasimha fulfils all the prayers of the devotees here at this temple. Once fulfilled, the devotees present a 10×6 Veshti to Yoga Narasimha and an Orange Veshti to Ramanuja at this temple as a thanks giving gesture.

Bitta Deva, much against the wishes of his people, became a Vaishnavite and changed his name to Vishnu Vardhan reasoning out to his people that in this Kali Yuga, Ramanuja was the avathara of Sesha (similar to how Lakshmana was in the Tretha Yuga).

An unhappy lot, the 1000 Jains of Thondanur wanted to confront Ramanuja in a debate. Outside the Yoga Narasimha Temple, after Ramanuja invoked the blessings of the Lord, he was thrown 1000 questions by the people of the kingdom. And in one go Ramanuja hit back at them with 1000 answers much to the delight of the people. Pleased with his answers, the Jains converted to Vaishnavism.

Moving from Thondanur, he later built/renovated the temples at Melkote, Gadag, Belur and Thalakkad. He also renovated the Amara Narayana temple at Eka Chakra Puram in Kaivara, a temple that relates to the legend of Hidumba Samhara.

When the time had come for him to leave for Srirangam, the people of Thondanur, who had become fond of him, requested him to stay back here.He told them that he would have to leave but would leave his powers here and installed his own idol here at Yoga Narasimha temple with Vaikanasa Agama Sastras and is seen even today in the Sarpa Roopa form.

While in Melkote, he has an Abhimana status, in Srirangam he is seen in ‘Shareeram’ (body form) and in a Sthoola Roopam (Athma form) at Sriperambadur. Here in Thondanur at the Yoga Narasimha temple on the banks of the Thonnur Eri, Ramanuja is seen in a Sookshma Roopam (Atom) with conch and chakra. A box used by Ramanuja in the 12th Century AD is still seen inside the temple. This temple too like the Lakshmi Narayana temple in Thondanur has a Chola Style Architecture but was built / renovated by Hoysala Kings. Hence there is no Raja Gopuram at the entrance. Temple Timings are : 930am-530pm Contact R Raghurama Bhattar @ 08236 251795 To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here. Otherwise Continue

4.6 Manikarnike Sri Gunja Lakshmi Narasimha Gudi, Mandya

Manikarnike Sri Gunja Lakshmi Narasimha Gudi, CPC4+MW6, Mandya, Karnataka 571401 Manikarnike Sri Gunja Lakshmi Narasimha Gudi is located in at Baburayan Koppal, Mandya, Karnataka at a distance of 4 Kms from Srirangapatna , 19 Kms from Mysore and 125 Kms from Bangalore. It is is situated on the banks of the sacred river Cauvery and near the confluence of Lokapavani and Cauvery rivers.

The Manikarnika Ghat of Kashi is supposed to be the very place where Lord Vishnu dug a pit with his chakra while he was performing penance. The pit was filled with his perspiration when he started meditating. When Lord Shiva shook his head in admiration, his jewelled ear ornament fell into the pit with a resounding murmur. This is how the bathing ghat Manikarnika in Kashi got its name.

At the temple here in BR Kappal, the deity Lord Narasimha has a small bead (gulaganji) held up in his right palm to indicate that this kshetra is more sacred (by the weight of a gulaganji) than the Manikarnika Ghat at Kashi. That is why the deity here is called “Manikarnika Sri Gunja Lakshmi Narasimha. Nearby are situated the famous Karighatta where Lord Srinivasa is worshipped and Naimishamba on the other side of the river.

As per a legend, Lord Shiva did Rudra Thandava when Sati Devi had self immol;ated in the Yagya fire of Dasha yaga. The pearls from His shika fell in this place and so it was called Manikarnika. There is a smashana nearby, A Vishnu Devalaya and Cauvery river make it as a punya Kshetram

As per another legend, Bhrigu Maharshi to atone for his sin of kicking Lord Narayana in his chest in anger, performed severe tapas at this place as instructed by Lord Narayana. Sri Lakshmi Narashima appeared before him. But He was in a fericious form and so Brighu Maharishi tried all mantras to cool Him down. As a last resort, he requested Goddess Lakshmi to come here and be with the Lord. Narasimha took Her in his lap as Lakshmi Narasimha.

As per another Legend, A washerman was washing clothes daily at the bank of Cauvery River at T. Narasipur. One day Lord Gunja Narasimhaswamy appeared in his dream. HE (God) told him (Washerman) that His idol is beneath the stone on which he is washing clothes and asked / told him (washerman) to build a temple for HIM. The washerman expressed his inability to build the temple as he is very poor-Lord told him that he could make use of the Nidhi (Gold Coins) which are also beneath the washing stone in a pot (KOPPARIGE). The temple was built. When the washerman expressed his desire to Lord, that he would go to KASHI / VARANASI on a pilgrimage, Lord told him (Washerman) that construction of temple had earned him more punya by the weight of a Gulaganji than that by visiting KASHI. Thus the word GUNJA came into usage along with the name of God Narasimhaswamy.

It is learnt from elders that the family name “Yachan Gunja” has come this way. Sri Ramanujacharya during his stay at MELUKOTE had many number of deciples. One of them was Sri YECHAN. His family descendents are called as YECHAN family vamshasthas. Their family Diety is Lord Gunjanarasimhaswamy at T. Narasimapura. Hence all their family members have “YECHAN GUNJA” as their SURNAME.

The temple was looked after for many years by the ancestors of the Manikarnika family who were reciding there. As the prakaram was in a dilapidated condition, “Manikarnika Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Seva Trust (Regd.)” was formed for the upkeep of the temple and it has taken up renovation and other works. The Trust has also been celebrating, every year, the Souramana Narasimha Jayanthi at the temple.

Sri. Gunja Narasimhaswamy Temple has inscriptions dating from Sri Krishna Devaraya period – Lord Narasimha Swamy with Sri Mahalakshmi Thayar in the sanctum sanctorum has in his Right – Hastha a Gulaganji seed (seed of the Gunja Tree) along with an indicator of a balance. There are separate sannidhi’s for, Thayar, Alwars and Acharayas etc., A little distance away from the Narasimha temple is the beautiful hill of Karighatta where a temple dedicated to Srinivasa is built.

The Temple Timings are Daily Morning 9.00 Am to 12.30 Pm and Evening 5.30 Pm to 8.30 Pm. Contact phone numbers : Prashanth Srivatsav 8660770293, V Narayana Iyengar – Parapethagar +91 08227 – 260509. Sri Sampath Kumar – 9448479838

4.7 Shree Lakshmi Narasimha Kshetram, Belagola

Shree Lakshmi Narasimha Kshetram – ಶ್ರೀಲಕ್ಷ್ಮೀನರಸಿಂಹಕ್ಷೇತ್ರ, Shree Lakshmi Narasimha Kshetram – “Dakshina Naimisharanyam Srinivasa Kshetram Road Belagola, Srirangapatna Tq, Karnataka 571606 Shree Lakshmi Narasimha Kshetram also called as “Dakshina Naimisharanyam Srinivasa Kshetram is located in Belagola, Srirangapatna Tq, Karnataka at a distance of 11 Kms from Srirangapatna, 15 Kms from Mysore and 140 Kms from Bangalore. The temple is of recent origin – around 15 years old.

This place is also called as “Simha Giri”, Inspired by the Lord in his deepest meditation, a young saintly person handed over the wonderful idol of Lord Lakshminarasimha to Sri. U. Ve. Viraraghavacharya, a pious and scholarly devotee of the Lord, then residing at Mysore. Thus the Lord arrived at the devotee’s home on May 9th, 2003, a Friday, to everybody’s amazement. The arrival of Lord Narasimha saw a spurt in activities around HIM and paved the way for the establishment of a Gurukulam for Vedic and traditional studies.

The Monthly Svati Nakshatra Yajnam was commenced in June 2004. Nitya Yajna, a yajna being performed everyday by one of the inmates praying for the welfare of everybody, was commenced in the year 2005. Since 2003, an annual 11-day event marking the Lakshmi Narasimha Jayanti is celebrated in the Gurukulam.

All these activities culminated in building a beautiful temple for the Lord as per the injunctions of Agama shastras. Instructed and inspired by the Lord in their intuitions, a righteous and devoted couple Sriman Nadathur Srinivasa Raghavan (N.S.Raghavan, Co-founder of Infosys) and Smt. Jamuna Raghavan came forward to buy the land and build the temple. Bhumi Puja of the Temple was performed on 6th of March 2009. The temple is a modern day marvel, built entirely in granite stones. No steel has been used to construct the temple and has been designed strictly in accordance with the Pancharatra Agama texts.

The first stage of Garbhagruha, Mukhamandapa, Garuda Shrine were completed and the consecration was performed on June 1st 2012, a Friday, on the auspicious Chitra star.Currently, the Mahamandapa, Prakara and Rajagopura are under construction. An Anjaneya Swamy idol around 6 feet tall has been installed 2 years ago.

Nitya Yajna – Homa for world peace is being conducted daily. Svati Yajna – Homa for Universal Welfare is being conducted monthly. Maasotsava – A Monthly 5-day Prayer Program is also being conducted in the premises.

The temple has a Goshala and a Gurukulam for learning Vedas. The temple Timings : 7am-1230 hrs, 5.30 -7.30 pm. Contact phone numbers : +91-9343 1294 90, +91-9343 1294 93, +91-9343 1294 95.

4.8 Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Mysuru

Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Sudharshana Narasimha Kshetra, near Aishwarya Petrol Pump, Vijayanagar 1st Stage, Vijayanagar, Mysuru, Karnataka 570017 Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Sudharshana Narasimha Kshetra is located in Vijayanagar, Mysuru, Karnataka at a distance of 6 kms from the heart of the city.

This temple is of recent origin though the Moolavar idol is quite old and brought from outside – time not known. The moolavar yoga narasimha swami resides in yogic posture (meditative state) and evokes serene devotion. It’s a perfect place to experience the divine and orient yourself through meditation. Special pooja is offered on Swathi Nakshatra and Amavasya days. The crowd is huge on weekends evening. Prasadam at 7.30 pm is sumptuous enough for anyone who visits the temple. The love for puliyogare distributed to devotees after maha naivedyam, is divine.

A very beautiful temple. Maintained very well. A lot of space for car parking. There is a medium sized hall and dining hall on both sides of the temple. Small functions can be carried out there. The temple timings are : 6:30am–1pm, 6:30 pm –10pm

4.9 Sri Yoganarsimha Swamy Devastana, Saligrama

Sri Yoganarsimha Swamy Devastana, SH108, Saligrama, Karnataka 571604 Sri Yoganarsimha Swamy Devastana is located at Saligrama, Karnataka at a distance of 60 kms from Hassan and 204 Kms from Bangalore. This is one of 1000+ Narasimha temples in India.

A lesser known town Saligrama, idoes not attract many people because very few know about its past and its association with the chief exponent of Vishishtadvaita, at whose influence Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana, otherwise known as Bittideva, embraced Vaishnavism,changing his faith from Jainism.

Escaping from the wrath of the religious men in Kanchi, travelling through the forests and crossingthe River Cauvery, Ramanujacharya is said to have first set his foot at Saligrama.Hence, it has acquired a place in religious history as a sacred place. His followers reside in goodnumbers in this town.

Initially, the villagers of Saligrama were opposed to Ramanuja. But, the saint turned the water of the pond holy and when the villagers drank it, they felt a changeand took to Vaishnavism. The saint’s followers consider the water of the pond bestowed with healing powers even now. TheTemple is still in-charge of the descendents of the family of Vadhuhanambi, whose forefather became a disciple of the proponent of Sri Vaishnava philosophy.

According to the local legend, the main idol was Ugra Narasimha. After writing his interpretations propounding Vaishnavism, the Bhashyakara converted ugra (ferocious) to yoga (meditative)Narasimha..

Gauhama Rishi did the initial Prathistai of the idol here.. It is said Nam Alwar got the temple constructed in 24 hours here. Then it seems Ramanuja Charya had dream that he should visit this Kshetram and On arriving in Karnataka Ramanuja reached Saligrama it is also known as Shalapuri.The serene atmosphere of the place appealed to him. Vaduhanambi, the priest of the local Narasimha temple, became Ramanuja’s disciple. The people of the vicinity, onlearning that Ramanuja had arrived at the village, gathered round him. There is pond in that village and it is a kind of memorial to the great man. Even today Sri PadaThirtha is considered to be sacred to all Srivaishnavas. The temple is still in charge of the descendants of the family of Vaduhanambi

Pushkara Khanda chapter of Padma purana has details of Sri Yoganarsimha Swamy Devastana, Saligrama Suta Puranika narrated this mahatme on the request of Muni Pungavas. Narada Muni once visited the place between Seetha river and Kumbha Kashi kshetra where many Koota Muni Pungavas where meditating, after taking holy dip in different theerta sarovaras and meditating at thirta kshetras.During this time they heard a Divya Vani that preached about Narasimha Vichara.

The Divya Vani informed that an idol of Lord Narasimha, holding Shanka and Chakra in both hands and seated in Yogananda Posture that is worshiped by Brahma and Rudra is sitated between Shanka and Chakra thirta in middle of a Ashwatta (people) tree. This will be installed by Narada Muni.

They searched and found the statue of Lord Narasimha and prayed to him. Narada then installed the statue of Lord Narasimha in between Shanka and Chakra Theertha. On Narada’s prayer Lord Narasimha appeared and as per his request agreed to be there in the location permanently.

4.10 Shree Lakshmi Narashima swamy Temple, Arakalagud

narashimaswamy temple, Shree Lakshmi Narashima swamy Temple Road Bhramans Beedi, kote, Arakalagud, Karnataka 573102

Shree Lakshmi Narashima swamy Temple is located in Arakalagud, Karnataka at a distance of 30 Kms from Hassan and 100 Kms from Mysore. Arkalgud, also known as Arakalagudu (Kannada: ಅರಕಲಗೂಡು).

This temple is of Chola Period and it is more than 1000 years old. It houses Lord Lakshmi narasimha. It is said that it was the family deity of the then Pallegara It got most of grants during of the pellagra Sri Krishnaappana Nayaka.

The ratotsava (Chariot festival) is celebrated every year and there is chariot and special poojas on that day every Saturday there will be a special pooja . Private Function also take place here rentals also available. Being a village temple, it has been looked after well by the local villagers and poojas are being performed with dedication.

To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here. Otherwise Continue

4.11 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Javagal

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, 573125, Javagal, Karnataka 573125 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple.is located at Javagal, Karnataka at a distance of 225 kms from Bangalore and 20 km from Halebidu is a 13th century Hoysala era temple gem and is the ancestral village of Indian cricketer Javagal Srinath. Daily puja, mangalarti and archana is offered in the temple.Contact Srivatsan Bhattar, Mob: 8495020313

It is a Trikuta temple – the main deity of this temple is Sridhara. The other two shrines are dedicated to Venugopala and Lakshmi Narasimha . As the main deity of this temple is Sridhara, some people also refer this temple to as Sridhara templeIt was completed between 1250–1260 A.D. by King Vira Someshwara of the Hoysala Empire. This temple is a protected monument under the Karnataka state division of the Archaeological Survey of India.

The temple is a compact illustration of a square plan typical of Hindu temple architecture, but one where the three sanctums share a common mandapa (hall). These sanctums are dedicated to Lakshminarasimha, Sridhara and Venugopala. It is notable for its lavish artwork consisting of over 100 panels, all intricately carved both outside and inside. Many of these panels depict legends from the Ramayana.

Like most Hoysala era temples, the Lakshmi Narasimha temple at Javagal stands on a jagati (raised platform), beautiful moulding friezes and sculptures on the outer walls and lathe turned pillars, sukanasi and garbha griha on the inside. Where it differs from the other temples is that even though it is home to three shrines, it has only one shikhara. And its outer wall panel sculptures, reliefs and friezes are folkish in character and much different from the other Hoysala temples where the work is more intricate, well planned and laid out.

The temple plan is square, similar to other Hoysala temples. It is a trikuta (three shrined) temple, one where only the middle shrine has a superstructure (tower or shikhara) and a sukhanasi (nose or tower over the vestibule) The three equal size shrines are all square in plan and are connected by a common closed hall (mantapa). The closed hall is preceded by an open porch. The lateral shrines are connected directly to the hall while the middle shrine has a vestibule that connects the sanctum (cella) to the hall.

The temple stands on a platform (jagati), a feature common to many Hoysala temples. The platform, in addition to its visual appeal, is meant to provide devotees a path for circumambulation (pradakshinapatha) around the temple. It closely follows the outline of the temple, giving it a good elevated look.

While entering the temple, one sees a mantapa with two elephant balustrades that were built in the Vijayanagara period. Then, one is greeted by a Garuda sthamba, two dwarapalas Jaya and Vijaya and then the ranga mantapa with the lathe turned pillars. From here, one can enter the main temple complex and its three shrines. If one stands in the vestibule, straight ahead would be the sukanasi and the garbha griha of Sridhara, to your left would be the shrine of Venugopala and to your right would be the shrine of Lakshmi Narasimha. The sukanasi and the vestibule connecting the 3 shrines have beautiful carvings, ceiling work and sculptures.

On the outside of the temple, as one takes a clockwise pradakshinam (circumambulation), one will notice the six equal width rectangular moldings or friezes close to your feet. Staring from the top, these friezes depict hansa (birds), makara (crocodiles), Hindu epics and other stories, leafy scrolls, horses and elephants. Right above these friezes, you will see close to 140 beautifully carved sculptures that include Chaturvimsati murtis (24 different aspects of Lord Maha Vishnu), Hari hara, Brahma, Goddess Parvati, Tandav Ganesha and more. Most of these sculptures were sculpted by the famous Hoysala temple artisan Mallitamma.

4.12 Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple (Trikutaachala), Belavadi

Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple (Trikutaachala), 7XJW+R78, Belavadi, Karnataka 577146 Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple, is located at Belavadi (also known as Ekachakranagara), Karnataka at a distance of 225 kms from Bangalore and 11 kms from Halebidu,. The Veeranarayana temple is a nationally protected monument of India, managed by the Archaeological Survey of India. Shree Venugopala swamy and Yoga Narasimha are on 2 sides of Sri Veeranarayana Swamy– Trikuta temple).

While one normally associates Hoysala temples with the magnifi cent ones in Belur and Halebid, , this temple is yet another example of the brilliance of the Hoysala school of architecture. The temple has three separate square sanctums connected through an unusually large square ranga-mandapa (103 feet). The main shrine faces east and is dedicated to Viranarayana (Vishnu). The north facing shrine is dedicated to Venu gopala, while the south facing shrine is for Yoga-Narasimha. (Trikutaachala)

Built with soap stone this architectural gem is a sight of stupendous beauty This ornate trikuta (three shrined) temple was built in 1200 C.E. by Hoysala Empire King Veera Ballala II. Each of the three shrines has a complete superstructure (tower on top of shrine) and is one of the largest temples built by the Hoysala kings. While the famous temples at Belur and Halebidu are known for their intricate sculptures, this temple is known for its architecture The entrance is awe inspiring with a slanting roof fl anked by two massive stone elephants on either side.

The plan of the temple is unique in that two of the shrines face each other and are located on either side of a wide and spacious open mantapa (hall) containing thirty seven bays. The temple complex has two closed mantapas, one with thirteen bays and another with nine bays, at the end of which is a central shrine. This third shrine is an older construction and exhibits a standard architectural idiom containing all the basic elements of a Hoysala temple. The inner walls of the older shrine are plain, but its roof is well decorated.

In all, the temple complex has fifty nine bays (hence it has many pillars), most of which are bell shaped, while a few have decorative carvings on them. According to Foekema, the outer wall of the temple is of the “old style”, with one eaves running around the temple where the superstructure meets the wall of the shrine. Below this are miniature decorative towers on pilasters (aedicule). This is followed by a second eves. A panel of Hindu deities and their attendants (frieze) are below this eves followed by a set of five moldings that form the base of the wall

The figures that stand out are the ones of Krishna dancing on Kaliya, and of Garuda. The central shrine has an idol of Veera Narayana, with four arms, standing on a lotus. This figure is eight foot tall. This is the central shrine, and the oldest.

The northern shrine has a seven foot tall idol of Yoganarasimha in a sitting posture, holding the Shanka and Chakra, with Sridevi and Bhoodevi standing on either side. The Prabhavati is carved with the ten avatars of Vishnu.

The southern shrine has an enchanting eight foot image of Venugopala Krishna, standing with his right leg in front of his left leg, leaning against a tree, is blissfully playing his flute. He is surrounded by various figures – Shravan Kumaras with folded hands, Gopikas, who are so lost in the music that one has forgotten to cover herself properly, a cow feeding her calf, lost in the music, Gopalas who are dancing to the Venu Gana. On either side of Venu Gopala stand Rukmini and Satyabhama.

The halls are filled with ancient idols and relics that reflect a glorious past. The cielings have ornate carvings and detailed patterns that are testimony to the superior craftsmanship that existed during those times.

The outer walls of the temple are adorned with intricate carvings and running pilasters with equally grand towers on top. The sculptures are a treat for the eyes with the camera doing little justice to the splendid work on display..

4.13 Channakeshava Temple, Arakere, (Trikuta)

Channakeshava Temple, 94FH+XQ7, Arakere, Karnataka 573112 Channakeshava Temple is located in Arakere, Karnataka at a distance of 50 Kms from Chikmagallure, 55 Kms from Hassan and 155 Kms from Mysore.

It is a Trikuta temple – Chenna Keshava, Venugopala and Narasimha. Murthis are very nice. Unauthorised houses alround – even approach road to temple is narrow –Though it is under ASI , not being looked after . Govt must take care from further decay.

This trikuta temple is dedicated to Lord Keshava in the main western garbhagriha with Lords Venugopala and Lakshmi Narasimha in the other two cells. The outer walls of this temple have some fine carvings of the Hoysala period. There is another temple dedicated to Lord Rameshwara built during the same period.

Much plainer compared to most other Hoysala temples, this small shrine is nonetheless beautiful. This is a trikuta Vishnu temple built in the 13th century as per the ASI website.

This temple was built in the later Hoysala period, in granite with a Kadamba Nagara shikhara and dated to 13th century AD on stylistic grounds. This trikuta temple, on plan has three garbhagrihas, opening into a common sabhamandapa and a mukhamandapa.The three sanctums house representations of Vishnu as Kesava in west, Venugopal in south and Lakshmi-Narasimha in north. In elevation, the temple has an adhisthana with conventional mouldings over which rises the wall.

The antarala of the western shrine is marked with sukanasa projection. This is the single shikhara of the temple.The exterior of the temple wall has crude representations of various aspects of Vishnu in addition to secular sculptures. The sculptures do not have the workmanship compared to others constructed under Mallitamma, the sculptor. The carvings, however, have their own beauty which differentiates the temple from other Hoysala temples.

In between the sculptural depictions on the external walls are inserted slender tall pilasters and single pilaster turrets to break the monotony.The main deities are exquisite and the statue of Channakeshava surpasses any other in its ethereal beauty. After all, Channakeshava means “Beautiful Vishnu”

To the left of the entrance is a large stone tablet which contains a inscription in ancient Kannada giving details of the construction of the temple.

The temple is currently under the ASI. But not maintained properly. There are unaurthorised houses alround the temple. Even the approach to the temple is very difficult – narrow paths due to unauthorised constructions.There are multiple villages called Arakere in Karnataka. There are some villages called Arakere which also have a Chennakeshava Temple. Visitors should ensure that they reach the correct temple when planning a trip.

The keys to the temple are available with the villagers in case it is found to be locked since the pujari is not always in attendance.A smaller temple than it’s more famous Hoysala temples in the area, this temple nevertheless has its own charm. Though it receives a lesser number of visitors being off the popular itineraries, it is definitely worth a visit

4.14 Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy Temple, Vignasanthe

Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy Temple, 4GWQ+PX6, Vignasanthe, Karnataka 572224 Ancient Shri Lakshmi Narasimhaswami Temple is located in Vignasanthe, Karnataka at a distance of 60 Kms from Hassan and 75 Kms from Tumkur.

This beautiful trikuta temple is dedicated to Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy in the main western garbhagriha with Lords Chennakeshava and Venugopala in the other two cells. The Shikara here has some fine carvings. At the entrance to the temple are two elephant statues.

This is a 13th century temple built by a Hoysala King. The typical Hoysala architecture is unmistakable. It is a small but extremely beautiful thrikootachala temple. As you enter you can see the Chennakeshava in the garbhagrha. On the right side is Lord Lakshminarasimha with Goddess Lakshmi on His lap. Her leg rests on a lotus flower and because of her weight L the lotus is bent a bit and an elephant is holding the lotus . The prabha has dashavathara sculpted (as with Chennakeshava). On the opposite side is Lord Venugopala with intricate carvings with Krishna’s epic stories in sculpture. At the entrance of Chennakeshava, we can find Ganesha on the left hand side and Chamundeshwari (extremely delicate and intricate carving to the last possible detail) can be found. Chamundeshwari is not worshipped as her arm is broken.

The main mahamantapa has magnificent carvings on the roof depicting the plantain flower motif. In addition, just below are eight wonderful carvings of the different devas.

The entire temple below the lintel level outside have very few carvings but the sculptures above are just so detailed that it would take days to see them all. The typical star shape is followed here too. However not enough care is taken to keep them in good condition – what has stood for over 700 years has to stand for posterity to enjoy the marvels of the bygone era.

The contact phone number of Archakar is : 9449440511. Contact him before visiting this temple as he stays in Novinkere.

4.15 Sri Hatyalu Narasimha Swami Gudi, Karekurchi

Sri Hatyalu Narasimha Swami Gudi, Tiptur District, Karekurchi B, Karnataka 572214 Sri Hatyalu Narasimha Swami Gudi is located in Tiptur District, Karekurchi B village , Karnataka at a distance of 50 Kms from Tumkur. It is on the top of a hillock Hatyalu betta -500 feet high ; a motorable road is available to reach the temple. From the parking lot, one has to climb a set of 50 steps to reach the temple . Not much parking space is available for cars. While returning, there is another road available from the hilltop to the road below. It is more than 400 years old. It was called Rajadadripura in olden days.

It is a small temple with garba gruha and Pradakshina path. Narasimha swamy idol is 4 feet tall and has 10 hands with ” Ugra” – angry pose.. Sri Narasimha swamy gives relief from Bootha – Pretha fears and is also called by name “Gali ganta” Here if one takes and ties ” Dayathu” in hand, gets relif from bad dreams etc.. The view from above is very nice. The temple is believed to have been built by Chola Kings.There are 2 dining halls on both sides of the temple.

Special poojas are conducted on saturdays and Narasimha Jayanthi day. Temple is open fron from 8.30 am to 6 pm whole day. To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here. Otherwise Continue

4.16 Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy Temple, MH Patna

Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy Temple, 8XRM+P7W, MH Patna, Karnataka 572216 Lakshmi Narasimhaswamy Temple is located at MH Patna, Karnataka at a distance of 17 kms from Tumkur.

It is one of the 1000 Narasimha Temples in India. This temple is of recent origin and is well maintained. The temple timings are : 8 am – 8 pm; Archakar stays near the temple. General contact : 7760509723, 7019122445

4.17 Sri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Temple, Kamsandra

Sri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Temple, 2CMQ+GQX, Kamsandra, Kammasandra, Karnataka 562162 Sri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Temple is located in Kamsandra, Karnataka at a distance of 50 Kms from Tumkur and 25 Kms from Bangalore.

Kambada narasimha swamy temple is reported 4000, yr old and is topobhommi of agastha rishi. As per the legend, when Agasthya rishi was praying to lord on the bank a river he found a pillar and on icy shanku chakra and face of lord Nara simha was visible . Later on chola kings found this and built this temple , this is a swayambu temple of lord narasimha and it is west facing. All problems relating to sanchita karmas get dissolved if you pray to lord narasimha drishti dohas also get dissolved.

The temple gopuram is a tDravidian style gopuram. The moolavar is kambadha narasimhar( meaning beautiful narasimhar face in pillar). You can enjoy this thirukolam only during thirumanjanam. otherwise narasimhar is covered with kavacham and beautiful alankaram.

The temple also has beautiful narasimhar in nindra thirukolam (both moolavar and urchavar) and mahalakshmi thayar.The temple is famous parikara sthalam and devotees throng the temple for parikaram.

Located within 1 km distance there is kamadhenu kshetra – temple of ragavendra swamy . The temple timigs are : 7.30 am – 1 pm ; 5 pm – 8 pm; Contact Phone number : Sandeep Archakar 9964441020

4.18 Bhoga & Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temples Devarayana Durga

Bhoga Narasimha Swamy Temple Devarayana Durga, Karnataka 572140 & Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple Details of the temples are given in my Blog : Hoysala Temples Trail -Must Visit Ancient Central Karnataka Temples – Part 3

4.19 Shri Narsimha Jharna Mandir, Bidar

Shri Narsimha Jharna Mandir, Malkapur Road ,Mangalpet, WG3V+6GQ, Pakalwada, Bidar, Karnataka 585401 Shri Narsimha Jharna Mandir is located in Bidar, Karnataka It is situated in a cave where the water runs up to 300 metres. This temple is situated at around 5 km from Bidar city. One has to wade through waist deep water to reach the feet of the deity.

This temple is situated under the Manichoola hill range .It is one of the 1000+ Narasimha temples in India.

The Narasimha Jhira Cave Temple, dedicated to the powerful Lord Narasimha, and also known by the names of Narasimha Zarna Cave temple and Jharani Narasimha Temple. The idol at Narasimha Jhira Cave temple is a swayambhu roopam – the deity is self manifested and is very powerful. The fourth incarnation of Lord Vishnu, Lord Narasimha, is half human and half lion.

Every year people flock to this temple in droves to get their wishes fulfilled. This sacred temple is located in a cave in Bidar.

Narasimha on the wall at the end of a cave,and it is an architectural wonder. A perennial stream of water is said to be flowing continuously for hundreds of years in this place. It is a thrilling experience to walk through waist deep water for 300 meters through a cave-like tunnel, to seek a view of Lord Narasimha. People utter the words govinda-govinda and narasimha hari-hari with devotion as mantras. Around eight people can stand and watch this spectacular sight as there is very little space in there. Others need to wait in the water for their turn.

The water has sulphur in it and is said to have healing properties for people having skin problems. This temple is especially visited by many couples seeking children. As this is one of its kind temple, the overall experience can be thrilling & adventurous.

It is one of the main attractions of Bidar. The Narasimha Jhira Cave Temple is known for its beautiful architecture and is considered to be very sacred. The temple in situated in a cave where the water runs up to 300 metres.

Narasimha Jharni is a tubular spring. Though Bidar is at an elevation, the temple is at a lower level. It is located amidst the slopes of the hilly terrain. The lateritic rock formation under the plateau enables percolation of surface water. Bidar urban plateau is of irregular shape, land stretching about 35 km in length and 20 km in width. The plateau consists of red laterite rocky crust, of a depth varying from 30 m to 150 m supported on impervious trap base. This has resulted in springs at the cleavages between trap and laterite rocks. Such water springs can be observed in Bidar also at Guru Nanak Jhira Sahib Gurudwara, Papanasha Shiva Temple etc.

As per the legend, the temple of Narasimha Jhira the mighty Lord Narasimha first killed Hiranyakashipu and then proceeded to slay the demon Jalasura who was a staunch devotee of Lord Shiva. After being killed by Lord Narasimha, the demon Jalasura turned into water and started flowing down the feet of the Lord Narasimha. And to this day water keeps flowing from lord’s feet and fills the cave.

So, to reach the lord one has to wade through a 300 feet long cave, with water about 4 feet deep. Bats hanging from the cave’s ceiling add to the thrill. Lighting and ventilation have been recently installed. You’ll need to take a quick bath in the water fountain located outside the Narasimha Jhira Cave temple.

At the the end of the cave houses two deities – Lord Narasimha and a Shiva Linga which the demon Jalasura had worshipped.is seen. Around eight people can stand and watch this spectacular sight as there is very little space here. Others will need to wait in the water.

To facilitate the devotees, the cave temple has been Air conditioned and Electrified for lighting systems The temple is open from 8AM to 6PM. The facilities at the temple are planned in a systematic way to draw more visitors. Creation of parking space, multi-purpose hall, rooms, overhead tank to ensure adequate water supply to the devotees and a percolation tank to make use of the water coming out of the cave has been taken up. A new approach road to the temple is being constructed to make a “systematic” entry to the temple. The pre-existing entry was not according to Vaastu. Now they are not allowing pilgrims to enter the cave as the water flow is slow.

4.20 Mudigere Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple

Mudigere Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple,Hassan Taluk, Mudigere, Karnataka 573118 10-09-2016. Details of the temple are given in my earlier Blog : Hoysala Temples Trail – Must Visit Ancient Central Karnataka Temples Part 4

4.21 Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Nagamangala

Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple , Nagamangala, Karnataka 571432 Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple is located at , Nagamangala, Karnataka at a distance of 120 kms from Bangalore and 60 kms from Mysore..This Temple is dedicated to Lord Vishnu, and is situated to the west of the famous Saumyakeshava Temple, Nagamangala. It is one of the 800 Narasimha temples in India.

The Temple Nagamangala was earlier called as Phani Pura or Paniparaha Kshetra (city of snakes) which later got changed to Nagamangala. However, in the inscriptions, the place is referred as Vira-Ballala-chaturvedi-bhattaratnakara, the name adopted over a Hoysala ruler, Vira Ballala. It is an important town of the district, from industrial as well as religious perspective. It was a principal sheep breeding taluk of the district and also famous for its brass objects. These brass objects are mainly made by the Jain community at Bellur.

The place was also known as Anantha Kshetra. Nagamangala came into prominence duringthe rule of Hoysala King Vishnuvardhana when it became an important center of Vaishnava faith and received patronage from one of his queens, Bommaladevi. She renovated, repaired and bestowed grants to the Soumya Narayana temple at the town.

During the rule of Veera Ballala II , Nagamangala prospered as an Agrahara (place of Hindu religious studies)and had the honorific Vira Ballala Chaturvedi Bhattaratnakara. As per local folklore, the town and the templeswere built by a prince named Jaga Deva Raya, belonging to the family of the Mysore rulers. The above folkloreis not true in historicity. The epigraphical evidences records Ganga king Marasimha II, who ruled between963 – 975 CE. The town was under the rule of Western Chalukyas, Gangas, Hoysalas, Vijayanagara and postVijayanagara rulers.

The temple consists of a sanctum, antarala, navaranga, maha mandapa and mukha mandapa. The sanctum hasa circumbulatory path around it. The sanctum houses an idol of Yoga Narasimha. The idol is very simple in appearance.. Idols of Vishakasena and Naga are present in the Navaranga There is an opening in the floor in front of the Naga idol It is believed to be a hole of an ancient Naga.The garbhagriha has a pradakshina-patha, thus putting the temple under santhara category.

An idol of Yoga-Narasimha is placed inside the garbhagriha. The idol is devoid of any ornamentation and gives a very plain appearance. An idol of Vishvaksena is placed in the navaranga.

4.22 Sri Ugra Narasimha Swamy Temple, Maddur

Sri Ugra Narasimha Swamy Temple, NH275, Fort, Maddur, Karnataka 571428

Sri Ugra Narasimha Swamy Temple is located at Maddur, Karnataka 80 kms from Bangalore. in between Bangalore and Mysore. It is one of the 1000+ Narasimhar Temples in India.

As per legend, during Dwapara Yuga the entire land of Maddur stretching to several kilometers were known as Arjunapuri where the crucial final periods of Mahabharata war reportedly took place when Pandava brothers along with Lord Krishna fought with Kauravas. During the first stages of war in this region, seeing killing spree on both camps, mentally tired Arjun requested to Lord Krishna to show him the form of Lord Narasimha so that he would gain mental peace and continue the war since he was losing internal strength to fight the enemies who were after all his own family members.

Lord Krishna understood the mental conflict of Arjun who has been weakened by the sight of his own clan falling dead and realized that Arjun retain his ferocious fighting spirit against the enemies, lest the purpose of the war would be lost. At the same time Lord Krishna knew that he cannot appear before him in the true form of Ugra Narasimha as Arjun would be further terrified by the sight of the horrific act and lose his mental agility to fight.

Therefore Lord Krishna asked Lord Brahma to show him in some manner the manifestation of Lord Narasimha in his true form so that Arjun’s desire can be fulfilled.

Lord Brahma, instantly installed a stone statue of Lord Narasimha in lively form having three eyes and eight hands in which two hands held Hiranyakashibu tightly in his lap while two other hands took out his intestine after slaying Hiranyakashibu and wearing it as a garland. The rest of the four hands held the weapons of Lord Vishnu. While Baktha Prahlada stood below his feet on the right side, divine Garuda was seen sitting in the left side. At the same time an unknown voice told Arjun that the third eye of the Lord came out when the Lord was engaged in the annihilation of Hiranyakashibu. Generally only Lord Shiva has three eyes and one can rarely see Lord Narasimha having three eyes. Though the appearance of the Lord is very aggressive to look at, still when devotees pray to him, the Lord gives strength and inner peace.

Arjun witnessed the ferocious form of the Lord and it appeared as if Lord himself appeared before him live. His mind firmed up with the grace of Lord Narasimha to continue the fight more vigorously to uphold good against evils. When he opened his eyes, he saw Lord Krishna standing before him smiling. The same place became a temple centuries later..

Puranas say that Sri Kadamba Rishi lived here and worshipped the Lord due to this it is also know as Kadamba Kshetra and Nadi which is flowing here is also know as Kadamba Nadi.

It is a small and compact temple. Lord gives darshan with eight hands and Three eyes which is a very rare sight. With two hands he is tearing the Asura Hiranya Kasipu who is lying in his lap, with other two hands he is wearing the Hiranya Kasipu’s Intestine as Mala, then in the other two hands he is holding Pasha and Ankusha and in other two hands as usual he is holding the Shanku and Chakara. At the feet of lord Garuthaman stands on left side and on the right Bhaktha Prahalada is standing in Posture doing Namskaram.

It is said that Lord’s third eye came when he was doing the Hiranya Kasipu’s Samhara. It is very rare to see a Thinetra Dari Narasimha ( Here we can recollect the the Narasimha Sostra which describes the lord Narasimha as Jwala Kesham , Tri Netram)

Other deities in the temple are: Lord Srinivasa,, Matha Yashode breast feeding Lord Kuti Krishnan (a rarity ) Goddess Sowmiya Nayaki Goddess Narasimha Nayaki. Patabhishekam Ramar Udayavar, Namalwar and Swami Desikan.

Sri Ugra Narasimha Swamy Temple is located at Maddur, Karnataka 80 kms from Bangalore. in between Bangalore and Mysore. It is one of the 800+ Narasimhar Temples in India.

As per legend, during Dwapara Yuga the entire land of Maddur stretching to several kilometers were known as Arjunapuri where the crucial final periods of Mahabharata war reportedly took place when Pandava brothers along with Lord Krishna fought with Kauravas. During the first stages of war in this region, seeing killing spree on both camps, mentally tired Arjun requested to Lord Krishna to show him the form of Lord Narasimha so that he would gain mental peace and continue the war since he was losing internal strength to fight the enemies who were after all his own family members.

Lord Krishna understood the mental conflict of Arjun who has been weakened by the sight of his own clan falling dead and realized that Arjun retain his ferocious fighting spirit against the enemies, lest the purpose of the war would be lost. At the same time Lord Krishna knew that he cannot appear before him in the true form of Ugra Narasimha as Arjun would be further terrified by the sight of the horrific act and lose his mental agility to fight.

Therefore Lord Krishna asked Lord Brahma to show him in some manner the manifestation of Lord Narasimha in his true form so that Arjun’s desire can be fulfilled.

Lord Brahma, instantly installed a stone statue of Lord Narasimha in lively form having three eyes and eight hands in which two hands held Hiranyakashibu tightly in his lap while two other hands took out his intestine after slaying Hiranyakashibu and wearing it as a garland. The rest of the four hands held the weapons of Lord Vishnu. While Baktha Prahlada stood below his feet on the right side, divine Garuda was seen sitting in the left side. At the same time an unknown voice told Arjun that the third eye of the Lord came out when the Lord was engaged in the annihilation of Hiranyakashibu. Generally only Lord Shiva has three eyes and one can rarely see Lord Narasimha having three eyes. Though the appearance of the Lord is very aggressive to look at, still when devotees pray to him, the Lord gives strength and inner peace.

Arjun witnessed the ferocious form of the Lord and it appeared as if Lord himself appeared before him live. His mind firmed up with the grace of Lord Narasimha to continue the fight more vigorously to uphold good against evils. When he opened his eyes, he saw Lord Krishna standing before him smiling. The same place became a temple centuries later..

Puranas say that Sri Kadamba Rishi lived here and worshipped the Lord due to this it is also know as Kadamba Kshetra and Nadi which is flowing here is also know as Kadamba Nadi.

It is a small and compact temple. Lord gives darshan with eight hands and Three eyes which is a very rare sight. With two hands he is tearing the Asura Hiranya Kasipu who is lying in his lap, with other two hands he is wearing the Hiranya Kasipu’s Intestine as Mala, then in the other two hands he is holding Pasha and Ankusha and in other two hands as usual he is holding the Shanku and Chakara. At the feet of lord Garuthaman stands on left side and on the right Bhaktha Prahalada is standing in Posture doing Namskaram.

It is said that Lord’s third eye came when he was doing the Hiranya Kasipu’s Samhara. It is very rare to see a Thinetra Dari Narasimha ( Here we can recollect the the Narasimha Sostra which describes the lord Narasimha as Jwala Kesham , Tri Netram)

Other deities in the temple are: Lord Srinivasa,, Matha Yashode breast feeding Lord Kuti Krishnan (a rarity ) Goddess Sowmiya Nayaki Goddess Narasimha Nayaki. Patabhishekam Ramar Udayavar, Namalwar and Swami Desikan.

4.23 Nuggehalli Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Temple

Nuggehalli Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Temple,Nuggehalli, Karnataka 573131 Trikuta temple – Chennakesava on the west, Venumadhav on the south, and Laxmi Narasimha 09-09-2016 Details are given in my earlier Blog : Hoysala Temples Trail -Must Visit Ancient Central Karnataka Temples – Part 3

4.24 Srirangapattana – Narasimha Temple

Srirangapattana – Narasimha Temple, Karnataka 571415 Details of the temple are given in earlier Blog : 10 Weekend getaways from Bangalore – Part 1(3 Days and 30 Ancient temples)

4.25 Lakshminarayana Temple, Hosaholalu – Trikuta

Lakshminarayana Temple, Hosaholalu, SH 85, Hosaholalu, Karnataka 571426 – Trikuta temple – Lakshminarayana Venugopala, and Lakshmi Narasimha – 24-01-2009 and 16-10-2021 Details of the temple are given in my earlier Blog : 10 Weekend getaways from Bangalore – Part 4 (2 Days and 17 Ancient temples) To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here. Otherwise Continue

4.26 Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Gorur

Sri Yoga Narasimha Swamy Temple, Gorur, Karnataka 573120 Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : Hoysala Temples Trail – Must Visit Ancient Central Karnataka Temples Part 4

4.27 Sri Vardha Yoga Bhoga Narasimha swamy devasthana, Shanti Grama

Sri Vardha Yoga Bhoga Narasimha swamy devasthana, Hassan taluk, Shanti Grama, Karnataka 573220 09-09-2016 Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : Hoysala Temples Trail -Must Visit Ancient Central Karnataka Temples – Part 3

4.28 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Bhadravathi

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, RPX2+C7R, Kanaka Nagar, Bhadravathi, Karnataka 577301 Trikuta’ style, Lakshmi Narasimha, Venugopalaswamy and Purushothama. Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : Top 100 Hoysala, Chalukya Temples in Karnataka – Part 1 of 4 (15 Hoysala tempels)

4.29 Shri Lakshmi Narasimha Temple, Hampi

Shri Lakshmi Narasimha Temple, 8FH5+JHM, Hampi, Karnataka 583239 Ugra Narasimha – Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : 10 Weekend getaways from Bangalore – Part 5 (Hampi, Anegundi and Navabrindavana)

4.30 Shri Kanakachala Lakshmi Narasimha Temple,Kanakagiri

Shri Kanakachala Lakshmi Narasimha Temple, Kanakagiri Main Road, Kanakagiri, Karnataka 583283 18-12-2021 Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : Top 100 Hoysala, Chalukya Temples in Karnataka – Part 4 of 4 (25 Chalukya temples)

4.31 Narasimhaswamy temple, Holenarasipur

Narasimhaswamy temple, SH108, Holenarasipur, Karnataka 573211 (Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple 16-10-2021 Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : 10 Weekend getaways from Bangalore – Part 1(3 Days and 30 Ancient temples)

4.32 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Nonavinakere

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, 5H73+WF3, Nonavinakere, Karnataka 572224 09-09-2016 Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : Hoysala Temples Trail -Must Visit Ancient Central Karnataka Temples – Part 3

4.33 Gandi Narasimhaswamy Temple, Swamymalai Block

Gandi Narasimhaswamy Temple, Kudligi Rd, Swamymalai Block, Karnataka 583124 See details of the temple in my earlier Blog : Top 100 Hoysala, Chalukya Temples in Karnataka – Part 4 of 4 (25 Chalukya temples)

4.34 Sri Soumyakeshava Swamy Temple, Nagamangala, Trikuta Temple

Sri Soumyakeshava Swamy Temple, Nagamangala, Karnataka 571432 Trikuta Temple – Soumyakeshava, Narasimha & Krishna With Rukmani & Sathyabhama – 24-01-2009 and 15-10-2021 Details of the temple may be seen in my earlier Blog : 10 Weekend getaways from Bangalore – Part 4 (2 Days and 17 Ancient temples)

4.35 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Haranhalli

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple ,Unnamed Road, Singatagere, Karnataka 573122 (Haranhalli) See details of the temple in my earlier Blog : Hoysala Temples Trail – Must Visit Ancient Central Karnataka Temples Part 4 To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here.

4.36 Shri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Devasthana, Sondalagere

Shri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Devasthana, 12, Sondalagere, Karnataka 572126 Shri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Devasthana is located in Sondalagere, Karnataka at a distance of 68 Kms from Bangalore Railway Station and 93 Kms from Bangalore International Airport. It is one of the 1000+ Narasimha Temples in India.

Since Lord Narsimha an avatar of Maha Vishnu came from a Sthamba (pillar) to prove Bhakt Prahlada’s words, one can find many Narasimha temples associated with Sthamba. Shri Kambada Narasimha Swamy Devasthana in Sondalagere is one of them. The temple is located in the sleepy, quite village of Sondalagere. It is an ancient, small temple built in Chola period and west facing. The lord is in Shantha swaroopam – not Ugram (angry) . Two alwars Ramanujar & Madhwacharya are on both sides of Lord. One can do pradakshina of Lord in a paved path.

Sri Ramnavami is celebrated in a grand manner in the temple.

Temple timings are : Mon- Fri 9 am – 10 am- 6pm – 6.30 pm. Saturday 9 am – 2 pm, 6 pm- 6.30 pm. Gurukkal stays just opposite to the temple and so can be contacted for darshan / Pooja..

4.37 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swami Gudi, Sugganahalli

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swami Gudi, 545H+MX6, Sugganahalli, Karnataka 561101 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swami Gudi is located in Sugganahalli, Karnataka at a distance of 62 Kms from Bangalore Railway Station and 85 Kms from Bangalore International Airport. This temple is believed to be more than 1000 years old. It is one of the 1000+ Narasimha Temples in India.

Since Lord Narsimha an avatar of Maha Vishnu came from a Sthamba (pillar) to prove Bhakt Prahlada’s words, one can find many Narasimha temples associated with Sthamba. Shri Lakshmi Narasimha Swami Gudi in Sugganahalli is one of them. It is an ancient temple of Chola period with Dravidian architecture style temple This is a very rare temple in which Garuda is worshipped daily.

The consecrated murti of Lord Lakshmi Narasimha is in standing position facing west. Generally, Lakshmi Narasimha murti is in sitting position and facing east. The murti worshipped here thus does not follow the general rule. Garuda, the vahana of Lord Vishnu, is worshipped daily in the temple. It is quite a big temple; Thayar sannadhi and Krishna sannadhi are seperate.

There is a stone dwaja stambha in front of temple , the area covers about half an acre with ample space for parking . On entering , in front is a main sanctum of Lord Narasimha , surrounded by mantaps having idols of Hanuman , Navagraha. One can take a view of terrace gopuram taking the stairs. Temple environment is totally calm.

As per the Legend, Sage Shuka performed intense penance under a Badari tree in the place where the present day temple is located. The sage had the darshan of Narasimha murti along with Goddess Lakshmi. The murti Lakshmi Narasimha worshipped in the temple is in the same form in which Sage Suka had darshan.

Garuda is being worshipped daily here because Sage Shuka also had darshan of divine bird here. Devotees suffering from skin ailments and other diseases find relief after offering prayers to Garuda in the temple. The temple is also an excellent Sarpadosha Nivaran stal as it has the presence of Garuda.

There is a huge Elachi tree in the backyard of the temple, special offerings are made to the tree and to the footprints of Lord Narasimha found here.

Bramha Rathotsava observed for 11 days starting from Purva Phalguni Nakshatra in Phalgun month attracts thousands of devotees. A special fair held during the occasion. The Garudotsava observed on the sixth day of the festival during the period is the most important ritual. Other important festivals here are the Garuda Jayanti in February, Krishna Janmashtami in August and the Varalakshmi Puja.

Temple attracts local devotees , special chariot functions are conducted every year. It is believed , one is sure of fulfilling desires by offering prayers to diety with bhakti.

Temple timings : 10:30 AM to 1:30 PM and 6:30 PM to 8:30 PM. During Jathra and special occasions temple will be opened whole day. Contact Phone numbers : 7259896256,9945389826, 9901985343 080-7745002 (office) 9901480822 (Temple)

4.38 Sri Seebi Narasimhaswami temple

Sri Seebi Narasimhaswami temple, NH4, Seebi, Karnataka 572128 Sri Seebi Narasimhaswami temple is located in Seebi, Karnataka at a distance of 100 Kms from Bangalore Railway station and 117 Kms from Bangalore International Airport.

It is one of the 1000+ Narasimha Temples in India. See my Blog for the map of Narasimha temples with details of 25 Famous temples: https://kalyangeetha.wordpress.com/2018/03/23/map-of-narasimha-narasingh-temples/

Lord Narasimha is shaped larger than a linga, and is facing north east direction. Lord Narasimha is in the divine form of a shaligrama. Subsequently, this Shaligrama was also worshipped by Lord Sri Rama, for begetting issues. It is also said that Chandrahasa, the then king of Kuntala also worshipped the Narasimha Shaligrama for removal of obstacles.

As per the Legend, Seebi was the vanaprastra ashram of Shibi Chakravarthy, the grandson of Prahlad Maharaj, for whom Narasimha appeared in person to kill his evil father Hiranyakashipu. Shibi Chakravarthy wanted to worship Lord Narasimha and in return Lord Narasimha enshrined himself as Narasimha Shaligrama here. He is shaped larger than a linga, and is facing north east here. There is no visuals of narasimha and it is the shaligrama that is worshipped. Subsequently, this Shaligrama was also worshipped by Lord Sri Rama, for begetting issues. It is also said that Chandrahasa, the then king of Kuntala also worshipped the Narasimha Shaligrama for removal of obstacles.

As per another Legend, once a merchant carrying grain on bullocks stopped at Sibi. When a pot of grain was boiled on a projecting rock, its color turned blood red causing the merchant, his attendants and the buffalos to swoon. While in the unconscious state, the god Narasimha appeared in the merchant’s dream and informed him the rock was his abode and that the merchant should build a temple for him at that spot as atonement for desecrating his abode. A small temple was thus built by the merchant. In more recent times, the consecration of a larger temple over the pre-existing shrine was taken up by three wealthy brothers: Lakshminarasappa, Puttanna and Nallappa who were the sons of Kacheri Krishnappa, a Dewan in the court of King Tipu Sultan of the Mysore Kingdom. Story goes that Nallappa had a dream in which the god Narasimha promised him eternal happiness if a temple was raised where it stands today. The completion of the temple construction took ten years. The Narasimha Swamy temple is a simple yet elegant Dravidian structure built around the end of the 18th century.

The tower over the entrance is three tiered and the temple has a large prakara (bounding wall) which makes for a large court yard. The open mantapa (hall) leads to a closed mantapa (or navaranga) which has minor shrines for several deities: Rama, Ambegal Krishna, Sriranga (a form of Vishnu in the reclining posture), Narasimha (Vishnu with the head of a Lion), Ganesha and Saptamatrika.

The main attraction in the temple are the mural paintings on the ceiling and walls of the mukhamantapa (entrance hall) which depict courtly as well as religious themes such as scenes from the Hindu puranas (epics): the Bhagavata, the Narasimha Purana, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. The murals follow the same artistic idiom found in the murals of the Daria Daulat Bagh in Srirangapatna.

The murals on the walls and ceiling are divided into three rows: The first row depicts the Krishna Leela (“Krishna’s play”) of the god Krishna, the second row depicts a scene from the court of Maharaja Krishnaraja Wodeyar III with Nallappa (one of the sons of the Dewan Krishnappa) in attendance, while the third row depicts a scene from the court of Haidar Ali and his son Tipu Sultan with Kacheri Krishnappa, and Ravanappa and Venkatappa (maternal uncles of Nallappa who held high posts) in attendance. The ceiling of the main entrance mantapa has a mural in which the god Krishna plays the flute to other cowherd friends while watching Tipu Sultan fighting a Tiger. The ceiling has four beams each with a mural: the first depicts riderless horses followed by elephants; the second depicts horsemen wearing conical caps (common during the Vijayanagara era) with some horsman in gallop, others carrying flags and a couple on foot; the third depicts horseman, some riding and others on foot followed by elephants and a cart carrying cannons.

There is a Kalyani (Water Tank) called Gaja Pushkarini near the temple. It is said that the Gajendra Moksha episode happened here. Goddes Lokamba devi resides in the prakara of the temple. For unmarried boys and girls, there is a strong beleif that if a kalyanostavam is performed she bestows a spouse very fast.

Bramharatotsava is performed on Maasa Nakshatra, poorva palguna nakshatra of Magha Maasa. A grand Jaatre-Festival is conducted 3 days before and 3 days after the Bramharatotsava. Annual Special Days like Brahmostava, Mahabisheka, Kalyanostava etc :

Temple Timings : Sunday To Friday: 8:30 AM to 12:30PM, 3:30 PM to6:30PM; Saturday: 8:30 AM to 6:30PM, 8:30 AM to 12:30PM, 3:30 PM to6:30PM; Contact Phone numbers : +91-9141247344, Dharmakartha +91-9902919953

4.39 Sri Stambha Lakshmi Narasimha, Billur

Sri Stambha Lakshmi Narasimha ,V235+QJ7, Billur, Karnataka 563124 Sri Stambha Lakshmi Narasimha is located in Billur, Karnataka at a distance of 100 Kms from Bangalore Airport and 130 Kms from Bangalore Railway Station.

It is one of the 1000+ Narasimha Swamy temples in India. For more details, see my Blog : https://kalyangeetha.wordpress.com/2018/03/23/map-of-narasimha-narasingh-temples/

A beautiful Temple of Sri Stambha Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy is situated in this village. This was constructed during the Chola dynasty in the 13th century. As per the Legend, at the time of construction the idol was found to be growing day-by-day and also Gopurams & other constructions were becoming unstable due to the continuous growth of the Stambha (the pillar).

Then the Asthana Silpi hammered the idol with an iron rod and it was learnt that the growth had stopped since then. The depth of the lower part of the pillar under the ground is not known, but above the ground the upper part of the Stambha is 16 ft high on which the portrait of the Lord Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy along with shankhu and chakra is naturally engraved. There are clear evidences of the construction of the Mukha Mandapam during the reign of Sri Krishna Devaraya. The temple is being renovated with the initiative of residents of Billur.

Lord is Swamyambu(self manifested) in the pillar of thia temple is Shanta swaroopa with His consort Lakshmi. Ths small temple is on a small hillock – car can go upto the temple.

Temple timings : 7 am – 2 pm ,5 pm -7 pm; Contact Phone numbers : Raghavendra Archakar :7204286554; +91 80748 09324, +91 98456 93368 098863 43563 9886343569 To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here.

Index of Contents

Introduction

Google Map of Central & North Karnataka Temples

Google Maps of Implemented Tour Program Day 1 & 2

DAY 1 Hoysala Temples

Chenna Keshava Temple, Aralaguppe

Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple, Belavadi

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple,Javagal

Hoysaleshwara Temple,Halebeedu

Chennakeshava Temple, Belur

Amrutheshwara Temple, Amruthapura

DAY 2

Hoysala temples

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Bhadravathi

Sri Chintamani Narasimha Temple,Kudli

Rameswara Temple, Kudli

Kedareshvara Temple, Balligavi

Tripurantakeshwar Temple, Balligavi

Someshwara temple, Balligavi

Other Temples / Places

Kudli Sharadamba Temple

Tunga bhadra sangama Kudli

Rashtrakuta Temple

Shri Trimurthy Narayana temple, Shankrikoppa

Chalukya temple

Shri Shanteshwara Temple, Tilvalli

NOTE Since the Blog is lengthy, If you Click on any Title, you will be taken to the concerned paragragh by the link provided. Also you can return to the Index of Contents for which links have been provided at several places in the Blog.

1 Introduction

Karnataka is a veritable treasure chest of temples and monuments. In Northern part of Karnataka, Badami, Pattadakal and Aihole showcases the temple building skills of Badami Chalukyas. Hampi region of Vijayanagara dynasty. In Central part,Belur, Halabeid etc with its beautiful temples belonging to the Hoysala Empire. Western Chalukya Empire / Kalyani Chalukya in the Tungabhadra region – Dambal, Itagi, Lakkundi etc. This blog in 4 parts covers some of the above temples visited during 13 Dec 2021 to 20 Dec 2021 (8 Days) Part 1 describes temples covered on Days 1 & 2. Part 2 of the blog describes temples covered on Days 3 & 4. Part 3 of the blog describes temples covered on Day 5. Part 4 of the blog describes temples covered on Days 6,7 & 8.

In Central & Northern Karnataka, there could be more than 1000 Temples of architecture different from that of Chola, Pandya and Chera dynasty in South India.. It was very saddening to see several temples without idols in Garbagraha, many with idols damaged / disfigured by the Muslim invaders from time to time.The invaders not only looted all the valuables of the temples but also caused innumerable damage to temples and idols. Most of the temples have been reduced to the state of Monuments – for visitors to look at the architectural beauty only. The saving grace is that many temples have been handed over to the Archaeological department of Central / State Government. Poojas are being conducted in few temples and it is very nice to visit these temples. Temples berift of idols miss divinity. Hindu temples are not just prayer halls like Church or Mosque. God resides in the temples after elaborate and continous poojas. It will be great if the Government can ensure that Poojas are conducted at least in big temples (also by installing idols wherever missing / damaged).The great efforts of our ancestors in building magnificient temples should not go as waste – due to the unkindly acts of the invaders.

2 Google Map of North Karnataka Temples

Embedded Interactive Google Map of North Karnataka Temples is given below. By clicking on a location, photo of the temple, web links for more details of temple, Video (Youtube) links if any can be seen.

3 Google Maps of Implemented Tour Program Day 1 & 2

4 DAY 1 Hoysala temples

While one normally associates Hoysala temples with the magnifi cent ones in Belur and Halebid, Chenna Keshava Temple, Aralaguppe, Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple, Belavadi , Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple. Javagal and Amrutheshwara Temple, Amruthapura are yet other examples of the brilliance of the Hoysala school of architecture covered in Day 1. Poojas are being conducted in the previous 3 temples mentioned above.We had visited Belur and Halebid earlier and so included in this blog. To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here. Otherwise Continue

4.1 Chenna Keshava Temple, Aralaguppe

Chenna Keshava Temple,7J28+V5C, Aralaguppe, Karnataka 572212 Chenna Keshava Temple,located at Aralaguppe, Karnataka at a distance of 140 kms from Bangalore and 60 km from Hassan. The temple was built around 1250 during the rule of the Hoysala Empire King Vira Someshwara.The temple is a protected monument under the Karnataka state division of the Archaeological Survey of India.

Photographs and videos cannot truly convey the real beauty of this place. You have to visit it in person to have the true experience.

It is an Ekakuta temple with Lord Vishnu in the form of Chenna Keshava. There is a seperate sannadhi for Ugra Narasimha. This temple is simple and elegant, an Ekakuta type (jagati), housed on a raised star-shaped poly angled platform. Architecturally, the plan is 16-star pointed (stellate) with a good design with tower and shrine.

Aralaguppe flourished under the Ganga dynasty in the 9th century and then under the Kalyana Chalukyas and then the Hoysalas in the 13th century. It’s important place in these kingdoms can be seen through its spectacular temples. The older one, built by the Gangas is called Kalleshwara temple and the other is the Chenna Keshava temple that was built under the rule of the Hoysalas.

Starting from the top, the friezes depict hansa (birds) in the first frieze, makara (aquatic monsters) in the second, epics and other stories in the third (which in this case is from the Hindu epic Ramayana and stories of Krishna), leafy scrolls in the fourth, horses in the fifth and elephants at the bottom. The cella (sanctum) contains an image of Keshava (a version of the Hindu god Krishna) raised on a large pedestal. The image of Vishnu in the garbhagriha is magnificen

At every angle, there is an intricately carved elephant. As usual, the temple has six pattikas, with carvings of Elephants, Horses, Creepers, Puranic tales, Crocodiles, and Swans, counting from bottom to the top. The outer wall has amazing carvings of Lord Vishnu and his consorts and various other forms of Vishnu.

There is an elaborately carved doorway and ornately carved mandapa ceiling. The mandapa ceiling is an engineering marvel .The statue of Lord Chenna Keshava on an elevated pedestal inside the garbha griha is another work of pure art.

The vimana of this temple is constructed in a full star deign. Its navaranga is the only sapta-ratha hall among the Hoysala creations. The vimana measures 4.8m while the temple as a whole measures about 20 m. With its attributes like series of bands, double eaves on external walls and profuse embellishments, the temple would be assigned to the matures Hoysala architectural phase.

4.2 Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple, Belavadi

Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple (Trikutaachala), 7XJW+R78, Belavadi, Karnataka 577146 Sri Veeranarayana Swamy Temple (Trikutaachala), is located at Belavadi (also known as Ekachakranagara), Karnataka at a distance of 225 kms from Bangalore and 30 km from Chikamagalur and 11 kms from Halebidu,. The Veeranarayana temple is a nationally protected monument of India, managed by the Archaeological Survey of India.

While one normally associates Hoysala temples with the magnifi cent ones in Belur and Halebid, , this temple is yet another example of the brilliance of the Hoysala school of architecture. Belavadi is an ancient town which has been referenced in the Mahabharatha andis believed to be the place where Bheema killed the demon Bakasura and protected the village..

The temple has three separate square sanctums connected through an unusually large square ranga-mandapa (103 feet). The main shrine faces east and is dedicated to Viranarayana (Vishnu). The north facing shrine is dedicated to Venu gopala, while the south facing shrine is for Yoga-Narasimha. (Trikutaachala)

Built with soap stone this architectural gem is a sight of stupendous beauty and was built in theearly 13th century by king Veera Ballala II. This ornate trikuta (three shrined) temple was built in 1200 C.E. by Hoysala Empire King Veera Ballala II. The material used is Soapstone. Each of the three shrines has a complete superstructure (tower on top of shrine) and is one of the largest temples built by the Hoysala kings. While the famous temples at Belur and Halebidu are known for their intricate sculptures, this temple is known for its architecture The entrance is awe inspiring with aslanting roof fl anked by two massive stone elephants on either side.

The plan of the temple is unique in that two of the shrines face each other and are located on either side of a wide and spacious open mantapa (hall) containing thirty seven bays. The temple complex has two closed mantapas, one with thirteen bays and another with nine bays, at the end of which is a central shrine. This third shrine is an older construction and exhibits a standard architectural idiom containing all the basic elements of a Hoysala temple. The inner walls of the older shrine are plain, but its roof is well decorated.

In all, the temple complex has fifty nine bays (hence it has many pillars), most of which are lathe-turned and bell shaped, while a few have decorative carvings on them. According to Foekema, the outer wall of the temple is of the “old style”, with one eaves running around the temple where the superstructure meets the wall of the shrine. Below this are miniature decorative towers on pilasters (aedicule). This is followed by a second eves. A panel of Hindu deities and their attendants (frieze) are below this eves followed by a set of five moldings that form the base of the wall

The temple complex has two closed mandapas with 13 and 9 bays respectively. The oldest shrine is of Veera Narayana Swamy and is housed in the sanctum of the inner mandapam. Theouter mandapam has the shrines of Lord Krishna (called Gopal Krishna as He is holding a flute) and Yoga Narasimha and are opposite to each other. The outer hall is replete with several pillars which are bell shaped. The figures that stand out are the ones of Krishna dancing on Kaliya, and of Garuda. The central shrine has an idol of Veera Narayana, with four arms, standing on a lotus. This figure is eight foot tall. This is the central shrine, and the oldest.

The northern shrine has a seven foot tall idol of Yoganarasimha in a sitting posture, holding the Shanka and Chakra, with Sridevi and Bhoodevi standing on either side. The Prabhavati is carved with the ten avatars of Vishnu.

The southern shrine has an enchanting eight foot image of Venugopala Krishna, standing with his right leg in front of his left leg, leaning against a tree, is blissfully playing his flute. He is surrounded by various figures – Shravan Kumaras with folded hands, Gopikas, who are so lost in the music that one has forgotten to cover herself properly, a cow feeding her calf, lost in the music, Gopalas who are dancing to the Venu Gana. On either side of Venu Gopala stand Rukmini and Satyabhama.

The halls are filled with ancient idols and relics that reflect a glorious past. The cielings have ornate carvings and detailed patterns that are testimony to the superior craftsmanship that existed during those times.

The outer walls of the temple are adorned with intricate carvings and running pilasters withequally grand towers on top. The sculptures are a treat for the eyes with the camera doing littlejustice to the splendid work on display..

One of the most unique properties of this temple is that on 23rd March (Equinox) each year, themorning rays of the sun fall directly on the Garbagriha from the entrance door, which is at a distance of 270 feet.

Though I had contacted Archakar one day before, he locked the temple and went away on his private work Prashant Bharadwaj – Bhattar 9449707098. Temple timings are : 8am to 6pm. 2pm to 4 pm closed

4.3 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple, Javagal

Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple.573125, Javagal, Karnataka 573125 Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy Temple.is located at Javagal, Karnataka at a distance of 225 kms from Bangalore and 20 km from Halebidu is a 13th century Hoysala era temple gem and is the ancestral village of Indian cricketer Javagal Srinath. Daily puja, mangalarti and archana is offered in the temple.Contact Srivatsan Bhattar, Mob: 9448894575

It is a Trikuta temple – the main deity of this temple is Sridhara. The other two shrines are dedicated to Venugopala and Lakshmi Narasimha . As the main deity of this temple is Sridhara, some people also refer this temple to as Sridhara templeIt was completed between 1250–1260 A.D. by King Vira Someshwara of the Hoysala Empire. This temple is a protected monument under the Karnataka state division of the Archaeological Survey of India.

The temple is a compact illustration of a square plan typical of Hindu temple architecture, but one where the three sanctums share a common mandapa (hall). These sanctums are dedicated to Lakshminarasimha, Sridhara and Venugopala. It is notable for its lavish artwork consisting of over 100 panels, all intricately carved both outside and inside. Many of these panels depict legends from the Ramayana.

Like most Hoysala era temples, the Lakshmi Narasimha temple at Javagal stands on a jagati (raised platform), beautiful moulding friezes and sculptures on the outer walls and lathe turned pillars, sukanasi and garbha griha on the inside. Where it differs from the other temples is that even though it is home to three shrines, it has only one shikhara. And its outer wall panel sculptures, reliefs and friezes are folkish in character and much different from the other Hoysala temples where the work is more intricate, well planned and laid out.

The temple plan is square, similar to other Hoysala temples. It is a trikuta (three shrined) temple, one where only the middle shrine has a superstructure (tower or shikhara) and a sukhanasi (nose or tower over the vestibule) The three equal size shrines are all square in plan and are connected by a common closed hall (mantapa). The closed hall is preceded by an open porch. The lateral shrines are connected directly to the hall while the middle shrine has a vestibule that connects the sanctum (cella) to the hall.

The temple stands on a platform (jagati), a feature common to many Hoysala temples. The platform, in addition to its visual appeal, is meant to provide devotees a path for circumambulation (pradakshinapatha) around the temple. It closely follows the outline of the temple, giving it a good elevated look.

While entering the temple, one sees a mantapa with two elephant balustrades that were built in the Vijayanagara period. Then, one is greeted by a Garuda sthamba, two dwarapalas Jaya and Vijaya and then the ranga mantapa with the lathe turned pillars. From here, one can enter the main temple complex and its three shrines. If one stands in the vestibule, straight ahead would be the sukanasi and the garbha griha of Sridhara, to your left would be the shrine of Venugopala and to your right would be the shrine of Lakshmi Narasimha. The sukanasi and the vestibule connecting the 3 shrines have beautiful carvings, ceiling work and sculptures.

On the outside of the temple, as one takes a clockwise pradakshinam (circumambulation), one will notice the six equal width rectangular moldings or friezes close to your feet. Staring from the top, these friezes depict hansa (birds), makara (crocodiles), Hindu epics and other stories, leafy scrolls, horses and elephants. Right above these friezes, you will see close to 140 beautifully carved sculptures that include Chaturvimsati murtis (24 different aspects of Lord Maha Vishnu), Hari hara, Brahma, Goddess Parvati, Tandav Ganesha and more. Most of these sculptures were sculpted by the famous Hoysala temple artisan Mallitamma. To return to the Index of Contents, Click Here. Otherwise Continue

4.4 Hoysaleshwara Temple, Halebeedu

Hoysaleshwara Temple,6X6V+XJW, Halebeedu, Karnataka 573121; Hoysaleshwara Temple,is located at , Halebeedu, Karnataka at a distance of 215 kms from Bangalore and at a distance of 150 kms from Mysore.

Hoysaleswara Temple is dedicated to Lord Shiva.The construction of the temple began in the 12th century by the King of Hoysala.The Hoysala Empire and its capital Dorasamudra was invaded, plundered and destroyed in early 14th century by the Delhi Sultanate armies of Alauddin Khilji, with Belur and Halebidu becoming the target of plunder and destruction in 1326 CE by another Delhi Sultanate army of Sultan Muhammad bin Tughlaq . Hoysaleswara Temple witnessed ransack of loot and raid by the the Muslim armies. After the horrifying incident, the temple was reduced to rubble and fell into the state of sheer neglect.

The famous temple derived its name from the King Vishnuvardhana Hoysaleswara, who built the temple. A large amount of contribution was received from the Shaivas for the construction of the temple. It was built to compete with the Chennakesava temple which was under construction as a Vaishnava temple. The Hoysaleswara Temple is surrounded by ponds, mantapas and lakes. It is well known for the sculptures and architecture of Hoysala period.

Halebidu temple is another great example of temple architecture the twin temples of Hoysaleshwara, Kedareshwara built by Vishnuvardhana and Ballala-II at Halabidu. Sequences from Ramayana, Mahabharatha & Bhagavatha are depicted on the outer walls of these temples. The efficiency and experience of the sculpture, who had carved these stories in stone is bewitching.

The temple has exclusive carvings and has a plan with two shrines, one for the King and one for the queen. It has about thousand figures on the walls which depict scenes of Mahabharata and Ramayana. It reflects the Hoysala architecture and was built in soapstone. The outer walls of this temple have intricate carvings and the temple has been described as an outstanding example of Hindu architecture.

The temple has four porches for entry and the main shrine faces on the east. There are exquisite sculptures and paintings inside the temple. There is an image of a dancing Ganesha at the entrance of the temple. There are more than 240 images in the temple and no other temple has these many intricate sculptures.

The superstructure on the shrines is known as ‘Sunakasi’, which used to be a row of ornamented miniature roofs on top of the attics of the hall, are all gone astray. Even the towers of the shrines are not there. The temple was constructed at a height to grant adequate horizontal and vertical space to illustrate large and small sculptures.

The most interesting part of the temple is the Garuda Sthamba, which is a rare pillar that depicts the history of the bodyguards that lived with the Kings in olden days. These bodyguards committed suicide on the death of their master and this pillar pays homage to a bodyguard named Kuruva Lakshma who killed himself after the death of his master. The event is narrated in detail on the pillar. This temple has been listed as a heritage site by the UNESCO.

4.5 Chennakeshava Temple, Belur

Chennakeshava Temple, Temple Rd, Belur, Karnataka 573115 Chennakeshava Temple is located at Belur, Karnataka at a distance of 224 Kms from Bangalore is one of the grandest examples of Hoysala architecture,.It is one of the Pancha Narayana Kshetras of Karnataka: Thondanur Nambi Narayana, Melukote Cheluvanarayana, Veeranarayana in Gadag, Keertinarayana in Talakadu, and Vijayanarayana or Chennakeshava in Belur.

The Chennakeshava Temple was a centrepiece of the Hoysala kingdom and it is believed to be closely related to the military achievements of the king who commissioned it in 1117 AD, King Vishnuvardhana. The king had fought wars with the Western Chalukyas and had also defeated the Cholas. The temple was built after the land’s best architects and artists were recruited and engaged in producing new designs and styles that would be the hallmark of the complex.

The Chennakesava temple is a fine example of fine quality work of art in stone. There are more than 80 Madanika sculptures in the temple, dancing, hunting, standing under canopies of trees and so on. The 4 Madanika figures (striking elegant dancing poses) on the wonderfully engraved columns of Navaranga are unique creations of Hoysala workmanship. The Garbhagriha is stellar in shape and its zigzag walls make the figures of 24 forms of Vishnu look different at different times of the day due to light.

The temple was built by master craftsmen – Dasoja and Chavana, a father and son duo, hailing from Balliganve, a centre of Kalyana Chalukya art in Shimoga district. It is said that Shantaladevi, the accomplished queen of King Vishnuvardhana is the model for one of the sculptures in the Vavaranga – Darpana Sundari. This work of art alone, speaks for the beauty of the magnificient temple. The temples of Kappe Chennigaraya, Soumyanayaki, Andal and other Vaishnava manifestations surround this main temple. Belur also has a samadhi believed to be of Raghavanka, the celebrated Kannada poet of the 13th century.

As one enters this vast complex, a large rajagopura or gate arches above. The centre-piece the temple sits in the centre, facing the east, following the most fol