Have you ever experienced the beauty of Indian architecture in its Temple form. Temple is a religious place dedicated for worship but temples in India are more than just that. They are a personification of our culture, art, our community and beliefs. Each structure has a purpose and every stone placed tells you a story.

Am here to share one such story of a hidden gem built in the 13th century, the Chennakeshava Temple. It stands tall even today glorifying the Hoysala architecture.

Being from a south Indian family means, you spend most of your summer vacations visiting different temples and prominent pilgrimages. Same goes with me but like any other child I was always bored and wished to visit some exotic touristy place far away until I grew up and realized very late, how fortunate I have been to have spend time amongst these marvels i.e. Indian Temples .

And today I can not emphasize enough to anyone who wants to know about my country, culture or our history to visit these places of worship where every stone carving is an exemplary representation of innovation and heritage our people carried.

Chennakeshava Temple, Somanathapura

I am not qualified to speak on the vast subject of Indian architecture but I am an enthusiast who would love to share her experience as a naïve observer, who stumbled upon this hidden gem near Mysore.

The chennakeshava Temple was built by Somanatha Dandanayaka, a general of the Hoyasala kingdom in 1258 CE. Well, history and I have never been on the same page but when you see the most delicate designs carved on hard stones, you are intrigued to know who made this wonder possible.

The Hoyasala craftsmanship is significantly complex with its angles and projections. This temple has an unique shape with a outer base layer which acts as a pathway for the visitors to circumvent the shrines.

The Stella plan is the most characteristic feature of Hosyala architecture. This temple is a collation of multiple small stupas connected internally and each shrine looks like a star which enhances the detailing of sculptures when light hits at different angles craved on the outer sanctum.

Each pillar has an intricate and unique yet very delicate designs which are impossible to attain even today with the most modern machinery and to think such embellishments where achieved through crude tools available in the 12th century is astonishing.

The artisans and architects were clever to source the the locally available soft stones in South Karnataka known as the soapstone to crave elaborate designs on structures and intricate detailing on the shilas creating their own unique style in temple construction.

The local craftsmen were able to add in the tiniest details such as fingernails or a frill to the statues on the walls enhancing the carvings.

There are multiple ceilings, each with completely different design. It is pleasantly surprising for someone like me, who is used to the big Gopurams and gigantic pillars generally attributed to Hindu temples, to come across the various stories and creatures depicted in microscopic details on these enormous stones.

The skilled sculptors sculpted tales from Hindu puranas, animals, gods and goddesses on the outer sanctum.

The whole temple is amalgamation of 3 shrines each dedicated to different avataras of Lord Vishnu Keshava, Janardhana and Venugopala.

Unfortunately some structures are broken and some part of the temple destroyed due to invasions of various kings. The main idol is missing and others are damaged. Hence no worship or prayers are conducted in this temple. I have not been able to do any justification to this opulence structure.

We are fortunate to have such wonderful places within our reach and I cannot wait to visit other such marvels of our country. I hope to visit the other pillars of Hoyasala architecture, the famous temples of Belur and halebid.

Hope you have a chance to visit this marvel as well 🙂

My recent visit to the beautiful city of Jaipur has been so impactful that I cannot stop thinking about it. You would have understood my love for this city, if you have already read my looonnnggg (too short if you ask me 😛) article on the trip. Didn’t read it yet??? No worries! Sharing the link below 😊 Do read for more insights!!

https://perspectivebug.in/2022/12/10/mystery-myths-and-magnificence/

Without swiveling much, let’s get back to our list. Trust me when I say Jaipur has abundance of activities for everyone and below are few:

Historic expedition: Jaipur as a city has an abundance of monuments, each with a unique purpose for which it was built and a mesmerizing story to tell. One must take their time in visiting each of these monuments. They are well preserved and maintained.

Monument List:

Hawa Mahal

City Palace

Albert Hall Museum

Jantar Mantar

Amer Fort

Jaigahr Fort

Nahargarh fort

Panna Meena Kund

Pro Tip: Hire a guide ( They charge between ₹100-₹400) to help you navigate and understand the history and significance of these beautiful structures.If you are a solo traveler and prefer to tour on your own, Wikipedia has all the info you need and more. Still the stories these Guides have to share is a different experience.

Food: Simple yet complex is the only way I can describe Rajasthani food. High on calories but light on your tummy. Do not miss out the typical rajasthani thali for a wholesome meal or plethora of snacks/tidbits the streets of Jaipur has to offer. Few of our favorite spots are:

Rawat Mistan Bhandar: Pyaaz ki kachori, Ghewar with Rabdi and the Mirchi vada.

Lassiwala: Serves one of the best lassi. Must try their malai lassi, they do offer flavored lassi as well.

Masala chowk: Must try masala tea from Gulab chand chaiwala and the jalebis from Samrat.

Rajasthani Thali: The best I had was from chowki Dhani. And the other was from a beautiful restaurant in Amer Fort 1135 AD where food was served in a silver thali. Both were delicious in their own way.

Pro Tip: Panipuri is a must have in this city and street vendors are the best option to get tasty food.

Shopping: I cannot emphasize enough how amazing the shopping is in Jaipur. There are traditional bazaars (Market places) with small and large vendors selling textiles, footwear, trinkets and souvenirs and what not. The street shopping could take up your whole day, hence plan well and enjoy the walk around these ancient lanes.

There are Government authorized or the Royal Family backed shops in most of the major tourist places with a wide variety of options and tax benefits.

City Palace: The city palace has shops which are reasonable and authentic backed by the royal family. Must check things:

Pashmina Shawl

Rajasthani Razais/Bedspreads

Sarees

Jaigarh Fort:

Meenakari Jewellery (Beautiful Bangle collection)

Footwear

100 gram shirts

Amer Fort:This place has Government sanctioned outlets where the owners show you how the famous Rajasthani block printing is done with vegetable colors. Do check out their sarees varying from Bandani in different materials to bamboo sarees and Multani-mitti saree which is made to keep the body cool during summers.

Pro Tip: Do not hesitate to bargain 😉 and do not fall for the over persuasive but sweet salesmen.

Night life: All the tourist spots have marvelous lights set up and most of them are open to tourists till 9pm-10pm. Jaipur has amazing hangout places for night owls.

We could visit only 2 such places, one of which is Bar Palladio, an amazing bar and restaurant offering Italian cuisine. While its neighbor Shikaar Bagh offers more variants with great service and amazing cocktails.

Getting Around: Jaipur has these amazing bright and colorful electric rickshaws to travel with in the city. For visiting forts and palaces beyond the city limits, , I would suggest hiring a taxi as it is very difficult to find an Ola or Uber while returning.

There are many more wonderful places in this incredible city which we could not cover. So do explore and let me know what I missed😄

P.S I could cover all these places in 3 days including travel.

City that lives and breaths royalty – Jaipur

“The first condition of understanding a foreign country is to smell it.” – Rudyard Kipling

Step into the world of kings, queens and palaces and you are immediately transported into the era of the Kachwahas- the dynasty that made their mark in Indian history and the city Jaipur which stands tall and majestic till day, ready to recite the long lost tales of its makers to those who lend their ears.

Words do not suffice the beauty this city holds. The culture upheld by the proud but humble people of this land is so refreshing that any traveler would find themselves overwhelmed and at the same time crave to devour everything the city has to offer.

Jaipur named after its founder Sawai Jai Singh II is the city that offers a great blend of old and new catering to all kinds of travelers. It has been a representative of modern thinking in ancient times where the then kings planned and built the city to improve the lives of their subjects and cater to the needs of a growing population. Built in 1727, the city is based on the scientific and architectural principles per the ancient shilpa sharatas. Jaipur till day is recognized as one of the best planned cities of the country.

My visit to this alluring place happened only because of my dear husband who is equally passionate about such age old places and antique collectibles. His desire to own a gramophone and not any but to buy it from one of the hidden jewels of Jaipur and a connoisseur of musical instruments Aziz Bhai, led us to our own little adventure in the pink city.

As soon as you enter Jaipur, you are greeted with the hustle and bustle of city traffic and urban chaos to reach their destination like any other city but as you travel through this clutter, you unveil the glory and glam this city held under the reign of Kachwaha Rajputs. Each gate wall has a story to tell and every part of the old Jaipur is covered in a beautiful terracotta pink. Our stay for this short trip was going to be Narain Niwas Palace Hotel. We wanted to experience the elegance of royalty and this hotel surpassed our expectations. Narain Niwas was built by General Amar Singh Ji in 1928 as a country residence and was later converted into a hotel which offers exquisite rooms, ambience and great service.

Eager to get his hands on his dream gal (hehe i mean the gramophone obviously!!) My husband dragged me to Ramganj Bazar where we met with the maestro himself, Aziz Bhai from Gramophone and Radio house (shop no. 33). I was surprised by the simplicity and charm this old man and his shop held. It is evidently a very old and tiny shop which at the first glance looks like a shabby place but holds hidden treasures.

This man values a good conversation more than money. With a sweet smile he narrates his life story, about his father who was a ghost writer and a witty poet with four wives. And how he has always been invested in the gramophones so much so that he manufactures the intricate machinery needed for the instrument and fixes any old musical instrument with his own caring hands. My husband made a new friend in Aziz bhai and bought a rare round bottomed Gramophone. Bidding our farewell and promising stay in touch we ventured into the streets of Jaipur.

Street shopping must be one of the best things about Jaipur. The streets are filled with small vendors selling souvenirs, silver jewelry, colorful garments, puppets and the very famous razais (Quilts) which are extremely soft and light. Be mindful of the quality and as any shopping goes negotiation is the key 🙂

The other must do thing in these lanes is to savor the street food. The food in Jaipur has to be one of the best I have had. Please do not shy away from street stalls who sell Pani puris or Garam Garam pyaaz Kachoris.To even think of the delicious lassi and Jalebi brings water to my mouth.

Food contributes a lot to the culture of any place and it is true for Jaipur as well. The authentic Rajasthani thali is so soulful and heartwarming that each mouthful will leave you spellbound.

Our goal was met and we found what we were looking for and now was the time to explore the rich history of Jaipur through its forts and palaces.

Our first destination was Hawa Mahal, built intricately with 5 levels and was inspired by the shape of the crown of Lord Krishna. It was built for the queens to view processions, festivities and celebrations without any disturbance, as they followed a Purdah system, in which they were not allowed to be seen in the general public without a headcover.

The colorful glass windows and intricate Lattice Work at each level is noteworthy. Walking through these walls makes you wonder how people lived in the olden days.

A tour of the city palace provides few answers to your thoughts by showcasing the lives led by the royal family through enclosed cases which hold the royal paintings, attire, weapons and other everyday articles giving you a glimpse of the past.

Our next destination was the famous Amer fort, which acted as home to the Rajput Royal family before moving to Jaipur. The walls recite the hardships the fort faced and how it survived the political power struggles in its days. One of the most distinguished features of this fort is the amalgamation of Rajput architecture smoothly with the mughlai influences. A sheesh mahal is the main attraction of this fort. Each structure has beautiful doors each with its unique and meaningful designs.

Amer fort offers a beautiful light and sound show which helps in understanding the history of this region. The show has an intricate narration with effective light effects transporting you to the glorified days of Amer Fort and its kingdom.

Other but most recently built forts we had the chance to visit were Nahargarh fort and Jaigarh fort. Both these forts stood to protect their capital Jaipur. The former acted as a place of retreat while the latter acted as a center for training and defense.

Do take your time in visiting each of these monuments as the strategy used while building and the intelligence of utilizing nature to their advantages can be seens evidently. The use of rainwater harvesting and the filtration systems built to cater to varied water usage or the natural air coolers placed utilizing the natural breeze offered by the mountains and many such complexities implemented centuries ago without the aid of modern technology is truely astonishing and commendable.

Bidding farewell to this place was hard but we did end up packing lots of memories and souvenirs and promising to explore the other splendid parts of Rajasthan.

All in all, this was one the most memorable trips and would remain so for a long time. So what are you waiting for, pack your bags and as Rajasthan popularly says “Padharo maare des” 🙂