1

Day : Banglore

Arrival at Bangalore airport and transfer to hotel. The city is known as silicon valley of East. Afternoon visit Government Secretariat – the imposing edifice is built entirely of dressed Bangalore granite. Also visit Lal Bagh, a beautiful botanical garden sprawling over 240 acres. Overnight stay.

2

Day : Bangalore – Sravanbelagola – Hassan (200 Km, 4 Hours)

Morning leave for Hassan. Stop en-route to visit Shravanabelagola – The monolithic statue of Lord Gomateshwara, a Jain saint and an object of worship for centuries, standing atop one of the hills. Drive to Hassan and check in at hotel. Afternoon visit Belur and Helebid. Though the Belur and the Halebid are both 17 km away from each other, they are considered related. One is mesmerized at the marvels of architecture displayed here. Visit the main temple of Belur, the Chennakeshava which is dedicated to Lord Krishna. Then visit the Shiva Temple at Halebid where you will be awestruck at the colossal structure of Nandi. Overnight stay.

3

Day : Hassan – Mysore (140 Km, 4 Hours)

Morning drive to Mysore. En route stop for visit of Sri Rangapatnam – the summer palace of Tipu Sultan. Built in 1784 AD, it is set amidst exquisite gardens. Then proceed to Mysore and upon arrival check in at hotel. Mysore, once the capital of the Wodeyars, still retains the old world charm. Evening enjoy beautiful Vrindavan Gardens with its musical and colourful fountains. Overnight stay.

4

Day : Mysore

Morning is dedicated to visit of magnificent Mysore Palace built by the Wodeyars with its Golden Royal Elephant Throne, Durbar Hall, Kalyana Mandap and Gallery. Also visit 2000 years old Chamundeswari Temple, a huge structure with a seven storey Gopuram. Later in the day visist Art gallery and local bazaars. Overnight stay.

5

Day : Mysore – Kabini (65 Km, 2 Hours)

After breakfast drive to Kabini which is a wildlife destination and boats of a lush green landscape surrounded by a large picturesque lake exotic birds and give you a fantastic view of large herds of elephants. It comprises of the South – Eastern part of Nagarhole National Park. Situated on the bank of River Kabini, it extends over acres of forest land, steep valleys and water bodies. Upon arrival, check in at resort. Rest of the day is free to relax of you may also go for a jungle safari. Overnight stay.

6

Day : Kabani

Get ready for an early morning Jungle Safari into forests of Nagarhole Park. The park provides natural living conditions to several wild animals and home to gaur, deer, wild dogs and langur besides elephants. Enjoy the Park with elephant ride. Later, you can enjoy the boat cruise or take a fishing trip of the river. Overnight stay.

7

Day : Kabini – Vythiri (110 Km, 4 Hours)

Morning leave for Ooty, also known as Udhagamandalam, is the capital of the Nilgiris district. Situated at al altitude of 2240 meters it is called the “ Queen of the Blue Mountaina “. It used to be a popular gateway for the British during the colonial days. Arrival at Ooty and check in hotel. Afternoon visit Botanical gardens, Rose Garden, Museum and Ooty lake. Overnight stay.

8

Day : Vythiri

Morning leave for Cochin. En route stop and enjoy toy train ride from Ooty to Conoor which is a great experience. Then drive to Ooty and upon arrival check in at the hotel. Cochin has one of the best natural harbours in the country. Afternoon city tour of Cochin covering Dutch Palace Museum, Jewish Synagogue, Francis Church and Chinese Fishing Net. Evening watch one of the classical dances of South India which is known as Kathakali. Overnight stay.

9

Day : Vythiri – Kochi (250 Km, 6 Hours)

Morning leave for Cohcin. Upon arrival check in at hotel. Here you can see the St Francis Church, the oldest Church in India, 500 year old Portuguese Houses, and Chinese fishing nets, 16th century Synagogue, Jew Town and Mattancherry Palace, built by Portuguese, this Palace contains some of India’s most beautiful murals. In the evening you may enjoy one of the classical dances of South India which is known as Kathakali. Overnight stay.

10

Day : Kochi – Kumarakom (50 Km, 1 Hour)

Morning leave for Kumarakom, the backwater region of Kerala. Kumarakom slumbers on the banks of the famous Vembanad Lake. The Vembanad Lake with its majestic canals, streams and distributaries along its banks weave an intricate and enchantingly beautiful web. The gorgeous green of the fringed palms ripple in the blue waters and blend into wavelets. The whole atmosphere spells peace, bliss and tranquility. Afternoon is free to relax or go for Ayurveda massage in hotel spa. Overnight stay.

11

Day : Kumarakom – Alleppey ( Overnight Backwater Cruise In Houseboat )

After early breakfast at the hotel, transfer to Alleppey. On arrival embark the house boat. Enjoy a memorable houseboat ride on enchanting backwaters to explore its breathtakingly beautiful surroundings and the fascinating Kerala countryside. Traveling along on a houseboat through palm-fringed narrow canals winding through the vast expanse of lush paddy fields and the unique tiny hamlets lined up all along on the edges of the waterways are sights one can never forget. All meals will be served on board. Overnight onboard the House boat.

12

Day : Alleppey – Marari Beach (20 Km, ½ Hour)

After breakfast disembark the house boat. After a short drive, you will reach Marari. Far from the madding crowd, and distant from the world of trendy hotspots and beach raves, Marari’s lietmotifs are space and silence. Relax on the beach and overnight stay.

13

Day : Marari Beach

The day is free to relax on the beach or for ayurveda massage. Ayurveda, the Science of Life, is almost as old as the Indian civilisation. It’s holistic approach, the efficacy of its therapies and the absence of distressing side affects are some of its more salient features. Throughout the world there is a rising awareness of the benefits of natual health systems. Health in the ayurvedic view represents the Harmony of body, mind and soul. It’s pharmacopia is nature herself and its diagnostic and curative tools have been derived from the invaluable legacy of insights, experience and knowledge bequeathed to posterity by its great masters. It is based on natural principles that inform and animate human life. Overnight stay.

14

Day : Departure

Transfer to Kochi airport to catch your flight for onwards destination.