Hidden away in the small town of Haranahalli, 220km from Bangalore, is another forgotten little temple from the Hoysala era.

The Hoysalas, as you already know, ruled much of south India from the 10th to the early 14th centuries.

Belur was the first capital of the Hoysala empire, and the site of the grand Chennakeshava temple. Not far from Belur is the town of Hassan, a major commercial hub during the Hoysala period. Several villages in the vicinity of Hassan flourished along with the city. Each of these villages had a resident deity and a temple in its honor.

As a result, there are several small, but relatively unknown Hoysala temples within 50km from Hassan town. Most of these temples are still in daily use, while remaining unknown to most tourists.

These Hoysala temples are not as grand and vastly popular as the ones at Halebidu and Belur, but they are not lacking in artistic and architectural merit either. Only a connoisseur like Yours Truly goes into the hinterland looking for these little masterpieces of Hoysala architecture.

The Lakshminarasimha swamy temple at Haranahalli is one such masterpiece. It’s small, like its counterpart at Javagal, but does not fail to impress.

And just like at Javagal, the priest and the local caretaker were both helpful people. The temple was locked when I arrived there, but the owner of the pharmacy next to it told me to call the number printed on the door.

The caretaker and priest arrived soon after, and opened up the place for me. An archana was performed specially for me, and I was given free rein to use my camera, but only on the outside walls.

Considering that it was built in 1230 and was repeatedly damaged by invaders from the Delhi Sultanate during the 14th century, the temple is in reasonably good shape. The temple comes under the purview of the Archeological Survey of India, but except for putting up a board outside, one cannot see what the ASI has actually done for the place.

This is a trikuta temple, with three Vaishnava deities inside, i.e, Chennakeshava, Lakshminarasimha and Venugopala. The deities are carved from Krishnashila (black stone) and are in remarkably good shape.

They are beautifully carved and, according to the priest, these are the original deities of the temple. If so, after 800 years, they are really a joy to behold. The priest was gentle but firm in his refusal to let me photograph these deities. Remember, if it’s a functional temple, you will not be allowed to photograph the deities inside the sanctum.

Not an issue at all. There are a few hundred intricately carved sculptures on the outer walls, that one can freely photograph.

The garden around the temple is in serious need of maintenance, though!

Here too, as at many Hoysala temples, one can see the 24 primary forms of Vishnu carved on the outer walls. Along with several other deities and episodes from our scriptures.

The 24 forms of Vishnu (Chaturvimshati roopani), are usually portrayed in a standing position, wearing an intricate crown, clothed in finery and elaborate jewelry, and bearing a mace, lotus, conch and discus. Depending on the order in which these icons of Vishnu are held, each form has a separate name and a consort.

I tried to photograph as many as I could, but many of them inaccessible to a camera, or in poor lighting. Still, I had a good time going around this little place, merrily clicking away. I promised to share my photos with the priest, Narendra Haranahalli, and so I did.

I really wish the government of the day would do something to rejuvenate these priceless sculptures, before we lose them forever, to sheer neglect.

Surely, with so many talented sculptors in Karnataka and modern-day 3D technology, it should be technically feasible to recreate these magnificent icons of our ancient culture.

Haranahalli is about 220km from Bangalore. It will take you four hours to get there, although the road is pretty good, for the most part.

Since this place is off the highway that leads to tourist spots like Belur and Halebidu, there are several eating houses on the way, none of which I would particularly recommend. Too pricey and not too good.

Carry snacks, bottled water, a broad-brimmed hat, and plenty of sunscreen.

The temple is worth a quick visit, if you’re on your way to Halebidu or Belur. Try to get here before 8.30 am if you want to attend the morning puja. If you find the door locked, don’t panic. Just call the number printed on the door.

Check out the map I’ve embedded below, gather a few friends and just go.

Cheers … Srini.

Oct 8, 2023.

The birding season is upon us.

And it’s time for Yours Truly to grab his camera and binoculars, and go traipsing across the countryside, seeking the company (and nice photographs) of his feathered friends in Class Aves.

I am a birder. I am not a bird-watcher. The correct term is “birder”.

There’s a difference. Bird-watchers watch birds. Birders study them.

I prefer to be a solitary birder. Sometimes I call upon a few birder friends to join me, but I do most of my birding alone. Gives me a sense of peace, and allows me to actually commune with Nature.

The best birders I know do not own a camera. Just a pair of binoculars and a notebook. Some of them are genuine ornithologists, some are from other walks of life. But they all share common traits – they keep their mouths shut and their eyes and ears open, and they really know their stuff.

So. Let’s share some tips about birding, shall we?

Anyone can be a birder. There’s no need for a degree in the field, unless you want to be a professional ornithologist.

Unfortunately, that’s the problem. Everyone thinks he or she is a birder. And makes a big noise about it.

If you’re just starting out as a birder, first buy a good field guidebook. One would recommend Grimmett and Inskipp or Salim Ali. Grimett’s book is a tad expensive. The Kindle version is cheaper.

Next, get yourself a pair of binoculars. With a magnification factor of 10x or 8x and an objective diameter of 40 or 50mm. These specifications are commonly mentioned as 10×50 or 8×40. Olympus is a decent brand. Nikon is better, but costs a bit. If you can afford it, get yourself a pair of Zeiss roof-prism binoculars. That’s an investment for a lifetime.

Next, get on to the internet, and get a list of birding hotspots in and around your city. Most of these hotspots will have a checklist of birds usually seen there, with photos.

And that’s all you need to begin with. If you wish, gather a couple of friends, no more. Get yourself to the nearest hotspot, preferably at dawn. Don’t go stomping around. Keep quiet. Pull out your binocs, and look around. Make a checklist of the birds you see. There are apps available, but the old-fashioned way is better, i.e, pen and paper.

And, pay attention to bird calls. All birds have characteristic calls. That is why it’s better to go birding alone or with a very select set of birders who know how to shut up and listen.

Choose a few such hotspots in your vicinity and keep visiting them regularly. Pretty soon, you will confidently identify all the birds there, and become an expert yourself.

Over a few weeks, you can improve your birding skills by studying the behaviour of the bird, its feeding habits, breeding season, and so on. Then you’ll be part of the bird’s life, rather than being a voyeur.

This would be the right time to get yourself a camera and start the creation of a birding album that you can enjoy over the years.

Bird photography is a craft all by itself, so we’ll delve into it later. For starters, you can cut your teeth on a reasonably inexpensive bridge camera. I’ve taken some of my best images using a simple bridge camera.

Over a few months, visit all the birding spots you can, and savor each visit. Do not forget to make a proper checklist each time. You will thank yourself in later years.

If there’s a bird sanctuary near your city, do make a visit there, during the right season. You will learn a lot in one visit.

Some obvious tips:

Safety first. You can get mugged, especially if you’re carrying an expensive camera. I’ve been accosted even in public places like Lalbagh. Avoid birding locations that are known to be unsafe, like Turahalli in south Bangalore.

Wear dull earthy colors. And good boots. And insect repellent. Carry a first-aid kit, and if you’re like me, keep your medication in hand.

Carry snacks and safe water. In many places in India, they sell counterfeit brands of bottled water, so carry your water.

If you intend to shoot photographs, always check about local laws, camera fees, etc. Many locations in India do not permit camera tripods and camera flashes.

Lalbagh botanical gardens is one place where cameras are no longer permitted. What an effing tragedy.

One guidebook, one pair of binoculars, one basic camera. Some patience. Some diligent practice. And some common-sense.

And that’s it.

Birding is the most rewarding pastime I can think of. The world outside can be ignored. Time comes to a halt. Your worries melt away. And you can just be yourself.

All of which you cannot do in a crowd of stomping bird-watchers with big cameras, loud mouths and empty heads.

Better hurry though. Birding locations are disappearing rapidly, especially in Bangalore. In the time taken to write this blogpost, another lake would have been encroached, another hundred trees would have been butchered, another bird species would have left the city.

So get off your gluteals. And just go birding.

Class Aves rocks!

Cheers … Srini.

Today, Aug 19th, is World Photography Day. Why Aug 19th, you ask?

In 1826, a French inventor called Nicephore Niepce made the first photograph, using a pewter plate coated with bitumen, and exposing it to the sun over eight hours. He called it a heliograph.

Later in 1829, Niepce met a French stage designer and artist called Louis Daguerre, and together they developed a much improved process, that came to be known as Daguerreotype.

Niepce died suddenly, and Daguerre continued the development of the process with Niepce’s son, Isidore. In 1839, the French government purchased the patent from Daguerre and Isidore, in exchange for a modest pension for the two innovators.

On Monday, August 19th, 1839, the French government released the Daguerreotype photographic process to the public as an open-source technology.

In the meantime, British inventor William Fox Talbot also developed his own photographic process called calotype, patented in 1841. Unlike the French government, Talbot did not release his patent to the public, and levied a license fee.

As a result, Daguerreotype was quickly adopted by enthusiasts across the world, except in England. And so, thanks to the French government, you and I can enjoy photography without paying hefty royalties to anyone. Vive la France!

In the days of celluloid film, photography was a demanding hobby. Composing a good photo required considerable skill, a great deal of patience, a lot of good luck and a competent studio that could develop film correctly. A professional photographer or a serious hobbyist who wanted to develop his own photos had to have skills in chemistry as well, and a dark room, and plenty of money for film and chemicals.

Film photography was a time-consuming and expensive hobby, but it was fun nevertheless.

Things changed with the birth of the digital camera. Nikon introduced the first commercial digital SLR camera in 1986. Other manufacturers like Canon, Minolta, Sony et al quickly followed. Those early digital cameras cost a fortune. Most of us photographers in India could merely dream of buying one.

Today, we have cameraphones, point-and-click digcams, gopro’s, webcams, god-knows-what-else, for any budget, any skill level.

Some questions about photography:

Is photography very expensive?

Of course not. If you have a decent smartphone, that’s enough to get started. If you have about Rs.20K to spare, you can get yourself a very good bridge camera that’s almost as good as a DSLR camera.

If you don’t have Rs 20K to spare, there are hundreds of affordable point-and-click digital cameras out there. As your skills improve, you can spend as much as you want, depending on how far you want to go. For most people, a bridge camera will be all they need.

Should I buy Photoshop or something?

Not necessarily. Most camera manufacturers offer free imaging software with their cameras. And there are many photo apps on the net, all free. Gimp, Snapseed, VSCO, are some of them.

Do I need a computer?

Perhaps. For cameraphone photography, you don’t need a PC. Just click, process, share. For a bridge or DSLR camera, you do. Any unbranded PC is enough.

Where do I save my photos?

As you take more pictures, you will find yourself running out of space on your PC or phone. Not to worry. There are many cloud-based sites like Google Drive, Google photo albums, Flickr and 500px that allow you to store and share hundreds of images. If you have the money, buy an external or internal hard disk.

What is the best time for photography?

In principle, any time is good. For outdoor photography, daytime is best. I do most of my photography in the hours between 3pm and 6pm, depending on the season. Dawn is also a good time. Avoid afternoons, in general. This is because the ambient light may be too harsh, especially at noon when the sun is directly overhead.

What kind of photography do I get into?

Anything you like. Nature, wildlife, food, people, travel, street, candids – anything at all. There are on-line resources for every taste, every skill level, every person.

Does photography pay? No.

Don’t even think of quitting your job. At the professional level, photography is really expensive and very risky. Save your money and time. Enjoy photography as a hobby, take great photos that you can share with your friends and family, spend as much as you can afford, and not a penny more.

And what about AI?

Yes, artificial intelligence systems will have a profound effect on photography, and already are.

The primary applications of AI are in image processing and editing, improvement of poorly focused images, removal of noise, deletion of unwanted elements in your photograph, change of contrast and exposure, to name a few. The possibilities are many. AI image generators can actually create a realistic photo from scratch.

That doesn’t mean photographers and cameras will become obsolete. Won’t happen.

A good photograph requires the photographer’s personal touch, his judgement of the shot, his interpretation of the moment. I cannot imagine an AI or robot doing any of this, at least not in the foreseeable future.

What camera do I buy?

Buy a camera you that can comfortably afford, without the need to pay in instalments. Buying a camera (or any other electronic device costing less than Rs. 20K) on instalments is just foolish. Cameras have negligible resale value. Remember that.

As I said, all you need to start with, is a good smartphone and a free app. Nowadays, you get all kinds of affordable lenses and accessories for smartphone photography, if you think your phone is not good enough on its own.

If you’re looking for an inexpensive and immensely satisfying hobby, that will last for a lifetime, I’d say modern photography is one of the best options you have.

Go ahead. Take out your camera. Make your day.

Cheers … Srini.