For fans of: Lunachicks, Blondie, Le Tigre

Theo Kogan, singer of the legendary NYC all-female punk band Lunachicks, has recreated herself with a new group and a new sound. Planting herself in the middle of three band-mates that stand 6’5 and over, Theo & the Skyscrapers tear holes in the clouds with a hypnotic concoction of dark new wave, laser punk, and metal pop. Imagine Blondie’s tour bus smashing into Slayer on Gary Numan’s driveway. Yet at the same time, the music conjures up images of a NYC sidewalk at dawn in the year 2025. Past collides with future. Chaos fellates beauty. The band unofficially began when Theo and Toilet Boys co-frontman Sean Pierce began collaborating on songs before adding Chris Kling and Dimitry Makhnovsky to solidify the line-up.

DL So Many Ways to Die LP

DL Self Titled

Buy

For fans of: Queen Dresch, 7 Year Bitch, The Gits

Tribe 8 is an all-women outspoken punk band from San Francisco, California. Considered one of the first queercore groups, they take their name from the practice of tribadism.

Tribe 8 has had some turnover of personnel, but Lynn Breedlove, Flipper (Silas Howard), and Leslie Mah (formerly of Anti Scrunti Faction), and Slade Bellum were consistent members. In concert, lead singer Lynn frequently performed shirtless, wearing a strap-on dildo, and encouraged audience members to interact with it. Their songs often deal with subjects such as S/M and the band was the subject of controversy because of this, nudity, fellation, and transgender issues.

Tribe 8 toured throughout the U.S., playing at venues such as DUMBA and 924 Gilman Street; they also played in Europe and Canada, and released a number of recordings on independent record labels.

Outside of the band, Lynn Breedlove is also the author of a novel, Godspeed, published in 2002, now tranlated into German “Goetterspeed”. Leslie Mah has appeared in various films including The Yo-Yo Gang by G.B. Jones; Shut Up White Boy, co-directed by Vu T. and Thu Ha; and produced her own film, Estrofemme, in 1998, as well as appearing in movies with Tribe 8.

In 1996, the band made its screen debut in A Gun For Jennifer, directed by Todd Morris. The band performs live in the documentary film She’s Real, Worse Than Queer by Lucy Thane, released in 1997. As well, members of the band are interviewed, speaking about a range of topics including the development of the queercore music scene. In 2003 the film Rise Above: A Tribe 8 Documentary, by director Tracy Flannigan, was released, documenting not only performances by the band but, as well, the motivations and reasons behind the band and the part it plays in their lives.

DL

Buy