“They will hear most of The Chantoozies’ hits, some album tracks and some of our favourite covers,” band member Eve von Bibra revealed to me last week when asked what fans could expect to hear at the show.

I recall first seeing the group perform on the banks of Shepparton’s Lake Victoria in November 1990 as part of a massive live concert to celebrate the launch of Shepparton’s then Sun FM, which at the time was regional Victoria’s first commercial FM radio station.

“1990 was two years after we released our single Wanna Be Up and we had been touring for just a little while,” von Bibra said.

“It was fun, and we always felt so lucky that our job that we loved to do was also incredibly fun!”

Back in May of this year, I supported the group at one of their Melbourne shows, and after my set, I stayed to watch their show, and the fun spirit the group oozed onstage was hugely infectious.

So how do country audiences compare to city audiences?

“Country audiences are fantastic,” von Bibra said.

“They’re relaxed and they are there to have fun and really give back to us with such a great authentic energy.

“With the city shows, the audience are also really into it, so I guess country vs city is the same but slightly different.

“We think touring has changed quite a bit since COVID and it’s all still finding its way back to whatever the new normal is going to be.

“We have had some great gigs over the last 12 months, and we are looking forward to playing at Murchison.”

Country queens

With regional centres seeing a continuing upward trend in major country artists bringing music back to the bush, next month sees two Australian artists performing shows in our region.

First cab off the rank is Aussie country music icon Tania Kernaghan, who pops into Shepparton for a special up-close-and-personal performance at the Shepparton Senior Citizens Centre on Tuesday, October 7. With a swag of number one radio hits and awards such as Country Music Association of Australia Female Artist of the Year Award under her belt, this is a show not to be missed.

Soon after, multi award-winning country artist Catherine Britt drops by the Tungamah Hotel on Saturday, October 22 for a performance as part of her Bush Pubs Tour. Having traversed Australia during her 20-odd year career, Britt firmly believes country music doesn’t reach the rural areas as much as it should. Her tour is a way for her to take country music back to where it belongs: rural towns.

Harvey book

While on the topic of country music, another Aussie star, Adam Harvey, is himself busy writing a book titled Tales from the Road, which will feature a selection of stories from Adam and some of his country music colleagues recounting some of the funniest, inspiring and downright scary things that have happened on tour over the years. The book is scheduled for a 2023 release.

Heard on the grapevine

And speaking of Adam Harvey, are Adam and fellow country artist Beccy Cole planning to visit Shepparton in early 2023?

Yesterday’s music, today’s hits

Songs from the 70s and 80s continue to remain hugely popular with music fans in the region. According to Shepparton's Triple M radio breakfast announcer Josh Arthur, the top three most popular songs with Goulburn Valley listeners this week are:

At number one is I Wanna Dance With Somebody by Whitney Houston, followed by Saturday Night's Alright by Elton John at number two, and in third place is Rosanna by Toto.

Fun fact

Did you know that pop-rock group Blondie performed a show at the GV Hotel in December 1977 as part of their first ever Australian tour? The trip was largely due to their single In The Flesh being hugely popular here, and with Australia being where the group scored their first ever hit.

Send feedback, suggestions and news tips to: MusicalMusings@mmg.com.au

’Till next time, keep rockin’.