All about Eve von Bibra. Evie is an Australian singer-songwriter and actress, and a founding member of girl band The Chantoozies, ‘one of Australia’s most dynamic, irresistibly catchy and hottest live bands’. The best thing about writing these stories for my website is that I get to go in to the audience and discover so many secret talents of girls I know, may have met backstage at a gig, or booked to sing on the little old stage at Gowings Grace Darling in the ’90s. Some I have never met.

In the case of Evie, I met her many, many moons ago. I was nineteen and I lived on Murphy Street in South Yarra and worked for a beautiful woman named Robyn who owned an uber chic costume jewellery shop called Tinsel Trading. The year was 1986 and the Australian music scene was enjoying a heady brew of big bands who were breaking into the US. Think Russell Mulcahy VDOs, big hair, shoulder pads, Levi’s 501s, Haynes white T-shirts and Ray Ban Aviators.

A sizzling hot band full of spunks called Australian Crawl had management offices upstairs from the shiny little shop where I worked by day – by night I wore a kimono and cooked Sukiyaki at a Japanese restaurant around the corner on Toorak Road – but that’s another story. Whenever there was a management meeting you could pretty much guarantee that every single woman in the neighbourhood would be preened and primped pretending to shop nonchalantly in the hope of meeting the band as they descended on Murphy Street.

Now these Aussie Crawl admirers included my aforementioned boss, and a dear friend that owned a shop next door we named Aunty Cath who sadly passed away suddenly last year. Cath was a real character who taught me many things – most of them illicit – may she rest in peace. In addition to the local shop owners, there was a tribe of goddesses who were more beautiful than you could ever imagine. Collectively they formed the all girl band The Chantoozies, and in the beginning included said Boss, Evie, Tottie Goldsmith and Ally Fowler. Back then they were supported by four male musicians including Brett Goldsmith and David Reyne. Evie co-wrote many of the songs that appeared on their albums. She penned their biggest hit ‘Wanna Be Up’ in collaboration with fellow band member Brett Goldsmith, which peaked in the top ten on the national charts twice.

Eve von Bibra – Wanna Be Up

Cocktails, cowboys and groovy grown ups

One Friday night I walked into The Melbourne Underground nightclub on King Street (a mystical cavern of cocktails and cowboys for groovy grown ups that we would flock to flashing our poorly forged fake IDs to gain entry) where I was lucky enough to witness the debut of Melbourne’s shiniest all girl band with oozes of style and sassy – The Chantoozies. In 2014 the band are back with a cover of Baby It’s You, a 1979 song by Canadian pop group Promises and is The Chantoozies first single since 1991.

The Chantoozies – Baby It’s You

Print

All about Eve von Bibra

In more recent years, Evie segued into production, working with Princess Pictures on Angry Boys and Sporting Nation. She joined the Rockwiz team for SBS where she works as the Rock Star Wrangler. And this is where this episode begins, at the Rockwiz Byron arrival dinner, in town for Byron Bay Bluesfest. This easter we spent some joyous moments together as my best friend Vika was in town singing with the Rockwiz crew. So much fun was to be had that after much Rosé at dinner, I invited the entire cast and crew to come to my house for an Easter Saturday dinner party. The night was made even merrier when Evie walked in the door.

Evie is a classically trained singer who also studied at the prestigious Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts in London. She has the distinction as being the only Chantoozie to have worked alongside a British Prime Minister (Tony Blair), attend the same drama school as Joan Collins (RADA) as well as turn down a romantic advance from Shane Jacobsen. Clearly she is far too canny for Kenny!

Follow Evie on Instragram

A final note from Eve…

I have the privilege to live in Melbourne and know inspiring creative and magic people like Sam Gowing! I have watched Sam G from a distance for the last ten years grow create inspire and follow her passion and dream….and I always feel like I’m breathing in pure oxygen full of inspiration and possibility when I am with her…. Sam is a gem and I thank the powers that be that she is in our world!!!