When Pizza 73 opened its first location in 1985 the company embarked on a path of innovation that quickly led to new products, marketing concepts and its signature double-decker pizza boxes. The boxes have remained to this day a symbol for the brand and an example of early environmental stewardship. While many customers enjoy the hot and fresh products inside, what’s on the outside is just as appealing.

The original double-decker pizza boxes are believed to be the first and only boxes in the Canadian pizza industry to integrate packaging efficiency, functionality and convenience with environmental sustainability. Through its two-tiered layers, customers receive two pizzas — or a pizza and a wing meal — all in one compact container. This distinctive feature uses fewer materials to serve twice as much food, while reducing the amount of energy and water needed to create the boxes. Both the pizza and wing boxes are made from 100 per cent recycled materials with 94 per cent of its content coming from post-consumer fibre.

“Pizza 73’s double-decker boxes are an example of how you don’t have to sacrifice performance, convenience or great taste for sustainability,” affirms Pat Finelli, chief marketing officer for Pizza 73. “These innovations are a testament to the entrepreneurial spirit and demonstrate how sustainable business practices lead to better business and industry leadership.”

Last year, Pizza 73 and parent company Pizza Pizza spared more than 100,000 trees simply by using recycled materials in their boxes. Pizza 73 was acquired in 2007 by Pizza Pizza Limited, making it Canada’s number one pizza chain in terms of sales. Combined, Pizza 73 / Pizza Pizza operate more than 600 traditional and non-traditional restaurants.

As everyone knows, corrugated cardboard is a thin, stiff material made from paper pulp which is a combination of ridged (corrugated) materials in between two flat facings. This type of material is recyclable and naturally biodegradable when it doesn’t contain any food and is in dry condition. While many pizza boxes are recyclable, what makes Pizza 73 boxes special is that they have evolved over time to use fewer materials and an improved grade of corrugated cardboard. Today these boxes are lighter, while still maintaining the temperature, humidity and freshness of the meal inside.

By recycling corrugated cardboard, consumers can help conserve natural resources like water and energy, reduce the amount of carbon sequestered from the atmosphere, and supply an excellent source of fibre for recycling. According to Environment Canada, products from recycled cardboard use about 25 per cent less energy and create half as much pollution than if they were made from virgin materials.

Pizza 73 aims to satisfy each and every customer by providing excellent quality food and true value in a fast and friendly manner. Founded in 1985, from coast to coast. The company is a leader in the communities in which it operates by providing in-kind support and volunteers to numerous charities, events, youth programs, and sports teams at the corporate and franchise level.

Ani Chakmakian is with Torchia Communications in Edmonton, Alberta. Contact Ani at ani@torchiacom.com

———