Euskal Barrokensemble

Enrike Solinís explores the musical sources used by Manuel de Falla for his ballet El amor brujo. The composer mixed the seguiriyas, soleares, polos, martinetes and zambras of the Andalusian Roma with the sound of the burgeoning flamenco scene: an effervescent cocktail of past and present. Euskal Barrokensemble mixes up works by De Falla, Francisco Tárrega and Joaquín Rodrigo with Renaissance dances and traditional music, bringing along a dazzling flamenco singer as well as Baroque instruments and Persian percussion.

Programme

Manuel de Falla / Dimitrie Cantemir

Escena Bestenigar

1876-1946 / 1673-1723

Traditional

Introduction: Seguiriya

Manuel de Falla

Pantomima

Canción del Amor Dolido

Gaspar Sanz / Nicola Matteis / Traditional

Chaconna-Guajira

1640-1710 / 1670-1737

Luigi Boccherini

Fandango y verdiales

1743-1805

Giovanni Girolamo Kapsperger / Manuel de Falla

Pasacalle en círculo mágico

c1580-1651

Domenico Scarlatti

Sonata K32

1685-1757

Traditional, Persian / Manuel de Falla

Koumiss del fuego fatuo

Gaspar Sanz

Canarios

Manuel de Falla

Danza ritual del fuego

Anonymous

Falalanlera

(from: Cancionero de Uppsala, Venice 1556)

16th century

Traditional

Taranta de la Siega

Federico García Lorca

Zorongo

1898-1936

Antonio de Santa Cruz / Manuel de Falla

Xácara del juego de amor

fl. 1700

Manuel de Falla

Las campanas del amanecer

Programme subject to change

Musicians

María José Pérez cantaora (flamenco singer)

María Moreno bailaora (flamenco dancer)

Miren Zeberio violin

Pablo Martín Caminero double bass

Paquito González percussion

Vicente Parrilla flute

Elies Hernándis sackbut

Enrike Solinís artistic direction, guitar, lute

Analytical cookies

These cookies ensure the proper functioning of the website (e.g. cookies for login or for remembering items in the shopping cart).

Functional cookies

We use cookies for web analysis and optimization of the user experience on the website. Cookies are set in order to detect discrepancies on the site, such as broken links and accessibility errors, and to analyze how users use the site.

Tracking cookies

These cookies are placed by third parties. They allow us to display videos from YouTube, maps from Google Maps and playlists from Spotify on our website. Additionally, cookies can be used for personalized advertisements.