Within the framework of the “Mediterranee Festival” that will take place in the city of Ashdod between June 14 and 21, this year also emphasis is placed on presentations of Spanish origin. The montage “The Three Granadas” will be staged, which according to its creators is “the living connection between the three cultures: Judeo, Christian and Muslim along with the gypsy and Andalusian.”

A show created by Yarden Amir who is the director, the choreographer and also dances, along with “La Moneta" in dance and choreographic direction, with the flamenco guitars of Ofer Ronen and Alvaro Martinete who also compose pieces, the singing and clapping of Mercedes Cortes together with the inevitable Yehuda Shuki Shveyki and the Andalusian singing of Tamar Bloch. Completing the group are musicians Elad Levi, Yogev Levi and Hagai Leshem on percussion. It is presented on June 20.6 in the Beit Yad Lebanim room.

Yarden Amir is an Israeli flamenco dancer and choreographer originally from Jerusalem who lives and works in Spain. She comes from a Moroccan family with a rich musical background. In 2015 she won first prize in the prestigious Eva Agmon Adi Foundation competition, and currently she is an independent producer. She began dancing at an early age and flamenco is part of her identity, due to the influence of her Jewish-Moroccan Sephardic roots. In Israel she was a soloist of the group “Flamenco Natural” under the direction of Sharon Saghi and after winning the award she was sent to study in Spain. Since then she lives between Israel and Andalusia

Yarden tells us that Granada is the most beautiful city in Spain, a city with the largest Muslim and Jewish influence in Spain, despite the expulsion of Jews and Muslims from this city, the cultural presence of Muslims and Jews is maintained. The gypsies brought with them the traditions of dance and music. Based on all this, flamenco, rhythms, musical scales and dance movements were developed, echoing the glorious Jewish and Muslim history of the city.

The show “Las Tres Granadas” (in Hebrew it is just called Granada) presents the trio composed of La Moneta, a famous dancer from Granada, and the guitarist Ofer Ronen. They are joined by the aforementioned musicians and dancers from Israel and Spain. Together, they create a deep connection between Granada's unique flamenco and Andalusian Arab-Jewish music originating from ancient Granada, and a combination of Ladin folk sources originating in Spain. The creators especially thank the Adi Foundation for its contribution to the development of dance in Israel and the Mifal Hapais for its assistance.