Hailing from the deep south burg of Louisville, Kentucky, the Villebillies are a massive conglomeration of like-minded musicians consisting of Adam on acoustic guitar, BJ on keyboard, Child on vocals, Demi on vocals, Dylan on vocals, Justin on electric guitar, Ron on bass, Tim on drums, and Tuck on vocals.

The band dropped their major label debut, simply titled Villebillies, last September and as any good solid musical outfit is wont to do, they've been spending a fair amount of time out on the road grinding out live show after live show.

We caught up with group member Child and managed to tie him down long enough to get some quick Q's A'd with aplomb.

IGN Music: Who is your favorite superhero or super villain and why?

Child: I used to be a comic book nut when I was a kid, and back then it was Spider-man, as he was the unexpected hero. He used stealth and speed as opposed to brute force... the movies suck though...

IGN Music: What would you say is your favorite late night snack when you're in the studio or out on tour?

Child: If I am the right part of the country, it has to be White Castle (on the west coast Jack in the Box is a good substitution). Hamburgers, cheese fries and a Big Red is the way to go. The only down side is severe heartburn and indigestion.

IGN Music: Can you name some of your non-musical influences?

Child: Ralph Waldo Emerson is my biggest non-musical influence. I read a collection of his poems and essays that really spoke to me. I would say that is one person who really changed how I view the world.

IGN Music: Do you have a motto that you live by?

Child: I believe in following your gut and not stepping on others, if you do that, everything else will fall into place.

IGN Music: Realizing that they are like apples and oranges, which do you prefer, performing music live or creating it in the studio?

Child: That's a hard one. I love performing, it's beautiful when a room full of people are all on the same page at the same time, it makes people feel human and connected. Being in the studio is having a whole world of possibilities in front of you, and I love that freedom. You have a chance to create something that may very well outlive you. Performances are a fleeting joy. I'd say I prefer the studio.

IGN Music: Can you recall the first concert you ever went to?

Child: The first big concert I ever went to was Busta Rhymes, and we were the opening act.

IGN Music: Do you remember the first album you ever bought? If you do, was it on CD, vinyl, cassette or 8-track? Why did you buy it?

Child: The Fatboys on a 45. Technically it was a single and my parents bought it for me, but I loved their version of "Wipeout." I can't remember what the b-side was.

IGN Music: Another sort of tough question: What is your favorite album and why?

Child: Bob Dylan's The Times They Are A-Changin. It was the first Dylan album I owned and it blew me away. Every song on that album is good, and I never seem to tire of it.

IGN Music: Can you name a musician that you've always wanted to work with but haven't yet?

Child: I'd love to work with Josh Ritter. He is my favorite emerging singer/songwriter. He's got Spiderman-like qualities.

IGN Music: If you could change one thing about the music industry, what would it be?

Child: I would change this "Sure thing" mentality. Everyone from labels to radio is always looking for "The Next Whoever" because it is an easy sell. They need to take more risks on bands that are different. Isn't that what music is all about?

IGN Music: What would you say has been your most important professional accomplishment to date?

Child: Working with Bob Ezrin who produced Pink Floyd, Alice Cooper, Kiss and many others. He produced the last track on our album, "Greatest Moment." It was an amazing experience, and we learned a lot from him.

IGN Music: What has been your most memorable or most f@#ked-up gig to date?

Child: Several years ago we played at a sports bar in Lexington, Kentucky and had the plug pulled on us three songs in. We basically got booed out of the building.

IGN Music: Have your dreams or nightmares ever influenced your music?

Child: Not so far. But now that you mention it I'll probably start writing them down...

IGN Music: What do you like to do on your days off?

Child: I'm on the road quite a bit, so when I'm home I mostly hang at the house, watch TV, play guitar, read, maybe have some friends over for a few beers. I still get out from time to time, but home is where the heart is.

IGN Music: What do you do on the tour bus between shows to while away the time?

Child: We joke on each other, you have to be on your toes, nobody is safe.

IGN Music: What do you miss most about home when you're on the road?

Child: Good food for one, it's mostly burgers and fries on the road. Also privacy, we're constantly cooped up together when we're touring.

IGN Music: What do you like most about visiting other countries when on tour?

Child: We haven't toured outside of the states yet, but I can't wait...

IGN Music: What is your kindred spirit animal?

Child: The Indian Wild-Ass. I think that speaks for itself.

IGN Music: What is your favorite book?

Child: The Antichrist by Nietzsche

IGN Music: What is your favorite cocktail and why?

Child: Bourbon and Coke. Because it's delicious and nutritious.

IGN Music: Please name the last thing that moved you.

Child: I woke up on a hangover the other day and Rudy was on TV. I wept like a baby.

IGN Music: How about the last thing that pissed you off?

Child: Kentucky got beat by Florida. Why are you making me relive that?

IGN Music: Do you harbor any Pet Peeves?

Child: Bad Lighting.

IGN Music: What about superstitions?

Child: None.

IGN Music: Who is the coolest person you have ever met?

Child: Doug Morris, the CEO of Universal Music. Hands down.