Villebillies: Villebillies CD 2006 CD

Artist: Villebillies

Release Date: Sep 2006

Format: CD

Record Label: Universal Records (USA)

Genre: Rock & Pop

UPC: 602517064423

Arising from Louisville, Kentucky’s underground scene, The Villebillies have worked hard over the years to achieve recognition in the music industry and earn the admiration and respect of fans and fellow musicians alike. With their down home attitude and an eclectic, crossgenre musical style, The Villebillies display a realness and originality that is all too rare in the world of popular music. It’s difficult to pin The Villebillies musical style to any one genre.

Rap and rock elements are most prominent but the band goes far beyond with their skillful incorporation of a wide variety of sounds. The band doesn't follow a specific songwriting formula or focus on one particular message or vibe. Instead, each song reflects a different experience within the greater context of the Villebillies’ story. The bands signature is a well choreographed vocal style that features hard hitting rap verses, infectious melodic hooks and intricate soulful harmonies.

Each of the three frontmen brings their own technique and personality to the stage with lyrics that touch on a wide variety of subjects that listeners can relate to. The backbone of the Villebillie multigenre instrumental style is a rock band type lineup. Drums, bass, acoustic, and electric guitar form the foundation with additional accompaniment that can include anything from hiphop style samples to hillbilly banjo licks to classical strings. It’s this nolimit approach that has given The Villebillies an uncanny ability to reach across cultural boundaries in a way that few other bands can.

On stage, The Villebillies present an exciting performance that can be enjoyed by music lovers from all walks of life. The band has played hundreds of shows across the United States, sharing the stage with independent and major acts, from Hed PE to Hank Junior, to Nelly. The Villebillies’ originality and authenticity has turned the heads of even the most skeptical audiences, earning the band a large and diverse fan base. Explicit Lyrics

Track Listing 1. Intro 2. Whiskey 3. Burnin Down the House 4. Grass Roots 5. Mr. Brown Bag 6. Rolling Stone 7. Ol" Faithful 8. Mary 9. I Got Moves 10. Talkin Stupid - (with Skinny Deville) 11. Hey 12. Greatest Moment