The Ex Factor! Liv Tyler and her ex-husband Royston Langdon make beautiful music together as they reunite for charity concert

Liv Tyler got on stage with the one that got away - her ex-husband Royston Langdon.

It seemed like old times as the couple were joined together on Wednesday at a charity Spacehog concert at Electric Lady Studio in New York.

Liv, the daugher of Aerosmith rocker Steven Tyler, gave it her all as she took the microphone in hand and belted out a tune while Royston accompanied on his acoustic guitar.

Perfect harmony: Liv Tyler reunited with her ex-husband Royston Langdon for a charity concert at Electric Lady Studio in New York on Wednesday

The 36-year-old Lord Of The Rings star was a natural, looking chic in a black-and-white polka dot top with red suspenders that matched her red nails and a slim-fitting black maxi skirt.

Black ballet flats and dramatic bluish-purple eye shadow completed the overall effect.

Royston, 41, wore a navy ensemble with a fedora on his reddish hair and old-fashioned spats on his shoes.

Like old times: The pair hugged and seemed to be getting along splendidly during the intimate rooftop event

She's a natural: The 36-year-old daughter of Aerosmith rocker Steven Tyler has music in her genes

Mingling: Liv put her arm around fellow guest Sean Lennon, the son of the late Beatles singer John Lennon

The music filled the air in this intimate rooftop setting where guests include Sean Lennon, son of Beatles singer John Lennon, and his model girlfriend Charlotte Kemp Muhl.

The concert was staged to benefit the David Lynch Foundation’s First Responders Initiative.

The Spacehog website described the program as bringing 'Transcendental Meditation to first responders in need of coping techniques for stress, trauma, and more.'

In tune: Sean performed on stage too at the concert to benefit the David Lynch Foundation¿s First Responders Initiative, which helps disadvantaged people

Girl power: Liv posed with model Charlotte Kemp Muhl at the event

The site went on to reveal: 'TM does not require a change in lifestyle, nor is it a philosophy or a religion. It is tailored to each individual who learns the practice. C H A N G E B E G I N S W I T H I N.

'We need your help to raise awareness and heal traumatic stress in at-risk populations.'

When she wasn't on stage, Liv was the belle of the ball, hugging fellow guest Charlotte, and at one point the girls even seemed to give each other lingering looks for the camera.

Look into my eyes: The gals played it up good for the camera

Man in the middle: Sean made a funny face as Liv caressed his beard and his girlfriend Charlotte pouted for the photographer

For Liv, who shares a nine-year-old son, Milo, with Royston, the reunion must have been bittersweet.

The actress began dating the British musician in 1998 and married him in a Barbados ceremony on March 23, 2003.

A year later their son was born, but sadly their marriage ended in divorce in 2008.

Speaking of their split, Liv told Wonderland magazine in 2009: 'There's nothing worse than heartache, being lovesick. It's like there's a physical sickness.

‘You through a couple of weeks where you think, "Oh, I'm OK, I feel better," and then suddenly, out of nowhere, it hits you again.’

As they were: Liv and Royston, pictured at The Cove Atlantis grand opening in The Bahamas on May 12, 2007, were wed for five years before their split 2008