After Worlds Collide (1934) was a sequel to the 1933 science fiction novel, When Worlds Collide, both of which were co-written by Philip Gordon Wylie and Edwin Balmer. After Worlds Collide first appeared as a six-part monthly serial (November 1933–April 1934) in Blue Book magazine. Much shorter and less florid than the original novel, this one tells the story of the survivors' progress on their new world, Bronson Beta, after the destruction of the Earth, as two ships carrying American colonists, as well as two colonizing ships made up of German, Russian, and Japanese survivors, all explore a new and dangerous landscape.

At the Publisher's request, this title is being sold without Digital Rights Management Software (DRM) applied.

About the Author

Philip Gordon Wylie (1902 – 1971) was a prolific American author of works ranging from pulp science fiction, mysteries, social diatribes and satire, to ecology and the threat of nuclear holocaust. He served as director of the Lerner Marine Laboratory, and also was an advisor to the chairman of the Joint Congressional Committee for Atomic Energy. As his scientific and philosophical views were present in his novels, so were his love of pulp-style serials, and his earliest work influenced the creation of Flash Gordon and later, Watchmen, while at least nine movies were made from his novels and stories, including When Worlds Collide.

Edwin Balmer (1883-1959) was a writer of detective stories and speculative fiction. He was also the editor of Redbook, and later associate publisher. Balmer also collaborated on the comic strip Speed Spaulding, which was based on the co-authored (with Philip Wylie) novel When Worlds Collide.

Title: After Worlds Collide

Author(s): Philip Wylie, Edwin Balmer

ISBN: 9781429991162

Copyright 2016

Release Date: April 12, 2016

Publisher: Tor Publishing Group

Countries: United States, Canada | Learn more about available countries

Language: English

Format: mobi,ePub | Learn More about our supported formats

Dragonmount is a proud provider of DRM-free eBooks. By purchasing any eBook from our store, you are not only helping support our website, but you are helping small businesses thrive in a market traditionally dominated by large companies. Learn more in our eBook FAQ.