Published first as a six-part serial in 1932, When Worlds Collide is a story of golden-age cataclysmic vision, bursting into the hearts and minds of science fiction readers ever since. The thrilling plot follows an astronomer, Sven Bronson, as he tries to save humankind from two approaching rogue planets that are sure to destroy the Earth as they readjust their orbit. Banding together with a team of scientists, the race to escape to the skies begins—but the more immediate threat seems to already be on the ground. When Worlds Collide was made into a film in 1951, and inspired various comic strips and pulp conventions in Science Fiction, and is now available as an ebook for the first time.

At the Publisher's request, this title is being sold without Digital Rights Management Software (DRM) applied.

About the Author

Edwin Balmer (1883-1959) was a writer of detective stories and speculative fiction. He was also the editor of Redbook, and later associate publisher. Balmer also collaborated on the comic strip Speed Spaulding, which was based on the co-authored (with Philip Wylie) novel When Worlds Collide.

Philip Gordon Wylie (1902 – 1971) was a prolific American author of works ranging from pulp science fiction, mysteries, social diatribes and satire, to ecology and the threat of nuclear holocaust. He served as director of the Lerner Marine Laboratory, and also was an advisor to the chairman of the Joint Congressional Committee for Atomic Energy. As his scientific and philosophical views were present in his novels, so were his love of pulp-style serials, and his earliest work influenced the creation of Flash Gordon and later, Watchmen, while at least nine movies were made from his novels and stories, including When Worlds Collide.

Title: When Worlds Collide

Author(s): Philip Wylie, Edwin Balmer

ISBN: 9781429991155

Copyright 2016

Release Date: April 12, 2016

Publisher: Tor Publishing Group

Countries: United States, Canada | Learn more about available countries

Language: English

Format: mobi,ePub | Learn More about our supported formats

Dragonmount is a proud provider of DRM-free eBooks. By purchasing any eBook from our store, you are not only helping support our website, but you are helping small businesses thrive in a market traditionally dominated by large companies. Learn more in our eBook FAQ.