https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/File:BuryTheHatchet-GTAV-Dialogue.ogg

Bury the Hatchet is a mission in Grand Theft Auto V that protagonists Michael De Santa and Trevor Philips both perform independently with each other.

This mission can be performed from either Michael or Trevor's point of view, and is a major turning point in the storyline where Trevor finally sees through Michael's lies.

Description[]

Trevor visits Michael at his house and reveals his plan to bust former associate Brad Snider out of prison. Michael, however, is reluctant to discuss Brad and this soon leads to a debate. While initially friendly, the two soon get into an argument about their respective futures. Michael intends to retire in peace, while Trevor accepts that a life of crime is all he has. Eventually, their dispute brings Trevor to the one question Michael hoped he would never ask, and Trevor asks Michael who was buried in his grave in North Yankton. Michael claims he never "gave it much thought." Trevor, becoming even more suspicious, finally snaps and threatens Michael, claiming he is "fucking dead," and storms out of the house. Michael, realizing what Trevor might be thinking, attempts to follow, but finds that Trevor has stolen his car. While Trevor is en-route to Sandy Shores Airfield, Michael calls him and attempts to talk him out of flying to North Yankton, but Trevor refuses and hangs up.

Both men travel back to Ludendorff. Trevor via his plane at Sandy Shores Airfield (where he receives a call from Michael, and calls Ron) and Michael through Los Santos International Airport, (during the drive, Michael calls Trevor to convince him to stop, and to warn Dave Norton that Trevor knows about their secret). Michael arrives at the airport, where some men watch him check in. Once in North Yankton, Michael drives to the cemetery. Along the way, he has flashbacks about the events that took place in 2004, including convincing Amanda that they must accept the FIB's deal and move to Los Santos, as well as memories of the set up. Trevor calls Ron asking for a plane to use to take him across country, and Ron confirms a plane is at the Airfield fueled up and ready to use. Trevor arrives at the Airfield and boards the plane to fly to North Yankton. While en-route, he receives a text message from Ron, warning him that Wei Cheng's men are looking for him. Trevor arrives first at the graveyard, finds "Michael's" grave, and starts digging it up. Michael finally arrives and finds Trevor digging up the grave. Michael attempts to talk Trevor out of opening the coffin, but the efforts prove to be fruitless. Trevor opens the coffin, and his suspicions are confirmed when he finds Brad's body inside.

Through Michael's confession and a flashback scene (if played from Michael's perspective), the true events of the Prologue come to light: the FIB caught up to Michael and offered him a deal to surrender Trevor and Brad in exchange for protection. The heist in turn was a set-up to lure the crew into the FIB. Brad was shot and killed by accident, when Brad walked into Dave's line of sight and took the bullet meant for Trevor, while Michael play-acted to convince Trevor he was mortally wounded as well.

Trevor and Michael have a standoff over the grave and argue whilst pointing pistols at each other, but before either one can shoot, the Triads arrive to capture Trevor. Trevor attempts to shoot Michael, but his gun jams. He throws the weapon at Michael and escapes through the cemetery gates while Michael fires at him. Michael must now return to his car whilst fighting off Cheng's henchmen. He eventually reaches his car, but finds that Trevor has damaged it. At that moment, some Triad members arrive and order Michael out of the car at gunpoint. With no other option, Michael surrenders.

The scene switches to Trevor flying back to Sandy Shores. During the flight, he receives a call from Cheng. The Triad boss states he has captured Michael and is prepared to kill him, unless Trevor surrenders his control of criminal activities in Blaine County to the Triads. Cheng thinks that this threat will work because he and his men mistakenly believe that Trevor and Michael are "ji laos" (gay lovers), and he threatens to kill Michael if Trevor does not co-operate. Trevor mocks Cheng for this assumption and sarcastically tells him to tell Michael "[he] loves him dearly" before hanging up. On the way, he receives a text message from Lamar Davis, telling him that he and Franklin Clinton just found the last car on Devin Weston's list, and would like him to join them.

The mission ends with Trevor landing back at Sandy Shores Airfield.

Mission Objectives[]

The mission has different objectives, depending on whether the player started it as Michael or Trevor.

If travelling to Ludendorff as Michael[]

Go to Los Santos International Airport.

Go to the second level terminal entrance.

Go to Ludendorff Cemetery.

Go to your grave.

Get in the car.

If travelling to Ludendorff as Trevor[]

Go to Sandy Shores Airfield.

Get in the plane.

Fly to North Yankton.

Fly back to Sandy Shores Airfield (after the shootout).

Gold Medal Objectives[]

Time - Complete within 11:00.

Skip all cutscenes, at the end of the mission fly directly to the airfield.

Headshots - Kill 20 enemies with a headshot.

Michael's ability comes in handy.

Accuracy - Finish with a shooting accuracy of at least 80%.

Self-explanatory. Michael's ability will definitely help get body shots more frequently. If possible, pick up another weapon, it will grant more accuracy than the supplied pistol and have more power. The Triad members spawn with a variety of weapons that can be taken and used, including the Assault Rifle, Pump Shotgun and Micro SMG.

Deaths[]

Several Triad members - Killed by Michael while escaping the cemetery.

Transcript[]

This section/page depicts all cutscenes and dialogues in the mission "Bury the Hatchet" in Grand Theft Auto V.

Transcript

Michael De Santa walks into his living room, sighing at an empty sofa. Shortly after sitting, Trevor appears at the doorway.

Trevor: *whistling* Hey, man.

Michael: Fuck... What do you want?

Trevor: (Approaching Michael before sitting beside him)

I'm your friend, I don't want anything, man. Come on, your company's good enough, huh? Same as always.

Michael: Yeah... Thanks. I really appreciate that.

Trevor: So. Family ain't back yet, huh?

Michael: Nope.

Trevor: She's a goddamn fool, man.

Michael: Despite all the chaos of these last few weeks, I think I've finally figured it out. I know, sounds ridiculous.

Trevor: No. Actually, it does not sound ridiculous. Y'know? Because you, you're a killer. Y'know? You are a man of action! You do not sit on couches, you take scores! You're back man. We are back! Alright? All we gotta go do is bust out Brad, and then we're golden, man! Franklin, he makes us multicultural. Lester makes it cyber. We're like modern America. We just get ourselves a gay friend. Bam!

Michael: No. It's not it. I got money, it just makes you miserable. I wanna make movies...

Trevor: Great. That's great... and, uh... so where exactly does this leave me in this second act of your life?

Michael: We're gonna do this last big job, and then we're gonna dissolve the partnership.

Trevor: This is not a game to me! Alright? This is a fuckin' way of life.

Michael: I got a fuckin' family!

Trevor: Yeah, well, I ain't got nothin'! No one gives a fuck about me!

Michael: I do.

Trevor: Oh. Fuck you. I saw your grave. I mourned you. And then it turns out that everything I fucking thought about you was wrong. Everything! You're not dead. And you're not a man.

Michael: Well, what the fuck are you?

Trevor: I'm your fucking nightmare!

Michael: Yeah, enough with your goddamn threats!

Trevor pauses with disgrace, walks away as an angry Michael sits back down. Trevor then gives himself several seconds to think about what Michael just said.

Trevor: Let me... let me just ask you something. Alright? Something I've been, I've been thinking about. Up in North Yankton, exactly who was buried in your place?

Knowing full-well the truth, Michael sits back, concealing his guilty face with an unknowing one.

Michael: I never gave it any thought.

Trevor: You know what I'm thinking?

Michael: I have no clue.

Trevor: You treacherous piece of shit!

Trevor, realizing the truth, storms towards the door.

Trevor: You're fuckin' dead! You're fucking dead!

Hopelessly, Michael runs after Trevor.

Michael: Oh, fuck! Trevor! Hey, T!

The door slams, and the camera cuts to Trevor fleeing Michael's driveway in his car in rage.

If playing as Trevor...

Trevor: (growling) Fuck!

If playing as Michael...

Michael:

*That's my car, you prick!

*Aw, great.

After leaving the mansion, Michael calls Trevor.

Trevor: Fuck you.

Michael: Hey, come on. Where are you going?

Trevor: You know where I'm going. Fuck you!

Michael: You don't need to go all the way to North Yankton to find out what I can tell you over a couple beers back at my house. Come on, we'll order pizza.

Trevor: Fuck you! Fuck your pizza! Fuck everything it stands for!

Michael: This is insanity.

Trevor: Ho, no. No, it's clear and reasoned thought. Finally.

Michael: Come on. Come back, we'll talk.

Trevor: I'm not gonna listen to another one of your lies!

Michael: Hey, I'll lay it all out for you. Everything. Turn around.

Trevor: I'm going up there to see it for myself.

Michael: You'll be disappointed.

Trevor: (angry moan) I'll be something.

Michael: It'll be an anti-climax. The grave's empty. Just a bag of sand, something like that. Just smoke and mirrors.

Trevor: (angry moan) The lies! How do you do it, man? The game is up!

Michael: I'm trying to save you a trip.

Trevor: You've done me enough favors, buddy. Save your fucking breath.

Michael: Trevor. Come on.

Trevor: Fuck you, Michael. Soon enough I will.

Trevor hangs up the phone.

Michael: Shit!

NOTE: The following phone call happens if the player started the mission with Michael.

After Trevor hangs up the phone on Michael, Michael calls Dave.

Dave

(Voice only): Special Agent Norton.

Michael: Shit. Davey. Shit, he knows. I think he knows.

Dave

(Voice only): What, who?

Michael: Think.

Dave

(Voice only): Shit. Shit! How?

Michael: I don't know how. He used his head.

Dave

(Voice only): But... does he know... does he know it all?

Michael: Hey, he's on his way up to Ludendorff to confirm his suspicions.

Dave

(Voice only): Shit! Then what?

Michael: Then who fuckin' knows what? I don't know! I'm going to go - see if I can reason with him.

Dave

(Voice only): Well, I'd come but I - I - I...

Michael: Yeah don't worry about it. This is between me and him. Besides, if it goes wrong up there, I'm sure you ain't far down his list.

Dave

(Voice only): That's good to know.

As Michael enters the airport, Wei Cheng's men watch him from their car.

Wei Cheng's men: (in Chinese) His boyfriend has arrived at the airport. We'll have people on whatever plane he boards.

NOTE: The following phone call happens if the player started the mission with Trevor.

After hanging up on Michael, Trevor will call Ron.

Ron

(Voice only): Trevor? It's great to, ah...

Trevor: There a plane I can use? Get me across country?

Ron

(Voice only): Sure. Sure. We got one fueled up for a trip south of the border.

Trevor: I'm taking it.

Ron

(Voice only): Is everything okay, man?

Trevor: Everything is not okay. Nothing has ever been okay. But I got to see it for myself. I'm going to see an old friend, alright? If you're where I think you are, buddy... I don't know why id didn't see it. I guess... I guess... I didn't want to. Fuck! Maybe I knew all along. I'm gonna find out for sure, and I'm gonna... do something about it. (angry moan) There was always something wrong with that job. What went down after. I guess I...I guess I wanted to believe. Fucking... fucking flea circus! Idiot! Idiot! Idiot!

Ron

(Voice only): I'm sorry, Trevor.

Trevor goes to the Sandy Shores Airfield and gets into a plane to fly towards North Yankton. He then gets a text message from Ron.

Ron

(Text only): Shit, T. Theres sum Chinese guys looking for you, asking where ur flying. I think its Chengs ppl. I didn't tell where u was goin. I swear I didn't!

After flying to North Yankton, Trevor arrives as the cemetery. He walks up to Michael's grave.

Trevor: Who you got in here, huh? As if I need to ask.

Trevor picks up the axe and swings.

Trevor: Argh! (repetitive moaning and heavy breathing)

NOTE: The following happens if the player started the mission with Michael.

Michael arrives in Ludendorff by car, driving past the town's welcome sign. Along the way, Michael has flashbacks of the 2004 bank robbery, including quotes Michael said to Amanda and his family off-scene, as well as the events that took place during the failed heist.

Michael: Listen, Amanda. We're going to move to Los Santos. Start over. I made a deal. The slate will be totally wiped clean.

(from Prologue): Alright, everybody pays attention, no one gets hurt!

Trust me, darling. Look at me, Amanda. It was the only thing I could do. Either everyone dies, or one guy gets out. I'm that guy!

(from Prologue): Slow and steady, T, slow and steady.

His name is Dave Norton, nice guy - realist. He gets the glory, I get out. It's not even a decision. Amanda, I don't have a choice. Do you wanna die here where it's always snowing? Or do you wanna go and live where it's always sunny?

(from Prologue): Alright, you wanna live? Tell me you wanna live. Work this out.

Some depot out of town, you don't need to know. Trust me, nothing is gonna go wrong. Nothing.

(from Prologue): Yeah, I hear ya! We gotta follow the plan - everything'll work out.

I did the deal, Amanda. It's over. Baby, we get out. Be happy. Be normal!

(from Prologue): It ain't supposed to go down like this.

We did it. Baby, we are home free. It's over.

(from Prologue): This is fucked, man! The thing is blown!

Just this one job, and everything is done...(strong echoing fades out)

Michael finds Trevor digging up the grave, and slowly walks towards him.

Michael: Hey, you're wasting your time.

Trevor: Is that why you flew out here? Huh? Tell me I'm wasting my time?

Trevor continues to break away the rubble and dirt.

Michael: Go ahead, dig it up. I don't give a shit.

Trevor: Yeah, it's what you look like, a guy who doesn't give a shit.

Michael: Ah, this is ridiculous.

Trevor: How long are you going to keep lying for, Mikey, huh? When's it going to stop? What happens in the dark, comes out in the light.

Michael: Give it a rest, Trevor. There's nothing there!

Trevor gives it one last swing with the axe, then picks up the spade, ready to break open the casket.

Trevor: This is it. Moment of truth.

Having broken open the casket, Trevor looks at the corpse with dismay. He throws the spade down, crouches down to the open hole and breaks away the dirt. Brad's face is revealed. Trevor struggles to contain his shock having predicted it. Shouting in rage, he stands up from the casket, glaring despairingly at Michael, who stands over the grave, not daring to look.

Trevor: As if I didn't know...Brad.

Michael: Look, we do what we got to do to survive. This thing, it didn't work out the way it was supposed to.

Trevor: Oh, and how was that, huh? With Brad in the can and me in the ground? Or...or...or-or both of us in the coffin?

Michael: Brad got shot. You saw it! He didn't make it. I got shot, I did. That's, that's it.

Trevor, having known the truth about what happens, jumps out of the grave and stands up to Michael.

Trevor: I think the only thing that didn't go as planned was me showing up on your doorstep ten years later. Mikey. I mourned you.

Michael: And I missed you, but I got a fucking family, Trevor. We were all gonna die. He did die.

Trevor and Michael quickly pull out pistols and point them at each other.

Trevor: You reptilian motherfucker!

Michael: I didn't want it to come to this.

Trevor: Yes you did, you just don't have the fucking balls to do it, but I do.

Michael: I've got more to lose than you.

Trevor: Never a truer word has been spoken, brother. Now pull the fucking trigger. You ain't got the guts.

Michael: Take the fucking shot!

Wei Cheng's men emerge from tombstones behind Michael, pointing their weapons at the pair.

Trevor: Who is that?

Michael turns around, and Trevor sees the opportunity to fire, but the gun jams. He throws the gun at Michael and makes a break for it.

Trevor: *clink* Fuck!

Michael: Fuck!

Michael swings back round and fires at Trevor, who's breaking open the cemetery's rear gate.

Wei Cheng's men: Trevor Philips, Mr. Cheng has requested a word.

Trevor escapes the cemetery, leaving Michael to defend himself from Mr. Cheng's men. He ducks behind a tombstone with his gun still drawn.

Michael: Hey, ho, ho, I'm not the guy you're looking for.

Wei Cheng's men: (in Chinese) Hey, he's over here, he's over here. (in English) Get the boyfriend.

Michael: Boyfriend? Motherfucker.

Michael fights off Mr. Cheng's men as he makes his way back to the car. Along the way, a Burrito full of Mr. Cheng's men enters the cemetery.

Michael: Who're your friends, T?

Wei Cheng's men: Stop the van - go find him!

Michael fights off more of Mr. Cheng's men.

Michael: You shoulda gone after the other guy! This is how many guys you send to kill Trevor Philips? Philips went that a way.

Wei Cheng's men: We know you are weak and feminine.

Michael reaches his car and attempts to start it to no avail.

Michael: Trevor... Fuck!

Triad Member #1: (speaking in Chinese) Shit, there he is!

Wei Cheng's men reach Michael's car and hold him at gunpoint.

Triad Member #1: (speaking in Chinese) Let me see your hands!

Triad Member #2: You got nowhere to go, boyfriend.

Michael: Alright, alright...

Triad Member #2: Get out the fucking car.

Meanwhile, Trevor is flying back to San Andreas, heading to land his plane back at the airfield. He then gets a phone call from Wei Cheng.

Conversation #1

Trevor: Trevor Philips Industries.

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): Mr. Philips. This is Wei Cheng. You know my eldest son, Tao.

Trevor: Oh, yeah. Massive E head, backed out a contract we agreed on. How is he?

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): Still learning the ropes, thank you. We've been watching you, Philips. Your operation causes problems for our plans for expansion, and since you are not a viable business partner...

Trevor: My lover?...

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): Yes. Michael de Santa. You lived with him with your maid. He is in our custody now. Give yourself up, and he will live.

Conversation #2

Trevor: Trevor Philips Industries.

Trevor: Yeah. The X nut, backed out of a contract we agreed on. How is he?

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): Still learning the ropes, thank you. My friends miss you in North Yankton. I was hoping we could talk.

Trevor: (laughs) Was that your people? (in a mock Chinese accent) Of course, sorry I had to cut out.

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): Your operation causes problem for me. I want to expand into Blaine County, but your business and your temperament prevent me from making inroads.

Trevor: Ah, well, too bad. (in a mock Chinese accent) I don't know what you can do 'bout that.

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): I've already done something. We have your lover.

Trevor: Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. My lover?!

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): Michael De Santa. You lived in your trailer together...with your maid...and then you were alone in that big house. Well, you are clearly very close. You know, how much will you give up for his safety?

Trevor: (laughs) My lover? Yeah, right. That's a tough break. I'd never want to double cross a friend, and put him in danger, but you got to do what you got to do. My business ain't going anywhere.

Wei Cheng

(Voice only): I'm serious about this. He will die.

Trevor: Tell him I love him dearly. (hangs up)

As Trevor lands the plane on the airfield, he receives a text message from Lamar.

Lamar

(Text only): Eh, crazy man! Meet me at my crib. Me n Frank goin roll on tht last car for the rich dude. U in?

Aftermath[]

The player cannot play as Michael until the completion of Fresh Meat. However, the player is still free to switch between Franklin and Trevor.

Trevor receives another call from Patricia Madrazo, to his shock. He tells her that his time with her was something he will never forget, and she tells him to value his friendship with Michael when he says they aren't speaking. He will ask how Martin is treating her before she says goodbye and hangs up.

It is possible for Trevor to call Jimmy.

In this phone call, Trevor will remind Jimmy of how much he hates his father, in which Jimmy attempts to correct him that they just don't always get along. After Trevor attempts to assert that Jimmy hates Michael more, Jimmy says that Trevor is scaring him, and will continue to defend himself and his father.

It is possible for Trevor to call Wei Cheng, who will now be available in Trevor's contacts.

Wei Cheng will state that it's up to Trevor to decide whether he wants his business or his "boyfriend." After Trevor makes a sarcastic remark about being unable to choose, and asserting that he wouldn't see Michael again, Wei says that Michael will be kept alive to give Trevor a chance, but it would soon be too late.

It is possible for Trevor to call Ron, who berates him for his failure to figure out the truth about Michael De Santa sooner.

Ludendorff Weekly Newspaper[]

"A grave was desecrated and several Chinese gangsters were left dead in a violent and bizarre incident in Ludendorff yesterday that has left police confused. In the worst violent crime to take place in the state since the famous depot robbery of nine years ago, a gangland shootout erupted at a cemetery, involving Chinese triads and an uncertain number of Caucasian gun men. The Chinese, who the FIB believe have links to the Wei Cheng Triad, a prominent criminal gang in China and Hong Kong, were not previously believed to have much presence in North Yankton although maybe they have come, enticed like everyone else, by our booming oil industry and glorious weather. No one is yet sure what caused the shootout but it seems as if someone dug up the grave of Michael Townley. Bizarrely Mr. Townley was himself responsible for the robbery of nine years ago. The links between the two incidents are very unclear at present."

Weazel News (Radio)[]

"Quiet town in North Yankton erupts in bloodshed. Several Chinese gangsters are dead, a grave was desecrated and a town is scared and confused after a shootout at a cemetery in Ludendorff, in North Yankton. Steve Petorya at the scene."

Reporter: "Thanks, Sheyla. The dead are mostly Chinese gangsters with links to a Chinese gang called the Wei Cheng Triad. The grave that has been desecrated was the nearly final resting place of a Michael Townley, a bank robber himself killed in the last major shootout in the area nine years ago. The cause of his grave to be desecrated and the links between the two crimes remain a mystery."

Bleeter Posts[]

@LudendorffAnnie - "Boy oh boy helluva business with that shootout eh? At least they were already in the cemetery :)

@snowchainlennie3 - "Anybody else noticed all those Asian fellers coming into town? I never seen so many foreign faces in Ludendorff!"

The soundtrack that plays during this mission is "Burning Bar", known also as "No Happy Endings" on the official Music of Grand Theft Auto V album, and "Burning The Bad Seal" on Tangerine Dream's "GTA 5: The Cinematographic Score" album.

Walkthrough[]

Video Walkthrough[]

Gallery[]

Trivia[]

In the cutscene where Michael is boarding the plane, through the plane window, a bus can be seen within the airport tarmac. This cannot be seen in normal gameplay, as buses will only spawn normally on the roads surrounding the airport tarmac instead.

The mission title is an idiom meaning "to make peace" or "to forget about the past".

The Burritos driven by the Triads have much lower health than normal. They can be destroyed with a full Carbine Rifle magazine. This is because Michael's arsenal is "weak" (no explosives or heavy weapons), so destroying vehicles before Triads members exit is easier. These Burritos can be driven, but they break down if the player drives too far, usually before the player gets across the railroad tracks.

If the player decides to travel to North Yankton as Trevor, he will have to fly west of San Andreas in order to go to North Yankton, despite it being located east of San Andreas. As he flies closer to the Pacific Ocean, the weather changes from cloudy to rain to a thunderstorm.

When Michael fires his pistol at Trevor during the cutscene, it notably has a different firing sound.

The alien frozen under the railway bridge seen in the Prologue is still there in this mission.

This mission is one of the rare appearances of the Asea in the original version of the game if playing as Michael.

This is the second mission in the series which requires the player to fly into another restricted and snowy location. The first being Saint Mark's Bistro in Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas.

This mission is very similar to the Chapter 8 mission of the Rockstar game Max Payne 3. Both the mission and the chapter happen in a cemetery while it is snowing, both involve the protagonist trying to get out of the cemetery after a shootout begins, and both the protagonists (Michael and Max Payne) have a special ability of being able to shoot in slow motion. Both protagonists are also captured whilst trying to escape (although Max escapes, whilst Michael does not).

Once Fresh Meat is complete, Michael's outfit from this mission will be available to wear. It is entitled "Ludendorff." Trevor's Ludendorff outfit will be available immediately upon completing this mission.

When the player is in North Yankton, the time always starts at 22:00 and freezes once it gets to 00:00.

This mission spawns 6 snow covered vehicles. All of them except the Burrito and Mesa can be observed driving on the roads leading to and around Ludendorff, with the Asea being controlled by the player. These vehicles are as follows:

Asea (used by Michael).

Burrito (variant 2, when the Los Santos Triads attack).

Emperor (beater).

Mesa (outside the church; it likely belongs to Trevor, as it disappears when the shootout occurs).

Rancher XL.

Sadler (rarely with trailers).

Michael's stolen Tailgater will still be parked at Sandy Shores Airfield when Trevor returns. This offers a rare chance for a character to easily obtain and save another character's default vehicle. Any mods applied to it previously by Michael (or Jimmy) remain in place.

During the scene where Michael gets on the plane and the plane takes off, when it shows the plane in flight, North Yankton's visible ground can be seen in the background.

If started with Michael, Trevor will steal any car previously driven by Michael, not exclusively his Tailgater, this only works if the player leaves Michael's Tailgater anywhere (or otherwise destroyed it) to take any other car.

Michael noticeably is trying to hold his tears when he argues with Trevor. As he talks about Brad when "He did die!". Also, while they point their guns to each other, Michael says "I've got more to lose than you!", his voice cracks multiple times due to emotion.

On the PlayStation 3, if started as Trevor, a glitch may occur where Michael will be blacked out on the switch menu, as if he is not unlocked then, he will appear standing at the grave during the cutscene where Trevor finds the shovel and pickaxe, then for the fight the player would be using Trevor with all his weapons and if the player enters the Asea the mission will fail and claim the Asea was abandoned.

The Cuban 800 Trevor uses in this mission has a unique grey color scheme. It can be obtained by simply storing it in his hangar after completing the mission.

Trevor stating that "What happens in the dark, comes out in the light" could possibly be an adaptation of a quote from Luke 12:2-3 in the Bible that reads "Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light".

Navigation[]