What do you think about when you hear the words “New Orleans”? Probably Jazz, Mardi Gras, Bourbon Street, and Voodoo. How about Indians? I know, me neither, but local tribes known as Mardi Gras Indians are a huge part of New Orlean’s cultural legacy. They have a long and sometimes sad history within Louisiana, they have a low-simmering rivalry with one-another, and they were in danger of being another part of the city’s lush history lost to Hurricane Katrina six years ago.

These tribes and their leaders are the subject of BURY THE HATCHET, an intriguing documentary by director Aaron Walker. Their tradition goes back to runaway slaves who were given quarter by Native Americans. That memory is honoured by some New Orleans’ African-American forming ‘Tribes’ (like clubs divided by neighbourhood), making elaborate costumes inspired by Native American dress, and taking to the streets for their own special parade during Mardi Gras.

Through the film we learn that these communities in New Orleans hold these traditions very dear. For them, it isn’t enough just to pass on the legacy through stories and old photos, they want to keep it alive by ingraining it into their families and children. They spend many months, a lot of money, and massive effort in creating their lavish costumes by hand. They choose to continue living out the legacy rather than just passing it on by word of mouth.

As the doc plays out, we watch as this tradition and the people who celebrate it are forced to weather their customs get hot from different sides. First from a moment that I dare not spoil – except to say that it is shocking to see it play out on-camera. Second by way of Hurricane Katrina and the way it took away so much from these proud citizens and their traditions.

BURY THE HATCHET is about seeing something that at first seems to draw lines and cause division, but then looking closer and realizing that it actually unites people and brings them a truer sense of identity. It introduces us to some very strong and very proud men and teaches us about the value of tradition. It is lavish to watch and complimented wonderfully by some stellar New Orleans music.

The film is a compelling documentary, and stands as a testament to the diversity that made New Orleans what it was, and the fortitude that will guide it down the road to recovery.

BURY THE HATCHET plays Hot Docs once more: Tuesday May 3rd – 4:30 at The Cumberland.