UNITED STATES

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Washington, D.C. 20549

FORM 8-K/A-1

CURRENT REPORT

Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the

Securities Exchange Act of 1934

Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported):

March 7, 2008

AVANT IMMUNOTHERAPEUTICS, INC.

(Exact name of registrant as specified in charter)

Delaware

0-15006

13-3191702

(State or other jurisdiction

(Commission file number)

(IRS employer

of incorporation)

identification no.)

119 Fourth Avenue

Needham, Massachusetts 02494-2725

(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip code)

Registrant’s telephone number, including area code:

(781) 433-0771

Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions:

o Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)

o Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)

o Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14d-2(b))

o Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.13e-4(c))

AVANT IMMUNOTHERAPEUTICS, INC.

FORM 8-K/A-1

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page No.

Item 2.01

Completion of Acquisition or Disposition of Assets

Merger of AVANT and Celldex

1

Business

2

Risk Factors

34

Unresolved Staff Comments

51

Properties

51

Legal Proceedings

51

Item 9.01

Financial Statements and Exhibits

F-1

Signatures

S-1

i

ITEM 2.01 COMPLETION OF ACQUISITION OR DISPOSITION OF ASSETS.

MERGER OF AVANT AND CELLDEX

On March 7, 2008, AVANT Immunotherapeutics, Inc. (“AVANT”) announced it had closed the merger (the “Merger”) contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger dated October 19, 2007 by and among AVANT, Callisto Merger Corporation (“Merger Sub”), a wholly owned subsidiary of AVANT, and Celldex Therapeutics, Inc. (“Celldex”). Pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Celldex, with Celldex as the surviving company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of AVANT. Approximately 8.7 million shares were issued to the former Celldex shareholders in connection with the merger. Those 8.7 million shares included the assumption by AVANT of stock options held by Celldex employees, consultants and directors, which now represent options to purchase approximately 1,446,914 shares of AVANT common stock.

The Merger was accounted for using the purchase method of accounting and was treated as an acquisition by Celldex of AVANT with Celldex being considered the accounting acquirer, even though AVANT was the issuer of common stock and the surviving legal entity in the transaction.

Safe Harbor Statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995: This report on Form 8-K/A contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of the words “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “will,” “should,” “may,” “plan,” “intend,” “assume” and other expressions which predict or indicate future events and trends and which do not relate to historical matters. You should not rely on forward-looking statements, because they involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond the control of AVANT. These risks, uncertainties and other factors may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of AVANT to be materially different from the anticipated future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.

There are a number of important factors that could cause the actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by AVANT. These factors include, but are not limited to: (1) the successful post-merger integration of the business, multiple technologies and programs; (2) the ability to adapt AVANT’s APC Targeting TechnologyTM to develop new, safe and effective vaccines against oncology and infectious disease indications; (3) the ability to adapt AVANT’s vectoring systems to develop new, safe and effective orally administered vaccines against disease causing agents; (4) the ability to successfully complete product research and further development, including animal, pre-clinical and clinical studies, and commercialization of CDX-110, CDX-1307, CholeraGarde® (Peru-15), Ty800, ETEC E. coli vaccine, and other products and AVANT’s expectations regarding market growth; (5) the cost, timing, scope and results of ongoing safety and efficacy trials of CDX-110, CDX-1307, CholeraGarde® (Peru-15), Ty800, ETEC E. coli vaccine and other preclinical and clinical testing; (6) the ability to negotiate strategic partnerships or other disposition transactions for AVANT’s cardiovascular programs, including TP10 and CETi; (7) the ability of AVANT to manage multiple clinical trials for a variety of product candidates; (8) the volume and profitability of product sales of Megan®Vac 1, Megan®Egg and other future products; (9) the process of obtaining regulatory approval for the sale of Rotarix® in major commercial markets,

1

as well as the timing and success of worldwide commercialization of Rotarix® by our partner, GlaxoSmithKline or Glaxo; (10) Glaxo’s strategy and business plans to launch and supply Rotarix® worldwide, including in the U.S. and other major markets and its payment of royalties to AVANT; (11) AVANT’s expectations regarding its technological capabilities and expanding its focus to broader markets for vaccines; (12) changes in existing and potential relationships with corporate collaborators; (13) the availability, cost, delivery and quality of clinical and commercial grade materials produced at AVANT’s own manufacturing facility or supplied by contract manufacturers and partners; (14) the timing, cost and uncertainty of obtaining regulatory approvals; (15) AVANT’s ability to develop and commercialize products before competitors that are superior to the alternatives developed by such competitors; (16) AVANT’s ability to retain certain members of management;(17) AVANT’s expectations regarding research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses; (18) AVANT’s expectations regarding cash balances, capital requirements, anticipated royalty payments (including those from Paul Royalty Fund), revenues and expenses, including infrastructure expenses; (19) the ability to obtain substantial additional funding; (20) AVANT’s belief regarding the validity of our patents and potential litigation; (21) Pfizer’s and our strategy and business plans concerning the continued development and commercialization of CDX-110; and (22) certain other factors that might cause AVANT’s actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements including those set forth under the headings “Business,” “Risk Factors” and Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in each of AVANT’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, its Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and its current Reports on Form 8-K, as well as those described in AVANT’s other press releases and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, from time to time. You should carefully review all of these factors, and you should be aware that there may be other factors that could cause these differences.

In addition, the factors described under “Risk Factors” in this report may result in these differences. You should carefully review all of these factors. These forward-looking statements were based on information, plans and estimates at the date of this report, and we do not promise to update any forward-looking statements to reflect changes in underlying assumptions or factors, new information, future events or other changes.

BUSINESS

A. General

As used herein, the terms “we,” “us,” “our,” or “AVANT” refer to AVANT Immunotherapeutics, Inc., a Delaware corporation organized in 1983 and its direct and indirect subsidiaries, Celldex, Celldex Therapeutics, Ltd. (“Celldex Ltd”) and Megan Health, Inc. (“Megan”). We are a biopharmaceutical company that uses novel applications of immunology to develop products for the prevention and treatment of diseases. We are developing a broad portfolio of vaccines and targeted immunotherapeutics addressing a wide range of applications including oncology, infectious and inflammatory diseases. These include therapeutic cancer vaccines, monoclonal antibodies, single-dose, oral vaccines that protect against important disease-causing infectious agents and a treatment to reduce complement-mediated tissue damage. AVANT is advancing a robust pipeline of clinical and preclinical product candidates, the most

2

advanced of which are for treatment of various cancers. Our lead programs are therapeutic cancer vaccines designed to instruct the patient’s immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells.

Our strategy is to demonstrate proof-of-concept for our product candidates before leveraging their value through partnerships or, in appropriate situations, continuing late stage development ourselves. Demonstrating proof-of-concept for a product candidate generally involves bringing it through Phase 1 clinical trials and one or more Phase 2 clinical trials so that we are able to demonstrate, based on human trials, good safety data for the product candidate and some data indicating its effectiveness. Our current collaborations encompass the commercialization of an oral human rotavirus vaccine, the development of a Glioblastoma Multiforme treatment, and the development of oral cholera, typhoid fever, ETEC and HIV vaccines, and vaccines addressed to human food safety and animal health. Our product candidates address large market opportunities for which we believe current therapies are inadequate or non-existent.

AVANT’s web site is located at http://www.avantimmune.com. On AVANT’s web site, investors can obtain a copy of AVANT’s annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, as soon as reasonably practicable after AVANT files such material electronically with, or furnishes it to, the Securities and Exchange Commission.

Our focus is on using the power of the immune system to prevent and treat disease. We have assembled a broad portfolio of technologies and intellectual property that we believe will give us a strong competitive position in vaccines and immunotherapeutics. This portfolio includes:

· technology and patents for CDX-110;

· APC Targeting Technology™ that utilizes fully human monoclonal antibodies to directly target specialized types of immune system cells, known as antigen presenting cells;

· patent rights directed to various humanized monoclonal antibodies;

·Cholera- and Salmonella-vectored vaccine delivery technologies;

· patent rights directed to a rotavirus strain;

· our VitriLife® patented drying system for the preservation of proteins, cells, bacteria and viruses; and

· technology and patents for complement inhibitors based on sCR1 “TP10”.

We currently have three products on the market and six products in clinical development. Our goal is to become a leading developer of innovative vaccines and immunotherapeutics that address health care needs on a global basis. Our success has depended and will continue to depend upon many factors, including our ability, and that of our licensees and collaborators, to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize our product candidates. To date, commercial sales have only been generated from Rotarix® and our Megan poultry

3

vaccines. We have had no commercial revenues from sales of our human therapeutic or other human vaccine products and we have had a history of operating losses. It is possible that we may not be able to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval for or commercialize our product candidates, and we are subject to a number of risks that you should be aware of before investing in AVANT. These risks are disclosed more fully in “Risk Factors.”

Using our expertise in immunology, we are building business franchises in major disease areas: oncology, infectious and inflammatory diseases. Each of our business franchises addresses large market opportunities for which we believe current therapies are inadequate or non-existent. We have pursued some of these opportunities independently in a highly focused manner. In other cases, we have leveraged the financial support and development capabilities of corporate and public sector partners to bring our development projects to fruition. The research we have pursued over the past several years has matured into an exciting portfolio of product candidates.

Our products are derived from a broad set of complementary technologies which have the ability to utilize the human immune system and enable the creation of preventative and therapeutic agents. We are using these technologies to develop vaccines and targeted immunotherapeutics that prevent or treat disease caused by infectious organisms, and treatment vaccines that modify undesirable activity by the body’s own proteins or cells. Our products are in various stages of research and development. Below is a table of our currently active programs:

CURRENT PROGRAMS AND PARTNERSHIPS

Technology

Product

Indication/Field

Partner

Status

ONCOLOGY

CDX-110

Glioblastoma Multiforme

Pfizer

Phase 2b/3

CDX-1307

Colorectal, Bladder, Pancreas, Ovarian and Breast Tumors

—

Phase 1

CDX-1401

Solid Tumors

—

Pre-clinical

CDX-1189

Myeloid Leukemias

—

Pre-clinical

INFECTIOUS DISEASE

CholeraGarde®

Ty800

Cholera Typhoid fever

IVI

NIH

Phase 2b

Phase 2

ETEC

Enterotoxigenic E coli infection

NIH

Pre-clinical

Paratyphoid

Paratyphoid fever

—

Pre-clinical

CDX-2401

HIV

Rockefeller University

Pre-clinical

INFLAMMATORY DISEASE

TP10

Transplantation AMD

—

—

Phase 2

Pre-clinical

MARKETED PRODUCTS

Rotarix®

Megan®Vac 1

Rotavirus infection Salmonella infection in chicken

GlaxoSmithKline

Lohmann

Marketed

Marketed

Megan®Egg

Salmonella infection in laying hens and eggs

Lohmann

Marketed

B. Development Strategy

AVANT’s strategy is to utilize our expertise to design and develop vaccines and targeted immunotherapeutics that have significant and growing market potential; to establish

4

governmental and corporate alliances to fund development; and to commercialize our products either through corporate partners or, in appropriate circumstances, by our own direct selling efforts. Our goal is to demonstrate clinical proof-of-concept for each product, and then seek partners to help see those products which we cannot develop ourselves through to commercialization. This approach allows us to maximize the overall value of our technology and product portfolios while best ensuring the expeditious development of each individual product. Implementation of this strategy is exemplified by our lead programs which are discussed in the following sections.

Factors that may significantly harm our commercial success, and ultimately the market price of our common stock, include but are not limited to, announcements of technological innovations or new commercial products by our competitors, disclosure of unsuccessful results of clinical testing or regulatory proceedings and governmental approvals, adverse developments in patent or other proprietary rights, public concern about the safety of products developed by AVANT and general economic and market conditions. See “Risk Factors.”

C. Cancer Vaccine Development Programs

1. CDX-110

AVANT’s lead clinical development program, CDX-110, is a peptide-based immunotherapy that targets the tumor specific molecule called EGFRvIII, a functional variant of the naturally expressed epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a protein which has been well validated as a target for cancer therapy. Unlike EGFR, EGFRvIII is not present in normal tissues, and has been shown to be a transforming oncogene that can directly contribute to the cancer cell growth.

EGFRvIII is commonly present in Glioblastoma Multiforme, or GBM, the most common and aggressive form of brain cancer, and has also been observed in various other cancers such as breast, ovarian, prostate, colorectal, and head & neck cancers. We are currently pursuing the development of CDX-110 for GBM therapy, and plan to expand the clinical development into other cancers through additional clinical studies.

Initial clinical development of EGFRvIII immunotherapy was led by collaborating investigators at the Brain Tumor Center at the Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center and at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas. The results from Phase 1 and Phase 2a studies, 16 and 23 patients, respectively, have demonstrated a significant increase in the time to disease progression (greater than 113%) in the patients which were vaccinated, and also in overall survival rates (greater than 100%), both relative to appropriately matched historical controls. AVANT believes that the therapy has been well tolerated, and significant immune responses to EGFRvIII were generated in many patients. An extension of the Phase 2a program at the same two institutions has enrolled 18 additional GBM patients treated with standard of care. The preliminary data support the observations from the previous studies. Independently, active immunotherapy for EGFRvIII in prostate and ovarian cancer patients has been conducted in a Phase 1 trial at the University of Washington.

5

AVANT initiated a Phase 2b/3 randomized study of CDX-110 combined with standard of care, temozolomide, versus standard of care alone in patients with GBM in May 2007, and AVANT intends to open a total of 29 sites in the United States and Canada during 2008.

The FDA has granted orphan drug designation for CDX-110 for the treatment of EGFRvIII expressing GBM as well as fast track designation.

On April 16, 2008, AVANT, acting through its wholly owned subsidiary Celldex Therapeutics, Inc., and Pfizer, Inc. (“Pfizer”) entered into a license and development agreement under which Pfizer will be granted an exclusive worldwide license to CDX-110. The agreement also gives Pfizer exclusive rights to the use of AVANT’s EGFRvIII vaccines in other potential indications. Under the license and development agreement, Pfizer will make an upfront payment to AVANT of $40 million and will make a $10 million equity investment in AVANT. Pfizer will fund all development costs for these programs. AVANT is also eligible to receive milestone payments exceeding $390 million for the successful development and commercialization of CDX-110 and additional EGFRvIII vaccine products, as well as double-digit royalties on any product sales.

CDX-110 Clinical Programs Summary

6

2. CDX-1307

AVANT has developed an APC Targeting Technology™ that utilizes fully human monoclonal antibodies to directly target specialized types of immune system cells, known as antigen presenting cells. AVANT is advancing several clinical and preclinical product candidates that use APC Targeting Technology™ to manipulate critical types of antigen presenting cells, known as dendritic cells and macrophages, which are key cells within the immune system. Because these cells are largely responsible for initiating the immune system’s disease-fighting mechanisms, AVANT believes that product candidates using AVANT’s technology will create more potent immune responses than standard vaccination strategies.

AVANT’s lead APC Targeting Technology™ product candidate, CDX-1307, is in development for the treatment of epithelial tumors such as colorectal, pancreatic, bladder, ovarian and breast cancers. CDX-1307 targets the beta chain of human chorionic gonadotropin, known as hCG-b, which is an antigen often found in epithelial tumors. The presence of hCG-b in these cancers correlates with a poor clinical outcome, suggesting that this molecule may contribute to tumor growth. Normal adult tissues have minimal expression of hCG-b; therefore, targeted immune responses are not expected to generate significant side effects.

Tissue of Origin

hCG—a

prognostic

indicator

hCG—

Expression

Bladder

Yes

30-76

%

Colorectal

Yes

17-54

%

Breast

No/Yes

19-80

%

Pancreas

Yes

42

%

Renal

Yes

23

%

Cervical

Yes

26-35

%

Ovarian

Yes

36-41

%

Lung

Yes

14-93

%

CDX-1307 is human antibody-based product that consists of the cancer antigen hCG-b linked to a human antibody that attaches to mannose receptors on dendritic cells and macrophages (see illustration below). AVANT believes that preclinical studies demonstrate that CDX-1307 can efficiently deliver hCG-b to antigen presenting cells (APCs) in animals, and leads to strong antibody and cell-mediated immune responses. The manufacture and purification of CDX-1307 uses procedures already well established for the production of standard monoclonal antibodies; however, AVANT believes the active dose levels will be significantly lower for

APC-Targeting Technology products than standard therapeutic antibodies.

7

Thirty-five (35) patients with epithelial cancers have been treated in Phase 1 clinical trials of CDX-1307 at the Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center. The immunotherapy has been well tolerated, and one patient with pancreatic cancer demonstrated a reduction in tumor burden, with only minor adverse events observed (reddening at the injection site). The investigators at the Duke Comprehensive Cancer Center were awarded a two year $500,000 grant from the Avon Foundation and the National Cancer Institute to support Phase 1 work in breast cancer. The safety of CDX-1307 in combination with defined immune stimulators will next be evaluated with intent to enter Phase 2 research in 2009.

3. CDX-1401

AVANT is developing CDX-1401, another APC-Targeting vaccine, for treatment of malignant melanoma and a variety of solid tumors which express the proprietary cancer antigen NY-ESO-1, which AVANT licensed from the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research in 2006. AVANT believes that preclinical studies have shown that CDX-1401 is effective for activation of human T-cell responses against NY-ESO-1. Further preclinical studies and manufacturing process optimization are in progress, with an IND filing planned for Q4-2008.

DEC-205

receptors

NY-ESO-1

8

D. Infectious Disease Development Programs

Overview

Modern biotechnology offers great potential for improving health conditions worldwide. New vaccine technologies, in particular, can provide avenues to disease prevention and treatment with notable advantages over drugs in terms of patient compliance and cost. They also offer strategies to solve global health problems, to protect both civilians and the military from infectious disease threats, and to increase the safety of our food supply. Our goal is to become a leading developer of innovative vaccines that address health care needs on a global basis. In this regard, we acquired VitriLife®, a new technology with the potential to improve product stability, reducing the need for vaccine refrigeration. With this technology and our Cholera- and Salmonella-vectored delivery technologies, named VibrioVec® and SalmoVec®, we can now develop a new generation of bacterial vaccines that have an ideal product profile: safe and effective, oral, single-dose, rapidly protective with temperature stable products.

AVANT is developing a series of single-dose, genetically-attenuated, live bacterial vaccines to prevent diarrhea and enteric disease. These diarrheal vaccines are targeted to address the U.S. and European travelers’ market as well as the healthcare requirements of developing countries. AVANT’s single-dose oral vaccine technology is currently addressed to serious bacterial diseases, but combines the advantages of rapid onset of protection with the flexibility to address a variety of different causes of disease. The attenuated live bacteria used to create these vaccines can also serve as vectors for the development of vaccines against other bacterial and viral diseases. By engineering key disease antigens into the DNA of the vector organisms, AVANT can extend the protective ability of its single-dose oral vaccines to a wide variety of illnesses. AVANT has partnered with Pfizer, Inc. who will apply AVANT’s vaccine technology to animal health and human food safety markets.

1. Global Health

AVANT’s oral, bacterial vaccine technology can address the healthcare requirements of developing countries, where, for example, the need for cholera and typhoid vaccines is particularly acute. These vaccine technologies may provide avenues to disease prevention and treatment with notable advantages over drugs in terms of ease of use, patient compliance, thermostability and cost. Thus, they may offer strategies to solve global health problems. Development of safe and effective cholera and typhoid vaccines is the first step in establishing AVANT’s single-dose, oral bacterial vaccine franchise.

CholeraGarde® Vaccine: We are developing an attenuated form of the bacterium Vibrio cholerae as a potential cholera vaccine. In several Phase 1/2 clinical studies, single oral doses of the cholera vaccine, CholeraGarde® (or Peru-15), were administered to more than 75 human subjects and shown to be safe, immunogenic and protective against infection with the virulent organism.

In October 2000, we initiated a Phase 2b trial in collaboration with the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (“WRAIR”) and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (“NIAID”) of the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”) at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital

9

Medical Center (“CCH”) to test the safety, immunogenicity and protective capacity of the vaccine against a challenge with live virulent cholera. AVANT and WRAIR successfully manufactured clinical supplies of the vaccine at WRAIR’s facility for use in the study. Results of the study demonstrated the ability of CholeraGarde® to provide complete protection against the trial’s primary endpoint, moderate and severe diarrhea. During 2002, AVANT completed a Phase 2 dose-ranging study with CholeraGarde® to assess the safety and immunogenicity of this vaccine and which supported the start of trials in December 2002 with the International Vaccine Institute (“IVI”) in Bangladesh where cholera is endemic.

In January 2004, we announced positive preliminary results of the adult portion from the Phase 2 clinical trial of CholeraGarde® in Bangladesh. In 70 adult patients, enrolled as part of this ongoing study that is assessing the safety and immunogenicity of the vaccine in adults prior to moving into progressively younger pediatric populations, vaccination with the single-dose, oral cholera vaccine was well tolerated. Moreover, over 70% of the vaccinated adults responded with a favorable immune response. In July 2005, the Bangladesh study results in children and infants showed CholeraGarde® to be well tolerated and highly immunogenic, with 77% of children aged 9 months to 5 years generating protective immune responses. These results showed the vaccine to be consistently well tolerated and immunogenic against the cholera organism in all portions of this trial.

In August 2006, IVI received $21 million in funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for a Cholera Vaccine Initiative (“CHOVI”), which will include conducting further clinical trials of CholeraGarde®. IVI plans to conduct Phase 2 clinical trials of CholeraGarde® in Bangladesh, India and Thailand beginning in the second half of 2008 followed by Phase 3 field studies. IVI will be purchasing clinical materials produced at AVANT’s Fall River, MA manufacturing facility for the trials.

AVANT has decided to focus only on the fully-funded opportunity for CholeraGarde® in the developing world. AVANT has determined that the high clinical costs of our own Phase 3 clinical trials in the United States and the investment in a commercial manufacturing facility are not justified by the limited market opportunities for a cholera vaccine in developed countries at this time.

Ty800 Typhoid Fever Vaccine: AVANT has developed an oral vaccine to offer rapid, single-dose protection against Salmonella typhi, the cause of typhoid fever. Ty800 is targeted for both the travelers’ market and global health needs. In 2006, the NIAID initiated a Phase 1/2 in-patient dose-ranging clinical trial aimed at demonstrating the safety and immunogenicity of the Ty800 typhoid fever vaccine. NIAID funded the production of Ty800 vaccine for clinical testing and completed the Phase 1/2 trial at a NIH-funded clinical site in 2007. Results showed the single-dose, oral vaccine to be well tolerated and immunogenic, with over 90% of vaccinated subjects generating immune responses. AVANT initiated its own sponsored Phase 2 trial of Ty800 in July 2007. Enrollment was completed in late September 2007 and preliminary results reported in April 2008 from the study showed that the single-dose, oral vaccine was well tolerated and immunogenic, demonstrating that the desired immune response was achieved. Incidence of reactogenicity symptoms and adverse events post-vaccination were similar to placebo. Importantly, immunogenic response was dose-dependent. Positive immune response or seroconversion (prospectively defined as a 4-fold increase in anti-LPS titers over pre-dose level)

10

rates were 65.5% (36/55) and 80% (44/55) in the low and high dose groups, respectively, and was significantly (p<0.001) higher than placebo.

2. Travelers’ Vaccines

AVANT has several travelers’ vaccine programs in pre-clinical development—all addressing important causes of serious diarrheal diseases worldwide. In November 2007, AVANT entered into an agreement with the Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases of the NIAID, whereby NIAID will sponsor a Phase 1 study of AVANT’s investigational single-dose, oral vaccine designed to offer combined protection against both enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) and cholera. AVANT expects NIAID to initiate the Phase 1 trial of its ETEC vaccine candidate in the first half of 2008. AVANT’s long-term goal is to develop a combination vaccine containing Cholera, Ty800, S. paratyphi and ETEC as a “super enteric vaccine” to address the travelers’ market.

3. CDX-2401

AVANT is also using its APC Targeting Technology™ to develop vaccines against infectious disease. The lead program is CDX-2401, an APC-Targeting prophylactic vaccine, aimed at providing protection from infection with HIV, the virus known to cause AIDS. This program is in a Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation funded partnership with collaborators at Rockefeller University in New York City, who have shown in model systems that protective immunity can be induced with such a vaccine. Preclinical studies and manufacturing development are in progress and AVANT, with it collaborators, plans to initiate Phase 1 clinical studies in the first half of 2009.

E. Inflammatory Disease Programs

1. Complement Inhibitors

We have been developing a new class of immunotherapeutics that inhibit a part of the immune system called the complement system. The complement system is a series of proteins that are important initiators of the body’s acute inflammatory response against disease, infection and injury. Excessive complement activation also plays a role in some persistent inflammatory conditions. Our lead compound, TP10, a soluble form of naturally occurring Complement Receptor 1, has effectively shown to inhibit the activation of the complement cascade in animal models and in human clinical trials. We believe that regulating the complement system could have therapeutic and prophylactic applications in several acute and chronic conditions, including reperfusion injury from surgery or ischemic disease, organ transplant, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, age-related macular degeneration (“AMD”), and myasthenia gravis. Medical problems that result from excessive complement activation represent multi-billion dollar market opportunities. In the United States, several million people are afflicted with these complement-mediated conditions.

We elected to initially develop and commercialize TP10 for cardiac surgery. The objective of our clinical studies was to assess the ability of TP10 to mitigate the injury to the heart, brain and other organs that occurs when patients are placed on cardiopulmonary bypass (“CPB”) circuits, thus potentially improving post-operative outcomes. In February 2002,

11

AVANT announced that TP10 had not achieved a significant reduction in the primary endpoint of death, myocardial infarction, prolonged intubation or prolonged intra-aortic balloon pumping following preliminary analysis of a Phase 2 adult cardiac surgery trial conducted in 564 patients. However, further analysis of the study data demonstrated an important treatment benefit in male patients participating in the trial, with no significant treatment benefit observed in female patients. In February 2006, AVANT reported that results from a females-only study did not meet the primary endpoint, thus confirming the results for female subjects in the previous TP10 trial. Because of these study results, AVANT is seeking a corporate partner to complete the development and commercialization of TP10 for an organ transplantation indication or an AMD indication.

In addition to TP10, AVANT has identified other product candidates to inhibit activation of the complement system. The lead candidate under research evaluation is a form of sCR1 (“TP10”) that has been modified by the addition of sialyl Lewis × (“sLex”) carbohydrate side chains yielding sCR1sLex. sLex is a carbohydrate which mediates binding of leukocytes including neutrophils to selectin proteins. Selectin-mediated binding of neutrophils to activated endothelial cells is a critical event in inflammation. sCR1sLex may be effective in complement- and selectin-dependent indications such as stroke and myocardial infarction. We believe that sCR1sLex has the ability to target the complement-inhibiting activity of sCR1 to the site of inflammation and, at the same time, inhibit the leukocyte/endothelial cell adhesion process.

AVANT plans to seek partnering arrangements to capture the value inherent in the complement inhibitor programs and their strong intellectual property. AVANT can offer a worldwide license for all fields as a part of such a partnership arrangement.

F. Marketed Products

1. Rotavirus Vaccine

AVANT has developed a novel vaccine against rotavirus infection. Rotavirus, a major cause of diarrhea and vomiting in infants, affects approximately 80% of the approximately 4 million infants born each year in the United States. As a result, on an annual basis, about 500,000 infants require medical attention and 50,000 are hospitalized. The economic burden in the United States is estimated at over $1 billion in direct medical and indirect societal costs. In the United States, a vaccine against rotavirus disease has become a universal pediatric vaccine. In the rest of the world, rotavirus is a cause of significant infant mortality.

We initiated a Phase 2 efficacy study in 1997, conducted at four U.S. medical centers, which examined the vaccine’s ability to prevent rotavirus disease and to further studied the safety of the vaccine. A total of 215 infants were enrolled in the study and were immunized with the vaccine. In 1998, we announced positive results which showed that approximately 90 percent of the vaccinated infants were protected from rotavirus disease and demonstrated a statistical significance at p<0.001 and which were published in Lancet in July 1999. Examination of the safety data revealed that mild fever in a small number of infants was the only side effect significantly more common in the vaccine group than in the placebo group.

12

In 1997, AVANT licensed this rotavirus vaccine to GlaxoSmithKline (“Glaxo”). AVANT and Glaxo have collaborated on the development and commercialization of our oral rotavirus vaccine, Rotarix®. As discussed under “H. Collaborative Agreements”, with the successful completion of the Phase 2 clinical trial and the development by Glaxo of a viable manufacturing process, Glaxo has assumed financial responsibility for all subsequent clinical and development activities and paid us an initial milestone payment of $500,000. Glaxo completed Phase 1/2 bridging studies in over 6,500 infants in Europe, Latin America and Asia using the two-dose oral Rotarix® vaccine. Glaxo initiated global Phase 3 clinical trials of Rotarix® in the third quarter of 2003 and AVANT recognized a $1.0 million milestone payment.

Glaxo gained approval for Rotarix® in Mexico during 2004, which represented the first in a series of worldwide approvals and commercial launches for the product. During 2005, Glaxo launched Rotarix® in additional Latin American countries as well as Asia Pacific countries, and they filed for market approval with the European regulatory authorities. In February 2006, the European Commission granted approval of Rotarix® in the European Union. Glaxo filed a Biologics License Application (“BLA”) with the FDA for United States market approval in mid-2007. On April 3, 2008, Rotarix® received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for the prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants. With only two doses, Rotarix® offers protection against the most commonly circulating rotavirus types in the U.S. and allows infants to complete the vaccination series by four months of age. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) currently recommends that children complete the rotavirus immunization series by six months of age. Rotavirus infects virtually every child in the United States by age five and is the leading cause of severe gastroenteritis in infants and young children worldwide. Rotarix® may help prevent many of the 55,000 – 70,000 hospitalizations by young children that result from rotavirus in the U.S. each year. AVANT expects Glaxo to launch Rotarix® in the second half of 2008.

AVANT licensed the Rotarix® technology in 1995 from CCH and owes CCH a license fee of 30% on net royalties received from Glaxo. In May 2005, AVANT entered into an agreement whereby an affiliate of Paul Royalty Fund (“PRF”) purchased an interest in the net royalties AVANT will receive on worldwide sales of Rotarix®. To date AVANT has received $50 million in milestone payments under the PRF agreement. Under the PRF agreement, AVANT retained 50% of the $4 million and $1.5 million milestones payment from Glaxo for the European Commission and FDA approvals, respectively, discussed above, with the balance payable to PRF and CCH. The PRF agreement also provides for a $10 million milestone payment to AVANT if Rotarix® is launched in the United States in 2008. AVANT expects to achieve this milestone in the second half of 2008.

Royalty rates on Rotarix® escalate from 7% to 10% based on net product sales in countries that have valid patent protection. These royalty rates are discounted by 30% for “non-patent” countries (primarily international markets). In September 2006, AVANT received notice from Glaxo that Glaxo would begin paying royalties on sales of Rotarix® vaccine at the lower of the two royalty rates under their 1997 license agreement. Glaxo’s decision to pay the lower royalty rate (which is 70% of the full rate) is based upon Glaxo’s assertion that Rotarix® is not covered by the patents Glaxo licensed from AVANT in Australia and certain European countries.

13

2. Food Safety Vaccine Products

Our Megan subsidiary has commercialized three veterinary vaccines; Argus™ SC, licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture (“USDA”) in March 1998 and marketed by Intervet, Inc., and Megan®Vac 1 and Megan®Egg, licensed by the USDA in November 1998 and 2003, respectively, and marketed by Lohmann Animal Health International (“LAHI”).

Megan®Vac 1: Megan®Vac 1 is a double gene-deleted modified vaccine for use in chickens for protection against multiple species and/or strains of Salmonella bacteria. The vaccine is administered to chicks at the hatchery in a spray cabinet with a field boost generally given at around two weeks of age. The objective of the vaccine is to eliminate or reduce the overall load of Salmonella spp. in the bird and environment, thus reducing bacteria levels on broiler carcasses in the processing plant. While the reduction of Salmonella spp. in the broiler may provide some direct health benefit to the chicken, the primary purpose of the vaccine is to increase food safety. Megan®Vac 1 is also registered in New Zealand. Registration activities are currently underway for Australia.

Megan®Egg: Megan®Egg is from the same master seed as Megan®Vac 1 with titer, dosage recommendations, and product configuration specifically targeting the layer (commercial table-egg pullets) and breeder hen markets. Pullets generally receive three vaccinations during the growing period and are protected throughout the lay period without further vaccination. In the case of table-egg layers and breeder hens, the primary objective is elimination or reduction of Salmonella enteritidis levels in the eggs, birds, and poultry houses.

Because AVANT’s focus is on human health care, in September 2002, we appointed LAHI as the exclusive distributor of our Megan Health poultry vaccines in North America. LAHI performs all marketing and distribution activities of Megan’s marketed products for the commercial poultry market.

G. Research Programs

1. Overview

AVANT’s research programs focus on further applications of AVANT’s APC Targeting, human monoclonal antibody and other technologies for the development of further therapies for cancer and infectious diseases, as well as specific immunosuppressive approaches to allergy and autoimmune disease.

·Human monoclonal antibody therapies. AVANT, through its licenses from Medarex, Inc. (“Medarex”), has access to Medarex’s Ultimab® technology to develop up to 10 novel therapeutic monoclonal antibody product candidates. The initial programs will focus on developing antibody therapies for cancer, but AVANT also plans to apply this capability to develop therapeutic approaches for infectious diseases.

· CDX-1189. AVANT has proprietary human monoclonal antibodies to CD89 for the first of these programs which aims to develop a novel therapy for

14

leukemias. The next steps for this program will be to identify the lead candidate.

·APC Targeting. AVANT has several other APC targeted therapeutic vaccine candidates for cancer and infectious diseases at the preclinical research stage, and AVANT is developing the technology for use in the induction of antigen-specific immune suppression for application in the treatment of allergic and autoimmune diseases.

·CDX-2101, a Virus-Like Particle, or VLP, therapeutic vaccine to treat patients chronically infected by the Hepatitis B virus, or HBV, which can lead to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Chronic HBV infection is a major health problem, particularly in Asia, where widespread prophylactic HBV vaccination has not been available. The prophylactic vaccines induce protective antibody responses to a viral coat protein, blocking infection, but these are ineffective in patients already chronically infected with the virus. CDX-2101 is designed to stimulate strong T-cell responses to a key HBV antigen expressed by virus-infected cells in the liver, which can then mediate viral elimination and inhibit the progression of liver pathology. Manufacturing and preclinical development of CDX-2101 has been completed and AVANT is seeking a partner to further the clinical development of CDX-2101.

·CDX-S03, a novel auto-immune targeting vaccine designed to down-regulate the undesired immune responses involved in destroying the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas of juvenile-onset, type I, diabetes patients. This product candidate is based on the Notch signaling technology platform brought into AVANT through the acquisition of Lorantis in 2005. Initial preclinical studies have shown this therapy can significantly inhibit diabetes in model systems. Further dose and regimen optimization studies in animals are planned prior to beginning clinical development studies. A manufacturing process for CDX-SO3 has been developed. This Notch technology should also be applicable for the development of similar specific immunotherapies for other autoimmune diseases. AVANT is seeking a collaboration partner to further the clinical development of CDX-S03.

2.APC Targeting Technology™ for Active Immunizations

The body’s immune system is tasked with recognizing and combating cancer cells, viruses, bacteria and other disease causing organisms. This defense is carried out mainly by white blood cells and their specific subsets, T-cells, and B-cells, which utilize cell-mediated immune responses and antibody based immune responses targeted against specific disease-associated molecules or antigens. Professional antigen presenting cells, or APCs, including dendritic cells and macrophages, are additional subsets of white blood cells that are critical to the development of specific immune responses by guiding the activity of T cells via a system called antigen processing and presentations. AVANT’s APC Targeting Technology™ is designed to boost this process using human monoclonal antibodies linked to disease-associated antigen to efficiently deliver the attached antigen to APCs. AVANT’s proprietary human antibodies are specific for molecules located on the surface of these APCs, which are known to be entry portals for antigen processing pathways. In vivo, the antigen attached to the antibody is specifically

15

delivered to the appropriate antigen processing pathways in APCs, particularly dendritic cells, which are often referred to as “professional” antigen presenting cells. APCs internalize these targeted antigens into specific cellular compartments and then present the processed antigen on the cell surface, thereby initiating the desired immune response.

The delivery of antigens into the appropriate intracellular compartments of APCs with AVANT’s proprietary antibodies can enhance antigen processing and presentation to T cells at least 100 to 1000 fold more efficiently than non-targeted antigen. Furthermore, APC-Targeting has been shown to be more effective than other vaccine strategies in animal models for cancer and infectious disease.

AVANT’s APC Targeting Technology™ has been designed to allow AVANT to take advantage of many important characteristics of human monoclonal antibodies, including their long circulating half-life, generally good safety profile, and standardized manufacturing procedures. AVANT believes that in addition to robust efficacy, its APC Targeting Technology™ provides significant manufacturing, regulatory and other practical advantages over patient specific and other immune-based treatments and can substantially reduce the dosage and cost currently required in conventional immunotherapies.

16

Preclinical studies have demonstrated that the APC Targeting Technology™ is able to deliver an antigen in a manner that result in significantly more efficient processing and presentation by APCs than a non-targeted antigen. AVANT believes this creates a more potent immune response than standard sub-unit peptides used in competing immunization strategies. Model systems have demonstrated that the antigens delivered by AVANT’s proprietary monoclonal antibodies are processed and presented by human dendritic cells substantially more efficiently than a non-targeted antigen. Furthermore, using animal models, AVANT has shown the effectiveness of this strategy in protection against tumor challenges. In addition, using in vitro methods with cells from cancer patients, AVANT has demonstrated that its product candidates can elicit antigen specific activated T-cells that killed tumor cells expressing the antigen but spared cells lacking the antigen. CD4, or helper, T-cells were also elicited. AVANT believes that activation of these cells are critical for enhancing both humoral and cellular responses, and that these results support AVANT’s strategy of seeking to develop additional clinical candidates.

AVANT believes that its studies, and those of other investigators, indicate that this APC targeted approach induces rapid and significantly heightened immune responses in vivo as compared with non-targeted agents. Further, AVANT believes that by effectively targeting antigens to dendritic cells in vivo, its product candidates can transform weakly immunogenic antigens into viable targets for immunotherapy.

H. Collaborative Agreements

We depend on our collaborative relationships and may enter into more of them in the future. Some of the above referenced agreements give our collaborator substantial responsibility to commercialize a product and to make decisions about the amount and timing of resources that are devoted to developing and commercializing a product. As a result, we do not have complete control over how resources are used toward some of our products.

In addition, some of these agreements relate to products in the early stages of research and development. Others require AVANT and our collaborator to jointly decide on the feasibility of developing a particular product using our technologies. In either case, these agreements may terminate without benefit to us if the underlying products are not fully developed. Moreover,

17

once specific products are chosen for development, the agreements relating to them may require AVANT to meet specified milestones, to invest money and other resources in the development process or to negotiate additional licenses and other agreements, which may not be possible or advantageous. If we fail to meet our obligations under those agreements, they could terminate and we might need to enter into relationships with other collaborators and to spend additional time, money, and other valuable resources in the process.

Moreover, we cannot predict whether our collaborators will continue their development efforts or, if they do, whether their efforts will achieve success. Many of our collaborators face the same kinds of risks and uncertainties in their business that we face. A delay or setback to a collaborator will, at a minimum, delay the commercialization of any affected products, and may ultimately prevent it. Moreover, any collaborator could breach its agreement with us or otherwise not use best efforts to promote our products. A collaborator may choose to pursue alternative technologies or products that compete with our technologies or products. In either case, if a collaborator failed to successfully develop one of our products, we would need to find another collaborator. Our ability to do so would depend upon our legal right to do so at the time and whether the product remained commercially viable.

GlaxoSmithKline (“Glaxo”) and Paul Royalty Fund (“PRF”): In 1997, AVANT entered into an agreement with Glaxo to collaborate on the development and commercialization of our oral rotavirus vaccine. Under the terms of the agreement, Glaxo received an exclusive worldwide license to commercialize our rotavirus vaccine. We were responsible for continuing the Phase 2 clinical efficacy study of the rotavirus vaccine, which was completed in August 1998. Subject to the development by Glaxo of a viable manufacturing process, Glaxo assumed responsibility for all subsequent clinical trials and all other development activities. Glaxo made an initial license payment of $250,000 in 1997 upon execution of the agreement. In June 1999, we received a milestone payment of $500,000 from Glaxo for successfully completing the Phase 2 clinical efficacy study and establishing a commercially viable process to manufacture the vaccine. Glaxo initiated global Phase 3 clinical trials of Rotarix® in the third quarter of 2003, and AVANT recognized a $1.0 million milestone. Glaxo filed for market approval with the European regulatory authorities in late 2004, triggering a $2 million milestone fee payable to AVANT. In February 2006, the European Commission granted approval of Rotarix® in the European Union, which triggered a $4 million milestone payment from Glaxo. On April 3, 2008, Rotarix® received approval from the U.S. FDA for the prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis in infants which triggered a milestone payment of $1.5 million from GSK.

Royalty rates on Rotarix® escalate from 7% to 10% based on net product sales in countries for which we have valid patent protection. These royalty rates are discounted by 30% for “non-patent” countries (primarily international markets). Our internal commercialization models for Rotarix® suggest a blended royalty rate ranging from mid to high single digits over the next three years. The term of this agreement is through the expiration of the last of the relevant patents covered by the agreement, although Glaxo may terminate the agreement upon 90 days prior written notice. In September 2006, AVANT received notice from Glaxo that Glaxo would begin paying royalties on sales of Rotarix® vaccine at the lower of the two royalty rates under their 1997 license agreement. Glaxo’s decision to pay the lower royalty rate (which is 70% of the full rate) is based upon Glaxo’s assertion that Rotarix® is not covered by the patents Glaxo licensed from AVANT in Australia and certain European countries.

18

AVANT licensed the Rotarix® technology from CCH in 1995 and owes a license fee of 30% to CCH on net royalties received from Glaxo. In May 2005, AVANT entered into an agreement whereby an affiliate of PRF purchased an interest in the net royalties AVANT will receive on worldwide sales of Rotarix®. Under the PRF agreement, AVANT will retain 50% of future Glaxo milestone payments, with the balance payable to PRF and CCH.

If Glaxo’s royalty position stands, the royalties to which PRF is entitled will no longer be limited by a $27.5 million annual threshold, which AVANT projected may have been reached in later years as sales of Rotarix® increased. Irrespective of Glaxo’s position, AVANT will still retain the royalties on worldwide sales of Rotarix® once PRF receives 2.45 times the aggregate cash payments it makes to AVANT, though the potential amount of such residual royalties will be lower if Glaxo’s position stands.

Medarex, Inc (“Medarex”): Under our agreements with Medarex, AVANT has access to use Medarex’s UltiMAb® technology to develop therapeutic monoclonal antibody product candidates and may be obligated to pay license fees, milestone payments and royalties relating to the development and regulatory approval of certain of its technologies.

Under the terms of a research and commercialization agreement with Medarex, AVANT will be required to pay Medarex license fees to obtain commercial licenses for antibodies arising from research licenses granted by Medarex. AVANT will also be required to pay Medarex milestone payments with respect to the development of any products containing such licensed antibodies. These fees and milestones may total up to $7 million to $10 million per licensed antibody if a product containing such licensed antibody receives approval from the FDA and/or equivalent foreign agencies. None of AVANT’s product candidates currently under development trigger such milestone payments. In general, potential milestone payments for AVANT’s antibody product candidates may or may not be triggered and may vary in size depending on a number of variables, almost all of which are currently uncertain. Typically, the events that trigger these payments per product candidate include:

· submission of investigational new drug application(s) or foreign equivalents;

· commencement of Phase I, Phase II and/or Phase III clinical trials or foreign equivalents;

· submission of biologic license application(s) or foreign equivalents; and

· receipt of marketing approval(s) to sell products in a particular country or region.

In addition, AVANT will be required to pay royalties on any sales of products containing licensed antibodies. The royalties will be payable on a country-by-country and product-by-product basis until the date which is the later of: (i) the expiration of the last-to-expire of the Medarex patents covering the product in such country or (ii) the tenth anniversary of the first commercial sale of a product in such country. AVANT expects that this will occur no earlier than 2019. AVANT will also be responsible for the payment of any royalties, license fees and milestone and other payments due to third parties if AVANT licenses any additional technology in order to commercialize such products.

19

To date, AVANT has not made any royalty payments on sales of any products and believes it is at least a number of years away from selling any products that would require AVANT to make any such royalty payments. Whether AVANT will be obligated to make milestone or royalty payments in the future is subject to the success of AVANT’s product development efforts and, accordingly, is inherently uncertain.

Pfizer Inc (“Pfizer”): In connection with AVANT ‘s acquisition of Megan in 2000, we entered into a licensing agreement with Pfizer whereby Pfizer licensed Megan’s technology for the development of animal health and food safety vaccines. Upon execution of the agreement, Pfizer made an initial license payment of $2.5 million together with a $3 million equity investment. In December 2002, we received a milestone payment of $500,000 from Pfizer as a result of the submission of an application with the USDA for licensure of a food safety vaccine. Under the agreement, we may receive additional milestone payments of up to $3 million based upon attainment of specified milestones. We may receive royalty payments on eventual product sales. The term of this agreement is through the expiration of the last of the patents covered by the agreement. AVANT has no obligations to incur any research and development costs in connection with this agreement.

On June 1, 2006, AVANT entered into a Collaborative Research and Development Agreement with Pfizer aimed at the discovery and development of vaccines to protect animals. In 2007, further funded work at AVANT on the joint research program was terminated by Pfizer. Under this collaboration arrangement, AVANT recognized $62,500 and $137,500 in product development and licensing revenue from Pfizer in 2007 and 2006, respectively.

On April 16, 2008, AVANT, acting through its wholly owned subsidiary Celldex Therapeutics, Inc., and Pfizer, Inc. (“Pfizer”) entered into a license and development agreement under which Pfizer will be granted an exclusive worldwide license to CDX-110. The agreement also gives Pfizer exclusive rights to the use of AVANT’s EGFRvIII vaccines in other potential indications. Under the license and development agreement, Pfizer will make an upfront payment to AVANT of $40 million and will make a $10 million equity investment in AVANT. Pfizer will fund all development costs for these programs. AVANT is also eligible to receive milestone payments exceeding $390 million for the successful development and commercialization of CDX-110 and additional EGFRvIII vaccine products, as well as double-digit royalties on any product sales. The agreement is subject to approval under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 (as amended) and is expected to close in the second quarter of 2008.

Rockefeller University (“Rockefeller”): On November 1, 2005, AVANT and Rockefeller entered into a license agreement for the exclusive worldwide rights to human DEC-205 receptor, with the right to sublicense the technology. The license grant is exclusive except that Rockefeller may use and permit other nonprofit organizations to use the human DEC-205 receptor patent rights for educational and research purposes. In addition, AVANT acknowledges that Rockefeller has granted Howard Hughes Medical Institute, or HHMI, a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable license to use the patent rights, biological materials, and technical information for HHMI’s research purposes, but with no right to sublicense. AVANT may also be required to pay royalties on any product sales. The royalties will be payable on a country-by-country and licensed product-by-licensed product basis until the date which is the later of (i) the expiration of the last to expire of the patents covering the licensed product in such country or (ii) ten years

20

following the first commercial sale of a licensed product in such country. AVANT may be required to pay license fees and milestone payments to Rockefeller with respect to development of the human DEC-205 receptor. These fees and milestones may total up to $2 million to $4 million per product candidate that receives approval from the FDA and equivalent foreign agencies.

Duke University (“Duke”): On September 1, 2006, AVANT and Duke University Brain Tumor Cancer Center of Duke entered into a license agreement that gave AVANT access and reference to the clinical data generated by Duke and its collaborators in order for AVANT to generate its own filing with the FDA relating to its product CDX-110. In exchange for referencing all the Duke data, AVANT paid Duke a one-time upfront payment of $.175 million and issued to Duke 100,000 shares of its common stock, which AVANT recorded in its consolidated statement of operations as a licensing expense in research and development. The estimated aggregate fair value of the common shares issued was $330,000. AVANT may be required to pay license fees and milestone payments to Duke with respect to development of the CDX-110. These fees and milestones may total up to $1.2 million if CDX-110 receives approval from the FDA and equivalent foreign agencies. AVANT may also be required to pay royalties upon approval of CDX-110. The royalties will be payable on a country-by-country and licensed product-by-licensed product basis until the date of the expiration of the last to expire of the patents covering the licensed product in such country.

Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research (“Ludwig”): On October 20, 2006, AVANT and Ludwig entered into an agreement for the nonexclusive rights to six cancer tumor targets for use in combination with AVANT’s APC Targeting Technology. The term of the agreement is for ten years. As consideration for the nonexclusive license, AVANT agreed to pay an annual license fee of $7,500 and $2,500 for each full-length antigen and partial-length antigen, respectively, until such antigens enter a randomized Phase 1 clinical trial. In consideration for a nonexclusive license, AVANT may be required to pay license fees and milestone payments to Ludwig for the use of the cancer targets in combination with AVANT’s technology. The fees and milestones may total up to $1.5 million to $2.5 million on a product candidate that receives approval from the FDA and equivalent foreign agencies. AVANT may also be required to pay royalties upon approval of any product candidate. The royalties will be payable on a country-by-country and licensed product-by-licensed product basis until the date of the expiration of the last to expire of the patents covering the licensed product in such country.

BIOSYN Corporation (“Biosyn”): On August 18, 2006, AVANT entered into a nonexclusive supply agreement with BIOSYN for the supply of Good Manufacturing Grade (GMP) proprietary formulation of BIOSYN’s hemocyanin products, including keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH), to be used in combination with AVANT’s lead product CDX-110. AVANT, as part of this agreement, will gain access to BIOSYN’s Drug Master File (DMF), which will be maintained with the U.S. and Canadian regulatory authorities. BIOSYN will support all regulatory filings of AVANT and allow cross-referencing letters by company for U.S. and foreign equivalent agencies. The term of the agreement is for ten years, and AVANT agreed to source all of its KLH requirements through BIOSYN, unless BIOSYN cannot meet AVANT’s demand. AVANT will pay $750,000, payable over ten years, for the license and will pay a per gram cost for product for clinical and commercial use. This agreement was assigned as part of the Pfizer transaction.

21

Corixa Corporation (“Corixa”): In December, 2005, Corixa Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of GlaxoSmithKline, and Celldex Ltd (formerly Lorantis Ltd.), a wholly-owned subsidiary of AVANT, entered into a termination agreement of their collaboration of CDX-2101 or HepVax for the development of a therapeutic vaccine for Hepatitis B. Under the terms of the termination agreement and in consideration for Glaxo terminating the agreement, Glaxo paid to AVANT the sum of $1.63 million. In addition, and subject to the terms and conditions of the termination agreement, Glaxo granted to AVANT a worldwide, fully paid up, royalty-free, perpetual, nonexclusive license to certain technology. AVANT is recognizing the revenue from the termination agreement with Glaxo in accordance with EITF No. 00-21. AVANT has concluded that because the original collaboration between Corixa and Celldex Ltd contained multiple deliverables (either party was able to opt out only after completion of certain milestone events) EITF 00-21 applies. For the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, AVANT recognized approximately $466,000, $466,000 and $14,000 of revenue under the termination agreement, respectively.

DynPort Vaccine Company LLC (“DVC”): In January 2003, AVANT was awarded a subcontract by DVC in the amount of $2.5 million to develop for the U.S. Department of Defense an oral combination vaccine against anthrax and plague using AVANT’s proprietary vaccine technologies. AVANT received a number of additional subcontract modifications from DVC to support further development and pre-clinical animal testing of vaccine constructs of anthrax and plague vaccine candidates. Total contract funding awarded by DVC totaled approximately $12 million. As a result of AVANT’s restructuring in 2007, it is no longer investing its resources in biodefense research and development activities and terminated its contracts with DVC as of September 30, 2007. Through December 31, 2007, AVANT had received approximately $9.7 million in payments under the subcontract agreements.

Lohmann Animal Health International (“LAHI”): In September 2002, AVANT appointed LAHI as the exclusive distributor of its Megan Health poultry vaccines in North America. LAHI, an established animal health company, markets and distributes the Megan’s marketed products for the commercial poultry market. Under the distribution agreement, AVANT receives a percentage of Megan®Vac 1 and Megan®Egg product sales in the form of royalty payments. From the inception of the agreement to December 31, 2007, AVANT has received approximately $704,600 in royalties under the agreement. Royalties received in 2007, 2006 and 2005 were $115,925, $116,595 and $126,598, respectively. The initial term of the agreement is five years with automatic extensions thereafter unless the agreement is terminated by either party.

Biolipox AB (“Biolipox”, formerly Inflazyme Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (“Inflazyme”) and AdProTech, Ltd (“AdProTech”)): In March 2004, AVANT granted a license to AdProTech for non-exclusive rights to use certain components of its intellectual property surrounding complement inhibition. In April 2004, AVANT received an initial license payment of $1 million from AdProTech and AdProTech was acquired by Inflazyme which assumed the license. In November 2007, Inflazyme sold the majority of its research and development assets to Biolipox, including the AVANT license. Under the agreement, AVANT is entitled to annual license fees, milestone payments of up to $13.5 million in the aggregate and royalties on eventual product sales. AVANT has no obligations to incur any research and development costs in connection with this agreement.

22

Select Vaccines Limited (“Select Vaccines”): In February 2007, AVANT entered into a research and development partnership with Select Vaccines Limited, an Australian biotechnology company, focused on the use of Select Vaccines’ virus-like particles (“VLPs”) as a platform technology for the development of viral vaccines. On November 1, 2007, AVANT notified Select Vaccines that, effective December 31, 2007, AVANT for strategic reasons was exercising its rights to terminate its Collaboration and License Agreement with Select Vaccines.

I. Competition

The biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries are intensely competitive and subject to rapid and significant technological change. Many of the products that AVANT is attempting to develop and commercialize will be competing with existing therapies. In addition, a number of companies are pursuing the development of pharmaceuticals that target the same diseases and conditions that AVANT is targeting. AVANT faces competition from pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies both in the United States and abroad. AVANT’s competitors may utilize discovery technologies and techniques or partner with collaborators in order to develop products more rapidly or successfully than Celldex or its collaborators are able to do. Many of AVANT’s competitors, particularly large pharmaceutical companies, have substantially greater financial, technical and human resources than AVANT does. In addition, academic institutions, government agencies and other public and private organizations conducting research may seek patent protection with respect to potentially competitive products or technologies and may establish exclusive collaborative or licensing relationships with AVANT’s competitors.

AVANT is aware of a number of competitive products currently available in the marketplace or under development that are used for the prevention and treatment of the diseases that AVANT has targeted for product development. Many pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies are actively engaged in research and development in areas related to prophylactic and therapeutic vaccines, adjuvants, and vaccine and immunotherapeutic delivery systems, including Acambis, Anitgenics, Baxter, Cell Genesys, Inc., Crucell, Dendreon Corporation, Favrille Corporation, Genitope, GlaxoSmithKline, Intercell, Iomai, Merck, NeoPharm, Inc., Northwest Biotherapeutics, Novavax, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis SA, VaxGen, Vical. AVANT is aware that Cell Genesys, Favrille, Genitope, Northwest Biotherapeutics, and Dendreon are in late stage clinical trials for therapeutic vaccines for the treatment of lymphoma, GBM, melanoma and prostate cancer, respectively, which may compete with CDX-1307, CDX-110 and CDX-1401. In addition, companies such as ImClone, Inc. with its approved product Erbitux™ for the treatment of colorectal cancer, and Genentech, Inc. with its product Herceptin® for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer, have already commercialized antibody-based products that may compete with CDX-1307, CDX-1401 AND CDX-110.

Product candidates AVANT may develop are also subject to competition in the treatment of colorectal cancer from a number of products already approved and on the market, including the following chemotherapy products: AstraZeneca PLC’s Tomudex®, Hoffman-LaRoche’s Xeloda® (capecitabine), Immunex Corporation’s Leucovorin® calcium, Pfizer, Inc.’s Camptosar® (irinotecan) and Aduracil® (5-FU), Sanofi-Synthelabo Group’s Eloxatin™ (oxaliplatin), Genentech’s anti-VEGF antibody, Avastin™, GlaxoSmithKline’s Eniluracil™, and Titan Pharmaceuticals’ CeaVac™, in the treatment of patients with advanced-stage colorectal cancer. In addition, AVANT is aware that other companies such as Cell Genesys, Inc. and

23

Dendreon Corporation may be developing additional cancer vaccines that could potentially compete with other AVANT product candidates. AVANT may also face competition from Medarex and Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, which are developing a therapeutic vaccine for the treatment of melanoma using Medarex’s MDX-010 product candidate. AVANT also faces competition from a number of companies working in the fields of anti-angiogenesis and specific active immunotherapy for the treatment of solid tumor cancers. AVANT expects that competition among specific active immunotherapy and anti-angiogenesis products approved for sale will be based on various factors, including product efficacy, safety, reliability, availability, price and patent position.

Various other companies are developing or commercializing products in areas that AVANT has targeted for product development. Some of these products use therapeutic approaches that may compete directly with AVANT’s product candidates. Many of these companies and institutions, either alone or together with their partners, have substantially greater financial resources and larger research and development staffs than AVANT does. There can be no assurance that our competitors will not develop technologies and products that are safer or more effective than any which are being developed by us or which would render our technology and products obsolete and noncompetitive. These companies may succeed in obtaining approval from the FDA for products more rapidly than we do. There can be no assurance that the vaccines and immunotherapeutic products under development by us and our collaborators will be able to compete successfully with existing products or products under development by other companies, universities and other institutions or that they will obtain regulatory approval in the United States or elsewhere. We believe that the principal competitive factors in the vaccine and immunotherapeutic market are product quality, measured by efficacy and safety, ease of administration and price.

AVANT also faces competition from pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, academic institutions, government agencies and private research organizations in recruiting and retaining highly qualified scientific personnel and consultants and in the development and acquisition of technologies. Moreover, technology controlled by third parties that may be advantageous to AVANT’s business may be acquired or licensed by its competitors, thereby preventing us from obtaining technology on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. AVANT will also compete for the services of third parties that may have already developed or acquired internal biotechnology capabilities or made commercial arrangements with other biopharmaceutical companies to target the diseases on which AVANT has focused both in the U.S. and outside of the U.S. We will require substantial capital resources to complete development of some or all of our products, obtain the necessary regulatory approvals and successfully manufacture and market our products. In order to secure capital resources, we anticipate having to sell additional capital stock, which would dilute existing stockholders. We may also attempt to obtain funds through research grants and agreements with commercial collaborators. However, these types of fundings are uncertain because they are at the discretion of the organizations and companies that control the funds. As a result, we may not receive any funds from grants or collaborations. Alternatively, we may borrow funds from commercial lenders, likely at high interest rates, which would increase the risk of any investment in AVANT.

24

J. Manufacturing

We have no experience in volume manufacturing and we have relied upon collaborators or contractors to manufacture our proposed products for both clinical and commercial purposes. While we believe that there is currently sufficient capacity worldwide for the production of our potential products by our collaborators or through contract manufacturers, establishing long-term relationships with contract manufacturers and securing multiple sources for the necessary quantities of clinical and commercial materials required can be a challenge. Qualifying the initial source of clinical and ultimately commercial material is a time consuming and expensive process due to the highly regulated nature of the pharmaceutical/biotech industry. These costs are hopefully mitigated in the economies of scale realized in commercial manufacture and product sale. The key difficulty in qualifying more than one source for each product is the duplicated time and expense in doing so without the potential to mitigate these costs if the secondary source is never utilized.

We intend to establish manufacturing arrangements with manufacturers that comply with the FDA’s requirements and other regulatory standards, although there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so. We have established our own manufacturing facility in Fall River, Massachusetts to produce vaccine and monoclonal antibody products that we may develop at scale for clinical trials. We are in the process of converting the Fall River facility to mammalian cell culture manufacturing capabilities. In order for us to establish a commercial manufacturing facility, we will require substantial additional funds and will be required to hire and retain significant additional personnel and comply with the extensive cGMP regulations of the FDA applicable to such facility. The commercial manufacturing facility would also need to be licensed for the production of vaccines by the FDA.

To date, we have been arranging with contract manufacturers for the manufacture of clinical trial supplies of CDX-110, CDX-1307, TP10, CETi, and our bacterial vaccines who have facilities that satisfy current good manufacturing practice requirements. Manufacture of our rotavirus vaccine is the responsibility of Glaxo, which has received from us a world-wide exclusive license to commercialize this vaccine.

During the past two years, AVANT has manufactured three clinical lots of CDX-110 using contract manufacturing organizations in the United States. AVANT believes that the supplies necessary for the planned clinical programs will be supplied through our contract manufacturers. In addition to the contract manufacturers with which we currently have agreements, AVANT believes there are other contract manufacturers that can manufacture and release CDX-110.

Two clinical lots of CDX-1307 have been manufactured and released for clinical studies. The drug was manufactured and released by Medarex. AVANT believes that it has sufficient quantities to complete phase 1 clinical trials and that future product can be manufactured at a contract manufacturing organization with experience at manufacturing antibody-based products. AVANT does not have an agreement with Medarex, or any other manufacturer, to manufacture specific additional quantities of CDX-1307 should they be needed, or any of its other product candidates.

25

We contracted with Lonza Biologics plc for process development and scale-up of TP10 for clinical trials. WRAIR has manufactured CholeraGarde® (Peru-15) and Ty800 vaccines under collaborative agreements with us. LAHI manufactures Megan®Vac 1 and Megan®Egg.

The manufacturing processes for our other vaccine and immunotherapeutic delivery systems and vaccines utilize known technologies. We believe that the products we currently have under development can be scaled up to permit manufacture in commercial quantities. However, there can be no assurance that we will not encounter difficulties in scaling up the manufacturing processes.

Use of third party manufacturers limits our control over and ability to monitor the manufacturing process. As a result, we may not be able to detect a variety of problems that may arise and may face additional costs in the process of interfacing with and monitoring the progress of our contract manufacturers. If third party manufacturers fail to meet our manufacturing needs in an acceptable manner, we would face delays and additional costs while we develop internal manufacturing capabilities or find alternative third party manufacturers. It may not be possible to have multiple third party manufacturers ready to supply us with needed material at all or without incurring significant costs.

K. Marketing

Under the terms of existing and future collaborative agreements, we rely and expect to continue to rely on the efforts of our collaborators for the sale and marketing of our products. We have agreements with, among others, Glaxo, Pfizer, Biolipox, and LAHI for the development and commercialization of some of our products. The relevant aspects of these relationships have been previously discussed under the heading “H. Collaborative Agreements.” There can be no assurance that our collaborators will develop and market vaccine products incorporating our technologies, or, if marketed, that such efforts will be successful. The failure of our collaborators to successfully market products would harm our business.

We have retained, and in the future intend to retain, marketing rights to some of our product candidates, including vaccine and immunotherapeutic delivery systems and vaccine candidates, in selected geographic areas and for specified indications. We intend to seek marketing and distribution agreements and/or co-promotion agreements for the distribution of our products in these geographic areas and for these indications. We believe that these arrangements could enable us to generate greater financial return than might be obtained from early stage licensing and collaboration agreements. We have no marketing and sales staff and limited experience relating to marketing and distribution of commercial products, including vaccines. If we determine in the future to engage in direct marketing of our products, we will be required to recruit an experienced marketing group, develop a supporting distribution capability and incur significant additional expenditures. There can be no assurance that we will be able to establish a successful marketing force. We may choose or find it necessary to enter into strategic partnerships on uncertain, but potentially unfavorable, terms to sell, market and distribute our products. Any delay in the marketing or distribution of our products, whether it results from problems with internal capabilities or with a collaborative relationship, could harm the value of an investment in AVANT.

26

L. Patents, Licenses and Proprietary Rights

AVANT’s policy is to protect our technology by filing patent applications and obtaining patent rights covering our own technology, both in the United States and in foreign countries. In addition, we have acquired and will seek to acquire as needed or desired, exclusive rights of others through assignment or license to complement our portfolio of patent rights. We also rely on trade secrets, unpatented know-how and technological expertise and innovation to develop and maintain our competitive position.

Patents: The successful development and marketing of products by AVANT will depend in part on our ability to create and maintain intellectual property, including patent rights. We have established a proprietary patent position in the areas of complement inhibitor technology, cholesterol regulation technology, vaccine technologies, and preservation technologies, and we are the owner or exclusive licensee of numerous patents and pending applications around the world. Although we continue to pursue patent protection for our products, no assurance can be given that any pending application will issue as a patent, that any issued patent will have a scope that will be of commercial benefit, or that we will be able to successfully enforce our patent position against infringers. AVANT routinely reviews its patent portfolio and adjusts its strategies for prosecution and maintenance of individual cases according to a number of factors including program priorities, stage of development, and patent term.

AVANT owns or licenses rights under more than 600 granted patents and pending patent applications around the world covering inventions relating to our business. We have certain exclusive rights under nine issued national or regional patents and three pending national patent applications relating to the technology used in CDX-110. One of the pending patent applications (in Japan) is currently under appeal. Expiration dates for the key issued patents range from 2009 to 2014 in the United States and from 2010 to 2015 in the United Kingdom, Germany and France (not including any possible patent term extensions or Supplementary Protection Certificates, if these are obtained in due course).

In the area of APC targeting, through agreements with Medarex and Rockefeller, we are the owner or exclusive licensee of ten issued patents and more than 40 pending national and regional patent applications worldwide. Through our agreement with Ludwig, we have an option to obtain certain commercial rights in connection with our APC targeting technology under more than 100 national and regional patents and pending patent applications worldwide, relating to NY-ESO-1 and various other tumor antigens. We have, in the area of Hepatitis B vaccination, certain exclusive rights under five issued patents and more than 40 pending national and regional patent applications worldwide, and, in the area of Notch signaling modulation, control of seven issued patents and more than 20 pending national and regional patent applications worldwide. AVANT also has non-exclusive rights under more than 30 national and regional patents and pending patent applications worldwide relating to the adjuvant formulation currently used with CDX-2101. We also own patents covering human antibodies to CD89.

In the area of complement inhibitor technology, we have rights to 46 granted patents and 6 pending patent applications worldwide. Key patents in this area remain in force in the United States to 2016. We are co-owner with The Johns Hopkins University and Brigham & Women’s Hospital, whose rights AVANT has exclusively licensed, of patents and applications covering

27

inventions relating to soluble complement receptor type I (“sCR1”). These rights are based in part on the work of Dr. Douglas Fearon and include U.S. and foreign patents which claim nucleic acid sequences encoding CR1, sCR1 and active fragments; purification methods; and therapeutic uses of sCR1. We also own a number of other issued patents and patent applications relating to glyco-modification of sCR1 molecules and therapeutic uses for sCR1.

In the area of cholera and typhoid vaccines, we have rights to 84 patents and patent applications worldwide with the key patents in this area expiring between 2013 and 2016. In December 2000, we obtained exclusive rights to vaccine technology patents and applications based on the work of Dr. Roy Curtiss III. These patent rights complemented and expanded the exclusively licensed patent rights of AVANT based on the work of Dr. John Mekalanos and colleagues in this technological area. We have an exclusive license to two United States patents, and their corresponding foreign patents and applications, directed to vectors that are used in our VibrioVec® vaccine delivery system. We have exclusive licenses to six U.S. patents, and their corresponding foreign patents and applications, directed to vectors that are used in our SalmoVec® vaccine delivery system. In connection with our acquisition of Megan, we entered into a licensing agreement with Pfizer whereby Pfizer has licensed Megan’s technology for the development of animal health and food safety vaccines.

In January 2003, AVANT completed licensing and acquisition agreements which gave us ownership or exclusive rights in certain defined fields to a portfolio of patents and applications filed by Universal Preservation Technologies, Inc. and Elan Drug Delivery Ltd. (now Innovata plc). This portfolio affords AVANT exclusive rights in a particular technology of foam preservation of biomolecules and cells. This technology should be especially useful in AVANT’s vaccine programs to produce vaccine dosage forms that are shelf stable at room temperatures and do not require refrigeration.

In the area of rotavirus vaccines, we have rights to 20 patents and patent applications worldwide, with the key patents in this area expiring in 2011 and 2012. We have an exclusive license to nineteen issued patents in the U.S. and foreign countries directed to a rotavirus strain that has been developed by a licensee into a commercial rotavirus vaccine.

AVANT originated an autoimmunization approach to controlling cholesterol and owns 42 patents and eight pending patent applications worldwide covering this concept, with the key patents in this area expiring in 2016 and 2019. Our 2003 acquisition of intellectual property from Pharmacia relating to immunological control of cholesterol, coupled with our September 2001 acquisition of a portfolio of granted and pending patents from The Immune Response Corporation, consolidated AVANT’s ownership of the intellectual property that covers the technology of anti-atherosclerosis vaccines targeting CETP activity.

AVANT owns one issued patent and a pending application on the use of a recombinantly produced single protein of B. anthracis for vaccination against anthrax.

There can be no assurance that patent applications owned by or licensed to AVANT will result in granted patents or that, if granted, the resultant patents will afford protection against competitors with similar technology. It is also possible that third parties may obtain patents or other proprietary rights that may be necessary or useful to AVANT. In cases where third parties

28

are first to invent a particular product or technology, it is possible that those parties will obtain patents that will be sufficiently broad to prevent us from using important technology or from further developing or commercializing important vaccine and immunotherapeutic systems and vaccine candidates. If licenses from third parties are necessary but cannot be obtained, commercialization of the covered products might be delayed or prevented. Even if these licenses can be obtained, they would probably require us to pay ongoing royalties and other costs, which could be substantial.

Although a patent has a statutory presumption of validity in the United States, the issuance of a patent is not conclusive as to validity or as to the enforceable scope of the patent claims. The validity or enforceability of a patent after its issuance by the Patent and Trademark Office can be challenged in litigation. As a business that uses a substantial amount of intellectual property, we face a heightened risk of intellectual property litigation. If the outcome of the litigation is adverse to the owner of the patent, third parties may then be able to use the invention covered by the patent without authorization or payment. There can be no assurance that our issued patents or any patents subsequently issued to or licensed by us will not be successfully challenged in the future. In addition, there can be no assurance that our patents will not be infringed or that the coverage of our patents will not be successfully avoided by competitors through design innovation.

We are aware that others, including universities and companies, have filed patent applications and have been granted patents in the United States and other countries which claim subject matter potentially useful or necessary to the commercialization of our products. The ultimate scope and validity of existing or future patents which have been or may be granted to third parties, and the availability and cost of acquiring rights in those patents necessary to the manufacture, use or sale of our products presently cannot be determined by AVANT.

Third parties may have or obtain valid and enforceable patents or proprietary rights that could block AVANT from developing products using its technology, including:

· certain patents and applications in the United States and Europe owned by Sanofi-Aventis, which relate to antibody-antigen conjugates and methods of their use for eliciting an immune response against the antigen;

· certain patents and applications in the United States and foreign countries covering particular antigens and antigenic fragments targeted by AVANT’s current vaccine product candidates, including CDX-1307, CDX-1401, CDX-2401 and CDX-2402;

· certain patents and pending applications related to particular receptors and other molecules on dendritic cells and macrophages that may be useful for generating monoclonal antibodies and can be employed in AVANT’s APC Targeting Technology;

· two United States patents and related foreign patents and applications covering methods of diagnosing gliomas by detecting the presence of the EGFRvIII (tumor specific splice variant) protein;

· a United States patent relating to certain uses of GM-CSF;

· a European patent relating to certain tumor antigen splice variants;

29

· a United States patent owned by Genentech, Inc., relating to the production of recombinant antibodies in host cells;

· a United States patent owned by GlaxoSmithKline plc related to methods of culturing cells under certain conditions;

· certain patents held by third parties relating to antibody expression in particular types of host cells;

· certain patents and pending applications in the United States and foreign countries relating to Hepatitis B antigens, formulations and uses; and

· certain patents and pending applications in the United States and foreign countries relating to Notch ligands, sequences and uses.

We use a mutated Vibrio cholerae in our CholeraGarde® vaccine candidate and our VibrioVec® vaccine delivery system. We are aware of an issued U.S. patent which claims a culture of mutated Vibrio cholerae. We believe that only one claim (the “Claim”) of the patent may be pertinent to our CholeraGarde® and VibrioVec® products. The remaining claims of the patent cover other cultures, which we believe are not pertinent to the CholeraGarde® or VibrioVec® products. We have received an opinion of counsel from Fish & Richardson, P.C. that, based on the analysis set forth in their opinion and the facts known to them, the Claim is invalid. While a party challenging the validity of a patent has the burden of proving invalidity, the outcome of any litigation cannot be predicted with certainty. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that, if litigated, a court would conclude that the Claim is invalid.

In addition to the patent and patent applications referred to in the previous paragraphs, there may be other patent applications and issued patents belonging to competitors that may require us to alter our vaccine candidates and vaccine and immunotherapeutic delivery systems, pay licensing fees or cease some of our activities. If our product candidates conflict with patents that have been or may be granted to competitors, universities or others, the patent owners could bring legal action against us claiming damages and seeking to enjoin manufacturing and marketing of the patented products. If any of these actions is successful, in addition to any potential liability for damages, we could be required to obtain a license in order to continue to manufacture or market the affected products. There can be no assurance that we would prevail in any such action or that any license required under any such third party patent would be made available on acceptable terms or at all. We believe that there may be significant litigation in the biotechnology and vaccine industries regarding patent and other intellectual property rights. If we become involved in that litigation, we could consume substantial resources.

Licenses: We have entered into several significant license agreements relating to technology that is being developed by AVANT and/or its collaborators, including licenses from the following: Johns Hopkins University, Duke University and Thomas Jefferson University relating to technology used in or with CDX-110; Medarex and GenPharm International, Inc. relating to APC targeting technology and antibody technology; Rockefeller relating to APC targeting technology; Ludwig relating to tumor antigens; Apovia, Inc. and Celltech R&D Ltd. relating to Hepatitis B core particle technology; Corixa Corporation relating to adjuvant formulations used with AVANT’s product candidate CDX-2101, Harvard College relating to proprietary technology involving genetically altered Vibrio cholerea and Salmonella strains;

30

Cincinnati Children’s Hospital involving proprietary rights and technologies relating to an attenuated rotavirus strain for a rotavirus vaccine. In general, these institutions have granted us an exclusive worldwide license (with right to sublicense) to make, use and sell products embodying the licensed technology, subject to the reservation by the licensor of a non-exclusive right to use the technologies for non-commercial research purposes.

Generally, the term of each license is through the expiration of the last of the patents issued with respect to the technologies covered by the license. We have generally agreed to use reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize licensed products and to achieve specified milestones and pay license fees, milestone payments and royalties based on the net sales of the licensed products or to pay a percentage of sublicense income. If we breach our obligations, the licensor has the right to terminate the license, and, in some cases, convert the license to a non-exclusive license. Generally, we control and are responsible for the cost of defending the patent rights of the technologies that we license. However, AVANT does not always fully control the patent rights of the technologies that it licenses.

Proprietary Rights: We also rely on unpatented technology, trade secrets and confidential information, and no assurance can be given that others will not independently develop substantially equivalent information and techniques or otherwise gain access to our know-how and information, or that we can meaningfully protect our rights in such unpatented technology, trade secrets and information. We require each of our employees, consultants and advisors to execute a confidentiality agreement at the commencement of an employment or consulting relationship with AVANT. The agreements generally provide that all inventions conceived by the individual in the course of employment or in providing services to AVANT and all confidential information developed by, or made known to, the individual during the term of the relationship shall be the exclusive property of AVANT and shall be kept confidential and not disclosed to third parties except in limited specified circumstances. There can be no assurance, however, that these agreements will provide meaningful protection for our information in the event of unauthorized use or disclosure of such confidential information.

M. Government Regulation

Our activities and products are significantly regulated by a number of governmental entities, including the FDA in the United States and by comparable authorities in other countries and by the USDA with respect to products developed for animal health and food safety. These entities regulate, among other things, the manufacture, testing, safety, effectiveness, labeling, documentation, advertising and sale of our products. We must obtain regulatory approval for a product in all of these areas before we can commercialize the product. Product development wit