by Mark Rabinowitz

Picture This! Entertainment has launched Picture This! Home Video, a

home video distributor for gay and lesbian-themed titles. The new

company’s first three titles, set to be released this fall, are “No

Ordinary Love,” written and directed by company president Doug Witkins;

Peter S. Reed’s “Under Heat,” and Ronnie Larsen’s “Shooting Porn,” which

is based on Larsen’s Off Broadway comedy. Picture This! Entertainment

was created in 1996 by Witkins as an offshoot of his foreign sales

company, Amazing Movies, and has distributed such films as Carl

Workman’s “Superstar: The Life and Times of Andy Warhol“; “Bar Girls,”

directed by Marita Giovanni and written by Lauran Hoffman from her own

play; Jeff B. Harmon’s “Isle of Lesbos,” and Keith Froelich’s “Toilers

and the Wayfarers.”

Picture This! Home Video has also formed an alliance with domestic

distributor, Jour de Fete Films (“Leather Jacket Love Story,” “Broadway

Damage“), to co-release new gay and lesbian-themed films. Jour de Fete

will release the films domestically, while Picture This! Home Video will

release the films on video. The logos on each film’s advertising

material will reflect this alliance. Picture This! Home Video plans to

release three films every quarter, by the end of the first year of

operation, and according to a company release, they will “be working

closely with lesbian and gay film festivals and media in an effort to

meet the need of gay and lesbian viewers.”

In order to make sure that the new company gets off to the right start,

Witkins has hired Orly Ravid as Acquisitions Manager of the new company.

Ravid was previously a programmer at both the New York Lesbian and Gay

Film Festival and OUTFEST in Los Angeles and was also in development at

Schindler-Swerdlow Productions in New York. In addition, veteran

distributor John Tilley (co-founder of Cinevista Video) has signed on as

executive consultant. Tilley was involved in the distribution of films

such as David Lynch’s “Eraserhead,” Derek Jarman’s “Sebastiane” and

Jean-Charles Tacchella’s “Cousin, Cousine.”

In addition to Picture This! Home Video, Amazing Movies recently added

another subsidiary, when Highland Crest Pictures was launched at the

1998 Cannes Film Festival. This foreign sales company is aimed at

handling films that are “up-cast, up-budget family pictures,” according

to an ad in the recently published Daily Variety special issue, The

Independents.” Highland Crest’s first international release will be Adam

Bernstein’s “Six Ways To Sunday,” which will be released in the United

States by Stratosphere Entertainment. Other Highland Crest films include

“The Second Jungle Book,” and “The Littles at Large.”