At first glance, Brookfield Place seems like a fancy shopping center, but for the locals, office workers and visitors sightseeing in Lower Manhattan, this building complex is a centralized hub for everything from art installations and cultural events to happy hours and restaurants.

Brookfield Place holds court in Lower Manhattan’s Battery Park City, across from the World Trade Center in a prime spot taking up 14 acres overlooking the Hudson River. It’s near just about every transportation option available (subways, ferries and PATH trains; it even has valet parking for those driving), so whether you live nearby or you’re in town for business or pleasure, the waterfront complex is a convenient (and beautiful) destination.

But don’t take our word for it—we’ve asked real New Yorkers and travelers to divulge their tried-and-true picks at the downtown destination:

For jaw-dropping views…

Both the architecture and location of Brookfield Place are draws unto themselves—from the structure’s soaring palm-tree-lined Winter Garden glass atrium to the North Cove Marina to the Portside alfresco lounge in the summer and waterfront Rink in the winter.

“While the hustle and bustle of downtown Manhattan is just outside the east entrances to the building, exiting on the west side drops you right next to the Hudson River, and all of a sudden you feel like you’re in a different world,” says Suzanne, a marketing executive who lives on Manhattan’s Upper West Side. “It’s quiet, serene, and the river is right at your feet. Taking a stroll up and down the walkway, admiring the boats, sitting on a bench and staring out at the water, grabbing a drink or a snack at the spots along Brookfield’s Waterfront Plaza...it’s just the reset you need during a busy New York day.”

For inspired food…

Along with seven sit-down restaurants from lauded chefs, Brookfield Place holds a food destination called Hudson Eats with 13 food stalls featuring options like artisan bagels made by a James Beard–nominated chef and sushi featuring fish flown in daily from the Sea of Japan.

“I’m always on the hunt for the perfect bagel, and Black Seed Bagel offers a kind you don’t find much in New York: Montreal-style,” says Suzanne. “In the morning, I’ll get a toasted everything with scallion cream cheese, or for lunch, a BLT or tuna salad. If you’re with a crowd or kids, there’s nothing easier than grabbing a dozen, plus some schmears, and making an easy picnic outside on Brookfield’s gorgeous waterfront plaza.”

Beyond Hudson Eats, you can relax at a table with a view over just about any kind of cuisine—Italian, American, French and more. “Parm has all the hearty Italian old standards done consistently well,” says Jon, an IT professional who lives in Jackson Heights, Queens. “The best is just getting a hero or semolina roll with whatever version of parmesan you prefer—chicken, meatball, eggplant, you can’t really go wrong. I also love their homemade mozzarella sticks.”

“Le District is one of my favorite food markets in NYC,” says Suzanne. “If you’re a fan of all things French, stop for a bite at any of their three restaurants. On a sunny afternoon—or even better, golden hour—you can’t beat sitting outside at Liberty Bistro with a glass of wine and a cheese plate taking in the views of the Hudson River. Plus, if you’re with kids, they have the whole plaza to run around and enjoy while you wait for your meal.”

For the latest fashion…

The space has an incredible breadth of apparel shops to choose from, which span designer (including Adam Lippes’ only retail store in the world) to mid-range retailers. Perusing the windows and racks is a fashionista’s dream.

“I like to browse the different shops, specifically J.Crew,” says Erin, a creative strategist who lives in Manhattan’s East Village. “I spontaneously got an emerald green puffer coat there during a recent Brookfield Place pitstop, and it was a great deal. But even if I don’t buy anything, I simply enjoy looking at the different stores there for fashion inspiration.”

“I almost exclusively purchase my workwear at Theory,” says Lindsay, a human resources director who lives in Los Angeles and works from her company’s Brookfield office when in New York City. “The clothing is classic, well-cut and excellent quality.”

And Anna Lee, a content strategist who lives in Flatiron, Manhattan, loves Madewell. “It’s never done me wrong, and if I’m in need of a last-minute gift or to treat myself, you’ll find me here!”

For the happiest hour…

After a long day of work or sightseeing, there are plenty of spots for kicking back with a cocktail and enjoying stunning views. “The Tartinery shack on Brookfield Place’s waterfront terrace is the spot,” says Ted, a senior art director who works near Brookfield Place and lives just across the water in Hoboken, New Jersey. “It’s like a coastal oasis—you can enjoy happy hour next to the marina while watching the sun set over the Hudson. The crew at Tartinery is the best—Isaac makes a mezcal cocktail called Smoke on the Boardwalk that’s summer in a glass.”

Anna Lee agrees—she frequents Tartinery’s indoor location year-round. Ted also loves P.J. Clarke’s happy hour. “They have excellent seafood and uninterrupted views of the harbor,” he says. But if you’re a seafood lover, consider the flagship location of Seamore’s at Brookfield Place; it features sustainable fare from local fishmongers as well as an excellent happy hour, with deals on mixed drinks, wine and beer from 4 to 7pm.

For the ultimate self-care experience…

Along with world-class shopping and dining, Brookfield Place has you covered for just about any wellness need—from a massage to a manicure. “When I lived in Brooklyn, I frequented Brookfield Place—it’s a really convenient location that has everything I need under one roof,” says Lindsay. “Now I often travel back to NYC for work, and I always find myself there. My absolute favorite spot is Clean Market—I decompress after a long flight or a day of meetings with their NutriDrip IVs and infrared sauna.”

Lindsay is also a Plaza M Spa devotee. “It’s my go-to spot for an expert manicure, which is a must after carrying bags to and from the airport,” she says. “It’s a chic and calming environment, and I love that they offer hand massages and nontoxic nail colors.”

For a dose of inspiration...