In this delightful film, Paul Weeks, a master science teacher in Harlem, uses the horseshoe crab to illustrate the scientific method and the way we all learn.

Students will learn about the biology and ecology of the horseshoe crab (Limulus polyphemus). Teachers and concerned adults will learn how to motivate students and give them self-confidence through scientific discovery, and the effectiveness of a well-planned field trip.

The DVD version of this program is recorded on DVD-R which is not compatible with some older DVD players. See the new DVD page for more details.

Awards:

Best of Festival, 3rd Scientific Film Festival, Barcelona, Spain

Golden Babe, Chicagoland Educational Film Festival

New Directors/New Films Festival, Museum of Modern Art

Best of Category, National Educational Film Festival

Red Ribbon, American Film Festival

CINE Golden Eagle

Best of Category, North American Assn. for Environmental Education Film Festival

Reviews:

"A sweet, very funny documentary... With great good humor, intelligence and patience (and without ever condescending to his students), Mr. Weeks is able to communicate his appreciation for the horseshoe crab... With kids and a teacher like this around, there may be some hope for us yet." Vincent Canby, NY Times

"This film is an excellent introduction to the scientific method and to what you should expect to encounter on a field trip. Above all, it shows what youngsters can do if properly motivated." School Library Journal

"A film for teachers and teachers-to-be -- and parents, school board members, administrators, legislators who control purse strings, and any others who care about what schooling should be...Do yourself and "your" kids a favor and share this film with any or all of the above audience." Editor's Choice, Science Books & Films

Related Subjects:

Biology

Coasts and Oceans

Marine Biology

Outdoor Education

Scientific Method

Related Titles:

The Crabs, The Birds, The Bay: Migrating shorebirds feast on horseshoe crab eggs in Delaware Bay.

The Intertidal Zone: Ecology of the ecological zone between the tides.

Keepers of the Coast: Surfers organize to save the ocean and the coastline.