We will also use this forum to release announcements to all of our users.

This will be related to feature releases, improvements, changes, planned forum maintenance work, events or to tell you that we've accepted a multi million pound bid for the site and have sold up and moved to the Bahamas.

If you are unsure of the new forum then this is the place to ask questions.

You may also email support@pieandbovril.com or click "Support" in the top menu to open a support ticket if you are experiencing technical problems, or use the contact us link at the bottom of the page or on the homepage of the website.

Note that content complaints should not be filed here, instead if you have a problem with a particular post use the new "Report" button which is shown on the post.

The only show on television looking at every ounce of Scottish football. Join us as we discuss our weird and wonderful game, from the fan's perspective.Catch the show every Friday night on the BBC Scotland Channel and stream previous episodes now on BBC iPlayer.

Published every three months, Nutmeg is a high-class home for quality articles about Scottish football’s past, present and future. It offers opinion, reflection, interviews, insight, illustration, photography and poetry. It is a unique blend between 196 uniquely elegant pages.

It's our game. In Print. On podcasts. At events.

The national side is a constant source of abject misery but at some point it might end. Sir Steve Clarke is the latest man charged with leading us to the glory of a first round exit at a major tournament. Discuss all aspects of the Scotland team here.

Scotland are going to Germany in 2024 and it looks like half the country are planning a visit!

Use this forum to discuss the built up to the tournament itself, and we've also split off a wee sub-forum for discussing travel arrangements for those thinking of making the trip.

The P&B massive have a love of many other sports too so if you want to talk Golf, Egg Chasing, Tennis, Yank Football, Baseball, Cricket, Darts, Snooker or Synchronised swimming or anything else then here is the place to do it.

Jamie Wire has retired as our resident statto but never fear as craigkillie has stepped in to take over ! Feel free to post any question in this forum on the subject of Scottish football (line-ups, results, trivia etc) and either he or one of the many forum regulars will be only too happy to try and help!

This is the General Nonsense forum for use by all P&B visitors to discuss anything and everything. Note that any music, tv, film, gaming or technology related threads should be placed in the respective forums (see below this one) for those topics.

Getting good travel advice is invaluable when you are thinking of heading somewhere new. P&B has a very well well travelled membership so this section is for you to pick their brains about where you are off to.

It's long been requested by the masses and finally here it is. P&B Gold is where old classic threads will be moved to by the mods whenever they have served their time in the main forum.

Users can contribute to threads that make their way in here, but can't start new topics here. Of course we want users to suggest threads that merit being moved here, and we will NEVER archive any of the threads that sit in Gold.