1. TYPES OF SETTLEMENT SUBMITTED BY:- AKASH KUMAR SEM- VII, SEC-A JAGANNATH UNIVERSITY

2. SETTLEMENT • A settlement is a general term used in archaeology, geography, landscape history and other subjects for a permanent or temporary community in which people live, without being specific as to size, population or importance. A settlement can therefore range in size from a small number of dwellings grouped together to the largest of cities with surrounding urbanized areas.

3. HISTORY • Earth estimated to be formed about 4 billion years ago • Homo Sapiens (the one existing species of man) believe to date from about 500,000 B. C. • Earliest man did not settle anywhere as they wandered around in search of food • Did not know how to construct buildings so lived in the open • Occasionally took shelter on top of trees to protect themselves from wild animals

4. Towards Settled Habitation (Up to 10,000 B. C. - 5,000 B. C.) • Some of the earliest settlements began to take shape. • Settlements then consisted of groups of houses built by the side of agricultural fields, a shrine and a burial ground. • Some inhabitants continued to live in caves and wander around for hunting animals - more as a pastime rather than as a necessity.

6. RURAL SETTLEMENT • The majority of its inhabitants are involve in activity like farming, fishing, forestry, mining. • The pattern of rural settlement can vary from a single farm to a cluster of houses.(dispersed, linear and nucleated.) • In the past most of the population lived in rural areas.

7. CHARACTERISTIC OF RURAL SETTLEMENT • In the form of village, surrounded by farms With Small population. • Occupation such as forestry, farming ,fishing mining, tourism. • Service provided are in limited range and mostly for every day needs. • Close knit communities and the atmosphere is quiet. • dominance of community feeling.

8. RURAL ADVANTAGES:- 1. More natural environs. 2. Better social/support network . 3. Less stressful environment . 4. Perceived as safer. 5. Class differences are not as distinctive. RURAL DISADVANTAGES:- 1. Limited transportation available. 2. Social network can lead to strain (in the case of small town gossip. 3. Limited employment opportunities. 4. Slower social, political progress. 5. Less immediately available social services.

9. URBAN SETTLEMENT • The majority of people are engage in non –rural activity. • They work in office, shops and factories, operate machinery, provide health care or other services. • urban settlement can be small like 1000 people or can be as large as Tokyo-Yokohama in Japan with over 30million people.

10. CHARACTERISTIC OF URBAN SETTLEMENT • In the form of towns and cities. • They are large, both in population and area. • Has functions such as business, manufacturing, government cultural center. • Wide range of services offered including specialized service. Like- • Unlike rural settlement, neighborhood is separate with limited knowledge of others. • Traffic and pollution problem.

11. DIFFERENCES IN SERVICES BETWEEN RURAL AND URBAN SETTLEMENTS Service Rural Settlements Urban Settlements Health Medical clinic Hospital Education Primary school University Shopping General store, market Shopping mall Finance Moneylender, co-operative National bank Transport Bus service Airport

12. URBAN ADVANTAGES:- 1. Services: Proximity to major and varied services. 2. Employment: Majority of higher paying jobs/careers are found there. 3. Current: art, fashions, politics, and higher culture. 4. Multi-cultural (which I personally see as a plus). 5. Transportation: Mass transit, buses, taxis...ect. URBAN DISADVANTAGES:- 1. More crime. 2. Pollution: more people, more waste, more noise, less trees and nature...etc... 3. Impersonal and sometimes isolating. 4. Clear distinction between social classes (example: the beggar on the street, in front of million dollar downtown condos)

13. RURAL SETTLEMENTS VS URBAN SETTLEMENTS • Population Density The U.S. Census Bureau defines urban settlements as areas with more than 50,000 people and at least 1,000 people per square mile; including contiguous census tracts or blocks with at least 500 people per square mile. In contrast, rural settlements contain less than 2,500 people, at a density between one and 999 people per square mile. • Transportation Network Rural transportation networks consist of local and county roads with limited interconnectivity to rail and bus lines. Urban settlements contain highway infrastructure as well as airports and light or heavy commuter rail. • Economy Urban areas are dependent on a global economy of import and export, whereas rural economies rely on a local and agricultural-based economy with dependencies on services, such as hospitals and educational establishments in nearby urban centres.

15. DISPERSED • They are small groups of buildings • That are separated from the next group by several kms.

16. NUCLEATED • These are place where building are clustered around the central point. • The central point can be town square, religious centre, road junction or a mine. • Maximum use of land in nucleated setting.

17. LINEAR • Settlement may follow the river or road, canal or railways. • It is due to easy access to transport ,fresh water or fishing . • Roads also attract the shops beside the settlement.