Book: Elisa Albert, The Book of Dahlia Publication date: 2008 Publisher: Free Press (Simon & Schuster): New York Cancer is hastening Dahlia Finger’s demise. As she unrolls the scroll of her final days beside the scroll of her previous life history you can’t help but say, ?Wait a minute, Dahlia?we’re all going to die. You’re… Read more »

Reginald Shepherd is an American writer and academic. He has published five books of poetry. His latest work, Orpheus in the Bronx, a group of essays proposing a new understanding of?and direction for?modern poetry, was published by the University of Michigan Press as part of its Poets on Poetry series. The Voice recently reviewed Orpheus… Read more »

CD: Corb Lund, Horse Soldier! Horse Soldier! Release date: 2007 Label: Stony Plain Records One night my sleep was troubled by a name that kept dinging away repeatedly in my dreams. That name was Corbin Lund. While I was lying there trying to figure out who that was, I consoled myself with a promise to… Read more »

Library Voices is a 10-member band that formed in Regina in March and has been performing steadily ever since their third week together. They’ve just recorded their six-song debut EP, Hunting Ghosts (see review in this issue), and are planning a full-length CD for release this fall. At the time of this interview the band… Read more »

EP: Library Voices, Hunting Ghosts Soon to be released on Young Soul Records (see interview this issue) Your existence is a pinprick on a paper continent. The patron saints all patronize me. Step off the map and float! And you float and you float and you float and you ohhh . . . from ?Step… Read more »

Book: Reginald Shepherd, Orpheus in the Bronx: Essays on Identity, Politics, and the Freedom of Poetry Publication date: 2007 Publisher: The University of Michigan Press There was once a poor southern gal who decided her children would escape her world of suffering by means of superior intelligence. She bought her son Reginald books before he… Read more »