Aurelien Boucher, a French sinologist and lecturer at the Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), began his two-decade story in China with the country's iconic sport, table tennis.

The Frenchman's unique connection to China began at the age of 14, when he was mentored in France by a retired Beijing athlete. He soon struck up a friendship with the Chinese sportsman.

"My first teacher was like a father to me. Very often, after training, I would have dinner at his place and help him with errands, because he didn't speak French. I trained very hard, and he loved players that work hard, so we quickly became really good friends," said Aurelien.

Then, in the 2000s, he was lucky enough to be one of the few French students who had the opportunity to study at a table tennis academy in Beijing. At the time, China was preparing for the 2008 Olympic Games, and he was impressed by the Chinese people's dedication to sports. He learned that in China, "fitness for all" has been a national strategy for the last decade, seen as a way to unite and strengthen the nation.

"Every night after dinner we would start training, and we could watch CCTV. There was all this news every day about new constructions for the Beijing Olympics. I thought, it hasn't even started yet, they were already talking about it non-stop. I realized how important the Olympics was for China. The 2008 Beijing Olympic Games showed that China was opening to the world. It was like a display of national rejuvenation," said Aurelien.

Aurelien's time in Beijing left a lasting impression that would inspire his later studies in sociology. After retiring from the table tennis team, the Frenchman has been following the development of sport and society in China for decades. Now a full-time university lecturer, Aurelien continues his studies and research on sport, educational strategies and modernization processes.

Aurelien's learning in China goes beyond academics. As a husband and father, he embraces his second home in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area metropolitan area in southern China, where the French scholar said he enjoys the views and activities.

"I really like the Greater Bay Area. I can go hiking or go surfing. France is my home, this is my home too," said Aurelien.

French scholar’s two-decade journey in China began with table tennis

French scholar’s two-decade journey in China began with table tennis

Brazil, the world's largest coffee producer, has witnessed a rapid surge in its coffee exports to China in recent years, hitting a record high in 2023.

In the first half of 2024, over 510,000 bags (each weighing 60 kg) of Brazilian coffee were delivered to Chinese consumers.

In a coffee farm named "Santa Izabel Fazenda" in Minas Gerais state in southeastern Brazil, around 42,000 coffee trees are bearing coffee cherries of 40 different varieties. Just a few years ago, coffee beans grown in this farm started making their way to a new large market -- China.

Marquinho Florezi, the farm's manager, explained the fermentation and drying processes of fresh coffee cherries. "It's a good harvest, and we expect high-quality coffee since there was no rain during maturation. After harvesting, we wash the coffee beans and sort them by color, selecting ripe, green, and drier ones. Then, we place the beans in barrels for fermentation, which lasts 100 hours. This is the first batch to complete fermentation. After this, the coffee will be dried for another seven to ten days," said Florezi.

The processed coffee is usually sent to a nearby export company. The company began exporting coffee to China in 2017 with just 600 bags (each 60 kg) a year. In recent years, exports have increased significantly because of the rising demand and recognition of Brazilian coffee quality in the Chinese market.

"The coffee export volume to China has grown greatly. Last year, we exported about 10,000 bags of coffee (each 60 kg) to China," said Victor Vuolo, the company's manager.

In 2017, Brazil exported fewer than 100,000 bags of coffee to China, but by 2023, that number had risen to nearly 1.5 million sacks, according to data from the Council of Coffee Exporters of Brazil.

"China, which was ranked the 22nd on the list of Brazil's coffee exports until 2022, has now moved up to the sixth place, showing significant growth. Coffee has become a cultural symbol for the Chinese, and Brazil hopes to be the leading partner in supporting the expansion of the coffee culture in China," said Marcos Antonio Matos, general director of the council.

Brazil's coffee exports to China reach new high