This undated photo shows a view of the tennis courts on King Abdullah University of Science and Technology’s campus. (PHOTO PROVIDED TO CHINA DAILY)

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology signed Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with six Shenzhen institutions including Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen (RITS), Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School (SIGS) and The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CHUK-Shenzhen) at KAUST’s campus in Thuwal, Saudi Arabia on Sept 14.

According to the MOUs, all parties will further explore the potential for cooperation, solidify and expand the cooperative achievements in areas such as technological innovation, emerging industries and higher education. The collaborations aim to facilitate academic exchange, collaborative innovation, technology transfer, and joint efforts to create a promising future.

“Our collaboration with esteemed Shenzhen institutions embodies one of KAUST’s primary objectives - to enhance our research’s commercialization and promote global research partnerships and talent cultivation. These synergies will amplify our influence and bring tangible benefits to the Kingdom. This transformative partnership heralds a new chapter for KAUST,” KAUST President Prof. Tony Chan commented.

KAUST brings together the best minds from around the world to advance research. Students and faculty members of more than 120 different nationalities live, work and study on campus

Established in 2009, KAUST is a graduate research university devoted to finding solutions for some of the most pressing scientific and technological challenges in the world as well as Saudi Arabia in the areas of food and health, water, energy, environment and the digital domain. KAUST is a curiosity-driven, interdisciplinary, problem-solving environment with state-of-the-art labs, distinguished faculty and talented students.

READ MORE: HKU signs MoU with Fudan University, University of Sydney

KAUST brings together the best minds from around the world to advance research. Students and faculty members of more than 120 different nationalities live, work and study on campus. KAUST is also a catalyst for innovation, economic development and social prosperity, with research resulting in novel patents and products, enterprising startups, regional and global initiatives, and collaboration with other academic institutions, industries and government agencies.

ALSO READ: Chan: S'pore, M'sia students 'enthusiastic' about HK policies

Between 2015 and 2020, the university's academic research units and scholarly papers were ranked first in the world for citations for six consecutive years, earning it the nickname “Saudi Arabia's Massachusetts Institute of Technology”. Presently, the university is engaged in collaborations with several universities and research institutions in Shenzhen.