While quality academic study is the core of any university, the environment in which you study plays a vital role in helping you to perform at your peak and your overall happiness while studying. Located in the rolling hills of the booming Shenzhen metropolis, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen) offers both elite world-class education and one of the most scenic university campuses in China.

The modern facilities are set amidst a beautifully landscaped campus which reflects the values of the university – to bring together China and the West. Divided between the upper, middle, and lower campuses, CUHK-Shenzhen stretches from the homely colleges to the spectacular library, the study-friendly classrooms and lecture theatres to the state-of-the-art laboratories, and from the glistening lake to the meandering hill-side walking paths. Hosting a comfortable and lively community life, CUHK-Shenzhen offers all students an inspiring atmosphere for study and research.

But, if you can’t wait to visit in person, why not take a virtual reality tour and check out CUHK Shenzhen’s beautiful campus here? Explore the grounds by yourself, or follow the links to some of the special locations around the university highlighted below.

Supporting Your Academic Study

As noted above, university life is all about learning and CUHK-Shenzhen offers a wide range of contemporary facilities to enhance your studies. You’ll attend classes in our lecture theatres and classrooms. It’s almost guaranteed you’ll find yourself spending plenty of time studying in either our reliable old or spectacular new library.

The Library provides the CUHK (SZ) community with user-friendly

access to a diverse collection, and encourages active learning.

Depending on your major, you might find yourself conducting experiments in our research laboratories or coding that program in our computer laboratories. Perhaps you’ll produce your own content in our Media Centre, run a mock court, work on a simultaneous interpreting task or pursue an extra-curricular project of your own in the Centre for Innovation, Design & Entrepreneurship (CIDE).

CUHK-Shenzhen has some of Asia’s best facilities for studying and researching Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, founded by multiple Nobel Prize winners and other top STEM leaders. These top labs can help you conduct in-depth research into everything from robotics to cell biology.

Alternately, you’ll find yourself attending seminars on cutting-edge topics by academics from near and far in our meeting rooms. All the resources and facilities for success are at your fingertips.

CIDE is a designated Shenzhen and Longgang Incubator working with

various government, private and leading NGO entities, most notably

the AAMA, Hult Prize, and Galaxy World, to provide training, mentorship

and support for entrepreneurial project teams.

Colleges at CUHK Shenzhen

However, studying is only part of your university life. You also need a home, and CUHK-Shenzhen provides a friendly and welcoming collegiate system. When you arrive at CUHK-Shenzhen, you’ll be affiliated with one of the four colleges: Shaw College, Diligentia College, Muse College, and Harmonia College.

With the support of your college master, wardens, residential tutors, and specialist office staff, you’ll be able to join events and develop as an individual together with students with different academic and cultural backgrounds.

All students live in dormitory rooms, which are shared between domestic and international students. However, the colleges also provide numerous convenient facilities for residents such as social rooms, TV Rooms, gyms, billiard rooms, multifunction rooms, self-study rooms, dance studios, piano rooms, music rooms, meditation rooms, movie rooms, laundries, and kitchens.

Recreational Facilities

CUHK-Shenzhen students are strongly encouraged to follow interests beyond their academic pursuits, whether they be physical, artistic, or otherwise. In addition to a lively activity schedule of events hosted by clubs, colleges, schools, and other university departments, students can also chase their passion in additional recreational facilities on and around campus.

For example, to keep fit we have a variety of sports venues including several gyms, a multi-purpose sports hall, an Olympic-size swimming pool, a Taekwondo Room, several dance studios, a table tennis room, basketball courts, a futsal field, and tennis courts.

If you prefer something more relaxing, take a stroll around our lakes, gardens, ponds, and over the hills. Alternately, take a change of pace at the latest university art center exhibition, or release your inner artist at our numerous arts facilities such as art studios, painting workshops, and calligraphy rooms.

Facilities and Services

To ensure nothing is left out, the campus is equipped with all the other necessary day-to-day facilities and services for academic existence. There are several canteens and dining rooms on both upper and lower campus which offer a large choice of cuisines to suit every palette.

There are services available to all students, such as the Counselling Office, the Social Practice Centre, multi-function rooms, reading rooms, and other entertainment rooms. Further, the university also offers such services as a clinic, two convenience stores, a bookstore and a post office.

To provide convenience for all staff and students, the university operates three bus routes that run throughout the day to connect the upper and lower campus.

Ready to study?

If you’re ready to study in China and want to experience CUHK Shenzhen’s beautiful campus first hand, search for CUHK-Shenzhen programs on our platform and start your university application now!

Read related articles