The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen was founded in accordance with the Regulations of the People’s Republic of China on Chinese-foreign Cooperation in Running Schools upon approval by the Ministry of Education. It strives to explore a new path of higher education featured by strong connections to both China and the world. The University is committed to providing top-quality higher education that features an integration of the East and the West and fostering an enriching research environment. It is CUHK-Shenzhen’s mission to cultivate innovative talents with a global perspective, Chinese cultural traditions and social responsibilities.

Currently, more than 5,600 students are studying at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen.

Over the years, the University has established five schools: the School of Management and Economics, the School of Science and Engineering, the School of Humanities and Social Sciences, the School of Life and Health Sciences, and the School of Data Science, offering 17 undergraduate programs and 18 postgraduate programs.

CUHK-Shenzhen encourages international experiences and seeks to nurture global awareness. As of December 2019, it has signed agreements with more than 100 renowned universities in 29 countries across the globe, offering more than 160 international programs of different types. Over 60% of undergraduates have participated in overseas academic exchange programs.

Postgraduate International Students Application:

Entry Requirments

For a Master’s Program, the applicant shall have:

1). graduated from a recognized university and obtained a Bachelor’s degree, normally with honors not lower than Second Class; or

2). graduated from an honors program of a recognized university with a Bachelor’s degree, typically achieving an average grade of not lower than “B ; ”or

3). completed a course of study in a tertiary educational institution and obtained professional or similar qualifications equivalent to an honors degree.

For the Doctor of Philosophy stream under the “MPhil-PhD Programs,” the applicant shall have:

1). a Master’s degree from a recognized university; or

2). graduated from a recognized university and obtained a Bachelor’s degree, normally with honors not lower than Second Class; or

3). graduated from an honors program of a recognized university with a Bachelor’s degree, typically achieving an average grade of not lower than “B;” or

4). completed a course of study in a tertiary educational institution and obtained professional or similar qualifications equivalent to an honors degree.

All students should fulfil the English Language Proficiency Requirements prescribed below before they are admitted:

a. completed a degree program for which the medium of instruction was English, and the CUHK(SZ) Graduate School may request applicants to provide additional supporting documents to prove their English proficiency; or

b. submit one of the following original score reports or certificates for assessment by the programs concerned:

TOEFL (typically not lower than 550 Paper-based; and 79 Internet-based);

IELTS (Academic; typically not lower than Band 6.5);

GMAT (Verbal, typically not lower than 21); or

c. possess a passing grade in English in one of the following examinations:

Hong Kong Advanced Level Examination. (AS Level);

Hong Kong Higher Level Exam; or

d. achieve Level 4 or above in the English Language subject of the Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education (HKDSE) Examination; or

e. provide documentation of having obtained a recognized professional qualification, provided that the examination was conducted in English.

Scholarships for Undergraduates

Entry Scholarship for 4 years:

If your application for CUHK-Shenzhen is successful, you will automatically be considered for an Entry Scholarship. There are five types of entry scholarships to cover tuition fees:

• Honor Scholarship (120,000 RMB / yr.),

• Full Tuition + Accommodation Scholarship (96,200 RMB / yr.),

• Half Tuition + Accommodation Scholarship (48,700 RMB / yr.),

• Quarter Tuition + Accommodation Scholarship (24,950 RMB / yr.), or

• Full-accommodation Fee Scholarship (1,200 RMB / yr.).

Selection will be based on your suitability for CUHK-Shenzhen, taking into account your academic performance, English ability and character as assessed through an interview. The scholarship will be provided for 4 years, as long as your GPA remains above 3.0.

Academic Performance Scholarship:

In addition to the Entry Scholarship, students with outstanding academic performance may receive one of three Academic Performance Scholarships:

• Tier 1 (80,000 RMB / yr.)

• Tier 2 (40,000 RMB / yr.)

• Tier 3 (20,000 RMB / yr.)

Government-Sponsored International Scholarships:

Shenzhen Universiade International Scholarship

This foundation was established by the Shenzhen government following the university games held in Shenzhen to promote sporting spirit and boost cultural and educational exchanges among international youth.

The foundation supports full-time international students at the bachelor level or above in Shenzhen. The scholarship ranges from 20,000 RMB to 40,000 RMB. Applications open in April each year.

Guangdong Government Outstanding International Student Scholarship

These scholarships were created by the provincial government to support international students studying in Guangdong and encourage talent cultivation, scientific research, social service and cultural exchange. They are awarded to full-time university students at the bachelor level or above on the basis of academic performance. The value of the scholarship is 10,000 RMB. Applications open in October each year.

Contact Info

Add: 2001 Longxiang Blvd., Longgang District, Shenzhen

Tel: (86-755) 8427 3284

E-mail: intladmissions@cuhk.edu.cn (undergraduate) / gs@cuhk.edu.cn (graduate)