G

RAMMY nominated musician Dr. Martin Taylor, MBE, is a virtuoso guitarist, composer, educator and musical innovator whom magazine calls ‘THE Acoustic Guitarist of his Generation’.

Widely considered to be the world’s foremost exponent of solo jazz and fingerstyle guitar playing, Martin possesses an inimitable style that has earned him global acclaim from fellow musicians, fans and critics alike. He dazzles audiences with a signature style that artfully combines his virtuosity, emotion and humor with a strong, engaging stage presence.

Taylor has enjoyed a remarkable musical career spanning across five decades, with more than 100 recordings to his credit. Completely self-taught beginning at the early age of 4, he has invented and developed a unique way of playing the guitar that is greatly admired, and often emulated, by guitarists all over the world.

In addition to his solo concerts and recordings, he has also collaborated with musicians from many different musical genres, including: Jeff Beck, Tommy Emmanuel, Bill Wyman, Chet Atkins, Stephane Grappelli, David Grisman, George Harrison, Jamie Cullum, Bryn Terfel, Dianne Schuur and Gary Burton.

Taylor brings a rich and varied musical heritage to his play, to the extent that Tommy Emmanuel remarked that [Taylor] is “a portal into all that came before.”

Over his stellar career, Taylor has amassed a record 14 British Jazz Awards as a guitarist. Several of his albums have been in the Top 10 in the USA and Europe.

The vast majority of my creative work is offered to you 100% free of charge. My goal is to bring you the very best of my music and teaching as I create it.

If you’ve read this far, thank you. I hope this is just the beginning of our relationship. And, I’d love to learn more about you. The best way to share that and stay connected is to make sure you become one of our MT Insiders – just enter your name and email.

As you might have heard, although I teach guitar online – I spend as much time offline as possible. I don’t live my life on social media, so if you want the inside scoop from me, our Insider’s list is where it’s at. Most of the time, you’ll only hear from me once a month; more if something is time-sensitive or important.

Plus, you’ll get a fantastic (and free) music track and video guitar tutorials on Fingerstyle Guitar as soon as you subscribe.

Thank you so much for taking the time to visit. I’m thrilled we’re connected and I’m excited for the journey ahead.

Best wishes,

Martin