26: GAMBIT: 1966. Director: Ronald Neame. US. Comedy heist. Michael Caine. Shirley MacLaine. Herbert Lom. Roger C. Camel. Arnold Moss.

Screenplay by Jack Davies (1913-1994, English actor and editor) and Alvin Sargent (1927-2019, American scriptwriter – this was his first play), from a story by Sidney Carroll (1913-1988, American film and television scriptwriter). Producer: Leo L. Fuchs. Editing: Alma Macrorie. Costume design: Jean Louis. Screen-time: 109 minutes. Box office takings, US and Canada only: $2.5million. Director Ronald Nearme (1911-2010), was an English producer, director, screenwriter and cinematographer, his filmography is from 1930 to 1991, director 1950 to 1990, including: Prudence and the Pill (1968, with Deborah Kerr); The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (1969, with Maggie Smith); Scrooge (1970); The Poseidon Adventure (1972); The Odessa File (1974), and Meteor (1979). Gambit was shot in California, mostly on the Universal Pictures studio backlot, with Santa Barbara standing in for the Riviera.

The overriding criteria for being one of my favourite movies is I don’t mind how many times I might watch it again. There are some movies you only want to watch once: Mike Nichols’ Catch-22 (1970) for instance; The French Connection (1971); A Clockwork Orange (1971); The Longest Day (1962); Pal Joey (1957); The Terminator (1984); The Long Good Friday (1979); most war movies or Westerns, almost anything with John Wayne in it. Gambit is a light comedy caper – it’s fun, rather silly in an enjoyable way, but has several star turns – versatile Czech-born Herbert Lom (1917-2012), who we have already met in The Ladykillers; Michael Caine, perhaps fresh from Alfie role that same year, and still in his best Cockney crook mode, as if rehearsing for The Italian Job; and Shirley MacLaine, at her most sexy and cat-like before she wrote these bonkers biographies about her previous life in ancient Atlantis, UFOs, and having sex with space people.

The following are several reviews from the internet:

“Cockney cat burglar Harry Dean [Michael Caine] and exotic Hong Kong showgirl Nicole Chang [Shirley MacLaine] are seen executing a masterful planned robbery of a pricey antique owned by Mr Shahbander [Herbert Lom], the world’s richest man. However, it turns out that this fool-proof scheme is only in Harry’s head for now, still in the planning stage. When he and Nicole set out to the pull the actual heist, everything that possibly could go wrong does indeed go wrong.” – universalmonsters-fandom.com

“A heist movie needs more than a clever plot. It needs at least one charismatic star (two is even better). It needs sparkling dialogue. It needs to be visually impressive, and ideally it needs generous side-orders of humour and romance. Gambit has all of these and they’re combined perfectly…this is the kind of light-hearted romp that movie-makers just don’t seem to have the style or lightness of touch to pull of any more. In the 60s though they did know how to do this sort of thing, and do it supremely well. Gambit is witty, clever, stylist, romantic, amusing and exciting. It’s pure entertainment of the highest order.”

– dfordoom-movieramblings.blogspot.com

Just why did other movies – not nearly as clever in their plots – get all the razzmatazz, and Gambit barely gets noticed? The first 20 minutes or so are brilliant, as we see Harry and his partner-in-crime, sculptor Emile Fournier (John Abbott – born John Albert Chamberlain Kefford, 1905-1996), first contemplating, then inviting Shirley MacLaine’s Eurasian showgirl over to their table, and – by offering a British passport and money – apparently persuading her to be part of their scam, except they assure her it isn’t anything illegal. We then watch the heist unfold, apparently flawlessly, but with Nicole not saying a word, a docile doll, beautiful, captivating, dutifully following Harry’s instructions, as they use her resemblance to Herbert Lom’s dead wife to get access to where he keeps the ancient Chinese statuette that, in turn, also is the sculptured image of both the late Mrs Shahbander and the living Nicole. Of course the plan goes without a hitch, Harry and Emile depart in one direction, Nicole in another….Except…except, of course, that was Harry’s projection of his so-called ‘masterplan’. It all starts to unravel, back in the Hong Kong bar, as soon as a far-from-docile Nicole opens her mouth. From then on, it’s an hilarious rollercoaster of a saga, with Harry less and less in control of events, first with Nicole – who is totally overwhelming, sassy and outspoken – and then, when they finally meet Shahbander at the Middle Eastern city of Dammuz, pretending to be ‘Sir Harold Dean and Lady Nicole Dean’ (Michael Caine gets to put on his ‘posh’ voice), nothing is as Harry had visualised it, and the wily Shahbander soon sees through their charade, but plays them along. Eventually it is Nicole who uses brain and ingenuity (and some lovely physical moves to get round the statuette’s electronic alarm system), succeeding where Harry flounders, but there are still more plot twists to come, as Shahbander outsmarts them. He already has Harry’s dossier (which he gives to Nicole to read), and threatens both with arrest unless the original statuette is returned. Except, in yet another twist, Harry and Emile reveal that actually stealing the priceless statuette was irrelevant; the original is still in Shahbander’s apartment, hidden in a buddha statue. The purpose of the heist was to spark the possibility that it might have been stolen, and perhaps replaced by a skilful copy. That then meant Emile’s authentic, but fake, copy could be marketed to less scrupulous, but gullible, collectors as the ‘stolen’ original. At the end, another final twist, Harry smashes the copy and walks off with Nicole, but, in the closing minutes, Emile is still left with a cupboard of yet more identical statuettes to sell!

Shirley MacLean Beaty, born 1934, is the older sister to actor, producer and director Warren Beatty, born 1937. Her mother – maiden name MacLean – named her after Shirley Temple. Her acting career is from 1953 to 2019, and she is actress, singer, former dancer, activist and author. Her earliest film was with Alfred Hitchcock, The Trouble with Harry, 1955, having been spotted while as the understudy in the Broadway production of The Pyjama Game. She has one daughter, Stephanie, aka Sachi, although they are estranged. Like Grace Kelly or Deborah Kerr, she is another actress (by her own admission) who often had affairs with her leading men, although Kelly and Kerr still operated under the old studio system, who were good at keeping such things discreet. Apparently the exceptions to Shirley’s collection of bed-buddies were Jack Lemmon and (I’m surprised) Jack Nicolson, while co-starring with Anthony Hopkins resulted in a feud between them – he called her the “most obnoxious” actress he ever worked with. Amongst her lovers (so she claims) were the Swedish prime minister Olaf Palme (1929-1986), American novelist Peter Hamil (1935-2020), Italian-French actor/singer Yves Montand (1921-1991), and actor/poet/composer Robert Mitchum (1917-1997). While she hung out with the ‘Rat Pack’ – Sinatra, Dean Martin, Sammy Davies Jr. – she denied sleeping with them. Really? Even Sinatra? Both she and Warren (he changed the spelling of their name) are Democrats, and she supported Kennedy, George McGovern’s 1972 presidential candidacy, and Clinton. Now something of the Grand Dame of Hollywood, she is equally well-known for her more zany ideas concerning reincarnation, spiritualism, New Age beliefs, and metaphysics.

In 2012 Gambit was another movie to suffer the indignity of a remake by Joel and Ethan Coen, who re-wrote the screenplay, changing the McGuffin from a statuette to a priceless Monet painting. It starred Colin Firth (another fine actor who ought have known better), Cameron Diaz, and Alan Rickman. It was 89 minutes long, and the worldwide box office receipts were $142million, and thereafter went to DVD. Again, the question has to be, are the Coen brothers really so devoid of imagination or originality that they have to keep ransacking bygone classics to produce something that will always be inferior? It had “overwhelming negative reviews” – example: “Curiously charmless caper squanders its strong cast.” – “Agonisingly pointless remake…Joel and Ethan Coen have written the script to which the only rational response is to shout the word: why? Talent put to waste.” – The Guardian.