Infobox character

name = Ray Barnett

caption =

first = September 23, 2004 (Episode: One for the Road)

last = May 17, 2007 (Episode: The Honeymoon is Over)

cause = Returns to Baton Rouge after a double below the knee amputation

nickname =

alias =

species =

gender = male

age =

born = Baton Rouge, LA

death =

occupation = ER Resident, 2004-2007

title = Doctor

family = Jacey Barnett (mother)

spouse =

children =

relatives =

episode =

portrayer = Shane West

creator =

Ray Barnett is a fictional doctor portrayed by actor Shane West on the television show "ER". The character first appeared in fall 2004 at the start of the 11th season. He is a talented doctor but has struggled with conflicting commitments to the medical profession and his life as a rock musician.

Starting out at County General Hospital, his cowboy personality got him into trouble early on with his superiors. In season 12, his character became romantically involved with roommate and colleague Neela Rasgotra. His feelings for her created tension between the two, because Neela was at the time married to Dr. Michael Gallant, who was away serving as a doctor in the Iraq War. In episode "If Not Now," Ray's band received an offer to go on a tour. Ray's requested time off was not granted, but he was given an ultimatum by Doctor Weaver, The hospital or the band. Ray picked the band, but his band members rejected him because they felt he was too committed to his job at the hospital. Ray returned to County General. Ray and Neela remained friends and after Gallant's death when a truck he was riding in exploded in Iraq, Ray attempted to become closer to Neela. This attempt at closeness proved to be unsuccessful and was affected by the arrival of new character Tony Gates, played by John Stamos.

Ray did not keep his feelings for Neela a secret. Still he remained bitter and hung up over her. Late one night, Ray was hit by a truck when walking home drunk from a bar following a fight with Tony Gates at Luka Kovač and Abby Lockhart's wedding. As the newly renovated ER reopened, the staff was unaware of his accident.

However, it was later revealed Ray was alive and had been transported to another hospital across town. When Neela visited him, she discovered that both of his legs had been amputated. Ray expressed his disappointment and resentment toward Neela for leading him on regarding their relationship, while Ray's sometimes-girlfriend Katey blamed Neela for Ray's accident. Shortly after, Ray left Chicago to return home to Baton Rouge with his mother.

After Ray's departure, we learn that Ray has been writing to Neela. Katey and Neela have another altercation and Neela tells her that she will not take the blame for what happened to Ray. She also reveals that Ray himself doesn't blame her for the accident.