Ran (written and) is a 1985 film directed by Japanese Director Akira Kurosawa. The title of the movie is Japanese for chaos or revolt. In 1985 it was the most expensive Japanese film which one had ever made.

The film is based on the tragedy King Lear by William Shakespeare and on the life of Mōri Motonari, daimyo . The film won several awards, including an Academy Award and two BAFTA's.

Content[]

[hide]*1 Story

2 Cast

3 Trivia

4 References

Story[Edit][]

Hidetora is the patriarch of the powerful Ichimonji clan. He decides to leave his empire to his three sons: Taro, Jiro, and Saburo. Taro is the oldest of the three sons and get the leadership of the clan and the first castle. Jiro and Saburo respectively the second and third Castle and must get Taro support. Although the three sons initially agree with the new State of affairs, has doubts about the situation are Saburo. He fears that the brothers will make feud and that there will be war again soon.

Hidetora banishes his son, a former warlord, Saburo. But it doesn't take long before Saburo predictions come true. The wife of Taro, Lady Kaede, Taro and Hidetora plays against each other and hopes to conquer the realm of Hidetora. Because once was the realm of Hidetora in the hands of the father of Lady Kaede. Hidetora had it on a bloody way conquered and then forced to marry Taro with Kaede.

Hidetora searches the struggle with Taro the help of Jiro on. But his father would not help Jiro, in fact, he wants to use his father. Finally Hidetora flight to the third Castle, which was abandoned by Saburo. Hidetora is ambushed by the two people drunk with power Taro and Jiro. After a violent confrontation Hidetora is required to seppuku(ritual suicide) to commit. But because his sword is broken, the old warlord no commit suicide. Hidetora flight again and broken the grip of his two sons. In the meantime let Jiro kill his brother Taro.

Saburo help his father comes and goes into battle with Jiro. The two remaining brothers award each other nothing. While Saburo to Hidetora goes in search of, touch Jiro mortally wounded during the great battle with Saburo's men. Saburo manages to find Hidetora but is killed by a Hitman employed by Jiro. By the great tragedy that has taken place also Hidetora finally dies. And by the disappearance of Hidetora and his sons, there is also no longer the powerful Ichimonji clan.

Cast[Edit][]

Tatsuya Nakadai - Hidetora Ichimonji

Akira Terao - Taro Takatora Ichimonji

Jinpachi Nezu - Jiro Masatora Ichimonji

Daisuke Ryu - Saburo Ichimonji Naotora

Mieko Harada - Lady Kaede

Trivia[Edit][]