A premium lifestyle opportunity, in one of Ringwood's best streets, this flat 590 sq m approx. block of land is a blank canvas, awaiting the creation of your prestige new home (STCA).

Promising uncompromised convenience, the property rests within a no-through road that backs onto Maroondah Federation Estate and is zoned and located within walking distance to Ringwood Secondary College. For those seeking an easy CBD commute, it is about 200 metres to Ringwood Train Station and only a few minutes' drive to EastLink.

World class shopping and dining options will be at your doorstep, with Town Square and Eastland Shopping Centre situated about 400 metres away.

A wide range of green open spaces and recreational facilities are also accessible on foot; including Greenwood and Jubilee Parks, Ringwood Lake and Aquanation.

Several surrounding schools provide excellent choice in education; such as Greenwood Park Kindergarten, Our Lady of Perpetual Help and Great Ryrie Primary Schools, Ringwood Secondary and Aquinas Colleges.

Rare, remarkable and unrivalled in its position, this prized parcel of land is sure to be snapped up quickly.

So act now, bring along your grand plans, desires and dreams and build a lavish residence to match the lifestyle you will experience (STCA).

Flat 590 sq m approx. block of land in one of Ringwood's best streets The ideal site to build a prestige lifestyle home (STCA) About 200 metres from Ringwood Train Station Approximately 400 metres from Town Square and Eastland Shopping Centre Zoned and located within walking distance to Ringwood Secondary College Walking distance to reserves and recreational facilities Minutes from premium primary and secondary schools A quick, easy commute to EastLink

____

Fletchers COVID-19 Update

Fletchers remains committed to conducting our services in a COVID-safe and responsible manner. We ask all visitors to please refrain from touching any surfaces, opening cupboards, drawers, windows and doors, when inspecting a property.

For more information, please visit: fletchers.net.au/response-to-covid-19

____