Karen Elson and Jack White are now officially divorced, after eight years of marriage.

According to the Associated Press, the couple's divorce was finalised on November 26 at a Nashville court. Elson was named as the primary residential parent for their two children, Scarlett and Henry, and White maintained the rights to all of his musical businesses including The White Stripes, The Raconteurs, Dead Weather and his record label, Third Man Records.

The settlement comes following an acrimonius few months for the pair, which saw a restraining order granted to Karen Elson, and White counter-suing her claims of aggressive behaviour, with his lawyer claiming that Elson was still in love with him.

The couple first split in 2011, throwing a "divorce party" to celebrate the time spent together, telling friends: "We feel so fortunate for the time we have shared and the time we will continue to spend both separately and together watching our children grow".

SOURCE: US WEEKLY

On Tuesday 6 August, we wrote...

Following a restraining order granted to Karen Elson, singer Jack White has challenged his ex-wife's claims of aggressive behaviour.

In court documents obtained by Rolling Stone, White is countersuing with allegations that Elson is still in love with him and that she lied about his violent nature. The singer's attorney Cathy Spears wrote in response to Elson's claims:

"Mr. White vehemently denies Ms. Elson's allegation that she is fearful for her safety, as well as the safety of the parties' two minor children."

She also added that "Mr. White does not want to be portrayed as something he is not - violent toward his wife or children."

Using emails as examples of a friendly relationship between the former couple, Spears pointed out that Elson left the children with White for 10 days and travelled to New York for a work/pleasure trip after signing the restraining order, and that Elson allegedly told a mutual friend, Dead Weather bandmate Dean Fertita that she's still in love with White and "I'd move back in tomorrow if he asked me."

The couple broke up back in 2011, throwing a 'divorce party' for friends and family. Neither White nor Elson are yet to comment publicly on the situation.

On Friday 2 August, we wrote...

Karen Elson has been granted a restraining order against her former husband, Jack White. A judge signed off on the English model's request after she claimed she feared for the safety of herself and their two young children due to the rocker's aggressive behaviour over their pending divorce settlement. According to E!, White was served with the temporary order at the end of last month and is barred from any contact with his estranged wife except that which pertains to parenting time with the two's young children. She alleges the singer and guitarist contacted her legal team "in an inappropriate and aggressive manner" and made derogatory remarks about her to their business manager. The email the White Stripes frontman is claimed to have written, reads: "I'm not extending this anymore. And we're not getting lawyers involved to rip me off." Meanwhile, the affidavit reportedly says: "Wife fears for her and the children's safety as a result of this harassment... This pattern of husband's bullying wife into submission was a contributing factor in the demise of their marriage.' On the ruling, Elson has since said: "This is a private matter. I thank you for respecting my family's privacy and will be making no further comment." However, White's representative declined to comment.

News of the couple's discord comes after it was widely reported that theirs was an amicable separation. The couple famously invited friends to a "divorce party" when the news broke to celebrate the two's marriage. Speaking in an interview a few months ago, the Manchester-born model revealed that the divorce process had been "awful" and "emotional" but reaffirmed that she and White remained friends: "You have a responsibility to your children. It's not like splitting up with a boyfriend in your Twenties... You are breaking up with a whole life. It's not an easy process. But you've got to be friends, there is no choice."

The restraining order, which was granted in Tennessee, is pending a hearing scheduled for 29th August.

SOURCE: E! ONLINE