History Highlight:

Today in 2005, White Stripes singer Jack White married his girlfriend, British model Karen Elson, in a canoe on the Amazon in Brazil. The ceremony was officiated by a shaman. The couple had two kids together but divorced in 2013.

Also, Today In:

1966 - During a 12-hour session at Abbey Road studios, the Beatles added overdubs on "Yellow Submarine" with John Lennon blowing bubbles in a bucket of water and shouting "Full speed ahead, Mister Captain!" Roadie Mal Evans played on a bass drum strapped to his chest, marching around the studio with the Beatles following behind (conga-line style) singing "We all live in a yellow submarine."

1968 - Simon and Garfunkel went to No. 1 on the U.S. singles chart with "Mrs. Robinson", which was featured in the film The Graduate, directed by Mike Nichols and starring Dustin Hoffman and Ann Bancroft. While he was filming The Graduate, Nichols became fascinated with Simon and Garfunkel's music, listening to them nonstop during principal photography of the film. Nichols later met with Columbia Records chairman Clive Davis to ask for permission to license Simon and Garfunkel music for the film. Paul Simon wrote two songs that Nichols was unimpressed by, but after a break from the meeting, Simon and Garfunkel returned with an early version of "Mrs. Robinson", which they had given a working title of "Mrs. Roosevelt". Nichols loved the song, and the duo recorded the final version in February 1968. The song, which contains a nod to the Beatles' "I Am the Walrus" ("coo-coo-ca-choo") and a mention of baseball great Joe DiMaggio, went on to win two Grammy Awards in 1969. It became the first rock song to win Record of the Year, and it also was awarded the Grammy for Best Contemporary-Pop Performance - Vocal Duo or Group.

1969 - The Plastic Ono Band recorded "Give Peace a Chance" during a 'bed-in' at the Hotel La Reine in Montreal. Producer Phil Spector, poet Allan Ginsberg and writer Timothy Leary all sang on the song.

1971 - The two-room shack in Tupelo, Miss., where Elvis Presley was born on Jan. 8, 1935, was opened to the public as a tourist attraction.

1975 - The Rolling Stones kicked off their biggest ever U.S. tour at Louisiana State University. The tour would take in 45 shows in 26 cities. Guitarist Ron Wood joined the Stones on tour for the first time, replacing Mick Taylor.

1985 - Prince and the Revolution started a three-week run at No. 1 on the U.S. album chart with Around the World in a Day.

1991 - American soul singer David Ruffin of the Temptations died of a drug overdose.

2013 - Modern Vampires of the City by Vampire Weekend went to No. 1 on the U.S. album charts.

Birthdays:

Nelson Riddle was born today in 1921.

Pat Boone is 82.

Ronnie Wood is 69.

Depeche Mode keyboardist Alan Wilder is 57.

Simon Gallup of the Cure is 56.

Mike Joyce of the Smiths is 53.

Brandi Carlile is 35.