<< Tuscany

Lucca is a city in Tuscany known for its well preserved old town and Renaissance city walls. Founded in ancient times, Lucca was an important Roman city and later the seat of a Lombard duchy during the Early Middle Ages. The city then became a free comune and the capital of the Republic of Lucca, which ruled over a small territory in northeastern Tuscany and lasted from 1160 until 1805, surviving various wars and internal struggles. The city was occupied by the French in 1799 and was later joined with Piombino in the Principality of Lucca and Piombino. In 1815 Lucca became independent once again as the seat of the Duchy of Lucca, which was eventually annexed by Tuscany in 1847, joining Italy during the unification of the country. Lucca is now a tourist destination famous for its rich artistic and historic heritage.

Places to see in Lucca

✪ Walls of Lucca

The old town of Lucca is completely surrounded by a series of Renaissance walls that are among the largest and best preserved in Europe from that era. These walls were built during the 16th and 17th century to replace the previous Roman and medieval fortifications, and are now surrounded by a park that clearly separates the old town from the newer neighborhoods. The walls feature various ramparts and city gates. A few structures of the older medieval walls are still standing, such as the large gate known as Porta San Gervasio.

✪ Lucca Cathedral

Also known as: Cathedral of San Martino (Cattedrale di San Martino)

The Lucca Cathedral (Duomo di Lucca) is the main church of the city and a masterpiece of Romanesque architecture. The cathedral was built starting in the 11th century, while the interiors were later reworked in Gothic style. The facade of the church features a series of elaborate Romanesque decorations with several reliefs, statues, and arches. The cathedral houses many important artworks, including paintings by Ghirlandaio and Tintoretto, and the elaborate funerary monument of Ilaria del Carretto, dating from the early 15th century. A small Renaissance shrine inside the church, called Tempietto del Volto Santo, houses the relic of the Holy Face of Lucca (Volto Santo di Lucca), a large medieval wooden crucifix. The bell tower adjacent to the church, was also erected in Romanesque style during the Late Middle Ages, and it is one of the symbols of the city. A museum housing historic pieces of religious art is located next to the church.

✪ Guinigi Tower

The Guinigi Tower (Torre Guinigi) is one of the few remaining medieval towers of Lucca. Erected in the 14th century as one of the many towers of the city, it is famous for the small garden with tall trees located on the top of the structure. This garden also serves as a panoramic terrace with a view over the city.

Church of Santi Giovanni e Reparata

The Church of Santi Giovanni e Reparata is a church of ancient origins in the old town of Lucca. The current structure was erected in the Late Middle Ages, and it was reworked various times, most notably in the 19th century. Despite being stripped of most of its artworks, the church still features some historic decorations, along with some Paleochristian ruins.

Torre delle Ore

The Torre delle Ore is a clock tower located in the old town of Lucca. The structure was erected in the 13th century and it is the tallest tower in the city. The top of the tower features a panoramic spot with a great view over the old town of Lucca.

Church of San Michele in Foro

The Church of San Michele in Foro is a historic church erected on the site of the ancient Roman forum of Lucca. Originally built in the Early Middle Ages, the church was later completely reworked in Romanesque style. Its facade features elaborate decorations, and it is adorned with numerous arches and statues. The interior is simple but it features a few artworks and relics.

Puccini Museum

Also known as: Birthplace of Giacomo Puccini (Casa Natale di Giacomo Puccini)

The Puccini Museum is a museum dedicated to composer Giacomo Puccini, hosted in his birthplace. The museum features historic furnishings and various memorabilia of the composer, including his piano and various music sheets and drafts of his most famous operas. A statue of Puccini stands in the square in front of the museum.

Museum of Palazzo Mansi

The Museum of Palazzo Mansi (Museo di Palazzo Mansi) is an art museum hosted in a Renaissance palace featuring richly decorated and frescoed halls. The museum houses several interesting artworks dating between the Renaissance and the 19th century.

Piazza dell’Anfiteatro

Piazza dell’Anfiteatro is a peculiar oval square in the old town of Lucca. This square stands on the site of the ancient Roman amphitheater of the city and it follows its elliptical shape. The historic palaces facing the square host various stores and private residences.

Basilica of San Frediano

The Basilica of San Frediano is a historic church in Lucca. Originally erected in the 6th century, the church was rebuilt in the Late Middle Ages in Romanesque style. The decorated facade features a large golden mosaic, while the interiors host various artworks including frescoed chapels and an elaborate baptismal font.

Palazzo Pfanner

Palazzo Pfanner is a 17th-centuy palace in Lucca, which features various richly decorated halls and a large garden. This beautiful garden, probably designed by Filippo Juvarra, is adorned with some statues and has been used as a set for various movies.

National Museum of Villa Guinigi

The National Museum of Villa Guinigi (Museo Nazionale di Villa Guinigi) is an art and archaeology museum hosted in a 15th-century villa in Lucca. The museum houses a collection of Etruscan, Roman, and Lombard finds and artworks, and an art gallery featuring pieces dating from the Late Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and the Neoclassical era.