"Delta Goodrem and Brian McFadden regretfully announce that they are no longer engaged, and after much consideration, have mutually decided to end their relationship," it read.

"This decision has been made with a lot of soul searching from both parties with the realisation that they have grown apart. They leave the partnership with respect for one another, wishing each other success and happiness for the future."

The former Westlife star was previously married to Kerry Katona, and has two daughters from that relationship.

However, since his move to Australia, he and Delta had become the country's most high-profile pop couple. They were engaged in 2007.

She is seen as Australia's sweetheart but McFadden -- currently a judge on 'Australia's Got Talent' -- was described as "something close to a controversy magnet" in yesterday's 'Sydney Morning Herald'.

Recently the pair have been spending long periods apart.

McFadden is based in Sydney while Goodrem is working on a new album in Los Angeles -- she has not released one in four years despite being one of Australia's most successful female vocalists.

After the announcement, McFadden wrote on his Twitter page: "I love Delta and always will. She is one of God's living angels. I thank her for giving me the best years of my life. Please give us time x."

The 30-year-old from Dublin has rarely been out of the headlines during the couple's time together.

He had a recent spate of bad publicity for his latest single 'Just The Way You Are (Drunk At The Bar)' where he sang about taking "advantage" and doing "some damage" to a drunk girl.

After the outcry against the lyrics that were seen as promoting date rape, he asked radio stations to pull the single.

He said the song did not promote rape but rather was about Goodrem getting "giggly" after some champagne.

Sick

He tweeted: "I feel sick that my single is getting so much attention for the wrong reasons" -- and said he would donate all proceeds to charity.

Other recent problems include accusations he behaved recklessly when crashing into a wall at a track race for celebrities at the Australian Grand Prix, and when he was escorted off an international flight by Australian federal police after allegedly being loud and intoxicated and smoking on a flight from Los Angeles to Sydney.

The pair met in 2004 when McFadden sang a duet with Goodrem for his song 'Almost Here'; written about the end of his marriage to Katona, with whom he has two children Lily and Molly Sue.

Neither singer was available for comment last night.