DELTA Goodrem has said hooking up with Brian McFadden was bad for her pop career.

The engaged pair split after seven years and she said she “learnt the hard way” that it was the wrong relationship.

Delta, 36, said: “I can’t help but think that being with a guy who wasn’t right for me at that time had an effect on my career.”

The pair met in 2004 when she was just 20 and ex-Westlife star Brian had split from wife Kerry Katona.

He had asked the Aussie singer to duet with him for hit song Almost Here after quitting the boyband.

At the time Delta was also on the rebound - from tennis ace Mark Philippoussis - when she and Brian fell in love after working together.

She opened up about her past in her new book Bridge Over Troubled Dreams, which details the inspiration behind the songs on her latest album of the same name.

'ALL THE WRONG REASONS'

One song is called Dear Elton, a personal letter to Sir Elton John who contacted her out of the blue when she battled cancer and they “formed a beautiful connection over the phone”.

Delta said a couple of years later she met Elton in person when she was back in the UK for the Royal Variety Performance, where she was performing with Brian, when someone questioned whether she was wise to be with the Dubliner.

She said: “That same night, someone else in the room asked me if I thought the guy I was seeing was really right for me - and in the time that followed, I made some choices that completely changed the trajectory of my career in the UK.

“It seemed like I was on front covers everywhere I looked - and for all the wrong reasons.

“All the focus was on my private life and none on my music, and it did put me off course there for a little while.

MISSING OUT

“When I circled back around these moments while I was making Bridge Over Troubled Dreams, I checked in with myself and reflected on that time and being in the UK, and it got me thinking, as the lyrics say, ‘Have I let you down, Rocket Man?’”

Brian, 41, is currently engaged to PE teacher Danielle Parkinson and the pair recently welcomed their first child, while Delta is now with guitarist boyfriend Matthew Copley.

Delta said, looking back, her choices saw her miss out on a possible career boost.

She said: “Getting into the wrong relationship is something almost everyone can relate to and there’s no shame in it - we’ve all been there.

“But the choices I made at that time saw me run away from a scenario that could’ve been incredible for my career.

“I was only 20, 21 - still a kid, really - and I learnt the hard way that you have to be so careful about the decisions you make.

“I was also dealing with a lot at the time - my parents were going through a divorce, I’d just finished chemotherapy - and while I definitely make no excuses, because all of the choices were 100 per cent my own, I can’t help but think that being with a guy who wasn’t right for me at that time had an effect on my career.”

She said that her track Dear Elton helped her to heal.

Delta added: “I’ve shut the door on that now thanks to this song. I finally forgave myself.”