Singer Delta Goodrem has announced her engagement to Irish musician Brian McFadden, capping off a hugely successful year with a fairytale ending.

Goodrem, 23, today was forced to issue a statement confirming the engagement after earlier reports that she had turned down a proposal from McFadden, whom she has credited for her renewed interest in music.

"Contrary to false reports, the couple were hoping to keep the news private, however, they feel it is important to now confirm their exciting news,'' the short statement said.

The report said McFadden popped the question last weekend after returning to Sydney from Dublin.

No wedding date has been announced.

Fans today posted messages of congratulations on Goodrem's website.

"I'm sooooo proud of you darling. I hope you and Brian live the happiest life possible and have the most perfect wedding,'' wrote Renee N Redman.

"Congratulations Delta and Brian! You guys make such a perfect couple,'' posted another fan.

Goodrem, who battled cancer after being diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma at the age of 18, has been dating 27-year-old McFadden since 2004.

Their relationship was criticised by British tabloids who labelled Goodrem a "home-wrecker'', after speculation the pair embarked on their union before McFadden and then-wife Kerry Katona had separated.

Goodrem and McFadden have denied this.

McFadden, a former singer with boy band Westlife who now has his own solo career, has two children with Katona, and Goodrem has spoken about her struggle to be a stepmother to the girls.

"I've taken a long time to be able to adjust to the fact that someone I love has two kids. But it is a big responsibility and I resented it at the start,'' she told Andrew Denton in August.

"I found it really hard, I was going ... 'I don't know what to do?'.

"But now I love them, and they're a part of our life, and I'm not their mother and I don't try to be.''

The engagement caps off a huge year for the Australian singer, who burst back onto the charts with a new sexy look and a fresh sound, after spending time with McFadden in the UK and Ireland.

Her latest album, Delta, and its first single, In This Life, both debuted at number one on the Australian charts.

On the album sleeve, Goodrem thanked McFadden for his love and support.

"You made me believe again in life, love, music, and to be the best person and therefore the best artist I can be. Every dream I have, we're standing side by side, we laugh, we sing, we cry.''

AAP