OM SHANTI OM

Introduction :

Om Shanti Om is a 2007 Indian romantic comedy reincarnation film directed and choreographed by Farah Khan.It stars Shah Rukh Khan and debutant Deepika Padukone in the lead roles while Arjun Rampal, Shreyas Talpade, and Kirron Kher feature in supporting roles. More than forty-two well-known Hindi Movie stars appear in the course of the film, including thirty of them (not including the stars of the film) in one song alone. The film is set in the 1970s and 2000s; it pays tribute to, and pokes fun at, the Indian film industry of both these eras.

The film was released in 2,000 prints worldwide making it the largest Indian cinematic release at the time. Om Shanti Om was released on 9 November 2007 to mostly positive reviews from critics and record-breaking box office collections. It grossed ₹1.49 billion worldwide and thus became the highest-grossing Hindi film at the time of its release.

Summary :

Om Prakash Makhija (Shah Rukh Khan) is a junior artist in the 1970s Hindi film industry, in love with film star Shanti Priya (Deepika Padukone). One evening, Om views the premiere of Shanti’s film Dream Girl, posing as Manoj Kumar. Later that night, Om becomes drunk and describes his vision of himself as a famous, wealthy film star winning the Filmfare Award for Best Actor to his friend Pappu (Shreyas Talpade) and some local children. At the shooting of a later film, Om rescues Shanti from a fire scene where of the fire has escaped control, and they become friends. One day, after following Shanti, he overhears her and producer Mukesh Mehra’s (Arjun Rampal) conversation, that Mukesh and Shanti have married in secret and Shanti is pregnant and expects a traditional wedding. Mukesh pretends to be happy with the news, and invites Shanti at the set of their soon-to-be-made film Om Shanti Om. Mukesh promises to cancel the film, reveal their marriage to the public, and have a grand wedding on the set; but instead traps Shanti on the set and sets it on fire to prevent a financial loss and to protect his career. Shanti tearfully begs Mukesh to release her but he leaves anyway.

Om, who happens to be at the same location that night, attempts to rescue Shanti, but is attacked by Mukesh’s guards. After the guards leave, he again attempts to rescue Shanti and enters the set. He finds Shanti but he is thrown from the building by an explosion. The building explodes after he is thrown from it and Shanti appears to have died.

Outside, Om is hit by a car owned by Rajesh Kapoor (Javed Sheikh), a well-known actor taking his wife Lovely to the hospital to give birth. At the hospital, Om remembers his moments with Shanti as he dies due to these injuries while Lovely gives birth to a son, also named Om. This Om in adulthood becomes a popular movie star and the reincarnation of Om Prakash. He is nicknamed ‘O.K.’, and lives the luxurious life imagined by Om Prakash, but experiences pyrophobia and subconsciously inherits Om Prakash’s memories. In acceptance of an award, O.K. unexpectedly delivers Om Prakash’s drunken speech to the assembly. Pappu hears this on television. At a celebration of his award, O.K. is introduced by his father to Mukesh Mehra, and remembers the events that happened in his past life thereupon completely recovering Om Prakash’s memories. He later reunites with Om’s mother Bela (Kirron Kher) and Pappu and conspires to avenge Shanti’s death by making Mukesh confess his crime.

To that end, O.K. convinces Mukesh to restart Om Shanti Om, while scheming to convince Mukesh that Shanti is a ghost haunting him. To impersonate Shanti, O.K. finds Sandhya, a.k.a. Sandy, a doppelganger of Shanti. Throughout the film’s shooting, O.K. and his friends arrange incidents to remind Mukesh of his crime. During the music launch of the film, O.K. taunts Mukesh by revealing, through a song, the extent to which he knows the story of Shanti’s death. But when Mukesh runs after Sandy thinking she is a ghost of Shanti, Sandy accidentally cuts her arm and bleeds. Seeing this, Mukesh confirms that she is not Shanti’s ghost. But when he is about to confront O.K, he is suddenly hit by the chandelier.

After Mukesh wakes up, O.K. confronts Mukesh but is shocked when Mukesh reveals that he knows who Sandy is. During the quarrel, Sandy shows up. O.K. tries to send Sandy back. Sandy reveals that Mukesh, after the fire ceased to burn, found that Shanti survived the fire, but he buried her alive below the set’s chandelier. O.K. is confused about how Sandy knows this. Mukesh attempts to shoot Sandy shocked by the extent to which she knows about the murder, but Mukesh and O.K. fight, which results in yet another fire. Just when O.K. is about to kill Mukesh, Sandy stops him, says that Mukhesh will not die by his hand, and the chandelier drops on Mukesh, killing him instantly. Pappu and Sandy join O.K. O.K. is shocked when he sees the real Sandy and realizes the person he assumed Sandy was actually Shanti’s ghost. The ghost smiles warmly towards Om and tearfully bids goodbye to him. The film ends with Shanti’s ghost leaving the scene and disappears into the light.

Star Cast :

Shah Rukh Khan as Om Prakash Makhija aka ‘Omi’ / Om Kapoor

Deepika Padukone as Shanti Priya / Sandhya aka Sandy

Arjun Rampal as Mukesh Mehra, Shanti Priya’s husband

Kirron Kher as Bela Makhija, Om’s mother

Shreyas Talpade as Pappu Master, Om’s best friend

Javed Sheikh as Rajesh Kapoor

Asawari Joshi as Lovely Kapoor

Yuvika Chaudhary as Dolly

Bindu Desai as Kamini

Satish Shah as Film Director

Shawar Ali as Shawar Ali Khan

Nitesh Pandey as Anwar.

Other Film Crew’s :

Directed by Farah Khan

Produced by Gauri Khan

Dialogue Written by Mayur Puri

Screenplay by Farah Khan and Mushtaq Sheikh

Story by Farah Khan

Music by Songs: Vishal-Shekhar

Background Score: Sandeep Chowta

Cinematography by V. Manikandan

Edited by Shirish Kunder

Production Company : Red Chillies Entertainment

Distributed by Eros International and Warner Bros. Pictures

Release date : 9 November 2007

Country : India

Language : Hindi.

Special appearances during the song “Deewangi Deewangi” :

Rani Mukherjee

Zayed Khan

Vidya Balan

Jeetendra

Tusshar Kapoor

Priyanka Chopra

Shilpa Shetty

Dharmendra

Shabana Azmi

Urmila Matondkar

Manisha Koirala

Karisma Kapoor

Arbaaz Khan

Malaika Arora Khan

Dino Morea

Amrita Arora

Juhi Chawla

Aftab Shivdasani

Tabu

Govinda

Mithun Chakraborty

Kajol

Preity Zinta

Bobby Deol

Rekha

Ritesh Deshmukh

Salman Khan

Saif Ali Khan

Sanjay Dutt

Lara Dutta

Sunil Shetty

Other Cameo appearances throughout the film :

Abhishek Bachchan as himself

Akshay Kumar as himself

Ameesha Patel as Om Kapoor’s heroine at Filmfare Awards

Amitabh Bachchan as himself

Arshad Warsi as himself

Bappi Lahiri as himself

Bipasha Basu as herself

Chunky Pandey as himself

Dhananjay Singh as himself

Dia Mirza as Om Kapoor’s heroine at Filmfare Awards.

Farah Khan as the woman who makes fun of Om when the show ends

Feroz Khan as himself

Gauri Khan as herself

Hrithik Roshan as himself

Karan Johar as himself

Soumya Seth as Audience

Koena Mitra as herself

Mayur Puri as the director of Apahij Pyar

Vishal Dadlani as the director of Mohabbat Man, a superhero film

V. Manikandan as the director of Mind It, a parody of action films

Virat Kohli as Ranbeer, villain of Apahij Pyar

Priya Patil as Natasha, heroine of Apahij Pyar

Rakesh Roshan as himself

Rishi Kapoor as himself

Shabana Azmi as herself

Subhash Ghai as himself

Yash Chopra as himself

Jeetendra appearing through graphics in a song

Sunil Dutt appearing through grapnics in a song

Super Star Rajesh Khanna appearing through graphics in a song

Production :

The film is based on reincarnation. It is inspired by Rishi Kapoor’s 1980 Hindi film Karz and borrows many elements from it, including the title which is named after one of that film’s songs. In the beginning of Om Shanti Om, Rishi Kapoor can be seen dancing to the song of the same name. The second half of the film is inspired also by Bimal Roy’s Madhumati, which was the first Hindi film that revolved around the concept of reincarnation. Shooting of the film began in January 2007 at various locations in India. The film was released on 9 November 2007.

Om Shanti Om created a record of sorts by going in for an unheard of 2000 prints (worldwide) release. This was the highest number of prints (including digital) for any Indian movie at the time of its release. Om Shanti Om set another record for registered pre-advance booking of 18,000 tickets in a chain of theatres in Delhi a few days before the advance booking was to start.

Red Chillies Entertainment had reportedly sold the world rights for the film to Eros International for an amount between Rs. 720–750 million. Baba Films, production and distribution company, had offered a record Rs. 110 million for the rights to the Mumbai Circuit, easily surpassing the highest amount ever paid for the territory.

A book, titled The Making of Om Shanti Om written by Mushtaq Sheikh, was released after the release of the film. The book gives an insight into the production and happenings behind the camera of the film.

Deepika Padukone’s voice has been dubbed by sound artiste Mona Ghosh Shetty for this film.

Soundtrack album by Vishal-Shekhar

No. Title Singer(s)

1. “Ajab Si” – By KK

2. “Dard-e-Disco” – By Sukhwinder Singh, Caralisa Monteiro, Nisha, Marianne

3. “Deewangi Deewangi” – By Shaan, Udit Narayan, Shreya Ghoshal, Sunidhi Chauhan, Rahul Saxena

4. “Main Agar Kahoon” – By Sonu Nigam, Shreya Ghoshal

5. “Jag Soona Soona Lage” – By Rahat Fateh Ali Khan and Richa Sharma

6. “Dhoom Taana” Abhijeet Bhattacharya and Shreya Ghoshal

7. “Dastaan-E-Om Shanti Om” – By Shaan

8. “Dard-e-Disco (Remix)” – Sukhwinder Singh, Caralisa Monteiro, Nisha and Marianne

9. “Deewangi Deewangi (Rainbow Mix)” Shaan, Udit Narayan, Shreya Ghoshal, Sunidhi Chauhan and Rahul Saxena

10. “Om Shanti Om (Medley Mix)” Sukhwinder Singh, Caralisa Monteiro, Nisha, Marianne, Shaan, Udit Narayan, Shreya Ghoshal, Sunidhi Chauhan, Rahul Saxena and Abhijeet Bhattacharya

11. “Dastaan-E-Om Shanti Om (Dark Mix)” – By Shaan