The Republican Party of Armenia is one of the unique organizations operating on the Armenian political scene, with decades-old ideological and political roots. RPA is the ideological and political successor of Garegin Nzhdeh’s Tseghakron teaching and clandestine National United Party of 1967-1987 which in the fateful for Armenians days became the torch bearers of the ideas of independence both in the Diaspora and Armenia.

The birth of the RPA is also organically linked to the 1988 National Awakening, fight for independence and Artsakh national liberation struggle. The military-political unit Army of Independence, formed at the outset of the struggle, became the organizational basis of the RPA establishment. On 2 April 1990 the founding council composed of the detachment commanders of the Army of Independence proclaimed the establishment of the Republican Party of Armenia in Yerevan and became the first officially registered socio-political organization in the Republic of Armenia.

Since its foundation and up to November 1997 the late Ashot Navasardyan had been the chairman of RPA. After his death and until March 2007 late Andranik Margaryan headed the party.

In July 1998 RPA and Yerkrapah Volunteers’ Union issued a joint statement, which commenced the political consolidation process within the RPA. Vazgen Sargsyan became the party leader.

Following the parliamentary elections in 1999 the role of the RPA in the Armenian political life increased greatly. RPA was enabled to participate in Government formation. Vazgen Sargsyan was appointed Prime Minister.

Following the tragic events of 27 October 1999, as a result of political rearrangements Andranik Margaryan, chairman of the RPA council, was appointed in capacity of Prime Minister. During his years in the Prime Minister’s office tangible activities were carried out towards increasing the weight of the national ideology in the social, political and public life of the country.

The parliamentary elections of 25 May 2003 resulted in increasing the number of the Republican Party’s seats in the Parliament, compared to 1999 elections. Andranik Margaryan continued to head the Armenian Government.

The RPA 10th extraordinary congress of July 2006 proclaimed the Republican Party of Armenia a national conservative party.

On 25 March 2007 RPA chairman Andranik Margaryan passed away, and the council chairman Serzh Sargsyan assumed the duties of RPA Chairman.

At the parliamentary elections of 12 May 2007 RPA Vice Chairman Tigran Torosyan was elected Speaker of the Parliament.

Government led by Serzh Sargsyan was formed based on the results of parliamentary elections.

On 10 November 2007 the 11th ordinary congress of the RPA was held, and some amendments to the Charter were made. RPA Executive body was elected as the permanently functioning governing body, while the RPA Council was elected as the party's representative body. Serzh Sargsyan was elected RPA chairman.

At the presidential elections of February 2008 Serzh Sargsyan was elected President of the Republic of Armenia. Government was formed led by Tigran Sargsyan.

Following Tigran Torosyan’s resignation in September 2008 Hovik Abrahamyan, member of the RPA executive body, was elected Speaker of the National Assembly.

At the 12th congress of the RPA held in November 2009 RA President Serzh Sargsyan was re-elected as party chairman.

In November 2011 after NA President Hovik Abrahamyan’s resignation, Samvel Nikoyan, member of RPA Council, was elected in the capacity of RA NA President.

In March 2012 at RPA 13th Congress RA President Serzh Sargsyan was re-elected in the capacity of party chairman.

Thus, being widely involved in public governance and local self-governance, the Republican Party of Armenia remains an influential political force with its own goals, ideology and biography.