The Chair of Ancient and Medieval Armenian Literature and its Teaching Methods of the Faculty of Philology marked the 25th anniversary of Independence in a unique way. At the proposal of the Head of the Chair, Professor Ayelita Dolukhanyan, the Chair held two seminars at the house-museums of Armenian writer Paruyr Sevak and military and political figure Vazgen Sargsyan. The members of the Chair set off to Ararat province in the morning of April 4.

“Homeland becomes homeland and is perceived as such when it is tangible…” The members of the Chair said, admiring with inner pride the wonderful sight of Masis, the vineyards lying at its foot and proud mountains. The day was really festive. It was filled with more excitement when getting to Zangakatun village, the birthplace of Armenian writer Paruyr Sevak, we found groups of schoolchildren with excited and enthusiastic faces in the yard overgrown with wild briers and emerald green grass. The museum welcomes its visitors with posters immortalizing the writer’s sayings and a beautiful park. It takes its visitors to the troubled world of the son who is concerned about the future of his nation. The exhibits include documents, photographs, archival materials, books and vivify Sevak’s thoughts and concerns. However, the most impressive thing inside the building is the mural painted by Sargis Muradyan in 1985-86 that covers the front wall of the museum. It opens for the visitors the inner world and life of the great writer, stating from his birth to his death and immortality. The symbolic images complete the life of the devoted son, freedom-loving warrior, tireless seeker and dedicated writer. The mural also portrays Armenians who ever had any connection with the prominent writer, among them Hamo Sahyan, Martiros Saryan, Hrant Matevosyan, Aram Khachatryan and many others. The members of the Chair also visited

Paruyr Sevak’s tomb in the garden of the house.

The visit to the house-museum after Vazgen Sargsyan in Ararat village was also symbolic; it is the evidence of the creation of Armenia's independence and perfectly represents Vazgen Sargsyan’s activities as a writer, soldier, commander and statesman. Next to the exhibits, visitors can read the Commander’s notes and observations made about Armenia’s independence, statehood, army and future. It was interesting to see the cheerful, warm, active and erudite political figure smiling at us and schoolchildren unconditionally from all pictures. Everything was impressive at the museum, including the collection of gifts donated by his adherents, the personal belongings of the Commander showcased in the corner, his desk and library…his pen and a weapon put side by side. On behalf of the Chair, Ayelita Dolukhanyan made a note in the commemorative book, saying the museum fully fits the hero who forged freedom and independence of his Motherland.

The museum clearly shows Vazgen Sargsyan’s concerns over the challenges faced by the newly independent country and the ways of their solution. It is an appeal for sobriety and call for care towards the long-awaited and expensive gift - the independence of Armenian people. “About 10-15 people from each region, from our old guys, experienced suiciders, who will go to fight in the most difficult places on the frontline. If we are able to gather a battalion of 500 suiciders, it will mean we still exist, we shall fight and win. 15.08.1992,” Commander Vazgen Sargsyan wrote.