Education & Experience

Matthew McDonough is a native of Northeast Arkansas, born at St. Bernard’s and raised in Jonesboro. After graduating from Jonesboro High School, Dr. McDonough completed his undergraduate education at Arkansas State University, earning a B.S. in biological sciences with a minor in chemistry.

He then attended the University of Tennessee College of Dentistry, completing his dental education and obtaining a Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS).

Residencies & Internships

Following dental school, Dr. McDonough completed two one-year internships in oral and maxillofacial surgery (OMFS)—one at the University of Texas Southwestern/John Peter Smith Hospital in Ft. Worth, Texas, and another at St. Luke’s Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.

He then completed a four-year residency and certificate in oral and maxillofacial surgery at Allegheny General Hospital in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He received extensive instruction in diagnosing and treating various afflictions of the face, mouth, and jaws and managing complex surgical patients.

After graduating from residency, Dr. McDonough worked in private practice in Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio, for four years before making the easy decision to return to his hometown to join the well-established practice of Dr. James Phillips. Today, Dr. McDonough is well-trained and offers exceptional skills in all areas of the specialty of oral and maxillofacial surgery.

Community Involvement

Dr. McDonough is passionate about his profession and his community. He holds privileges and voluntarily takes calls at St. Bernard’s Regional Medical Center and NEA Baptist Hospitals in Jonesboro. As the only oral surgeon currently taking calls in the region, Dr. McDonough helps provide a specialized service to Northeast Arkansas and Southeast Missouri citizens.

In 2018, Dr. McDonough was appointed to the Arkansas State Board of Dental Examiners by Governor Asa Hutchinson and served as the Board’s president from 2021-2022.

By extension of his Board service, Dr. McDonough also serves as a dental examiner for the Southern Regional Testing Agency (SRTA). This organization evaluates and examines the clinical performance skills of senior dental students and dentists who seek to obtain state dental licenses.

Outside of the Office

When not in the clinic or the operating room, Dr. McDonough enjoys watching college sports. He is an ardent and faithful supporter of Arkansas State University. He can be found most Saturdays in the fall at Centennial Bank Stadium dressed in scarlet and black.

Dr. McDonough’s other hobbies include traveling and reading and he’s a member of Valley View Church of Christ in Jonesboro.