Dr. Matthew McDonough is a native of Northeast Arkansas. After graduating from Jonesboro High School, he obtained his undergraduate education at Arkansas State University, earning a B.S. in biological sciences with a minor in chemistry.

He went on to the University of Tennessee College of Dentistry where he completed his dental education and earned a Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS).

Following dental school, Dr. McDonough completed two one-year internships in oral and maxillofacial surgery (OMFS)—one at the University of Texas Southwestern/John Peter Smith Hospital in Ft. Worth, Texas and another at St. Luke’s Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.

He then completed a four-year residency and certificate in oral and maxillofacial surgery at Allegheny General Hospital in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he received extensive instruction in the diagnosis and treatment of a myriad afflictions of the face, mouth, and jaws and the management of complex surgical patients.

After graduating from residency, Dr. McDonough worked in private practice in Cleveland and Columbus, Ohio for four years before making the decision to return to his hometown to join the well-established practice of Dr. James Phillips.

Dr. McDonough is well-trained and offers exceptional skill in all areas of the specialty of oral and maxillofacial surgery.

Dr. James Phillips majored in Athletics and Biology from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. After graduation, he served as an Army Infantry Officer (SF) in Vietnam and Korea (2nd Infantry Division).

Dr. Phillips entered the oral and maxillofacial residency at Wilmington Medical Center in Wilmington, Delaware, and completed his residency in 1979. In 1980, Dr. Phillips opened his practice in Jonesboro, Arkansas.

Dental Implants

Dental implants at Northeast Arkansas Center for Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery consist of three components: the implant, the crown, and the abutment, which fastens the crown to the implant. The implant itself is made of titanium and threaded on the outside like a screw to securely fasten it into the bone.

Dental implants in Jonesboro are most commonly used to replace single or multiple missing teeth in conjunction with bridges or dentures. They can also help the shape and density of the jawbone by supporting the facial structure and soft tissues around the gums, cheeks, and lips. The functionality of implants helps you to eat, chew and have natural-looking results.