We are proud to announce Matthew McDonough’s promotion to Divisional Director. This promotion is a testament to his exceptional dedication, strategic mindset, and commitment to both our clients and employees.

Matthew’s career at PiLON is a shining example of what can be achieved through hard work and dedication. Joining PiLON in 2015 as an Assistant Quantity Surveyor, he quickly demonstrated his strategic and commercial acumen, earning the respect and admiration of both colleagues and clients. His progression to Divisional Director reflects his ability to manage and oversee PiLON’s strategic contracts and clients effectively, ensuring the successful delivery of our projects.

Leadership and Mentorship

In his new role, Matthew will continue to head up our Planned, Voids, Fire and Compliance division, including for some of PiLON’s largest and most significant contracts. His leadership style is characterised by a genuine care for his colleagues, a commitment to their professional growth, and a focus on creating a positive and productive working environment. His team holds him in high regard, not just for his professional expertise but also for his mentorship and support. Matthew’s dedication to mentoring has seen two colleagues transition from roles as Project Administrator and Resident Liaison Officer to pursuing formal qualifications and careers as Quantity Surveyors.

Building Strong Client Relationships

Matthew is not only a valued leader within PiLON but also a respected main contact for several of our key client partners. His ability to foster strong, positive relationships with client representatives has been instrumental in creating a collaborative and productive working atmosphere. Clients appreciate his deep understanding of the challenges faced in delivering services within customers’ homes, an insight he brings from his own background in electrical works. Matt and his team are continually coming up with ways to improve the residents experience and improve access rates resulting in a more efficient service.

Vision for the Future

As Divisional Director, Matthew’s role extends beyond day-to-day management. He plays a pivotal role in shaping the future of PiLON, contributing to various initiatives across the organisation. His strategic input is highly valued as we continue to innovate and improve our services.

On behalf of Pilon’s board and SMT, well-deserved congratulations, Matt and a heartfelt thank you.”

“I’m delighted to announce Matt’s promotion to the Divisional Director role, after an impressive career progression with Pilon for almost 10 years. Matt gained a huge respect from all of us across the years, at all levels – his professionalism, commitment, loyalty, client feedback, and contribution to the business being second to none.

Vlad Nedelcu, Managing Director at PiLON

In June, Matthew was honored as ‘Manager of the Quarter’ by his colleagues. This award is presented quarterly to the manager who receives the highest number of colleague nominations for exemplary leadership skills and embodying our company values.

A Personal Touch

Outside of his professional achievements, Matthew is known for his love of golf and his dedication to charity work, most recently coming up with the 10 Peaks Challenge, which saw 30 of PiLON’s colleagues scale ten mountain peaks, raising over £6,000 for the Thames Hospice. These personal interests further illustrate his all-rounded nature and his commitment to making a positive impact both within and outside the workplace.

We are incredibly fortunate to have Matthew leading our teams, and we look forward to seeing how he will continue to drive PiLON’s success in his new role.