Our label, sticker and signage workshop is located in Canning Vale, so all our labels and stickers are proudly printed right here in WA. Our highly skilled staff include designers and printing technicians who have a wealth of experience in their field. Our staff follow your job from production through to delivery so you’ll always know the progress of your project.

Our factory can accomodate small or large quantities, simple or difficult print jobs, straight forward or complex. We have the personnel, state-of-the-art printing equipment, and experience to ensure our clients receive the best service and the best quality self-adhesive label products in Perth.

The Label Factory houses some of the most advanced printing equipment found in Australia. We deploy a mix of conventional flexographic printing machines, with high end reel to reel digital label printing presses. We run class leading finishing lines that are capable of multiple embellishments including hot foil, multi laminates, screen printing, special effects and coatings, cold foil, embossing, debossing, peel and reveal and more.

From our modern print manufacturing facility in Canning Vale, we deploy a blend of ultra-modern manufacturing technology with old school craftsmanship and technical printing expertise. Our team are highly experienced, having been in the industry for decades.

Our high speed flexographic presses are equipped with the latest Fleye Inspection systems, carefully inspecting every single label printed for defects, and automatically rejecting any media that fails inspection. Our slitting machines are also equipped with state-of-the-art inspection systems allowing us to inspect every single label we supply for defects and remove them ensuring 100% defect free supply.

We use spectrophotometer testing for our colour analysis, ANSI approved barcode verification equipment to ensure our barcodes are fit for use and will scan in the field, and a whole host of other highly automated ancillary equipment which allows us to produce your labels to the highest standards achievable.

We have smart IT systems in place, like our cloud-based MIS which allows for live tracking of the jobs as they move through our production processes, keeping our sales team up to date with the progress of each job we have in hand at the moment.