Years active

2008–present

Record label

Napalm Records

Past members

David Kimmell

Labels

Napalm Records, Karate Body Records

Website

themidnightghosttrain.com

Origin

Topeka, Kansas, United States (2008)

Members

Brandon Burghart, Steve Moss, Mike Boyne, David Kimmell, Toby Cole

Albums

Cold Was the Ground, Live at Roadburn 2013, Buffalo, The Midnight Ghost Train

Genres

Rock music, Hard rock, Blues rock, Southern rock, Heavy metal

Similar

Mammoth Mammoth, Glowsun, High Fighter, Mondo Drag, The Atomic Bitchwax

Profiles

The midnight ghost train spacefaze

The Midnight Ghost Train is an American rock band from Topeka, Kansas. The band’s line-up consists of Steve Moss (guitar/vocals), Brandon Burghart (drums), and Mike Boyne (bass). The trio has been categorized as hard rock, stoner rock, and heavy blues. TMGT is known for their energetic live shows. They have been consistently touring the U.S. and Europe since their formation in 2008. They are signed to the Austrian based label, Napalm Records.

Contents

The midnight ghost train spacefaze

The midnight ghost train foxhole

History

Members

Discography

Songs

References

The midnight ghost train foxhole

History

The Midnight Ghost Train was originally formed by Steve Moss in Buffalo, NY. The band's name comes partially from a Hank William's song lyric in I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry. TMGT's first release was "Johnny Boy EP" in 2008. In 2009 they self-released their first full length album "The Midnight Ghost Train". The album was self-recorded in their home studio after the band relocated to Kansas. They followed up with their 2012 album "Buffalo", released on Karate Body Records. It was recorded entirely analog by Dave Barbe in Athens, Georgia. Displaying the band's delta blues influences, the album features a Lead Belly cover of Cotton Fields done a cappella. In 2013, TMGT performed at the Roadburn Festival in Tilburg, Netherlands, and released "Live at Roadburn 2013" shortly after. After losing their previous bassist, they went through several lineup changes before finding current bass player Mike Boyne. In 2014, TMGT signed with the Austrian based metal label, Napalm Records, which released TMGT's "Cold Was The Ground" on February 28, 2015. The album has a much faster tempo than previous releases, with more emphasis on song and lyric construction. They have been most commonly described as hard rock, and related to bands like Kyuss, Black Sabbath, and Clutch. The band has built the majority of their fan base from consistent touring, and intense live performances.

Members

Steve Moss – vocals, guitar

Brandon Burghart – drums

Mike Boyne – bass

Former members

David Kimmell - bass (2010–2012)

Discography

Cold Was The Ground (2015)

Live at Roadburn 2013 (2013)

Buffalo (2012)

The Midnight Ghost Train (2009)

Johnny Boy EP (2008)

Songs

BC TruckerCold Was the Ground · 2015

A Passing Moment of MadnessBuffalo · 2012

SpacefazeBuffalo · 2012

References

The Midnight Ghost Train Wikipedia

(Text) CC BY-SA