The Swiss Federal Railways (Schweizerische Bundesbahnen), in the German-speaking part usually referred to by the abbreviation SBB, is very well organized, convenient, and takes you almost everywhere. Intercity trains connect Zurich directly to various cities in Switzerland or abroad. Regional trains and the S-Bahn (suburban rail) network also include stops in-between the larger cities. SBB has a useful app for checking timetables and purchasing tickets via smartphone.

SBB

Half-fare travelcards (Halbtax)

With the Half-fare travelcard you can travel half price on the entire Swiss public transport network, including all SBB railway routes, busses, boat and ferry crossings and even many private and mountain railways. Half-fare travelcards can be purchased at railway stations, you just need to bring a recent photograph and a valid identification document. If you’d like to buy a travelcard online, you’ll need an electronic picture, your ID or passport number and a credit card.

SBB half-fare travelcard

GA travelcard

If you’re a frequent traveler or intend to travel longer distances, you might consider purchasing a GA (Generalabonnement), which allows unlimited travel on all SBB railway routes, busses, boat and ferry crossings and numerous private and mountain railways.

SBB GA travelcard

Point-to-point travelpass

If you're commuting to Zurich from outside the canton of Zurich, a point-to-point travelpass might be an option as well. This is only valid on a particular route. It’s recommended to carefully compare prices, as for instance a Bern-Zurich travelpass is more expensive than a GA, which allows unlimited travel on all routes.

SBB point-to-point travelpass

seven25 travel card

If you’re under 25, then the seven25 travelcard might be a good addition to a half-fare travelcard. It allows for unlimited travel on trains and other public transporting Switzerland (including the ZVV network) from 7pm to 5am in 2nd class.

SBB seven25 travelcard

Supersaver Tickets

One possibility to save money on train trips is by buying a supersaver ticket, where discounts reach to up to 50 per cent. This kind of ticket is available only 30 days before the date of your trip and is only valid for the selected train connection.