Route suggestion

For this suggestion, I would like to suggest the Drammen railway (Drammenbanen) that runs from Oslo Central station to Drammen in Norway. As well as that, I am suggesting the Asker railway (Askerbanen) as well as the Spikkestad railway (Spikkestadbanen). I think it is appropiate to make them as ONE network route.

The Railways (and some history)

Drammenbanen

This is the main railway on this route. The railway streches 42 km (26 miles) from Oslo Central station to Drammen. It opened in 1872 and is one of the most important railways in Norway. Intercity/regional trains towards Bergen, Kristiansand and Stavanger use this railway, as well as much more regional and commuter traffic around the districts. More information (norwegian): https://no.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drammenbanen

Askerbanen

To reduce travel time and heavy traffic congestion on Drammenbanen, there were built three new railway tunnels. The first is Bærumstunnelen, which runs from Lysaker to Sandvika. It opened to traffic in 2011. The second and third tunnels are Tanumtunnelen and Skaugumtunnelen. They run from Sandvika to Asker, and could in fact be just one single tunnel, however it became two instead. Both opened in 2005. In other words, regional and intercity trains use Askerbanen instead of the original Drammenbanen to get to Drammen for the benefits as already mentioned. Under is a map that shows where Askerbanen runs relatively to Drammenbanen. More information (norwegian): https://no.wikipedia.org/wiki/Askerbanen

Spikkestadbanen

Nowadays, this railway just runs from Asker (where it connects with Drammenbanen) to Spikkestad, and is therefore called Spikkestadbanen. In other words it is a branch line. Although, it has not always been like this. Spikkestadbanen was in fact a part of the main Drammenbanen until 1973. That year, opened new railway tracks including a long tunnel (Lieråstunnelen) running from Asker to Brakerøya (near Drammen). That railway became a part of Drammenbanen. The old Drammenbanen (now Spikkestadbanen) closed between Brakerøya and Spikkestad, now forming the Spikkestadbanen we now today. More information (norwegian): https://no.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spikkestadlinjen

Major stations along the route

Oslo Central station

Nationaltheatret

Skøyen

Lysaker

Stabekk

Sandvika

Asker

Spikkestad

Drammen

Route map

Below is the route map showing commuter services around and in Oslo as well as some regional lines in eastern Norway. Can you see where on the map I am suggesting?

Lines/operators/rolling stock - What should be included?

All lines on the map are operated by the norwegian state operator, Vy. (Formely called Norske Statsbaner (NSB)). The only exception is the line F1 and F2 which runs by Flytoget (Airport Express train). Under I will mention all the lines and the rolling stocks operating en route. Also, I will suggest if it should be included in TSW2 on this route. (There are limits in how much Dovetail should focus upon).

L1

Route IRL: Spikkestad - Lillestrøm

Route TSW: Spikkestad - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 72 (BM 72)

Included TSW: Yes

General: Most important for this route. Make use of the original Drammenbanen from Lysaker to Asker + Spikkestadbanen from Asker to Spikkestad.

F2

Route IRL: Drammen - Oslo Airport Gardermoen

Route TSW: Drammen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 71 (BM 71) + Type 78 (BM 78)

Included TSW: No. Possible loco add-on(s).

General: Require extra licensing (Flytoget).

R10

Route IRL: Drammen - Lillehammer

Route TSW: Drammen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 74 (BM 74)

Included TSW: Yes.

General: Make use of Askerbanen.

R11

Route IRL: Skien - Eidsvoll

Route TSW: Drammen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 74 (BM 74) + Type 70 (BM 70)

Included TSW: Yes, BUT, only the BM 74. The BM 70 could be a possible loco add-on.

General: Make use of Askerbanen.

L12

Route IRL: Kongsberg - Eidsvoll

Route TSW: Drammen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 75 (BM 75)

Included TSW: Yes.

General: Make use of Askerbanen.

L13

Route IRL: Drammen - Dal

Route TSW: Drammen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 75 (BM 75)

Included TSW: Yes.

General: Make use of Askerbanen.

L14

Route IRL: Asker - Kongsvinger

Route TSW: Asker - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 75 (BM 75)

Included TSW: Yes.

General: Make use of Askerbanen. Aslo provides shorter services.

L2 / L2x

Route IRL: Stabekk - Ski

Route TSW: Stabekk - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 69 (BM 69)

Included TSW: No, BUT, could be a loco-addon.

General: Provides relatively shorter services to the route. The line is operated by the BM 69, and could be a loco add-on. As these services are quite short, the BM 69 might not be worth creating it. I do think though, that the services for this line should be added anyway, with the BM 75 operating instead for instance.

L22

Route IRL: Skøyen - Mysen / Rakkestad

Route TSW: Skøyen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 75 (BM 75)

Included TSW: Yes.

General: Provides the shortest services en route, with only calling at 2 stations.

L21

Route IRL: Stabekk - Moss

Route TSW: Stabekk - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 75 (BM 75)

Included TSW: Yes.

General: Provides the shortest services en route, with only calling at 2 stations.

OTHER SERVICES / LINES

There are railway lines that are not on this map, that still use Drammenbanen on this route. Although, I do not think that Dovetail should make it as it will be too much for them. It could however be added in the future if they make other lines, for instance the Jæren Line (Jærbanen), which I suggested earlier. That would probably include the Type 73 (BM 73). The BM 73 would perfectly fit this route, as it will run highspeed services from Oslo Central station to Drammen.

41

Route IRL: Bergen - Oslo Central station

Route TSW: Drammen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: EL 18 (with Type 7 coaches)

Operator: Vy "Bergensbanen".

50

Route IRL: Stavanger / Kristiansand - Oslo Central station

Route TSW: Drammen - Oslo Central station

Rolling stock: Type 73 (BM 73) + EL 18 (with Type 5 coaches)

Operator: Go-Ahead Nordic "Sørtoget".

Freight services

There are much freigh services too running on the line. I am not an expert on freight services and the rolling stock used, so I cannot provide much information upon that. I do not see the need of freight services on this route, but it would of course make the route more interesting and create more variety. I know that the german BR 185 is used in Norway, and I saw one on THIS route IRL. That could be added, since it is already in the game. I also know that the british BR Class 66 is used in Norway, although I think that one is just running up in the north.

The freight operators that I know run in Norway are: Green Cargo + CargoNet + Hectorail.

Rolling stock (included within the route)

Type 72 (BM 72)

Train type: EMU

Manufacturer: AnsaldoBreda

Lines operating (this route): L1

Maximum speed: 160 km/h (100 mph)

Extra: The most important EMU to include, as it is the only one that use Spikkestadbanen and the full length of the original part of Drammenbanen. The motor sounds on this unit are VERY NICE! Check out the video below (recorded by myself at Sandvika station on this route).

Type 74 (BM 74)

Train type: EMU

Manufacturer: Stadler FLIRT

Lines operating (this route): R10 & R11

Maximum speed: 200 km/h (124 mph)

Extra: Used on the regional lines in eastern Norway. Almost the same as the type 75, however there are some minor changes. For passengers the only difference that stands out are the seats, which is much better on the type 74. Also, many type 74's still have the ex-NSB livery.

Type 75 (BM 75)

Train type: EMU

Manufacturer: Stadler FLIRT

Lines operating (this route): L12, L13, L14, L21 & L22

Maximum speed: 200 km/h (124 mph)

Extra: Used on the local/commuter lines in eastern Norway. Almost the same as the type 74, however there are some minor changes. For passengers the only difference that stands out are the seats, which is not as goods as the ones used on the type 74. Unlike the type 74, most of the type 75 have got the new Vy- livery.

Rolling stock (POSSIBLE loco add-ons)

Type 69 (BM 69)

Train type: EMU

Manufacturer: Strømmen Værksted/NEBB/EB/ABB

Lines operating (this route): L2 & L2x

Maximum speed: 130 km/h (80 mph)

Extra: Used on the local/commuter lines in eastern Norway, as well as Arendalsbanen in the southern region. It would be a nice train to have in the game. The only negative will be that there are only short distance services in this particular route. Therefore I think it will be unlikely for this route. It could however, be added as a layer if this train comes out in another route in Norway, for instance Østfoldbanen, where the BM 69 is still actively going as line L2 & L2x.

Type 70 (BM 70)

Train type: EMU

Manufacturer: Strømmen Værksted/EB/ABB/ADtranz

Lines operating (this route): R11

Maximum speed: 160 km/h (100 mph)

Extra: Used on regional lines in eastern Norway. For this route this train would make the route more interesting and provide more variety. I think this is the most likely DLC to come within this route. It could make substitutional services on the R11 line together with the BM 74. This makes the train more uncommon, which I think would be great!

The Airport Express Pack

I think it would be nice to make a pack with the Airport Express services. This would be like the BR Heavy Freight Pack for the Northern Trans-Pennine route; more services and two new locos/units. This pack would increase services from Drammen to Oslo Central station, running on the F2 line. The trains operated by "Flytoget" would depart every 20 minutes! This pack would indeed give the route a more busy feeling. So, the trains that would include in this pack are:

Type 71 (BM 71)

Train type: EMU

Manufacturer: Strømmen Værksted/ADtranz

Lines operating (this route): F2

Maximum speed: 210 km/h (130 mph)

Type 78 (BM 78)

Train type: EMU

Manufacturer: CAF

Lines operating (this route): F2

Maximum speed: 245km/h (152 mph)

Extra: Recently came into service, but is taken out of traffic temporary due to a fault

Safety Systems on the trains and the route

Sifa: A deadmans pedal and a vigilance device. Works the same way as the one used in Germany.

ATC: The same one as they use in Sweden. The system is split in two;

DATC: Stands for "Delvis Automatic Train Control". Delvis means partially. Ensures that the driver do not pass a signal of danger. The system is also fitted with train information, such as train length, etc. Maximum permitted speed: 130 km/h. DATC is not used on this particular route.

FATC: Stands for "Fully Automatic Train Control". Ensures that the driver is not exceeding the speed limit and provides the driver information about upcoming speed limits, in additon to everything mentioned about DATC. Maximum permitted speed: 210 km/h.

Anything else about the railway

Max speed: 160 km/h (100 mph)

Electrification: Electrified all way through with 15 kV 16.67 Hz AC power on Overhead Line Electrification (OHLE)

Track: Standard gauge 1,435 mm (4 ft 8+1⁄2 in). Double track most of the time on Drammenbanen and Askerbanen. Single track on Spikkestadbanen. Extra track on major stations.

Conclusion

I REALLY want Norway in the game! I think it is the perfect country to make for TSW 2. Norway offers scenic, beautiful, historic, varied, interesting, fast, slow, busy and FANTASTIC routes and railways in all kinds of sorts. Everything from flat scenery to busy commuter routes to DRASTIC mountains to climb. Norway awaits you!

I think the route (Eidsvoll) Drammen-Skien is also a beautiful route and it has a almost a 360 turn at Tonsberg what unique is in the world of trains. but this route is also fun to have.