The Film Amadeus

This paper will take a look into the movie Amadeus, to see if the film accurately

depicts the history of Amadeus and the enlightenment of the characters. The time period

that the film takes place in is the 18th century. There is a mixture of social class in this

film. There are rulers and commoners shown in this film. The main characters in the film

which are Mozart, Salieri, and Emperor Joseph represent actual historical figures. The

film was made in 1984.

The film was somewhat accurate with the characters and the time, but for the

most part the film never stated what year everything was happening in. Someone could

tell that the time frame of the film was the 18th century, but …show more content…

For example when

Emperor Joseph wanted Amadeus to stay in Vienna to make an opera he also wanted him

to stay because it would upset the bishop. There were also many ideas that Mozart

showed Joseph. Joseph allowed these works to happen showed his enlightenment. These

idea were seen wrong in the social class in Vienna, but Joseph still accept these ideas.

One example was the first opera that Mozart did for Joseph. Amadeus wanted to

do the opera in German. This was seen as unmoral cause all opera’s were in Italian. Also

Mozart wanted to use a setting of Turkey. This idea was accepted by Joseph. The ideas

that Joseph accepted looked to be the most risky. These idea showed that he was an

enlighten Despot. Another example was when Mozart was plan on doing an opera on The

Marriage of Figaro. This was a very risqué opera. Mozart promised that it not going to be

a vulgar opera. Joseph again agreed to this opera, even do his subjects didn’t agree. Then

during rehearsals there was ballet in the opera which was against the law to have in the

opera. This law was made by Joseph. Then after seeing the play without it, he wanted it

in because it didn’t look right. He basically changed his own law, to the displeased of his

subjects again. Emperor Joseph showed enlightenment many times in this film.

Mozart can be viewed as an enlightenment hero. He stood against the opposition

of the church and the convention. For