About this Item

A signed first edition Joseph Wambaugh detective fiction novel about the LAPD, with further inscriptions from fellow crime authors James Ellroy and Michael Connelly. The first edition, first printing of this novel, inscribed by the author to the title page, dated 7 Dec 2006.In the publisher's original unclipped dust wrapper.This work is signed to the half title by best-selling mystery authors Michael Connelly and James Ellroy, both of whom attended Wambaugh's signing event at the Westwood Crest Theatre, in Los Angeles.A thrilling tale following the Hollywood division of the LAPD.With three loosely inserted pieces of ephemera, including and LAPD/Wambaugh bookmark, an advertisement for the signing event, and a 'Certificate of Authenticity'. In the publisher's original quarter cloth binding, with paper covered boards, and price unclipped dust wrapper. Externally, fine. Dust wrapper in exceptional condition. Internally, firmly bound. Two inscriptions to the half title, and one to the title page. Pages clean and bright. Fine. Seller Inventory # 904F4

Contact seller

Report this item

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

Thompson Acquisitions Ltd

The Dispensary, 8 Cleveland Pl, 8 Cleveland Place East, Bath, BA1 5DJ, United Kingdom

Terms of Sale:

We send all our books on approval and we gladly accept returns for any reason in like condition within 30 days of purchase.

Shipping Terms:

Note For CoronaVirus. We post only via DHL and this is getting to everybody even in badly affected areas without problems and in good time, so please order with confidence. Also we do not ever charge extra for postage so what you see is what you pay. DHL gives next day delivery to places as far afield as New York.