While he has been living in Florida for 10 years, mystery writer Michael Connelly’s head is still in the San Fernando Valley.

It was in April 2001, just before he moved to Tampa, that Connelly went to a Dodgers opening-day game and met an attorney who worked out of the back of his car. A lightbulb went off and thus was born “The Lincoln Lawyer,” which features defense attorney Mickey Haller.

The 2005 novel has been turned into a movie, now in theaters, starring Matthew McConaughey as the crafty lawyer. On Tuesday, Little, Brown and Co. will release Connelly’s new Haller mystery, “The Fifth Witness.” It is “again set in the Valley,” says the author, who spent 14 years covering crime in the area as a reporter. “I like to write about places I know.”

The story grows out of the foreclosure crisis, says the writer, and Haller finds himself defending a woman accused of killing the banker who is trying to take her house away.

Connelly wrote his first novel, “The Black Echo,” in 1992. It featured LAPD Detective Hieronymus “Harry” Bosch, and won the Edgar Award for best first novel by the Mystery Writers of America. “Blood Work” (1998) was made into a movie in 2002 by Clint Eastwood.

It was Hollywood that got the 54-year-old author into crime fiction – Robert Altman’s 1973 take on Raymond Chandler’s “The Long Goodbye.” A lot of hard-core fans of Chandler and his detective Philip Marlowe weren’t pleased with the movie, but Connelly was inspired by it. He then went out and read all of Chandler’s works as well as those by Ross Macdonald, who created another quintessential Southern California private detective, Lew Archer. Connelly also lists Joseph Wambaugh as another of his main influences.

(By the way, when Connelly got some money he rented the same apartment with a Hollywood view in which Elliott Gould’s Marlowe lived in the Altman film. In addition, “Lincoln Lawyer” director Brad Furman, knowing the author’s regard for the movie, even has a nod to the ending of “The Long Goodbye” toward the end of his own film.)

Connelly, though, took a different route than Chandler or Macdonald when creating the character of Bosch. “He’s an insider who feels like an outsider, but Haller is definitely an outsider,” says the writer.

“He’s more like a Philip Marlowe … a defense attorney is already the underdog in the criminal justice system – without getting into whether someone is guilty or not.”

And the author is pleased that he is still writing about the Valley.

“It was really a rush for me to write about what I considered undiscovered territory,” says Connelly, who will be seen again on the ABC hit “Castle” this spring as one of the title character’s poker-playing mystery-writer pals.

While he grew up in Florida, the author says that he’s never been attracted to setting a novel there. The crime writer says the style there is more “over the top and comedic and that has never spoken to me.” But living in Tampa requires Connelly to come back often to L.A. for research and to vet his plots. “I certainly use the city to delineate characters,” he says.

So, like his character Mickey Haller, don’t be surprised to spot Connelly cruising around the city on the freeways or the backstreets.

“I really want to experience places and go to places for details and then bring them back with me.”