January is a reflective time for us as founders of Spiceworks. We incorporated the company January 4th, 2006 - so every year at this time we naturally reflect back on how far we’ve come and more importantly, where we’re headed. But this year is a little different – we started working on the concept of Spiceworks in early 2005 so we’re now a full decade into our experiment! It seems only fitting that we take stock of what got us to where we are today as it’s those values that will carry us into the future.

A look back.

Before we look forward, lets take a quick look back and see how far we’ve come. We launched Spiceworks with a simple premise - build world class systems management software and give it away for free. We started with network inventory and then added basic monitoring and reporting followed by the help desk and user portal. And finally, a knowledge base and real-time monitoring were added to the mix. While never perfect, we strive to make these applications powerful yet easy to use. And always free.

These applications became the foundation of Spiceworks. They’re what drew hundreds and then thousands of IT Pros every day to Spiceworks. But it was something unplanned, almost accidental that turned us into what we are today. And that was crowd-sourced feature requests. The idea was simple - let IT Pros click a button, tell us what feature they want next, and let the community vote it up or down based on popularity. Not only was it wildly successful, but feature requests led to support, support to general Q&A, Q&A to best practices, then product reviews, purchasing advice, etc, etc. From this seed you grew Spiceworks into the world’s largest social network for IT professionals.

So here we sit in 2014, a pivotal year for us as we had a number of firsts this year. We now regularly see over five million visitors monthly in Spiceworks, which is more than 1-in-3 of all IT Pros worldwide. In 2014 we hit 100M monthly page views for the first time and saw over one billion page views for the year. Collectively, all of you spent more than six billion minutes in Spiceworks managing 210 million devices and handling more than 200 million help desk transactions. That’s impressive! And because you control more than $600 billion in annual spend on IT products & services Spiceworks has become the place to be if you want to market and sell technology products. There are now more than 3,500 technology companies with a presence in Spiceworks and more are joining every day.

Back here at HQ, the company saw several firsts as well. We had our biggest growth year yet adding more than 100 employees and bringing our total to 350. On the business front we saw similar results with revenues up over 40% and we continue to add new customers every month. But I’m most proud of two special recognitions we received in 2014. For the 5th year running Spiceworks has been named one of the Top Workplaces to Work by the Austin American Statesman. And perhaps more significantly, we were recognized nationally by Glassdoor as one of the Top Ten Places to Work in the US & UK

Looking to the Future.

From crazy idea to more than a third of the world’s IT Pros in Spiceworks - it’s been quite the decade. But we’re just getting started. We want to bring the value of Spiceworks to the rest of the world’s IT Pros. And not just Sys Admins, but other IT disciplines as well - database admins, network engineers, dev operations, etc. We want to do for these disciplines what we’ve done for sys admins around the world - add value to and simplify their day.

A tall order to be sure. How will we pull it off? What’s our strategy for making this vision come to pass? Simple actually - we’re going to do what we’ve always done, focus on adding value to your day. Making sure that all the products and services we bring to you have one objective, to make your work day in some way, some fashion - easier and less work. This might be through products like Network Monitor, or advice and expertise like you get from the community. But whatever it is, be it from us or a partner, it needs to make your job in the field of IT easier.

Ok, I know what you’re thinking … blah, blah, blah. Give me some specifics. So here’s the over arching framework. At the highest level the strategy is two-fold: 1) make Spiceworks so valuable that if you’re in the field of IT, you have to be in Spiceworks; and 2) if you’re already in Spiceworks, make it so valuable that you have to come back more often. Moving forward there are three pillars to this strategy that you’ll see start to play out in 2015 and beyond:

Everything IT, for Everyone IT. We started Spiceworks focused on the IT generalist in small and medium size businesses. We don’t want to lose that audience, it’s core to who we are. But many of you have grown up into larger organizations or other roles, and we don’t want to lose you either. As such, you’re going to see us expand Spiceworks into related domains such as database administration, network engineering, and dev operations. Our goal will be to bring you the tools, information and advice you need to be successful in those roles just as we have with general IT. Big company or small, we want you to be able to find everything IT you need in Spiceworks.

A Single Pane of Glass. Inventory, Help Desk and Knowledge Base were a great start, they encompassed a big chunk of your day. And this year we added Network Monitor, another missing piece of the equation. But we want to do more, and do it faster. When we think of our 20/80 rule - focus on the 20% of the functionality you need 80% of the time - there is much more we can do. From virtualization, to cloud, to mobile and new storage technologies - there are lots of opportunities for us to positively impact your day. Be it part of the Spiceworks core platform, or via our partners through the App Center - we want to be that single pane of glass for managing all your technology.

Your Tools, Your Way. Installed or hosted, free or for fee - we want you to be able to get the tools you need, the way you need them, at the cost you can afford. If you don’t want the hassle of maintaining a local version of Spiceworks, you’ll be able to get them all in Cloud versions. Don’t want ads running inside your network - you can choose to pay for the applications instead. But free or for fee, local or in the cloud, all the functionality will be the same. No premium versions, no device limits, no time limits. You decide how you want to consume Spiceworks.

Clearly this won’t all happen overnight, it’s a journey not a destination. But today is the first step. We’re making some big investments in 2015 that you should see start to pay-off later this year, and it will only continue in 2016 and beyond. Thanks to all of your support over the years - Spiceworks is here to stay, and we’re just getting started

Divide and Conquer.

As you can see we have a lot to do over the next 12 months, and that’s just for you the IT Pro using Spiceworks. But we’ve got another audience that we need to bring value to - those 3,500+ technology companies in Spiceworks. Like you they get immense value out of Spiceworks and we have a whole set of initiatives for them designed to ensure they get even more value out of Spiceworks. For us to thrive as a business, both audiences need to grow and continue to get great value out of Spiceworks.

However, as the business has grown in scale and complexity, it has become increasingly difficult for one person to focus on both audiences. In fact, Jay and I have been talking about this for well over a year now. Our first step in managing this better this was for Jay to take on the role of COO a little over a year ago. This let me spend more time with the team focusing on the tools & technologies we build for you the IT Pro. He in turn spent more time on products & services for the Tech Companies in Spiceworks. Our divide-and-conquer strategy worked phenomenally well - the business is stronger than ever and we shipped three major releases and two new products in the last year alone.

Well it’s time for the next step. We’re going to take our divide-and-conquer model even further. Today I’m excited to announce that Jay is taking on the role of President and CEO focused on running all of our day-to-day operations. As Founder and Chief Strategy Officer, I’ll focus on two critical areas: the products and services we build for you the IT Pro and ensuring the company culture that got us to where we are today not only survives, but thrives. Without these two foundations, none of the rest will matter.

So welcome to the next chapter in the Spiceworks story. I have no doubt that the next decade will be as fun and exciting as the last.

- Chief Spice