I have a meeting tomorrow with some of my colleagues here at Spiceworks but also with those from Ziff Davis B2B. Of course, I’ll be talking about our Community and I have my own version of the elevator pitch on how to describe the Community… but it got me thinking. I wonder how all of you would describe it? And yeah, I’ll probably grab a few responses and add it to my portion of the presentation.

So, if you were talking to someone who may have never been in the Spiceworks Community, how would you describe it and what do you enjoy about it?

Irreplaceable. The amount of information and connections made within the Spiceworks Community is greater than any conference or networking event you could attend. The broad experience of professionals here relating to almost every category in the IT Field (other fields/hobbies for that matter) in every avenue and everyone’s willingness to assist others with what seem to be easy questions for some but to others we can’t seem to figure it out. Spiceworks and it’s community has the answer, and if a member doesn’t, it usually involves their colleague and they still come back with an answer, the answer to get us on our way to continue setup or looking in to a new product or vendor.

What I enjoy about the Spiceworks community is that mentioned above, the willingness of ALL community members ability to help and that they want to. The vendors. Them too, they are a HUGE part of this community, filling in as the glue that holds the structure, we the community together. The Spiceworks staff. They are awesome! Just plain and simply that.

I would say it’s a haven and resource for the people that are fixing problems, both present and future.

Direct contact with representatives is truly invaluable, and the free communication and exchange that is available here is a big foundation for moving new and conceptual systems created in the laboratory to the hands of the people.

People can come up with new ideas and theories every day, but until they can truly test them, they will never live up to their true potential without real technicians seeing just how far they can go.

The Spiceworks Community is a profound, unique and, I dare say, irreplicable resource for all things IT (and even a few things not-so-IT in the case of some of the private groups for shared interests outside of the field).

The atmosphere is unmatched compared to any other IT-related site (at least that I’m aware of) thanks to a mix of community managers and moderators that hold the line between keeping things spicy and bursts of all-out spontaneous combustion. This allows for a healthy environment for both vendors and other knowledgeable professionals helping to solve problems and offer direction for all sorts of IT-related concerns, everything from helping with a specific issue on specific hardware or software to Dear SpiceRex posts from people looking for a little anonymous guidance.

The Spiceworks Community is a one of a kind collection of IT Pro’s from all walks, corners, and backgrounds who come together to share knowledge and experience and help further one another’s skillsets while also having the ability to engage one on one with vendors and other prominent figures in the industry in a more casual conversation type environment. You can find literally every type of IT Pro from literally every type of industry here. When you’re sick of shop talk, you can find other stuff to do like share your frustration with the Game of Thrones finale with fellow IT Pro’s or find some new friends to play online games with.

People have created new solid friendships from this community. People in this community have married one another. We have community-ran publications like Spark! We have a community group in the SpiceBuddies that further helps folks get the most out of Spiceworks and SpiceWorld. We have SpiceCorps where you get to put a face to the username with local IT Pro’s like you. We have pepper points, levels, and badges. Beyond all of this though, we have a corner of the internet where nerds like us can get together and feel right at home from the first post all the way onto the post that puts us over the Pure Capsaicin pepper level.

We also have Spiceduck.