If you’re reading this, there is a good chance you’re coming back to the Spiceworks Community from one of our emails after taking some time off. So let me be one of the first to say, welcome back!

Based on that, there is also a good chance you’ve had a hiatus from the Community for a year or two. Not much has changed at the foundation, we’re still one of the best communities out there for Information Technology professionals can ask questions, share experiences and opinions, and socialize with peers and colleagues. But there are a few things you will want to know about.

First, the Spiceworks Product Plan will give you a bit of a high-level picture as to what is going on not just with the Community but Spiceworks in general. It also links to our Products blog and Previews & Updates group, which are great resources for keeping up with things.

One of the big announcements last year was that we joined the Ziff Davis family ! Not only that, but we helped form a new section called Spiceworks Ziff Davis (SWZD), which contains not only Spiceworks but other great brands such as Toolbox, MarTech Advisor, and HR Technologist. As you’ll see in the announcement and the follow-up, the Spiceworks Community has not had any drastic changes, and we’re moving forward purposefully and thoughtfully to continue to improve the Spiceworks experience.

In the Community, we’ve also had a variety of additions and updates. Here are a few that you’ll definitely want to know about:

The launch of the Spiceworks Status Program. You can read my long (probably too long) of an overview , but the short version is that we’re labeling members in topics when we feel they may have some expertise on the subject matter based on their contributions to the Community.

Adding your Professional Experience to your Spiceworks Profile. You can read the update about this here , but, much like the name suggests, it’s a way to add your job experience to your profile.

Becoming a Verified Professional. It started as an experiment but turned into a full-fledged feature after gaining a lot of popularity in the Community. As you’ll see here, this a validation that will help other SpiceHeads feel more confident when engaging with you in knowing you’re not just you but also that you’re a technology professional.

Updating Helpful Votes. We added the first version of this a few years back but felt like we needed to iterate to help everyone out. The Best Answer is still awarded by the author (original poster) of a topic, but members can award Helpful Votes in any question in a technology discussion area. This will not only award points but also contribute to someone’s expertise score (part of the Status System).

There is a new type of topic called Recommendations. We both launched and updated this new topic type , so for when an IT pro isn’t looking for a break-fix solution but rather wanting recommendations from peers on a technology decision. This works as a type of question so that Best Answers and Helpful Votes are still applicable but add some additional required fields to help that conversation get started.

We added a backend database to the Spiceworks Collections system. Not only does this feature allows you to save any Spiceworks topic, article, or how-to that you find valuable, but it allows you to organize each piece of content into a collection that you can name. You can learn more about this feature here , including subsequent updates.

Updates to tagging within a topic. This one was more of a quality of life update than anything. Instead of creating a unique way of tagging people and technology to a conversation, we took a model that everyone else on the internet already uses , tagging people with the at-sign (@) and technology (reviews and vendor pages) using the number sign (#).