Today at SpiceWorld 2023 we announced an exciting new era for the Spiceworks Community with the launch of the Playground. For 15 years, Spiceworks Community has been the go-to platform for IT professionals to connect, collaborate, and find solutions to the complex challenges they face daily. It was founded with a mission to bridge the gaps between IT pros, recognizing that the expertise of one could be the lifeline for another. Today, as we step into a new era, we are excited to share the Playground which will pave the way to enhancing your experience and foster even stronger connections within our community.

Your Voice Matters

Spiceworks Community has always been for and by you. Your voices have been heard through feature requests, topic posts, messages, and surveys. What we learned was invaluable. You want a modern and responsive community that works seamlessly across all devices, an improved search experience, streamlined ways to showcase your expertise, and efficient problem-solving. These insights and our goal to return to a more user-centered approach to our community is behind our launch of the Playground

To address these vital requirements, we realized that we needed to rebuild the foundation of Spiceworks Community. The existing architecture, while robust, was no longer aligned with our vision for the future. The result? A Playground to explore that we can’t wait to share with you!

Welcome to the Playground

The Playground is where the future begins. It’s a glimpse into the new Spiceworks Community, offering a selection of core features we look forward to your feedback on. While it doesn’t yet encompass everything from the current community, it’s your opportunity to explore and provide feedback on the features that help you solve your problems and connect with each other. Your input is invaluable in shaping our community as we evolve to meet your needs today and into the future.

Login and Explore

Go to https://community2.spiceworks.com/

You will see this welcome message and need to click Login:

In the login form enter your existing email address and password for your existing user account on Spiceworks Community - you should then see the Playground Homepage.

When you are exploring, you will find a post with more instructions from us on exploring the Playground, and you can report any feedback on the Playground in our Site Feedback Category .

Please remember, this is a Playground, a place for experimentation, so feel free to test, provide feedback, and help us make it even better.

What You Can Expect

Homepage Overhaul: A unified homepage that combines your feed when logged in.

Enhanced User Experience: A user-friendly design that’s accessible on all devices.

Your Favorite Categories and Topics: They’re here, ready for your engagement.

Chat Functionality: Chat is back! Connect with others seamlessly.

Vendor Pages: Explore pages dedicated to vendors, with more to come.

What’s on the Horizon

While the Playground is exciting, there are a few features that are not yet available:

Emails are not enabled in the Playground

Badges and Spice Levels: We’re working on bringing these to the Playground shortly after SpiceWorld.

Other features such as Events and How Tos

New Account Creation: For now, the Playground is for existing community members (with accounts created up to the end of July 2023) and the Spiceworks team.

As Spiceworks Community enters this new era, we invite you to join us on this journey of exploration and innovation. Your feedback is invaluable, and together, we’ll shape a community that continues to be the beating heart of IT professionals worldwide. So, log in, explore, and help us create the future of Spiceworks Community.

Please ensure you are subscribed to/following this blog to receive updates from us regarding any outages on the Playground, launches of new features/functionality into the Playground and other updates to enhance your experience.

We are looking forward to your feedback and shaping the future of the Spiceworks Community together!

Issues logging in?

If when entering your details on the login form you get the message “Your account does not exist in Community” (see screenshot) it means that while you have an account on Spiceworks it was created after the end of July 2023 and you won’t be able to access the Playground at this time. Please check back on this blog for future feature releases and updates as we will confirm when this is available to more of our community members.

If you get a message about your account being suspended (screenshot below), please contact our Support Team and we will work to enable your account again.