Footnotes

Provenance

Collection of the heirs of Boris Gurvich (1905-1985), Russian artist and student of Pavel Filonov. Together with Yury Khrzhanovsky, Gursky worked on the sound script for the film Youth of Maxim

Private archive, Germany, from 1980s

Youth of Maxim is a 1935 Soviet historical drama film written and directed by Grigori Kozintsev and Leonid Trauberg, the first part of the trilogy about the life of a factory worker named Maxim. The story of a young revolutionary activist immediately captivated the audiences in and outside of the Soviet Union, quickly making Youth of Maxim one of the highest grossing Soviet films in 1935. Starring Boris Chirkov as Maxim, Valentina Kibradina and Mikhail Tarasov, the film premiered in the USSR on 27 January 1935. Banned from screening in France, several European countries and Detroit due to censorship of the "soviet propaganda," Youth of Maxim received favorable reviews from the highest authority in the Soviet Union at the time, Joseph Stalin, along with numerous awards including the Grand Prix "Silver Cup" of the International Film Festival in Moscow (1935), Award of the USA National Film Critics Association for best foreign language film (1935), and the Stalin Prize awarded to Kozintsev, Trauberg and Chirkov in 1941.

The success of Youth of Maxim was undeniably owed to the brilliance of the production team. In 1932, the founders of the avant-garde theater society "Factory of an eccentric artist," Kozintsev and Trauberg announced the making of the "grand revolutionary poem in three parts." In the two years of production, the original concept of Maxim's character, loosely inspired by the biography of Maxim Litvinov, an underground agent of Lenin's Iskra, was gradually developed in the hands of these young pioneering filmmakers into an original and inventive personification of an ideal revolutionary hero. The outstanding excellence of Youth of Maxim was enhanced by the extraordinary photography of Andrey Moskvin, soon to be the star camera man of Sergey Eisenstein's Ivan the Terrible (1944), talented art direction of Evgeny Enei, and fascinating music by Dmitry Shostakovich. Two remarkable artists and students of Pavel Filonov, Yury Khrzhanovsky and Boris Gurvich, who became the guardian of the present collection of scripts, stood behind the sound script for the film. Included in the present collection of scripts and draft materials for Youth of Maxim are also rare drafts of "zaum" texts by the Russian futurist poet Aleksei Kruchenykh (4 leafs), as well as texts by Aleksei Tufanov (1 leaf) intended by the filmmakers for portrayal of the "decaying bourgeoisie." The present offering of an extensive collection of handwritten and printed scripts and texts related to the production Youth of Maxim documents uncovers a captivating story behind the making of the iconic motion picture which marks an important moment in the history of Soviet cinema.