Results of a Podcast Radio study in the United States conducted by Coleman Insights show that 81% of respondents would be very likely or somewhat likely to listen to a radio station broadcasting curated podcasting content; 25% said they “Love it,” and 28% said they “Like it a lot.” The study tested the appeal and listener likelihood based on a description of Podcast Radio among a panel of 500 18-64-year-old podcast consumers.

The results are encouraging for the Beasley Media Group, Podcast Radio and KMG Networks, who unveiled the new podcast multiplatform radio format in four regions across the company last month. The format is now available to listeners via broadcast in multiple regions on Beasley stations, including:

Detroit: Translator 93.5 FM and WCSX-94.7 HD2

Tampa: 1010 WJBR-AM (formerly WHFS-AM), WRBQ-HD2 and Translators 92.1 and 103.1

Charlotte: Translator 94.7 FM and WSOC-HD3

Ft. Myers/Naples: Translators 96.5 FM, 101.5 FM & 105.1 FM and WXKB-HD2

Gerry Edwards, founder and CEO of United Kingdom-based Podcast Radio, said: “Podcast Radio can help radio effectively play offense to the rise of podcasts as an in-vehicle, in-home and mobile entertainment choice. This new data reinforces that strong, engaging, spoken word content continues to evolve in exciting ways to meet the needs of U.S. listeners. That can enable radio to remain competitive and provide an attractive alternative for radio stations and radio groups.”

Gary Krantz, founder and CEO of KMG Networks, said that Podcast Radio’s curated, customized and localized podcast programming on the radio presents a tremendous opportunity for the radio industry and podcasters. “The Coleman Insights study reinforces what we are experiencing in the first U.S. markets to introduce Podcast Radio: It is an innovative and highly appealing new option for spoken-word radio programming, and an idea whose time has come,” He said. Krantz is at the 2023 NAB Show New York, Oct. 24–26, at the Javits Center in New York.

AJ Lurie, vice president and market manager for Beasley Media Group-Southwest Florida, a Podcast Radio affiliate, commented, “Listeners are enthusiastic about getting high engagement podcasting content on their local radio stations, which presents a premium opportunity for advertisers. In just a short time airing the Podcast Radio format on our stations, we have already started selling local programming, and we are excited to see continued revenues and growth.”

In addition, fans of spoken word content can stream Beasley’s first four custom Podcast Radio stations and discover new podcasts via the PodcastRadioUS.com website. Each region’s podcast content carries localized imaging, promos and IDs. Podcast Radio is available as a 24/7 format or as programming “blocks” that can run throughout the week. It is now available to radio stations and groups on a network/barter basis via KMG Networks. AdLarge Media handles network advertising sales for Podcast Radio.

Other stories on RedTech featuring podcasts

Media: The Importance of trust

AdLarge adds Headspace to podcast portfolio

Triton releases September Podcast Ranker

Beasley Media Group launches Podcast Radio U.S.

Educational radio and podcast webinars launched

Podcast Radio Network signs on for Triton Digital Services

Podcast Radio is ready for business

Podcast Radio attracts second investment in 12 months