Barcelona Ladies Open

The Barcelona Ladies Open was a tennis tournament for women held in Barcelona in Spain and was played on outdoor clay courts.

Avinguda Tibidabo (Barcelona Metro)

Avinguda Tibidabo is a station of the Barcelona Metro and is the terminus of FGC-operated line L7 (also known as Línia de Balmes). The station is situated under Carrer de Balmes at Plaça de John F.

Vallvidrera

•Vallvidrera is a neighbourhood of the Sarrià-Sant Gervasi district of Barcelona, Catalonia. It is situated in one of the sides of the Collserola hills, considered to be the lungs of the city due to the abundant forests it has. This wealthy neighbou…

Universitat (Barcelona Metro)

Universitat is a Barcelona Metro station named after Plaça de la Universitat, split between Eixample and Ciutat Vella districts of Barcelona, where the station is located in. This square holds the historical building of Universitat de Barcelona, cel…

Trinitat Nova (Barcelona Metro)

Trinitat Nova is a Barcelona Metro station, named after the nearby La Trinitat Nova neighbourhood, in the Nou Barris district of the city of Barcelona.

Reial Acadèmia Catalana de Belles Arts de Sant Jordi

The Reial Acadèmia Catalana de Belles Arts de Sant Jordi (Catalan pronunciation: [rəˈjaɫ əkəˈðɛmiə kətəˈɫanə ðə ˈβeʎəz ˈarts ðə ˈsaɲ ˈʒɔrði], in English "Royal Catalan Academy of Fine Arts of Saint George") is a Catalan art school located in Barcelo…

Poble Sec (Barcelona Metro)

Poble Sec is a station of the Barcelona Metro network located in the neighbourhood of the same name, in the district of Sants-Montjuïc, Barcelona.

Plaça de Lesseps, Barcelona

Plaça de Lesseps is a square serving as the border between the Sarrià-Sant Gervasi and Gràcia district of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, loosely divided in two parts.

Pavelló Club Joventut Badalona

Pavelló Club Joventut Badalona (also known as Pavelló dels Països Catalans) is an indoor arena located in Badalona, Catalonia, Spain. Built in 1972, it hosted the boxing events for the 1992 Summer Olympics.

La Maternitat i Sant Ramon

La Maternitat i Sant Ramon is a neighborhood in the les Corts district of Barcelona, Catalonia (Spain), the westernmost area of the district, distinctly more working class than its neighbours Pedralbes and Les Corts and similar to the also neighbour…