Mura Map — Satellite Images of Mura

original name: Mura

geographical location: Barcelona, Cataluna, Spain, Europe

geographical coordinates: 41° 42' 0" North, 1° 59' 0" East

detailed map of Mura and near places

Welcome to the Mura google satellite map! This place is situated in Barcelona, Cataluna, Spain, its geographical coordinates are 41° 42' 0" North, 1° 59' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Mura. See Mura photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Mura in Spain. Mura hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Mura or add new placemark for Mura.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Mura hotel reservations

Book hotel in Mura online and save money

Mura hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Spain »

Mura hotels – sortable list of all Mura hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Mura hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Mura, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Mura, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Mura hotels map

The location of each Mura hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Mura hotel map is available where all hotels in Mura are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Mura hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Mura hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Mura hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Mura hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Mura

Hostal Cal Pla (in San Lorenzo Savall, distanced approximately 6.6 km)

Fonda La Masia Del Sola (in Monistrol de Calders, distanced approximately 7.2 km)

Hotel Món - Món St Benet **** (in San Fructuoso de Bages, distanced approximately 8.7 km)

El Munt (in Castelltersol, distanced approximately 11 km)

Hotel Urbisol **** (in Calders, distanced approximately 12 km)

Hostal del Camp **** (in Sallent, distanced approximately 12 km)

Hotel 1948 Manresa * (in Manresa, distanced approximately 13 km)

more Mura hotels »

Mura car rental

Compare Mura car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Mura rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Mura car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Mura — we will do it for you!

Car hire Mura and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Mura the city centre. Compare Mura car rental offers by various suppliers.

Barcelona - Ctra De Vic car rental (distanced approximately 13 km)

Manresa car rental (distanced approximately 13 km)

Terrassa car rental (distanced approximately 16 km)

Madrid - Pza Espana car rental (distanced approximately 19 km)

Sabadell car rental (distanced approximately 21 km)

more offers and Mura car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Mura

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Mura »

Overview of flights to and from Spain »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Mura. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Mura and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Mura are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Manresa Barcelona Airport (distanced approximately 10.0 km) – airport hotels

Sabadel Airport (distanced approximately 23 km) – airport hotels

Calaf-Barcelona Airport (distanced approximately 36 km) – airport hotels

Barcelona Airport (distanced approximately 45 km) – airport hotels

Gerona Airport (distanced approximately 68 km) – airport hotels

Mura 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Mura in Spain

You can also dive right into Mura on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Mura 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Mura, Spain in Google Earth »

Get more out of Mura map

Add placemark to Mura

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Mura map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Mura google map link options

link to us:

small Mura google map image link

medium Mura google map image link

large Mura google map image link