The Paleface Blu-ray Review

A first-rate comedy-western with a must-see performance by Bob Hope

Reviewed by Neil Lumbard, August 22, 2020

The Paleface is an entertaining comedy-western with plenty of adventure tossed into the mix. The film is a laugh-a-minute riot and one that has plenty to thrill audiences. Produced by Robert L. Welch (The Lemon Drop Kid, Variety Girl), The Paleface is best remembered for its charming lead performances with Bob Hope and Jane Russell at the top of their game. A classic comedy with just the right dose of Western fun tossed into the mix.

Guns are getting into the hands of Indians. Sharp-shooting Calamity Jane (Jane Russell) is tasked with finding out who is smuggling them weapons. Going undercover to find out who has given the Indians their batch of guns, Calamity Jane finds trouble when her partner dies in the process of uncovering the mystery. As she attempts to continue her mission, Calamity Jane recruits the bumbling dentist 'Painless' Peter Potter (Bob Hope) to continue the task. As the Indians acquire more weapons and 'Painless' Potter becomes a target himself, will the unlikely duo come out of the situation alive? Or will dentistry be the height of Potter's heroics?

What a charming comedy The Paleface turned out to be. Though some elements of the film might be a little dated, the comedy certainly isn't and stands up to this day. Bob Hope is an amazing comedian to watch. There is just something so charming and care-free about his performance. He delves into the role with the kind of dedication that only a first-rate comedian can bring to a part. Jane Russell is a match for his dynamic energy and adds some suave charisma to the table. A perfect pair and reason enough to see the film.

The production has a number of other impressive elements on display as well. There is so much to be in awe of in this regard. The film features some remarkable elements such as the first-rate art direction by Hans Dreier (Double Indemnity, Sunset Boulevard) and A. Earl Hedfrick (Ace in the Hole, The Lost Weekend) and the breathtaking visuals imbued by the cinematography by Ray Rennahan (Lady in the Dark, Blood and Sand). The film looks glorious and has the rich kind of classic cinema aesthetic that is so easy to soak up and enjoy. The stunning scenic outdoors are also brought to life by a top-notch score composed by Victor Young (Strategic Air Command, Three Coins in the Fountain).

"Han shot first."

Another aspect of the film that was deeply impressive to me was the outstanding editing. The film feels far more modern in approach. The editing is ahead of its time. Edited by Ellsworth Hoagland (The Great Lover, Holiday Inn), The Paleface has a fast-paced tempo (especially during the climatic sequences of action-adventure at the end) which are so well cut that one will be glued to their seat.

The characters always look the part as well. The costume designs by Mary Kay Dodson (Appointment with Danger, Chicago Deadline) fit the tone and style of each respective character with complete ease. These characters are well established by the attire and the costumes fit the narrative to boot. Dodson is an amazing costume designer and her efforts her should be well commended.

The screenplay by Edmund L. Hartmann (Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves, The Lemon Drop Kid) and Frank Tashlin (The Girl Can't Help It, Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?) is one of the more dated elements of the production: there are some moments that are out of touch with modern times. A disappointing aspect of the film, but one that should not hinder one from enjoying in the film. Comedian Bob Hope brings the best out of the script and the humor is perfectly corny: a delight.

Norman Z. McLeod (Taking a Chance, Horse Feathers) brought the film to life with a level of care usually left for dramas: the comedy is so well staged. There are many scenes in which the staging brings forth the best of Hope and Russell. McLeod has a clear understanding of the craft of cinema. The language. The art. The Paleface is an entertaining, fast-paced Western comedy that is a must- see for fans of classic cinema. Don't miss it.