The Portland Trail Blazers, known by most as simply Blazers, are a professional basketball team currently competing in the National Basketball Association (NBA), specifically in the Northwest Division, within the Western Conference. They are based in Portland, Oregon and have played their home games at the Rose Garden (Moda Center as of 2013) since 1995.

The Blazers entered the league in 1970 as an expansion team along with Cleveland Cavaliers and Buffalo Braves. Despite being a new team, theybecame NBA champions in only their 7th season. In addition, from 1977 to 1995 they filled the arena in 814 consecutive games, a record at the time. The franchise was named after the marks that were left when exploring new regions, a common practice of the pioneers who colonized the area.

Today, they are the only team located in the Pacific Ocean region of the American Northwest. Previously, so were the Vancouver Grizzlies and Seattle Supersonics but both were relocated (Memphis and Oklahoma City respectively).

Throughout their history, the Portland Trail Blazers have managed to win one NBA championship (1977), 3 conference titles and 6 division titles, having had in their roster historical players such as Lenny Wilkens, Bill Walton, Clyde Drexler, Drazen Petrovic, Arvydas Sabonis or Scottie Pippen, all of them members of the Hall of Fame.

Entry into the league

The Portland Trail Blazers entered the NBA in 1970, but the idea of having a franchise in Portland was born in 1955. Moreover, with the opening of the Memorial Coliseum in 1960, the proposal gained momentum, although they would have to wait another decade.

In February 1970 the city of Portland managed to get a team in the NBA for a price of 3.7 million dollars and that same year they joined the league, as a result of its expansion policy, along with two other teams: Cleveland Cavaliers and Buffalo Braves (Los Angeles Clippers).

To decide the name of the team, a contest was held and the winner was the 'Pioneers' . However, the proposal was rejected because the name was already in use by a college team. They finally decided on 'Trail Blazers', which refers to the marks left by the pioneers themselves as they explored new regions. In this way, the initial essence was maintained.

The Blazers, as is normal for newcomers to the league, were not very successful in their first years, finishing last in their division in 5 of their first 6 and therefore out of the Playoffs. Sidney Wicks was the highlight of that era, becoming an All-Star in his first 4 seasons.

NBA Champions

In 1974, the Portland Trail Blazers selected Bill Walton from UCLA in the Draft. Later, with the dissolution of the ABA, many players became available so the Blazers acquired Maurice Lucas and Jack Ramsay as coach. All three would be instrumental in the coming years.

After two seasons of steady growth, in 1976-77 the Blazers exploded, demonstrating a very attractive game that surprised the entire NBA. Walton and Lucas represented the franchise in the 1977 All-Star Game and on April 5 of that same year they would begin a streak of 814 consecutive games selling out their home games. A streak that would last until 1995.

For the first time in their history, the Blazers finished the season with a positive winning record (49-33), which gave them the right to debut in the Playoffs. After disposing of the Chicago Bulls and the Denver Nuggets, they faced Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's Lakers in the conference finals. And to everyone's surprise, the Oregonians swept the Los Angeles Lakers to reach their first NBA Finals .

There awaited the Philadelphia 76ers of Julius Erving and company, who won the first two games of the finals. However, the Blazers recovered and won the next 4 games, becoming NBA champions for the first time.

In the final game, they overcame the Sixers despite Erving's 40 points thanks to the great work of Bill Walton, who finished with 20 points, 23 rebounds, 7 assists and 8 blocks. Walton was named MVP of those Finals and was the star that stood out the most in a very balanced team.

The following year, the Blazers' style of play and the great performance of their stars, coupled with a fantastic start to the season (50-10), suggested that the NBA was on the verge of a great dynasty. Unfortunately, Walton was injured, and the Blazers would not be able to meet the Seattle Supersonics in the conference semifinals.

The former Finals MVP was unhappy with the team's medical treatment and ended up asking for a trade, leaving as a free agent a year later.

Despite this situation, the franchise qualified for the Playoffs the 4 years following the ring, but they were not able to get out of the first round in any of them.

Beginning of a historic streak

After a season of absence from the Playoffs (1981-82), the Portland Trail Blazers began a streak of 21 consecutive seasons qualifying for the Play offs the following year (1983-2004).

In the 1983 Draft, the Blazers selected Clyde Drexler with the 14th pick, who would become the face of the franchise for the next 12 years and one of the most important players in its history. Top scorer and rebounder, member of the Hall of Fame, 10 times All-Star (8 with the Blazers) and 5 times in the best five. A true legend.

Drexler's selection made him the team's main point guard, and for this reason, in the following year's draft, the Blazers selected Sam Bowie ahead of Michael Jordan in the second position. This decision is one of the most criticized in the entire history of the Drafts, since Bowie's career was marked by his countless injuries, while Jordan's is not necessary to remember.

Drexler and his Blazers grew together little by little and in the 1987-88 season the Blazers were already a serious candidate for the ring. Although they would later fall in the first round, Drexler had already established himself among the best players in the league, averaging 27 points per game. It was the first of 5 seasons in which he led the team in scoring.

The 1988-89 season was a collective disappointment, however Drexler continued to stand out as an individual (top scoring shooting guard of the season). In addition, at the end of the campaign, Larry Weinberg sold the franchise to Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen, who has been the owner until passing away in 2018.

Clyde Drexler's best Blazers.

The early 1990s are the most memorable years in the club's history (with the exception of the championship). Led by Clyde Drexler, Terry Porter and Jerome Kersey, and with a style based on tough defense, the Blazers won their conference title after beating their first three opponents in the Playoffs.

In the finals they ran into the 'Bad Boys' from Detroit, but even so, the city was filled with optimism to see their team back in contention for the championship.

The following year the Blazers would finish with the best record in the league with a record of 63 wins and 19 losses, which gave them home-court advantage in the playoffs. However, they were defeated in the conference finals by the Lakers of Magic Johnson and company.

In the 1991-92 season, the Blazers again qualified first in the Western Conference with a record of 57 wins and 25 losses. After disposing of their first three opponents without too much trouble, they met in the finals with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls, who would take the series 4-2. That clash was the peak of the Jordan-Drexler rivalry, which was marked by the controversial choice in the 1984 Draft.

The following seasons were conditioned by injuries and an aging roster, losing in the first round of the Playoffs for 6 consecutive years (1993-1998). In addition, in 1995 would take place the end of the Drexler era, who was traded to Houston in search of a ring that he finally got. And the franchise moved to the Rose Garden Arena (with a capacity of almost 20,000 spectators) where the streak of 814 consecutive full houses ended.

Portland 'Jail' Blazers

In the 1998-99 season, a balanced Blazers that boasted great collective play, once again took the franchise to the conference finals, although they were swept by the San Antonio Spurs. Those Blazers were led by the likes of Isaiah Rider, Rasheed Wallace, Damon Stoudamire, Arvydas Sabonis and Brian Griant.

In the 1999-00 season, they came close to 60 wins (59) and again made it to the conference finals, this time against the Lakers. Although they would take the Angelinos to Game 7, they squandered a 15-point lead in the last quarter and once again fell just short of another Finals appearance.

With the arrival of the new millennium, the Blazers earned the nickname 'Jail Blazers' which referred to the many extra-sporting problems that many of their players had. Chemistry problems, firings, sex scandals, fights, arrests, suspensions... and the list goes on and on.

These problems, coupled with the many injuries to the roster, caused the team's streak of 21 straight years of qualifying for the Playoffs to come to an end in 2004. In addition, interest in the team began to decline, and as a result, so did ticket sales.

The only good news of those Blazers was the level shown by Zach Randolph, who in his third year averaged 20.1 points, 10.5 rebounds and 2 assists, achieving 43 double-doubles and being named most improved player. Also the appearance of Brandon Roy, selected at No. 6 in the 2006 Draft by the Timberwolves, but traded immediately to the Blazers. Roy was named Rookie of the Year injecting some air of optimism into the franchise.

Unlucky years

The Blazers won the draft lottery and in 2007 selected Greg Oden ahead of Kevin Durant with the first pick. A decision that will also be remembered forever. Oden was destined to dominate the league, but injuries plagued him and he missed his entire first season due to his knee.

Even so, led by Brandon Roy, who was already an NBA All-Star, and with the talent of LaMarcus Aldrige, the Blazers qualified for the Playoffs for 3 consecutive years, although without much success in the postseason. But the illusion reigned again in the city.

Injuries forced Brandon Roy into a super early retirement in 2011 and the Blazers also cut Oden, weighed down by his physical problems, so they were forced into a rebuild.

Damian Lillard's time

In the 2012 Draft the Blazers select Damian Lillard in the sixth position and he would quickly bring fresh air to the team, being unanimously named Rookie of the Year after averaging 19 points and 6.5 assists.

A year later, CJ McCollum was drafted in the draft, and the Blazers posted 21 more wins than the previous season thanks to a very solid group and the talent of their Lillard-Aldrige duo, which boded well for Portland.

The two represented the franchise in the All-Star Game and in the Playoffs they overcame the Houston Rockets in a very close series that was decided thanks to a Lillard three-pointer at the buzzer in Game 6. It was the first time they had advanced past the first round in 14 years. Then, they would not be able to beat the eventual champions, San Antonio Spurs. The following season, despite dealing with a myriad of injuries, the Blazers won their first division title since 1999, but lost in the first round to the Memphis Grizzlies.

With a completely revamped team and of which Lillard was already the absolute leader, the Blazers qualified for the conference semifinals in the 2015-16 season, where they would fall to the Warriors of Curry and company. And it would not be the last time, as the following year they would be swept by the same in the first round.