Synopsis:

Fully authorised by the estate of Philip K. Dick and written by the author they felt best equipped to take forward the vision of one of the great names in SF, Blade Runner IV: Eye and Talon combines the dark imagery, paranoia, tension and pace of Dick's original novel and the cinematic genius of Ridley Scott in a novel that takes the Blade Runner series into a new millennium. Blade Runner has become one of the most recognizable and well-loved brands in SF and K.W. Jeter has only added to its reputation and impact.

My comments:

Blade Runner 4 Eye and Talon...latest Blade Runner book by K.W. Jeter. I read the other ones by him as well. This book is better than them (Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human, and Blade Runner: Replicant Night).

I will not give away any major details/plot so...read on...

This book ties in with the other ones...but can be read without having read them. It's not as "Flashback-ed" as "Replicant Night".

And...the blade runner is a woman.

The start of the book does not appear very promising. But then it picks up. In my mind's eye, I pictured Angelina Jolie as the blade runner ("Iris"). Another character appears in the book named "Vogel"...and the actor I associated with that character was Jeff Goldblum.

The first half of the book was VERY interesting...some of the visions...scenes...and "devices" and what-not...GREAT material for a movie. I was excited...thinking, finally a new way to present another Blade Runner movie!

I simply could not put the book down!

However....the second half of the book...for me, was a big disappointment. My visions of Jolie and Goldblum were shattered. As Jeter had done with the other sequels, he redefined and twisted the Blade Runner movie as we know it to his liking. A shame. I had to force my way to read through a great portion of the last quarter.

Does anyone else have any opinions or feelings about this...or the other sequels by Jeter?

BLADE RUNNER DOWN

A script was written for a proposed sequel, entitled Blade Runner Down, which would have been based on K. W. Jeter's first Blade Runner sequel novel.

March 8, 1998

"...submitted anonymously:

"Blade Runner 2.

"Just thought you'd like to know this project *does* exist.

"Because I have in my hands a copy of the screenplay titled BLADE RUNNER DOWN, by Stuart Hazeldine, based on the book by K.W. Jeter.

"This script is dated 11/1/97 and appears to follow the plot from Jeter's book (REPLICANT NIGHT) -- it opens in a cabin in the woods with Deckard and Rachel. This movie would require either Harrison to come back, or the audience to swallow a new actor playing him, because it's all Deckard."

End of scoop. The cool part is (all thanks to a mystery friend) -- I just got to read this puppy.

Yeah, I sense the tension in the room. A whole bunch of Blade Runner fans just shifted uncomfortably in their chairs, riled at the thought of a sequel to BR. 'A sequel?? Who the hell in the right mind is gonna make a sequel to what many people consider the best serious SF film of the 80s? They gotta have rocks for--'

It's good. It's really, really good. I haven't read Jeter's book but I have friends who had. I asked them about some of the stuff in this script and they scratched their heads. 'Sure, some of it's the same, but not that part. Or that, or that.'

This moves. It's got legs to stand on and it'd be a kick-ass movie. But to pull it off the scooper's right -- you need Ford back as Deckard, but it works: he'd pull a 55-year-old Deckard off. The movie opens ten years after the last scene in Blade Runner (no, not Ridley Scott's Director's Cut but the theatrical '82 version). Rachel's dying -- there's a hidden lifespan embedded in her genes. Deckard puts her into cryo and goes back to the only place she might be saved: the Tyrell Corporation and L.A. But the cops aren't forgetting about how Deckard blew out of town; before he knows it he's got the entire Blade Runner division hunting him like a replicant. The sixth replicant from BR isn't forgotten about, and neither is Tyrell's niece (the parts I was told are also in Jeter's book).

It wouldn't be the same as the original BR, but that's part of the script's charm: it's a different beast but still set within the same universe, like Alien is to Aliens. It's got some great chase sequences (the one at police HQ particularly) and some well thought out characters. I'd pay $8 to see this. Patrick Sauriol, Creator, Chief Content Writer & Director Coming Attractions"

The author of the script had the following to say about it:

"WB don't have sequel rights, only a first-look at making a sequel. The rights reside with original producer Bud Yorkin. When my script went out 'the town' loved it and offered me loads of jobs. Harrison's manager liked it but wouldn't give it to him unless a studio offer was behind it, and the only people in town who didn't 'get' my script were the majority of execs at WB and Bud Yorkin himself. What can I say? Other studios would love a crack, but it's these guys who hold all the cards right now. Harrison hasn't read my script and may never read it."

- Stuart Hazeldine, author of the Blade Runner Down script. (18 March 1999).

About Blade Runner Down

Remember the sequence in "Blade Runner" when Deckard (Harrison Ford) gets orders from Captain Bryant (M. Emmett Walsh) to go out and hunt down the "replicants" who had recently arrived on our planet from Off-World' If you pay VERY close attention to that sequence, you'll catch an odd bit of discontinuity that serves as the central thrust of this screenplay's story.

In both edits of "Blade Runner", Bryant tells Deckard that SIX replicants came to Earth aboard the Off-World shuttle. He tells Deckard that one of the replicants was killed trying to gain access to the Tyrell Corporation, the place the replicants were created. This means FIVE of the replicants are left alive. But Bryant only sends Deckard out to kill FOUR replicants - even makes numeric reference to "four skin jobs walking the streets", and shows Deckard videos of them - Zorah, Roy Batty, Leon Kowalski, and Pris. All things being equal, this leaves ONE of the replicants both un-named and unaccounted for. This discrepancy sets into motion the story of "Blade Runner Down". Actually, when all is said and done, the story is as much about this missing replicant as it is about Deckard and Rachel.

"Blade Runner Down" opens in the snowy woods of Oregon. Deckard and Rachel have made a humble and meager life for themselves, having escaped the hellish cityscape that was 2019 Los Angeles. It's ten years later. They're older. They're free. She's still a replicant, and her time is up.

Deckard realizes he must go back into the city - back to the Tyrell Corporation - to find the secret to keeping her alive. He does so, and is instantly detected by the police force. Turns out he's a wanted man - he quit his job and took off with a "registered replicant". To Deckard's horror, Blade Runners (there are many Blade Runners in this script) are immediately dispatched to "air him out". But this can't slow him down - he's got to fight the good fight - got to save Rachel.

After breaching Tyrell Corporation security and explaining his mission to the Tyrell powers that be, he is offered a trade. The Tyrell Corporation has found a way to keep replicants alive past their in-bred deterioration (which Rachel is suffering from). But they will only keep Rachel alive if Deckard does something for them."

That missing replicant I mentioned above' He's very, very important to the Tyrell Corporation. For several reasons, not the least of which is he has already *outlived* his four-year lifespan - without their help. The Tyrell folks need Deckard to bring him in, and if he does, they'll give Rachel the "kiss of life."

And so it begins.

In this script, we see much more of the world Ridley Scott envisioned in the original film. We see parts of the city we did not see the last time around: subways, extensive animal facilities, the spaceport where Off-World shuttles land and depart (the scene of an ultra-violent foot chase that could put the Deckard / Zorah street chase in the first film to shame).

But "Blade Runner Down" also takes us through some familiar places and environments. We see the singing propaganda blimps again - there are some terrorists who don't like them and pick on them constantly. The Tyrell Corporation is presented in much more vivid detail and scope (locker rooms, showers, landing pads). We re-visit Bryant's office - now occupied by Captain Holden. If you don't remember, Holden was the Blade Runner that got smoked at the beginning of the first film. There's a later reference in that film to him being "able to breathe okay as long as no-one unplugs him".

Holden is now back at a *desk job*, hauling around a Frankensteinian breather-unit thingie. While functional, he appears rather horrific. In a sequence in which Deckard confronts Holden about the cops that have been sent out to "retire" Deckard once and for all, the monstrous Holden tells Deckard he's illegal and now a wanted man because he ran off with Rachel the replicant.

"Give yourself up" insists Holden.

"I can't do that," replies Deckard.

"Leave LA. Don't come back" from Holden.

"I'm trying - you're not helping. Call off your dogs" from Deckard.

Holden answers "I can't do that."

"I am not a replicant" insists Deckard (a reference to the Blade Runners that have been sent out to terminate him).

"You took off with a listed skin-job" from Holden.

Deckard - "I love her."

Holden - "You love IT, Deckard. Except you can't love an IT, can you? Not really, anyway."

Deckard moves closer to Holden. "No' What are you now, Holden' a he? An it?'"

"Blade Runner Down" is filled with little moments like this- where the tables are turned and one's not quite sure what to expect from any given character or circumstance. In fact, there's a surprise in the plot line that is heavily predicated on pulling the rug out from under us, and messing with our perceptions.

"Blade Runner Down" approaches the world of "Blade Runner" with great understanding and respect for the atmosphere, setting, and character-interaction which has already been established by Scott. But it also conjures a film that feels a bit different than the first installment.

Much of the script seems to take place in daylight, with occasional descriptions regarding how the BR environment would translate at a particular time of day (this is really rather intriguing and interesting). This story also feels more tense, more kinetic and intensified than the pacing of the first film. Descriptions of people being shot in the head, pools of blood, and replicant self-mutilation (sounds like a Joe Bob Briggs Drive In Totals list) bring to mind Verhoven efforts such as "RoboCop" and "Total Recall". Mad foot chases through jammed space-port concourses or busy police stations (through locker-rooms and showers and computer facilities) bring to mind the good old mad-dash steady cam days of Peter Hyams in "Outland" or "The Star Chamber".

So the question has to be asked: is it a GOOD SEQUEL to "Blade Runner"' Visually and stylistically, this story has the capacity to equal or transcend "Blade Runner". There's a wider variety of settings, circumstances, and ambiance with which a director could work to fashion the world of Los Angeles 2029.

Is it a good story, and how does it compare with the first one?

In many ways, it is more sweeping and daring than the first BR. It is grander in scale, and as indicated above, harder edged. But there is something un-focused about BRD. Not in a story sense, but in the reader's capacity to sort through driving motivations behind the screenplay's premise.

Perhaps this is because "Blade Runner Down" ends up being about ideas far greater than four disenfranchised replicants who are just "want to live". BRD is about making life forms to be our slaves, and a conspiracy to keep the extent of that effort from being known. It asks us to sympathize with the notion, but never really visualizes the idea for us - never gives us a Batty-like tragic figure on which we can pin our sympathies and sorrows. So we are once again left to imagine the situation against which the Off-World replicants are revolting, and left to imagine what their circumstances must have been like. We are asked to embrace esoteric conjurings instead of being given cold, hard fact.

We are asked to take at face value the notion that it is immoral and disgusting. Slavery IS, by its very nature, immoral and disgusting. But somehow, people murdering and hating in reaction to an experience that is conceptually intangible and abstract (to a vast majority of viewers) seems emotionally un-involving. Dramatically, we need to *see* what the replicants are so afraid of - we need to FEEL what they are feeling. Be it through a vision in their head or through powerful and vivid description (my preference). This would make it a lot easier for audiences to go along for the ride with these misunderstood replicants, and give "Blade Runner Down" the emotional resonance and powerful subtext it is struggling towards, but hasn't quite attained.

The first "Blade Runner" got away without taking us into these areas because its story was more intimate and close-quartered. It was hard not to be affected when the one realized the film was about a man who was killing people who just wanted to stay alive. Not because they were criminals, not because they were evil incarnate - because they were made to serve us and made to die. But they're living and breathing and want more life and more experience - more time. Notions which move every one us, and the idea that Deckard's sole purpose in life was to snuff these people out is a coldly sobering, and in the end, he is affected by this realization.

There few such transformations or lofty moments of power in "Blade Runner Down". Nothing to bring us into the SOUL of the story. There are no characters who move us the way Batty moved us. Nothing to quantify the life experiences of the replicants in BRD as being meaningful or exceptional. No one has "seen things you wouldn't believe". No one talks of moments that will be "lost in time like tears in rain". BRD needs to rise to that next level - and *then* it will become another classic-in-waiting.

Can it get there VERY EASILY? There are a lot of clever things going on in this script, a lot of delicate nuance and flavor that should translate magnificently to the big screen. As a whole, it is well written and sometimes even elegant. But it needs a little more heart to make it "timeless". There are some perfect places to install that hart - and then I think it will be a story completely worthy of its name.

Will "Blade Runner Down" ever hit film? There are possibilities. Is this the template with which the filmmakers' efforts should be started? Yes, as long as the conditions above are satisfied. Will it be GOOD' on paper? It's a good "Blade Runner" story, I think, and can be a good "Blade Runner" movie as well - if not great.

The status of the project is - at this time - still very much unclear, but it looks as if SOMETHING is happening. Even under the best of circumstances, it will be a while before "Blade Runner Down" gets visualized - if it ever does. It's got a long road to travel before its ready to be threaded-up. While every fiber of common sense within me says a sequel shouldn't be done to "Blade Runner". I wait with bated breath to see what Los Angeles 2029 will look like. To see how a softened Deckard deals with a harder world. To see if magic can happen twice.

It's a good start. The rest is up to time, fate, and economics.

Source: aint-it-cool-news.com

About Stuart Hazeldine.

Writer - filmography:

Riverworld (2003) (TV)

Producer - filmography :

Nichts als die Wahrheit (1999) (associate producer)

... aka After the Truth (Canada: English title) (International: English title)

Excerpt from "CreativeScreenwriting.com" by David Michael Wharton 05/20/04

"...I leave you one last point of view. In addition to having written Riverworld for the Sci-Fi Channel, Stuart Hazeldine has one of the most interesting unproduced resumés in Hollywood (a Blade Runner sequel spec, which first brought him notice, and a high-fantasy version of Edgar Allan Poe's Masque of the Red Death, written with Alex Proyas). He told me his own process for breaking down the story:

"I've found a formula that works for me, whether it's a treatment or a screenplay or what-have-you. I call it 'Bones, Muscles, and Skin.' The bones of the script are literally just going through and writing all the slug lines. That normally takes about two hours, but you can only do that once you have some sort of treatment, even if it's illegible and in a foreign language. You have to know roughly what the structure is. The slug lines are the bones. What I call the muscles is going through the slug lines and writing every possible thing that could be said or done: action, description, or dialogue. Just writing in no particular order: you write down bits of dialogue, you write down anything that could potentially go into that scene. Once you've done that -- and that's a big process -- you go through and actually write the scenes. I find that as I struggle with that middle phase, I naturally give more order to it. I start to move scenes around or say, 'That works better with this.' So when you finally get to the last phase, skin, which is making everything pretty and writing it properly, there's a lot less work for you to do."

Was said to have been approached about writing a screenplay for Joe Madureira’s "Battle Chasers".

British sci-fi magazine SFX ( in issue #88 ) published a short interview with him.

Hazeldine co-wrote with Alex Proyas a script for Proyas' direction of Edgar Allan Poe's "The Masque of the Red Deathtale"-a production in limbo at present.

Wrote a proposed storyline for Alien 4.

Blade Runner Down (November 1, 1996, Second Draft) .pdf HERE.

Blade Runner Games

Can't get enough of Blade Runner? The next best thing to watching the movie, or reading the book, is living it...virtually. There is Westwood's computer game that allows you to be a blade runner and "retire" illegal Replicants. There is Commodore 64's and Sinclair ZX Spectrum's game, and CPC's Blade Runner boardgame.

The First Real-Time 3D Adventure

This is a computer game that allows you to be a Blade Runner and "retire" illegal Replicants.

You begin the game in the role of Ray McCoy, a rookie Blade Runner. You start with the investigation of an animal murder, and the game quickly introduces you to picking up clues and interviewing people. What you do from here on in basically depends on you!

Westwood's Blade Runner Game Complete Endings Guide

HERE!

An excellent walk-through website from the Let's Play archives!

Blade Runner by Scorchy

Commodore 64's and Sinclair ZX Spectrum's

Blade Runner

There used to be a "Blade Runner" computer game for the Commodore 64 as well as the Sinclair ZX Spectrum home computer that was based on the music by Vangelis. This game produced by CRL was actually based on the movie but due to unknown reasons, the film producers, in the end, decided to refuse to sell the rights. To be able to go ahead and distribute the game CRL changed their plan and credited the game to be a "Video game interpretation of the film score by Vangelis".

It ended up being sold as such in shops, with this credit, visibly printed on the packaging.

The CRL Group PLC released a computer game for Commodore 64 and ZX Spectrum, in 1985.

Gameplay:

Several replicants have managed to reach the Earth, which is forbidden under penalty of death. It is your duty as a Blade Runner to kill, no, 'retire' them. The gameplay is quite simple. You move across a map of Los Angeles searching for flashing dots that mark the position of a replicant. When you get to the dot, your spinner lands and a side-scrolling view of a street is shown. After a short chase, the replicant is spotted and shot down without opposition, as life seems to be much easier for Blade Runners in computer games. I'll put it plainly, this game is just a curiosity for Blade Runner fans only. The Spectrum-like graphics are awful, and the gameplay is always the same. Only the menu music has some quality (guess why - it's a Vangelis theme).

SHARP AS A BLADE

We're on our way to the 21st century, so start thinking android quick! Unless you want to be left behind on this Earth while everybody else leaves for bigger and better planets, you'd better shape up your brain and get into action as a Blade Runner! If you've seen the fast-moving, futuristic film, then you'll know that Blade Runners are inter-planetary bounty- hunting police. It's their duty to capture and kill super-human Replicants, those lithe and lethal, living androids. This mission isn't execution, but 'retirement'. You'll have a flying car and an information screen to help you, but with the Replicants bent on revenge, your task is tough. You could make enough money to retire if you outwit them, but the fight will be tight. If you think you're sharp enough, then apply to the headquarters at CRL. They'll let you know how to get in on the action but you may have to wait. Tel. 01- 533 2918 and prepare for the future ...

Review from "Your Spectrum"

Issue 20, November 1985 - Frontlines & Hacking Away

Play it online here!

c64s.com

Instructions:

Press any key to start. Then started the game - you've got a city map on the right and a sector map on the left. The yellow city map (right) is divided into the green sectors (left).

Press fire to start.

Look on the right map - the flashing dots are reps.

Use the up/down/left/right to get to one of the sectors occupied by one of the reps - as you move around the yellow map, each sector is displayed in more detail with the green map. When you're in the same sector (left map) you'll see the rep appear as a red and yellow cross. Move your cursor over it and press fire. This will send you and your spinner to the reps location.

The view will change to a side-scrolling street. Once you've landed and gotten out of the car, you've got to catch up with the fleeing rep, who is off the screen to the right. You can see his dot on the scanner in the middle of the screen.

So, run to the right using your 'right' key, using up and down to dodge the people on the sidewalk and the traffic on the road. If you manage to catch up with the rep, line up using up and down and shoot him to retire him. If the rep manages to out-run you and disappears off the scanner, your spinner will land and back up you go again to the main map.

Repeat ad-nauseum.

Dunno if you get the chance to VK em - I doubt it 'cos all I saw was a 'bounty' bonus.

More at: World of Spectrum