Now that Blade Runner 2 has an official title (Blade Runner 2049, in case you’d forgotten), the amount of things we know about the return to the bleak future envisaged by Ridley Scott back in 1982 is steadily increasing. With Denis Villeneuve (Arrival, Sicario) in the director’s chair, Hampton Fancher and Michael Green on the writing team and Scott back on board as director, it would appear to be safe hands. With this in mind, here’s what we know about Blade Runner 2049…

1) The cast is incredible

Joining Harrison Ford, Ryan Gosling and Robin Wright (The Princess Bride, House Of Cards) are Ana de Armas (Knock Knock), Mackenzie Davis (The Martian), Dave Bautista (Guardians Of The Galaxy), Lennie James (The Walking Dead), Barkhad Abdi (Captain Phillips) and Jared Leto (Suicide Squad).

2) Deckard’s true nature may be revealed – or not

Depending on which version you’ve seen, protagonist Rick Deckard is heavily implied to not be as flesh-and-blood as he thinks. Speaking at Toronto Film Festival, Villeneuve cryptically said that he would “take care of that mystery.”

3) The world isn’t any nicer

Judging by the first piece of official concept art to be released, the world hasn’t changed. The grey sky and persistent rain remains, as does the neon-hued art deco design. It’s only concept art, but it looks like Villeneuve is staying very faithful to the original.

4) It may leave LA (at least for a bit)

While LA will be the main location, it will start outside the city, with producer Ridley Scott teasing a scene taking place on a barren section of farmland inhabited by Deckard. During his conversation with Mtime, he likened the landscape to John Steinbeck’s bleak Depression-era novel The Grapes Of Wrath.

5) Most of the main supporting cast won’t be back

It looks like we won’t be seeing some of the major background players return. Actress Sean Young (who played Rachael in the original film) said in an interview with The Guardian that she hasn’t been asked to reprise her role as Rachael, and Rutger Hauer (Roy Batty) was very vocal in his opposition to the film.

6) It could draw on the unofficial sequel

Yes, a sequel already exists! Penned by KW Jeter in 1995, Blade Runner 2: The Edge Of Human depicts Deckard having retired to a small house outside the city (see point 4), so it’s not unreasonable to assume that more of its plot elements will be drawn on.

Blade Runner 2049 will be released in cinemas on 6 October 2017. For all the latest movie news, pick up the new issue of SciFiNow.

Related posts:

No related posts.