A troubled Vietnam veteran seething with rage against his upright Texan family and his inevitable explosion during a Thanksgiving celebration: the situation sounds familiar to the point of triteness. But ''The War at Home,'' James Duff's adaptation of his play ''Home Front,'' which ran briefly on Broadway in 1985, still finds moments of wrenching sadness in its microscopic examination of an all-American family torn apart by the Vietnam War.

On Broadway, Carroll O'Connor and Frances Sternhagen portrayed Bob and Maureen Collier, a car dealer and his dithering, Bible-thumping wife, who live in a comfortable Dallas suburb with their children, Jeremy and Karen. In the movie, directed by Emilio Estevez, who also plays the disturbed son, Jeremy, the parents are Martin Sheen and Kathy Bates, and Kimberly Williams is the teen-age daughter.

The film opens up the play by bringing in battlefield flashbacks in which the Colliers' front lawn metamorphoses into a fiery Asian forest. And scenes that were once played for comedy, like the Colliers' bickering over which one made a secret late-night foray into a fresh batch of mama's homemade peanut brittle, generate a queasy sense of dread. Much of the dialogue in Mr. Duff's screenplay consists of niggling family small talk charged with volatile undercurrents.

''The War at Home'' is set on Thanksgiving in 1972. And the film, which uses Crosby, Stills and Nash songs to potent nostalgic effect, captures the look and feel of the period, right down to a scene in a college coffeehouse where a long-haired girl strums a guitar and earnestly screeches out a wobbly out-of-tune rendition of ''Me and Bobby McGee.''

The coffeehouse is where Jeremy, a decorated Vietnam veteran who has been home for several months, has a tense reunion with an ex-girlfriend who informs him she is living with someone else. Jeremy spends much of the rest of the film in a glowering funk as he shuttles between his upstairs bedroom and the front porch of the Colliers' tidy clapboard house. When his parents and his sister try to reach out, Jeremy is at first brusque, then surly. By the middle of the film, he has erupted into a tantrum that grows scarier as the movie goes along.

''The War at Home'' resurrects the generation gap of the 1960's and early 70's with a vengeance. Bob and Maureen are starchy Southern conservatives whose children sometimes address them as ''sir'' and ''ma'am.'' Bob, who fought in World War II, boasts of ancestors who fought beside Robert E. Lee in the Civil War. Maureen, a devout Baptist, is still mad at Ingrid Bergman for her scandalous out-of-wedlock union with Roberto Rossellini decades earlier. The familial bickering turns to strife after Jeremy refuses to say grace at breakfast and eventually escalates into screaming obscenities and gun-waving.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.