Frédéric Jousset

Frédéric Jousset graduated from HEC in 1992, where he chaired the alumni association. In 2000, he co-founded the Webhelp group, which has become a world leader in customer relationship management. A former board member of the Musée du Louvre and the Beaux-Arts de Paris, and a board member of the École Nationale Supérieure des Arts Décoratifs, he is passionate about art and deeply involved in the world of culture and heritage. As Chairman of Beaux Arts & Cie (Beaux Arts Magazine) and since the creation of the Art Explora Foundation, as well as the ArtNova investment fund dedicated to the creative and cultural industries, Frédéric Jousset is now devoted to culture. Strictly independent, these two entities share the same objective: to democratise access to culture and promote know-how and creative talent.

Bruno Julliard

Executive Director

As a law student, Bruno was elected as Chairman of the leading student union, UNEF, in 2005. In 2008, he became deputy-mayor in charge of youth for the City of Paris. As First Deputy to the Mayor of Paris, he was in charge of culture, artistic professions and heritage in 2014. He sits on a the boards of a number of Paris’ cultural institutions and, between 2014 and 2018, was Chairman of Paris Musées, a public body representing the 14 museums of the City of Paris. As special advisor to the Ministry of National Education, he helped to draw up education policy guidelines in 2012. He left the City of Paris Council in 2018 to join Frédéric Jousset who was prefiguring Art Explora, and became the director of the foundation on its creation in 2019.

Zoé Dailey

Head of artistic projects

Zoé Dailey has been working in the arts and events sector since 2013. After several experiences in galleries or for exhibitions such as the Parcours Saint-Germain, she was in charge of FIAC's artistic programmes from 2015 to 2021. Zoé contributed to the development of the fair's Hors les Murs projects, which present every year over sixty works in the public space, as well as to the programming of performances, artists' films and conferences. She also participated in the launch of the digital platform FIAC Online Viewing Rooms in 2021. Zoé is now head of the artistic projects of the foundation Art Explora, and is in charge of the artist residencies programs, as well as projects presented at the Hangar Y and within the foundation's itinerant programs.

Ingrid Brochard

Director of mobile museum

A graduate of Sciences Po Paris, Ingrid, an entrepreneur who lives between France and Asia, is committed to French culture. In 2007, she founded Be Contemporary, a quarterly magazine promoting contemporary art. In 2008, she produced a series of twelve programmes of the same name for Direct 8. Driven by the conviction that art should be accessible from an early age, in 2010 she created MuMo, a travelling museum designed to reach out to children, particularly those who are furthest away from access to culture. In 2017, the mobile museum won the France s'engage award, and Ingrid went on to develop museum trucks for the national collections of the Frac, the CNAP and the Centre Pompidou. In 2023, Ingrid joined the Art Explora Foundation to develop these trucks.

Art Explora

Trademark registered and published on 8 November 2019 in the Bulletin Officiel de la Propriété industrielle (BOPI).

By decree of May 23, 2023, the Art Explora Foundation became a foundation recognized as being in the public interest (FRUP). After review by the Council of State, the change from an endowment fund to a foundation marks the full recognition by the State of the foundation's commitment, missions, and projects. This change will enable the foundation to continue its development by involving new public and private players in its governance, and to appeal for sponsorship, IFI donations and the generosity of all donors.

Frédéric Jousset

Frédéric Jousset graduated from HEC in 1992, where he chaired the alumni association. In 2000, he co-founded the Webhelp group, which has become a world leader in customer relationship management. A former board member of the Musée du Louvre and the Beaux-Arts de Paris, and a board member of the École Nationale Supérieure des Arts Décoratifs, he is passionate about art and deeply involved in the world of culture and heritage. As Chairman of Beaux Arts & Cie (Beaux Arts Magazine) and since the creation of the Art Explora Foundation, as well as the ArtNova investment fund dedicated to the creative and cultural industries, Frédéric Jousset is now devoted to culture. Strictly independent, these two entities share the same objective: to democratise access to culture and promote know-how and creative talent.

Jemima Montagu

Jemima has worked in the fields of visual arts, education and arts development with a range of international arts institutions and non-profits. Educated at Cambridge University and the Courtauld Institute, she worked as Curator of Contemporary Art for Tate, and later joined the UK’s Arts Council to manage funding for museums and arts organisations in London. She spent three years in Afghanistan initiating arts, heritage and education projects with the NGO Turquoise Mountain, and later co-founded a UK agency called Culture+Conflict, to support artists working in war zones. As an international arts and heritage consultant, she has worked with the Lobkowicz Collections in the Czech Republic to create a new museum and education centre, and digital education programmes. Jemima is now leading the Art Explora UK programme.

Cherie Silver

Cherie has over 15 years experience working in the arts. Starting with auction houses in Australia and London, Cherie then completed an MA in Curating and Collections at Chelsea College of Arts. As a recipient of the Chelsea Arts Club Trust Research Fellowship, Cherie took up a position in a non-commercial gallery, Chelsea Space, including curating two exhibitions. In her next role with Mayfair Art Weekend, a gallery weekend event, she developed the public programme including the Mayfair Sculpture Trail and the May Fair Showreel. Cherie leads on the Art Explora UK Mobile Museum tours and public programming.

Phoebe Grudzinskas

Phoebe has over 10 years’ experience of working in the community arts sector in London and Australia. After completing her MA Applied Theatre at Goldsmith’s University, Phoebe started her career working in Melbourne, Australia for Polyglot Theatre, a children’s theatre company, on their Community Connections programme, supporting primary aged children in accessing arts. After returning to London, she worked for Magic Me, managing their award winning ‘Cocktails in Care Homes’ project, bringing monthly cocktails parties across 18 care homes in London run by 450 volunteers and ‘Inside Out Festival’, by turning care homes into creative spaces for residents, artists and volunteers. During the Covid 19 pandemic, Phoebe led community programmes at Time & Talents community centre in Southwark. Phoebe is now leading the Art Explora Community Programme.

Maider Larrauri

After graduating from the Spanish business school ICADE and Northeastern University in the United States, Maider began her international career in Paris where she spent 9 years marketing products for L’Oréal on the world Luxury market. Her passion for contemporary art and design led her to the Carpenters Workshop Gallery in London’s Mayfair district where she worked as an exhibitions and PR manager. She is now a patron of the Hayward Gallery in London. As a consultant, Maider has also helped many luxury brands to team up with artists. Today, she manages the international development of the foundation.

Erin Saunders

After graduating from her undergraduate degree in Graphic and Communication design at Leeds University, Erin travelled to Berlin where she worked at an established contemporary art gallery and an arts press and marketing agency. This experience inspired her to enrol in an MA in Curating and Public Programming at London Soutbank University in partnership with Whitechapel Gallery. Over several years, Erin has gained invaluable experience in audience engagement and creative arts facilitation through engaging with Watts Gallery’s public arts programme as a learning facilitator. Between finishing her studies and starting with Art Explora, Erin was part of the Communications team at Whitechapel Gallery. Erin brings these recent experiences to her role at Art Explora as she develops the UK’s social media presence.

Frédéric Jousset

Frédéric Jousset graduated from HEC in 1992, where he chaired the alumni association. In 2000, he co-founded the Webhelp group, which has become a world leader in customer relationship management. A former board member of the Musée du Louvre and the Beaux-Arts de Paris, and a board member of the École Nationale Supérieure des Arts Décoratifs, he is passionate about art and deeply involved in the world of culture and heritage. As Chairman of Beaux Arts & Cie (Beaux Arts Magazine) and since the creation of the Art Explora Foundation, as well as the ArtNova investment fund dedicated to the creative and cultural industries, Frédéric Jousset is now devoted to culture. Strictly independent, these two entities share the same objective: to democratise access to culture and promote know-how and creative talent.

Anna Somers Cocks

Anna is a distinguished museum curator, editor, and journalist with a rich history in the art world. Born in Rome and educated at Oxford University and the Courtauld Institute, London University, she has authored books and numerous articles. Throughout her career, she has been a sought-after speaker, delivering lectures at renowned institutions like the Victoria & Albert Museum and Metropolitan Museum of Art. Anna's professional journey includes roles such as Assistant-Keeper at the Victoria and Albert Museum and Editor in Chief of Apollo Magazine. In 1990, she founded The Art Newspaper. As a CEO, she played a pivotal role in initiating and negotiating the licensing of titles like The Art Newspaper Russia and The Art Newspaper China. Currently, she continues her passion for journalism and writing, leaving an indelible mark on the world of art and culture.

Ksenia Zemtsova

Ksenia co-founded Art Night in 2015, a national, biennial contemporary art festival presenting ambitious work by artists in civic spaces. In her role as Director until 2019, Ksenia was focusing on strategy, development and partnerships. She has also been a Visiting Lecturer at Sciences Po Paris, leading a conference on 'Culture in Global Cities’ at the School of Public Affairs, Masters Degree. In 2022 Ksenia moved to Lisbon to take on the role of Founding Director of a new museum, opening in 2024. Ksenia is interested in the positive impact of the arts on the public realm and is always keen to discover and create new cultural experiences. She studied Public Affairs and Cultural Policy at Sciences Po Paris, holds an MSc in International Relations from the London School of Economics and is a fluent Russian and French speaker.