Where Wall Street Unites

To Fight Childhood Cancer

Our Mission

The Sohn Conference Foundation is dedicated to supporting innovative initiatives to cure and treat today’s public health priorities. Identifying specific areas of need, The Foundation funds groundbreaking research, state-of-the-art technology, and programs to target cures and improve patient care.

⭢ Learn more about The Foundation

Sohn’s COVID-19 Response

In an effort to help fight the global pandemic, all proceeds from both the 2020 and 2021 Sohn Investment Conferences supported Rockefeller University’s research into novel therapy for COVID-19.

The Sohn Conference Foundation takes a unique, selective investor’s approach to grant making. The Foundation supports cutting-edge research, innovative technologies, and bold initiatives that will have the greatest impact in treating and curing today’s public health priorities.

The Foundation designed its four-pronged approach in response to the challenges faced by the scientific and medical community.

Inspire.

Inspire cutting-edge scientific research collaborations in New York City and beyond.

The Foundation emboldens the best researchers to collaborate and discover, leveraging their resources and talent for maximum results.

Invest.

Invest in state-of-the-art technology.

New technologies—microscopes, cell sorters, DNA sequencers—will lead scientists to medical breakthroughs, but these technologies are expensive and government funds do not support such purchases. Sohn aims to supplement where other sources of funding are lacking.

Develop.

Develop the next generation of physician scientists.

The Foundation seeds a fellowship program to award funding to innovative, new scientists who are being overseen by the current leaders in the field.

Promote.

Promote quality of care for patients.

Insurance does not support comprehensive quality-of-life initiatives in hospitals. The Foundation funds cutting-edge diagnostic precision medicine and the renovation of dilapidated spaces to improve the quality of the treatment experience.

A Global Network

The Foundation calls the world’s most successful investors to give their time and inspire large audiences and followers in the name of The Foundation’s cause. The Foundation has expanded its investment forums to include Australia, Brazil, Canada, Geneva, Hong Kong, India, London, Monaco, San Francisco, and Tel Aviv.

$95 million+

raised over 25 years