LAST YEAR, A MODEST LITTLE noir thriller called "Red Rock West" came out of nowhere, brought almost instant fame to its director, John Dahl, and proved, critically and commercially, to be far more successful than anyone had anticipated. (It made $2.5 million at the box office -- not bad for a film that had already been shown on television and was available on videotape.)

"Bulletproof Heart," a no-budget noir thriller opening on Friday, may turn out to be another "Red Rock West." It tells the story of a New York hit man (Anthony LaPaglia) who falls in love with a mysterious woman (Mimi Rogers) he is supposed to murder.

The first film directed by Mark Malone, a New York screenwriter, "Bulletproof Heart" played last fall at the Toronto Film Festival, where "Red Rock West" was shown the previous year. "Bulletproof Heart" got its first American screenings at the Roxie Theater in San Francisco, the same theater that first showed "Red Rock West." And it will open in New York at Cinema Village, the same theater that gave "Red Rock West" its New York premiere.

Barbara Shulgasser, of The San Francisco Examiner, awarded "Bulletproof Heart" three and a half stars out of four. In her review, she said, "This is a movie with an unbelievable plot so beautifully constructed by writer Gordon Melbourne, so athletically paced by Malone and so well played by the actors that asking for believability seems like nit-picking."

Is it valid to compare "Bulletproof Heart" to "Red Rock West" or Mr. Dahl's subsequent noir film, "The Last Seduction," as some critics have done? "I understand it," said Ms. Rogers, whose femme fatale in the new film actually wants to be killed. "If we look at intelligent, quirky, humorous film noirs, then we can put John Dahl's work and Mark Malone's work in the same class."

The film also stars Matt Craven as Archie, a would-be hit man who has, as Mr. Craven puts it, "an I.Q. of about 44." "He's a guy who just lacks sophistication," Mr. Craven says. "He's just a not-too-bright guy from the neighborhood." In "Red Rock West," Nicolas Cage played a nice guy mistaken for a hit man.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.