Red Rock West (Cinématographe) Blu-ray Review

Released by: Cinématographe

Released on: January 30th, 2024.

Director: John Dahl

Cast: Nicolas Cage, Dennis Hopper, Lara Flynn Boyle, J.T. Walsh

Year: 1993

Purchase From Amazon

Red Rock West – Movie Review:

Director John Dahl’s 1993 film, Red Rock West, stars Nicolas Cage as a former Marine named Michael, now a drifter who winds up stopping in the titular town in the middle of Wyoming hoping to find himself some work and make himself a bit of money. It doesn’t work out the way he wants it do, so he walks into a bar where the own, Wayne (J.T. Walsh), assumes he’s the Texas hitman that he’s hired to kill his wife. Michael decides to go along with this, accepting a deposit for his services and then, armed with the information that Wayne has given him, he heads out to Wayne’s house where he meets Suzanne (Lara Flynn Boyle).

Not surprisingly, there’s an obvious and immediate attraction between the two and Michael, maybe not so wisely, tells Suzanne about his predicament. Suzanne, in turn, offers to pay Michael to kill Wayne. Michael is unsure what to do about all of this when a man named Lyle (Dennis Hopper) from Texas shows up, clearly the actual hitman that Wayne had hired to do away with Suzanne. Wayne then realizes that he’s paid the wrong man to kill his wife, while Michael decides he’s going to split town with the money he’s received from both parties.

But of course, there’s a lot more to it all than just that.

Produced by Columbia/Tri-Star, who didn’t have the confidence in the film to give it a proper wide theatrical release, the movie hit HBO and video and wound up finding a cult audience, Red Rock West has been criminally underseen over the years. Yes, it is very much a noir film, dealing in all of the stereotypes so frequently associated with the genre, but John Dahl, who co-wrote the script with his brother Rick Dahl, puts his love of movies on display for everyone to see and appreciate with this picture, so much so that the fact that the film deals almost entirely in clichés never seems to matter that much.

The storyline twists and turns and offers some interesting double-crosses, just as you’d expect, and it plays nicely with the old noir tropes of a man who, somewhat inadvertently, finds himself in a bad spot and, of course, a sexy femme fatale, giving Cage and Boyle ample opportunity to show off their acting chops. Cage is really strong here, bringing an energy to the role but never playing the part in the over the top manner that he’s brought to a lot of his other work (especially lately). He’s a believable ‘everyman’ type and while his military background assures that he’s handy with a firearm, he never feels invincible or even especially heroic. Boyle, on the other hand, plays the mysterious dark-haired beauty that is Suzanne very effectively. We don’t really know what her character is up to until the film’s final act and she does a great job of keeping us guessing. Hopper, likewise, is really good here even if he isn’t breaking any new ground. We’ve seen him play this type before – a killer who isn’t playing with a full deck – but his screen presence remains remarkable and he crafts out of his character someone that we want to know more about. As to J.T. Walsh, he too does a great job here. His character is sneaky and manipulative and he brings to the role an admirably shifty vibe that works really well. Look for none other than Dwight Yoakam in a small role as a truck driver.

Beautifully shot by cinematographer Marc Reshovsky, the movie looks fantastic. There’s some genuinely unorthodox camera angles used here that help build mood and atmosphere and, as you’d expect from a noir, some impressive use of shadow and light to give things just that little bit more in terms of visual flair. The score from William Olvis works really well, heightening tension and drama throughout the movie without ever distracting us from the acting or the visuals.

Red Rock West – Blu-ray Review:

Red Rock West arrives on Blu-ray from Cinématographe in an AVC encoded 1080p high definition transfer framed at 1.85.1 widescreen taken from a “new 4K Restoration of the 35mm Interpositive.”Picture quality is impressive, there’s plenty of detail here and colors in particular really look fantastic. Skin tones are nice and natural and we get strong, deep black levels as well. There’s good depth and texture to take in and the image is very clean, retaining natural film grain as it should (occasionally the grain gets a little heavy but never to the point where it’s bothersome) but showing very little in the way of visible print damage. Night scenes, which are fairly common in the movie, demonstrate superb shadow detail. All in all, this looks really strong.

The only audio option on the disc is a 24-bit DTS-HD 2.0 Stereo track in English with optional subtitles provided in English only. Dialogue is clean, clear and easy to listen to and the film’s score sounds excellent. There are no problems with any hiss or distortion and the levels are balanced nicely.

A new commentary track with historian Alain Silver and filmmaker Christopher Coppola (who is Cage's brother) starts off the extras. It's very conversational track that goes over how old school the initial setup for the movie is, how Cage's character is established, the obvious neo-noir elements, John Dahl's work and career as well as his directorial abilities, why certain shots are setup the way that they are, the lighting on display in the movie and the use of color in the film, the staging of the action set pieces in the movie, thoughts on Cage's character and how he portrays him, whether or not the love scene in the movie is needed, the use of music in the film, the character development and arcs in the movie and lots more.

From there, dig into the new interview with director and co-writer John Dahl titled 'A Thousand Miles From Nowhere.' Here, over twenty-seven minutes, he talks about his love of film noir and the inspiration that it provided for the feature, working on the script with his brother, casting the film and thoughts on the performances delivered and other details related to the production.

A new interview with co-writer Rick Dahl titled 'Neon And Dust' runs seventeen minutes and goes over how he developed his love of film, the influences of noir and western films on the script, working with his brother on the writing of said script, casting the film, location work, what was done on location versus a soundstage and some of the reshoots that were needed to complete the movie.

An archival interview with editor Scott Chestnut runs twenty-two minutes and covers how he got into the business, collaborating with John Dahl and how well they worked together, what his work on Red Rock West entailed, the film's lack of a proper theatrical release and the cult following that has developed around the movie since it came out.

The first of two video essays is up next with 'Desperate Times Call for Desperate Measures,' a fourteen minute piece that was put together by Chris O'Neill. This essay covers Dahl's three neo-noir films (Kill Me Again, Red Rock West and The Last Seduction), what the neo-noir terms entails, how the movies balance the line between absurdity and realism, the carnival ride style of the narrative in Red Rock West, character arcs, thoughts on the performances, how Michael tries to handle Lyle and other details that tie everything together quite effectively.

The second video essay is 'Caged In, and it's a nine minutes archival piece by Petros Patsilivas and it covers Cage's career and performance, what sets his work here apart from other films, where Cage's career was at this period and how earlier roles in his filmography "share some DNA with Red Rock West," how he challenges himself as an actor with this role, the moral quandaries that his character deals with and how his acting reflects this.

As to the packaging, this release, which is limited to 6,000 copies, comes with a limited edition, individually numbered J-card slipcase (designed by Sean Phillips) and is housed inside a cloth-bound, media book with embossed foil titles and custom molded disc trays. The book contains new text essays – ‘Lost In America: Red Rock West And Drifter Noir’ by Justin LaLiberty, ‘New Kid In Town’ by Keith Phipps and ‘Dark Night Of The Soul’ by Jordain Searles – in addition to credits for the Blu-ray edition. It’s a very fancy and impressive package overall!

Red Rock West - The Final Word:

Red Rock West is a superior neo-noir picture made all the better by some great work from the film’s four main leads and some really slick cinematography. The special edition Blu-ray release from Cinématographe is a good one, presenting the movie looking and sounding excellent and on a disc loaded with quality extra and in some truly beautiful packaging. Highly recommended!