Selected sixth overall in the 2005 draft by the Portland Trail Blazers, forward Martell Webster has had a career affected by multiple major injuries. Subject of a couple back surgeries during his time in the league, he most recently was ruled out from play after a successful right hip treatment. This surgery, completed in 2015, has kept Webster off the court since then.

Being part of the Washington Wizards’ roster at that time, he was subsequently waived by the team due to that particular surgery. Many experts listed it as a potential career-ending injury. As of today, that projection stays true.

However, the 6-foot-7 wingman has expressed his desire to attempt an NBA comeback, per Gary Washburn of the Boston Globe. If healthy, he could constitute a good source of long-range shooting off the bench to go along with a veteran presence in the locker room for any offering organization.

Martell Webster has worn jerseys for three different NBA franchises. He first played five seasons with the Trail Blazers from 2005 to 2010. Right after that, he would be associated with the Minnesota Timberwolves until 2012 before signing a contract with the Wizards to spend three campaigns in the nation’s capital.

The 30-year-old veteran has averaged 8.7 points, 3.1 rebounds, and 1.0 assist per game on 38 percent shooting from long distance in his pro career.

Martell Webster’s best season, though, came in 2012-13, as he dropped 11.4 points per game to go along with 3.9 boards and 1.9 assists. That year, he shot for 44.2 percent from the field, including a stellar 42.2 percent from three. He also converted for 84.8 percent of his opportunities from the charity stripe.

Webster was one of the last players selected in the NBA draft directly from high school, just before the league changed its policies concerning prep-to-pro situations in 2006.

Many teams could use him as a specialist off the bench. If he puts effort and commitment in making a proper comeback, Webster may find a job in the NBA soon and pull off a successful return.