Martell Webster solidified himself as a sniper in the NBA. His ability to knock down perimeter shots was top tier and part of the reason behind Portland’s success. As the Blazers were huge threats in the West during the late 2000s, Webster remained a huge boost with his scoring throughout the years.

High School

Webster was one of the modern High School players who took his talents directly to the NBA. He was ranked #4 overall in the nation and #1 in the state of Washington. It was nearly difficult to contain a player with a strong build and the physical tools that Webster displayed during that time. Webster was a hometown hero in Seattle, Washington, and looked forward to the opportunity to represent his city in the NBA.

NBA Dreams

Webster’s childhood dreams came true when he was selected sixth overall by Portland in 2005. Coming straight out of High School, Webster had to mature right away and figure out the atmosphere of professional basketball. In his first season, he had many growing pains to overcome. Bouncing from the Blazers roster to the D-League, Webster had to figure out how to make an impact right away.

In year three, he began to show more signs of life on the floor. Webster averaged 10.7 points per game in the 07–08 season. He initially began the season averaging 17.2 points in his first five games of the season. For most of the year, he was a consistent offensive threat, providing great perimeter shooting and even creating for his own at times.

Webster’s best game

The most memorable game from the 2008 season was January 5th’s matchup against the Utah Jazz. Webster went bananas in the third by scoring 24 points that quarter, contributing to Portland extending the lead midway through the quarter. With Brandon Roy sidelined for the game, there had to have been another player to step up. Thank goodness it was Martell Webster. Webster attacked the defense by running off-ball screens and freeing himself open for three-pointers. For Webster, you can say it was a night to remember scoring-wise that he can always reflect on.

Through three seasons, it seemed as if things were coming together for Webster. He signed a four-year deal in the offseason and was emerging with a young roster that was on the rise. Webster and the rest of his team knew that gaining more experience together would allow the team to thrive as a whole in the Western Conference. Except it was only a matter of time before he and the team would face reality.

In the 2009 season, Webster would be sidelined the majority of the season due to a fractured foot he suffered in the preseason. He would only play five minutes in his season debut on December 7 against the Toronto Raptors before re-injuring his foot again. It was a huge blow for Webster and Portland, considering how well he was coming into his own.

End of the road

Webster returned in full effect during the 09–10 season. Although he did play all 82 games, his play was rather inconsistent. Webster averaged 9.4 points on 37% from the three-point line. Many could tell that Webster was still possibly recovering from the foot injury. He didn’t have the same bounce or explosiveness that he had in the past. In that case, Webster and the Blazers were eliminated in six games to the Phoenix Suns in the playoffs. Another failed season would become the end of an era for Webster in Portland.

Conclusion…