Sarah Silverman was most recently the host of the two-time Emmy-nominated weekly topical series, I Love You America, which streamed on Hulu and also received a Writers Guild Awards nomination.

Silverman is currently working on a musical adaptation of her 2010 memoir and New York Times Bestseller called The Bedwetter: Stories of Courage, Redemption, and Pee. The musical, The Bedwetter, will premiere Off Broadway at the Atlantic Theatre Company in April 2020.

On-stage, Silverman continues to cement her status as a force in stand-up comedy. In May 2017, she released her latest standup special A Speck of Dust on Netflix, which culminated in two Emmy Award nominations and a Grammy Award nomination. In 2013, she debuted her hour-long HBO standup special Sarah Silverman: We Are Miracles, which earned her the 2014 Primetime Emmy Award for "Outstanding Writing for a Variety Special." The special received an additional Primetime Emmy Awards nomination that year for "Outstanding Variety Special" in addition to a Writers Guild Awards nomination. In September 2014, Silverman released the special as an audio album through Sub Pop Records, which went on to receive a 2015 Grammy Awards nomination for "Best Comedy Album." Previously, Silverman made an impressive splash with her concert-meets-comedy film Sarah Silverman: Jesus is Magic, which garnered major attention at the Toronto Film Festival.

In the film world, Silverman was most recently seen opposite Emma Stone and Steve Carell in the critically-acclaimed film Battle of the Sexes, which was based on the true story of the 1973 tennis match between Billie Jean King and Bobby Riggs. She also starred in I Smile Back, the film adaptation of the Amy Koppelman novel. The drama premiered at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival and was later released in theaters by Broad Green Pictures. Silverman received much praise for her role as "Laney Brooks," culminating in a 2016 Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for "Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role." Her additional film credits include The Book of Henry, Popstar: Never Stop Never Stopping, Ashby, A Million Ways to Die in the West, Take This Waltz, Gravy, Peep World, I Want Someone to Eat Cheese With, The School of Rock, There's Something About Mary, The Way of The Gun. Silverman also lent her voice as "Vanellope" in the Oscar-nominated smash hit Wreck It Ralph and Golden Globe nominated Wreck it Ralph 2: Ralph Breaks the Internet.

Silverman was nominated for a 2009 Primetime Emmy Award for "Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series" for her portrayal of a fictionalized version of herself in her Comedy Central series The Sarah Silverman Program. This marked Comedy Central's first ever Emmy nomination in a scripted acting category. Silverman also received a Writers Guild Award nomination for her work on the show. In 2008, Silverman won a Primetime Emmy Award for "Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics" for her musical collaboration with Matt Damon. Additionally, she was honored with a Webby Award for "Best Actress" for her online video "The Great Schlep," in which she persuaded young kids to encourage their grandparents in Florida to vote for President Obama prior to the 2008 Presidential Election.

Silverman has made memorable guest appearances on a number of acclaimed and notable television shows, including Monk, which earned her a 2008 Primetime Emmy Awards nomination for "Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series." Silverman also lends her voice to Emmy Award-winning FOX animated series Bob's Burgers. Her additional television work includes buzzed-about roles on HBO's Crashing, Masters of Sex, The Good Wife, The Larry Sanders Show, Seinfeld, and Mr. Show with Bob and David. Silverman has hosted a number of major awards shows, including the 2007 MTV Movie Awards and the Independent Spirit Awards.

Silverman grew up in New Hampshire and attended one year of New York University. In 1993 she joined Saturday Night Live as a writer and feature performer and has not stopped working since.

She currently lives in Los Angeles.

Irene Bedard (born July 22, 1967) is an Alaska Native actress enrolled in the Native Village of Koyuk who has played many aboriginal American characters in a variety of television shows and films. She is best known for her voice role as the title character in the Disney animated film "Pocahontas," and the cult-classic "Smoke Signals" as Suzy Song. She is known for bringing a powerful emotional presence to her characters.

Bedard was born in Anchorage, Alaska, raised primarily in Alaska, but also spent a few years as a child in Washington state. Her father was Bruce Bedard, and mother was Carol Bedard, and she is their oldest of four - Leslie Bedard, Joseph Bedard and David Bedard are her younger siblings. She is Inupiaq and Yup'ik on her mother's side and Cree on her father's side. She graduated from Anchorage's Dimond High School in 1985, and then earned a Musical Theatre degree from The University of the Arts in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Bedard's son Quinn Wilson was born in 2003.

Her first role was as Mary Crow Dog in the television production, "Lakota Woman: Siege at Wounded Knee," which depicted the 1970s stand-off between police and aboriginal Americans, many of the Pine Ridge Reservation, at Wounded Knee, South Dakota. She received a Golden Globe nomination for the role. Besides the first Disney Pocahontas movie, she also voiced the sequel "Pocahontas II: Journey to a New World." Bedard was the physical model for the character. She appeared in a different take of the Pocahontas story in Terrence Malick's 2005 film "The New World," as Pocahontas' mother Nonoma Winanuske Matatiske. In 2005 she was cast in the television mini-series Into the West, portraying the half-Lakota, half-white Margaret "Light Shines" Wheeler. In 2011 Bedard portrayed the Messenger in the Academy Award-nominated film, "Tree of Life." In 2018, Bedard reprised her voiced role of Pocahontas for Disney's "Ralph Breaks the Internet."

Her television roles span from 1995, including Stephen Spielberg's "Into the West," "The Spectacular Spider-Man," "Longmire," "Westworld," and "FBI: Most Wanted." She has performed in two Stephen King series, 2017's "The Mist" as Kimi Lucero, and 2020's "The Stand" as Ray Rentner. In the 2017 she portrayed the future Co-President of the United States for the Jay-Z music video "Family Feud," directed by Ava Duverney.

Bedard's decades of creative work includes singing, theatre, spoken word, producing television and movies, speaking, and teaching. She fosters a passion of many creative disciplines, and is a great lover and adopter of non-human animals. Bedard was chosen in 1995 as one of People magazine's "50 Most Beautiful People." She's served on the American Indian Enterprise and Business Council to the United Nations and is involved in frequent activist work around the environmental and aboriginal issues.

Jodi Benson was born on October 10, 1961 in Rockford, Illinois as Jodi Marie Marzorati. She has received worldwide recognition & critical acclaim as the voice of Ariel in Arielle, die Meerjungfrau (1989), Tour Guide Barbie in Toy Story 2 (1999), Weebo in Flubber (1997) as well as Thumbelina in Däumeline (1994). Other projects include Arielle, die Meerjungfrau - Wie alles begann (2008), Arielle, die Meerjungfrau 2 - Sehnsucht nach dem Meer (2000), Susi und Strolch 2: Kleine Strolche - Großes Abenteuer! (2001), 101 Dalmatiner 2 - Auf kleinen Pfoten zum großen Star! (2002), Joseph - König der Träume (2000), Balto II - Auf der Spur der Wölfe (2001), Balto III - Sein größtes Abenteuer (2004) & Verwünscht (2007).

She starred in Crazy For You as Polly Baker, receiving a Tony & Helen Hayes award nomination for best actress in a musical. Other Broadway credits include Smile, Welcome to the Club & Marilyn. Internationally, she has had the honor of sharing the stage w/ her husband Ray Benson at the European premiere of Ira Gershwin's My One & Only, starring as Miss Edythe Herbert. In Los Angeles, she starred in the critically-acclaimed Reprise/UCLA production of Babes in Arms, South Pacific, Flora the Red Menace, Oklahoma!, My Fair Lady & Chess, for which she won the Best Actress Drama League Award.

She can be heard in over a dozen recordings & has a 6-part DVD series titled Baby Faith. Her animated works include Camp Lazlo (2005), Arielle, die Meerjungfrau (1992), Batman of the Future (1999), The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy (2003), Expedition der Stachelbeeren (1998), Hercules: Zero to Hero (1999), P.J. Sparkles (1992) as well as many others. On the concert stage, she has performed as a concert soloist w/ symphonies all over the world such as the Hollywood Bowl Orchestra, The National Symphony, Cleveland Philharmonic, Dallas Philharmonic, Tokyo Philharmonic to name a few. She has starred in the Kennedy Center Honors for Ginger Rogers, The 25th Anniversary of Walt Disney, Central Park Disney Spectacular & Disney's 100 Years of Magic. She's honored to be the resident guest soloist for the Walt Disney Company/Disney Cruise Line & ambassador for feature animation. She gives thanks & praise to the Lord for her family, friends, her loving husband Ray as well as her precious children: son McKinley Benson & daughter Delaney.

Amanda Leigh Moore was born in Nashua, New Hampshire, on April 10, 1984, to Stacy (Friedman), a former news reporter, and Don Moore, an airline pilot. During her childhood, her family moved to Orlando, Florida, where she was raised. She has Russian Jewish (from her maternal grandfather), English, Scottish, and Irish, ancestry.

After seeing the musical "Oklahoma!", she decided that she wanted to pursue a career in singing. As a child, she performed the National Anthem at several athletic events around her hometown of Orlando, Florida, and became known as the "National Anthem girl". At the ripe age of fourteen, while she was recording in a studio in Orlando, a Fed-Ex worker who happened to be passing through heard her and was interested in her talent. He happened to know someone at Sony as well. Moore worked on cutting a demo and shortly thereafter signed a record deal with Sony 550 Music. At 15, her first record "So Real" was released. Her first tour was with the Backstreet Boys.

As her touring and recording schedule demanded more of her time, Moore withdrew from Bishop Moore Catholic High School in Orlando and opted for a tutor/correspondence. She has stated that her education is important to her and says that the fact that she wants to go to college motivates her to continue with her schooling.

Though Moore's record sales were not up in the ranks of Britney Spears or Christina Aguilera, she has proved to be a formidable talent both in singing and in acting, and snagged an MTV Movie Award in June 2002 for her first feature film role in Nur mit dir - A Walk to Remember (2002). Her biggest dream, though, is to perform on Broadway someday.

Throughout the 2000s, Mandy headlined several films, ranging from the little-seen drama All I Want (2002) to mid-level releases like How to Deal - Wer braucht schon liebe? (2003), American Princess (2004), Im Rennstall ist das Zebra los! (2005), and the more broadly comedic Von Frau zu Frau (2007) and Lizenz zum Heiraten (2007). She also appeared in the odd-ball sci-fi film Southland Tales (2006), and voiced Rapunzel in the Disney blockbuster CGI animation Rapunzel - Neu verföhnt (2010).

In the mid 2010s, she re-emerged as a star actress, headlining the show This is Us: Das ist Leben (2016) and the hit thriller film 47 Meters Down (2017), with more film roles to come.

Ming-Na ("enlightenment") was born on the island of Macau, forty miles from Hong Kong. Her mother, Lin Chan Wen, divorced her father when Ming-Na was only a toddler. She has an older brother named Jonathan. After the divorce, they moved to Hong Kong where her mother became a nurse. There her mother met Soo Lim Yee, a U.S. businessman. They soon married, and at four years, Ming-Na moved with her family to Queens, New York. Five years later, they transferred to Yee's hometown of Pittsburgh where his family runs the Chinatown Inn restaurant. Jonathan and half-brother, Leong, now manage this restaurant. Struggling to fit in at school, she changed her name to Maggie & Doris. She found a love for acting while appearing in a third grade Easter play, where she played a klutzy bunny. Her mother was not excited about her desire to pursue acting, She preferred that she go into medicine. Nonetheless, Ming-Na graduated from Carnegie Mellon University with a degree in theatre. She got her first acting job in 1988 on the soap Jung und Leidenschaftlich - Wie das Leben so spielt (1956). Her big break came when she was cast in Töchter des Himmels (1993). When she needed a ride to the premiere of the film, her acting instructor sent one of his students, Eric Michael Zee. The two started dating in 1994 after Ming-Na moved permanently to Los Angeles and married in 1995, dropping her last name, Wen, at that time. She says she is now like Ann-Margret. Zee is a screenwriter and, with Ming-Na, manages At Last, a boy band.

Paige O'Hara's an American actress, singer & painter. She was born on May 10, 1956 in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida as Donna Paige Helmintoller. She's best known as the voice of Belle in Die Schöne und das Biest (1991).

She started receiving acting lessons around 4 & singing lessons around 12. She enrolled at a performing arts high school, aspiring for a professional career as an actor & singer. She has cited American actress & singer Judy Garland as an inspiration for her career choice.

She started out as a theatrical actress, making her Broadway debut in 1983. She played the role of singer & dancer Ellie May Chipley in a revival of Show Boat, which depicts the life of fictional show-woman Magnolia "Nolie" Hawks over a 40-year period, from her 1st performances to her retirement. From 1985-1987, she played the roles of actress Alice Nutting, disappearance victim Edwin Drood & private investigator Dick Datchery in the The Mystery of Edwin Drood. In 1988, she appeared in the musical's 1st national tour. Other notable roles include Ado Annie Carnes in a 1986 revival of Oklahoma!.

In 1989, Walt Disney Animation Studios started production of Die Schöne und das Biest (1991). She learned about the upcoming film production from a newspaper article & applied for a voice role. She competed against 500 other applicants & was chosen for the lead role of Belle. The design team of the film had modeled Belle's appearance on Judy Garland so the casting crew wanted an actress & singer whose tone was reminiscent of her. She was thought to offer a decent artistic impression of Garland's style & had considerable experience in stage musicals, making her ideal for the role. After its release in 1991, she gained worldwide fame for voice acting.

In 1993, she joined the cast of the animated TV series Prinz Eisenherz (1991). She voiced Princess Aleta of the Misty Isles, a warrior woman who serves as a love interest for Valiant.

In 1995, she played Fantine in productions of Les Misérables. In 1996, she played protagonist Peter Pan in a revival of the musical Peter Pan.

She voiced Belle again in the direct-to-video film Die Schöne und das Biest - Weihnachtszauber (1997) & the direct-to-video anthology film Belles zauberhafte Welt (1998). In 1999, Disney released the compilation film Belle's Tales of Friendship (1999), which had a live-action Belle presenting animated tales. The live-action Belle was played by Lynsey McLeod but she voiced Belle for an animated segment featuring a brand new story. In 2000, she voiced Belle in the video games Disney's Beauty and the Beast: Magical Ballroom (2000), Kingdom Hearts II (2005) & Kingdom Hearts II: Final Mix+ (2007).

In 2007, she played the soap opera character Angela in a story-w/in-a-story featured in the film Verwünscht (2007).

In 2011, she received a Disney Legend Award, honoring her for her contributions to Disney productions over the past 20 years. That same year, she stepped down from her role as the official voice of Belle. Her voice had changed considerably over 2 decades, so she could no longer match her original voice. It was announced that she would continue to work as a painter for Disney Fine Art & make promotional appearances for Disney. In 2018, she reprised the role of Belle in Chaos im Netz (2018).

She has now mostly retired from acting though she continues to enjoy fame through voice acting in popular productions.

Character actor, dramatic leading man, or hilarious comic foil? With an astonishing range of roles already under his belt, John C. Reilly has played an eclectic host of rich characters to great effect over the years, from seedy ne'er-do-wells, to lovable, good-natured schlepps.

The fifth of six children, John Christopher Reilly was born in Chicago, to a father of mostly Irish descent, and a Lithuanian-American mother, and was brought up on Chicago's tough Southwest territory. His father, also named John, ran an industrial linen supply company business. On the amateur stage from age eight, Reilly trained at the Goodman School of Drama and eventually became a member of Chicago's renowned Steppenwolf Theatre.

His film break came with a small role in the Vietnam War drama Die Verdammten des Krieges (1989), wherein Brian De Palma liked his work so much during the early stages that he recast him in a major role by the start of shooting as a soldier bent on rape. Reilly gained momentum throughout the 1990s and showed his dazzling stretch of talent in such films as Tage des Donners (1990), Schatten und Nebel (1991), Gilbert Grape - Irgendwo in Iowa (1993) and Am wilden Fluß (1994). He became a major stock player in director Paul Thomas Anderson's films, while finding some of his best roles in Last Exit Reno (1996) as a compulsive gambler, Boogie Nights (1997) in which he played a narcissistic porn star, and in Magnolia (1999) as a compassionate policeman. He went on to earn further critical points for his role of the soldier sent to the front lines in Terrence Malick's war epic Der schmale Grat (1998).

On stage, Reilly has wowed audiences in "The Grapes of Wrath" on Broadway, "A Streetcar Named Desire" and "Othello" at Steppenwolf, and earned an Outer Critics Circle Award and Tony nomination for "True West" alongside another impeccable character player Philip Seymour Hoffman. Reilly finally received the film recognition he deserved in 2002 with a slew of choice, high-profile parts in The Hours - Von Ewigkeit zu Ewigkeit (2002), The Good Girl (2002), Gangs of New York (2002), and especially Chicago (2002) as the put-upon husband, Amos Hart, who is played for a patsy by murderous wife Roxie (Renée Zellweger). For this last part, he received both Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations for Best Supporting Actor.

Since then his stock has risen considerably, and he has further widened his cinematic repertoire, appearing in everything from dramatic roles - We Need to Talk About Kevin (2011), Aviator (2004) and Der Gott des Gemetzels (2011) - to broader comic turns - Walk Hard: Die Dewey Cox Story (2007), Ricky Bobby - König der Rennfahrer (2006), Stiefbrüder (2008), Cyrus (2010) and Willkommen in Cedar Rapids (2011). Most recently, he has voiced the lead in Disney's animated smash Ralph reichts (2012).

Reilly is married to producer Alison Dickey.

Best known for his role as NBC page Kenneth Parcell on NBC primetime comedy 30 Rock (2006), Jack McBrayer was born on May 27, 1973 in Macon, Georgia. He studied theater administration at the University of Evansville in Evansville, Indiana, and went on to work at The Second City and IO Theater from 1995-2002. McBrayer became acquainted with Tina Fey during that time, which helped him ultimately secure the role on 30 Rock (2006).

After his time with those comedy troupes, McBrayer frequently appeared in sketches on Late Night with Conan O'Brien (1993) playing a series of stereotypical Southern characters. That stretch lasted from 2002 to 2004, and soon after McBrayer secured his role as a series regular on 30 Rock (2006), which begins its seventh season in Fall 2012. McBrayer received an Emmy nomination in 2009 for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series for his role as dim-witted NBC page Kenneth Parcell. He was also the main character in "30 Rock" web series 30 Rock: Kenneth the Webpage (2007) which ran from 2007 to 2009 and earned two Emmy nominations for short-format programming.

Other noteworthy television credits include a small role on Arrested Development (2003) and a recurring voice on Phineas und Ferb (2007), among others. McBrayer has also worked in numerous movies over the past decade, including Ricky Bobby - König der Rennfahrer (2006), Nie wieder Sex mit der Ex (2008), Cats & Dogs - Die Rache der Kitty Kahlohr (2010), and Die Qual der Wahl (2012), and he is voicing the character Fix-It Felix in November 2012's Ralph reichts (2012).