In 1964, Walt Disney released a legendary movie, Mary Poppins. This film is absolutely amazing, especially for the time period it was produced in. Back in the early 60’s many movies were not animated yet, but Disney blew it out of the water by having real life AND animation. In order to create this wonderful masterpiece, three actors (and actresses) helped make that dream come true.

The leading actress is Julie Andrews. Whom, by herself, is awesome! I love her! In this film, she portrays the main character as a bubbly, yet stern, nanny who magically appears to take care of two young children. She shows them that life can be magically and fun, but they should always value their family and possessions.

In the film, Mrs. Andrews has two types of acting, stylized and method. She portrays stylized acting by the fact that she “acts” as though, she is indeed a fairy tale herself. No one has ever heard of her and when they do, they deeply respect her. She seems like a figment of their imagination, causing this style of acting to draw attention to that fact (Goodykoontz & Jacobs, 2014). Her second form of acting is “the method”. This type is the most famous and used types of acting (Goodykoontz & Jacobs, 2014). This style of acting is most popular because the actor or actress goes beyond just pretending, so they can really play the emotions of that certain character.

Now, I do not think that Julie Andrews used her past experiences and memories to really portray Mary Poppins, but I do think she researched and tried her hardest to literally become her. She used stylized acting in the scene when is using her “magic” to clean the children’s room, but also when they are transported to the chalk drawings. When it comes to method acting, Mrs. Andrews uses this constantly throughout the film. She refers to herself as ‘Mary Poppins’ numerous times, let alone everyone else who sings about how great she is.

The leading male in this film is none other than Dick Van Dyke. Mr. Van Dyke is another amazing actor who has been in a few of Alfred Hitchcock’s film and even had his own television show in the 1980s. In Mary Poppins, he plays Bert and Mr. Dawes Senior, but being dressed differently as an old man, many people just recognize him as Bert’s character. He portrays a chimney sweep as Bert who is an audacious young artist/ musician on his off time. He teams us with Mary Poppins to show the children the hidden worlds in the chalk drawings and leads a group of chimney sweeps in a classic tap-dancing number on rooftops and in the children’s home.

Like Julie Andrews, Dick Van Dyke uses two forms of acting, stylized and method. He uses stylized acting when he is playing his strange instrument contraption in the street, unlike the book says, it shows that even though it is over-the-top, it still brings in the audience. With the second form of acting, Dick Van Dyke uses method acting when he is doing the dance scene with the penguins. This shows his natural external talents, as well as his learned talents.

The third main actor in this film is David Tomlinson, who plays Mr. Banks. Mr. Tomlinson was best known as playing Mr. Banks in Mary Poppins, but he also played in Bedknobs and Broomsticks and various minor films. In Mary Poppins, he plays the over condescending father who at the beginning of the movie seems to value money more than his family, but has a change of heart. Compared to the other two actors (actress), Mr. Tomlinson uses the realism acting method. This form of acting does not exactly drawn attention to itself, just like Mr. Bank’s character. He is more on the factual side of this movie because he believes in structure and money. He demonstrates this when he is in the bank and wants to try and force his son into giving up his money.

Altogether, these acting styles make up this wonderful movie. They all come together to create the happy and serious moods of the actors, but also the setting of old London. With Julie Andrews, she is a bright young woman in this movie showing an imaginative side to these children, which she also does in some of her other films. She plays many voices in animated fairy tale musicals, but also in many other fairy tale genres. Based on this fact, Julie Andrews is also looked to when it comes to any sort of narrative for Disney movies or musicals. Yet, even though she mainly has been in fairy tale genres, I’m sure she would be great in any other films, just because she is Julie Andrews. I also bet she’s a great grandmother to be around!

References:

Goodykoontz, B., & Jacobs, C. P. (2014). Film: From watching to seeing (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Bridgepoint Education, Inc.