Happy Birthday to Yuriko, Princess Mikasa, who celebrates her 100th Birthday today! The illustrious Aristocrat who married the Emperor’s brother during the Second World War, who is now the oldest member of the Imperial Family, Princess Mikasa has worn several splendid jewels over the past eight decades, but she has primarily worn her Mikimoto Tiara and Parure!

But first, lets learn about Princess Mikasa! The second daughter of Viscount Masanari Takagi and Kuniko Irie, a second cousin of Emperor Shōwa, she grew up in Tokyo, where she graduated from Gakushuin Women’s Academy in 1941. The same year, she married Takahito, Prince Mikasa, the youngest brother of Emperor Hirohito. Prince and Princess Mikasa had five children, with the three sons having predeceased them, and two daughters having left the imperial family upon marriage. The Prince and Princess continued an active round of public duties well into their old age, with the Prince passing away just days after their 75th wedding anniversary in 2016. Princess Mikasa has had health issues in recent years, but continues to reside at the family residence in the grounds of the Akasaka Estate. The Princess is now the oldest member of a reigning Royal Family.

When Yuriko Takagi married Takahito, Prince Mikasa, in 1941, the new Princess Mikasa received a spectacular Diamond Kokoshnik Tiara and a coordinating necklace created by Mikimoto. However, unlike her sisters-in-law, Princess Takamatsu and Princess Chichibu, who had also received Parures on their Weddings, Princess Mikasa was unable to wear the Parure on the Wedding Day due to the ongoing Second World War.

After the end of the War, Princess Mikasa began to wear her Mikimoto Tiara and Parure for State Banquets, remaining her only Tiara through the 1950s and much of the 1960s, including for Princess Alexandra’s visit to Japan, until she began wearing her daughter’s Tiaras.

Princess Mikasa continued to wear her Mikimoto Tiara and Parure through the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, with notable appearances at the Celebrations of 2500th Anniversary of the Persian Empire in 1971, the Danish State Visit to Japan in 1981, the Prince and Princess of Wales’ visit in 1986, and the Enthronement of Emperor Akihito in 1990.

The annual Ceremony of New Year’s Celebration at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo is one of the most glittering events in the Japanese calendar, and Princess Mikasa was often photographed wearing the Mikimoto Tiara at the New Years Court, though these days, the Princess does not attend the public audiences, most recently being seen in 2019.

After the Abdication of Emperor Akihito in 2019, Princess Mikasa made a rare public appearance in the Mikimoto Tiara and Parure for the Sokuigo Choken no Gi Ceremony in the Matsu no Ma State Room in the Imperial Palace, though she did not attend for Emperor Naruhito and Empress Masako’s Banquet to celebrate their Enthronement a few months later.

Share this:

Like this:

Like Loading...