Takahito, Prince Mikasa (三笠宮崇仁親王, Mikasa-no-miya Takahito Shinnō, 2 December 1915 – 27 October 2016) was a Japanese prince, the youngest of the four sons of Emperor Taishō (Yoshihito) and Empress Teimei (Sadako). He was their last surviving child. His eldest brother was Emperor Shōwa (Hirohito). After serving as a junior cavalry officer in the Japanese Imperial Army during World War II, Prince Mikasa embarked upon a post-war career as a scholar and part-time lecturer in Middle Eastern studies and Semitic languages.

Prince Mikasa married Yuriko Takagi in 1941, and they had three sons and two daughters. Prince and Princess Mikasa outlived all three of their sons. With the death of his sister-in-law Kikuko, Princess Takamatsu, on 17 December 2004, Prince Mikasa became the oldest living member of the Imperial House of Japan. He remained active until a few months before his death at the age of 100. At the time of his death, Prince Mikasa was the oldest living royal.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Prince Takahito Mikasa has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Creative, Intelligent, Energetic, Imaginative, Generous, Honest, and Diplomatic.

Adventurous and Independent

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Prince Takahito Mikasa is someone who is an adventurous, independent, and energetic person, who is insightful, imaginative, generous, and honest. A person who is known for being diligent and strong.

Warm and Caring

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Prince Takahito Mikasa well know them as someone who can be warm, caring, and compassionate, like a lamp or torch.

Imaginative and Sentimental

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Prince Takahito Mikasa as someone who is imaginative, sentimental, and in touch with emotions.

A person who has extremely good memory and analytical skills, likes to make sure that everyone gets along, enjoys all kinds of situations and people, has a talent for travel and languages, and who makes lifelong friends.

Charismatic and Playful

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Prince Takahito Mikasa is someone who is used to being the center of attention, and who has a playful approach to dealing with life.

They are also someone who is balanced, stable, and energetic, who likes the idea of home and family, and who is very comfortable being the person in charge.

Optimistic and Quick-witted

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Prince Takahito Mikasa tends to be someone who is optimistic and spontaneous, and who has a clear and analytical mind. Who can be witty, with a happy-go-lucky- nature that makes others cheerful, and who possesses an adventurous zest for life.

Some of Prince Takahito Mikasa's challenges

While Prince Takahito Mikasa has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Prince Takahito Mikasa can be Impulsive, Careless, Hesitant, Narcissistic, Emotional, Standoffish, and Irritable.

Impulsive and Careless

One of Prince Takahito Mikasa's key challenges is that they are someone who can be impulsive and careless.

Prince Takahito Mikasa must also exercise caution as they can be excessive and unrealistic.

Irritable and Moody

Prince Takahito Mikasa is someone who can be irritable and moody, have a tendency to experience self-doubt, be too secretive, can take too many risks, and who can have an extreme approach to managing personal finances.

Irritable and Callous

Finally, Prince Takahito Mikasa also can be short-tempered, childish, insensitive, and careless at times.