Brief Summary

Official Tribal Name: Texas Band of Choctaw Indians

Address:

Phone:

Fax:

Email:

Official Website:

Recognition Status: Unrecognized

Traditional Name / Traditional Meaning:

Chahta – The name of a legendary chief

Common Name / Meaning of Common Name:

Choctaw – From Chahta

Alternate spellings / Misspellings:

Alternate names / Alternate Spellings / Misspellings:

Five Civilized Tribes, Chactaw, Chaktaw, Chatha, Yowani Choctaws

Name in other languages:

Region: Southwest

State(s) Today: Texas

Traditional Territory:

Confederacy: Five Civilized Tribes, Muskogean

Treaties:

The Choctaw signed nine treaties with the United States before the Civil War, beginning with the Treaty of Hopewell in 1786 – which set boundaries and established universal peace between the two nations. Subsequent treaties, however, reshaped those borders and forced the Choctaw to cede millions of acres of land. In 1830, the United States seized the last of the Choctaw’s ancestral territory and relocated the tribe to Indian Territory west of the Mississippi.

Reservation:

Land Area:

Tribal Headquarters:

Time Zone:

Population at Contact:

Registered Population Today:

Tribal Enrollment Requirements:

Genealogy Resources:

Black Choctaws adopted through the Dawes Commission

Government:

Charter:

Name of Governing Body:

Number of Council members:

Dates of Constitutional amendments:

Number of Executive Officers:

Elections:

Language Classification:

Language Dialects:

Number of fluent Speakers:

Dictionary:

The Books of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, Translated into Choktaw Language

Origins:

Bands, Gens, and Clans

The Choctaw like all of the Muscogean tribes was a matriarchal and clan culture. There were two distinct Moieties: Imoklashas (elders) and Inhulalatas (youth). Each moiety had several clans or Iskas, it is estimated there were about 12 Iskas altogether. Identity was established first by Moiety and Iska, so a Choctaw identified himself first as Imoklasha or Inhulata and second as Choctaw.TheChoctaw clans include the Wind, Bear, Deer, Wolf, Panther, Holly Leaf, Bird, Raccoon and Crawfish Clans.

Related Tribes:

Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, Jena Band of Choctaw, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, Texas Band of Choctaw Indians (Yowani Choctaw), MOWA Band of Choctaw Indians, Mount Tabor Indian Community

Traditional Allies:

The Choctaw were early allies of the French, Spanish and British during the 18th century.

Traditional Enemies:

In the 1750’s the tribe was involved in a Civil War that decimated whole villages. The division was driven by factions affiliated with the Spanish and the other the French. In the 18th century the Choctaw were generally at war with the Creeks or the Chickasaw Indians.

Ceremonies / Dances / Games:

Choctaw Stickball

Modern Day Events & Tourism:

Choctaw Legends / Oral Stories:

Choctaw Creation Story

Art & Crafts:

Animals:

Clothing:

Housing:

Subsistance:

Economy Today:

Religion & Spiritual Beliefs:

Burial Customs:

Wedding Customs

Education:

Radio:

Newspapers:

Choctaw Chiefs and Leaders:

Pisatuntema –

Catastrophic Events:

Tribe History:

During World War I and II, the U.S. Military used members of the Choctaw Nation for secure communications. They became the first code-talkers.

Choctaw History Timeline

In the News: