The Kwame Nkrumah University of Science & Technology (KNUST) in partnership with the Mastercard Foundation (MCF) is offering scholarships for academically talented yet economically disadvantaged young people in Ghana and Africa with access to quality university education. The Programme offers an opportunity for its scholars to receive holistic training that empowers them to be change leaders. The Scholars Programme embodies an array of services including mentorship and cultural transition.

The goal of the Scholars Programme is to raise the next generation of ethical and transformative leaders who would influence positive forward-looking changes in their respective home countries specifically and on the African Continent as a whole.

The Mastercard Foundation Scholars Program (MCFSP) targets academically talented yet economically disadvantaged young people in Africa who will contribute to the transformation of the continent through their knowledge, skills, attitudes and values evidenced by their leadership.

More information on the Mastercard Foundation Scholarships can be found at: https://mcf.knust.edu.gh/announcements/general/call-applications-mastercard-foundation-scholarship-20222023-academic-year

Degree Level

Undergraduate studies

Deadline

29 July 2022

Who can apply?

Candidates should be citizens from Africa;

Applicants should come from economically disadvantaged backgrounds and demonstrate financial neediness;

Applicants must have a National Senior Certificate and meet KNUST's admission requirements. NO AWAITING RESULTS candidate will be accepted. Applicant’s result must not be more than five years old;

Applicants should demonstrate leadership potential and ought to be involved in a giving back project eg. in a community, at school, church etc;

Priority will be given to;

Females;

Displaced Persons (Certified Refugees, Internally Displaced Persons, etc.); and

Persons with Disability

Applicants must be prepared to Go-Back and Give-Back to their communities;

Applicants must NOT be enrolled in any tertiary institution.

Fields of Study

All fields of study

Scholarship Benefits

Full tuition fees;

Fully paid on-campus accommodation;

Learning materials;

Transportation;

Monthly stipend

Counselling Support Services;

Career Development Services;

Regular group meetings with other scholars that focus on personal and professional development opportunities and activities tailored to build societal relationships and scholars’ capacity;

Continued academic support through academic mentoring, virtual learning and tutoring;

Opportunities to participate in leadership congresses, community services and mentoring;

Uniquely sourced internships with industry for Professional development;

The prestige of becoming part of and network with the growing family of the Mastercard Foundation Scholars Alumni and the Global Scholars Community.

Application Process

Eligible candidates for the scholarship can apply by downloading the application form (HERE!)

Completed application forms must be sent via courier mail (Eg. EMS, DHL, Fedex, UPS) to the address below;

The Program Manager

Mastercard Foundation Scholars Program at KNUST

Africa Hall Road, Impact Building

PMB KNUST,

Kumasi, Ghana.

Contact

If you have further inquiries or need assistance with the application process, please contact the MCF Secretariat at KNUST at +233-206-030-790 or +233-3220-62975 or send an email to This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. or This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it..

Documents and Links

About MCFSP

Call for Applications

Admission portal for the MCFSP

Note

Please note that this opportunity is not offered by the Department of Higher Education and Training. Applicants are required to undertake their own research into programmes and institutions and are responsible for ensuring that the qualifications will be recognised in South Africa. If there are any discrepancies in the details provided, the information given by the sponsor supersedes the details provided above. No additional financial support will be provided by the Department of Higher Education and Training.