Paris, 3 April 2023 - Société du Grand Paris has awarded a contract to the Colas Rail / Alstom consortium, which is led by Colas Rail, to supply the track, rigid overhead catenary system and linear equipment for the 2nd section of Grand Paris Express metro's line 17.

With a length of 26.5 km, line 17 will stretch over 13 municipalities and link 9 stations between Saint-Denis Pleyel and Le Mesnil-Amelot in less than 25 minutes, facilitating travel for nearly 565,000 inhabitants.

The Colas Rail / Alstom consortium, in charge of the 2nd section of line 17, will supply and lay 10 km of track, the rigid overhead catenary system, as well as the linear equipment between Le Bourget Aéroport and Parc des Expositions, located before Roissy. The work will take place in a tunnel, in embankments and on a viaduct over 3 km.

The project will involve up to 200 employees. The first works will start by mid-2024.

The award of this new contract demonstrates Société du Grand Paris's confidence in the Colas Rail / Alstom consortium and confirms the consortium's expertise in this type of integrated infrastructure contract, as well as the two companies’ ability to work together on multidisciplinary projects in the field of railway equipment and systems.

The two companies have worked together on a number of major projects such as the Grand Paris Express line 15 South-East section, the tramways in Reims, Nice and Bordeaux and the Nimes-Montpellier high-speed line bypass. They recently won a contract to supply an integrated rail system for the extension of the North-South Commuter Railway (NSCR) project in the Philippines.

A work in progress

The consortium pays particular attention to environmental and social impacts. For example, it has committed to limiting its greenhouse gas emissions by supplying low-carbon concrete made from cement produced by reducing energy consumption, and rolled rails made from steel produced from a low energy-consumption process.

Other initiatives have been implemented such as the use of electric vehicles, the use of LEDs for tunnel lighting, the treatment of rainwater and the establishment of a treatment and recycling station for residues from the tracks concrete.

To promote access to employment, the site will facilitate access to training for young people through apprenticeship contracts, work-study programmes and internships at all levels (training for workers, supervisors and engineers). A significant volume of labour hours will be reserved to people on long term unemployment to promote professional inclusion on site.

In addition, a percentage of the amount of work and systems will be reserved for VSEs and SMEs.