A consortium encompassing several Vinci Construction and Vinci Energies companies has been awarded a €2.71bn (£2.32bn) design and build contract for Line 15 West of the Grand Paris Express.

Société du Grand Paris’ overall €35.6bn (£28bn) Grand Paris Express project will see 200km of new metro line to its public transport network. The new lines will form outer circuits to the existing network, providing direct connections between the suburbs. They will enable rail passengers to travel between suburbs without having to travel into the centre of Paris as part of their journey.

Line 15 will be a 76km circular route connecting the southern and eastern suburbs with Saint-Denis in the north with the business district at La Défense in the west. The works are split into three sections: east, south and west. The south section is being delivered by a joint venture called CAP group, which is also led by Vinci Construction, and saw tunnelling complete in January 2022.

The newly awarded design and build Line 15 west package, won by the Vinci consortium known as Intencités15, will see works undertaken in a high-density urban area linking Pont de Sèvres station to La Défense. It will feature design and construction of 14km of tunnels, five stations (Saint-Cloud, Rueil-Suresnes Mont-Valérien, Nanterre La Boule, Nanterre La Folie and La Défense), a set of tail tracks and 16 service buildings.

Vinci has committed to entrusting 20% of the works to local small and medium enterprises (SMEs). At peak construction, over 2,000 people will work on the project and 10% of the hours will be allocated to people on integration programmes.

Line 15 West of the Grand Paris Express is expected to start operation in 2031.

The Intencités15 consortium features Vinci Construction subsidiaries (Vinci Construction Grands Projets, Chantiers Modernes Construction, Dodin Campenon Bernard, ETF), Vinci Energies (SDEL Infi), Razel-Bec, Fayat Energie Services, Ingérop, Artelia, JFS Architectes, Grimshaw, AREP Architectes, Archi 5 Prod and Philippe Gazeau Architecte.