“I’m the Latino son of James Brown,” claims Carlinhos Brown, and while it’s true that he has absorbed funk’s deepest rhythmic lessons, the Brazilian percussionist, producer and pop star is far more than South America’s answer to the Godfather of Soul.

He first gained widespread notice through his work with Sergio Mendes and Caetano Veloso, particularly for penning “Meia Lua Inteira,” a hit from Veloso’s seminal 1985 album “Estrangeiro.” But Brown became an international force with his huge band Timbalada. Featuring up to 100 percussionists and vocalists, the ensemble became a thrilling showcase for young musicians from Salvador, the capital of the Brazilian state of Bahia.

In only his second Bay Area appearance under his own name, Brown closes San Francisco Jazz Organization’s spring concert season on Saturday at the Masonic Center with a percussion-laden 10-piece band. He’ll be concentrating on material from his Latin Grammy-winning album with Marisa Monte and Arnaldo Antunes, “Tribalistas,” as well songs from the various solo albums he’s released over the past decade.

The theatrical Barcelona-based combo Ojos de Brujo opens with its incendiary mix of flamenco, hip-hop and rumba.

Brown’s music is a densely textured, infectious blend of American funk, reggae and Afro-Brazilian grooves. While he hasn’t established a strong presence in the U.S., it’s difficult to overstate his influence on Brazilian music over the past two decades. A master of collaboration, he’s worked closely with many of Brazil’s important artists, including Daniela Mercury, Marisa Monte and Margareth Menezes. Something of a workaholic, he produces a seemingly endless flow of songs, of which more than four dozen have ascended the Brazilian charts.

“My first song, I remember it was onomatopoeic,” says Brown from Salvador, demonstrating the tune by scatting a melodic line. “This is instinctive. I was 12 years old and I was imitating animals. I was born in the forest, surrounded by clear waters and flowers. When I was 17, I still didn’t know what a radio was, I didn’t know what a record was.”

To understand Brown, you have to understand Bahia, the huge northeastern state that’s the heart of Afro-Brazilian culture. Its capital, Salvador, served as the center of Brazilian government from 1549 to 1763, when the booming sugar industry imported millions of Africans to toil in slavery on immense plantations. While the southern megacities of Rio and Sao Paulo long ago eclipsed Salvador economically, Bahia is the nation’s musical wellspring, with arguably the most vital concentration of African culture in the Americas.

Growing up in rural Salvador, Brown absorbed the rhythms of the city’s celebrated carnival, which are played by big percussion ensembles similar to the Mardi Gras Indians of New Orleans. He also soaked up the cadences of the Afro-Brazilian religion known as Candomble, which, like Cuba’s Santeria, employs chants in the West African language of Yoruba.

Speaking mostly in Portuguese through an interpreter, though lapsing occasionally into English, Brown sketched out a detailed account of his far-flung musical lineage, starting with the brilliant but short-lived Afro-Cuban conga master Chano Pozo, who helped lay the foundation for Latin jazz through his work in New York City with Dizzy Gillespie in the 1940s.

“The first song I heard was by Chano Pozo. Later I fell in love with a very special guy, Luis Caldas,” Brown says, referring to the Brazilian musician who founded samba-reggae. “But Chano Pozo was so important for my life because he wrote in Yoruba. Then Sly and the Family Stone, James Brown, Smokey Robinson, Stevie Wonder and Michael Jackson — those were my influences. When I heard James Brown, I heard funk, I heard a new way. Funk reminded me of Candomble.”

Brown has taken another page from James Brown’s book, building a social movement that has helped thousands of people in Salvador. Working in the city’s Candeal neighborhood, he’s built a school and social services infrastructure that includes day care, kindergarten and a school that teaches music and English.

“I’m a success story from the glories of James Brown,” he says. “I learned from his good things, not his defects. Once I dreamed of moving to the United States to make my life and make money, and today I don’t need that anymore. All I need is to spread God’s gift, my knowledge about happiness, about peace, about being a man who seeks equality, who respects family, a man who can teach about what it’s like to live on the street. I’m also a man who believes that problems teach us how to move ahead, not how to be sad. The music that I bring with me is the result of these influences.”

Reach Andrew Gilbert at jazzscribe@aol.com.

PREVIEW

WHO: Carlinhos Brown

WHEN: 8 p.m. Saturday

WHERE: Nob Hill Masonic Center, California and Taylor streets, S.F.

HOW MUCH: $25-$75