Kalka is a town in the Panchkula district of Haryana, India. The name of this town is derived from the Hindu goddess Kali. The town is situated in the foothills of the Himalayas and is a gateway to the neighbouring state of Himachal Pradesh. It is on the National Highway 22 between Chandigarh and Shimla, and it is the terminus of the Kalka-Shimla Railway. To the south of Kalka is Pinjore, and the industrial village of Parwanoo(Himachal Pradesh) is to the north on NH 22.

Places to Visit

Kalki Mata Temple

Known as a gateway to the eastern side of Himachal Pradesh, Kalki Mata Temple is one of the oldest shrines located in Panchkula, Haryana. The temple in Chandigarh tri-city region features an imposing 6-feet tall statue of Kali Mata whereas the interiors are adorned with figurines of birds and animals, showcasing the rich culture of the medieval period. There is also a wonderful Gurudwara just next to the temple, which is also worth visiting and seek blessings of the almighty.

Pinjore Garden

Pinjore Garden, also known as Yadavindra Gardens is one of the most gorgeous places in Panchkula to relax and reconnect yourself with nature. Sprawling across 100 acres, this historic garden belonging to the 17th Century depicts the Mughal Gardens style and was built during the reign of the famous Patiala Dynasty. Pinjore Garden was built by the Nawab Fidai Khan, a renowned architect of the 17th century and was refurbished by the late Maharaja Yadavindra Singh, former prince of Patiala.

Bestowed with mesmerising fountains, lush greenery and sparkling water bodies, Pinjore Garden is one of the best places to see in Kalka for couples. This ancient Mughal architectural marvel is inclusive of seven terraces that have been beautifully built on each level. On the first level, there is a spectacular palace built in Mughal-Rajasthan style called the Shish Mahal and Hawa Mahal. The second level features an eye-catching painted palace called Rang Mahal. An open-air theatre on the last level makes this place one of the must-visit tourist places in Kalka. There is also a small zoo, which can be visited too.

Morni Hills

Located around 35 km from Panchkula District and 45 km from Chandigarh, Morni Hills is yet another must places to visit in Kalka for couples. Perched at an altitude of 3,600 feet above the sea level and blessed with beautiful natural vistas, Morni Hills is a perfect weekend getaway for the people of Delhi and Chandigarh. The wide range of excotic flora and fauna will leave you spellbound. The gushing waters of River Ghaggar flows through the steepy valleys of this hill and offers scintillating scenic views, making it a paradise for nature lovers. One can also indulge in some basic trekking, camping and rock climbing activities here.

Manki Point – Hanuman Temple

Appreciated for its staggering views, natural beauty and serene atmosphere, Manki Point is truly a heaven on earth where you can find complete solace and harmony. Located on a hilltop about 6,200 miles above sea level, Manki Point offers phenomenal panoramic views of Chandigarh. There is a Hanuman Temple on the hilltop shaped in the form of a foot.

Sunset Point

One of the top places to visit in Kalka among nature lovers, adventure junkies, photography enthusiasts and of course newlywed couples, Sunset Point will leave you awestruck with its unspoiled beauty and absolute calmness. Located on a hilly terrain and engulfed by natural greenery, Sunset Point cannot be missed during your vacation to Kalka.

Gurudwara Nada Sahib

Located approximately 19 km from Kalka, Gurudwara Nada Sahib is one of the most religious sites of Sikhs. The Gurudwara holds rich historical significance and is thronged by a huge number of visitors every year. Located on the banks of Ghaggar River in Panchkula District, Gurudwara Nada Sahib is one of the popular religious tourist places in Kalka. There is also a museum within the premises that displays some of the ancient facts and residuals from the Sikh history. Don’t miss the Langar, which is organised here on a daily basis.

Cactus Garden

Spread across an area of 7 acres, Cactus Garden is said to be Asia’s largest outdoor landscaped cacti and Succulents Garden. The garden is inclusive of three greenhouses and has a comprehensive collection of endangered species of cacti & succulents including the Genus Caralluma and Indian succulents, the largest in the world. A must visit place for plant lovers and botanists.

Ticket price: INR 10 per person

Timings: Daily from 9:00 am to 1:00 pm and 2:00 am to 6:00 pm

Must Try Food in Kalka

1. Food Star

2. Punjabi Dhaba

3. Shelly Restaurant

4. Sardarji

5. Cheeze Box

6. Chicken Paji

7. Hunger’s

8. LTD Family Dhaba

9. Andaaz

10. Lazeez Vyanjan

How To Get Here

By Air

There are no regular flights from other major cities of the country to Kalka. Nearest airport is Chandigarh Airport.

Kalka

18 km away

Chandigarh Airport (IXC), Chandigarh, Punjab

Kalka

99 km away

Ludhiana Airport (LUH), Ludhiana, Punjab

By Road

You can easily get regular buses to Kalka from other major cities of the country.

Bus Station(s): Kalka , Kalka

By Train

Kalka is well connected to other major cities of the country via regular trains.

Railway Station(s): Kalka (KLK)