Kalka

Kalka is a town in the Panchkula district of Haryana in India.It is situated in the foothills of the Himalaya.This Place is well known as a gateway of neighbouring state of Himachal Preadesh.Town takes its name from Kalika maa the ruling deity.This town is derived from the goddess Kali. Kalka town is on the National Highway 22 between Chandigarh and Shimla and it is the terminus of the Kalka Shimla Railway.To the south of Kalka is Pinjore, and the industrial village of Parwanoo (Himachal Pradesh) is to the north on the NH 22. Industrial development has led to a continuous urban belt from Pinjore to Parwanoo, but Kalka remains largely unaffected by these developments.If you are looking for Cab Service in Kalka let us know and we will be happy to provide you with best price Deals for Car Hire in Kalka for Airport Transfer, Railway Station Transfer, Half-Day and Full Day Service in Kalka City. car rental in Kalka ,Kalka cabs booking , Kalka car rental, cab service in Kalka, luxury car rental Kalka, rent a car Kalka, corporate car rental Kalka, taxi service in Kalka, business rent a car Kalka, Kalka Airport cab booking, Cabs in Kalka, Car Rental Tour Packages in Kalka To visit Kalka and its destinations, car rentals in Kalka, cabs booking,Kalka car rental, car rental in Kalka, luxury car rental Kalka, rent a car Kalka, corporate car rental Kalka, business rent a car Kalka, Kalka cab booking M.I.C.E in Kalka,You can hire the taxi from Musafircab at reliable costs and according to your choice that can be fit in your budget.

Why you choose Us ?

If you are looking for a cab services you can try MusafirCab. We are the most trusted Cabs services provider all over the India. We cover +140 cities and over +1600 destination all over India. We provide you the fare tour with a variety of packages which you can choose according to your need. Our driver take off you on time and help you as a local guider in that city. You can book a cab for a full day or for some hours as you need.Our agents will help you to plan your day for a proper visit. If in case you want to postpone or cancel your journey we can refund you amount without any cancellation charges(T&C applied).

How can you book a Cab?

You can book a cab or taxi to visit Kalka we can provide our best service for your destination. Our services are best,we can provide you comfortable and relaxed journey for your source to destination. You can book a cab through our website wwwmusafircab.com or you can call us on +91- 888-111-8838 our customer care support are 24*7 available for your help. You can call anytime for an enquiry. Musafircab is a trusted company among all the tour and travelling company.

Full Days Cabs And Half Days Cabs

Full Day Cab :If you are planning to spend your whole day in Kalka we can provide our cab with a driver as a local guide who can help you to visit your place on time without any worry.

Half Day Cab : If you want to spend some hours in Kalka we can provide you the fair prize trip.You can book a Cab for some hours. We can suggest you to Musafir Cab.

Kalka Shimla Heritage Toy train

The Kalka-Shimla rail route, which has completed 100 years It’s not just a regular train journey which you do but it connects you to the heritage and rich past which connects you even to nature.The space of 96 kilometers. More than two-thirds of the track is curved, sometimes at angles as sharp as 48 degrees.Laid out on a 96 km long narrow gauge track that passes through 103 tunnels and across more than 800 bridges and viaducts, it is one of the most beautiful hill railways in India. It was considered the “crown jewel” of the Indian National Railways during British times.The toy train chugs along the line, whistling through the deodar, pine, ficus, oak and maple woods at a speed of 22 km an hour. As the journey begins, one is taken in with the change in vegetation, and the majestic glory of the railway stations and Gothic-style bridges en route.

Place you can visit in Kalka

Shri Balaji Temple

An ancient Hindu Temple in Parwanoo, Shri Balaji Temple is dedicated to Lord Balaji who isan incarnation of Lord Vishu. The temple is a major attraction of Parwanoo and is also popular by the name of Sri Trimurti Dham Balaji Hanuman. It has idols of Lord Hanuman and Lord Vishnu.You will get to Shri Balaji Temple. Tourists can also hire a taxi or cab to reach the temple.

Pinjore Garden

Pinjore Gardens is a beautiful Mughal Garden made in 17th Century India located in the city of Pinjore, in the district of Panchkula, Haryana.The garden expands over a massive area of 100 acres and is a beautiful place to unwind with nature in the ever-growing concrete city. The Pinjore garden is also known as Yadvinder Garden which is famous all over the world for its well-maintained greenery, refreshing fountains and mesmerising water bodies.

Kali Mata Mandir at Panchkula is also called as Kalka Mandir which is a gateway to the eastern side of Himachal Pradesh. Actually Kalka is a town which is named because of Kali Mata Temple. This temple is one of the old shrines from Panchkula Temples.It belived that this temple was buiid in the age of Mahabharat by Pandvas during "Agyat Vas" When they stayed here for some time.

Musafircab delivers on time transfer services which you can avail to reach places of commuting like airports, railway station, pick from hotels from bus stands and vice versa to a location of your choice. Read more at Kalka Transfer Taxi.