Kalka

Kalka is a town in the Panchkula district of Haryana, India. It is near Panchkula city. The name of the town is derived from the Hindu goddess Kali. It is situated in the foothills of the Himalayas and is a gateway to the neighbouring state of Himachal Pradesh. It is on the National Highway 22 between Chandigarh and Shimla, and it is the terminus of the Kalka-Shimla Railway. To the south of Kalka is Pinjore, and the industrial village of Parwanoo (Himachal Pradesh) is to the north on the NH 22. Railways and Industrial development has led to a continuous urban belt from Pinjore to Parwanoo, but Kalka gained major economic benefits due to only highway until 2010, shimla. It is the tehsil of 253 nearby sub villages. Nearby is Chandimandir Cantonment, where the Western Command of the Indian army is based. In 2013, the municipal committee of Kalka was dissolved and the administration was reassigned to Panchkula Municipal Corporation.

kalka

There seems to be no general definition for the term "kalka" available in English language dictionaries. Its meaning could vary depending on the context or geographic location, and it may be a proper noun or a term from a different language. Please provide more context.

Kalka

Kalka is a town in the Panchkula district of Haryana, India. The name of the town is derived from the goddess Kali. The town is situated in the foothills of the Himalayas and is a gateway to the neighbouring state of Himachal Pradesh. It is on the National Highway 22 between Chandigarh and Shimla, and is the terminus of the Kalka-Shimla Railway. To the south of Kalka is Pinjore, and the industrial town of Parwanoo is to the north on the NH 22. Industrial development has led to a continuous urban belt from Pinjore to Parwanoo, but Kalka remains largely unaffected by these developments. Nearby is Chandimandir Cantonment where the Western Command of the Indian army is based.

KALKA

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Kalka is ranked #33164 in terms of the most common surnames in America.

The Kalka surname appeared 690 times in the 2010 census and if you were to sample 100,000 people in the United States, approximately 0 would have the surname Kalka.

89.5% or 618 total occurrences were White.

4.2% or 29 total occurrences were American Indian or Alaskan Native.

3.4% or 24 total occurrences were of Hispanic origin.

1.5% or 11 total occurrences were of two or more races.