Tourist Places around Kalka

Kalka is a well known place situated in Panchkula district of Haryana .The name Kalka is derived from the goddess Kali. Kalka is located in the foothills of the Himalayas and also a gateway to the neighboring states of Himachal Pradesh. Kalka has a broad gauge line toward Chandigarh and narrow gauge line toward Shimla.

Climate of Kalka

[hana-code-insert name=’rectangle’ /]The weather of Kalka is pleasant most of the year as compared to other big cities. Summers in Kalka are very hot during the months of June and July where as winter season, even though being chilly. At the end of winter Kalka also receives some rainfall.

Places of Interest near Kalka

One can enjoy various places in Kalka. The major places of tourist’s attractions are given below:

Pinjore Garden

Pinjore garden also known as Yadvinder garden is one of the most popular destinations among the people visiting in that area. It is believed that the Yadvinder garden was built by Mughals in the seventeenth century by an architect Nawab Fidai Khan. Pinjore garden was renamed as Yadvinder garden in the memory of Maharaja Yadvinder Singh. The garden was remaintained and restored by Yadvinder Singh after a long ignorance.

The Pinjore garden has been laid in seven terraces. The first gate of the garden opens into the first terrace that was built in Rajasthani Mughal style and also known as shish Mahal. The second terrace known as Rang Mahal. Third terrace has trees and a flower beds. The next terrace has Jal Mahal with a square fountain bed and a platform to relax. The next terrace is surrounded with fountains. The lower most terrace has an open air theatre, which is designed in a disk like structure. Pinjore garden is well maintained with different outlook and best place to enjoy.

Kali Mata Temple

Kali Mata temple is very popular among the devotees and an ancient temple of goddess Kali that is located on the national highway 22 that runs through Kalka. People believed that this temple was built in the age of Mahabharata by Pandavas when they stayed here for some time. One must visit the years old Kali temple during their journey to Kalka.

Timber Trail Parwanoo

Timber trail is the popular attraction among the tourists located at the foothills of Shivalik ranges in Parwanoo and very nearby to Kalka on the Kalka Shimla national highway. The timber trail is connected between the two hills by a cable car that covers the total distance of 1.8 Km at a height of 5000feet above sea level. One can enjoy the panoramic views of valleys and Kaushalya River flowing below. The cable car takes you to timber trail resort where you can enjoy delicious dishes in your meal.