In the foothills of the mighty Himalayas, lies Kalka a beautiful town attracting lots of tourists from every corner of the world. If you are looking for a blissful vacation this winter, this is the place to be. This quaint town located in Haryana’s Panchkula district derives its name from Goddess Kali and is well-connected from different cities like Chandigarh, Shimla, Ambala, Ludhiana, and Delhi.

One of the most interesting places to visit in Kalka is the Kalka Shimla railway, which is listed under UNESCO’S World Heritage sites. Built in the 19th century, this 96-km long, single track with a narrow gauge is an engineered masterpiece. Let’s find out more such places that you can visit in and around Kalka.

Top 10 Tourist Places In Kalka Within 100 KM

Kalka lies very close to Panchkula and acts as a gateway to the best Himalayan destinations like Shimla. Since Chandigarh is also close to Kalka, you can free some time to visit the famous attractions in the capital as well. To save you from the never-ending chaos of listing down the places to visit in Kalka, we have handpicked some of the Kalka tourist places for you. Check them out!

Kalki Mata Temple – Oldest Shrine

Pinjore Garden – Family Excursion

Morni Hills – Weekend Getaway

Manki Point – Hanuman Temple

The Rock Garden – Stupendous Creation

Sukhna Lake – Perfect Stopover

Sunset Point – Absolute Calmness

Mata Mansa Devi – Seek Blessings

Gurudwara Nada Sahib – Historical Significance

Cactus Garden – Asia’s Largest

1. Kalki Mata Temple

Image source

Known as a gateway to the eastern side of Himachal Pradesh, Kalki Mata Temple is one of the oldest shrines located in Panchkula, Haryana. The temple in Chandigarh tri-city region features an imposing 6-feet tall statue of Kali Mata whereas the interiors are adorned with figurines of birds and animals, showcasing the rich culture of the medieval period. There is also a wonderful Gurudwara just next to the temple, which is also worth visiting and seek blessings of the almighty.

Must Read: The First-Ever Glass Roof Train From Kalka To Shimla Is Set To Be On Tracks Soon!

Looking To Book A Holiday Package?

2. Pinjore Garden

Pinjore Garden, also known as Yadavindra Gardens is one of the most gorgeous places in Panchkula to relax and reconnect yourself with nature. Sprawling across 100 acres, this historic garden belonging to the 17th Century depicts the Mughal Gardens style and was built during the reign of the famous Patiala Dynasty. Pinjore Garden was built by the Nawab Fidai Khan, a renowned architect of the 17th century and was refurbished by the late Maharaja Yadavindra Singh, former prince of Patiala.

Bestowed with mesmerising fountains, lush greenery and sparkling water bodies, Pinjore Garden is one of the best places to see in Kalka for couples. This ancient Mughal architectural marvel is inclusive of seven terraces that have been beautifully built on each level. On the first level, there is a spectacular palace built in Mughal-Rajasthan style called the Shish Mahal and Hawa Mahal. The second level features an eye-catching painted palace called Rang Mahal. An open-air theatre on the last level makes this place one of the must-visit tourist places in Kalka. There is also a small zoo, which can be visited too.

Suggested Read: Top 12 Summer Festivals In India You Shouldn’t Miss

3. Morni Hills

Located around 35 km from Panchkula District and 45 km from Chandigarh, Morni Hills is yet another must places to visit in Kalka for couples. Perched at an altitude of 3,600 feet above the sea level and blessed with beautiful natural vistas, Morni Hills is a perfect weekend getaway for the people of Delhi and Chandigarh. The wide range of excotic flora and fauna will leave you spellbound. The gushing waters of River Ghaggar flows through the steepy valleys of this hill and offers scintillating scenic views, making it a paradise for nature lovers. One can also indulge in some basic trekking, camping and rock climbing activities here.

Suggested Read: 30 Places To Visit In India In April: Beat The Heat This Summer Like A Pro!

4. Manki Point – Hanuman Temple

Appreciated for its staggering views, natural beauty and serene atmosphere, Manki Point is truly a heaven on earth where you can find complete solace and harmony. Located on a hilltop about 6,200 miles above sea level, Manki Point offers phenomenal panoramic views of Chandigarh. There is a Hanuman Temple on the hilltop shaped in the form of a foot.

Suggested Read: 25 Amazing Wildlife Sanctuaries In India For Adventurous Safaris And Encounters With The Wild

5. The Rock Garden

The Rock Garden was once a dumping ground for wastes from industries of Chandigarh. Nek Chand gave this dumping ground a complete renovation using his creative imagination and transformed this place into a beautiful masterful piece of arts. All the wastes like frames, broken bangles, metal wires, pieces of slate, cap of the bottles, burnt bricks, forks, human hair and other wastes were remodeled as interesting shapes of humans or animals. Regarded as one of the finest modern wonders of the world, The Rock Garden is undoubtedly ranks high on the most visiting places in Kalka for all age-groups.

Ticket price: INR 10 per child and INR 30 for adults

Timings: 9:00 am to 7:00 pm during summers and 9:00 am to 6:00 pm during winters

Suggested Read: Delhi To Mumbai In 10 Hours By Train Now Made Possible By Indian Railways

Planning your holiday but confused about where to go? These travel stories help you find your best trip ever!

6. Sukhna Lake

Created in the year 1958, Sukhna Lake is a man-made wonder located in the foothills of Shivalik range and is the perfect place for some fun-filled water sports activities like boating and yachting. Counting among the best places to visit in Kalka, Sukhna Lake is a perfect stopover to enjoy the majestic sunset views. Visiting Sukhna Lake is one of the best things to do in Chandigarh.

Suggested Read: Choose The Best Travel Insurance In India With Our Guide

7. Sunset Point

One of the top places to visit in Kalka among nature lovers, adventure junkies, photography enthusiasts and of course newlywed couples, Sunset Point will leave you awestruck with its unspoiled beauty and absolute calmness. Located on a hilly terrain and engulfed by natural greenery, Sunset Point cannot be missed during your vacation to Kalka.

Suggested Read: 35 Gorgeous Places To Visit In India In December With Your Loved Ones

8. Mata Mansa Devi

Spread across an area of 100 acres, Mata Mansa Devi is an ancient temple dedicated to Hindu goddess Mansa Devi, a from of Shakti. This is one of the most prominent shrines of the country and witnesses hundreds and thousands of devotees every year. The festival of Navratri is celebrated in a grand style with much zeal here at this temple. Mata Mansa Devi is a peaceful sojourn for people desiring solace from all the hustle bustle of the urban life.

Suggested Read: Diwali Celebration In India: An Extensive Guide To The Festival Of Lights

9. Gurudwara Nada Sahib

Located approximately 19 km from Kalka, Gurudwara Nada Sahib is one of the most religious sites of Sikhs. The Gurudwara holds rich historical significance and is thronged by a huge number of visitors every year. Located on the banks of Ghaggar River in Panchkula District, Gurudwara Nada Sahib is one of the popular religious tourist places in Kalka. There is also a museum within the premises that displays some of the ancient facts and residuals from the Sikh history. Don’t miss the Langar, which is organised here on a daily basis.

Suggested Read: 17 Impeccable Food Trucks In India That Serve Scrumptious Food With A Twist!

10. Cactus Garden

Spread across an area of 7 acres, Cactus Garden is said to be Asia’s largest outdoor landscaped cacti and Succulents Garden. The garden is inclusive of three greenhouses and has a comprehensive collection of endangered species of cacti & succulents including the Genus Caralluma and Indian succulents, the largest in the world. A must visit place for plant lovers and botanists.

Ticket price: INR 10 per person

Timings: Daily from 9:00 am to 1:00 pm and 2:00 am to 6:00 pm

Further Read: Go Karting In India: A Thrill Ride Awaits At These Exciting Venues Across The Country

Excited to plan a trip to Kalka? Well, you have made the right decision. We ensure you that this holiday trip is going to be an awesome experience. You would surely be in a treat with nature’s enchanting beauty and a lot more. So, pack your bags and get set go! Happy Travelling!

Disclaimer: TravelTriangle claims no credit for images featured on our blog site unless otherwise noted. All visual content is copyrighted to its respectful owners. We try to link back to original sources whenever possible. If you own the rights to any of the images, and do not wish them to appear on TravelTriangle, please contact us and they will be promptly removed. We believe in providing proper attribution to the original author, artist or photographer.

Please Note: Any information published by TravelTriangle in any form of content is not intended to be a substitute for any kind of medical advice, and one must not take any action before consulting a professional medical expert of their own choice.

Frequently asked questions About Places To Visit In Kalka

Why is Kalka famous?

Kalka is famous town located in the foothills of the mighty Himalayas and is known for housing the famous religious shrine Kali Mata Temple, dedicated to the Hindu Goddess Kali.

Which is the best toy train from Kalka to Shimla?

Shivalik Express is the best toy train from Kalka to Shimla. The toy train was first opened by British Government in the year 1903.

How do you get from Kasauli to Kalka?

Kasauli is hardly 26 km from Kalka and one of the best and cheapest ways to reach Kalka from Kasauli is to hire a taxi.

How far is Shimla from Kalka?

Shimla is approximately 94 km from Shimla and regular train services are available from Kalka to reach Shimla.