1. Old Railway Stations around Kalka Kalka –A small peaceful town located in the Panchkula district of Haryana , India derives its name from the goddess Kali. Situated, in the foothills of the Himalayas it's a serene getaway to the neighbouring state of Himachal Pradesh. Offering a moderately pleasant climate this place is one of the favourite stopovers for the visitors going towards Shimla. Hotels in Kalka are very comfortable and offer a luxurious stay to its visitors with a delicious food menu. Kalka railway station is the northern terminal of the Delhi-Kalka line of Northern Railway.The railway was constructed by the Delhi-Ambala-kalka Railway company commencing in 1898.The Kalka Shimla Railway charged a higher rate as compared to the other tariffs on the other lines, because of the high cost that this project incurred during its execution. The cost almost doubled from the estimated cost of 87 Lacs, and then the maintenance cost was high too. Anyways it was a hard deal for the company to survive in such tough conditions and as a result the Government had to buy it out on January 1,1906. The site of this railway line offers a number of railway stations on the Kalka Shimla route. Here are some of the stations you will be witnessing on your rail route : Kandaghat -Approximately 37 miles from Kalka and at a height of 4667 feet above the sea level this station is situated, from here the final ascent to Shimla starts. Dharampur-Situated at a height of 4900 feet and at a distance of 20 miles from Kalka the gradient here is very steep,whereas the railway requires having a flatter gradient and to achieve the same the line develops into three loops at taksal, gumman and dharampur.This small town also has a very famous hospital for the cure of tuberculosis and is connected very closely to the station. Shogi- Shoghi Railway station is located on the Kalka Shimla heritage narrow gauge railway track of the Indian Railways. This station comes after the Kethlighat railway station while travelling from Kalka (five kilometers),Shoghi is a small town near Shimla and a beautiful destination in Himachal, it offers many hotels with the best of stay arrangements at reasonable rates. Tara devi railway station-The route after Dharampur leads the road route by taking shortcuts and tunnels which helps in cutting down the travel time by one-fourth miles less than the distance by road. Built back 260years ago the temple is Situated on Tara Parvat in the western side of Shimla, the temple provides an overwhelming view of the mountains below and Shimla town. Salogra –A very small peaceful destination for serene view lovers the railway station falls on the route to Shimla, but not all the trains make a stopover here. So, in case you are a travel fan , arrange your rail route accordingly.