(LOUISVILLE, Ky.) -- Longtime civil-rights activist Anne Braden, who was accused of sedition and being a communist and who endured death threats and arrests, was remembered as an icon who fought for equal rights until she died.

More than 300 people came to her funeral Friday at St. George's Episcopal Church, many sharing stories of Braden, who died Monday at age 81.

Some said she called them late at night to goad them to action. Others called her a mentor.

"Anne belonged to all of you. ... She belonged to the whole community," the Rev. Louis Coleman said. "We have lost a giant in our midst."

Braden was admitted to Jewish Hospital over the weekend and was battling penumonia and dehydration.

In 1954, Braden and her husband, Carl, bought a home in southwestern Jefferson County for a black World War II veteran and his family. The black family was spurned when attempting to purchase the home. The Bradens used the family's money to purchase the house, then deeded it over to them, Catherine Fosl, Braden's biographer, said this week.

A few weeks later, the house was bombed, but no one was injured.

The Bradens later were charged with sedition, and Carl Braden was convicted and given a 15-year prison sentence, Fosl said. He served seven months before his conviction was overturned.

Anne Braden was never tried on the state sedition charge.

The Bradens worked with Martin Luther King Jr. and other notable civil-rights leaders.

At her funeral, Bob Cunningham, a longtime activist with the Kentucky Alliance against Racist and Political Repression, said Braden never moved or took her number out of the phone book after people called making death threats.

After her husband's death in 1975, Anne Braden supported causes including busing to desegregate Jefferson County's public schools. Busing opponents set her cars on fire twice. She spoke out on issues such as gay rights, pollution and police shootings of black residents. Braden was arrested numerous times.

"She was a teacher, a mentor, a taskmaster, a family member, a dear friend and a comrade," activist Carla Wallace said. "She believed the world could be a better place."

Her two children and several grandchildren attended the funeral, along with local civil-rights leaders and activists.