Correction Appended

Anne Braden, a prominent civil rights activist who in the 1950's was indicted on charges of sedition in a famous case after she helped buy a house for a black family in an all-white suburb of Louisville, Ky., died March 6 in Louisville. She was 81.

No cause of death was announced, but Ms. Braden's biographer, Catherine Fosl, said she died after being admitted to a hospital with pneumonia and dehydration. Ms. Fosl's biography, "Subversive Southerner: Anne Braden and the Struggle for Racial Justice in the Cold War South," was published in 2002 by Palgrave Macmillan.

An advocate of racial and economic equality for more than half a century, Ms. Braden was one of the white Southerners singled out for praise by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in his celebrated "Letter From Birmingham Jail" in 1963. In 1985, she was among the founders of the National Rainbow Coalition, now the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition. She also helped start the coalition's Kentucky chapter.

In May 1954, Ms. Braden and her husband, Carl, both white Kentuckians active in progressive politics, bought a house in a segregated Louisville suburb on behalf of a black associate, Andrew Wade IV, and his family. In June, the house was dynamited. (No one was injured in the explosion, and the bomber was never caught.)

In October, in a case that attracted nationwide attention, the Bradens and five other whites were indicted on charges of sedition in connection with the blast. The state said the Bradens, who were believed to be associated with the Communist Party, had intended to incite unrest with their purchase of the house.

Carl Braden was convicted and sentenced to 15 years in prison, but he served just over seven months before the verdict was overturned in 1956. Anne Braden's case never went to trial.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.