What is the currency in Slovakia?

The official currency in Slovakia is the Euro, which is issued and overseen by the National Bank of Slovakia. If you’re buying your travel money online you may also see the official code being shown - EUR. In stores and restaurants, Euro prices are likely to use the currency symbol €.

Once you’re in Slovakia you’ll see costs of items shown in EUR and you’ll need to start paying for things in local coins and notes which are often found in the following denominations:

banknotes - 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500 and coins - 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 cents; 1, 2.

Can you officially pay in CAD when you are in Slovakia?

You’re unlikely to be able to officially transact in CAD in Slovakia, which is why it’s time to start getting used to EUR and learning more about the currency exchange rates so you’ll know what you’re spending on your trip.

This guide will walk through all you need to know, including Canadian Dollar/Euro rates and where best to get your travel money from.

EuroCurrency nameEuroISO codeEURSymbol€SubunitCentCentral BankNational Bank of SlovakiaBest travel cards to take to SlovakiaWise

Euro coins and banknotes

Here’s a full rundown of the EUR coins and banknotes you’ll need to be familiar with when you’re in Slovakia.

EUR banknotesEUR coins5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 5001, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 cents; 1, 2

Is CAD accepted in Slovakia?

As we’ve seen, the official currency in Slovakia is EUR. If you carry Canadian Dollars with you on your trip, you’ll probably need to exchange it before you can spend.

Sometimes when you’re away on a trip abroad you’ll find that merchants will take payments in a selection of major foreign currencies. However, the chances are that where this is offered, you won’t get a good exchange rate for your CAD. Planning smart and convenient ways to spend in EUR when you’re away is likely to mean you save on costs in the end.

Usually, having a few different ways to pay and get cash is the best option for travellers and tourists. That’s because you’ll have a back up plan in case one payment method isn’t accepted for any reason, and you can pick the method that’s best suited to the specific transaction. Having a multi-currency card from a provider like Wise, plus your normal bank debit card, and some local cash in EUR should mean you’ve always got options. You can use your cash for small purchases and tipping, and make low cost payments and cash withdrawals with your multi-currency card, while keeping your bank card in reserve for emergencies.

Use a travel card on your next trip to Slovakia

Using a travel debit card in Slovakia is usually cheap, safe and convenient. A few providers in Canada offer multi-currency cards which come with a linked payment account that lets you convert, hold and spend in EUR. That allows you to add a balance in CAD and switch over to EUR to lock in the exchange rate and set your travel budget.

Once you have EUR in your account there are no extra fees to make payments, and you’ll not have foreign transaction charges to worry about, either.

Here’s a quick overview of a couple of handy travel debit cards you may want to order and use in Slovakia.

What is the currency exchange rate for £ 1 CAD/EUR?

It’s helpful to get to know the live CAD/EUR rate so you can easily calculate how much things are costing you while you’re on your trip abroad.

The rate you need to focus on is the mid market rate, which is the one banks and major currency services get when buying and selling currencies. This rate isn’t always passed on to customers. Instead you may find that the CAD/EUR rate you get when exchanging travel cash includes a markup - an extra fee.

Find the CAD/EUR mid-market rate from a currency conversion site or a website like this, so you can keep an eye on the market and compare the rates you’re offered as you travel against the mid-market rate easily.

Should I exchange CAD to EUR before traveling to Slovakia?

It’s a good idea to exchange Canadian Dollars to Euro before you head off to Slovakia, as you can often find a better exchange rate and lower overall costs before you travel.

When you’re in Slovakia you may need EUR in cash for some of your spending - particularly when tipping or making smaller value purchases. Buying your EUR travel money in advance can get you better CAD/EUR exchange rates, and saves you wasting precious time shopping around for a good deal once you arrive in Slovakia.

Get familiar with the exchange rates offered locally to you, and online, so you can decide whether it’s worth switching some funds in advance of travel, using a card to pay while you’re away, or converting cash on arrival. Both in Canada and in Slovakia, steer clear of exchanging currency at the airport. A captive market means that CAD/EUR rates are often worse in the airport than in city centers.

Tips for exchanging money in Slovakia

At merchants and ATMs, make sure you’re charged in EUR. If you’re asked if you’d rather pay in CAD instead, say no. That’s a sign of dynamic currency conversion, which usually means extra costs. Withdrawing money in target-currency can be easy, particularly in big cities and Bratislava, here’s a few other tips if you want to exchange money in Slovakia

Avoid using exchange providers at airports or hotels in Slovakia as they usually offer pretty poor exchange rates because they have a captive market and little competition nearby

Use a travel debit card like the Wise card while you’re in Slovakia for fast and cheap conversion between currencies and easy ways to manage your money from your phone

Best place to exchange currency in Slovakia

You can get your EUR in Slovakia in a couple of ways.

You’ll be able to use a travel debit card from a provider like Wise to make convenient payments and cash withdrawals and to convert funds online.

Or if you prefer an offline solution you can carry some cash in CAD to exchange when you arrive. Currency exchange providers are often in airports and hotels, although the exchange shops in a city centre are likely to be cheaper overall.

How to pay in Slovakia?

You’ll need to have EUR to spend in Slovakia. However, generally having a few different payment methods is a good plan. That means that if a merchant won't accept one, you’ve got a back up. It’s also reassuring to know you have a different way to pay if you were unlucky enough to have a card or some travel cash stolen. Here are your key payment options in Slovakia.

Debit or credit card

Card payments can be helpful in shops, restaurants and hotels but there will be places where cash is also important. Order a travel card from a provider like Wise for cheap and fast transactions, including card payments and cash withdrawals as and when you need travel money in EUR.

Euro cash

You’ll usually find you can use a card to make payments in Slovakia, but carrying some cash in EUR is also reassuring. It’s often easier for tipping and making smaller purchases, plus you’ve got a nice backup if your card is ever out of action for some reason.

It’s a smart idea to have both a card and some cash in EUR when you’re in Slovakia. Some merchants will prefer cash, but having a card for higher value payments and in busier more tourist places is also convenient. Consider using a travel card from a provider like Wise alongside your cash for flexibility.

Paying for the trip in CAD

If you’re paying for things in Slovakia with a CAD bank card you might find a foreign transaction fee is added. This pushes up your costs when you spend in a foreign currency, and can be tricky to calculate.

Travel debit cards don’t always work this way. When you make purchases in Slovakia using the Wise card you can either choose to convert your account balance to EUR in advance in the Wise app, or just leave your balance in Canadian Dollars and let the card handle the transaction when you pay. You’ll always get the lowest available fee and there are no extra foreign transaction charges.

Conclusion - Currency in Slovakia

You won’t be able to pay in CAD when you visit Slovakia - so learning about the currency you need is essential. Whether you decide to use a travel debit card from a service like Wise , or stock up on EUR in cash in advance, knowing the mid-market exchange rate can help you get the best available deal. Use this guide to learn all you need to know about the options, rates and fees for exchanging CAD to EUR, and make your money go further while you’re away.

The official currency in Slovakia is EUR. You can’t usually pay in Canadian Dollars in Slovakia, so you’ll need to plan in advance to get your travel money sorted. Consider ordering a travel debit card from a service like Wise, for low cost conversions to EUR and convenient spending and withdrawals - and remember that knowing the CAD to EUR mid-market exchange rate is essential to check you’re getting a fair deal on currency exchange.

FAQ - Currency in Slovakia

What is the currency in Slovakia called?

The official currency in Slovakia is the Euro. You may also see the code EUR and the currency symbol €.

What's the currency in Bratislava?

The official currency in Bratislava is the Euro. You’ll only be able to spend in EUR while you’re there.

What is the old Slovakia currency?

Today the currency in Slovakia is the Euro. If you’re worried about currencies changing, why not get a travel debit card from a service like Wise which will automatically pick the currency needed in your destination when making a payment - with no penalties or inflated fees.

What is the best currency to take to Slovakia?

You’ll only be able to spend in EUR while you’re in Slovakia. Carrying some money in cash and using a travel debit card from a service like Wise is usually the best way to spend while you’re away from home.