WOMEN IN HISTORY - ELLA FITZGERALD

African American Jazz singer – the First Lady of Song

DATE OF BIRTH

April 25, 1917

PLACE OF BIRTH

Newport News, Virginia

DATE OF DEATH

June 15, 1996

PLACE OF DEATH

Beverly Hills, California

FAMILY BACKGROUND

Born to William Fitzgerald and Temperance “Tempi” Henry, her mother died in 1932, and her stepfather took care of her for a brief time. With rumors of abuse from her stepfather, her life changed dramatically after her mother’s death, when she later moved to Harlem to live with her aunt in 1933.

EDUCATION

Though she was an excellent student through junior high, she began skipping school after moving to Harlem, and spent time in a state reformatory school in Hudson, New York. She did not have formal music training, but enjoyed the music of Connee Boswell, Louis Armstrong, and others. Although she had aspirations of becoming a dancer, she started singing publicly after winning a contest at the Apollo Theater in 1934. Her recording career began in 1935 and lasted nearly 60 years. Her rendition of A Tisket a Tasket was her first major hit, which became one of the best-selling records of the decade.

ACCOMPLISHMENTS

Ella Fitzgerald was an American jazz singer, sometimes referred to as the "First Lady of Song.” She was noted for her purity of tone, phrasing, intonation, and improvisational ability, particularly in her scat singing.

Her first major singing engagement was as lead singer for the Chick Webb Orchestra. Following his death, she took over the band and recorded over 150 songs on the Decca record label. She later recorded under the Verve label and began singing renditions of what we now call the Great American Songbook with songwriters Cole Porter, Duke Ellington, and George and Ira Gershwin. Her voice and their music were a perfect match, which secured her spot as one of the greatest jazz singers of all time.

Ella toured the world and made countless television appearances, including a commercial for Memorex where she sang a note that shattered glass. She also collaborated with Louis Armstrong, the Ink Spots, Count Basie and Duke Ellington.

AWARDS AND RECOGNITION

Ella won 13 Grammy Awards, and received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1967.

In 1958 Fitzgerald became the first African-American woman to win at the inaugural show.

In 1986, she received an honorary Doctor of Music from Yale University, and an honorary Doctor of Music from Harvard University in 1990.

The Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Medal of Honor Award

CITATION