Who has notoriously been called the “First Lady of Song,” “Jazz,” and “Swing,” and even more humbling, the “Queen of Jazz?” Ella Fitzgerald, of course! She came to tumultuous notoriety in the late 30’s to the early 40’s and for decades afterwards remained an icon in the jazz scene.

Ella Fitzgerald was born in Virginia on April 25th, 1917. When she was a baby she and her family moved to Yonkers, a city in Upstate New York less than an hour north of New York City. From a young age she fell in love with jazz music, listening to notable artists such as Bing Crosby, The Boswell Sisters, and Louis Armstrong. She was especially inspired by The Boswell Sisters, idolizing the lead singer Connee Boswell who Fitzgerald had said she aimed to be just like. Fitzgerald ended up orphaned after the unfortunate death of her mother and moved from orphanage to orphanage, working illegal jobs until she was placed in a juvenile correctional facility. She ran away after some time and lived homeless in Manhattan.

While homeless, she made a living by singing on the streets of New York City. Her first big break was in an amateur contest at The Apollo Theater, where she placed first in the competition and received $25 dollars. Shortly thereafter, she met Chick Webber and joined his orchestra/band as a back up singer, performing at Harlem’s most famous jazz clubs and earning a name for herself.

Ella’s breakthrough hit as a solo artist was her unusual rendition of the nursery rhyme “A-Tisket, A-Tasket,” which she released in 1938. The song peaked at number 1 on the Billboard charts. She co-wrote the song herself and put her own unique twist on the original sound.

In 1939, Chick Webber died and Ella was named the lead singer of the orchestra which was re-named “Ella Fitzgerald and her Famous Band.” During her time with the band, she recorded over a 150 songs. Despite their initial success, Webber’s death signified the beginning of the end, and in 1942, Fitzgerald left the band to start her solo career, signing with Decca records.

In the early 40’s, Jazz music was drastically changing. The popularity of the “swing” sound was declining, making way for the beginning of bebop and scat singing. Fitzgerald adapted her singing style and began using scat in a ton of her songs, having been quoted as saying, “I just tried to do what I heard the horns in the band doing.” Her uncanny ability to mimic the sounds of instruments in her scatting set her apart from her peers.

The late 1950’s and early 60’s were really the peak of her career, with her finally receiving her notorious nicknames as the “Queen of Jazz,” and “The First Lady of Song.” She began to record music with Verve Records, and met her hero Louis Armstrong, releasing an entire album with him containing such hits as “Cheek to Cheek,” “Dream a Little Dream of Me,”and “They Can’t Take That Away from Me.” She also collaborated with Frank Sinatra, even putting on a two-week long concert series in NYC along with Sinatra and Count Basie, another hero of jazz.