(1936–59). U.S. musician Buddy Holly was an outstanding singer, songwriter, and guitarist of the 1950s who produced some of the most distinctive and influential work in rock-and-roll music. Holly and his musical group, the Crickets, recorded such rock classics as “That’ll Be the Day,” “Rave On,” “Peggy Sue,” and “Oh Boy.” Holly’s career ended prematurely when he died, along with singers Richie Valens and the Big Bopper (J.P. Richardson), in a plane crash at Mason City, Iowa, on Feb. 5, 1959.

Charles Hardin Holley (the e was dropped from his last name—probably accidentally—on his first record contract) was born in Lubbock, Tex., on Sept. 7, 1936, the youngest of four children in a family of gospel-loving, devout Baptists. He became seriously interested in music at about age 12 and pursued it with remarkable natural ability. The African American rhythm and blues that Holly heard on the radio had a tremendous impact on him, and by age 16, he became a rhythm-and-blues devotee. By 1955, after hearing Elvis Presley, Holly was a full-time rock and roller. Late that year he bought a Fender Stratocaster electric guitar and developed a style of playing featuring ringing major chords that became his trademark. In 1956 he signed with Decca Records’s Nashville, Tenn., division, but the records he made for them sold poorly and were uneven in quality. His first break came and went quickly.

In 1957 Holly and his new group, the Crickets, began their association with independent producer Norman Petty at his studio in Clovis, N.M. Together they created a series of recordings that displayed an emotional intimacy and sense of detail that set them apart from other 1950s rock and roll. When the Crickets’ first single, “That’ll Be the Day,” was released in 1957, their label, Brunswick, did nothing to promote it. Nevertheless, the record had an irrepressible spirit, and by year’s end it became an international multimillion-seller. Soon after, Holly became a star and an icon. Holly and the Crickets’ association with Petty (who also served as their manager, songwriting partner, and publisher and owned their recordings) was far from all beneficial, however. According to virtually all accounts, he collected the Crickets’ royalty checks and kept the money. By 1959 the hit records tapered off, and Holly was living in New York with his new bride. Estranged from the Crickets and broke, he was also contemplating legal action against Petty. This left him little choice but to participate in the Winter Dance Party of 1959 tour through the Midwest, during which he and coheadliners Ritchie Valens and the Big Bopper were killed in a plane crash. In 1986 Holly was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and in 1996 he was honored by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences with a lifetime achievement award.