Roy C. Webb, 92, of Montcoal, WV, received his angel wings on Wednesday, November 6, 2019. He was born August 16, 1927, to Harrison and Jane (Brown) Webb at Mill Hollow in Edwight, WV. He was a loving and hardworking husband, father and grandfather. He loved going to church and worshiping the lord at Stickney Community Church, where he served as a deacon. He worked as a coal miner at Armco Steel in Montcoal, WV, for 35 years. He worked with a lot of good men whom he thought about daily. Besides his parents, he was preceded in death by his wife of 61 years, Lucille (Elkins) Webb; a son, Donald Webb; a granddaughter, Heather Diane Webb; a brother, Aiden Webb; a sister, Goldie (Webb) Osborne; and 5 brothers-in-law: Hillard, Bobby, Bill, Jr. and Ed. Roy is survived by 2 sons, Richard (Patty) Webb of Fairdale, WV, Jerry (Annette) Webb of Inwood, WV; 3 daughters: Kay (Danny) Howell of Naoma, WV, Margo (Danny) Canterbury of Montcoal, WV, and Diane (Steve) of Fairdale, WV; 3 brothers: William Basil Webb and Charles Webb of Merced, CA, and Troy Webb of Cleveland, OH; a niece that is like a sister, Mary Frances Jarrell of Stickney, WV; brother-in-law, David (Vern) Elkins; and sisters-in-law: Rosie Cramer, Daisey Harmon and Jean Elkins; grandkids: Kim Griffy, Christa Justice, Randa Daniel, Franklin Webb, Danny Howell II, Bendi Howell, Christina Allen, Brandy Robinette, Danny Canterbury II, Melissa Turner, Diana Chipley, Jeffery Canterbury and Jennifer Canterbury; great grandkids: Alan Snow, Cooper Justice, Makayla Basham, Brooklyn Basham, Connor Basham, Jaxten Moses, Sylis Cook, Talon Howell, Allen Dickens, Tyler Dickens, Isabella Pearce, Alanna Canterbury, Lacy Canterbury, Daniel Canterbury, Jacob Turner, Camden Turner, Averie Harbert, Remington Harbert and baby girl Canterbury coming in January and a great great-granddaughter Dickens in March and many nieces, nephews and a host of friends. Funeral services will be held on Monday afternoon, Nov. 11, 2019, at one o'clock in the Armstrong Funeral Home, Whitesville, WV, with Pastor Jerry Brown officiating and Benny and Debbie Turner singing. Interment will follow in the Pineview Cemetery, Orgas, WV. The visitation will be 2 hours before the service at the funeral home. Online condolences can be made at www.armstrongfuneralhomewv.com.