London: 23rd August 2014 [PR]

New York based Doctor and singer Biba Singh is set to release her first ever Bhangra collaboration with UK based producer Dipps Bhamrah titled “Panga Facebook Da”. Biba Singh, born and raised in New York was always passionate about culture and music and sang Shabad Kirtan at the local Gurudwara from a young age. She was then spotted by Bollywood legendary singer Daler Mendhi who advised her to take her singing career seriously. It was her dear family friend Mika Singh who launched her first album “BIBA” by worldwide records in 2011 and her second album “Biba for You” was launched by the legendary Bollywood king Bappi Lahiri. Biba has a number of successful releases including “Nachne da Cha” and “Akhian” released by moviebox and is now looking to hit the international market. She is working on a single with DJ Shadow of Dubai and Taz of stereo nation and shooting her next music video as we speak.

Biba singh has collaborated with one of UK’s finest Djs and Music Producers -Dipps Bhamrah who has been responsible for some smash hit anthems through his career. He’s not only a talented DJ but also hosts his own Punjabi show on the BBC Asian Network which strengthens his knowledge for music and the Punjabi scene. Panga Facebook Da is a song every couple will relate to! It’s through and through Bhangra which will be one of the favorites for the dance offs! It’s funny quirky lyrics by Amrit Mangwalia reflect the funny stresses of Facebook in your relationships and the renowned Video director- Raju Sethi, has conceptualized the music video wonderfully. Just get ready for a light hearted, comical Bhangra track with a fresh dance beat.

The song has been signed to UK based record label Generasian Records which is owned by the international Dj and producer Dipps Bhamrah he’s excited to release this international project “ Biba is a talented singer, she’s got a different vibe. We have kept the track catchy and fun, it’s got that UK Bhangra feel to it. This song’s vision, concept and story line was designed by renowned PR Guru Nisha Sahdev”. Panga Facebook Da Releases on 28 August 2014 on Generasian Records