MediaCoder is a free universal batch media transcoder, which nicely integrates most popular audio/video codecs and tools into an all-in-one solution. With a flexible and extendable architecture, new codecs and tools are added in constantly as well as supports for new devices. MediaCoder intends to be the swiss army knife for media transcoding in all time and at this moment, it already has millions of users from 170+ countries all over the planet.

Features In Brief

Convert to and from many audio and video compression formats and re-multiplex into various container formats in batches

Full control over transcoding parameters, you can learn about audio/video encoding and play with various codecs

Strong decoding capability for partial or corrupted contents

Simplified UI for popular mobile devices (e.g. PSP, iPhone/iPod)

Fully standalone, no dependance on system codecs/splitters

Extension (scripting language) infrastructure to expand user interfaces and improve user experience

Typical Applications

Improving compression / reducing size for audio/video files

Converting for audio/video playback devices (digital audio player, MP4 player, mobile phone, PDA, PSP, VCD/DVD player etc.)

Extracting audio tracks from video files

Ripping audio/video discs

Reparing corrupted or partial downloaded video files

Supported Fomats

MP3, Vorbis, AAC, AAC+, AAC+v2, MusePack, Speex, AMR, WMA, RealAudio, mp3PRO*

FLAC, WavPack, Monkey’s Audio, OptimFrog, AAC Lossless, TTA, WAV/PCM, Waveform

H.264, XviD, DivX, MPEG 1/2/4, Theora, Flash Video, Dirac, 3ivx*, RealVideo*, Windows Media Video

AVI, MPEG/VOB, Matroska, MP4, PMP, RealMedia*, ASF, Quicktime*, OGM*

CD, DVD, VCD, SVCD, CUESheet*, HTTP*, FTP*, RTSP*, UDP*

Homepage | Download

BonkEnc is a CD ripper, audio encoder and converter for various formats. It can produce MP3, MP4/M4A, Ogg Vorbis, AAC, Bonk and FLAC files.

BonkEnc makes it easy to convert your audio CDs to MP3 or Ogg Vorbis files which you can use in your hardware player or with your favorite audio software. The program supports the CDDB/freedb online CD database and CDText and automatically writes song information to ID3V2 or Vorbis comment tags.

BonkEnc is currently available in 31 languages (English, French, German, Spanish, Spanish (Latin American), Italian, Russian, Hungarian, Serbian, Finnish, Dutch, Chinese (simplified), Chinese (traditional), Japanese, Greek, Polish, Ukrainian, Portuguese, Portuguese (Brazilian), Czech, Slovak, Korean, Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Turkish, Romanian, Lithuanian, Esperanto, Valencian and Catalan). It can be translated to other languages easily using the ‘smooth Translator’ utility that is included in the distribution.

Homepage | Download

More than just another MP3 Player, ALSong is your LIVE SONG LYRICS source.

Bring your music to life with:

1,000,000 Song Lyrics Synchronizations – See the music

Skins – Attractive skins & skinnable interface

Language Learner – Slow down to easily listen

Multi-format Music Support – MP3, OGG, WAV, APE, FLAC, CDs and more

Create Mixed Music Albums – Organize portable music

Free Music Downloads – Get free music in ALSong albums

Cool Video Help – Watch videos to learn cool things that you can do with ALSong

Homepage | Download

CompuEx Express Accounting – Free Edition – Version 2.0, Fully functional, commercial-grade, FREE accounting software, A Single Company, Single User, Single Currency Small Business Management and Accounting Software, offers a comprehensive suite of integrated financial accounting and operations management modules covering Accounts, Bank, Inventory, Sales and Receivable, Purchase and Payable, Tax Management, and a comprehensive Financial and Management Reports via Crystal Reports.

Your business is more than internal operations: to be successful, you need to efficiently manage your own purchases of goods and services; foster and control your relationships with your suppliers and your business partners; and create, manage, and retain your own sales and customer base; with efficient inventory, bank and accounts control. All these relationships are more efficiently and economically managed with Express Accounting.

Homepage | Download

OpenOffice.org is both a product and an open-source project. Both have been in existence since October 13, 2000. OpenOffice.org 1.0, the product, was released on April 30, 2002.

OpenOffice.org’s Mission Statement is…

To create, as a community, the leading international office suite that will run on all major platforms and provide access to all functionality and data through open-component based APIs and an XML-based file format.

The OpenOffice.org project is primarily sponsored by Sun Microsystems, which is the primary contributor of code to the Project. Our other major corporate contributors include Novell, RedHat, RedFlag CH2000, IBM, and Google. Additonally over 450,000 people from nearly every curve of the globe have joined this Project with the idea of creating the best possible office suite that all can use. This is the essence of an “open source.” community!

“Open source” means that you can contribute to make the product (and Project) better by joining the community.The remainder of this page should tell you a lot more about the organization of OpenOffice.org and how you can get involved!

Homepage | Download

StarOffice 8 Office Suite is a complete, feature-rich office productivity product that’s available for approximately 75% less than Microsoft Office 2007 Standard Edition. It includes powerful programs for word processing, spreadsheets, presentations, drawing, database, graphics, and Web publishing. Its user interface is intuitive and easy to use. Plus, it’s multi-platform: available on the Microsoft Windows and Linux platforms, as well as on the Solaris Operating Environment.

Homepage | Download

GIMPshop is a modification of the free/open source GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP), intended to replicate the feel of Adobe Photoshop. Its primary purpose is to make users of Photoshop feel comfortable using GIMP.

It shares all GIMP’s advantages, including the long feature list and customisability, while addressing some common criticisms regarding the program’s interface: GIMPshop modifies the menu structure to closely match Photoshop’s, adjusts the program’s terminology to match Adobe’s, and, in the Windows version, uses a plugin called ‘Deweirdifier’ to combine the application’s numerous windows in a similar manner to the MDI system used by most Windows graphics packages. While GIMPshop does not support Photoshop plugins, all GIMP’s own plugins, filters, brushes, etc. remain available.

Homepage | Download

FastStone Image Viewer is a fast, stable, user-friendly image browser, converter and editor. It has a nice array of features that include image viewing, management, comparison, red-eye removal, emailing, resizing, cropping and color adjustments. Its innovative but intuitive full-screen mode provides quick access to EXIF information, thumbnail browser and major functionalities via hidden toolbars that pop up when your mouse touches the four edges of the screen. Other features include a high quality magnifier and a musical slideshow with 150+ transitional effects, as well as lossless JPEG transitions, drop shadow effects, image annotation, scanner support, histogram and much more. It supports all major graphic formats (BMP, JPEG, JPEG 2000, animated GIF, PNG, PCX, TIFF, WMF, ICO and TGA) and popular digital camera RAW formats (CRW, CR2, NEF, PEF, RAF, MRW, ORF, SRF and DNG).

Homepage | Download