Harold Lloyd Wood, 92, passed away on Nov. 3, 2019, at his home in Daphne, Alabama.

He was born Jan. 24, 1927, in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, to Henry L. Wood and Mamie Smalley Wood. Harold grew up in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. He joined the United States Marine Corp in 1944 at the age of 17. He completed a tour of duty in China and Nagasaki, Japan. He was honorably discharged March 11th. 1945.

After discharge, Harold worked as an Electrician until March 1949, when he again volunteered to serve his country. His second tour of duty was in Korea, where he obtained the rank of Staff Sargent prior to being honorably discharged in March 1952. He was awarded numerous metals and commendations for his service.

Harold worked as a Maintenance Electrician for heavy industry. His long term employer was Southern Electric Steel (later named Birmingham Steel) where he rose to the rank of Maintenance Superintendent. Prior to leaving to serve in Korea, Harold married Doris Knight Wood in Birmingham, Alabama, on April 21, 1950.

The union produced two children, Michael Steven Wood and Marcia Suzanne Wood. A devoted Husband and Father, Harold and Doris enjoyed 50 years together before Doris passed away in 2000, only months after the couple had relocated to Daphne, Alabama. Harold married Donna Swope Wood April 15, 2002, and they enjoyed 17 years of happy companionship prior to his passing.

Harold enjoyed fishing and golfing. His top water fishing expertise was legendary. His golfing skills were best described as hazardous, at least by those who had witnessed his errant drives. Born and reared in the shadow of Bryant Denny stadium, his life-long passion for Alabama football never faded. Harold was preceded in death by his Mother and Father Mamie and Henry Wood, his sister Carolyn Blakney, sister Dorothy Taylor, wife Doris Wood, and son Michael Wood. Harold is survived by his spouse Donna Swope Wood, of Daphne, Alabama. His daughter Marcia Wood Swope (and son-in-law Barry Swope) of Daphne, Alabama. Billy Joe Wood (Donna), brother. Donald A. Knight (brother of Doris Wood), Grandchildren Matthew Wood (Jennifer), Justin Wood (Cindie), Holly Swope Ethridge, Kimberly Swope Swearingen (Dane) as well as great grandchildren Brenan Wood, Calleigh Wood, Logan Wood, Cheyenne Ethridge, and Braelynn Swope, and many nieces, nephews, and friends.

A memorial service will be held at Jefferson Memorial Gardens Funeral Home, 1591 Gadsden Hwy Birmingham (Trussville) Alabama, 35235 at noon on Friday, Nov. 8, 2019. Visitation will begin at 11 a.m. at the same location. Immediate family will be gathering at 10 a.m. for private visitation. Burial will follow the service at the above named location.