Harold Clayton Lloyd (Burchard (Nebraska), 1893 - april 20, Beverly Hills (California), 8 March 1971) was an American actor. Lloyd belonged together with Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton to the most popular filmcomedians from the era of silent film. His most famous character was an optimistic, but bumbling young man with a characteristic large black glasses with frame horns, which with the help of his luck and tenacity from setbacks and success achieved at the end of the film was welcomed as a hero. Lloyd was an athletic actor, and did itself quite dangerous stunts. A scene in the film Safety Last! 1923, in which Lloyd from high to the pointer of a clock hangs, is one of the most famous images from the history of cinema.

Content[]

[hide]*1 Biography

1.1 Career

1.2 private life

2 Filmography (selection)

3 Trivia

4 external links

Biography[Edit][]

Harold Lloyd was the son of j. Darcie ' Foxy "Lloyd and Elisabeth Fraser. His father was a little successful businessman: he traded settled of court, including photographer, and was frequently unemployed. Harolds eventually divorced parents. Hereinafter referred to as Harold left with his father to San Diego, where his father was the owner of a poolhal .

Lloyd acted at a young age. Later in life he began working at the scene, first chores for local theatres, he later played small roles in touring companies and repertoire.

Career[Edit][]

In 1912 , he made his filmdebut at the Thomas Edison's film society , for which he in a walk-on role played a half-naked Indian .

The following year, he played in some slapstick films for Keystone, and as an extra at Universal, where he became friends with Hal Roach, at that time also a supernumerary. When Roach got a legacy and a year later its own film society, Rolin, began, he hired Lloyd in order in a series of short comic films to play a character called "Willie Work". Roach, however, knew no market for his movies to find, and Lloyd left for Keystone. However, Lloyd got here arguing with Mack Sennett, the boss of Keystone, and when Roach, sponsored by Pathé, its society managed to reorganize, Lloyd returned back.

Roach and Lloyd developed a new character, "Lonesome Luke", actually a imitation of Chaplin. Although Lloyd and Roach were not satisfied with the character, was Lonesome Luke yet very popular, probably mainly thanks to the chases and action scenes that almost every movie ended. Between 1916 and 1917 Lloyd played the character in about a hundred short films , produced and mostly directed by Roach.

In 1917 developed Roach or Lloyd (both claimed to have come up with the idea) a new character, namely the nameless glasses wearing young man, often called simply "The Glasses Character" called. Roach and Lloyd developed more complex for this character comedies, in which the slapstick came to lie more in the background and building the story and the elaboration of the characters more attention. The everyday kid with the big glasses became very popular among moviegoers. The character he would play until 1921. In the first films with the "Glasses character" was his co-star Bebe Daniels, later became that Mildred Davis, with whom he would marry. After their marriage Lloyd advised her to continue working. She was replaced by Jobyna Ralston.

In the 1920s Lloyd grew into one of the most successful film actors and ultimately to the highest paid actor of his time. Many of Lloyds movies drew more visitors than for example the films of Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin. As the years progressed one films were longer, rinse to rinse, and two and three with A Sailor-Made Man from 1921 also long feature films. One of the best known and most successful films from that era was from Safety Last! 1923, in which Lloyds character for a publicity stunt had to climb a skyscraper . In 1923 went Roach and Lloyd friendly apart. Lloyd produced his own films since then, first together with Pathé, later with Paramount.

Lloyd did all his stunts himself, but this was not without risk. During the shooting of the film Haunted Spooks 1920 exploded from a bomb used in the film in his hand. At this accident lost his right thumb and index finger, Lloyd and touched his hand partially paralyzed. Despite his disability, he did still spectacular stunts, including hanging to a clock in Safety Last!. Usually he wore a prosthesis and a glove to his right hand to hide.

In 1928 , he made his last silent film Speedy. Welcome Danger from 1929 was originally intended as a silent film, but Lloyd decided to take him later on as a sound film. With the advent of the sound film sank its popularity, but he continued to play in films. These, however, were less successful than the silent films, and each film brought less money on. This was Partly due to the optimistic character of his characters, where in the time of the great depression was little need for. Sound films were Feet First (1930), a film in which he as in Safety Last eventually had to climb a skyscraper, Movie Crazy (1932) and The Milky Way (1936). In1947 , he made his last film, The Sin of Harold Diddlebock, funded by Howard Hughes and directed by Preston Sturges, who wanted to bring a tribute to the actor. For the film Lloyd was nominated for a Golden Globe. Hughes has the film in 1951 again edited and published under the title Mad Wednesday.

Harold Lloyd was one of the few actors who the screening rights possessed by most of his own films. He held hervertoning of its films, both in the cinema and on television, largely against. Only when he noticed that his fame was waning and he almost forgotten, he allowed his films also were shown on tv. Unfortunately, it was destroyed during a part of his earlier films a nitrate explosion, making these films probably have been lost.

In 1952 , he received a special Oscar for his career. He received the award because he was "a master comedian and good citizen", a sneer to Charlie Chaplin, who at that time, the time of Mccarthyism, had become unpopular. A compilation of scenes from his first films in 1962 was shown at the Cannes Film festival, under the name Harold Lloyd's World of Comedy. The compilation received a standing ovation. The following year, produced Lloyd a second compilation, The Funny Side of Life.

Private Life[Edit][]

Harold Lloyd was from 1923 to his death in 1971 married to Mildred Davis, who played the female lead in many of his films. The couple had three children.

When his film career at a lower ebb came, he began a wide variety of hobbies, including photography, movie marathons, the breeding of great Danes, collecting cars and he got an interest in Hi-Fi sound systems.

Lloyd died at the age of 77 to prostate cancer. His heirs got some $ 5 million. According to his testament had to his home "Green acres", a 44-room villa in Renaissancestyle, and the daaromliggende land to be transformed into a film museum. The villa was later auctioned.

Filmography (selection)[Edit][]

[1][2]Commercial (1919)*Luke's Shattered Sleep (1916)

Over the Fence (1917)

The City Slicker (1918)

I'm on My Way (1919)

An Eastern Westerner (1920)

Haunted Spooks (1920)

A Sailor-Made Man (1921)

Never Weaken (1921)

Doctor Jack (1922)

Grandma's Boy (1922)

Why Worry? (1923)

Safety Last! (1923)

Hot Water (1924)

Girl Shy (1924)

The Freshman (1925)

For heaven's Sake (1926)

The Kid Brother (1927)

Speedy (1928)

Welcome Danger (1929)

Movie Crazy (1932)

The cat's Paw (1934)

The Milky Way (1936)

The Sin of Harold Diddlebock (1947)

Harold Lloyd's World of Comedy (compilation, 1962)

The Funny Side of Life (compilation, 1963)

Trivia[Edit][]