Alice Baber

United States

Art Brokerage: Alice Baber American Artist: b. 1928-1982. Alice Baber (August 22, 1928 – October 2, 1982) was an American abstract expressionist painter who worked in oil and watercolor. She was educated in the US and traveled worldwide in the 1950s and 1960s. Baber, an active feminist, organized exhibits of women artists' work at a time when women were still struggling to gain prominence internationally. Baber began her career working primarily in oils, but began experimenting with watercolor paints in the 1950s. Her experimentation with watercolor initiated a shift in style for Baber as she went from painting still lifes to creating more abstracted works. Her abstract works focus on color and form with shapes such as the circle being a common motif. Baber was well known for her use of light and color holding several exhibitions devoted to these themes. In 1958, Baber had her first solo show in New York at March Gallery where she was a member. In that same year, she was also granted a studio residency at the Yaddo Art Colony. During this time, she began to develop her unique explorations of color that derive from the "infinite range of possibilities" for exploring color and light within the form of the circle. She told Brian Jones that she was looking for a "way to get the light moving across the whole thing" in Battle of the Oranges. This creative inspiration became fundamental to her artistic approach. The Baber Midwest Modern Art Collection of the Greater Lafayette Museum of Art in Indiana and the Alice Baber Memorial Art Library in East Hampton, New York are both named in her honor. Numerous major galleries in the United States own her works including the Guggenheim, Whitney, Metropolitan, and the Museum of Modern Art. She is also widely collected by private, corporate and university collections. Her art reflects, but defies "various stylistic trends" and is "imbued with undulating, sensuous movement, and...pure, translucent colors." Listings wanted.

Read More +