Wupa Map — Satellite Images of Wupa

original name: Wupa

geographical location: AbujaMun, Fct, Nigeria, Africa

geographical coordinates: 9° 3' 19" North, 7° 27' 28" East

detailed map of Wupa and near places

Welcome to the Wupa google satellite map! This place is situated in AbujaMun, Fct, Nigeria, its geographical coordinates are 9° 3' 19" North, 7° 27' 28" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Wupa. See Wupa photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Wupa in Nigeria. Wupa hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Wupa or add new placemark for Wupa.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Wupa hotel reservations

Book hotel in Wupa online and save money

Browse & Book hotels – low rates, no booking & cancelation fees »

Wupa hotels – Wupa hotel guide »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Wupa hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Wupa, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Wupa, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Wupa hotels map

The location of each Wupa hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Wupa hotel map is available where all hotels in Wupa are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Wupa hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Wupa hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Wupa hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Wupa hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Wupa

Hôtel Prince De Galles *** (in Douala, distanced approximately 610 km)

Ibis Douala *** (in Douala, distanced approximately 610 km)

Le Meridien Douala **** (in Douala, distanced approximately 610 km)

Mont Febe ***** (in Yaounde, distanced approximately 730 km)

Les Gites de Kribi (in Kribi, distanced approximately 730 km)

more Wupa hotels »

Wupa car rental

Compare Wupa car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Wupa rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Wupa car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Wupa — we will do it for you!

Car hire Wupa and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Wupa the city centre. Compare Wupa car rental offers by various suppliers.

Douala - Boulevard De La Liberte car rental (distanced approximately 610 km)

Douala car rental (distanced approximately 610 km)

Douala - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 610 km)

Cotonou Airport car rental (distanced approximately 630 km)

Cotonou - Hotel Du Port car rental (distanced approximately 630 km)

more offers and Wupa car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Wupa

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Wupa »

Overview of flights to and from Nigeria »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Wupa. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Wupa and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Wupa are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Abuja Intl Airport (distanced approximately 22 km) – airport hotels

Minna Airport (distanced approximately 130 km) – airport hotels

Bida Airport (distanced approximately 160 km) – airport hotels

Jos Airport (distanced approximately 170 km) – airport hotels

Kaduna Airport (distanced approximately 180 km) – airport hotels

Wupa 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Wupa in Nigeria

You can also dive right into Wupa on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Wupa 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Wupa, Nigeria in Google Earth »

Get more out of Wupa map

Add placemark to Wupa

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Wupa map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Wupa google map link options

link to us:

small Wupa google map image link

medium Wupa google map image link

large Wupa google map image link