Diana Gurtskaya is a Russian and Georgian pop singer, whose popularity peaked in the early 2000s. Lack of vision did not prevent the girl from making a musical career, becoming an Honored Artist of Russia and joining the Public Chamber. Diana participates in charity events that contribute to the development of programs to help people with disabilities.

Childhood and youth

Diana Gudaevna Gurtskaya was born in Sukhumi on July 2, 1978. She became the fourth child in the family of a former miner and teacher. Together with Diana, 2 more brothers and a sister were growing up in the family. When the girl was born, her parents did not know about her illness. Only when the baby, not orienting herself, fell off the couch, did the adults suspect something was wrong. The doctors' diagnosis was disappointing - congenital blindness.

Diana Gurtskaya was born on July 2, 1978 in Sukhumi. Father - Guda Adamurovich Gurtskaya, worked as a miner. Mother - teacher Zaira Gurtskaya. Older brothers - Dzhambul and Robert (currently the producer of the singer). The elder sister is Eliso.

Diana Gurtskaya: “I was born as the youngest daughter in a happy, friendly family. Now my brothers and sister live in Moscow: Robert is my producer, Dzhambul is a businessman, both graduated from Tyumen University, and Eliso is looking after his family ... "

The future singer graduated from a boarding school for blind and visually impaired children in Tbilisi. At the same time, she learned to play the piano.

At the age of 10, Gurtskaya made her debut at the Tbilisi Philharmonic, singing a duet with singer Irma Sokhadze.

In 1995, the young singer became a laureate of the Yalta-Moscow-Transit music competition, becoming famous throughout the country.

Diana Gurtskaya: “When I was still in 10th grade, my brother called me from Moscow and said that he had sent my cassette to the“ Yalta-Moscow-transit ”competition and that after getting acquainted with it, the competition committee selected me to the semifinals. Afraid of going to Moscow, I began to deny. But my brother suddenly shouts: "Come, period!" And I turned out to be right - thanks to this competition people all over the former USSR recognized me ... "

The quote is taken from the magazine "7 Days", No. 11 (03/08/2007)

Name: Diana Gurtskaya

Date of Birth: 02.07.1978

Age: 41 years

Place of Birth: the city of Sukhumi, Abkhazia

The weight: 62 kg

Height: 1.68 m

Activity: singer, public figure

Family status: married

Diana Gurtskaya is one of the most famous and talented singers of our time. Since birth, Diana has suffered from blindness that cannot be eliminated even with the best medical technology. Despite this, the talented singer managed to win the special attention of her fans and present a large number of songs and albums.

Many people are interested in how Diana Gurtskaya looks without glasses, with her eyes open, but such photos are practically inaccessible. The singer always appears in public only in dark glasses, noting that she can only be herself in front of her loved ones, and the stage becomes a special "thread" connecting her with the outside world.

Brief biography of Diana Gurtskaya

Diana Gurtskaya was born on July 2, 1978 in Sukhumi (Abkhazia) into an ordinary working-class family. Her father worked as a miner, her mother as a teacher.

As a child, the girl behaved in the same way as her peers. It is for this reason that the parents did not realize for a long time that their daughter was suffering from congenital blindness.

The misfortune became known only after Diana accidentally fell off the couch and broke her face. Medicine was powerless. A couple of decades later, medical technology still cannot give Diana vision.

Diana as a child with her mother

Since childhood, Gurtskaya strived to perform on stage and sing. Many people were not serious about this desire for creativity, believing that the blind could not gain real popularity. However, the parents still supported and helped to develop singing skills.

At the age of 8, Diana already had to show the strength of her character. Then the teachers of the music school did not want to take the girl to study. Despite such a test, Diana managed to prove her ability to play the piano, after which she began to combine her studies at a music school and in a boarding school for blind children.

At the age of 10, the aspiring singer successfully performed at a concert. Then she was taken to the Tbilisi Philharmonic, where she managed to master the basics for further creative development. Diana even performed with Irma Sokhadze, one of the best Georgian singers. From that time on, Diana realized how important the scene was to her.

Diana Gurtskaya: photo

After the girl successfully graduated from school, she managed to move to Moscow and enter the Gnessin School, at the jazz vocal department. After graduation, a career began in Russian show business. In 2000, the debut album was released with the help of ARS studio. From the very beginning, Diana began cooperation with Sergei Chelobanov and Igor Nikolaev, who are still writing lyrics for the talented singer. The second album was the collection "You Know, Mom" ​​(ARS), which was recognized as one of the best.

Diana Gurtskaya showed her strength of character from the very beginning. It was a strong character combined with vocal abilities that allowed the singer to gain fame.

With Alla Pugacheva

Diana, despite congenital blindness, is engaged not only in releasing albums. The singer often goes on tour and participates in recording duet songs. Such creative activity confirms that Gurtskaya is ready for anything to stay on stage.

In 2014, Diana released a video for the song "I'm Losing You". It was then that viewers were able to see Diana Gurtskaya without glasses, with open eyes, not only in rare personal photos, but also on video.

In 2016, Diana took part in the popular television program Alone with Everyone. The singer told the features of her life. This program became important for Diana, who helped many of her fans in similar life situations.

In 2017, Diana Gurtskaya took part in the dubbing of the film “In spite of everything”. It was the first experience of scoring a movie that proved to be successful. The positive decision to participate in the dubbing was due to the special scenario and the opportunity to feel the heroine who was dubbed.

Diana is an established philanthropist. Gurtskaya is a public figure. Diana Gurtskaya works in the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation, travels to boarding schools to conduct "Lessons of Kindness", deals with social issues with the help of special societies. Diana Gurtskaya was awarded the Orders of State Significance of Georgia and the Russian Federation.

Singer on stage

Active creative activity and a desire for social action confirm: Diana Gurtskaya has a strong character.

What Diana Gurtskaya is hiding behind glasses

At the very beginning of Diana Gurtskaya's creative career, vile rumors appeared. Many people doubted that the talented girl actually suffered from congenital blindness. There were rumors that dark glasses and blindness were just PR to attract special attention. In addition, people did not see Diana without dark glasses, as a result of which rumors spread that hurt the young singer. Despite such a test, Diana Gurtskaya remained on the stage and continued to hide her eyes, focusing on her vocal abilities and strength of character.

With Igor Nikolaev

Many media outlets offer a lot of money to get a photo of Diana Gurtskaya without dark glasses, with open eyes. However, the singer never agrees to such offers. Only in the video "I'm Losing You" can you see the singer without dark glasses. Also noteworthy is the clip "You Know, Mom", which reflects the life of the singer: a young blind young lady plays the violin in the transition and meets a guy who wants to help a new acquaintance, collects money, but the operation after it turns out to be ineffective. The clip "You Know, Mom" ​​still turned out to be life-affirming, because the main character, like Diana Gurtskaya, is content with what she already possesses.

Diana Gurtskaya with her husband

Diana also had to endure a vision test. Diana has only light perception, since she could distinguish the color of objects and know where the window is.

However, later, in adulthood, the singer faced acute glaucoma and the need for surgery. Surgical intervention was successful, thanks to which light perception was preserved.

Diana Gurtskaya with her son Konstantin

Photos of Diana Gurtskaya without dark glasses, with open eyes, are not available to her fans. However, Diana Gurtskaya is ready to delight her fans with new touching songs, each of which becomes a real hit.

Diana Gudaevna Gurtskaya (cargo: დიანა ღურწკაია). She was born on July 2, 1978 in Sukhumi. Russian pop singer and public figure. Honored Artist of the Russian Federation (2006).

Diana Gurtskaya was born on July 2, 1978 in Sukhumi. Note that the surname of the singer of Megrelian origin is not inclined.

Father - Guda Adamurovich Gurtskaya, a miner.

Mother - Zaira Amiranovna Gurtskaya, teacher (died in 2001).

Diana was blind from birth. However, this is not a hereditary disease - everyone in her family has absolutely normal vision. Soon after her birth, it turned out that Diana did not react to pictures and bright toys, she could only distinguish between light and shadow, day and night. The girl was shown to the luminaries of ophthalmology, taken to Tbilisi and Moscow, but all was in vain.

She is the youngest (fourth) child in a large family.

Has two brothers: Dzhambul (businessman) and Robert (Diana's producer), both graduated from Tyumen University.

Sister - Eliso.

Doctors saw no way to restore the child's eyesight. Not familiar with the world of sighted people, for some time Diana had no idea that she was terminally ill: the family treated her like other children, not focusing the child's attention on his illness. She recalled: "I grew up as an ordinary child - I just ran, fell, played pranks. I was punished for pranks. As a child, I never thought that I had a problem. We never had tears at home, my parents did not discuss my tragic Although, of course, they were worried, they took me to the doctors. But they did not shake over me, on the contrary, I always heard from my parents: "You are the same as everyone else!"

She graduated from a boarding school for blind and visually impaired children in Tbilisi. At the same time, she convinced the teachers of the music school that she could learn to play the piano. She had to rely only on hearing and her own memory. In addition, Diana was cut off from her family: the boarding school was 500 kilometers from her home.

At the age of 10, she made her debut with a performance at the Tbilisi Philharmonic, sang a duet with the Georgian singer Irma Sokhadze.

At the age of eighteen, she moved with her family to Moscow. In 1995 she became one of the winners of the Yalta - Moscow - Transit music competition. In 1999 she graduated from the pop department of the Moscow Music College named after the Gnesins. In 2003 she graduated from the Institute of Contemporary Art and entered the magistracy of the Faculty of Arts of Moscow State University. M.V. Lomonosov.

In 2002, the singer's second album "You Know, Mom" ​​was released.

On March 1, 2008, a qualifying round took place at the Tbilisi Sports Palace, according to the results of which in May Diana represented Georgia in Belgrade at the international Eurovision Song Contest 2008.

Collaborated with such performers as Jose Carreras, Andrey Kovalev, Goran Bregovich,.

In 2009, on the International Paralympic Day, held for the first time in Moscow, the Sochi 2014 Organizing Committee awarded Diana Gurtskaya the status of Sochi 2014 Ambassador, as a person who popularizes the ideas of the Olympic and Paralympic Movement in Russia and the world.

In 2011, Diana Gurtskaya took part in the show "Dancing with the Stars", performing in tandem with Sergei Balashov.

In 2014, a video for the song “I’m Losing You” was released, which became special: for the first time, viewers could watch Diana without glasses.

Diana Gurtskaya - I'm losing you

In 2017, she took part in the dubbing of the German film In Spite of Everything. She had to voice the role of the mother of the protagonist. According to Gurtskaya, the work was easy for her, because she, as a mother, managed to feel her heroine.

"How I would like to be talked about my work, not remembering my dark glasses. But, apparently, this cannot be avoided ... I myself try not to cultivate this topic. And I do not consider myself any special - an ordinary person, I live normal life, "says Diana.

Social and political position of Diana Gurtskaya

Diana Gurtskaya is a member of the Public Council under the Chairman of the Federation Council of Russia.

One of the founders and chairman of the Board of Trustees of the At the Call of the Heart Foundation for Assisting the Blind and Visually Impaired Children.

Since 2011 - member of the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation, Chairman of the Commission for the Support of Family, Children and Motherhood.

Since 2013, by the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation No. 603 dated 03.07.2013, Diana Gurtskaya has been appointed a member of the Commission under the President of the Russian Federation on the Affairs of Persons with Disabilities.

On March 1, 2014, she signed an appeal by cultural figures of Russia in support of the policy of the President of the Russian Federation in Ukraine and Crimea.

She supported the idea of ​​Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Russia to ban abortion in Russia.

Diana Gurtskaya in the program "Alone with everyone"

Diana Gurtskaya's height: 168 centimeters.

Personal life of Diana Gurtskaya:

Married. Husband - Peter Aleksandrovich Kucherenko (born 1974), professor of the Department of Constitutional Law of the Peoples' Friendship University of Russia, lawyer, Doctor of Law. We met in 2002 thanks to. At first, there was a business cooperation between them, and then a relationship began, which grew into a marriage. "At first I did not imagine that we would succeed. We were so different - he is a serious person, I am a chatterbox, laughing. I was ashamed of him. At first we even called each other to you. Petya bribed me with erudition ... Then there were telephone conversations, which became longer and longer, flowers, signs of attention, a huge cake for Valentine's Day with the inscription “From everyone in love with you.” And then Peter declared his love, ”Diana shared.

Together with her husband, Diana created a fund to help blind children "At the Call of the Heart".

Discography of Diana Gurtskaya:

2000 - You are here

2002 - You know, mom

2004 - Tender

2007 - 9 months

Video clips of Diana Gurtskaya:

1997 - "The Magic Glass"

1999 - "You are here"

2000 - "Two Moons"

2001 - "First Love"

2002 - You Know Mom

2004 - Tender

2006 - "9 months" (duet with Andrey Kovalev)

2008 - "Peace Will Come"

2010 - "Native People" (duet with Joseph Kobzon)

2014 - "I'm Losing You"

Anyone can envy the strength of the spirit of this unusual artist. Despite a serious illness, our heroine - Diana Gurtskaya - not only conquered music lovers in our country with her wonderful voice.

She is also known as a member of the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation, is the founder of a charitable foundation, holder of the honorary title of Honored Artist of Russia.

When Diana Gurtskaya was just born, no one would have thought that the youngest daughter in this large and friendly family had vision impairments. Diana Gudaevna was born in the largest city of Abkhazia - Sukhumi. She is Georgian by nationality. This year, on July 2, the famous Russian singer will turn 40, but few can give her this age - Diana looks like a young girl.

The family of the teacher Zaira and the miner Guda had four children, Diana Gurtskaya is the youngest. The artist was blind from birth. Little Diana's parents lost hope that their youngest child could someday see the world in all its glory, but their daughters did not reveal their feelings.

They decided that the baby should grow and develop in the same way as other children in the family. Mom and Dad never mourned the difficult fate of the girl and did not distinguish her from other children, therefore, in her preschool childhood, Diana did not feel any special.

As you know, if a person loses one of the senses, his other becomes aggravated. So it happened with our heroine. To the delight of family and friends, Diana, being very small, accurately reproduced the notes she heard.

There are no barriers to creativity

Parents were very happy about this success of their daughter and tried in every possible way to develop her musical abilities. Diana could listen to music of different genres for hours. With a beautiful voice, she sang beautifully with a Georgian accent.

At the age of 8, the girl was sent to study in a specialized institution for children with visual impairments. Her dream was to get a musical education. Diana impressed the teachers with her desire for learning, hard work and excellent vocal skills, and very soon she mastered playing the piano.

The father and mother, who supported their daughter in everything, decided to give Diana the opportunity to take part in a music competition. At the age of ten, a talented young performer was invited to perform at the Tbilisi Philharmonic.

Diana's participation in a children's vocal competition was fateful, where she met the composer Igor Nikolaev, who was fascinated by the gentle voice of a young Georgian woman and offered her cooperation.

The parents, realizing that their daughter had a unique chance, unanimously decided that they must create all conditions for Diana for the further development of her singing talent. They decided to move to the capital of Russia. In Moscow, our heroine, having perfectly coped with the entrance exams, becomes a student of the vocal department of the Russian Academy of Music. Gnesins.

Inspired by her successes, diligent and diligent student Diana Gurtskaya, in parallel with her main studies, studied acting at the Institute of Contemporary Art. Since 2003, she studied art history at Moscow State University. M.V. Lomonosov, holds a master's degree.

Musical career of the famous vocalist

The first song performed by Diana Gurtskaya was written especially for her by Igor Nikolaev. The composition "You Are Here" instantly became the leader of the charts and brought the singer great popularity among listeners. Diana Gurtskaya successfully presented this song at the All-Russian Song Festival.

Since the 2000s, the artist has been releasing solo albums. The singer's brother, Robert, becomes her producer. Diana's discography is quite extensive, during her creative life in the domestic show business, Gurtskaya has released four music albums, which is about 50 song hits:

"Is there love in the world."

"Cool guy".

"Two under one umbrella."

"Winter".

"Wreath".

"To be with you".

"Heaven, don't cry."

"Winter's Tale".

"The Wounded Bird".

"Sunny Boy".

"Poodle".

"Overcome" and others.

Life in the media space

Diana Gurtskaya does not limit herself only to vocals. In addition to singing, the girl realizes herself in various television projects, she even participated in a dance show. Diana is a frequent guest of evening talk shows on the country's leading TV channels.

Another highlight in the singer's biography was her performance at the Eurovision Song Contest, where Diana represented her native Georgia.

In preparation for the Olympics in Russia, Gurtskaya was appointed "Ambassador of Sochi 2014". As the singer admitted in an interview, it was very honorable for her.

The public knows this young woman and as a talented presenter - Diana Gurtskaya, having realized her old dream, in 2010 organized and held a charity concert "White Cane". In the same year, the charitable foundation for helping blind children "At the call of the heart" began its work.

The talented vocalist also works a lot for the good of Russian society, being a member of the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation.

Family happiness

Many expressed doubts that a blind girl could have a fulfilling personal life. But Diana once again destroyed all stereotypes by marrying lawyer Pyotr Kucherenko.

Their meeting was not unexpected. For a long time, young people had strictly business relationships, but over time they developed into romantic ones. As Peter admits, Diana did not immediately agree to his marriage proposal. The man did not despair and made a second attempt, giving his chosen one a star named after her.

In 2005, their marriage was officially registered, and two years later a baby appeared in the family - the son of Konstantin. For a long time, the singer doubted that she would be able to give birth to healthy children, she was very afraid that the lack of vision would be inherited.

But everything turned out in the best way, and from the latest news we can learn that the spouses Diana Gurtskaya and Pyotr Kucherenko are thinking about the birth of their second child. Their son Kostya is developing well, he is engaged in various circles, studies well and does not lag behind his peers in anything.

Photos of the singer with her husband and child are freely available on the Internet, and the full biography of this talented pop singer and strong woman can be read on Wikipedia. Author: Sofya Maleeva