Diana Gurtskaya was born in Sukhumi in 1978 and was brought up in a friendly large family: her sister and two brothers grew up with her. Very quickly, the parents discovered a sad ailment in their daughter: she was born almost blind. Doctors argued that vision could not be restored. And yet, the parents did not despair, deciding, at least, to raise from Diana a worthy and useful person for society.

Diana grew up as a cheerful and active child, practically not thinking that she was somehow different from other children. She had a fine ear and a pleasant voice, so the girl was assigned to a music class at a Tbilisi boarding school for children with disabilities. There she not only learned to sing, but also began to play the piano beautifully. From the age of 10, Diana often performed at music competitions and in 1995 won the Yalta-Moscow-Transit event.

After winning a prestigious competition, the composer Igor Nikolaev became interested in the girl. It was he who wrote the first and main hit for the aspiring singer called "You Are Here". Diana Gurtskaya moved to Moscow and entered the famous "Gnesinka", graduating from pop education in 1999. In 2000, she recorded her first album with the already known to the public the title "You Are Here". Soon, another disc, "You Know, Mom" ​​followed.

Gurtskaya became one of the main artists at all-Russian concert evenings, and in 2008 she represented her native Georgia at the international Eurovision Song Contest. She also took part in the television show "Dancing with the Stars" and served as the ambassador of the Winter Olympics in Sochi. The singer released two more albums, entitled "Tender" and "Nine Months". Finally, Diana is a renowned philanthropist who is actively involved in solving many social issues.

Personal life

Diana Gurtskaya met her only husband in 2002. The well-known lawyer Pyotr Kucherenko became him. The man very beautifully looked after his beloved and even managed to make it so that one of the recently discovered stars in the sky was named after her. As a result, the couple played a magnificent wedding. In a happy marriage, a son, Constantine, was born. Close people do not leave Diana a single step, trying to provide her with all possible support.

Today Diana holds one of the important posts in the Public Chamber of Russia. She often travels to boarding schools, giving children “Lessons of Kindness” and helping them to adapt to the social environment. In addition, Gurtskaya hosts an author's program on Radio Russia, where she conducts conversations with famous people. She is currently working on recording new songs and the next album.

Diana Gurtskaya knows firsthand how to live in a world without colors. But with her creativity, she enriched the musical world with millions of shades. And thanks to the activities of the singer's charitable foundation, many blind children were able to feel truly happy.

Childhood

Diana was born on July 2, 1978 in sunny Sukhumi. She was the youngest daughter of the Mingrelian family of Guda and Zaira Gurtskaya. Parents were already at a respectable age; my father used to work in a mine, and my mother taught at school. The baby was surrounded with love and care not only by parents, but also by older children - brothers Dzhambul and Robert and sister Eliso.

For the first months, Zaire did not notice her daughter's illness, but when the girl fell off the couch, breaking her face to blood, her mother rushed to the hospital. The doctors' verdict was disappointing - congenital blindness. Ophthalmologists did not give a single chance that the child would be able to see. It was a big blow for the whole family, but the parents decided not to focus on their daughter's illness, and raised Diana in the same way as the older children. “I grew up as an ordinary child - I just ran, fell, played pranks. They never felt sorry for me, although everyone took care of me, ”the singer recalled.

At the age of 7, Diana was sent to study at the Tbilisi boarding school for blind and visually impaired children, located five hundred kilometers from her home. The girl took a long time to get used to the new unfamiliar environment and was very homesick. After class, she came into the room and opened the suitcase with her things in order to smell her mother for a moment. Diana missed her the most. But when the schoolgirl came home and asked for an extra day to extend the vacation, the parents were adamant: “You must get an education. Go through life with your head held high! "

Diana Gurtskaya in the studio "Let them talk"

When the girl was overcome with melancholy, she began to sing. This was her favorite pastime from early childhood - not yet having learned to speak well, Diana already memorized the melodies and sounds of the world around her, and then tried to reproduce them. Mom noticed her daughter's creative abilities, so she supported her in her striving to get a musical education as well. At the age of 8, Diana began to study with a vocal teacher, and after a couple of months she wanted to learn how to play the piano. But if in the boarding school the whole situation was adjusted to the characteristics of blind children, then in the music school it was much more difficult - the girl had to study on an equal basis with everyone else, relying only on her own memory and fine ear: “I almost forgot everything when I came home, and I had to start from scratch several times. But I couldn't live without music. And the harder it is, the more interesting it is! "

The efforts of the stubborn schoolgirl bore fruit: already at the age of 10 she stood on the stage of the Tbilisi Philharmonic and sang a duet with Irma Sokhadze herself. This was the first deafening success of the young talent.

Career

In 1995, 17-year-old Diana Gurtskaya applied to participate in the international pop song festival "Yalta - Moscow - Transit". For the competition, the singer chose the composition "Tbiliso". The soulful performance of the young Georgian woman did not leave indifferent even the masters of the Russian stage, among whom were Laima Vaikule, Mikhail Tanich, Igor Nikolaev, Alexander Malinin, Lolita and Igor Krutoy.

Diana Gurtskaya - "If the night is gone", 1995

And although Gurtskaya did not take first place, the jury awarded the singer with an extraordinary voice with a special prize. It was presented by the singer and composer Igor Nikolaev. This moment became the point of Diana's takeoff to the musical Olympus: Nikolaev offered cooperation to the talented performer, and she simply could not refuse.

Immediately after this competition, the entire Gurtskaya family moved to Moscow. Here the youngest daughter of Guda and Zaira decided to continue her musical education - she entered the pop department at the Gnessin School. 18-year-old Diana, inspired by success, decided that she would be able to conquer another peak, and began to simultaneously master the stage skills at GITIS. But even this was not enough for Diana - in 2003 she received a master's degree from the Faculty of Arts of Moscow State University. Lomonosov.

In 1999, Gurtskaya sang for the first time Igor Nikolaev's song "You Are Here". The composition became an absolute hit, but the audience did not even suspect that for the singer herself it was a requiem song: “When this song was being created, my mother was still alive. But even then she was diagnosed with cancer. She managed to see a little that my dream came true. I'm a singer". The composition instantly took off to the top of the charts, and Diana was invited to perform it on "Song of the Year". When Gurtskaya sang on the main stage of the country, Zaira was buried in Tbilisi: “I had the feeling that at the moment I was addressing my mother with this song. I had the impression that the whole audience knew then my history, my tragedy. "

In 2000, the singer's debut album "You Are Here" was released, it included songs written for her by Igor Nikolaev and Sergey Chelobanov. Gurtskaya continued her collaboration with these composers, and two years later the second album with their songs, "You Know, Mom", was released. Tours began, duets with world famous singers, including Joseph Kobzon, Toto Cutugno, Al Bano, Demis Roussos.

The first performance of Diana Gurtskaya and Toto Cutugno

A year later, another blow of fate awaited Diana - the singer's brother Dzhambul was severely beaten on the streets of Moscow. The guy was hospitalized, but the capital's doctors were unable to save his life. The family drama affected the singer's creativity, but Diana had many more achievements and victories ahead of her. In December 2006, Gurtskaya was awarded the title "Honored Artist of Russia". In 2008, she presented Georgia to the international Eurovision Song Contest, and a year later she became the Sochi 2014 Ambassador, as a person who popularizes the ideas of the Olympic and Paralympic Movement in Russia and the world.

Diana Gurtskaya at Eurovision 2008

In 2011, the famous singer took part in the show "Dancing with the Stars", Sergei Balashov became her partner on the floor.

In 2010, the singer made another dream come true - she held the White Cane: Tolerance, Equality, Integration Festival. At the same time, a charitable foundation “At the Call of the Heart”, which provides assistance to children with absent or low vision, began its work. And in 2013, Gurtskaya became a member of the Commission on the Affairs of Persons with Disabilities under the President of the Russian Federation.

Personal life of Diana Gurtskaya

Diana never devoted the press to her personal life until Pyotr Kucherenko appeared in her life. Irina Khakamada introduced the young people back in 2002. At first it was a business collaboration between a successful lawyer and an aspiring singer, but a year later they were published as a couple in love.

When Peter decided to take a serious step and offered his beloved his hand and heart, Diana dodged the answer, wishing "a star from the sky." Kucherenko promised to fulfill this desire too - and in 2004 a new star, discovered by astronomers, was named "Diana Gurtskaya".

In the video "I'm losing you" Diana Gurtskaya showed her face without glasses

The charitable foundation At the Call of the Heart is still functioning - Gurtskaya and Kucherenko continue to help children with vision problems.

Diana Gudaevna Gurtskaya - Honored Artist of the Russian Federation, a Georgian woman who blew up the vastness of the pop industry of the Russian Federation at the beginning of the 21st century. The artist made her debut at the suggestion of such pop masters as Igor Nikolaev, Igor Krutoy, Sergey Chelobanov. Today, Gurtskaya practically does not perform at large concert venues and devotes all her strength to social activities, protecting the rights of disabled people and mothers of disabled children at the state level. In addition, Gurtskaya is known for her charitable activities; with the help of her husband, she founded a fund to help blind children.

Height, weight, age. How old is Diana Gurtskaya

Diana Gurtskaya, who quickly burst into the world of show business, also quickly disappeared from the scene towards the end of the first decade of the 21st century. Despite this, interest in the creative activity of this woman, who has long given her heart to politics, does not disappear today. Fans of the artist ask questions: How tall, age, how old is Diana Gurtskaya, what is Gurtskaya doing today? If you believe the data on the world wide web, then Diana Gurtskaya this year turned 40 years old. The artist's weight is 62 kg and her height is 168 cm.

Biography and personal life of Diana Gurtskaya

The biography and personal life of Diana Gurtskaya is the story of the struggle of a person with disabilities. Despite being blind from birth, this woman proved that life can be filled with joy and different colors of emotions. At the same time, today she is trying to convey a similar idea to other people with visual impairment through social activities and participation in the consideration of issues of assistance to such people at the state level. The future star was born on July 2, 1978 in Sukhumi. Vision problems manifested themselves in early childhood, so the future star studied at a special school for the visually impaired and the blind. From early childhood she loved music, despite her illness, she mastered the piano. The first performance on stage happened in 1988. It was then that Diana decided that she wanted to connect her life with music.

After graduating from the boarding school, Diana entered the Moscow Musical College named after I. Gnessin., Defended her master's degree at Moscow State University. MV Lomonosov, despite all the efforts of ill-wishers, who believed that a blind person is not able to get such an education.

In 2000, under the protectorate of Igor Nikolaev, he began a solo career. Rumor has it that the composer spotted the blind girl during her performance at the Yalta - Moscow - Transit competition in 1995. However, there is still no confirmation of such information. The result of cooperation between Nikolaev and Gurtskaya was the release of the singer's debut album. 2 years later, show business blows up Gurtskaya's second album. 2002 is the peak of the artist's popularity. The central single of the disc "You Know Mom" ​​has been at the top of the radio charts and charts for a long time, for which the artist received one of the most iconic awards of that time, "Golden Gramophone".

In 2005, Diana Gurtskaya got married. Lawyer Pyotr Kucherenko became the artist's chosen one. Together with him, Gurtskaya organized a fund to help blind children, after which she announced a pause in her career as an artist. The next album of the singer Gurtskaya will be released only after 2 years, will receive the symbolic title "9 months", and will be dedicated to the birth of a child. The album did not enjoy much success and the next statement about herself was the performance of Gurtskaya at the Eurovision 2008 song contest from Georgia. She did not manage to climb the podium, but she did succeed in entering the history of the competition as the first blind artist.

After the failure at Eurovision, Diana took up social activities. I chose the protection of children and motherhood as a priority topic for myself, it is this area that has been in charge of the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation since 2011. In addition, Diana can boast of being a member of the Presidential Commission for the Disabled.

In 2017, Gurtskaya tried to return to her creative activity and even recorded a new album "Panic". Like the previous disc, released in 2007, this one did not make an impression on the audience, spoiled by that time. Today, Diana practically does not perform on the big stage, being engaged in social activities, sometimes she allows herself corporate performances for close friends and most loyal fans.

Family and children of Diana Gurtskaya

The family and children of Diana Gurtskaya are not the topic that the artist is used to advertising. Gurtskaya's father - Guda was a miner, Zaire's mother - a teacher. Diana has two brothers and a sister. One of the brothers acts as the producer of the star. In 2005, Diana created her own family, after long and hard thoughts, she nevertheless married a lawyer Pyotr Kucherenko. In 2007 she became a happy mother. The artist named her son Constantine. Kostya took from his mother a craving for creativity, he dances, learns to play the piano, plays tennis well.

Diana Gurtskaya's son - Konstantin Kucherenko

The son of Diana Gurtskaya - Konstantin Kucherenko was born on June 29, 2007. Today Kostya is already 11 and he is studying in one of the capital's grammar schools. Gurtskaya's son shows good results in education, but at the same time the boy demonstrates a special craving for art - he draws, is fond of dancing, studies at a music school in the piano class. In raising a child, Diana and her husband Peter are trying to get away from restrictions and fully master the art of compromise. For example, Konstantin has limited access to a TV and computer. At the same time, according to Gurtskaya herself, they do not have a clear taboo on the use of gadgets, there is a soft restriction policy.

Diana Gurtskaya's husband - Pyotr Kucherenko

Diana Gurtskaya's husband, Pyotr Kucherenko, is a well-known lawyer, public and political figure, founder of the At the Call of the Heart charitable foundation for the blind. For a long time he had a purely business relationship with Gurtskaya, she was a star who participated in Peter's PR campaign for one of the political forces. Over time, the business relationship has grown into something more. After Peter visited the birthday of his future wife, he realized that he was in love. However, melting the heart of a Georgian beauty, wounded by that time by previous relationships, was not so easy. The first step on the road to rapprochement was an invitation to, where Peter told the blind girl about everything that was happening on the screen. Then there were phone calls and a lot of doubts from Diana, which she tried to transfer to Peter, but he was unshakable and in 2005 made her an offer. This is how a new social unit was born, which today is considered one of the happiest in show business.

Diana Gurtskaya photo without glasses with open eyes

Stylish black glasses are an invariable attribute of Diana Gurtskaya's image from the very first appearance on the stage. For a long time, the tabloid press argued that blindness was just a PR stunt for an aspiring artist, but Diana steadfastly endured such accusations, remaining devoted to art and fans. Nevertheless, individuals are still trying to "bring the singer to clean water." Occasionally, fake news appears on the network under the headline: "Diana Gurtskaya photo without glasses with open eyes." Nothing special in this regard, hunters for sensations are not expecting, on the Internet you can only find photos from Gurtskaya's childhood. They show that the girl's eyes are slightly slanted, a photo without glasses is now unavailable for fans and "well-wishers". However, in 2014, the singer decided on a bold experiment, which for a long time excited those who, in Diana's illness, were looking for some kind of sensation. In the video for the song "I'm Losing You", she starred without glasses usual for the public, the artist's eyes were covered by a bandage, a lace ribbon, in some scenes of the video there is no protection on the eyes at all, they are closed, and the singer's eyelids are painted in the style of smokey ice, which looks very bold and eccentric.

Instagram and Wikipedia Diana Gurtskaya

Many fans of the artist's work are interested in whether there is Instagram and Wikipedia Diana Gurtskaya? The answer in both cases will be yes. On Gurtskaya's Wikipedia page, the main events in her life, discography and information about her personal life are indicated. As for Instagram, fresh photos appear on the singer's official page from time to time. Also, joint photographs with his wife can please Diana's fans and her husband. At the same time, the singer's account is not particularly popular. As of today, less than 2 thousand people have subscribed to it.

Diana Gurtskaya is a Russian and Georgian pop singer, whose popularity peaked in the early 2000s. Lack of vision did not prevent the girl from making a musical career, becoming an Honored Artist of Russia and joining the Public Chamber. Diana participates in charity events that contribute to the development of programs to help people with disabilities.

Childhood and youth

Diana Gudaevna Gurtskaya was born in Sukhumi on July 2, 1978. She became the fourth child in the family of a former miner and teacher. Together with Diana, 2 more brothers and a sister were growing up in the family. When the girl was born, her parents did not know about her illness. Only when the baby, not orienting herself, fell off the couch, did the adults suspect something was wrong. The doctors' diagnosis was disappointing - congenital blindness.

Anyone can envy the strength of the spirit of this unusual artist. Despite a serious illness, our heroine - Diana Gurtskaya - not only conquered music lovers in our country with her wonderful voice.

She is also known as a member of the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation, is the founder of a charitable foundation, holder of the honorary title of Honored Artist of Russia.

When Diana Gurtskaya was just born, no one would have thought that the youngest daughter in this large and friendly family had vision impairments. Diana Gudaevna was born in the largest city of Abkhazia - Sukhumi. She is Georgian by nationality. This year, on July 2, the famous Russian singer will turn 40, but few can give her this age - Diana looks like a young girl.

The family of the teacher Zaira and the miner Guda had four children, Diana Gurtskaya is the youngest. The artist was blind from birth. Little Diana's parents lost hope that their youngest child could someday see the world in all its glory, but their daughters did not reveal their feelings.

They decided that the baby should grow and develop in the same way as other children in the family. Mom and Dad never mourned the difficult fate of the girl and did not distinguish her from other children, therefore, in her preschool childhood, Diana did not feel any special.

As you know, if a person loses one of the senses, his other becomes aggravated. So it happened with our heroine. To the delight of family and friends, Diana, being very small, accurately reproduced the notes she heard.

There are no barriers to creativity

Parents were very happy about this success of their daughter and tried in every possible way to develop her musical abilities. Diana could listen to music of different genres for hours. With a beautiful voice, she sang beautifully with a Georgian accent.

At the age of 8, the girl was sent to study in a specialized institution for children with visual impairments. Her dream was to get a musical education. Diana impressed the teachers with her desire for learning, hard work and excellent vocal skills, and very soon she mastered playing the piano.

The father and mother, who supported their daughter in everything, decided to give Diana the opportunity to take part in a music competition. At the age of ten, a talented young performer was invited to perform at the Tbilisi Philharmonic.

Diana's participation in the children's vocal competition was fateful, where she met the composer Igor Nikolaev, who was fascinated by the gentle voice of a young Georgian woman and offered her cooperation.

The parents, realizing that their daughter had a unique chance, unanimously decided that they must create all conditions for Diana for the further development of her singing talent. They decided to move to the capital of Russia. In Moscow, our heroine, having perfectly coped with the entrance exams, becomes a student of the vocal department of the Russian Academy of Music. Gnesins.

Inspired by her successes, diligent and diligent student Diana Gurtskaya, in parallel with her main studies, studied acting at the Institute of Contemporary Art. Since 2003, she studied art history at Moscow State University. M.V. Lomonosov, holds a master's degree.

Musical career of the famous vocalist

The first song performed by Diana Gurtskaya was written especially for her by Igor Nikolaev. The composition "You Are Here" instantly became the leader of the charts and brought the singer great popularity among listeners. Diana Gurtskaya successfully presented this song at the All-Russian Song Festival.

Since the 2000s, the artist has been releasing solo albums. The singer's brother, Robert, becomes her producer. Diana's discography is quite extensive, during her creative life in the domestic show business, Gurtskaya has released four music albums, which is about 50 song hits:

"Is there love in the world."

"Cool guy".

"Two under one umbrella."

"Winter".

"Wreath".

"To be with you".

"Heaven, don't cry."

"Winter's Tale".

"The Wounded Bird".

"Sunny Boy".

"Poodle".

"Overcome" and others.

Life in the media space

Diana Gurtskaya does not limit herself only to vocals. In addition to singing, the girl realizes herself in various television projects, she even participated in a dance show. Diana is a frequent guest of evening talk shows on the country's leading television channels.

Another highlight in the singer's biography was her performance at the Eurovision Song Contest, where Diana represented her native Georgia.

In preparation for the Olympics in Russia, Gurtskaya was appointed "Ambassador of Sochi 2014". As the singer admitted in an interview, it was very honorable for her.

The audience knows this young woman and as a talented presenter - Diana Gurtskaya, having realized her old dream, in 2010 organized and held a charity concert "White Cane". In the same year, the charitable foundation for helping blind children "At the call of the heart" began its work.

The talented vocalist also works a lot for the benefit of Russian society, being a member of the Public Chamber of the Russian Federation.

Family happiness

Many expressed doubts that a blind girl could have a fulfilling personal life. But Diana once again destroyed all stereotypes by marrying lawyer Pyotr Kucherenko.

Their meeting was not unexpected. For a long time, young people had strictly business relationships, but over time they grew into romantic ones. As Peter admits, Diana did not immediately agree to his marriage proposal. The man did not despair and made a second attempt, giving his chosen one a star named after her.

In 2005, their marriage was officially registered, and two years later a baby appeared in the family - the son of Konstantin. For a long time, the singer doubted that she would be able to give birth to healthy children, she was very afraid that the lack of vision would be inherited.

But everything turned out in the best way, and from the latest news we can learn that the spouses Diana Gurtskaya and Pyotr Kucherenko are thinking about the birth of their second child. Their son Kostya is developing well, he is engaged in various circles, studies well and does not lag behind his peers in anything.

Photos of the singer with her husband and child are freely available on the Internet, and the full biography of this talented pop singer and strong woman can be read on Wikipedia. Author: Sofya Maleeva