A review by Georges T. Dodds

Advertisement

Klíma , in this biography of Karel Čapek, summarizes the life and works of one the premier Czech authors of the 20th century, and after Franz Kafka probably the best known. While known to most English readers as a writer of science-fiction and creator of the term "robot", Čapek was really a mainstream writer who employed science-fictional themes to expose the foibles of contemporary society, to promulgate his anti-fascist/pro-democratic rhetoric, and to outline his pragmatic and relativist philosophy. In some sense one could draw a parallel between Čapek and Rod Serling who, in the Twilight Zone, used fantasy and science-fiction to comment on society in ways network censors would not allow in a standard comtemporary drama context. Also, a large portion of Čapek's literary output was as a newspaper editorialist. In R.U.R. (1920), Čapek created the term "robot," though his "robots" were, like Philip George Chadwick's The Death Guard (1939), made up of live tissues rather than electro-mechanical. Similar themes of a cheap labour force revolting against humanity are revisited in his novel The War With The Newts (1936). Čapek's other works of science fiction with a message are Krakatit (1924) and The Absolute at Large (1922).

Besides these differences with the English science-fiction of the era, which tended far more towards the bug-eyed monster genre, one finds in Čapek, and in much Slavic literature, including their science fiction, a great sense of humour, a love of the absurd, and a conversational style of writing, as though the story was told around a pint of Urquell in a Prague beerhall -- if you've read some Stanislaw Lem (the Polish author of Solaris and others) you'll know what I mean. Čapek besides his novels and plays was also a full time editorialist for a major Czech newspaper.

Klíma's biography, while written by someone who obviously reveres Čapek, isn't beyond pointing out his foibles, character flaws, and idiosyncracies. For example, Karel's somewhat awkward adult relationships with women, particularly his later wife, Olga Scheinpflugová, were largely the result of an unnaturally coddling and clinging mother, combined with the difficulties of living with a spinal deformity. Nonetheless, Čapek was no Lovecraft-like recluse, and was close friends with a number of influential authors, artists, and politicians, including T.G. Masaryk the long-time president of the Czechoslovak Republic, whose biography-through-conversations he published (1934 in English). Čapek also had received a doctorate from Prague's Charles University and spent time in artists' circles in Paris. Consequently, Čapek was far more of an intellectual and aesthete than the vast majority of contemporaneous English writers cranking out science-fiction, who at best might have a scientific or technical degree. Yet, many of his characters are average folk, the sort of people who would have lived in the small mining village he grew up in.

Klíma delves into the meaning and sources of Čapek's writings, bringing out both the personal and socio-historical context of his writings. While the analysis of his early works and how he worked in his pragmatic and relativist beliefs is certainly of interest, but what is most remarkable and sad is that Čapek was one of the few voices with the guts and integrity to denounce Hitler and warn of Czechoslovakia's impending doom at his hands. Čapek's empassioned and tireless championing of democracy in his daily editorials further deteriorated his already poor health, until Chamberlain's signing of the Munich Agreement disheartened him and pneumonia killed him. Perhaps, he was better off not knowing what WWII did to his country.

Karel Čapek. Life and Work is literary biography which, by the author's own admittance, is not exhaustive, but strikes a good balance between documentary evidence and the emotion of a eulogy for a good friend. The book might have been improved by an index (the version I read was an "advance uncorrected proof"), but it does include a useful list of Čapek's works published in English and gives a good, succinct overview of Čapek the man and of his works. Catbird Press also reprints a number of Čapek's works, including short stories, essays, editorials and novels.

Copyright © 2002 Georges T. Dodds