Hi All

I’m back…………

Let’s continue on our journey.

We left off last time with a fantastic breakfast of the Nesbitt Castle and me telling you that AJS is not a birder but he is passionate about the history of Rhodesia/Zimbabwe – a passion he has had since a boy. We filled up with fuel and headed south, past Chipangali Wildlife Orphanage, (whose founder Viv Wilson sadly died this week) through Esigodini and Gwanda. About six kilometres later we turned right and our direction now became south-west. After about eighty kilometres the tarred surface abruptly ended and an hour later we passed through the metropolis of Hwali !

We were now in the deep south-west of Zimbabwe and Baobab country. The nests are those of the Red-billed Buffalo Weaver.

It is very dry down there and there were plenty of these spiny beasts. Anyone out there know what they are ? I don’t !

After Hwali the road deteriorated quite quickly but we only had about 40 odd km left to go before we would arrive at our destination.

The Shashi Wilderness Camp is owned and operated by the Matabeleland Branch of Wildlife Environment Zimbabwe. It is a fantastically restful and peaceful camp right in the riverine forests of the Shashi River adjacent to the Tuli Circle. This strange border phenomenon is a semi-circle of land that belongs to Zimbabwe but is on the Botswana side of the river that demarcates the border.

Something to do with the old Fort Tuli where the BSAC Pioneers entered into Matabeleland late in the 19th century.

Yes – that is AJS.

…. and looking at the view.

The next morning we embarked on the real purpose for coming to this remote place.

The Tuli Circle is managed by Zimbabwe National Parks as a safari area.

There is no real need for me to comment on the next four pictures.

That afternoon we went for a long walk up river from camp. Brilliant riverine forest with fantastically sized trees. We enjoyed that tremendously. When I got up that morning at the respectable hour of 07h30 it was VERY chilly.

But when we set out on our walk things had improved considerably……

After another chilly night in our little dormitory we packed up and returned to Bulawayo. We were there by about lunch time and went straight to our ‘hotel’.

The Bulawayo Club is one of those venerable old institutions known as a Gentleman’s Club but in this day and age is much more tolerant of the fair sex. It is lovely building and so reminiscent of its time.

We spent two nights at The Club because we needed to go shopping for supplies. Beer, coffee, lots of travel snacks, meat etc. The marathon journey was far from over.

We left Bulawayo with an extra body on board…………..

We picked up GJW and headed north. A long way north to Lupane where we took a right turn onto a dirt road then two lefts and now had 46 kilometres go and the road was pretty bad. It took an hour…..

And we still had a way to go. Eventually I saw it and we swung off the road for probably less than 100 metres and stopped.

AJS got out of the Bongo, looked around and said “What is it ?”

Remember the Shangani Patrol? Where Major Allan Wilson and his men were caught on the wrong side of the Shangani River by Matabele warriors? And all 34 were killed? This was the site of the battle on the 4th of December 1893.

AJS was very pleased.

GJW had not been there before either. It was my third visit, the first being more than fifty years previously! The beer drinking began!!

I drove back to Lupane, we filled up with fuel, swung right and continued north. “North?” I hear you say.

Yup it was not over yet……………

I will be back soon so we can continue with the journey.

Cheers

Tony