28-1468. Ignition interlock service provider application; denial; appeal; contract requirements; manufacturer reporting requirements; cease and desist order

A. An application for authorization of an ignition interlock service provider contract must be submitted to the director by the manufacturer in writing on a form prescribed and furnished by the director. The person shall include with the application all documents and fees prescribed by the director.

B. The application shall be verified and must contain:

1. The name and residence address of the applicant, the name and residence address of each partner if the applicant is a partnership or the name and residence address of each principal officer if the applicant is a corporation.

2. The applicant's principal place of business.

3. The location or planned location for each place of business at or from which the business is to be conducted.

4. Any other information the director requires.

C. The director may approve an application for authorization of a contract if the director determines that the requirements of this article are met.

D. The director may deny an application for authorization of a contract if any person included in the application has:

1. Made a misrepresentation or misstatement in the application to conceal a matter that would cause the application to be denied.

2. Been convicted of a class 1, 2, 3 or 4 felony or a crime of moral turpitude, breach of trust, fraud, theft or dishonesty in any jurisdiction or any foreign country within ten years before the date of the application.

3. Been convicted of any criminal act, other than a crime described in paragraph 2 of this subsection, in any jurisdiction or a foreign country within five years before the date of the application.

4. Been involved in any activity that the director determines to be inappropriate in relation to the authority granted.

E. The director may deny an application for authorization of an ignition interlock service provider contract under this article and, if denied, shall notify the applicant in writing of the denial within twenty days after the denial and of the grounds for the denial if the director determines that any of the following applies:

1. The applicant is not eligible for an ignition interlock service provider contract under this article.

2. The application is not made in good faith.

3. The application contains a material misrepresentation or misstatement.

4. The applicant has not met the requirements of this chapter.

F. An applicant whose application is denied may make a written request to the department for a hearing on the denial of the application within fifteen days after the notice of denial.Â If the applicant does not request a hearing within thirty days, the denial is final.

G. If the applicant requests a hearing, the director shall provide written or electronic notice to the applicant to appear at a hearing to show cause why the denial of the applicant's application should not be upheld.Â After consideration of the evidence presented at the hearing, the director shall issue a written decision and order.

H. If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to title 12, chapter 7, article 6.

I. If the director authorizes an ignition interlock service provider's application for a contract, the ignition interlock service provider's contract with the department must meet or exceed the requirements in this section, be for a term of at least three years and include all of the following provisions and requirements:

1. Require the ignition interlock service provider to maintain at least one service center in each county in this state.

2. Ignition interlock devices must be effectively and efficiently installed, calibrated and removed.

3. Ignition interlock devices must be serviced, inspected and monitored.

4. The ignition interlock manufacturer must electronically transmit reports to the department in a format that is determined by the department and that includes any of the following:

(a) Driver activity.

(b) Bypass approval.

(c) Compliance.

(d) Client violations.

(e) Unique identifying numbers for each device.

(f) Unique employee numbers identifying the person who installed or removed an ignition interlock device.

5. A detailed implementation plan that outlines the steps and the time frames necessary for the ignition interlock service provider to be fully operational.

6. The ignition interlock service provider must collect and remit all applicable fees and taxes to the appropriate government entity.

7. If the ignition interlock service provider is out of compliance, corrective actions that will be taken, including penalty provisions and liquidated damages.

8. The ignition interlock device must have security protections, including each device having the capability to record each event and provide visual evidence of any actual or attempted tampering, alteration, bypass or circumvention.

9. The ignition interlock service provider will process the transition and ensure that continuous monitoring occurs if an ignition interlock device client requires transition of services.

10. The ignition interlock service provider will self-certify, complete background checks and train technicians in compliance with the rules adopted by the department.

11. The ignition interlock service provider must ensure that each service center is adequately staffed and equipped to provide all ignition interlock device support services.Â Mobile service operations based at a service center are permitted, except that a tow truck may not be used for mobile service.Â A service center may not provide services for more than one ignition interlock service provider.

12. The ignition interlock service provider must train clients on how to use the ignition interlock device.

13. A transition plan that will ensure continuous monitoring is achieved if the ignition interlock service provider leaves this state.

14. Require the ignition interlock service provider to have and maintain insurance that is approved by the department.

15. A procedure for progressive discipline of an employee, agent or subcontractor of an ignition interlock service provider who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or of the ignition interlock service provider contract.

16. Require client information and financial records to be maintained at a commercial business location in this state that is not a residence and that has posted business hours where the department may access the records. On termination or expiration of the contract, the ignition interlock service provider must submit all client information to the department.

17. The ignition interlock service provider may not charge a client to replace a defective ignition interlock device.

18. The ignition interlock device must take a digital image identifying the client who is providing the breath sample and the digital image must include the date and time that the breath sample was provided.

19. The ignition interlock service provider must comply with all county and municipal zoning regulations for commercial businesses and provide a corresponding business license to the department.

20. The ignition interlock service provider must clearly post all client fees for the installation, removal and inspection of the certified ignition interlock device.

J. If the director has reasonable cause to believe that a person who is a party to an ignition interlock service provider contract pursuant to this article is violating any provision of this chapter, the director shall immediately issue and mail a cease and desist order to the person's last known address.

K. On receipt of the cease and desist order, the person shall immediately cease and desist, or cease and desist as provided in the contract between the department and the ignition interlock service provider, from further engaging in any activity that is not authorized pursuant to this chapter and that is specified in the cease and desist order.

L. On failure of the person to comply with the cease and desist order, the director may conduct a hearing pursuant to this section.