So there’s this incredible sequence in Akira Kurosawa’s “Ikiru” where a man has died. We’re at his wake, and it becomes clear that this man has devoted the last six months of his cancer-ridden life turning a wasteland into a park for children. There are a lot of very important people at this wake – businessmen, politicians, you name it. Some try to take credit for the achievement. Others dismiss the man’s work. Still others demean it as not all that important. There are a group of families there to pay tribute to the man for changing their lives for the better, and the “important people” easily dismiss them.

Here’s the thing, though. At the end of the day, the park is still there. The achievement has still been made. And it’ll still stand long after all those people’s words have drifted into nothingness.

Over the past few weeks, the zeitgeist has been filled with chatter about the comments of film writer and director Martin Scorsese and, more recently, writer/director Francis Ford Coppola. Specifically comments they made about Marvel superhero films.

“I don’t see them,” Scorsese said. “I tried, you know? But that’s not cinema. Honestly, the closest I can think of them, as well made as they are, with actors doing the best they can under the circumstances, is theme parks. It isn’t the cinema of human beings trying to convey emotional, psychological experiences to another human being.”

“I don’t know that anyone gets anything out of seeing the same movie over and over again,” Coppola added. “Martin was kind when he said it’s not cinema. He didn’t say it’s despicable, which I just say it is.”

Understandably, the Internet exploded. Because of course it did. One sect defended Marvel, demeaning Scorsese and Coppola as the old guard and out of touch. Many jokes were made about Coppola’s “Jack” and Scorsese’s “Vinyl” pilot. Another group rallied around the writer/directors, using the opportunity to savage Marvel movies and Disney in general, because the company seems like an easy punching bag these days for everything bad about everything.

The reaction is as visceral as it is predictable.

I have to admit I’m actually surprised it’s managed to continue on the entertainment Web sites as long as it has, and with Coppola’s new comments there probably isn’t going to be any stoppage.

It also takes place at an odd crossroads for myself, because I’m both a huge cinephile and a huge comic aficionado.

I watched my first Hitchcock movie when I was four – and this is not an exaggeration. Growing up, my bedroom had video store racks in it to house my VHS and DVDs. I attended the American Film Institute Conservatory for Screenwriting, go to TCM Fest every year and own about 400 movies from the Criterion Collection. More than that, I often guest on podcasts about the Criterion Collection. I’m the guy who wrote a letter to Warner Brothers when they shuddered Filmstruck. I’m the asshole who corrects you that “Star Wars” was really just “The Hidden Fortress” with more robots and less rape jokes.

I love Scorsese and his films have meant a hell of a lot to me. His “The Last Temptation of Christ” is one of those movies that made me begin to question all the strict teachings of the Catholic Church I had been brought up with. “Hugo” was the first movie I saw when I moved to Los Angeles. The final, bittersweet moments of “The Age of Innocence” were part of the reason I wanted to be a filmmaker. And though Coppola hasn’t had as much of an impact on my life, I still consider his “Godfather” trilogy and “Apocalypse Now” among the greatest of all films… I just came to them later than most.

I’m also the guy who started collecting comics when I was 12 and now have probably 80 boxes of them in my mother’s basement (because of course they’re in my mother’s basement) back in Ohio. In undergrad, I interned for Wizard Magazine and wrote a cover story about fellow geek Kristen Bell… she later hugged me, which is still one of my top fourteen memories. I wrote an interview column for Comic Book Resources for seven years and have talked to just about everyone in the industry multiple times. I remember Crossgen Comics. Hell, I own original art from Crossgen Comics.

I was always a DC guy growing up, and Superman remains my favorite superhero – maybe favorite character – of all time. The Marvel superhero films that began with “Iron Man” tap into that same sense of wonder and magic for me that the DC Comics from Mark Waid, Dan Jurgens and Grant Morrison did for me in my early adulthood. I see each one opening weekend, and though some are weaker than others, I genuinely believe that every one of the films made under producer Kevin Feige is, well, good.

All that is to say that I have all the skin in this game. When I look at my Facebook feed (yes, I’m an ancient 34 year old) and see certain comments from my Cinephile friends, they sting. So do the ones from my very testy comic fan friends.

And I know that we are living a world where everything is about Me! Now! Answers! Hell, if Postmates tells me it’s going to take more than 30 minutes to bring me my Cinnabon, I shut down the app and cry.

Yes, all of this seems very important right this very second, but remember that park I was talking about earlier? It’s the same thing here. In 10, 20, 50 years, all these Marvel movies will still be here. And so will the oeuvres of Scorsese and Coppola. Because, let’s face it, when Scorsese and Coppola use the word “cinema,” they really mean “art.” Great art will outlast all the Rotten Tomatoes scores. And the message boards. And the Reddits and SubReddits and the Instagram Stories and I don’t know what all.

Writer/director Akira Kurosawa, whose work I mentioned earlier when discussing “Ikiru,” really didn’t like the movies of another Japanese director of the era, Yasujiro Ozu. After Ozu released one of his familial dramas called “The Flavor of Green Tea Over Rice,” Kurosawa sniffed the following: “Japanese films all tend to be rather bland in flavor, like green tea over rice. I think we ought to have richer foods, and richer films.”

Ouch.

The comments, of course, caused a lot of hubbub at the time, but now they are nothing but a funny footnote in both filmmakers’ filmographies. Kurosawa’s work includes masterpieces that helped shape modern filmmaking like “Yojimbo,” “High and Low” and the aforementioned “Hidden Fortress.” He has two films on Sight and Sound’s Top 100 films of all time: “Seven Samurai” and “Rashomon.” However, those two movies are lower on the list than Ozu’s “Tokyo Story” and “Late Spring.”

In the ‘50s, “Tales From the Crypt” was considered trash and stories were banned for being culturally derisive. Today many of those stories are considered masterpieces. Science Fiction was considered a low art, and now Ray Bradbury is routinely called one of the greatest of all authors, and “2001: A Space Odyssey” one of the best films of all time. I could keep listing examples all night, but it all comes down to this:

Art perseveres.

And why are we even trying to dictate what defines great art anymore, when that meaning has changed so often? Really, when you think about it, how one defines art is the most intimate of subjects. Personally, I call art anything that moves me either positively or negatively. But that may be much different for you, and that’s okay.

Earlier I mentioned the end of “The Age of Innocence,” where Daniel Day Lewis’ character can’t quite bring himself to enter the home of his lost love. When I first saw it, I cried and cried. Hell, I still do when I watch it. Near the end of “Avengers: Endgame,” there is a single shot at the funeral of Tony Stark which encompasses just about every major character from the entirety of the Marvel Universe, and when I saw it, I cried and cried. When I took my mother to see “Captain Marvel,” the title character has a line just after the climax: “I have nothing to prove to you.” I looked over and my mother was dissolved in tears, at both the moment in the narrative and the meaning behind it.

We are human. To me, if something touches me emotionally, it is valid artistically. It is “cinema.” Don’t let others dictate to you what art is, because they may well be wrong. Hell, I may be wrong. Decide for yourself. Love what you love. Be inspired by whatever inspires you.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1993

Studio: Daiei Film, Toho

Screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa, based on the works of Hyakken Uchida

Cast: Tatsuo Matsumura, Kyoko Kagawa

Cinematographer: Takao Saito, Shoji Ueda

Music: Shinichiro Ikebe

After samurai, warlords, judo masters, shoe designers, artists and doctors, Akira Kurosawa focuses his last film on a man named Uchida. Upon first blush, he is the most ordinary of heroes. He’s never been to war, never tracked down kidnappers or a stolen gun, never ran into the blast of an atomic bomb, never lived in the Russian woods for decades and I’m pretty sure he never pulled a “Hamlet” on the company that murdered his father. Instead, Uchida is a retired professor. We don’t even know what he teaches. Instead of hiding princesses, getting across borders or getting involved in a press scandal, Uchida’s problems involve housing and missing cats. “Madadayo” purposely calls back what most consider to be the maestro’s greatest work, “Ikiru,” acting as its spiritual brother. It’s about living a life, and the thousands of decisions we make a day that make us human beings.

In other words, it’s the perfect way to say goodbye.

Then again, Uchida famously refuses to do just that. His students even create an annual party for Uchida where he shouts “Madadayo” over and over, which is literally translated as “Not yet!” There’s still so much more to say! So much more to do! I can only imagine that Kurosawa knew that this was his final film, and you can feel him coming to terms with these divergent ideas throughout – I know I have to say goodbye, but I’m not ready yet.

It’s also so fitting that his last film is, essentially, about love. Love between a teacher and his students, a husband and a wife, a master and his pet. Every one of the film’s loosely connected chapters (denoted with long fades) comes back to this idea. In the first scene, Uchida (Tatsuo Matsumura) announces that he is retiring, and his students tell him that he’ll always be their professor. It’s not quite “O Captain, my captain!” but it’s pretty close. Kurosawa, who also wrote the screenplay, purposely keeps the specifics of Uchida’s life general. As I wrote, we don’t even know what he teaches, and it’s stated that his writings will bring in enough money to keep himself and his wife afloat, but we don’t know what these writings are. Advice he gives his students is general and not specific to one subject. While in a lesser movie, these sort of generalities are infuriating, somehow Kurosawa makes it work here (I feel like I keep writing time and again in these final few essays that everything Kurosawa does should not work, and yet miraculously does. I suppose I should have always assumed he could pull anything off).

Kurosawa also keeps the supporting cast ciphers as well, instead placing his focus almost entirely on Uchida. This is another hallmark of late-era Kurosawa – he does the same thing with the main characters of “Dersu Uzala” and “Rhapsody in August.” Uchida’s wife, who isn’t even given a name but is played very well by Kyoko Kagawa, is the most well-sketched of the supporting cast, but she’s basically there to be supportive, emotional and to look on lovingly. There are four students who love Uchida dearly, and we are not so much engaged by their individual points of view (since they rarely have differing ones) and personalities (since they are all essentially the same), but by their obvious adoration for this quirky, interesting, stubborn old man.

I have to say, it’s so refreshing to see a movie about inherently good people doing good things to help one another. Is it far-fetched that these men drop everything immediately if their professor needs anything? Is it crazy that they build him a house and then buy the land next to it to make sure that he can see the suns in the morning? Is it nuts that they basically create a country-wide search for Uchida’s missing cat? Some might say so, but I don’t think so. If you are very, very lucky, at some point in your life you will have a teacher who you adore as much as these men love Uchida. When I was attending the American Film Institute Conservatory, I met a professor named Jim Hosney, and he changed the way I look at movies forever. It’s not an exaggeration to say I would do any of these things for him in a heartbeat.

In some ways, you have to wonder if Kurosawa based these four students off of George Lucas, Francis Ford Coppola and Steven Spielberg. They never “took one of his classes,” but they openly said that they learned almost everything from Kurosawa, and when the maestro had troubles getting funding for his films, they made the necessary calls to make sure his vision was uncompromised. Or is that a bridge too far?

Perhaps. Perhaps not. Uchida is obviously a version of Kurosawa, and much of the life advice the character gives could have easily come from the maestro (in fact, these bits of advice often are repeating morals and ethics he touched on earlier in his filmography). But while the supporting cast are ciphers, Kurosawa is very careful to craft Uchida into a fully three-dimensional, eccentric human being. When he learns his new home was often robbed in the past, his way of dealing with it is to leave his backdoor unlocked and nailing a sign to it that reads “Burglar’s Entrance.” What robber would actually take the bait? When he and his wife move into what is basically a shack in the bad part of town after the war claims their first home, Uchida notices that everyone urinates on his boundary wall. His solution? To paint a scissors on the wall, implying that if he catches anyone pissing on his wall, he’ll cut their dicks off. Not exactly subtle, but it works.

Uchida’s humanity is underlined when his cat, named Alley, disappears and he has a mental breakdown from worry. As his students rally to find Alley, he tries unsuccessfully to keep it together, unable to escape picturing the cat roaming around in dangerous situations. By this time his character has been set up so perfectly that we fully buy that this is the type of man who would have this reaction to losing a beloved pet, and our hearts break for him.

One of the movie’s missteps is a long, loooong sequence showcasing one of the “Not Yet!” birthday parties for Uchida. It is right after the war, and the dining hall is filled with men who get drunk and praise their professor. This is one of those very unfortunate sequences where Kurosawa has the characters laugh loudly and annoyingly at every word and phrase, and even throws in a prolonged musical number for good measure. Aside from “Ikiru” (oh look, another callback!), I loathe these types of scenes in Kurosawa, and this is no exception.

There is a second one of these parties in the third act, and this one is much more successful. Things have changed. The room is bigger. Women and children are now invited. Without overtly stating it, Kurosawa visually gets across that Uchida is surrounded by all the lives he has touched over his life. Not just his wife and students, but their wives, children and grandchildren… people who will carry on Uchida’s teachings even if they don’t know his name. And here, subtly at first, Uchida begins to fade away. He feels ill, and his cries of “Not Yet!” aren’t fooling anyone. He is taken home and the doctor says he’s going to be fine, but viewers know better – any time a doctor says someone is fine in the third act of a tearjerker drama, he or she will be dead in ten minutes or less.

And then we have the final sequence – Uchida’s dream, where he finally succumbs and stops shouting “Not Yet!” He’s a young boy again, hiding from girls in haystacks when he is silenced by seeing the great, beautiful…something above him. And that’s all there is. This is the only unreal moment in the entire film, and though we’ve seen this type of thing before, it feels fitting that they are the last images Kurosawa ever crafted.

It’s fitting as well, that “Mayadayo” is his final movie. It’s not his best, but it’s still great. I feared that anything after his transcendent “Ran” would feel like a needless epilogue, and though “Akira Kurosawa’s Dreams” and “Rhapsody in August” sometimes felt that way, this did not. He was an artist, yes, arguably the greatest filmmaker who has ever lived, but he was also a teacher. And this felt like a necessary goodbye from him – a final tip of the hat to all his students and an acknowledgement that his works would live on in filmmakers as long as films are made.

Thank you, maestro, for all the lessons.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1991

Studio: Shochiku Films Ltd.

Screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa, based on the novel by Kiyoko Murata

Cast: Sachiko Murase, Tomoko Otakara, Richard Gere

Cinematographer: Takao Saito, Shoji Ueda

Music: Shinichiro Ikebe

“Rhapsody in August” should not work. Its four children characters are uninteresting ciphers. They’re tasked with selling lines like “People are apt to forget even a dreadful event like that”… and then the child actors do not come close to being able to do that. The middle-aged characters are even more cardboard, and don’t get me started about the scene in the woods. Yes, I was ready to dislike the movie…

But then I didn’t.

Somehow, despite all of its shortcomings, Kurosawa has pulled off making “Rhapsody in August” something special. It takes awhile, but as soon as you recognize that this isn’t a “film,” but a meditation on subjects so close to Kurosawa’s heart, it clicks. In many ways, this is the movie that “Akira Kurosawa’s Dreams” could have and should have been, because it succeeds in almost all the ways that anthology failed. Most importantly, it creates emotional resonance for the viewer.

The maestro here deals with the subjects of age and nuclear devastation – ones he’s dealt with them numerous times throughout his career. Here, his point-of-view is somber. Resigned.

Our story concerns an old woman named Kane (Sachiko Murase), who takes in her four grandchildren for the summer. She has been invited to the death bed of her brother in Hawaii, but he is a man she does not remember nor is she sure he’s really her brother (this is not because of Alzheimer’s so much as it is because she had so many brothers and sisters). Kane was one of the survivors of the atomic bombing, though her husband was not so fortunate – he worked at the school that was directly under ground zero. Kane saw the explosion from her home and raced toward the devastation, and the aftereffects of the radiation made her lose most of her hair.

The four interchangeable grandchildren are, at first, horrible to Kane. They see the opportunity for her to say goodbye to her maybe-brother as a perfect chance to go on vacation to Hawaii! They mock her cooking (she has to prepare everything soft because of her dentures) and complain about not having any appliances. And then they begin to learn about the bomb and how it affected not only their family, but all of Japan. Kurosawa sets up what a big journey this will be early when he has all the kids wearing Americanized t-shirts with US schools and brands on during the first scenes.

There is a haunting sequence where three of the children tour Nagasaki. Kurosawa sets them at the center of a very empty frame when they stand in the schoolyard where their grandfather died decades before. Before them is a piece of metal playground equipment that was warped and half-melted in the explosion. It’s impossible not to think of the old man sitting in the swing set moments before he died in “Ikiru” at that moment, and I think that it is purposeful by Kurosawa. Later, the children visit all the memorials set up for the dead, but do not interact with any of them until they reach a stone that tells of how so many of the dead died of thirst after the blast. The children race into the pond in front of them and movingly splash the monument with water. This signals a change in their characters – they haven’t gained any depth, but we can now see that they are good people.

Kurosawa solely wrote the screenplay here, and he sets up an interesting dynamic. The children want to…need to know more about the bomb and how it affected the Grandmother they have come to love. In doing so, they are tearing open old wounds for the woman – the experience is wholly upsetting to both parties, but somehow necessary.

There is a third generation at play here… the parents of the children and the sons and daughters of Kane, but this is the least interesting aspect of “Rhapsody in August.” These moments play almost like a Greatest Hits from previous Kurosawa. They suspect their American cousin is important and therefore want to impress him. They don’t care about Kane and don’t want to spend time with her or understand her point of view.

Richard Gere is weirdly brought in around the two-thirds mark to meet Kane and, essentially, apologize on behalf of all Americans for dropping the bomb. It’s certainly an odd choice, considering that emotional maturation from Kane that appears to happen here is later undercut by the finale, as is using Gere as a voicebox for all of America. The movie rightly ignores the he-said/she-said of the bomb drop, choosing not to mention Pearl Harbor, the whats, whos, hows and why. Instead, it acknowledges that there are still bad feelings from the Japanese towards America and does the smartest thing possible by personalizing the devastation (both physical and mental) on one woman and her journey. So suddenly bringing in Gere to, essentially, speak for a nation is odd. That said, Gere acquits himself well to an almost impossible role to play, and there is a delightful moment with him and the grandchildren involving a makeshift bed that I very much enjoyed. It’s the most character development any supporting character gets.

Kurosawa gives us very simple shots and set-ups for most of the movie’s runtime, and considering what a simple story we have, this is fitting. But by doing that, he draws so much more attention to the moments where he does show off. The characters sometimes say that, when the bomb was dropped, it was like a gigantic eye opening over the hills, and Kurosawa blatantly illustrates that in a single shot of amazing power – it feels almost like a Dali painting. There’s another sequence with ants which is one of those metaphors that isn’t obvious… you can interpret the American cousin and the Japanese child watching marching ants make their way up a rose in multiple ways, and that’s a good thing.

And then, of course, there’s that image of Kane running through the storm, clutching her overturned umbrella as she refuses to go quietly into that dark night. It really is one of the most indelible of all Kurosawa images (so much so that it was made into the DVD cover I bought), made all the more heartbreaking by seeing the grandchildren who have grown to love her so chasing her… trying desperately to get to her. Save her. It’s moments like these where “Rhapsody in August” is a poem, one where you might not remember the individual words or phrases, but do remember how it made you feel. The scenes will fade, the melancholy will not.

Notes:

-The movie was apparently controversial because Kurosawa didn’t underline Japan’s responsibility on getting the bomb dropped on them. Really, stupid people? I mean, really?

-No Criterion edition yet, the DVD is released under MGM’s “World Films” brand, has a trailer as supporting material and… nothing else.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1985

Studio: Toho, Acteurs Auteurs Associes, Orion Classics

Screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa, Masato Ide, Hideo Oguni

Cast: Tatsuya Nakadai, Mieko Harada, Peter

Cinematographer: Takao Saito, Masaharu Ueda, Asakazu Nakai

Music: Toru Takemitsu

“King Lear” is a masterpiece. “Ran” is an even greater masterpiece.

The original play is one of the Bard’s finest, but one must allow for the possibility that another artist can improve upon his words and story. Kurosawa took all the best parts of Shakespeare’s work and then found ways to improve on them. Nothing the master does here is easy – any other filmmaker, no matter how talented, would have buckled under the hard, curious choices Kurosawa makes. But by taking those chances, the film becomes transcendent. When you step back and view the movie as a whole, it becomes clear that it is one of the greatest pieces of art of our time… or any time.

How’s that for praise? So where do I go from here…

Well, I suppose, to the story. Co-written by Kurosawa, Masato Ide and Hideo Oguni, they transport “Lear” to ancient Japan. The king is now a warlord named Hidetora (Tatsuya Nakadai). Not just any warlord, Hidetora has conquered land after land, until everything he can see is in his charge. As the film opens, he decides to “retire,” essentially, and gift land and a castle (since he’s got plenty) to each of his three sons. His most beloved son, Saburo (Daisuke Ryu), declares that this will only end in blood and chaos and, in a fit of rage, Hidetora disowns him.

Of course, Saburo was right, and soon the blood begins the flow…

Hidetora is not a good person. None of the characters are, except one. The warlord has killed countless people, and after slaughtering kings and other warlords has forced their daughters to marry his sons. The first is Sue (Yoshiko Miyazaki), who is the single righteous character, and has forgiven Hidetora for his sins — a gesture that the warlord cannot comprehend. The other is Kaede (Mieko Harada), who reacted… less sweetly. But more on her later.

Despite being a monster, Hidetora stupidly expects that his sons will live in peace with one another. Oops. Had he waited until after his death to have his intentions made clear, the chaos and bloodshed of the first two acts would have still probably happened in about the same manner they happen in the film. But allowing Hidetora to witness them, powerless to have any effect on them, adds in an extra layer of tragedy.

Even though we are essentially watching scorpions trapped in a bucket stinging one another until they are all dead, we still invest ourselves emotionally with the characters. Every time I watch the movie, I am shocked that this happens… and yet it does. This is further surprising considering one of Kurosawa’s visual techniques – he shoots nothing in close up. Whereas other directors and cinematographers would lean on those close ups in order to underline emotion and help us engage with the cast, Kurosawa keeps his distance.

And yet we still care.

So much of this has to do with the first few minutes of the film. Yes, we immediately see Hidetora powerfully take down a boar, but later he falls asleep mid-conversation. He might be a warlord, but he is still an old man. In a gesture so small and yet so resonant, Saburo cuts down two large branches and sticks them into the ground near his father, shading him as he sleeps. Horrible people, but through that one act of kindness, we care. Perhaps a comparable movie is the first “Godfather” film. Because Michael cares about Kate, we care about Michael. And because we see Vito in moments of humanity… moments of kindness… our heart aches when he dies. The same is true here.

Perhaps another part of it is that “Ran” has one of the greatest villains in the history of film with Lady Kaede. For me, she ranks right up there with the Joker, the Reverend from “Night of the Hunter” and Hannibal Lecter. Eyebrows painted high on her forehead, Kaede is the second variation on Lady Macbeth that Kurosawa has given us, after Lady Asaji in “Throne of Blood.” They have the same creepy slow squeak of their kimono whenever they move, but Kaede just blows Asaji away. In my “Throne of Blood” article I wrote that Kaede is “a tornado of a woman capable of slow manipulation and fierce battle depending on what tactic she needed to take,” and indeed she is. But the most interesting thing about her is that she is the only character in the entire film to get a happy ending. After being forced to marry into the family that slaughtered her family, Kaede has rightfully been plotting revenge for (one assumes) decades. And she does just that. The film lingers on her character even after the death of Hidetora to show her moment of triumph, and though she is immediately slaughtered (it happens offscreen, but we do see a glorious spray of blood hit the wall as she is beheaded), she gets the opportunity to learn that she has won. This is purposeful – Hidetora lives just long enough to see everything he built fall and Kaede lives just long enough to see the same thing. As written, it is nearly an impossible character to play, and yet Harada manages to pull it off with a tour-de-force performance. It’s not many actors who can go from begging to strength to literally sucking the blood from the neck of the man who killed your husband as a seduction tactic, and yet she does. Bravo.

If you haven’t seen the film, throw out any notions of how it looks, because you are wrong. While one would expect drab darkness in the costumes and insidious tones in the cinematography, we get neither. Instead we get over a thousand glorious, colorful costumes (which won an Oscar) that Kurosawa often frames against lush colors of green, red and orange. Nakadai is covered in garish overdone old person make-up which in almost any other movie would be laughable (this type of make-up hasn’t gone well for Kurosawa before). The music is sparse where you would expect it to crescendo, and I have already mentioned all the medium shots instead of close ups. It’s almost as if the master set out to turn every visual cliché on its ear, and not only managed to pull it all off, but make it look great.

It’s a testament to how engaging “Ran” is from a story standpoint that I’m just now getting to the battle scenes, which eclipse anything in Kurosawa’s oeuvre…and indeed probably 99% of other filmed battle scenes. By the time the battles hit, we are so engaged emotionally that the actual warfare is an afterthought – and I mean that as the highest possible compliment. What a joy it is to behold. That shot of Hidetora walking down the stairs of his burning castle. The shots of the cavalry galloping towards the woods, with no music and just the overwhelming thud of the hooves. Watching the sky darken over the field of battle when real clouds block out the sun. The sight of an army atop a hill. Filmmaking doesn’t get much better than this, folks.

The ending is the darkest Kurosawa ever created – even darker than “Kagemusha” and “I Live in Fear.” It seems to argue for the opposite of the themes that Kurosawa usually illustrated earlier in his career, and why not? People change. The world changes. His life was obviously very difficult, but in the end he still remembered that the art mattered. That the art lasted. Like the great paintings, plays, books and films of our time, “Ran” will last. And that final image of the blind man on the edge of the precipice, abandoned by his gods and ever closer to falling, remains possibly the most haunting final moment in film history.

Notes:

Because of some shady dealings, “Ran” was not chosen as Japan’s entry for the 1985 Academy Awards. Thankfully, members of the Academy still rallied and got Kurosawa nominated for Best Director (every now and then the Academy gets something right), and the movie was also nominated for Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography and won the Oscar for Best Costumes. Japan’s entry that year wasn’t even nominated for Best Foreign Film, and “Ran” lost in all other categories to “Out of Africa.”

The Criterion DVD is long out of print but worth spending the extra money for, because the supplements are essential to any fan of the film. Sidney Lumet’s incredible introduction alone makes the hefty secondary market prices worth it.

Roger Ebert’s Great Movies entry on “Ran” is also essential.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1980

Studio: Toho, 20th Century Fox

Screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa, Masato Ide

Cast: Tatsuya Nakadai, Tatsuya Nakadai, Tsutomu Yamazaki

Cinematographer: Takao Saito

Music: Shin’ichiro Ikebe

Visually, “Kagemusha” is the best looking film Kurosawa has made so far, eclipsing even “The Hidden Fortress” and “Dersu Uzala.” More than that, every single scene is good, often wonderful. If we are using Howard Hawks’ definition of a great movie (“three great scenes, no bad ones”), then “Kagemusha” is indeed great.

But great as it may be, it’s not very good.

As noted above, all of the ingredients are certainly there… and yet the parts exceed the whole. The movie seems to be about a lot of things, but at the same time is about nothing. You don’t engage with the main character (actually, I’m fairly certain the main character isn’t really our main character), and by the time we come to the final, stunning image…I was left cold. I was wowed by the visual beauty, but not emotionally moved. It’s very telling that none of the main characters take part in the climax of the movie – they all sit at the sidelines, pedestrians to their own fates.

And yet the excellence of the individual scenes and the beauty of what Kurosawa and his cinematographer Takao Saito achieve throughout make you almost able to wave off how impersonal it all feels. Almost.

In the 1500s, three clans battle with one another. When the leader of the Takeda clan (Tatsuya Nakadai) is assassinated by a sniper’s bullet, he lives long enough to put into motion a plot for a common Thief who is virtually identical to him (Nakadai again) to pretend to be him for three years’ time, preserving the clans’ safety. And thus the leader’s brother Nobukado (Tsutomu Yamazaki) is tasked with ensuring that the Thief completes his mission.

Why three years and not until the young heir to the crown is an adult? No idea. There’s also a subplot where Katsuyori (Kenichi Hagiwara), the illegitimate son of the leader, is grumpy because his son has been chosen as the heir, not him.

There is so much potential for the story here…potential that is never really acted upon. Kurosawa has returned again and again throughout his career to the question “What is the measure of a human being?” and one would think he would be exploring that here as well, considering the premise. And perhaps he was, as evidenced by one of the final shots – when the Thief races through the bodies of the murdered armies and is himself shot, Kurosawa interestingly cuts to the empty chair of the clan leader, implying that the Thief had become the leader metaphorically. There are discussions between Nobukado and other characters about how the Thief had started to resemble the leader more than just physically, but this isn’t justified by any of the Thief’s actions. The Thief creates a close relationship with the leader’s grandson, but the grandson is quick to point out that he was afraid of his real grandfather. The Thief tries to ride the leader’s horse, but is immediately thrown. The Thief is asked to make a single military decision, but his answer is merely a mimic of something he heard earlier, not his own thoughts. Finally, the Thief has a dream where the ghost of the Leader is chasing him, not embracing him or merging with him. I would have bought that the Thief became completely loyal to his adopted clan, but the end takes it three steps too far because it is not set up.

Or Kurosawa and his co-writer Masato Ide could have taken it in the other direction, where the Thief runs the clan into the ground because he is not the equal of his double. But that film was not to be either.

These are all symptoms of the main problem of “Kagemusha,” which that it does not know who the Thief is. Yes, it’s inspired that Kurosawa and Ide chose a Thief to, essentially, steal away the identity of the clan leader. But who is this guy? He seems to fervently disagree with the clan’s politics at the beginning, but that never gets paid off. He seems to have a sense of humor, but aside from a scene or two that is never paid off. He seems to be a lot of things, but the only real trait he has is being a cipher.

It’s not Nakadai’s fault – he’s a very good actor and shines extremely well when given something to play with… though you still can’t help but wonder what would have happened if Toshiro Mifune had played the role. This is the fault of the writing. Because the writers do not define the Thief before he takes the place of the leader, the actual act of the impersonation doesn’t have the suspense or pleasure it should bring the viewer.

Speaking of the impersonation scenes, this is also a major missed opportunity. Every time Nobukado walks the Thief into a room of the castle, he introduces the Thief and then says that the people know the secret. The brother does. All the generals do. The illegitimate son does. A group of seven bodyguards do. Basically everyone in the castle except the mistresses and the leader’s grandson know the secret… and that robs most of the scenes of any suspense they might have had. There’s one very funny scene of the Thief and the leader’s mistresses where he almost blows his cover, but that’s really it. It’s never played for real suspense, there are no real shocks and, when the cover is finally blown, it feels like a major anticlimax.

Perhaps Kurosawa picked the wrong protagonist. Shift the film over to Nobukado and perhaps it would have been a masterpiece. Every time he speaks with the Thief, he is essentially talking to a carbon copy of his dead brother – talk about a weird grieving process. And all of the pressure is really on him… he’s got to keep the Thief under control, the Generals happy and the clan together, all while keeping a titanic secret. Now that’s a story I would love to see, and it’s telling that in many scenes your eyes shifts to Nobukado, even though he is not the primary focus.

Now that I’ve walloped the movie for 1,000 words, I should underline that I still think you should see it… and as soon as possible. There are things in “Kagemusha” I have never seen on film before, and moments of transcendence that basically reach out of the screen, grab the viewer and shake him.

The movie lives in moments both intimate and sweeping. There’s a scene early in the movie where a messenger delivers an important report. It’s been done thousands of times before, many by Kurosawa. But he finds a fresh perspective here, with the messenger running through what appears to be a sea of dead bodies… that are revealed to only be sleeping. There’s a shot of soldiers framed against an orange/red sky that is the most beautiful image of war ever put on film – better than anything Kubrick, Malick or Spielberg ever cooked up. The first shot of the film is endless, in a wonderful way. It shows the throne room, with three virtually identical men sitting near one another, facing away from each other. The dialogue content is great, but Kurosawa’s simple frame has you searching desperately for where the split screen is, and just when you think you’ve figured it out (it’s gotta be the candlestick!), he then has the characters move in such a way that makes you scramble to rethink again.

This is the first time Kurosawa has really used color to his advantage. “Dodes’ka-den” was a failed experiment (not just visually, but that’s another story), and though “Dersu Usala” is definitely one of the most visually appealing of the maestro’s works, it uses natural forest colors for most of its running time. Here, the entire movie looks like a colorful painting. From the stunning costumes and fabrics to the shots of rainbows, weather and clouds, the master is working on a different level here. It never gets more beautiful than the aforementioned dream sequence, which feels somehow like a silent film ascetically while also resembling a Monet painting. It’s the kind of sequence where you want to rewind it as soon as you finish it, just to drink in its beauty over and over. It all never looks real (the blood at the finale might as well be literally paint brushed on the horses and soldiers by Kurosawa himself), but in this case the palate makes it visually transcendent.

Then, of course, there’s my favorite sound effect in the movies: hundreds of horses galloping all at once. It’s not quite as overwhelming and awesome as “Ran,” but it’s pretty close.

It’s interesting to compare “Kagemusha” to “Dersu Uzala.” If I were stacking the two together, “Dersu Uzala” is by most definitions a lesser film. The dialogue is a trainwreck, the pacing off and the premise told thousands of times before. It’s got a couple of great moments, but just as many clunky bits. And yet, I still like it more than “Kagemusha” because I love Dersu as a character, and this film might be really pretty in all the ways that count, but it’s also soulless.

Notes:

The Criterion disc is incredible. It has an unmissable conversation with George Lucas and Francis Ford Coppola, who helped Kurosawa find funding for this movie, as well as a 45 minute video comparing Kurosawa’s artwork to the finished film.

“Kagemusha” was nominated for Best Foreign Film at the Academy Awards, as was the Art Decoration.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1975

Studio: Daiei Film, Mosfilm

Screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa, Yuri Nagibin, based on the book by Vladimir Arsenyev

Cast: Maxim Munzuk, Yury Solomin

Cinematographer: Asakazu Nakai, Yuro Gantman, Fyodor Dobronravov

Music: Isaak Shvarts

What is the measure of a man?

It’s a question Kurosawa revisited often, most notably in “Ikiru” and “Red Beard” previously, and again the master returns to it. This film came out at the lowest point in his career, after the implosion of “Tora! Tora! Tora!,” the rumors of his mental instability, the bombing of the schizophrenic “Dodes’ka-den,” his attempted suicide and his inability to find funding for anything in Japan. And while the film was shot completely in Russia with an almost entirely new crew, it feels like a great Kurosawa movie – like the maestro had finally managed to overcome whatever darkness had surrounded him… and just got back to making great movies with great characters and great stories. And while the scope of “Dersu Uzala” is certainly epic, Kurosawa never forgets that awe is never genuine without intimacy.

The true-ish story of Dersu Uzala (played here by Maxim Munzuk) is one that he had been trying to make for decades, and the writing posits a tremendous understanding of this very fascinating enigma. He’s a man who lives simply in the woods, hunting and roaming from place to place, never settled and never wanting more than the basics. He is, for all intents and purposes, a hermit. And yet within Dersu’s soul is a kindness and engagement one would never expect. Every person he encounters (which, obviously, are very few), he treats with dignity and openness, wanting to share his lifestyle and ways with anyone who will listen. Aside from the whole living in the woods thing, does this guy sound at all familiar to you?

There is a slight frame story of a military captain named Arseniev (Yury Solomin) searching for the unmarked grave of Dersu. After that, we are flashed back several years to 1902 and the origin story of how Arseniev met Dersu – all with the backdrop of sweeping, epic shots of the Shkotovo forests shot in astounding 70 mm. Though in many ways this film represents Kurosawa going back to the basics, one thing has changed: In his older films like “Rashomon” he shot up through the trees into the sky. Now he shoots down into the trees toward the earth. Attach whatever symbolism you like to that observation.

The story is split down the middle, with the first half focusing on the first encounter of Arseniev and Dersu and the forming of their friendship. The second half is when they are reunited years later, when Dersu is losing his vision and becoming incapable of living the life he wants. Critical reaction when the film came out was positive (the movie won the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film), but critics mostly said that the first half was incredible, while the second sagged. I feel like the opposite is true.

When Dersu first meets Arseniev and his men, all of the expected things take place. Arseniev is a cipher, dreary except in his relationship with Dersu (shades of “The Great Gatsby” and “Sophie’s Choice” abound, with their bland narrator way less interesting than the title character) The men mock him for his smell, his way of life, his seemingly silly insights into the forest…etc. Kurosawa falls back on one of his most unfortunate clams – having the group of soldiers laugh so obviously at everything Dersu does. In the most clichéd scene in the film, the men are in a shooting competition to prove their manhood, and Dersu unsurprisingly blows them all out of the water by not only hitting the bottle they are swinging for target practice, but the string attached to the bottle. Would Kurosawa and his co-screenwriter Yuri Nagibin have been more successful if they had allowed Dersu to just seem nuts until he saves Arseniev’s life? I think so.

The movie perks up incredibly during that sequence, where Dersu and Arseniev are unable to head back to camp because they are surrounded in the wilderness by thin ice. Kurosawa goes to pains to show that these are real actors who are actually standing on real ice that is cracking in places, upping the stakes even further. What follows is a dizzying, wonderful sequence, one of the best in Kurosawa’s oeuvre, where the men start slicing straw down to build a make-shift hut that will save them from freezing to death.

The second half of the movie is much more bittersweet. Time passes, the two old friends reunite and there is another crackerjack suspense scene, this time involving Dersu in a flooding river (also shot very obviously without stunt men in a real flooding river). But the real heart of the second half is a quiet scene where Dersu finally admits to himself (and Arseniev) that he cannot see. It’s heartbreaking, and watching Dersu attempt to change his way of living to become acclimated to his macular degeneration by joining Arseniev prove to be some of the saddest passages in all of the master’s work.

Of course, one cannot mention the movie without mentioning the look. While Kurosawa’s use of color in “Dodes’ka-den” was disastrous, here it is vivid and deep. When Arseniev first visits the woods, Kurosawa blasts them in a deep red, almost like a horror film, and as Dersu’s point of view becomes more pronounced the light becomes more natural. The film was shot on 70 mm, and it’s one of those movies that truly needs to be seen on the biggest screen possible. It’s worth the wait. Other “epic” films like “Gone With the Wind” and “Lawrence of Arabia” are great on the big screen but hold up incredibly well on the small screen too. I feel like “Dersu Uzala” works as well as it does because its scope allows you to forgive the many storytelling flaws of the first half and the blandness of Arseniev. I would probably be less forgiving if I were watching it on an iPad.

And seeing it on a smaller screen robs the movie of its most interesting vision: Dersu’s face. Maxim Munzuk gives a great performance, but Kurosawa seems obsessed with his face and look – lingering shots on him and his reactions to those around him. It’s one of those faces which is not handsome, but is impossible to look away from or forget. Long after the memories of the forests and the river and even the ice fade, you’ll remember Dersu, and smile.

Notes:

-The film also reminded me of the works of Werner Herzog, specifically his one-two punch of “Aguirre: Wrath of God” and “Fitzcarraldo.” You get the same epic views of vistas that you can’t quite believe were actually captured on film, and there’s that inherent sense of danger as you see the actors encountering life-threatening things. But while Herzog’s masterpieces lacked humanity, Kurosawa has it here in spades.

-The film is only available on a pretty shitty Kino DVD, and there’s no sign of a Criterion release. This is a shame, since the movie needs some restoration and watching the Kino version at home won’t fill you with the sense of wonder you need to fully engage. Take my earlier advice and wait until you can see it in 70 mm at a revival house. Or call Criterion and start insisting that they get their act together and get the rights to the movie.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1970

Studio: Club of the Four Nights Productions, Toho Studios

Screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa, Hideo Oguni and Shinobu Hasimoto, based on the book by Shugoro Yamamoto

Cast: Yoshitaka Zushi, Kin Sugai, Toshiyuki Tonomura

Cinematographer: Yasumichi Fukuzawa, Takao Saito

Music: Toru Takemitsu

“Dodes’ka-den” comes with a lot of baggage, most of it unfortunate. After becoming marred in an abortive attempt to direct a part of “Tora! Tora! Tora!” it was rumored that Kurosawa had become mentally unhinged, and it was difficult for him to find funding for his next feature. With most people now glued to their television and movie attendance in decline, Kurosawa formed a company with three other iconic Japanese directors, hoping that their pedigree would help films get produced. This movie was to kick off everything, and was intended to make a huge splash…then it bombed and was the first and last movie the production company would release. The film’s failure is famously (though never confirmed to be) one of the reasons Kurosawa attempted suicide in 1971.

Yeah, like I wrote, a lot of baggage.

Because of that, you really want “Dodes’ka-den” to be some kind of masterpiece, considering all the suffering that went into it and that it (possibly) caused. Some people do really like it – the film was nominated for an Oscar for Best Foreign Film and it’s received the prestigious Criterion Collection treatment (like most of Kurosawa’s films). I do wish I could say “Dodes’ka-den” is great… but it isn’t.

Actually, I’m not quite sure what it is, either.

I watched this movie three times for this article, and I genuinely don’t know what Kurosawa was trying to do with the film. I also don’t know why he would choose this story for the film that would launch his new major production company and bring hoards of Japanese away from the television and into the theater. The film roughly translates to “Clickity-Clack” (which, again, isn’t the best title to bring people in) and it focuses on families and people who live in a dump. There’s no main character, either.

That said, my opinion about whether this was the “right” film is neither here nor there. What matters is the quality of the film itself. This is another one of Kurosawa’s stories focusing on the poor and destitute, but though one would imagine that actually physically living in a dump would be even worse than the shattered, broken building of “The Lower Depths,” you would be wrong. For a dump, there is barely any trash around, just a few broken rocks, and most of the houses (yes, houses) have silverware and full serving sets. The dump also gets alcohol deliveries daily. So even though Kurosawa seems to be saying that the characters are living in squalor, the reality is that it seems more like a lower middle class neighborhood. And a pretty one at that – this is Kurosawa’s first color film and he overuses it throughout, making the dump look positively beautiful in places, while in others the cinematography and set design is so interesting that your attention drifts away from the less-interesting things happening onscreen and onto the colorful walls and other sets.

There are several storylines, none of them particularly gripping, and all seem to have a different tone. The one group that does live in actual squalor is a father and son who get food poisoning. There’s one about two couples who swap partners and are almost endlessly drunk. Another tells the story of a girl raped by her uncle while her aunt is in the hospital and becomes pregnant. The “Dodes’ka-den” of the title refers to a mentally handicapped young man who pretends to be a trolly operator all day, marching through the dump while repeating the title over and over again. There’s more, much more, and yet despite six or seven main threads Kurosawa has to explore, the results all feel empty and half-formed.

The most problematic of the storylines is the one of the father and the son. The Father keeps pretending that they’re going to move into a big house, and Kurosawa uses weird cutaways to a fantasy house that seem like something out of a children’s movie. Every time the house changes or alters thanks to the Father’s words, we get a new version of the house. After the father insists that undercooked meat isn’t undercooked, and he and his son both eat it, they get food poisoning and progressively get sicker. The Father refuses to get help and the son dies. In theory, this could be an infuriating (in the right way) story where you feel so much for the child… it could be a story that “says” something. But Kurosawa inexplicably slathers the two actors with such over-the-top “sick” make-up that they look like vampire zombies (yes, zombies that are vampiric). How are you supposed to care about a dying child when, every time you look at him, you expect him to turn into a bat? Worse, at the climax of the story, when the child dies in front of his father, we get barely a few seconds to process it before Kurosawa does a random smash cut away from it to women laughing. Why? What I’m trying to say is that this story does not work on any level.

What’s most frustrating about “Dodes’ka-den” is that there are great scenes in it. An annoying woman (you can always tell a character is going to be annoying when he or she carries her cigarette low in her mouth) barters with a vegetable salesman (yes, they have vegetable salesmen in dumps too, apparently) over the price of cabbage, all the while tearing pieces off so it weighs less. Then, when she gets the price she wants, she stuffs all the torn pieces into her bag as well. There’s another scene where a girl is wrapping flowers, showing such quiet strength as her uncle just attacks her verbally, blaming her for all his problems. The scene where the boy first gets into his imaginary trolly and sets off for the day is beautiful.

And yet, I can’t believe that those scenes are in the same movie as a delivery boy who delivers exposition about as clunky as your usual telenovella. Or a metaphor so labored and obvious as when the uncle rapes the girl on a bed of red roses. Or that the father/son storyline ends by having Kurosawa pull back to show the father standing at the pool of his imaginary house. Or the aforementioned make-up.

“Dodes’ka-den” is one of those movies where you want to dismiss it, but the few great things in it make you unable to. There was still greatness in Kurosawa, but this is not a great movie. I wish I understood more of why Kurosawa wanted to make this movie…wanted to tell this story so badly, and why he chose this as his “comeback” film. There are so many questions and too few answers for a movie that frankly doesn’t deserve all the time invested in unwrapping its mysteries.

Notes:

-One of the most annoying things that Kurosawa repeatedly does in his films is having characters act “hilarious” while drunk. It doesn’t work in “Madadayo,” or “The Lower Depths” or “The Men Who Tread on the Tiger’s Tail” and it certainly does not work here. In fact, the only time drunken fools ever were worth the time and investment in a Kurosawa film was in “Ikiru,” which tends to be the exception to every rule.

-This is the only Kurosawa film I believe I would actively avoid watching again.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1963

Studio: Toho Studios, Kurosawa Productions Co.

Screenwriter: Ryuzo Kikushima, Akira Kurosawa, Hideo Oguni, Tomoyuki Tanaka, based on the book by Evan Hunter

Cast: Toshiro Mifune, Tatsuya Nakadai, Kenjiro Ishiyama

Cinematographer: Asakazu Nakai, Takao Saito

Music: Masaru Sato

“High and Low” has about six different movies wrapped into its two-and-a-half hour running time, and all of them are pretty awesome. Even more impressively, this is one of the rarest of thrillers – one without a main character. The only other one I can think of is Fritz Lang’s masterpiece “M,” so “High and Low” is in good company.

I much prefer the literal translation of the Japanese title, “Heaven and Hell,” and it addresses one of Kurosawa’s most revisited themes – wealth verses poverty. In the middle of a sweltering summer, someone has been staring up from the hells of the city ghetto to the stunning, air-conditioned house on a hill that overlooks the city. The house is owned by National Shoes executive Gondo (Toshiro Mifune), and the man in the ghetto decides to drag Gondo out of his heaven and down into hell.

But before that happens, we get 20 minutes of intrigue about women’s shoes. And it’s so much more gripping than any storyline about women’s shoes has any right to be. Gondo is fending off a group of executives who want to start producing cheap, shitty shoes. He’s putting his entire fortune on the line in order to take control of the entire company.

Then, suddenly, that drama is interrupted by a phone call – Gondo’s son has been kidnapped, and the ransom is roughly everything Gondo was going to spend on the takeover. 99% of lesser movies would have turned it into some sort of conspiracy, but Kurosawa and his three co-screenwriters have other ideas in mind. Turns out the kidnapper didn’t take Gondo’s son – he took the son of the Chauffer (Yutaka Sada) by mistake. The kidnapper doesn’t care, though – he insists on getting the ransom, otherwise he kills the Chauffer’s son, and banks on Gondo being humane enough to not let that happen.

Suddenly we have an incredibly gripping ethical dilemma. Would you give away all your hard-earned money to save the life of someone else’s child? The screenwriters have their cake and eat it too, framing Gondo’s decision to pay the ransom as the right thing to do…and absolutely nuts. When other characters offer opinions (in one incredible scene the police watch as the Chauffer gets down on his knees and begs for his son’s life), our sympathies keep aligning in different ways. There is no easy answer, and after Gondo gives his fortune away, Kurosawa ensures that we understand how devastating the consequences are – the right decision doesn’t mean it’s the easy one.

I make this sound like “High and Low” is all about Gondo, but it isn’t. After the first hour, the point-of-view shifts away from the shoe mogul and onto the detectives trying to figure out whodunit. The shift point is an incredibly tense sequence on a bullet train, where the police helplessly watch as Gondo throws his fortune out the window. The boy is returned, but the police still have work to do. The way the screenwriters handle the transition is brilliant – you feel frustration with the police for not helping Gondo keep his money… and then Kurosawa cuts to a room full of sweating, exhausted police officers and outlines just how much work the officers have done on the case. And it’s a lot.

It’s just as gripping as the ethical dilemma, albeit in a completely different way. There’s something so wonderful about watching competent people doing their jobs well. The lead detective on the case is named Tokura (Tatsuya Nakadai), and his character is kept purposely bland. We needed to get into the mind of Gondo to understand his decisions, but with Tokura the case is what we want to focus on. The detective might have inner demons, a drinking problem, or whatever other cliché you can think of, but we wouldn’t know from the movie. Tokura is a cipher, easily upstaged by the supporting detectives like Bos’n (Kenjiro Ishiyama), and I think it’s the smartest thing Kurosawa could have done.

I also have to ask what the hell happened to Kurosawa’s relationship with Takashi Shimura. He continues to be cast in almost every one of Kurosawa’s films, but he’s barely visible in any of them. Why not cast him as Bos’n or the lead detective on the case? Why not cast him as Gondo and make Mifune the detective? It seems like such a waste of potential to see Shimura relegated to such nothing roles.

The identity of the kidnapper is revealed fairly quickly in a non-showy manner. It’s a medical student named Ginjiro (Tsutomu Yamazaki)…and he seems pretty normal, as far as kidnappers are concerned. In “M,” the pedophile was played by Peter Lorre, with his round, child-like face and bulging eyes. It’s hard to forget that face. Ginjiro is vaguely handsome, stick thin and his face is barely memorable. He could be anyone, and that’s part of why the casting is effective. When the movie shifts gears in the final act from the investigation to a game of cat-and-mouse between the kidnapper and the detectives, Kurosawa puts a pair of reflective sunglasses on Ginjiro (it’s the middle of the night, but whatever). In doing so, he wipes away all traces of emotion from the kidnapper’s face, which makes his actions all the more unpredictable and, consequently, the sequence more tense.

The detectives follow Ginjiro down into the most hellish parts of the city – into brothels and crack houses where women in withdrawal scratch the walls until their nails break off. And then, to complete his metaphor, the screenwriters have the kidnapper head to the coast – he’s almost pulled off his murderous scheme and reached his “heaven” when the police find him.

In Alfred Hitchcock’s “Psycho,” the movie unravels in the final five minutes as a psychology explains every. single. motivation. behind Norman Bates’ actions. It’s so hammy that it reads as comedic today. It’s a testament to Kurosawa’s genius that he refuses to give us any easy answers. There’s an incredible final sequence where Gondo meets Ginjiro in prison. We learn that Gondo has started working for a smaller shoe company but has free rein to do what he likes… but learn nothing about Ginjiro’s motivations. He hints, cackles and has a mental breakdown… but he gives no answers. And isn’t that scarier? What added value would the movie have if the screenwriters had explained away his motivations?

“High and Low” remains one of my all time favorite Kurosawa films. We’re heading into the home stretch of the most fruitful, masterful section of the maestro’s career, which started with “The Bad Sleep Well,” includes “Yojimbo,” “Sanjuro,” “High and Low” and will wrap up with his next film “Red Beard.” Any of these masterpieces would be enough to solidify a director’s legacy as one of the greats, but to have all five in a row? It’s a run unsurpassed by any other filmmaker.

Notes:

-Need I mention Kurosawa’s obsession with feet here? I mean, Mifune plays a shoe designer.

-It’s oft said that “High and Low” directly inspired Dick Wolf in the creation of “Law & Order.” Who knows if it’s true, but it certainly is plausible.

-I’m pretty surprised that this has never gotten an American remake, since its storyline is such a great hook. Actually, I’m just gonna call my manager real quick…

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1961

Studio: Toho/Kurosawa Production Co.

Screenwriter: Ryuzo Kikushima, Akira Kurosawa

Cast: Toshiro Mifune, Tatsuya Nakadai, Yoko Tsukasa

Cinematographer: Kazuo Miyagawa, Takao Saito

Music: Masaru Sato

Certain classic films feel like they were a complete trial for all involved – you can see onscreen the filmmakers stretching and just reaching transcendence…despite the hell it took them to get there. Think of movies like “Gone With the Wind,” “Schindler’s List” or “Apocalypse Now.” But then there are other classics that seem to appear fully formed. They play to all of the cast, writers and filmmakers’ strengths and you regard the movie, thinking “Well duh! Why didn’t they do this years ago?” Now think of movies like “North By Northwest,” “Jurassic Park” or “La Dolce Vita.” Everything just seemed to click.

And that’s how I feel while watching “Yojimbo.”

It perfects Toshiro Mifune’s whole jaded/smart/wildcard persona that he seems to have been rehearsing with Kurosawa all the way back to their first collaboration on “Drunken Angel.” Kurosawa (along with his frequent writing collaborator Ryuzo Kikushima) address all the major thematic touchstones of his career – poverty, wicked fools, one man going up against a seemingly impossible institution – and also throws in a samurai because that’s always cool. Mix it all together and, voila!, you’ve got a classic movie. If only it could always seem so easy.

Mifune plays a samurai who probably isn’t named Sanjuro, but it’s the name he gives when asked. His robes are slightly tattered and, for a samurai, he seems to care one hell of a lot about money. We first see him literally at a crossroads and throwing a stick in order to find out which way to head next. As soon as he walks down the path pointed out to him, the plot is thrust upon him. He finds himself in a small town overrun by two warring crime bosses – and as a result the few good people left are barely surviving. The main street in the town is either filled with evil minions or completely empty (except for a dog that walks around with a random severed hand in its mouth – yum!).

Sanjuro gets the lowdown from two of the only good people in town – the restaurant owner and the casket maker. The casket maker is the only businessman in town who seems to be profiting from the gang war…though later, when the bodies are stacking up, he opines “When the fighting gets this bad, they don’t even bother with coffins.” Sensing an opportunity to make a profit and do some good, Sanjuro calls out the thugs and immediately kills off two and disarms another (literally, he chops off the guy’s arm!) and finds both gangs fighting over who will get him as their bodyguard.

The gang leaders believe that they are playing a game of chess and that Sanjuro is the most powerful player… but what they don’t know is that the game doesn’t matter because there’s a bomb under the table. Not my best metaphor, but still apt. The heavies on both sides are all idiots – Kurosawa puts him in garish make-up that makes them look like silent movie villains (he did the same thing for the bandits in “Seven Samurai”), and so it’s easy at first for Sanjuro to outwit them. They plot to kill him after he does their dirty work pretty loudly in a place where they can be overheard, after all.

But the smartest man in the room taking down dumb people one at a time can get pretty tedious (do you hear me, “House of Cards”?!), so Kikushima and Kurosawa throw in several fascinating wrenches, most notable of which is a new villain in the form of one of the boss’ brothers Unosuke (Tatsuya Nakadai), who arrives with a gun and a deep suspicion of Sanjuro. He actually catches Sanjuro red-handed and beats him senseless, which is a nice shock to the system for the audience – this is real.

The movie is one of the most beautiful I’ve seen so far in Kurosawa’s oeuvre, sometimes matching “The Hidden Fortress.” There is this incredible shot that manages to show Sanjuro arriving for his last battle, Unosuke heading off to the battle and the old man strung up in the middle of the town – all introduced in the least-expected way – that is breathtaking. Though he does this often in other films, “Yojimbo” seems very concerned with getting information across through images alone with as little dialogue as possible (after the first 15 minute endless dialogue dump). And he’s smart to do this – the movie doesn’t feel oddly silent, but the lack of in-depth dialogue makes it feel more like a visceral experience.

Another one of “Yojimbo’s” strengths is that it does not linger. In “Seven Samurai” Kurosawa took stereotypes and gave them time to create depth, but here we have no real interest in getting to know the scorpions of the town. Sanjuro is an enigma, and we gain more insight into his character by seeing the ingenious ways he responds to situations more than we would through monologuing. His “friends” in town are not afforded any depth, and are essentially interchangeable. And why not? What more did we need to know about them? The movie is under two hours long, and that feels just about right. We get the epic sweep we need and the plot complications a story like this requires, but it also keeps the story economical. Instead of adding epilogue after epilogue (you just know at some point there must have been a beat where Sanjuro threw another branch to choose his next journey), as Kurosawa has done before in lesser films, the maestro simply ends the film seconds after Sanjuro succeeds in saving his friend… and it’s the perfect note to end on and, more importantly, the right one.

What strikes me most about “Yojimbo” watching it again, is that it’s always smarter than it needs to be. For a movie where most of the characters are idiots, it does not talk down to its audience. The dog with the hand, having one of the heavies carry the coffin, Sanjuro hiding under the floor… all beats lesser films would have not spent the extra draft or two crafting. And, as mentioned above, Kurosawa makes it look easy, which is a sign that it was probably really hard.

Notes:

Since you are voluntarily reading a blog about Kurosawa, it should not come as a shock to you that the maestro’s next film is a sequel, entitled “Sanjuro.” More interesting is that there are two other unofficial sequels that Kurosawa had nothing to do with. The first is “Zatoichi Meets Yojimbo” – the 20th film in a series about a blind swordsman. Though Mifune certainly looks like Sanjuro, he gets a real name in the film and is working for the government, so it’s pretty obviously not the same character. The second is “Incident at Blood Pass,” which feels more true to Kurosawa’s vision of the character, albeit with less body scratching. Neither are especially great films.

The Kurosawa Odyssey

Year: 1960

Studio: Kurosawa Production Co.

Screenwriter: Akira Kurosawa, Hideo Oguni, Shinobu Hashimoto, Ryuzo Kikushima, Eijiro Hisaita

Cast: Toshiro Mifune, Masayuki Mori, Kyoko Kagawa, Takashi Shimura

Cinematographer: Yuzuru Aizawa

Music: Masaru Sato

In some ways, it shocks me that “The Bad Sleep Well” is the first film Kurosawa chose to make with his new production company. It’s a dark noir with a bleak ending starring Mifune in a decidedly unsexy role that serves as a public service announcement about corporate greed. Not sure how he expected it to make a profit. And then the other part of me speaks up, reminding me that Kurosawa probably had desperately wanted to make this film with these messages for awhile and may have been hobbled by Toho, so this was a “now or never” moment for him. Whatever the case, I’m happy he did, because this is a damn good movie.

Mifune plays a man named Nishi or, more accurately, he plays a man who plays a man called Nishi. He’s posing as Nishi to help bring down corporate corruption, which years ago resulted in the death of his father. He’s quite ruthless – marrying the lame daughter (physically lame, personality-wise she’s pretty cool) of Iwabuchi, who runs the corporation he’s trying to bring down, just to get closer to the nest of vipers. Well, at first it’s just for that reason, anyway. Things get complicated when Nishi develops real feelings for the woman, named Yoshiko (Kyoko Kagawa).

Critics often cite this as a loose adaptation of Shakespeare’s “Hamlet,” attempting to wedge it into an adaptation trilogy with “Throne of Blood” and “Ran.” And sure, if you squint at the “son seeking revenge” narrative and bump the third act of “Hamlet” to the first act of “The Bad Sleep Well” and then squint some more, there’s some truth there. I understand why critics do this – using the word “Shakespearean” makes everything seem more “important,” but it also does a disservice to the world Kurosawa and his co-screenwriters are building and the message of the film (which is quite different from that of the Bard).

In many ways, this is the most daring film Kurosawa has made since “Ikiru,” or perhaps ever. He has such faith in himself and the story he is telling that he does wild things with the structure and narrative that are basically unheard of before or since. His main character does not speak for the first half-hour of the movie (!), he only states his full motive an hour-and-a-half into the movie (!!) and the climax happens off camera (!!!). And yet, in each of these cases, “The Bad Sleep Well” is somehow strengthened by these choices.

The first 20-odd minutes are devoted to one of my favorite Kurosawa set-pieces ever. It’s a familiar setting to fans of the maestro, with a group of people talking about a character or situation in order to get exposition out but also set the stage, almost like a Greek chorus. He’s done it poorly (“The Quiet Duel”), well (“Seven Samurai,” “The Idiot”) and brilliantly (“Ikiru”) and this is one of those brilliant times. A bunch of reporters show up to Nishi and Yoshiko’s wedding to cover the arrest of two members of the evil corporation. They define the situation, the stakes, the rumors of corruption, and also define Yoshiko and Nishi in ways the characters will later overturn for us…but it’s neat to throw down those red herrings early. This is the kind of sequence where the humor is incredibly black and characters scream things like “If you hurt my sister, I’ll kill you!” and no one acts like it’s crazy town.

The sequence climaxes with the delivery of a three-foot high wedding cake shaped like the evil corporation’s headquarters with a rose stuck in the window designating the place where Nishi’s father died. Subtle? Nope. Absurd? Yes. If Francis Ford Coppola had put a threat-cake in “The Godfather” the movie would have been laughable. And yet somehow, with Kurosawa at the helm, it works.

Consciously or not, Kurosawa has Mifune dressed exactly like Clark Kent, a somehow fitting disguise for Nishi. Nishi’s arc is one of the most interesting in all of Kurosawa’s oeuvre. He dies off camera just before achieving his goals in a truly tragic finale, but upon second viewing you pick up parts of his character and what Kurosawa was going for. At one point Nishi laments that he’s not wicked enough for this game, and that “To overturn evil, you have to become evil yourself.” Nishi is, at heart, a good man…and therefore unable to achieve his goal. He also states that he wants to do it “…for all the people who don’t even know they’ve been had.” It would appear he misses this goal, but on second glance you realize that he does win over the two most important people – his wife and brother-in-law, children of the villain and blind to his machinations until Nishi opens their eyes. The co-writers underline that this is a victory by having other characters tell Nishi that Yoshiko “will never understand.” Turns out she does.

Hollow victories? You could argue yes, but I don’t believe so. Killing off Nishi offscreen is a baffling decision at first, until you realize that seeing Nishi’s loved ones reacting to the tragic news is far more upsetting than seeing the tragedy happen itself. To understand the power, you have to see the aftershocks, and that is what Kurosawa rightly chooses to highlight.

The film is beautifully shot by Yuzuru Aizawa in his only collaboration with Kurosawa…after this he’d be relegated to films like “Godzilla vs. Meglodon.” I don’t know why they never worked together again, because they make an incredible team here – making each frame ooze with noir style, never moreso than in the secret hideaway (That tremendous shot where man and wife are separated by a fallen beam? Beautiful!) and in the long office break-in scene.

Quibbles? The music! Good lord, but what was up with that weird circus music for Nishi in the second half? And could the music in the first half telegraph the emotions we’re supposed to feel any more obviously?

I was beginning to lose faith after the one two suckage punch of “The Lower Depths” and “The Hidden Fortress,” but “The Bad Sleep Well” is a Kurosawa masterpiece. I love that he gives no easy answers but is unafraid to ask the hard questions. It’s a movie that you adore intellectually, but the sucker punch hits you right in the heart. What a special film.

Notes:

-Kurosawa’s obsession with feet continues with all things Yoshiko-related. That first shot of her two feet, one lame and one normal, is impossible to look away from.

-The Criterion DVD is fine, but definitely needs an upgrade.