07/2011 - News release

Lord Justice Wilson to be sworn in as Supreme Court Justice

26 May 2011

One of the nation's top judges will start today styled 'Lord Justice' and end it styled 'Lord', as he joins the ten judges currently sitting on the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.

Former Court of Appeal judge Lord Justice Wilson will be sworn in this morning as a Justice of the Supreme Court at a ceremony at the Parliament Square court building. His appointment follows the retirement of Lord Saville last year.

Lord Phillips, President of the Supreme Court, will conduct the simple ceremony in which Lord Justice Wilson will take the Judicial Oath and Oath of Allegiance in front of other Supreme Court Justices dressed in their ceremonial robes, as well as friends, family and other guests. It has become tradition for a new Justice to shake hands with each of their fellow Justices in turn, before bowing to them. The bench of Justices will then bow to the new Justice in return.

This is the second swearing-in of a new Justice since the Supreme Court was inaugurated in October 2009, and the first to be broadcast live over the internet through the new live streaming service offered by Sky News.

Following the ceremony, Lord Justice Wilson will be styled Lord Wilson, according to Her Majesty The Queen's declaration in December 2010 that all Supreme Court Justices will be styled as 'Lord' or 'Lady' for life, regardless of whether they hold a peerage. More formally, he will be known as Lord Wilson of Culworth.

Lord Phillips said: "I have great pleasure in welcoming Lord Wilson to join us as the eleventh Justice of the Supreme Court. His scholarship and experience will be of great value to the Court." At the time of his appointment, Lord Justice Wilson said: "I am deeply honoured by my appointment which presents a huge challenge and casts a heavy burden of responsibility. I hope to contribute wisely to the development of the law."

Ends

Notes to editors:

Lord Justice Nicholas Allan Roy Wilson (65) was called to the Bar (Inner Temple) in 1967 and took Silk in 1987. He was appointed as a Recorder in 1987 and was made a Bencher in 1993. He was appointed to the High Court (Family Division) in 1993 and to the Court of Appeal in 2005.

Lord Justice Wilson was knighted in 1993.

His appointment to the Supreme Court was announced on 4 May 2011.

The swearing-in ceremony, which is not open to the public, begins at 10.30am and lasts around five minutes.

Formal photographs of Lord Wilson are available on request from the contact below.

UKSC contact: