Getting your Trinity Audio player ready...

2020 marks the 25th Anniversary of multi-instrumentalist/composer/ producer John Zorn’s founding of Tzadik Records. An incredibly prolific label, Tzadik Records also has an overtly diverse output. Our site initially planned a month-long celebration of some of the label’s releases. However, the chaos of the past year derailed those plans.

Before Tzadik, Zorn released a series of incredible albums that includes tributes to Ennio Morricone- The Big Gundown (Nonesuch, 1985)- and Ornette Coleman – Spy vs. Spy (Nonesuch, 1989)- and early Masada works. But Naked City (Nonesuch, 1990) stands out alongside the finest. Convening a band of some of the era’s best Downtown artists, Zorn leaps, often at a breakneck pace, between different styles or genre norms. Jazz, grindcore, metal, punk, country, classical, film scores, and many others all make appearances. But all is done in a way that feels both organic and respectful of the music that came before.

Perhaps most impressive is the process by which the group made this music. Hip hop, of course, samples different thoughts and places them together to produce new art. But this band neither relies on computer technology nor pre-recorded pieces, solely the respective artists’ inspirations at a given moment. Most listeners will not enjoy every moment of the album; some parts of it, even this author does not fully appreciate. But Naked City‘s eclecticism has proven incredibly influential for not just artists merging ideas from metal with those of jazz, but anyone who attempts to explore music outside of preset boxes.

Tracklist: 1. Batman; 2. The Sicilian Clan; 3. You Will Be Shot; 4. Latin Quarter; 5. A Shot in the Dark; 6. Reanimator; 7. Snagglepuss; 8. I Want to Live; 9. Lonely Woman; 10. Igneous Ejaculation; 11. Blood Duster, 12. Hammerhead; 13. Demon Sanctuary; 14. Obeah Man; 15. Ujaku; 16. Fuck the Facts; 17. Speedball; 18. Chinatown; 19. Punk China Doll; 20. N.Y. Flat Top Box; 21. Saigon Pickup; 22. The James Bond Theme; 23. Den of Sins; 24. Contempt; 25. Graveyard Shift; 26. Inside Straight.

Personnel: John Zorn (alto saxophone), Bill Frisell (guitar), Fred Frith (bass), Joey Baron (drums), Wayne Horvitz (keyboards), Yamatsuka Eye (vocals).