Steve Zahn

Steve Zahn was born in Marshall, Minnesota, to Zelda, who worked at a YMCA, and Carleton Edward Zahn, a Lutheran pastor at Peace Lutheran Church, Robbinsdale, Minnesota. His career kicked off in his native Minnesota when he crashed the audition of a local stage production of "Biloxi Blues" and won the lead role. He next trained at American Repertory Theatre in Cambridge, MA; then moved to New York City, where he won a role touring for 13 months in national company of Tommy Tune-directed version of "Bye Bye Birdie". Back in New York, he played opposite Ethan Hawke in "Sophistry" at Playwright's Horizon, where Ben Stiller noticed him and cast him and Hawke in Reality Bites (1994).

Lynn's Fire is his directorial debut.

Farmers, John and Betty, can sense something’s not quite right on their farm in New York’s Wallkill River Valley. They are disturbed to discover their beloved cow has been mutilated and their crops wrecked again - all while someone (or something) stalks them just out of reach. On a hot night, when Betty cannot sleep, she turns to her knitting, a glass of whiskey and a presidential radio address on national security. But there is someone outside. She cannot wake her husband, when she is consumed by light and abducted. She awakens on a hospital gurney surrounded by other victims. Upon the appearance of the men in black, the medical staff knows - this victim isn’t your typical case. She is rushed into emergency surgery where she transforms into an alien hybrid.

We are currently working on our festival assets -- DCP, and Subtitled versions. Please reach out if there's anything specific you may need. Thank you for your patience.

Francesco Paolo Cordaro, Andrea Cordaro

Andrea and Francesco Cordaro are the sibling directors behind Awake. Together they run Fusion Box Films, which has been operating for over 10 years. They hail from the Wallkill River Valley, which is located in New York’s Hudson Valley region.

The children of an Italian pastry chef, they created the documentary Cannoli, Traditions Around the Table. The project was funded by a grant from Anthony and Joe Russo, and won Best Documentary at NYWIFT’s Shorts Festival.

As many independent filmmakers, the two wear many hats.

Francesco Cordaro is a producer, director, editor, and cinematographer. He discovered his love for filmmaking as a teenager - making films with his friends on a camcorder and working as a projectionist in his local cinema. His first major collaboration would be as the producer of the documentary Aerodrome, winner of Best Documentary at Newport Beach Film Festival. As a director he would find more success. In the branded content space, he created a film for the Greenwich International Film Festival with Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford which would be aired on NBC’s The Today Show. Francesco also spent time in the ad agency world, working for an agency owned by Samsung. There he created many ads for companies like JBL, Ford, Subaru, and Mark Levinson. As an editor for Sony Music, he worked on branded content for fashion brand Marni starring Future, as well as content for Fenty with singer Joy Crooks. He is also a drone cinematographer, and shot the aerials for Adrian Brody’s film Clean, as well spots for Kenneth Cole and Cadillac.

Andrea Cordaro is a producer, director, actress, and voice over artist. She discovered her love for storytelling in her high school and local theater. As a director, she created the pilot of Water Is Life for emerging streamer Hudsy, which explores the cultural legacy of the Hudson River. Her horror film The Nursery, was produced and filmed along side Awake, in collaboration with Headless Horseman Haunted Attractions - considered one of America’s top haunted attractions. As an actress, she has performed on stage at Off Broadway’s New York Live Arts Theater, in the award winning comedy “Gay. Porn. Mafia”. Cordaro has lent her voice to characters in video games such as Dorothea in Kiss of War and Cleo in Hidden Expedition. She is a proud member of NYWIFT, SAG AFTRA and AEA.

Our Mother, Maria Cordaro, can often be found on our sets running the craft service table putting together a memorable lunch featuring embarrassing childhood stories.

Ratings

Alexander Stephens

Alexander Stephens is an award-winning Director of Photography and Director from Northern Colorado that has been growing as a filmmaker since 2017. After nearly 10 years in the United States Air Force, he was medically retired and is now a disabled veteran pursuing his dream to be a full-time filmmaker. Over the past 4 years, he has worked on many music videos, short films, and commercials that have been screened at Denver Film Festival, Filmquest, and many other film festivals both domestically and internationally. As a fan of the format of visual storytelling, he continues to seek out new and innovative ways to bring stories to life and is always excited to collaborate with other talented filmmakers who share his passion for filmmaking.