North Rhine-Westphalia

As with England, the first written account of this area and its people was by its conqueror, Julius Caesar who had subdued the territories west of the Rhine that were occupied by the Eburones and across from Cologne east of the Rhine the Ubii and other Germanic tribes such as the Cugerni who were later settled on the west side of the Rhine in the Roman province of Germania Inferior. Kenneth Wellesley (91-92) describes this region during the year of the four emperors, describing the opportunities its destruction during the Second World War provided for archæologists:

At Cologne, the capital city of the Lower Rhine District, the saturation bombing of the 1939–45 war opened up the possibility of excavation. It was carefully conducted for many years. We now know the site and shape of the governor’s palace by the Rhine, and public spirited ingenuity has seen to it that the visitor can still, despite rebuilding, study something of the impressive remains in a large crypt beneath the Town Hall. Already in 69 a walled city with its municipality, Cologne, the colony of the people of Agrippina, had a permanent bridge over the Rhine, serving to connect it with many Transrhenane Germans and funnel the trade flow in both directions. No legion guarded it; but slightly further on, at Bonn, just before the hills begin, lay the third station holding another single legion. A little before Koblenz a humble stream trickles into the latter from the west, flowing from a well-defined side valley penetrating the wooded hills; its name, the Vinxtbach, suggests that this was the frontier between Lower and Upper Germany, and inscriptions found north and south of the tributary make the supposition certain. At Mainz, where the inflowing Main forms a broad highway to and from the east, the double legionary fort was the main military site of the Upper District, of which the remaining legion lay now far to the south at Windisch in the Aargau. ... On the waters of the Rhine the ships of the German fleet gave further protection, and forwarded a useful riverborne supply of commodities and munitions.

The current German state of Rhine-Westphalia was created by the British when, after the war, they were tasked with ruling the largest and most populous of the four zones that Germany found itself divided into. The British military administration established it in 1946 from the Prussian provinces of Westphalia and the northern part of Rhine Province (North Rhine), and the Free State of Lippe. Giles MacDonogh summarises how great the task was that the British faced; my family didn't experience rationing growing up in England during the war; it did after:

The British needed to take stock of their zone. They had the largely empty farmlands of Schleswig-Holstein, the industrial and farming areas of Lower Saxony, and the industrialised but also highly cultural region of the Rhine and the Ruhr. The area had been very badly damaged by bombing. Cologne was 66 per cent destroyed, and Düsseldorf a staggering 93 per cent. Aachen was described as a ‘fantastic, stinking heap of ruins’. The British reordered their domain, creating Rhineland-Westphalia by amalgamating two Länder.

(255) After the Reich

Bad Godesberg

Bonn

Bonner Münster on June 6, 1941 and today

During the war, Bonn acquired military significance because of its strategic location on the Rhine River, which formed a natural barrier to easy penetration into the German heartland from the west. The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Bonn on March 7, 1945, and the US 1st Infantry Division captured the city during the battle of March 8–9, 1945.

Following the war, Bonn was in the British zone of occupation, and in 1949 became the de facto capital of the newly formed Federal Republic of Germany (the de jure capital of the Federal Republic throughout the years of the Cold War division of Germany was always Berlin). Nevertheless, Berlin's previous history as united Germany's capital was strongly connected with Imperial Germany, the Weimar Republic and more ominously with Nazi Germany. It was felt that a new peacefully united Germany should not be governed from a city connected to such overtones of war. Additionally, Bonn was closer to Brussels, headquarters of the EU. The heated debate that resulted was settled by the Bundestag only on June 20, 1991. By a vote of 338–320, the Bundestag voted to move the seat of government to Berlin. The vote broke largely along regional lines, with legislators from the south and west favouring Bonn and legislators from the north and east voting for Berlin. It also broke along generational lines as well; older legislators with memories of Berlin's past glory favoured Berlin, while younger legislators favoured Bonn. Ultimately, the votes of the 'Ossi' legislators tipped the balance in favour of Berlin.

The Feuerschlößchen on Rommersdorfer Straße 78–82 is a villa built in 1905/06 and remains as a monument under monument protection. Under the Nazis it became the new "Gauschulungsburg" when it was inaugurated July 1 1934 at the presence of DAF directors Robert Ley and Gauleiter Josef Grohé.

During Reichskristallnacht in November 1938, the Honnefer synagogue, formerly an evangelical church, was set on fire on the Linzerstrasse near the Ohbach and was destroyed in this way. Many Jewish inhabitants emigrated. The Jews living in Honnef after 1939 had to leave their homes and were all concentrated within two houses in Honnef. From here they had to relocate to a camp in Much. In July 1941, transport to the east was carried out from Much to their deaths. In the Second World War, around 250 Honnef soldiers were killed and the city had three civilian casualties. Honnef had been largely spared from air raids in the Allied air war. One of the few destruction was that of the Penaten factory. For this reason, foreign authorities moved to the city, including parts of the Upper Prussianium of the Rhine province from Koblenz, the NSKOV to Linzerstrasse 108. Numerous prisoners of war and later forced labourers, especially women from the Soviet Union, worked in Honnef. An air attack on Honnef with bombs dropped onto Lohfelder Straße took place in November 1944. On the evening of March 10, 1945, the 331st Infantry Regiment of the 78th Infantry Division of the United States had occupied Honnef. Three days later the American combatants reached Hohenhonnef and the Rhine heights near Rhöndorf.

Dortmund (North Rhine-Westphalia)

May Day 1933 with portraits of Friedrich the Great, Hindenburg and Hitler, „Saarbefreiungsfeier" 1 March 1935, “Celebration for memory of the seizure of power” on 30 January 1936 and „Heldengedenktag" March 7 1936 with memorial to the dead of the Great War.

During the war, Schulte-Frohlinde served as an officer in the Wehrmacht Air Force from 1939 to 1943. Initially deployed as a technical officer on the staff of Combat Squadron 2, he led the staff squadron of this squadron as a captain in 1940. He was shot down in the western campaign with his Dornier Do 17Z and barely survived the crash landing about ten miles southwest of Diksmuide, receiving the Iron Cross first class and was promoted to major. During the First World War he had served as a pilot in the Richthofen fighter squadron until the end of the war. On the left is the former Reichsschulungsburg der NSDAP und DAF in a period postcard and today, unchanged. In 1941 Schulte-Frohlinde was appointed honorary professor of architecture at the Technical University of Munich. Midway through the year he was relieved of his duties as head of the DAF architects' office and from that point on he headed the planning of the DAF's large-scale buildings in Munich. From 1943 to 1945 he took over the chair for architecture from German Bestelmeyer at the Technical University of Munich and in the final phase of the war he was appointed Gaudozentenbundfuhrer of Munich-Upper Bavaria. In the task force for reconstruction, which met from 1943 under the direction of Albert Speer, Schulte-Frohlinde was involved as an advisor and was entrusted with planning the reconstruction of Bonn. In August 1944, Hitler included Schulte-Frohlinde in the God-gifted list of the most important architects. On Easter Sunday, April 1, 1945, a member of the Freikorps Sauerland shot dead eight Soviet forced laborers in Erwitte.

Despite being banned in all uses by the German government, the town still uses the Wolfsangel, heraldic symbol of the forbidden Jungen Front, in its Nazi-era arms which were approved by the Oldenburg Ministry of State for the Interior and have been used since July 10, 1934. The Wolfsangel was used by Nazi organisations and SS units such as the Waffen-SS Division Das Reich and the Waffen-SS Division Landstorm Nederland during the Third Reich. Later the symbol was used by right-wing extremist organisations that were classified as anti-constitutional in the Federal Republic of Germany. Because of its history, the Wolfsangel is a mark within the meaning of Section 86a of the Criminal Code (use of marks of unconstitutional organizations). According to the Brandenburg Higher Regional Court however, the use of the wolf's rod can also have a different meaning such as its use in municipal coats of arms or in the Federal Armed Forces. Nevertheless, the Anti-Defamation League and others list the Ƶ-symbol as a hate and a neo-Nazi symbol.