Operation Infatuate II was the amphibious landing at Westkapelle, also conducted on the morning of 1 November. After a heavy naval bombardment by the British Royal Navy, troops of 4th Special Service Brigade (Nos. 41, 47 and 48 Royal Marine Commando and No. 10 Inter Allied Commando, consisting mainly of Belgian and Norwegian troops) supported by specialised armored vehicles (amphibious transports, mine-clearing tanks, bulldozers, etc.) of the 79th Armoured Division were landed on both sides of the gap in the sea dyke, using large landing craft as well as amphibious vehicles to bring men and tanks ashore. Heavy fighting ensued here as well before the ruins of the town were captured.

Hope this helps.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Scheldt

A week long battle for the Sheldt estuary in order to secure supplys into Antwerp. The assault involved intense fighting across canals and open ground, both of which were heavily mined. The success of the assualt was in large part due to the (very) close support provided by the Naval Support Craft, manned by Jack and Royal.

From the web: November 1st 1944 "Operation 'Infatuate' - The island of Walcheren was heavily defended and largely flooded when the battle took place. Army units were carried across the Scheldt to land on the south side, while Royal Marines were put ashore to the west (at Westkapelle) against tough resistance. Under the command of Brig B. W. Leicester, the 4th Royal Marine Special Service Brigade consisting of Nos 41, 47 and 48 RM Commandos was carried from Ostend in 180 landing craft. ... Many landing craft were lost in the assault and by the time the Germans surrendered on the 8th, Allied casualties totalled 8,000."

I'm not altogether sure, but I think the battle is mentioned in Lt Cdr Lovering's (2007) Amphibious Assault: Manoeuvre From the Sea. Originally put together in 2005 in order to enhance the 'core knowledge' of the Corp the book comprises 37 chapters, most of which are analyses of single operations, from the Dardenelles to the Al Faw Peninsula, written by experts in the field from both sides of the pond. See the review of it by Dr Eric Grove in this month's Navy News (June, 2007, p. 44). It looks a corker and is definitely on my to-get list, although it aint cheap.