Johnny Mercer was born Nov. 18, 1909, into the fourth generation of Mercers living in Savannah (georgiaencyclopedia.org). His grandfather had served as a colonel in the Confederate Army and practiced law in Savannah, while his father, George A. Mercer Jr., practiced with the University Of Georgia baseball team and later joined Mercer Sr.'s law firm.

Though no one in his family is known to have been gifted musically, as a young boy Mercer often attended Sunday concerts at a park near his home where local talent performed the music of Irving Berlin (Johnny Mercer Foundation).

Mercer's fascination with music continued as he served as a choir boy at Christ Church in Savannah. He also is said to have danced the Charleston at the DeSoto Hotel and at Barbee's Pavilion on Isle of Hope.

Like his brothers before him, Mercer attended Woodberry Forest School in Virginia for several years. Soon thereafter he set out for New York City to pursue an acting career. But you always return to your first love and Johnny Mercer was no exception to this rule.

It was about this time in his life that Mercer published his first lyrics for the show, "The Garrick Gaieties." Here he met Ginger Meehan and in 1931 they married and went on to have two children.

The catalyst for Johnny Mercer's legendary musical career was an event that took place at the Hotel Biltmore in New York City. Successful big band leader Paul Whiteman hosted a singing competition. Longshot and little-known Mercer entered and won.

In 1942, the young man from Savannah who had no formal musical training went on to co-found Capitol Records with Buddy DeSylva and Glen Wallichs (georgiaencyclopedia.org). This record label's office in Hollywood was creatively fashioned to resemble a stack of 45 RPM records.

By the mid 1940s, Capitol Records had flourished to such an extent that it was producing roughly one-sixth of all the records sold in the U.S. (research.library.gsu.edu/mercer). Their business model focused on signing and developing young, unknown musical talent. Artists who were introduced to the music industry by Capitol included Nat "King" Cole, Peggy Lee, Paul Weston, Stan Kenton and Margaret Whiting. Mercer and Weston collaborated and produced recordings on the Capitol label occasionally.

Johnny Mercer was a lyric and songwriting genius. Here is a sampling of some of his work: "I'm An Old Cowhand From The Rio Grande"; "You Must Have Been A Beautiful Baby"; "Jeepers Creepers"; "Tangerine"; "Accentuate The Positive"; "Come Rain Or Come Shine"; and "Glow Worm."

He won an Oscar for each of the following songs: "Moon River"; "Days Of Wine And Roses"; "In The Cool Cool Cool of The Evening"; and "On The Atchison, Topeka, and The Santa Fe."

He died in 1976, less than a year removed from brain tumor surgery, but his legend lives on as he was posthumously inducted in 1980 into the Georgia Music Hall Of Fame and in 2011 into the Georgia Writers Hall Of Fame.

Dean Coon owns Travel Thru Time Tours in Savannah. Contact him at info@travelthrutimetours.com or 912-335-8496.

By Dean Coon