With today being the opening of the 2023 Southern Legislative Conference in Charleston, SC, we (sadly) were forced to depart from the beautiful city of Savannah, Georgia. Before we left, however, there were a few spots we wanted to explore.

Bonaventure Cemetery

By Olivia Discon

We wanted to see Bonaventure Cemetery for a couple of reasons: (1) it was featured prominently in the book (and movie) of Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil…

…and (2) the great singer-songwriter Johnny Mercer is buried there.

Mercer was a prominent singer-songwriter from the 20th century, writing more than 1,500 songs in his lifetime. Some of his most notable songs include Moon River, Somethings Gotta Give, Too Marvelous for Words, and Come Rain or Come Shine. Mercer’s talent for crafting clever and evocative lyrics, combined with his smooth vocal style, made him a beloved figure in the music industry. He received numerous accolades throughout his career, including four Academy Awards for the Best Original Song. Johnny Mercer’s contributions to American music continue to resonate today, cementing his legacy as one of the most celebrated lyricists of all time.

And Savannah, Georgia is both the birthplace and resting place of Johnny Mercer, who lies alongside his family in the same cemetery section.

Many headstones were engraved with some of Mercer’s lyrics. For instance, inscribed on his mother’s grave is the line “My mama done tol’ me” from Blues in the Night.

Though this visit was certainly somber, the morning sun cast across the greenery and marble tombstones was a lovely way to start our day and commemorate our time spent in Savannah.

Tybee Island

Morgan Robertson

Continuing on our morning adventure, we went on to visit the beautiful barrier island: Tybee. The island proved both fun and educational, a great way to energize us despite an early start.

The Tybee Island Lighthouse has existed since 1733, albeit in different iterations. The first structure was 90 feet tall, but it succumbed to its proximity to the beach. Unfortunately, the lighthouse builders didn’t learn from this fate, and they again built too close to water that often encroaches upon hitherto dry land. The third structure was more fortunate, in that no acts of God befell it; but it did suffer from the onslaught of the Civil War and the destruction it brought.

Fortunately, the base of the lighthouse was salvageable and a fourth structure was built upon the base of the third. At 154 feet, this structure narrowly misses being one of the ten tallest lighthouses in the United States.

This being our first visit to a lighthouse, it shone light on the advance of technology. In 1791, for example, 15 lanterns were used to signal ships. Between the 1930s-1960s, 1,000-watt incandescent bulbs were standard practice. One-thousand-watt quartz bulbs were used until 2010, which were followed by the use of the 1,000-watt quartz-halogen bulb.

Lighthouse wasn’t an easy job and, in fact, a lighthouse might have up to three keepers, plus support staff. We were able to tour the houses for these staff, and, as part of the much-maligned “Gen-Z,” we saw many unfamiliar objects!

Despite the nice accommodations, comfortable amenities, and short commute, lighthouse-keepers definitely had a long climb to work. In the case of the Tybee Island Lighthouse, the climb consisted of 178 steps.

On the other hand, the occupation offers some beautiful views!

It was a great start to the day, bringing the past to life, offering great views, and getting our blood pumping.

Zunzi’s

Michelle Cardenas

After a beautiful morning of exploring Tybee Island we headed to Zunzi’s, one of Georgia’s most famous restaurants. Their menu included a variety of platters, salads, and sandwiches that did not disappoint. Our entrees included the Oliver’s Lunch Bowl, the Johnny Roll, and The Conquistador.

The Conquistador placed Zunzi’s on the map when it was named one of the best chicken sandwiches in America by the Travel Channel. I decided to put this to the test and indulge in one, and I must say it had very distinct flavors that made it overall delectable. This was the best way to say goodbye to Savannah and begin our South Carolina oddyssey.

Southern Legislative Conference

Ingrid Cuero and Michelle Cardenas

Fittingly, the first event of the Southern Legislative Conference was the “welcome evening.” And what a welcome! What an evening!

The event was held upon the deck of an aircraft carrier, the USS Yorktown.

We soon enjoyed southern hospitality, from the greetings of the staff to the conversation with other guests.

Arkansas Senator Clint Penzo, and his wife, Allison, generously shared time and dinner with us. Senator Penzo discussed his varied career path into politics, and how each of his careers has helped him in the political world.

Our education, however, wasn’t only vicarious. We also learned about the art and science of flying when we boarded a flight simulator.

Mimicking the experience of a pilot flying a military aircraft (or a passenger in a vehicle driven by our advisor, Professor Yawn)…

…the simulation included radio conversations, target strikes, and even an air stop for refueling.

It was a rather unique experience that we were not fully prepared for–clenching on to our seats and trying not to fall. Beyond the intensity of the simulator, it was a rather gratifying and educational experience

We proceeded to make our way through the aircraft carrier stopping by a couple landings to take pictures of the gorgeous view. The Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge paired up perfectly with the multi-colored sky allowing us to take some spectacular photos!

Our last stop on the Aircraft carrier was the flight deck, but just getting to the deck was an experience. We saw long corridors, war rooms, elaborate equipment, and steep stairs.

The deck featured stunning lights, military aircrafts, and a band.

Jazz bands filled the air as the sun set, and then the sounds of fireworks were accompanied by strings of colors decorating the Charleston skyline.

The band began playing patriotic songs, and as we looked over the harbor, which was harbor surrounded by forts (Fort Sumter, Fort Moultrie, Fort Johnson), we had a small sense of what Francis Scott Key might have felt when writing “the bombs bursting in air.”

For us, it was a day of new experiences, of looking back and forward, capped with a truly welcoming reception.

The charm and southern hospitality of South Carolina were made very evident as we ended our magical evening.