With today being the opening of the 2023 Southern Legislative Conference in Charleston, SC, we (sadly) were forced to depart from the beautiful city of Savannah, Georgia. Before we left, however, there were a few spots we wanted to explore.

Bonaventure Cemetery

By Olivia Discon

We wanted to see Bonaventure Cemetery for a couple of reasons: (1) it was featured prominently in the book (and movie) of Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil…

…and (2) the great singer-songwriter Johnny Mercer is buried there.

Mercer was a prominent singer-songwriter from the 20th century, writing more than 1,500 songs in his lifetime. Some of his most notable songs include Moon River, Somethings Gotta Give, Too Marvelous for Words, and Come Rain or Come Shine. Mercer’s talent for crafting clever and evocative lyrics, combined with his smooth vocal style, made him a beloved figure in the music industry. He received numerous accolades throughout his career, including four Academy Awards for the Best Original Song. Johnny Mercer’s contributions to American music continue to resonate today, cementing his legacy as one of the most celebrated lyricists of all time.

And Savannah, Georgia is both the birthplace and resting place of Johnny Mercer, who lies alongside his family in the same cemetery section.

Many headstones were engraved with some of Mercer’s lyrics. For instance, inscribed on his mother’s grave is the line “My mama done tol’ me” from Blues in the Night.

Though this visit was certainly somber, the morning sun cast across the greenery and marble tombstones was a lovely way to start our day and commemorate our time spent in Savannah.

Tybee Island

Morgan Robertson

Continuing on our morning adventure, we went on to visit the beautiful barrier island: Tybee. The island proved both fun and educational, a great way to energize us despite an early start.

The Tybee Island Lighthouse has existed since 1733, albeit in different iterations. The first structure was 90 feet tall, but it succumbed to its proximity to the beach. Unfortunately, the lighthouse builders didn’t learn from this fate, and they again built too close to water that often encroaches upon hitherto dry land. The third structure was more fortunate, in that no acts of God befell it; but it did suffer from the onslaught of the Civil War and the destruction it brought.

Fortunately, the base of the lighthouse was salvageable and a fourth structure was built upon the base of the third. At 154 feet, this structure narrowly misses being one of the ten tallest lighthouses in the United States.

This being our first visit to a lighthouse, it shone light on the advance of technology. In 1791, for example, 15 lanterns were used to signal ships. Between the 1930s-1960s, 1,000-watt incandescent bulbs were standard practice. One-thousand-watt quartz bulbs were used until 2010, which were followed by the use of the 1,000-watt quartz-halogen bulb.

Lighthouse wasn’t an easy job and, in fact, a lighthouse might have up to three keepers, plus support staff. We were able to tour the houses for these staff, and, as part of the much-maligned “Gen-Z,” we saw many unfamiliar objects!

Despite the nice accommodations, comfortable amenities, and short commute, lighthouse-keepers definitely had a long climb to work. In the case of the Tybee Island Lighthouse, the climb consisted of 178 steps.

On the other hand, the occupation offers some beautiful views!

It was a great start to the day, bringing the past to life, offering great views, and getting our blood pumping.

Zunzi’s

Michelle Cardenas

After a beautiful morning of exploring Tybee Island we headed to Zunzi’s, one of Georgia’s most famous restaurants. Their menu included a variety of platters, salads, and sandwiches that did not disappoint. Our entrees included the Oliver’s Lunch Bowl, the Johnny Roll, and The Conquistador.

The Conquistador placed Zunzi’s on the map when it was named one of the best chicken sandwiches in America by the Travel Channel. I decided to put this to the test and indulge in one, and I must say it had very distinct flavors that made it overall delectable. This was the best way to say goodbye to Savannah and begin our South Carolina oddyssey.

Southern Legislative Conference

Ingrid Cuero and Michelle Cardenas

Fittingly, the first event of the Southern Legislative Conference was the “welcome evening.” And what a welcome! What an evening!

The event was held upon the deck of an aircraft carrier, the USS Yorktown.

We soon enjoyed southern hospitality, from the greetings of the staff to the conversation with other guests.

Arkansas Senator Clint Penzo, and his wife, Allison, generously shared time and dinner with us. Senator Penzo discussed his varied career path into politics, and how each of his careers has helped him in the political world.

Our education, however, wasn’t only vicarious. We also learned about the art and science of flying when we boarded a flight simulator.

Mimicking the experience of a pilot flying a military aircraft (or a passenger in a vehicle driven by our advisor, Professor Yawn)…

…the simulation included radio conversations, target strikes, and even an air stop for refueling.

It was a rather unique experience that we were not fully prepared for–clenching on to our seats and trying not to fall. Beyond the intensity of the simulator, it was a rather gratifying and educational experience

We proceeded to make our way through the aircraft carrier stopping by a couple landings to take pictures of the gorgeous view. The Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge paired up perfectly with the multi-colored sky allowing us to take some spectacular photos!

Our last stop on the Aircraft carrier was the flight deck, but just getting to the deck was an experience. We saw long corridors, war rooms, elaborate equipment, and steep stairs.

The deck featured stunning lights, military aircrafts, and a band.

Jazz bands filled the air as the sun set, and then the sounds of fireworks were accompanied by strings of colors decorating the Charleston skyline.

The band began playing patriotic songs, and as we looked over the harbor, which was harbor surrounded by forts (Fort Sumter, Fort Moultrie, Fort Johnson), we had a small sense of what Francis Scott Key might have felt when writing “the bombs bursting in air.”

For us, it was a day of new experiences, of looking back and forward, capped with a truly welcoming reception.

The charm and southern hospitality of South Carolina were made very evident as we ended our magical evening.

We began our last day in Savannah embarking on an adventure. We went on a dolphin tour through the Savannah River and Atlantic Ocean. It was a sunny day, perfect weather for a boat ride.

Our tour took us past Tybee Island and into the Atlantic Ocean.

The view of Tybee Island from the ocean was nice. We encountered a shrimping boat that attracted many pelicans and dolphins.

The majority of the dolphins we saw today gathered around the boat because they feed off anything the shrimpers throw back into the ocean. My personal favorite was a baby and momma dolphin swimming together!

The Southern Legislative Conference provided us with lunch on our dolphin tour. We had packed sandwiches, chips, fruit, and a cookie for dessert. It was an okay lunch with a great view.

We learned much in the process. For example, the US government has established several “bird islands,” where birds can go to nest. Predators’ populations are controlled and care is taken to ensure that birds have a natural habitat.

The tour also highlighted several forts, energy plants, and bordering states.

As the tour came to a conclusion, it started raining. Fortunately, we dodged any serious storms. The tour was perfect way to begin our last day in Savannah, however we still had a long day ahead of us.

After briefly freshening up, we headed out to the Liquid Sand Glass Gallery to look at the glass art.

We browsed the store and a couple of us bought glass nail filers that we’re pretty excited about. On our way back to the car, we stopped at a nifty shop right next door that sold many natural products such as soaps, seasonings, and oils.

After some shopping, we visited the birthplace of Juliette Gordon Low…

…and, a few blocks away, her carriage house, where she founded the Girl Scouts of America.

Megan and Alex tried to get into the Girl Scouts photo with us, but they weren’t Girl Scouts, so we wouldn’t let them be in the picture. Well, they were in the picture, but not in any official capacity. The photographer captured them sulking in the background.

We also took another look at the Andrew Low House (Juliette Gordon Low’s Father in Law).

After taking photos, we made our way to Forsyth Park to see the famous Savannah water fountain that was built in 1858.

The fountain is striking from a distance…

…and from up close…

While at the fountain we took some selfies, group photos and tried to capture the beauty of the fountain.

This slideshow requires JavaScript.

Forsyth Park was laid out in the 1840’s so we really enjoyed the giant Oak trees covered in Spanish moss.

We also took a look at the Confederate War Monument in the Park, one of many veterans memorials in Savannah.

By the time we were done “modeling” for the camera at the fountain, we were all ready for Leopold’s Ice Cream. Leopold’s Ice Cream was founded in 1919 by three immigrant brothers from Greece and has been visited by many including Johnny Mercer, the famed lyricist.

We each tried Leopold’s famous Ice cream sandwiches. They were absolutely delectable!

Before wrapping up our time in Savannah with the State Dinner, we made a pit stop at Bonaventure Cemetery in Savannah. Bonaventure Cemetery is where Savannah native, Johnny Mercer is buried. Johnny Mercer is relevant to the state of Georgia for many reasons. He was a thriving lyricist with over 850 songs and founder of Capitol records.

He wrote a hit song called Moon River and today he still makes profits from his music. The cemetery overlooks the Moon River, so while there we snapped some photos of us and the famous river.

For many years, the Bonaventure Cemetery was the home of “The Bird Girl,” a statue featured on the best-selling book, “Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil.” Because of the success of that movie, however, visitors flocked to the cemetery, and the sculpture was moved to Jepson Art Center.

The visit to the cemetery was interesting. While leaving flowers at gravesites is popular, we saw rocks on tombstones at this particular one. We couldn’t figure out what they represented, but they were different and some rocks were beautiful. Because we were running short on time, we didn’t spend as much time as we would have liked to, but nevertheless we enjoyed our time learning about Mr. Mercer and Moon River.

Following a few more photographs of local scenes…

…and street performers…

Every evening, the conference has hosted a reception for socializing and networking. Each night, the receptions have been fun and memorable. This evening, the final night of the Southern Legislative Conference, we attended the State Dinner, which featured presentations and speeches by elected officials and entertainment. The dinner theme was “Georgia on my mind.” All the details of the décor reflected Georgia and its signature items, such as peaches and cotton.

We were pleasantly surprised when the LSC staff asked the four SHSU students to represent Texas in the flag parade.

While elected officials represented most of the 15 states attending, Texas was represented by four college students!

Following the parade, the Georgia Speaker of the House, David Ralston welcomed the conference attendees and thanked everyone for their dedication to the conference.

Dinner began where we enjoyed the filet mignon and peach glazed chicken among sweet tea and southern style sides.

Our table consisted of our group and Mr. & Mrs. Hickman. Mr. Hickman is the Deputy Staff Director of the Senate Finance Committee in the Virginia Capitol. Both Mr. and Ms. Hickman were knowledgeable and very welcoming, they offered interesting history facts about their hometown of Richmond, Virginia and travel tips for when we have the opportunity to visit Virginia. Our dinner conversation was pleasant and we were happy to have met them.

For entertainment, Jeff Foxworthy delivered hilarious comedy material, which everyone enjoyed.

Although most of his set was new material, he closed with some redneck jokes, including:

If your matching salad bowls all say, “Cool Whip,” you might be a redneck.

If your son’s name is Dale, Jr., but your name isn’t Dale, you might be a redneck.

Comedy was an amusing way to end dinner.

Comedy did not end the evening, however. That honor fell to Sheila Raye Charles, the daughter of the late Ray Charles. She sang some new materials, some covers of various artists (including Maroon 5) and covers of songs made famous by her father.

Just before we left, Ms. Hickman, introduced us to her friend and Virginia State Senator, Barbara Favola.

Senator Favola offered her advice and experiences on how to pursue a career path in politics one day. She was very knowledgeable and gave us some insight to her career. Throughout our Tour of the Deep South, it has been interesting to learn about how state legislatures differ from Texas’s. Thank you to Ms. Hickman for introducing us to Senator Favola!

After a few final pictures, we headed back to the hotel to get ready for our early morning departure and next full day of sightseeing in Alabama and Mississippi. Reflecting back on our time in Savannah, we have learned a lot about the rich history of the city and immensely enjoyed all the sightseeing. Thankful for the opportunity to attend the Southern Legislative Conference, we are sad to leave the beautiful city of Savannah…

…but excited about visiting more cities in our Tour of the Deep South!