Jennie Lee Crowder Barnaby, born January 12, 1931, stepped into the arms of her Savior on her 90th birthday, January 12, 2021.

Jennie was a first-class hostess and loved to serve wonderful food with candles for ambiance and enjoyed playing games and having a great time with her family and friends. She spent her summers canning a variety of fresh fruits and vegetables to enjoy during the winter months. She was especially known for her homemade noodles and breads. Her favorite past-times included numerous handcraft skills such as tatting, crocheting, and hand embroidery, which she learned at an early age.

Her first job was as a waitress in her father in law’s restaurant. She worked for several years at the auditor’s office in South Bend, Indiana. She also spent a number of years as a gift-wrapping specialist for Robertson’s department store.

Her favorite aspect of life was her involvement in the work of God. She spent many years at her home church at Christ Temple church in South Bend, Indiana. She later attended the First Pentecostal Church in Sulphur, Louisiana, and finally at Conyers Apostolic Church, in Conyers, Georgia. She loved to help other ladies with cooking and cleaning for church events. She was known for her passion for witnessing to others about Jesus and inviting everyone to her church.

Many will remember her most as a prayer warrior. Even in advanced dementia, and later in total Alzheimer’s, she was still able to clear her mind to pray and touch God for the needs of others.

Jennie received the best birthday gift from Jesus – her desire to be with Him finally answered.

She was preceded in death by her oldest son, James P. Barnaby, Jr., and seven of her eight siblings.

Jennie was married to James P. Barnaby, Sr., from 1948-1975 and together they had four children. Left to cherish her memory are her children, Kevin Barnaby and wife, Phyllis, Kandi Alvear and husband, Pastor Jonathan Alvear, Craig Barnaby and wife, Pam; grandchildren and their spouses, Rev. Juan and Sara, Michael and Marissa, Angelo and Maggie, Joshua, Christopher and Jennifer, Madison; great-grandchildren, Zackary, Gavin, Michaela, Milo, Jonathan, Judah, Levi, and one on the way; sister, Bettie Mieleszewicz; brother-in-law, James Dillon; many nieces and nephews; as well as many friends and church family.

The family would like to express their gratitude to Abbey Hospice Care and Mr. Patton and the entire nursing staff at Rockdale Health Care Center for the wonderful care, tender love, and kindness shown to her in the final years of her life. Many thanks are also due to the Conyers Apostolic Church family and to those who made it a special mission to visit and spend time with her.

This obituary was prepared with love and affection by Mrs. Barnaby’s family.

A Funeral Service for Mrs. Barnaby will be held Thursday, January 21, 2021, 1:00 P.M., at Conyers Apostolic Church, 1882 Irwin Bridge Road NW, in Conyers, with Pastor Jonathan Alvear and Rev. Juan Alvear officiating and interment following in Lawnwood Memorial Park, 1111 Access Road, in Covington. Friends are invited to visit with the family at the church, two hours prior to her service, from 11:00 A.M. – 1:00 P.M. Flowers are accepted, or donations may be made to Juvenile Diabetes Foundation https://www.jdrf.org/donate/ or Conyers Apostolic Church.