Four candidates are competing in the Republican primary in the 133rd House District.

They include a retired U.S. Air Force member turned conservative activist, a man who unsuccessfully ran for office in 2008 and two attorneys — one of them also a former member of the Air Force, the other a former aide to Republican U.S. Rep. Billy Long.

The 133rd district seat — which generally represents southwest Springfield, along with the city of Battlefield — is currently held by Eric Burlison, who is ineligible to run again due to term limits.

Burlison told the News-Leader this month he does not plan to endorse anyone ahead of the Aug. 2 primary. He said he is interested in running for the Missouri Senate in the future.

The candidate who wins the Aug. 2 primary will face Democrat Jim Clemmons in the November general election; Clemmons is the only person seeking the Democratic nomination for the seat.

The 133rd district tends to reliably elect Republicans. Burlison ran unopposed in 2014, and in 2012 defeated his Democratic rival by a 40-point margin.

The following information on the candidates includes remarks from a candidate forum held by the Greene County Republican Women's Club earlier this month, where three of the four candidates spoke. It also includes information from phone interviews conducted with the candidates, as well as their respective websites.

Candidates are listed in the order they appear on the ballot.

Curtis D. Trent

Age: 32

Education: Missouri State University, St. Louis University School of Law

Current occupation: Attorney, Parmele Law Firm

Family: Single

Website:curtisdtrent.com

Background: Curtis Trent was born in Springfield, and said he grew up on a small farm in Ava before attending college in Springfield and law school in St. Louis.

After graduation, he worked as an aide in the Washington D.C. office of U.S. Rep Billy Long (R-Springfield) before returning to Springfield in 2014 to begin working as an attorney.

"I think that my career, the things that I have done in the past, directly translate to what I am seeking," he said.

"I think I would be excellent at being a watchdog for the people, spotting things at the early stages when they could still be pulled back out of legislation."

Issues: During the candidate forum, Trent highlighted several issues important to him.

Religious freedom, Trent said, "has been heavily under attack the last few years," specifically referencing Springfield's debate over whether to add sexual orientation and gender identity to the city's nondiscrimination ordinance.

"Any cudgel that the left can grab hold of to push religion out of the schools, push religion out of the public square, we need to push back against that — and forcefully," he said. "We need to defend the traditional values and the culture of this country that made it what it is."

Trent said education "needs to be local, it needs to be under the control of the parents and it needs to emphasize the traditional values of the country." He said he is in favor of lower taxes and lower regulations.

"Too much of what our government does occurs outside the ballot box, where we don't really get to vote on it, where it's done by a regulatory agency or it's done by judicial fiat," Trent said. "We need to bring accountability back to the people and our people's representatives."

Missouri also needs to have "a culture that supports life," he said.

Total money raised: $89,945 as of the end of June

Exclusive endorsements: Trent said he's endorsed by Sug Hancock, the wife of the late congressman Mel Hancock.

Matthew Sims

Age: 42

Education: Missouri State University, William Mitchell College of Law

Occupation: Attorney, Sims Law Firm; Owner, Ormsby Group; Owner, The Deck Company of Northwest Arkansas

Family: Married, two children

Website: electmattsims.com

Background: Matthew Sims said he was born in Springfield and, after graduation from high school, joined the U.S. Air Force in 1992.

He served until 1999, and then went to college and law school. He currently works as an attorney, in addition to owning one company that installs decks and another that helps people with ideas for inventions bring products to market.

Sims said his two children are now in college, giving him the time to hold elected office.

"My Air Force service is something that was important to me, to be able to serve our country," he said. "I've always looked for other ways to continue to serve. Now that my kids are gone, I can do that."

Issues: Sims said the three issues at the core of his campaign are business, education and taxes.

"I'm a small business owner, and I know a lot of small business owners, and every small business owner I know wants to hire more people, but they can't," he said. "... So one of my focuses is going up there, trying to create a better business environment."

In terms of education, Sims said Missourians could have the best schools in the nation if they wanted.

"I'm for school choice — vouchers, magnet schools, charter schools, those kind of things — and getting rid of Common Core and bringing education back to our local parents and local teachers," he said.

Sims said he also would "like to see a push toward having every kid who graduates from high school have a certificate in something."

Sims said Missouri leaders need to "have a serious conversation" about possibly eliminating the income tax. He said it could be replaced "with a sales tax with a refund or an exemption for the first $10,000 to $20,000 of somebody's income — something along those lines — so it's not completely regressive."

He said the state needs to take a serious look at the corporate tax rate, and to focus resources on small businesses in addition to trying to recruit large corporations to relocate to the state.

Total money raised: $28,074 as of the end of June

David Cort

Age: 63

Education: Strafford High School

Occupation: Assistant store manager, King Cash Saver

Family: Married, five children, 10 grandchildren

Website: cortformo.com

Background: David Cort moved to the Springfield area from Massachusetts in first grade. After graduating from high school, he spent 23-and-a-half years in the U.S. Air Force, returning to the area upon retirement around 1996.

In additional to his current role managing a grocery store, Cort hosts a conservative online talk radio show and works in an unpaid capacity as executive director of the Missouri Grassroots Coalition.

"We have worked for a decade, working with legislators, to try to get solid conservative, pro-life legislation passed," he said. "We rally grassroots groups and organizations; I travel a lot."

Cort said he would retire if elected so he could focus on being a legislator, and referred to himself as "the candidate who has lived in this district for 20 years."

Issues: Cort said he is an advocate for "Missouri First."

"Pick your favorite issue," he said. "Pick gay marriage. Pick life. Pick who's going in the bathroom with your 3-year-old granddaughter. Pick guns. Pick voting rights. It is the priority of every state legislature to say to the federal government: We give you some very important jobs. But as Madison said, when it comes to the issues that affect the lives, liberties and properties of the citizens of the state of Missouri: We decide."

If elected to Jefferson City, Cort said, "I bring a commitment to fight Washington D.C., not to bring Washington D.C. to the table."

Funding: $22,140 as of the end of June

Exclusive endorsements: Cort's website cites endorsements from Missouri Rep. Mike Moon, R-Ash Grove, as well as Calvin Morrow, who played an organizing role in the successful effort to repeal Springfield's SOGI ordinance.

Mike Goodart

Age: 36

Education: Missouri State University

Occupation: Owner, Goodart Graphics

Family: Married, four children

Website: vote4goodart.com

Background: Mike Goodart is the only candidate to have previously sought elected office.

He won the Republican nomination for what was then the 138th House District — which covered parts of central and northeast Springfield — in 2008, ultimately losing in the general election. Then, Goodart said, his life got complicated.

At the time, he said, he was a Realtor. By March 2009, he said, as a result of the recession, he was two months behind on his mortgage. Goodart saw the Tea Party movement gaining steam, and printed up some "Don't Tread On Me" t-shirts.

"I took them to a Tea Party (rally) in St. Louis and I sold out and I took orders, and I was able to catch my house," he said. "And that's the business I have today. I run around the campaign rallies and I sell t-shirts and buttons and flags and hats and everything like that."

It wasn't instantaneous success, though. Goodart said he worked in Branson in 2011, sometimes sleeping in his car and showering in campgrounds. He said the experience made him understand how the decisions made by elected officials affect the average person.

"I know what it is to pinch pennies, I know what it is to make end's meet, live paycheck to paycheck," he said.

Issues: Goodart said he believes the state legislature needs to support a convention of the states — a gathering in which states can propose amendments to the Constitution.

"That is the only way that we are going to reign in the federal government," Goodart said. "We need to put a balanced budget amendment on the constitution; we need to put term limits in."

Goodart said education is also a focus of his.

"I want to see our kids put first in education," he said.

Asked to contrast himself with the other candidates, Goodart said "the real difference in this race is where the money's coming from." He said he had 112 individual donors to his campaign, more than any of his competitors.

"I'm getting much more of a grassroots support system," he said.