Suite Life on Deck

Suite Life on Deck is a TV show for kids on Disney Channel. It is a spin off of the Disney Channel show Suite Life of Zack and Cody. Like it's predecessor, the show features twins Zack and Cody played by real life twins Dylan and Cole Sprouse.

Storyline

Zack and Cody are older now and now live aboard a cruise ship called the SS Tipton. Like the hotel where Zack and Cody lived before, the SS Tipton is owned by London Tipton's father. Mr. Moseby runs much of the customer service aboard the ship and is the fourth major character from the original show. The kids attend a school on the ship and are joined by new friends Bailey, Woody, and Marcus.

Zack and Cody are the stars and specialize in getting into some kind of mischief. Generally Zack is the cause, while the brainy Cody gets caught up in Zack's schemes. Many episodes involve guest appearances from the earlier show like Maddie (Ashley Tisdale) and Arwin (Brian Stepanek). Also, stars from other Disney Channel shows appear including Hannah Montana (Miley Cyrus) and Alex Russo (Selena Gomez). In later episodes Bailey and Cody's crush become a major theme.

Characters from Suite Life on Deck (actors in parenthesis)

Zack (Dylan Sprouse) - The twin that causes the most trouble and get his brother involved with his zany schemes.

Cody (Cole Sprouse) - The brainy dorky twin.

London Tipton (Brenda Song) - Rich heiress. Her father owns the SS Tipton.

Mr. Moseby (Phill Lewis) - Runs the customer service on the ship. Zack and Cody generally cause him problems and get in the way of him doing his job.

Bailey Pickett (Debby Ryan) - Girl from the country. Later becomes Cody's girlfriend. Room mate with London.

Woody Fink (Matthew Timmons) - Friend of Zack and Cody.

Marcus Little (Larramie Doc Shaw) - Friend of Zack and Cody.

Overall Review

Suite Life on Deck is a good kid's show. It's not our favorite show on Disney Channel (see Phineas and Ferb and Wizards of Waverly Place), but kids seem to really enjoy it (it placed 2nd on a recent Ducksters poll of TV shows). The acting is average and the comedy is definitely targeted to kids. So we don't imagine a lot of adults enjoying this show, but….who cares? It is a show for kids after all. It may not be appropriate for some younger kids as there are boyfriend/girlfriend situations. It's more mature than the original show Suite Life of Zack and Cody.

Other kids TV shows to check out:

American Idol

ANT Farm

Arthur

Dora the Explorer

Good Luck Charlie

iCarly

Jonas LA

Kick Buttowski

Mickey Mouse Clubhouse

Pair of Kings

Phineas and Ferb

Sesame Street

Shake It Up

Sonny With a Chance

So Random

Suite Life on Deck

Wizards of Waverly Place

Zeke and Luther

Back to Kids Fun and TV Page