Illustration: Shmuel Mushnick, Cave of Machpelah

Shalom, friends. This is the anniversary of my series of weekly messages. My very first essay shared electronically, and inviting your comments and queries, started with this Torah portion, the fifth week of the Genesis cycle in our biblical lectionary. At that time, I spoke about the significance of the verse, “Abraham set out to lament for Sara and to weep for her.” (Genesis 23:2). I was impressed that, before getting lost in the details of Abraham’s negotiations to buy the Cave of Machpelah as Sarah’s final resting place—clearly, the focus of the chapter—the Bible pauses to note the emotional impact on Abraham of the loss of his wife.

Illustration: Bible map: Mamre in bibleatlas.org

After many years, I return to that Bible story. I understand that it is mostly about staking the claim of Abraham to the Land of Canaan. But the narrative transcends that particular agenda. It also tells us the importance of a physical final resting place—a grave. Why should that be? Why should it be important that there be a place where one can say, “Poh nikbar”—“here lies”?

As part of my answer, let me remind you of a dialogue in an Israeli film that I have shown my students many times, “Under the Domim Tree.” The film is set in Israel in the early years of the independence of the state—the early 1950’s. It portrays a chapter in the lives of a group of children. Most of them are orphans, specifically, child survivors of the Holocaust whose parents had been murdered. The lead character, Aviyah, is not a Holocaust orphan; she is in the children’s village because her one surviving parent is insane. The dedicated staff of the Israeli youth villages, to whom the film is dedicated, devoted resources and skill to help the children heal and prepare for successful adult lives.

Illustration: Still from Eli Cohen, Ets HaDomim Tafus (“Under the Domim Tree”), 1995. The lead character holds a photograph of her deceased father. In the film, she discovers his grave.

The lead character, Aviyah, receives a photograph of her deceased father, sent to her by her Aunt. In the course of the story, a remark by one of her peers, a troubled girl, Mira, launches her on a journey of discovery. Mira, whose own murdered parents had no grave, says “kever—ha-ikkar hu she’yihheh kever.” “A grave- the essential thing is that there should be a grave.” Aviyah pieces together the stray bits of information that she has and finds her father’s grave in the old, pre-1948 section of the Jewish cemetery in Haifa. Once there, she cleans the stone and offers a heartfelt prayer, that her father should watch over her afflicted mother and over her, too.

Illustration: Haifa Jewish Cemetery

The actress portraying Aviyah, Kaipo Cohen, turns in a wonderful performance. She portrays the rush of emotions that her teen-age character feels: sadness mixed with gratitude and a sense of finally achieving grounding, at finding where her father’s body reposes.

I understand that mix of emotions from my own work. One of the emotional high points of my year of service is to take congregants to the graves of relatives around the time of the High Holidays. The congregants are reflective, somber, sometimes still sad, depending on the length of time they have had to live on after their loss. They are frequently motivated to reminisce about the lives that loved ones had lived, and the ways in which those lives continue to shape their own. They are by and large settled, to know that they still somehow preserve a connection to the loved ones living on in their memory—living on in Heaven.

This is also my experience. Most years, I take a pilgrimage, together with Sheila and Emily, to our family graves in New Jersey. We can’t be there at the season of the New Year, so we go when we can, often in the summer. The experience is always moving. To see the stones accumulating on top of the monument stones is satisfying, in a sense—a concrete testimonial that my loved ones have not been forgotten, a tangible expression of the desire to reach past all borders and touch a loved one.

One time, half a year into my bereavement, I was having a hard day. I went to my father’s grave in the midst of a downpour. The sky was crying; I was crying; and then I had cried all my tears and I felt restored, if weak.

Another visit to my parents’ grave remains vivid in my memory. My two brothers and I each had tasks to perform in clearing the family house and preparing it for sale. My job was to go through the 10,000 books in the family library, decide which ones would go to which schools and libraries, and to get them there. It was physically demanding work. It was what I needed, a labor of love. It allowed me to channel energies productively and to accomplish the “work” of mourning. When the shelves were empty--- although my parents’ furniture was still in the house—suddenly, it felt to me as if their presence had departed from the house. They were such bibliophiles--- at the Jewish Theological Seminary, my parents’ fellow students composed a ditty in their honor, whose refrain was “David and Esther and the library”—that the absence of the books was the visual cue that suddenly moved me to the stage of acceptance of the finality of my loss.

At that point, I simply had to get to the cemetery. It was as if, in the words of the prophet Ezekiel, “A wind lifted me up and carried me.” I drove the hour from the house to the cemetery as if time had suspended. When I got to the grave, another heartfelt cry--- and then, peace.

This was halfway through the 11 months of reciting kaddish. I continued to recite it, in obedience to Jewish tradition, until the end. But the pain that had animated my earlier recitation was gone. The sense that I personally needed that recitation had ended. I had arrived at the end of the journey of bereavement. The cemetery was the place where I could acknowledge that.

Illustration: The Story of Abraham Series (detail) 1540-43, attributed to Pieter Coecke van Aelst. The Royal Trust