ALTHOUGH IT MAY sometimes seem as if the Holocaust and its aftermath have been thoroughly mined by film makers, now comes another look at the subject.

It is "Under the Domim Tree," an Israeli film that follows a group of teen-age Holocaust survivors living in a youth village in the new state of Israel in the 1950's. The film interweaves the stories of four characters: Aviya, who is looking for information about her dead father; Jurek, a boy from Poland who is trying to balance his affection for Aviya with the need to care for another boy; Yola, who has learned that her father is alive and is preparing to travel to Warsaw to be with him, and Mira, who has lost her memory, yet believes that she is an orphan.

Over several decades, some 300,000 children orphaned by the Holocaust and later by the Arab-Israeli fighting passed through these Youth Aliyah villages, as they were called, in Israel. Among them was Gila Almagor, 56, who wrote about her experiences in the book, also called "Under the Domim Tree," on which this film was based.

Ms. Almagor was a co-producer of the film, which won first prize at the International Film Festival in Jerusalem last year. She also acts in it.

Ms. Almagor vividly remembers sleeping five to a room in her youth village, waking up at 5 A.M. and gardening for three hours before classes. Although she recalls that the villages "looked healthy, with laughter and song" during the day, "at night came the shadows."

Every teen-ager had nightmares about the concentration camps, about losing family members. "When a roommate screamed, you wanted to turn on the lights," she said. "You thought they were going nuts. How did you know that you, too, had not been screaming for the last three nights in a row?"

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.