By of the

St. Francis — Even when he played in the same backcourt with Ricky Rubio and J.J. Barea, veteran guard Luke Ridnour started all 82 games for the Minnesota Timberwolves last season.

So imagine Ridnour's reaction to reduced playing time with the rebuilding Milwaukee Bucks, after he was acquired in an off-season trade with Minnesota.

"It's really hard," said the 32-year-old Ridnour, in his second stint with the Bucks. "You play in the league to play, and the way our record is and the way that it's going, it's not a fun situation.

"You've just got to take it in stride."

Ridnour missed the first seven games due to a painful back injury.

But he returned and has played in 14 of the last 17 games, although he has not played due to coach's decision in three of the last five. He is averaging 5.1 points and 3.4 assists while playing 20.3 minutes per game.

Bucks coach Larry Drew has opted to go with rookie Nate Wolters as the primary backup at point guard behind Brandon Knight.

"I've never been in this situation," Ridnour said. "Just go with it and just stay positive. The biggest thing is our record. As a team we've got to win games."

The Bucks (5-19) and New York Knicks (7-17), two of the biggest underachievers in a weak Eastern Conference, will meet Wednesday night at the BMO Harris Bradley Center.

Drew praised Ridnour for his approach to the recent benching and said he had spoken to him about it.

"I told him what we were looking to do and we wanted to take a look at some things," Drew said. "Not saying any of these things would be permanent.

"He was very professional about it. Maybe deep down inside he was a little angry, which he should be. I want guys that do want to play.

"I can see him talking to Nate and helping him, and that's just him being the professional that he is."

Ridnour started 201 times in 206 appearances with the Timberwolves during three seasons. Minnesota coach Rick Adelman valued his contributions and started him as an undersized shooting guard for much of last season, rather than at his usual point guard spot.

When Ridnour was with the Bucks the first time, from 2008-'10, he played an important role.

He started 50 of 72 games in his first season in Milwaukee and played in all 82 games off the bench as a key contributor in 2009-'10, when Brandon Jennings arrived to be the team's starting point guard. Ridnour averaged 10 points and 4.5 assists in those two seasons.

Ridnour and Jennings formed an effective tandem in the "Fear the Deer" year as the Bucks went 46-36 and reached the Eastern Conference playoffs as the sixth-seeded team.

Ridnour is making $4.3 million in the last year of a four-year deal he signed with Minnesota.

"I'm not worried about that," he said. "I've been in the league long enough and that's not really an important factor to me.

"I know good things will come. I've got faith. I trust in the Lord and he's got a good plan. He always turns everything for the good. Whatever that is, however it happens, it will work out."

In his limited time on the court it's apparent Ridnour has formed a bond with 19-year-old rookie Giannis Antetokounmpo. The two have teamed up for some sensational dunks with Ridnour finding the Greek athlete streaking to the basket.

"I've noticed if he gets the ball in transition he makes the right decisions," Ridnour said of the fleet forward. "Not just finishing but even passing.

"I just try to get it to him early to see if he can make something happen. He's going to be good. You can see it. The thing about it is he understands the game and that's going to help him in the long run.

"Everything else will come with playing time and being in the right system."

Wolters, the second-round draft pick from South Dakota State, has averaged 25-plus minutes a game in the last three games.

He had six points and five rebounds in 28 minutes in the loss at Dallas on Saturday and played the entire fourth quarter in tandem with Ridnour, who added eight points in 16 minutes.

"He's a good guy and he's willing to help me when I'm on the floor," Wolters said. "And when he's on the floor I try to watch him and see what he's doing."

There are a few similarities between the rookie and the veteran but some differences, too.

"He's a better shooter than I am right now," Wolters said. "I'm a little bigger. He's had a long career. I would love to stay in the league as long as he has."

The Bucks acquired Ridnour as part of a three-team deal with the Timberwolves and Oklahoma City Thunder. Milwaukee also received a 2014 second-round pick from Minnesota via the Los Angeles Lakers and cash from Oklahoma City.

"I see an opportunity for him to get back in there and get some consistent minutes," Drew said. "He just has to stay ready and step up when his number is called.

"I thought he came in against Dallas and gave us productive minutes."

Drew said he has seen veterans who pout and ask out as soon as their minutes are reduced.

"That has not been the case with any of our guys," Drew said. "I've tried to be totally honest with the guys about combinations that we're looking to try.

"No combination is set in stone. I think the real professionals embrace that and say, 'Just don't forget about me.'"