The Timberwolves are hoping veteran guard Luke Ridnour, the team's oldest player at 31, does not become the latest injury concern.

Ridnour said Sunday that he has a herniated disc in his lower back, an ailment that has sidelined him for three of the Wolves' five exhibition games. Ridnour did not practice Sunday, but said his back is "feeling much better" after getting a cortisone shot Friday.

"By taking care of it now, I'll be able to nip it in the bud and move forward from here and be pain-free," Ridnour said after practice. "I just want to make the necessary steps so I can be ready for November. I'll be ready to go."

Ridnour is a vital player in the Wolves' attempts to adjust without Kevin Love (broken hand) and Ricky Rubio (knee). Neither is expected to be available until at least mid-December. Wolves coach Rick Adelman plans to use Ridnour, if healthy, as the team's starting point guard until Rubio returns.

When healthy, Ridnour has been a dependable asset in the Wolves' backcourt as a shooter and playmaker. The nine-year veteran started 53 games last season and took over the point guard duties when Rubio suffered a major knee injury on March 9 against the Los Angeles Lakers. Ridnour, however, missed the final 11 games because of an ankle injury. He had hamstring and groin injuries during his first two seasons with the Wolves.

Ridnour said he intends to practice today and hopes to play in the Wolves' final two exhibition games. The Wolves play Detroit on Wednesday in Winnipeg and Milwaukee on Friday in Green Bay.

Ridnour downplayed the possibility of aggravating his back, which he said has given him trouble in previous seasons.

"I've had stuff in the past," he said. "These symptoms are a little different. I just needed to calm it down. I'm good where I'm at with it."

Ridnour did not make the trip to Chicago for the Timberwolves' 92-81 loss Friday night. Adelman used J.J. Barea, Malcolm Lee and free agent Will Conroy at point guard against the Bulls, but the trio combined for only five assists and 12 points. Barea, who started, shot 0 for 5 from the floor and had two turnovers and two assists in 23 minutes.

Though the Wolves are searching for stability in their offense without Love and Rubio, Adelman is being cautious with Ridnour, who was limited to light shooting drills after Sunday's practice.

"We'll have to see what the medical people say," Adelman said. "We have a couple of weeks (before the start of the regular season)."