From the Emperor’s Desk: Since I did not find a lot of information about Princess Amalie I decided to also include some information on her sisters.

Amelia Auguste (November 13, 1801 – November 8, 1877) was a Bavarian princess by birth and Queen of Saxony by marriage to King Johann of Saxony.

Amalie was the fourth child of King Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria and his second wife Caroline of Baden. She was the identical twin sister of Elisabeth Louise, later Queen of Prussia as wife of Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia.

Here is a list of her sisters

1. Princess Augusta of Bavaria, Duchess of Leuchtenberg (June 21, 1788 – May 13, 1851) was the second child and eldest daughter of Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria and Princess Augusta Wilhelmine of Hesse-Darmstadt. By marriage, she was a French Princess.

Although promised in marriage to the heir of Baden, Charles, originally, the engagement was broken at the behest of Napoleon I of France. On January 14, 1806 in Munich, Augusta married Eugène de Beauharnais, the only son of Josephine de Beauharnais and Alexandre, vicomte de Beauharnais and stepson of Napoleon. In return, Napoleon raised Bavaria from an Electoral state to a Kingdom. Although a diplomatic marriage, this union would turn out to be a happy one. In 1817, Augusta’s father raised his son-in-law to the title of Duke of Leuchtenberg and Prince of Eichstädt, with the style Royal Highness.

2. Princess Caroline Augusta of Bavaria (February 8, 1792 – February 9, 1873) was Empress of Austria by marriage to FranzI of Austria. She married first Crown Prince Wilhelm of Württemberg, whom she divorced, and then married Emperor Franz I of Austria.

3. Elisabeth Ludovika of Bavaria (November 13, 1801 – December 14, 1873) was Queen of Prussia as the wife of King Frederick William IV. She was known within her family as Elise. The marriage was childless.

4. Princess Sophie of Bavaria (January 27, 1805 – 28 May 1872) The identical twin sister of Queen Maria Anna of Saxony, Sophie became Archduchess of Austria by marriage to Archduke Franz Karl of Austria. Her eldest son Franz Joseph reigned as Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary; her second son Maximilian briefly reigned as Emperor of Mexico.

5. Princess Maria Anna of Bavaria (January 27, 1805 – September 13, 1877), known as ‘Marie’ was Queen of Saxony from 1836 to 1854 as the second wife of King Friedrich August II of Saxony. Friedrich August II died without an heir was succeeded by his younger brother Johann.

During a journey in Tyrol, he had an accident in Brennbüchel in which he fell in front of a horse that stepped on his head. On August 8, 1854, he died in the Gasthof Neuner.

6. Princess Ludovika of Bavaria (August 30,1808 – January 25,1892). Ludovika married Maximilian Joseph, Duke in Bavaria, whose father Duke Pius August in Bavaria was her cousin, on September 9, 1828 in Tegernsee. Ludovika was always frustrated that, unlike her elder sisters who married kings and Austrian archdukes, she would not be marrying someone with a grand title, but rather a peculiar and childish duke who had a fondness for circuses.

However, Ludovika was determined to create dynastic marriages for her daughters. She and her husband had ten children, including Elisabeth, known as Sisi who married her cousin Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria and Maria Sofia who married King Francisco II of the Two Sicilies.

~~~~~~~~~

In 1851 Amalie Auguste became chairwoman of Women’s Association of Dresden (Frauenverein zu Dresden), an organisation founded by her sister, the then queen. Three years later, her husband inherited the throne and she became queen. In 1859 she reorganized the association as the Zentralausschuß obererzgebirgischen und der vogtländischen Frauenvereine and established a legal basis for it, under which the organisation continued until 1932.

Marriage and issue