Dark powers have been unleashed across the galaxy. Will the Alchemist be humanity's saviour - or its doom? Following on from The Reality Dysfunction, The Neutronium Alchemist is the second epic novel in the Night's Dawn trilogy by Peter F. Hamilton.

A seemingly unstoppable force has entered our universe, and we are confronted by our most primal fear. Those who have succumbed to its horror have acquired godlike powers. Yet their actions are far from divine.

As they advance from planet to planet, these powerful individuals leave slaughter and mayhem in their wake. The Confederation Navy is dangerously overstretched, as whole worlds fracture and collapse. And a dark messiah prepares to invoke his own version of the final night.

In such desperate times, a powerful new weapon could cause yet more terror, but Dr Alkad Mzu is determined to retrieve the Alchemist - and complete her thirty-year-old mission to slay a star. However, as she works to obtain it, others have their own ideas on how to use this ultimate doomsday device . . .

The Neutronium Alchemist is followed by The Naked God.

Volume Two in the action-packed space opera, the Night's Dawn Trilogy.

About the Author

Peter F. Hamilton was born in Rutland in 1960 and now lives in Somerset. He began writing in 1987, and sold his first short story to Fear magazine in 1988. He has written many bestselling novels, including the Greg Mandel series, the Night's Dawn trilogy, the Commonwealth Saga, the Void trilogy, The Chronicle of the Fallers, the Salvation Sequence, short story collections and several standalone novels including Fallen Dragon and Great North Road.

Reviews

Hamilton puts British sci-fi back into interstellar overdrive * Times *

Space opera has rarely been dealt with in such majesty . . . inventive, ambitious, and, like the greatest of tumbling acts, leaves you giddy for more * Daily Express *

Book Information

ISBN 9781509868612

Author Peter F. Hamilton

Format Paperback

Page Count 1280

Imprint Pan Books

Publisher Pan Macmillan

Series The Night's Dawn trilogy

Weight(grams) 874g

Dimensions(mm) 197mm * 133mm * 63mm