Östersund is the number one winter city. The short distance to the mountains and the country’s top down hill centre “Åre” make many students choose Östersund as their city of studies. But the city and its surroundings have a wide range of recreational activities to offer the year around.

Sports fan, woodland scenery lover, or culture vulture? Östersund offers you a unique opportunity to choose, regardless of what category you belong to. The closeness to the stunning wilderness offers numerous opportunities for trekking as well as fishing and skiing. The slalom slope is situated in the midst of the city. In Östersund you will also have the possibility to try ice-climbing and when there is no snow on the ground, you can try climbing and challenging adventure tracks close to the slalom slope. The fine cross country ski stadium offers many long illuminated tracks for skiing, running, and even in-line skating. Every winter, big national sports events take place here. Over 10 km long ice-skating and skiing tracks on the lake “Storsjön” have been an appreciated contribution to the winter scenery in the city. This gives you the opportunity to go long-distance ice-skating and cross country skiing, when the snow has covered the city and the ice on the lake.

Entertainment and recreation

Östersund is not only the Mecca of sports fans. A few minutes walk from the city centre you find one of Sweden’s most frequently prized provincial museums “Jamtli.” In its role as the only city in the province of Jämtland, trade and business naturally take on a central function in Östersund. There are many shops that offer a wide range of products, which give you the opportunity of good shopping in the immediate vicinity. The city centre also has many cafés, pubs, open air bars, and restaurants that offer local specialties as well as international menus. The city has an active music and entertainment life for all kinds of tastes. For instance, annually in the shift between July and August, the city festivity “Storsjöyran” is arranged. Östersund is the seat of the county government in the province of Jämtland and it is situated right at Jämtland’s geographical heart. If one turns towards the west, one sees the mountain tops “Bydalsfjällen” and “Åreskutan” in relief against the horizon. Few other cities than Östersund offer a similar mix of nature experiences, entertainment, and recreational activities.

Campus Östersund

Campus Östersund, inaugurated in 2002, is situated a few minutes walk from the main shopping street in the centre of the city. The new city district with the university, which formerly was a regiment, has been carefully renovated, built out, and transformed into a welcoming campus. The area harbours a modern library, lecture halls, student restaurants, and a café.

Student life in Östersund

The students’ union in Östersund has its base in “Studenternas hus” in the midst of campus. Here you find among other things the student’s union office with chairman and vice chairman, the students’ union counselling, and the different student sections. The restaurants that are situated in the library building are run by the students’ union and lunch is served for student friendly prices. Also in the evenings this is a natural meeting-point on campus—the perfect place for after-work, meetings, and dinners. In case you yourself would like to arrange a dinner, a meeting, a party, or work on any of the pub evenings, you just have to sign up for it. In “Studenternas hus” there is always something going on. If you like sports, there is the association “ÖSIS” (The Östersund students’ sports association), which possesses knowledge and devotion. In case your own sport is lacking, you might want to start it up. No sport is impossible within “ÖSIS.” The students’ union of Östersund warmly wishes you welcome to a funny and exciting time of study!