Visions of Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carolare everywhere this time of year. This enduring story teaches us that personal growth is possible by balancing three unique perspectives: reflection on the past, awareness of the present, and hopeful planning for the future.

We find ourselves in 2020 experiencing an unusual holiday season, which makes it a good time for a visit from the Ghost of Christmas Past. Journey back in time* with us as we see how the traditions of Jovian Concepts were celebrated:

Inspired by the spirit of Mr. Fezziwig’s yearly parties in Charles Dickens’ A Christmas Carol, employees and their guests are treated to a hotel room, transportation, and an evening full of good friends and good food. “This party is for the employees,” says CEO Rich Scheper, our own Mr. Fezziwig. “I want them to have a good time and be happy.”

The original Jovian Concepts holiday parties took place in the home of Rich and Stacey Scheper, an extension of the family atmosphere that is a key part of the company culture. As Jovian Concepts grew, the parties moved to various iconic locations in the Schepers' hometown of Baltimore, such as the B&O Railroad Museum-- not quite the Schepers’ home, but their hometown nonetheless.

Memories of these large celebrations include touring a ballpark, drinking cocktails from beakers, getting lost in a castle, and dancing beneath jellyfish.

We recall award presentations, including some special ones like The Golden Flyswatter and the 007 Martini Glass.

Most importantly, we remember catching up with old friends, sharing photos of new babies, and laughing at some of the crazy dance moves we've tried.

As our visit with the Ghost of Christmas Past wraps up, we are reminded that these good times are a valuable part of our culture, supporting our Core Values of Cohesiveness, Loyalty, and Balance.

One of two yearly gatherings that include the entire company and their significant others, the holiday party is a chance to socialize just for the sake of socializing. By reflecting on these good times, we are reminded of how important they are to us.

Is there room in our busy lives for that? We think so. Charles Dickens seemed to think so, too. Eating and dancing and catching up with people we know is what makes life sweet--which is exactly the kind of Big Idea we cherish at Jovian Concepts.

*Adapted from original post, What's the Big Idea about a Holiday Party shared in 2017.

About Jovian Concepts, Inc.

Jovian Concepts, Inc. provides unique on-site consulting services to agencies of the United States government. Founded in 2009 by Richard Scheper, Ph.D., Jovian Concepts is based in Maryland and is an Equal Opportunity Employer, including disability and veterans.