Mulligan Stew made with beef and lots of vegetables is the savory soup of your dreams. It’s easy to make, tender, and absolutely delicious.

This post is sponsored by Klarbrunn.

Mulligan Stew

If you’re looking for a soul-satisfying recipe that’s perfect to enjoy on a cold night, this is the soup you’ve been searching for.

This amazing and simple stew is comfort food at its best. A warm bowl of this, followed by an evening curled up with a great book in a comfy chair by a wood stove is my idea of perfection.

I’ve partnered up with Klarbrunn to bring you this delicious stew recipe. I’m always sipping on a can of their flavored sparkling water while I cook, and Citrus Blend is my favorite flavor to sip on while I make this recipe. You can find out where to buy Klarbrunn here.

Mulligan Stew Origin

Mulligan’s beef stew, also known as community stew, is said to have originated during the Great Depression in homeless camps. It’s essentially a combination of meat, potatoes, and vegetables, in any and all combinations.

That means there’s a ton of variety in recipes from family to family. This is our family recipe, and while I love adding in other vegetables from time to time, this recipe is tried and true and I always come back to it.

Mulligan Stew vs. Beef Stew

Since Mulligan Stew originated as a Depression era food, it tends to have a much higher ratio of vegetables to meat than beef stew does. While a traditional beef stew will normally have about a 3:1 ratio of meat to potatoes, Mulligan Stew actually has more potatoes and vegetables than it has beef.

What Kind of Potatoes Should You Use?

This depends on how long you plan to cook the potatoes. I add the potatoes when the stew’s a little over halfway finished, so peeled and cubed russet potatoes work really well for me. If you’re planning to start the stew with the potatoes already in it and cook them for the full amount of time, I’d recommend using Yukon Gold potatoes.

Slow Cooker or Crock Pot Stew

You can definitely make this in the slow cooker! Just saute the beef and vegetables as directed in the instructions, then cook the beef and liquids on low for 3 hours, then add the vegetables and potatoes and cook on low for an additional 5 hours (a total of 8 hours).

You could add everything in at the start and cook the whole stew on low for 8 hours, but I think the vegetables and potatoes would be a little too soft (at least for my taste).

Instant Pot Stew

This is a great soup to make in the Instant Pot! Start by following the sauteing instructions, then cook the browned beef and liquid ingredients on Manual for 25 minutes, followed by a natural release for 10 minutes. Add in the potatoes and sauteed vegetables, and cook on Manual for 10 minutes, followed by a quick release.

Can You Freeze This Soup?

If you’re planning to use this soup as a freezer meal, I’d recommend freezing it without the potatoes. The rest of the stew will freeze well, but potatoes in soup can end up with a grainy texture after they thaw.

Optional Ingredient Additions

Here’s the beautiful thing about Mulligan’s Stew. It’s seriously SO adaptable. It’s meant to use whatever you have on hand, so if you have any vegetables you’d like to add, definitely include them.

Some of my favorite additions are:

Frozen Mixed Vegetables

Corn

Green Beans

Pearl Onions

Chicken

Sliced Mushrooms

Cabbage

Fresh Herbs

This last one isn’t an addition, but an adaptation. If you happen to have leftover roast, that would make this a super fast and easy stew to throw together! Just skip the first 30 minutes of simmering time, and replace the stew meat with the leftover roast. You could even use ground beef in place of the stew beef if that’s what you have on hand.

How to Make this Gluten Free

The only ingredients you need to watch in this recipe are the Worcestershire sauce and the bouillon. The brand of Worcestershire sauce that I use is gluten free, but not all of them are. You’ll need to use gluten free brands for this recipe to be gluten free. Other than those, the rest of the ingredients are gluten free.

How to Make This Keto

To make this keto, you’ll need to halve the amounts of carrots and celery, replace the potatoes with quartered radish, and thicken the soup with xantham gum instead of cornstarch.

Beef Recipes

If you’re looking for more delicious beef recipes, be sure to check out some of our reader favorites!

Cajun Butter Steak Bites

Instant Pot Frozen Roast

Chili Lime Steak Fajitas

Mojo Marinade

I’d love to hear what you thought of this recipe in the comments or on Instagram! @KeyToMyLime #KeyToMyLime

Click here to pin this recipe for later!