Mulligan Stew – This classic dutch oven recipe combines tender beef and your choice of veggies in a delicious tomato broth. “Hobo Stew” is easy to make on the stovetop in one pot!

Why We Love This Stew Recipe

Although we have another rendition of Beef Stew already on the blog (my mom’s amazing recipe) this super simple Mulligan Stew is also a favorite. It’s more rustic and casual, a dutch oven beef stew recipe that is easy to make on the stovetop. But while there is nothing fancy here, it’s a one-bowl meal that is perfectly hearty, flavorful, and incredibly satisfying.

Also known as Irish Stew and Hobo Stew, the idea behind this recipe is a “community dish” where everyone chips in to throw something into the pot. So although we’re using frozen peas and corn, you can certainly add other frozen vegetables like green beans, okra, broccoli, or even hominy.

Ingredients You Need

Olive oil – or other high-heat oil like avocado or canola oil

Beef stew meat – typically pre-cut chunks of chuck roast

Fresh vegetables – mushrooms, onion, celery, carrots, potatoes

Garlic – minced

Italian seasoning – store-bought or use our fantastic homemade Italian Seasoning recipe

Beef broth – or beef bullion, or try homemade Beef Consommé for the deepest, meaty flavor

Tomato paste – for a rich and tangy stew broth

Frozen corn and frozen peas – no need to thaw!

Salt and black pepper – a bit of both to finish the dish

How To Make Mulligan Beef Stew

Set a 6 to 8-quart saucepot over medium heat. Add the oil to the pot. Liberally salt and pepper the beef cubes on all sides, then place them in the pot. Use a wooden spoon to stir and cook the beef chunks until they are browned on all sides, approximately 5 minutes.

Next, add in the mushrooms, onions, celery, carrots, garlic, and Italian seasoning.

Stir and soften the vegetables for another 3-5 minutes.

Pour in the beef broth and tomato paste. Cover the pot and turn the heat to medium-low. Simmer (low-boil) for one hour, stirring occasionally.

Get the Complete (Printable) Dutch Oven Mulligan Beef Stew Recipe Below. Enjoy!

Peel and chop the potatoes into 1-inch cubes. (If doing this ahead of time, place them in water, so they don’t brown. Then drain right before using.) Add the potatoes and corn to the stew.

Stir, then cover and simmer for another 20 minutes until the potatoes are cooked through and the beef chunks are very tender. Stir in the peas.

Then taste and salt and pepper as needed.

How To Make Hobo Stew In Crockpot

Start the beef stew by first cooking the meat, garlic, onions, mushrooms, celery, and carrots in a dutch oven on the stovetop per the original recipe below. Then transfer everything to the slow cooker, and add the remaining ingredients.

Cover, and cook on low for 8-10 hours or high for 4-6 hours.

How To Make Mulligan Stew In Instant Pot

The recipe needs to be cut in half to properly cook in an electric pressure cooker. Use the sliding scale in the recipe card below to reduce the servings from 8 to 4.

Use the saute function to cook the beef. Remove it from the pot. Then saute the garlic, mushrooms, onions, celery, and carrots with the Italian seasoning. Add the meat back to the pot along with the beef broth, tomato pasta, and potatoes.

Close to seal, and pressure cook on high for 20 minutes. Then do a quick release and remove the lid. Turn on the saute function again, and add the frozen peas and corn. Cook the Irish Stew for about 5 more minutes.

Recipe Variations

Customize this recipe with whatever frozen veggies you have on hand! Try frozen okra, green beans, or lima beans. For even more convenience, leave out the fresh carrots and use a frozen veggie blend with carrots, green beans, peas, and corn.

Feel free to experiment with herbs and spices as well. Although Italian seasoning has several well-selected herbs to offer a full flavor, consider adding in bay leaves, oregano, basil, dill weed, marjoram, or thyme.

Serving Suggestions

Irish Beef Stew is a full meal in a bowl, with plenty of filling meat and vegetables. But for a super hearty dinner, it’s always a fantastic idea to have crusty bread on the table. Everyone loves our warm and fluffy homemade yeast rolls and breadsticks! It would also go great with biscuits.

Or, you can serve this Irish mulligan stew recipe with a side of fluffy mashed potatoes to soak up that lovely broth!

Frequently Asked Questions

Is Mulligan beef stew gluten-free?

Yes, this is a gluten-free stew recipe! There are no thickening agents like all-purpose flour or cornstarch, so it has a slightly thinner broth than a classic pot roast stew.

How long do leftovers last?

Leftovers are ah-mazing! The flavors of the beef, tomatoes, and veggies get more deliciously intense as everything sits together. Let the stew cool completely, then transfer it to an airtight container. Keep in the fridge for up to 4-5 days.

Can you freeze beef stew?

Yes, hobo stew is very easy to freeze for up to 3 months. Cool the dish first before transferring it to a freezer-safe container. For extra protection, I recommend wrapping the container in a layer of aluminum foil before freezing.

Looking for More Comforting Stew Recipes? Be Sure to Also Try:

Healthy Crockpot Chicken Stew

Beef and Lentil Stew

Pressure Cooker Corned Beef Cabbage Stew

Carne Guisada Recipe (Con Papas)

Tuscan-Style Beef Cassoulet

Share This Recipe With Friends!