Mccarthey Athletic Center Event Tickets

Grab your Mccarthey Athletic Center tickets today and watch live college basketball and more at this indoor arena. This venue is the home of the Gonzaga Bulldogs men’s and women’s basketball teams and has also hosted live concerts. Audiences will enjoy watching college sports action and more at Mccarthey Athletic Center.

Gonzaga University is located in Spokane, Wash., and is the home of the Gonzaga Bulldogs. The university boasts several accomplished athletic teams, including their winning men’s and women’s basketball programs. Until 2004, these teams had played their home games at Charlotte Y. Martin Centre, but in 2003, construction started on a new arena for the Bulldogs. A year later, the Mccarthey Athletic Center opened its doors with a game between Gonzaga and Portland State. The site is named after a generous donor and supporter of the university and its athletics department, Philip McCarthey.

Do not miss the chance to buy your Mccarthey Athletic Center tickets now and enjoy all the entertainment at this modern venue. With the capacity to seat 6,000 fans, the Mccarthey Athletic Center has not only hosted Gonzaga’s home games, but also the WCC post-season tournament in 2006. Beyond live sporting events, this space has been utilized as a live concert venue, welcoming fans to see artists like Switchfoot, Yellowcard, Ben Folds and Death Cab for Cutie. Secure your seats today to watch basketball and more at this indoor arena.

Where is McCarthey Athletic Center located?

McCarthey Athletic Center and its ticket office are located at 502 East Boone Ave., Spokane, WA 99258.

McCarthey Athletic Center Seating Chart

Secure your seats at McCarthey Athletic Center in Spokane with our interactive and easy-to-use seating chart. Most sports complexes will include several venues ranging from baseball and softball fields to hockey arenas and basketball courts with seating for spectators. TicketSmarter offers extensive filtering options to help you secure McCarthey Athletic Center tickets in Spokane, WA. Our convenient delivery options make it easy to instantly download your tickets or have them transferred to you.

How much are McCarthey Athletic Center tickets?

The price of your ticket will vary depending on the event and where your seat is located. Right now, there aren’t any scheduled events, but when McCarthey Athletic Center schedules events we’ll be able to calculate average ticket prices for you.

McCarthey Athletic Center Schedule

McCarthey Athletic Center tickets are easy to find when you buy them from TicketSmarter. Quickly navigate the schedule above for McCarthey Athletic Center events using our filtering tool. Youth and professional sports are played year-round. Some sport complexes will also host fundraisers, conferences and expos in between tournaments too. Our online marketplace makes buying McCarthey Athletic Center tickets simple. Use the calendar of events located above to plan your next trip to this beautiful church.

How many events are coming to McCarthey Athletic Center?

Right now there are no events scheduled for McCarthey Athletic Center at this time.

What time does McCarthey Athletic Center open?

McCarthey Athletic Center doors typically open an hour before performances but, fans will want to arrive at the venue 30 - 60 minutes early to find parking.