Edward Scissorhands (1990)

available on Disney+

Director: Tim Burton

Writer: Caroline Thompson based on story by Tim Burton

Stars: Johnny Depp, Winona Ryder, Dianne Wiest, Anthony Michael Hall, Kathy Baker, Vincent Price, Alan Arkin.

Genre: Drama, Fantasy, Romance

Themes: Compassion, Surrealism, Misfit.

An artificial man, who was incompletely constructed and has scissors for hands, leads a solitary life. Then one day, a suburban lady meets him and introduces him to her world.

Edward Scissorhands was released to a positive reception from critics and was a financial success. Both Burton and composer Danny Elfman consider Edward Scissorhands their most personal and favorite work.

MIX UP REVIEWS:

★★★★

Daniel (Age 11) - ★★★★

'This was very different from the sort of movie I would normally watch but it was a really interesting story and funny too. I liked how the character was introduced in a creative way and I think there was an important message about supporting people who are different. I liked Johnny Depp's performance, although he doesn't say much we feel a lot of sympathy for the character through his facial expressions and body language. I recommend this film."

Mix Up Rating - ★★★★★

Have you seen it?

AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS

ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: 1

Best Makeup

BAFTA AWARD NOMINATIONS: 4 WINS: 1

WINNER: Best Production Design

Best Costume Design

Best Makeup

Best Special Effects

GOLDEN GLOBE NOMINATIONS: 1

Best Leading Actor - Johnny Depp

Like this? Try these!....

Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000) - #93 - ★★★★★

Willow (1988) - #321 - ★★★★

The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (2008) - #322 - ★★★★

Beauty and the Beast (1946) - #323 - ★★★★

The Secret Life of Walter Mitty (2013) - #324 - ★★★★

The Illusionist (2006) - #325 - ★★★★

Big Fish (2003) - #390 - ★★★★

Corpse Bride (2005) - #473 - ★★

Click (2006) - n/a

The Age of Adaline (2015) - n/a

Tim Burton creates another fine surreal fantasy romance film in Big Fish again working with composer Danny Elfman. They both are rejoined with star Johnny Depp for the animated fantasy romance, Corpse Bride.

For more magical-realism and fantasy romance movies it's worth checking out Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon, Willow, The Secret Life of Walter Mitty, The Illusionist and Click. All of which have some stylistic links with Edward Scissorhands.

Meanwhile Tim Burton's own influence for the film can be seen in the original Beauty and the Beast. Whilst you can see actress Kathy Baker return to another unsuual romance in The Age of Adaline.

Have you seen these films?