A steadfast statesman and a riveting orator, Prime Minister Jean Chrétien gives a rousing presentation from the perspective of one of the most influential and most beloved world leaders in modern history. Born in Quebec, Canada, the son of a paper mill machinist, he knew he was destined to lead. Trained as a lawyer and serving as Canada’s 20th prime minister, he made his mark as a legislator and raised his country’s presence on the world stage.

Exclusively represented by Leading Authorities, Inc. speakers bureau, Chrétien discusses today’s most pressing global and geopolitical concerns. He brings the insights of his extraordinary career to discuss myriad universal themes such as globalization, the world economy, security, and social issues. A speaker of great majesty and enthusiasm, Chrétien’s dedication to politics, to his country, and to making a better world, comes across when he addresses an audience. He speaks his mind—from the heart—about the current state of civilization and what can be done to improve it.

Political Prominence and Longevity. Chrétien’s career spans more than 40 years in public service, through six prime ministers. He held virtually every major cabinet post until he eventually led Canada as prime minister for more than a decade, becoming one of the most respected world leaders of the last 25 years.

First elected to the House of Commons in 1963 to represent the constituency of Saint-Maurice—Laflèche, he was re-elected numerous times and went on to hold many positions in the government including ministers of finance, state, national revenue, and justice, as well as industry, trade, and commerce. Chrétien resigned from the House of Commons in 1986 and worked as counsel with the law firm of Lang, Michener, Lawrence, and Shaw. He was also a senior advisor with Gordon Capital Corporation in Montreal. In June 1990, Chrétien was elected leader of the Liberal Party of Canada. He was elected a member of parliament in December 1990 and was sworn in as leader of the opposition in the House of Commons a week later.

A Reprise in Leadership. Chrétien was re-elected member of parliament again in October of 1993, when his party won a majority of seats in the House of Commons. He was sworn in as Prime Minister of Canada in November 1993. As prime minister, he was re-elected in both 1997 and 2000, with his party winning a third consecutive majority of seats in the House of Commons. He was active on the world stage and formed close relationships with world leaders such as Jacques Chirac, John Major, and Bill Clinton. He worked to preserve Canadian unity, balance the federal budget, and fight for justice. Chrétien retired as one of the Canada’s most respected leaders in December 2003.

After leaving the prime minister’s office, Chrétien joined the Ottawa office of the law firm Heenan Blaikie. In November 2008, he and Ed Broadbent came out of retirement to negotiate a formal coalition agreement between the Liberals, the New Democratic Party and the Bloc Québécois, the first power-sharing coalition since World War I. In July 2009, Queen Elizabeth appointed Chrétien to the Order of Merit, an award given to “individuals of exceptional distinction in the arts, learning, sciences and other areas such as public service."