The Royal Society of Edinburgh (RSE) has announced the 2024 cohort of new Fellows, and among the names are BAFTA and Emmy-winning satirist Armando Iannucci and award-winning journalist and charity founder Sally Magnusson.

Among the 57 Fellows on the list of those joining the RSE are entrepreneur and philanthropist Dr Michael Welch, Leonie Bell, Director of the V&A Dundee, public health advocate Professor Jason Gill, and Professor Elham Kashefi, a world leader in the field of quantum computing

New Fellows have been elected from institutions from across the UK, including Dundee, Aberdeen, St Andrews, Stirling, Highlands and Islands, and from countries around the world including the Netherlands, Germany, USA, and China

Nominated for their individual excellence in a wide range of fields such as physics, chemistry, informatics, literature, law, social sciences, and business, they will be joining the 1,800 current Fellows of the RSE, Scotland’s National Academy.

Armando Iannucci was elected as an Honorary Fellow, known for award-winning satirical films and programmes such as The Death of Stalin and The Thick of It. He is vice president of the Royal Television Society and takes an active interest in political issues and the functioning of democracy.

Armando Iannucci was elected alongside one other Honorary Fellow, health and social care expert, chair of both the Royal College of Physicians and Dementia UK, Professor David Croisdale-Appleby.

Broadcaster and journalist Sally Magnusson was also elected for her charity work and her own dementia charity Playlist for Life.

Among the 57 new Fellows elected to the Society is Professor Lorna Marson, an outstanding leader in surgery and surgical training. Already a Fellow of the Faculty of Surgical Trainers, she is the first woman to be appointed Professor of Transplant Surgery by the University of Edinburgh and the first woman to be elected President of the British Transplant Society, as well as being Chair of the UK Organ Donation and Transplantation Research Network.

Professor Jason Gill, Professor of Cardiometabolic Health at the University of Glasgow, was elected for his major contributions to the prevention and management of vascular, metabolic, and chronic diseases. As well as influencing national health guidelines, he has contributed to the communication of these public health issues with a range of television programmes, broadcast on BBC1, BBC2, ITV, and Channel 4.

Professor Donna Heddle of the University of Highlands and Islands (UHI) was elected for her own outstanding contributions to research. She set up and now leads the UHI’s Institute for Northern Studies, a world-leading establishment combining research, teaching, and community engagement.

Professor Elham Kashefi of the University of Edinburgh and Chief Scientist at the UK National Quantum Computing Centre (NQCC) is a world-leader in her field. Among a raft of achievements, she developed the world’s first method for secure cloud quantum computing. She called her election “a thrilling opportunity.”

BAFTA-winning Professor Paul Mealor is also on the list of newly elected Fellows. He is an internationally renowned composer as well as Professor of Composition at the University of Aberdeen. In 2020 Universal Music announced that he had made his way into the top ten “most performed living and recorded composers alive.”

President of the RSE, Professor Sir John Ball PRSE, said: “It is an immense honour to extend a warm welcome to each of our distinguished new Fellows.

View all 2024 Fellows in the directory

The complete list of new Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh is below:

RSE Honorary Fellows 2024

Professor David Croisdale-Appleby

Chair, Healthwatch England

Armando Iannucci

Writer and political satirist

RSE Corresponding Fellows 2024