The Royal Society of Edinburgh has announced this year’s cohort of Fellows, and among the names are nine University of Glasgow academics including Professor Kirsteen McCue.

Nominated for their individual excellence in a wide range of fields such as physics, chemistry, informatics, literature, law, social sciences, and business, they will be joining the 1,800 current Fellows of the RSE, Scotland’s National Academy.

Professor Kirsteen McCue, Professor of Scottish Literature and Song Culture at the School of Critical Studies, said: "I am delighted to have been elected a Fellow of the RSE. It's a huge honour. I am excited to work with the Society and with its fellows from all disciplines to realise its aims. And I hope that I can help underline the importance of the arts and humanities, of our national culture, in enhancing and enriching everyone's lives."

President of the RSE, Professor Sir John Ball PRSE, speaking of about the 57 new Fellows for 2024, said: “It is an immense honour to extend a warm welcome to each of our distinguished new Fellows.

“Individually, they embody exceptional dedication and accomplishment spanning multiple sectors and disciplines. Collectively, they demonstrate a profound commitment and determination to make meaningful contributions through their endeavours.

“From groundbreaking research that redefines our understanding to the creative pursuits that inspire and enrich our cultural landscape, the RSE proudly embraces the brightest minds, leveraging their unique expertise and perspectives for the betterment of society.

“As Scotland’s National Academy, we remain committed to mobilising a diverse array of expertise to confront society's most pressing challenges, and I am certain that our new Fellows will prove invaluable assets to the RSE.”

Among the other eight UofG academics joining Professor McCue as new Fellows elected to the Society are:

Professor Emma Thomson - Professor in Infectious Diseases (Virology), School of Infection & Immunity

Professor Fiona Leverick - Professor of Criminal Law and Criminal Justice, School of Law

Professor Jason Gill - Professor of Cardiometabolic Health, School of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Health

Professor Nicole Busby - Professor of Human Rights, Equality and Justice, School of Law

Professor Ross Forgan - Professor of Supramolecular and Materials Chemistry, School of Chemistry

Professor Sayantan Ghosal - Adam Smith Chair in Political Economy, Adam Smith Business School

Professor Sonja Franke-Arnold - Professor in Atom and Quantum Optics, School of Physics & Astronomy

Professor Tom Guzik - Regius Chair of Physiology and Cardiovascular Pathobiology, School of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Health

Armando Iannucci was elected as an Honorary Fellow, known for award-winning satirical films and programmes such as The Death of Stalin and The Thick of It. Alongside Armando Iannucci was another Honorary Fellow, health and social care expert, chair of both the Royal College of Physicians and Dementia UK, Professor David Croisdale-Appleby. Broadcaster and journalist Sally Magnusson was also elected for her charity work and her own dementia charity Playlist for Life.

About the RSE

The Royal Society of Edinburgh recognises, supports, and mobilises expertise from across academia, business, and public service for the benefit of Scotland and the wider world.

Our 1,800 Fellows from across disciplines are among the most distinguished in their fields. We engage and connect nationally and internationally to share knowledge and tackle the most pressing challenges of the modern world.