Post by HER MINAJesty on

Oh this is his 2nd album? I wasn't aware of that

I haven't heard Charlene yet, but I like "Comin From Where I'm From" and Im also really enjoying "My 1st Love" featuring LaToiya Williams

That song is hot, they take it to church big time on that one, I wish that was his 2nd single, or a future single

but somehow I dont know if his album will get more than 2 singles

I saw his album yesterday at HMV for $19.99, and it was "on sale", lol. I was tempted, but I didn't get it.

Post by Deleted on

Yes, his first album "XTC" was released in 1996. It was critically acclaimed, but it didn't sell well and was discontinued.

I'm not a big fan of "My First Love," mainly because it's one of those songs where I like the original so much that I hate any covers of it.

Post by krazymack on

I've got to hear Anthony's track "Charlene" because right now I'm really loving "Comin' From Where I'm From." That's probably one of my favorite Urban AC songs on the chart right now. The song exemplifies some good darn R&B soul! I love it to death.

Post by Deleted on

ANTHONY HAMILTON

Charlene

Producer(s): Mark Batson

Writer(s): A. Hamilton, M. Batson

Publisher(s): Songs of Universal/Tappy Whyte's Music/Bat Future Music, BMI

Genre: R&B/HIP-HOP

Label/Catalog Number: So So Def/Arista 57597 (CD promo)

Source: Billboard Magazine

Originally Reviewed: March 20, 2004

Having shared a bit of himself by way of his debut single, "Comin' From Where I'm From," Anthony Hamilton opens his heart and soul again with "Charlene." Hamilton tells the semi-autobiographical tale of an artist who is so focused on his career that he doesn't realize what's important in his life—his woman and child—until it's too late: "Baby, I'll be sitting here waiting on you to come home again/I won't leave/Promise I'll be here till the very end/And I'll be by your side/To protect you and to love and to be with you for life." Hamilton's gritty, church-honed voice conveys the ballad's sentiment with such emotion that you feel as if you have also gone through the experience. Adult R&B radio should be all over this one. This is the essence of soul music.—RH

Post by krazymack on

Wow, this song was out since January.

Yet it is just blowing up and receiving attention at Urban radio at the end of July. ??? The song spin gains at the format now stands at +208.

I have two reasons which might explain Anthony Hamilton's "Charlene," doing well right now. His multiple award nominations at the Soul Train Awards, Grammies and BET awards.

Also his current hit with Jadakiss called "Why" is blowing up right now. So I think they're really pushing him to walk in R. Kelly's footsteps.

Post by Bob on

krazymack said:

I particularly don't care if you "really don't know about that" comparison because it's called an opinion. *shrugs*

as was mine, grow up and dust that dirt off your shoulder!

Post by krazymack on

Bob said:

as was mine, grow up and dust that dirt off your shoulder!

I'm already grown up and I don't need YOU of all people to tell me that. Lol!

Post by Blacmajic on

I think Charlene was a good choice for a release. His album is a soulful breath of fresh air. He sounds like a grown man singing grown folks music.

I love his voice. It would be nice to hear him do something with Syleena Johnson. That would sound real classy. His song with LaToiya Williams is nice too.

Post by Me. I Am Justin... on

I love "Charlene", but "I'm A Mess" is my favorite on the album. I hope the release that in the future, but they probably won't ....

Post by HER MINAJesty on

lol...alot of people ask for MP3's, why don't you guys just download the songs off WinMX or whatever program?

but anyway, a 7 minute version of "Charlene"? I like Anthony Hamilton and he's got a great voice but I have a feeling I'd be bored to tears after the first 45 seconds, if I even got that far. I can't even listen to the original for more than 10 seconds.

Post by WhySoSerious? on

I love "Chyna Black" and want it to be his next single, but I don't think urban will play it. >:( It's too laid back and has a rock-ish vibe.