Post by Deleted on

This is the third single from the Grammy nominated Comin' From Where I'm From. It's funny that the second single, "Charlene," was released over a year ago but hung around for so long that this is only just being released now. I don't like it as much as "Charlene," but it's nice.

Post by ClassicCase on

It's alright despite the fact that Charlene clinged on to both urban charts for so long. I think that it's time Charlene needs to bow down.

Post by Me. I Am Justin... on

YAY! I think I mentioned before in another Anthony thread that I wished they'd release this. It's one of my faves off the album. I hope it does well. It's time for him to start working on another album though.

Post by Night Senses on

Hot said:

It's one of my faves off the album. I hope it does well. It's time for him to start working on another album though.

Agreed on all counts. I've only had Comin' From Where I'm From for about 1 year, but it feels like I've had the album for 2 or 3 years. I'm ready for some Nu Anthony!

Post by Boogey on

Excellent Choice.

This is the best song on the album.

Anthony Hamilton sung the heck out of this song.

media.bmgonline.com/aristarec.com/anthony_hamilton/audio/05_im_a_mess_96.asx

Post by WhySoSerious? on

This is good, but I like "Chyna Black" better. They aren't ever going to release a song about drugs though.

Post by Deleted on

ANTHONY HAMILTON

I'm a Mess

Producer(s): Cedric Solomon

Writer(s): A. Hamilton, C. Solomon, J. Smith

Publisher(s): various

Genre: R&B/HIP-HOP

Label/Catalog Number: So So Def/Zomba SSCD-67584 (CD promo)

Source: Billboard Magazine

Originally Reviewed: March 19, 2005

Anthony Hamilton strikes a direct hit on the third single from his popular debut album, "Comin' From Where I'm From." You can't help but feel every drop of sorrow that he wrings out of this lost-love ballad. His rough-and-ready vocals paint an indelible picture of a man trying to find himself as he desperately mourns his missing soul mate. Further delineating the scenario: a call-and-response exchange between Hamilton and his own soulful Greek chorus. Contemporary without compromising his retro roots, Hamilton remains proof that heartfelt R&B can still hold its own in a seemingly all-hip-hop world.—GM