Arista Records has soul. Specifically, the label has R&B sensation Anthony Hamilton, whose classic lived-in voice and Southern-fried grooves on his label debut, Comin’ From Where I’m From, have found a warm reception. The album has sold more than 150k (up to 22-26k per week) since its release Sept. 23.

Arista Executive VP Promotion Steve Bartels points to the enthusastic response from “key tastemakers, celebrities and industry critics” and the fact even he can dance to it as reasons for the album’s success: “It’s gritty, raw and powerful, yet enthusiastically passionate, and that’s just my love life. It celebrates real and meaningful music. We are excited about the progress to date. Along with the impressive weekly and initial early sales, we are just starting the campaign and plan on a long focused launch to bring Anthony into the mainstream consciousness."

The Charlotte, NC native’s momentum owes a great deal to grass-roots activity. The track’s national video exposure has been strongly supplemented by love on 89 local and regional video shows, as well as endorsements from hip-hop artists like Murphy Lee, Ying Yang Twins and Bone Crusher.

“It’s a rare occurrence in today’s marketplace that artists show staying power without the obvious drivers being present,” adds Arista Sr. VP of Marketing and Artist Relations Mark Shimmel. “Clearly there’s a musical vocabulary at work here that listeners are sharing with each other. Perhaps the best artist development, overall, is good music. At least that’s what my crack team of psychics tells me.”

● The album’s lead single/title track has enjoyed strong spins since its impact at Urban AC (8/11), where the single moved into the Top 10 this week, and Urban (8/18).

● "Charlene,” a love ballad, is already slated to be the second single at the same formats.

● National TV exposure includes appearances on Letterman, Regis & Kelly, Ellen DeGeneres, Jimmy Kimmel and Soul Train. An appearance on One on One is upcoming.

●MTV2, VH1 Soul and BET, with an appearance on MTV’s July “You Hear It First Tour.”

● Features in The New York Times, Vibe, Rolling Stone and Interview, reviews in Vanity Fair and GQ, among others.

● Online campaign (including acoustic performances on VH1.com) and generous satellite radio play (XM even added one of his songs to its country format) have also helped generate attention.

● Performing at Impact Marketing Retreat on 11/8 and opening for Sarah McLachlan at the PENCIL benefit for public schools in NYC 11/10.

● Joining Missy Elliott and Beyoncé in the RIAA’s anti-piracy trade ad campaign.

● Ongoing promo tour.