Some very sad news to report: piano great Oscar Peterson died yesterday (12/23) in Ontario at the age of 82, reportedly from kidney failure. I was fortunate enough to see him perform in the late 70's as part of the Pable Jazz Festival. He was a big man, but he was able to move so quickly on the keyboards. One of my favorite jazz albums is Peterson's Live At The Northsea Jazz Festival The Hague 1980 with Joe Pass, Toots Thielemans and Niels Henning Orsted Pedersen. A very sad day for jazz fans. More from the JazzTimes site:

Oscar Peterson, August 15, 1925-December 23, 2007

Oscar Peterson, acknowledged as one of the most significant and beloved jazz pianists of all time, died December 23 at age 82 in Mississauga, Ontario. The reported cause was kidney failure. Sources close to Peterson said that he had been “going downhill” for some time.

During his seven-decade career, Peterson played with many of the iconic names in jazz, including Louis Armstrong, Count Basie, Charlie Parker, Roy Eldridge, Nat King Cole, Stan Getz, Dizzy Gillespie, Ella Fitzgerald and Duke Ellington.

Peterson's impressive collection of awards include a Lifetime Grammy (1997) and induction into the International Jazz Hall of Fame. Peterson was frequently invited to perform for various luminaries, including the British Queen and President Richard Nixon.

Ellington once referred to him as a "Maharajah of the keyboard," while Basie said, "Oscar Peterson plays the best ivory box I've ever heard."

Born August 15, 1925, near Montreal, Peterson’s love of music was passed down from his father Daniel, a railway porter and self-taught musician. Oscar Peterson learned to play trumpet and piano at a young age, but after a bout with tuberculosis had to concentrate on the latter.

He became a teen sensation in his native Canada, playing in dance bands and recording in the late 1930s and early 1940s.

As the only black member of a dance band, he was frequently subjected to the racism of the day. Peterson spent a great deal of his life acting as a spokesman for minority rights, drawing on his experiences growing up St. Antoine district of Montreal. Peterson called Canada home throughout his entire life.

He quickly made a name for himself as a jazz virtuoso, often compared to piano great Art Tatum, his childhood idol, for his speed and technical skill. He was also influenced by Nat King Cole.

International exposure came in 1948 when Norman Granz, producer of Jazz at the Philharmonic, heard Peterson on Montreal radio and later invited the 24-year-old to New York to play as a surprise guest at Carnegie Hall. After the performance, the young talent joined the troupe and toured North America with them for two years.

Peterson, whose career was managed by Granz for over 30 years, formed a trio in 1951 with Ray Brown on bass and Charlie Smith on drums and continued playing with the prestigious group.

His most famous threesome, from 1953 to 1958, was with guitarist Herb Ellis and bassist Ray Brown, who were often cited as one of the world's finest jazz combos.

Ellis left the Peterson trio in 1958 and was replaced by drummer Ed Thigpen. That trio lasted for seven years.

Peterson suffered a stroke in 1993 that weakened his left hand, but within a year he was back on tour, recording "Side By Side" with Itzhak Perlman.

As he grew older, Peterson kept playing and touring, despite worsening arthritis and difficulties walking.

"A jazz player is an instant composer," Peterson once said in a CBC interview, while conceding jazz did not have the mass appeal of other musical genres. "You have to think about it, it's an intellectual form," he said.

Capt. Bacardi

...saddened online...

Captain Bacardi said:

That would've been a good place to hear him. Love the sound at the Paramount. When I saw him in the late 70's it was at the Erwin Center (I forget what it was called back then). Aside from Oscar there was also Joe Pass, Ella Fitzgerald, Toots Thielemans and the Paul Smith Trio. I was in the 8th row for that show, so it sounded good from there, unlike most shows at the Erwin.

Capt. Bacardi

Agreed--the Paramount has a great sound. Thinking back over the acts I've heard there...Dizzy Gillespie, Dave Brubeck, Miles, Chuck Berry, Milton Nascimento, and more...all had a great big sound for such a relatively small space. Miles sounded good even with his back turned to the audience the whole time. I think the Erwin Center was called Special Events Center (SEC) back when you saw Peterson there. Now of course it's the Frank Erwin Center (FEC, or FECes for short). Rotten place to hear music, but OK for basketball, I guess.

I understand Oscar Peterson had something like an octave and a half handspan. Big man, big sound!

Mike A.