Synopsis

Oscar Peterson, whose flying fingers, hard-driving swing and melodic improvisations made him one of the world's best known and influential jazz pianists, has died. He was 82.

TORONTO: Oscar Peterson, whose flying fingers, hard-driving swing and melodic improvisations made him one of the world's best known and influential jazz pianists, has died. He was 82.

#Budget' 2024 with ET

Budget Highlights: Your 2-minute guide

FM 's plan for Viksit Bharat: A look at key numbers

What's in Sitharaman's Budget for you?

Peterson died at his home in the Toronto suburb of Mississauga on Sunday, said Oliver Jones, a family friend and jazz musician. He said Peterson's wife and daughter were with him during his final moments. The cause of death was kidney failure, said Mississauga's mayor, Hazel McCallion.

``He's been going downhill in the last few months,'' McCallion said, calling Peterson a ``very close friend.''

During an illustrious career spanning seven decades, Peterson played with some of the biggest names in jazz, including Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie. He is also remembered for the trio he led with bassist Ray Brown and guitarist Herb Ellis in the 1950s.

Peterson's impressive collection of awards include all of Canada's highest honors, such as the Order of Canada, as well as seven Grammys and a Grammy for lifetime achievement in 1997.

``I've always thought of him as Canada's national treasure. All of Canada mourns for him and his family,'' said Jones. ``He had 60 full years of being considered the top jazz pianist in the world.''

``A jazz player is an instant composer,'' Peterson once said in a CBC interview. ``You have to think about it, it's an intellectual form.''

Peterson's stature was reflected in the admiration of his peers. Duke Ellington referred to him as the ``Maharajah of the keyboard,'' while Count Basie once said ``Oscar Peterson plays the best ivory box I've ever heard.''

Herbie Hancock, another legendary jazz pianist, said Peterson's impact was profound.

``Oscar Peterson redefined swing for modern jazz pianists for the latter half of the 20th century up until today,'' Hancock said in an e-mail message. ``I consider him the major influence that formed my roots in jazz piano playing. He mastered the balance between technique, hard blues grooving, and tenderness. ... No one will ever be able to take his place.''

Decades later Peterson had a similar impact on his fellow Canadian, singer-pianist Diana Krall.

``He was the reason I became a jazz pianist,'' Krall told the Los Angeles Times. ``In my high school yearbook it says that my goal is to become a jazz pianist like Oscar Peterson.

``I didn't know then we'd become such close friends over the years. We were together at his house in October, playing and singing songs together. Now it's almost impossible for me to think of him in the past tense.''

The 20-year-old jazz pianist, Eldar Djangirov, said he decided to become a jazz musician after listening to Peterson's records as a boy growing up in the former Soviet republic of Kyrgyzstan.

``He was the first I ever heard and my main artistic influence,'' said Djangirov, who included the fast-tempo Peterson tune ``Place St. Henri'' on his Grammy-nominated album ``re-imagination.'' ``He would play things with one hand that most piano players couldn't do with both of their hands.''

Peterson's death also brought tributes from notable figures outside the jazz world.

In a statement, French President Nicolas Sarkozy said ``one of the bright lights of jazz has gone out.''

``He was a regular on the French stage, where the public adored his luminous style,'' Sarkozy said. ``It is a great loss for us.''

Peterson was often invited to perform for heads of state, including Queen Elizabeth II and U.S. President Richard M. Nixon. He wrote ``A Royal Wedding Suite'' for the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer.

Former Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien, a fan and friend of the pianist for decades, reminisced about a 2001 Ottawa event when the pianist met South African leader Nelson Mandela.

``It was very emotional,'' said Chretien. ``They were both moved to meet each other. These were two men with humble beginnings who rose to very illustrious levels.''

Born on Aug. 15, 1925, in a poor neighborhood of Montreal, Peterson got his passion for music from his father. Daniel Peterson, a railway porter and self-taught pianist, bestowed his love of music to his five children, offering them a means to escape from poverty.

At five years old, Oscar Peterson learned to play trumpet and piano, but after a bout with tuberculosis, he chose to concentrate on the keyboards. He studied with a Hungarian-born classical pianist, Paul de Marky, who helped develop his technique and ``speedy fingers.''

He became a teen sensation in his native Canada, playing in dance bands and recording in the late 1930s and 1940s.

He quickly made a name for himself as a jazz virtuoso, often earning comparisons to jazz piano great Art Tatum, his childhood idol, for his speed and technical skill. He was also influenced by Nat King Cole, whose piano trio recordings he considered ``a complete musical thesaurus for any aspiring jazz pianist.''

Jazz pianist Marian McPartland, who called Peterson ``the finest technician that I have seen,'' recalled first meeting Peterson when she and her husband, jazz cornetist Jimmy McPartland, opened for him at the Colonial Tavern in Toronto in the 1940s.

``From that point on, we became such good friends, and he was always wonderful to me and I have always felt very close to him,'' she said. ``I played at his tribute concert at Carnegie Hall earlier this year and performed `Tenderly,' which was always my favorite piece of his.''

American jazz impresario Norman Granz was so impressed after hearing Peterson at a Montreal club that he invited the pianist to come to New York for a Jazz at the Philharmonic concert at Carnegie Hall in 1949 that launched his international career.

Peterson was brought up from the audience as a surprise guest to play a duet with bassist Brown, overwhelming everyone with his dazzling technique and mastery of different jazz styles from boogie woogie to bebop.

Granz, who became the pianist's longtime manager, signed him to the Verve record label and made Peterson part of his touring Jazz at the Philharmonic package which featured the top jazz headliners.

``One of my biggest memories was hearing that Jazz at the Philharmonic ... had signed a young pianist from Canada who played like he ate fire and iron for breakfast,'' recalled music impresario and record producer Quincy Jones. ``Oscar more than lived up to the description. It was a blessing to have known and worked with him. He was one of the last of the giants, but his music and contributions will be eternal.''

In 1951, the pianist formed the Oscar Peterson Trio with a guitarist and bassist. When Ellis left the group in 1958, he replaced the guitarist with a series of drummers. Peterson would often release four or five albums a year and became a mainstay at jazz festivals around the world.

But Peterson never stopped calling Canada home, and probably his best known major composition is the 1964 ``Canadiana Suite'' with jazz themes inspired by the cities and regions of his native country.

But at times he felt slighted in Canada, where he was occasionally mistaken for a football player, at 6 foot 3 inches (1.9 meters) and weighing more than 250 pounds (113.4 kilograms).

In 2005 he became the first living person other than a reigning monarch to be honored with a commemorative stamp in Canada, where streets, squares, concert halls and schools have been named after him.

Peterson suffered a stroke in 1993 that weakened his left hand. But after a two-year recuperation, he gradually resumed performances, and made a series of recordings for the U.S. Telarc label.

He kept playing despite worsening arthritis and difficulties walking, saying in a 2001 interview that ``the love I have of the instrument and my group and the medium itself works as a sort of a rejuvenating factor for me.''

Peterson's survivors include his fourth wife, Kelly, and their daughter, Celine, and six children from his previous marriages.

#Budget' 2024 with ET

What's cheaper and what's costlier? Here's the list

New slabs announced in new income tax regime

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless