TASMANIA returned to WNCL action last week and kept its undefeated record in tact with a pair of wins over NSW. The first of which featured a starring performance from young spinner Amy Smith.

Smith claimed five wickets in a performance that saw her dismiss batters at both ends of the innings, with her later wickets proving crucial in curtailing the NSW scoring.

Rightly adjudged Player of the Match, Smith’s haul of 5-33 came off seven overs and ensured Tasmania would chase a relatively gettable total of 197.

Her first wicket came in the 18th over with NSW cruising at 1-61, boasting two set batters at the crease and scoring at a steady rate.

After starting the over by conceding a four, Smith then recovered to bowl two dots before a single.

Then the wicket ball came, which was in the end a pretty straight delivery which Anika Learoyd misjudged. She was trapped in front and sent packing.

Between Smith’s first and second wickets, she was still involved in the wicket-taking process, collecting a catch at point to help Hayley Silver-Holmes dismiss opener Tahlia Wilson.

Her second wicket came a little bit later in the innings, and by this stage the Breakers were 3-86 and the preceding balls in the over had only leaked three runs.

The wicket ball was again quite straight in terms of line, but skidded on through Erin Burns‘ defence and she was clean bowled.

Smith’s final three wickets all came within the closing five overs of the innings, as NSW sat at 6-175.

Seemingly sampling all modes of dismissal, Smith sprung into action with a caught-and-bowled as Maitlan Brown struck the ball right back at her. Without much time to think, the catch was made.

The next over in her spell produced another wicket. The Breakers were now up to 7-181, and after delivering consecutive dots, Smith clean bowled Sammy-Jo Johnson as she attempted to hit across the line.

Smith’s fifth wicket came in the final over of the innings, capping it off with another caught-and-bowled to remove Sarah Coyte.

Having held NSW down in the field, Tasmania went on to win by four wickets with over 14 overs remaining. Smith’s exploits ended with the ball as she failed to score batting at seven.

She backed up nicely in that regard as Tasmania beat NSW again on Sunday, finishing unbeaten on 12 as her side chased down 274 with just five balls to spare.