Tasmania has revived its domestic one-day cup hopes with an unlikely two wicket win achieved with a ball to spare after South Australia had posted a season-high score at Bankstown Oval on Wednesday.

Without a win in its opening two matches, Tasmania maintained a healthy run-rate throughout with Ben Hilfenhaus edging a four off the penultimate delivery for the victory.

An embarrassing missed run out opportunity by Kane Richardson in the final over cost the South Australians dearly, the quick bizarrely failing to hit the stumps at the non-striker's end when Tasmania's Ben Laughlin backed up too far.

Richardson had plenty of time to knock the bails off with ball in hand but threw the ball at the stumps at close range only to miss.

The duo then closed out the match for the Tigers.

South Australia accumulated runs at a good rate throughout their innings to finish with 6 for 268; 32 runs higher than the best score of the season to date set by Victoria.

Opener Michael Klinger struck an unbeaten 140 in a sparkling knock which included three sixes.

Former Australia all-rounder Andrew McDonald was stumped for 20 off the bowling of Clive Rose, but Klinger and Tom Cooper added 116 for the second wicket at virtually a run-a-ball.

Cooper was dismissed for 65 off 71 deliveries in a fluent innings which included four fours and two sixes.

Tasmania rallied in the second half of the innings, taking wickets at regular intervals to help temper the run rate until South Australia's late surge.

South Australia captain Johan Botha, who was cited for a suspect bowling action on Monday, looked impressive until being dismissed for 16 off 25 balls.

Off-spinner Rose was the best of the Tasmania bowlers collecting 2 for 33 on debut off his allotted 10 overs, having made the move from Victoria during the winter.

In reply, Alex Doolan top-scored for Tasmania with 66, and he enjoyed good support from Evan Gulbis who hit 50.

Tasmania was marginally off the required run rate for much of the innings.

Tim Paine and Jordan Silk put on a half-century partnership to help their side back into the contest, while Laughlin's 34 off 17 deliveries including three sixes was crucial at the death.