Tasmania have taken five wickets in a final over for the ages to secure back-to-back WNCL titles with a one-run victory over South Australia.

Sarah Coyte was in the centre of the action, taking three wickets and conjuring one of her team’s two runouts in the last over.

South Australia required four runs from the final six deliveries with five wickets in hand under an adjusted Duckworth-Lewis-Stern target at Hobart’s Blundstone Arena on Saturday night.

Enter Coyte, who bowled Annie O’Neil (28 from 20) off ball one before getting South Australia skipper Jemma Barsby (28 from 17) stumped two balls later.

South Australia were still in the box seat, needing three from three deliveries, when Coyte ran out Amanda-Jade Wellington (one), knocking the ball onto the stumps in her follow through.

Coyte, who finished with 4-30 and was named player of the match, then trapped Ella Wilson lbw on the second-to-last ball.

South Australia needed three runs off the final delivery but could manage just one, before Tasmania made sure of the win with a runout as the South Australian pair turned to tentatively consider going for a second.

The dramatic last over capped a thrilling final in which both sides navigated rain delays and had their noses in front at different stages under DLS.

“It was really bizarre. I don’t think I’ve ever come off [for rain] that much in one game before,” Coyte said.

“Easily the best game I’ve been a part of. The ebbs and flows. You can’t even replicate a game like that.”

Coyte said she was calm at the start of the last over, describing the reflex run out as an accident.

“I actually didn’t mean to hit it on to the stumps. I just wanted to stop it,” she said.

“It’s an ongoing joke that I don’t field off my own bowling. It is lucky I even got a touch to it.”

Tasmania are just the second team to secure back-to-back WNCL titles, leaving South Australia runners-up for the second year in a row.

“It’s pretty raw. It was an unbelievable finish. Unfortunately we couldn’t get across the line,” Barsby said.

“We need to come back bigger and better next year.”

A red-hot Elyse Villani had earlier spearheaded Tasmania to 264 from their 50 overs with 110 from 126 balls, her third century in her past four innings.

Villani also hit an unbeaten 111 in last season’s decider to help her side secure a first WNCL title.

Loading

She shared a crucial 139-run stand with Naomi Stalenberg (75 off 89) after the pair came together at 3-105 in the 21st over.

The covers came on and off during South Australia’s chase, which was headlined by an impressive 83 from youngster Courtney Webb.

Webb’s departure in the 42nd over left South Australia at 5-185, before Barsby and O’Neil dragged their team back into the game.

South Australia were ahead on DLS when the covers went on again with six overs to go.

But play was able to resume, with South Australia needing an adjusted 23 from 18 balls to win.

Tasmania fell over late in their innings, with Villani’s departure sparking a collapse of 7-20 as they were bowled out off exactly 50 overs.

Redbacks down Victoria to make one-day final

South Australia will face Western Australia in the men’s One-Day Cup final after a thumping win over Victoria at Adelaide Oval.

The Redbacks cruised to an eight-wicket win with 24 overs to spare on Sunday after Victoria were routed for just 136.

In what was effectively a final-round play-off for second spot on the ladder, South Australia cruised to the target with a century opening stand, before ending on 2-137. Henry Hunt made 63 and fellow opener Jake Carder 49 as the pair put on 116.

Sri Lankan-born leg-spinner Ruwantha Kellepotha picked up both openers to return 2-43.

It will be South Australia’s first One-Day Cup final since losing against Western Australia in 2018.

Earlier, only James Seymour defied the Redbacks’ attack with the Vics’ No.5 scoring 51 before being the final wicket to fall.