Chasing a bonus point, Tasmania tumbled from 181-5 to 184 all out within ten balls, falling short of Victoria’s 185-run total by a solitary run. Jackson Coleman snared three wickets in the 39th over, and Chris Tremain backed him up by seeing to the last two batsmen.

At the end of the 38th over, Tasmania looked on course for a comfortable win, with Beau Webster having shared a 38-run stand with opener Ben McDermott. They required just 14 runs at that time. However, Webster’s attempt to clear Tremain over the ropes ended in the hands of mid-off, triggering a stunning collapse.

James Faulkner and McDermott perished in consecutive deliveries, and Gurinder Sandhu followed them back to the dugout three balls later, leaving Tasmania at a precarious 183-8. Still, they were just three runs adrift of the target.

But Tremain returned, capitalising on the nerves to clean up the last two wickets in the 40th over. He sent back Jackson Bird, and followed it up with the scalp of debutant Nathan Ellis in the fourth ball of the over. Riley Meredith remained unbeaten on 1, and was one of the seven Tasmanian batsmen that failed to progress beyond single-digit scores.

McDermott [72] was one of only two half-centurions in the game, the other being Player of the Match Will Sutherland, whose 53 at No.8 helped Victoria boost their total significantly. It was his maiden half-century in List A cricket, and that it came after a horrendous outing with the ball in the previous game, would have been soothing.

[breakout id=”0″][/breakout]

Sutherland hit all three sixes of Victoria’s innings during his 66-ball stay, helping them recover from a tricky 64-5. His was the final wicket to fall, the third to debutant Ellis, who finished with Tasmania’s best figures of the day.

Having bagged their first win of the tournament, Victoria will now enjoy a six-day break before clashing with Queensland on September 29. Tasmania have little time to recover, with their next game slotted against Western Australia on Wednesday.