This paper presents a multi-layer software architecture to simulate, in a accurate and realistic way, a set of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) operating in a specific mission. A set of tools are employed, each one to simulate a specific part of the overall UAV hardware and software structure: a 3D visualization engine, a physical simulator, the flight stack and a network simulator to handle interactions among UAVs. A software architecture able to orchestrate and coordinate such tools is proposed, based on multiple layers of processes divided into two categories. The described approach is based on a protocol system for exchanging messages to synchronize the various simulation tools. The simulation of the unmanned aerial vehicles can therefore be performed on a single machine or distributed on several machines in order to create a distributed simulation and spread the workload. In this way, it is possible to simulate the behavior of the UAVs and also to reason about the problems due t...

The interest in unmanned systems especially unmanned aerial vehicle is continuously increasing. Unmanned aerial vehicles started to become of great benefit in many different fields. It is anticipated that unmanned aerial vehicles will soon become a main component of the future urban air traffic. The integration of unmanned aerial vehicles within existing air traffic environments has started getting the attention of researchers. Integrating unmanned systems in the real-world urban air traffic requires the development of tools and simulators to enable researchers in their ongoing efforts. In this article, a simulator called UTSim is introduced. The proposed simulator is built using the Unity platform. UTSim is capable of simulating unmanned aerial vehicle physical specification, navigation, control, communication, sensing and avoidance in environments with static and moving objects. The simulator enables studying and exploring several unmanned aerial vehicle air traffic integration is...

This paper summarizes background fundamentals of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) as related to terminology and diverse applications. This information is followed by a discussion on the challenges that need to be overcome in order to take full advantage of what UAS may offer, focusing on control system design, autonomy and cooperation. A UAS simulator currently under development at the Technical University of Crete, capable of simulating complex aerial systems under operational environments, is presented. The simulator is mission oriented and is focused on the design and performance evaluation of these systems.