Tom Mansfield is the founder of Pale Blue where he offers Coaching and Consulting and all in service to Planetary Health. Self taught in many subjects as an autodidact he naturally creates tools and programmes for participatory learning.

Through Pale Blue he undertakes engagements across the Creative, Technology, Environment and Social sectors. He has worked with cultural institutions in London, UK and across Europe as well as liminal spaces such as festivals creating and producing cultural programmes for thematically diverse public engagements. He has developed cross sector climate restoration programmes with both public and private sector organisations internationally through The Carbon Removal Centre as programme director and community lead. He now works with the Bio-leadership project directing and producing the graduate programme for the global community of fellows.

His current focus is on frameworks for regenerative practice in business and organisational design where he is living the question ‘How do organisations participate regeneratively in life sustaining systems?’ The project for inter-organisational learning Cards for Life is a response to this question which supports individuals and teams with a coaching approach to bring ‘living systems thinking’ into the cultures where they live and work.

His vision is a healing planet generating abundant living for all.

Language of connection

I focus on behavioural change through language, becoming mindful of the concepts we use can radically alter the opportunities we notice and the expectations we have. Industrial and materialistic concepts are no longer fit for purpose in a world defined global ecological issues and systems. There is now a need to develop connective, process oriented language that enables us to rethink our systems by seeing the world more as it is: moving, dynamic.

Do we Build or Grow community…? Studying NLP, Ecolinguistics and non-competitive dynamics have formed the theory and tools for seeding these better performing concepts in many forms of communication, internal and external messaging, marketing and education. By identifying language which is misaligned with the purpose and direction of individuals and organisations it is possible to transform concepts and affect rapid purposeful change.

Tom attained an NLP Practitioner certificate recognised by the AIP and uses the tool kit for individual clients and organisational work to highlight and choose the concepts we live by.

Regenerative Infrastructure

To live in a way that is conducive to life, we are now forced to entirely re-imagine the layers of our civilisation. This means a radical shift from the extractive to the regenerative whether in energy, food, construction, logistics and technology, across all areas of infrastructure as we can no longer silo solutions.

Drawing on 15 years of direct experience in the built environment from design to fabrication he works with clients to find regenerative approaches and solutions. He offers expertise in co-design to involve communities and stakeholders in projects while advocating for circular economy processes and sustainable materials at every opportunity.

‘Reluctant’ Futurologist Mark Stevenson is an author, broadcaster and expert on global trends and innovation. He is one of the world’s most respected thinkers on the interplay of technology and society, helping a diverse mix of clients from government agencies, to corporates, to NGOs become future literate and adapt their cultures and strategy to squarely face the questions the future is asking them (or to die gracefully if they need to).

He is the author of the internationally best-selling An Optimist’s Tour of the Future, which has been translated into 10 languages and was described by The Atlantic as “An essential, illuminating, refreshingly hopeful, auspicious yet grounded vision of the future”. Mark's second book, the award-winning We Do Things Differently: the outsiders rebooting our world, was published in January 2017, and soon hit the Amazon top ten (“If you worry for the future of humanity, you will beg not to be interrupted as you read this book,” wrote Kate Raworth in The Week).

TED curator, Chris Anderson remarks, “Stevenson wears no blindfold. His tools are curiosity, open-mindedness, clarity and reason.”

Mark is also an occasional comedy writer. His work has been performed on Radio 4 and his play (co-written with Jack Milner), Octopus Soup, toured the UK in 2019. He is also one half of The Futurenauts, working with comedian Jon Richardson.

markstevenson.org

Mark works with Pale Blue to surface the deep frames and stories that guide the beahvuiours and expectations of our institutions. His assertion that ‘Our systems are no longer fit for purpose’ inspired the corollary - ‘Our concepts are no longer fit for purpose’.