Tom Mansfield | Mansfield, Gautier & Rosenthal LLP

Rating:

Firm Summary

Tom’s background is varied, and includes business, law, government and politics. A graduate of Middlebury College and New York Law School (magna cum laude), Tom began his career working for the City of New York Law Department as an Assistant Corporation Counsel, where he earned his stripes as a litigator, and gained experience not only in municipal government, but in a wide variety of legal areas, including labor and employment, administrative and civil rights law.

After several years, Tom then caught the entrepreneurial bug and began a career running the first of two import/export businesses, the second of which led him to settle in the Hudson Valley town of Red Hook. As the successful business owner and manager of a small start-up and later a thriving mid-sized company, Tom learned every aspect of his business, from start-up and financing, to product development and procurement, to marketing, sales and order fulfillment. Through it all, Tom handled budgeting, payables, receivables and collections, personnel hiring and training, and regulatory compliance (both domestic and international).

After over a decade in Red Hook, Tom became involved in local politics and was elected to the Dutchess County Legislature, in which he served his district for two years. While in the Legislature, Tom was appointed Vice Chairman of the Public Works & Capital Projects Committee, dealing with important infrastructure and budgetary issues. Following his stint with the County, Tom moved on to the State level, where he spent almost two years serving as the Chief of Staff to the Majority Leader of the New York State Senate. During that time, he oversaw all policy development and legislative initiatives, managed the staff and budget, handled constituent services, acted as liaison to the Senate leadership and central staff and planned media strategy and events.

Since returning to the practice of law, Tom has brought a wide practical knowledge of the inner workings of business, government, law and politics to our firm. He also understands what it takes to get things done.