Beyond Good & Evil is an action-adventure game with elements of puzzle-solving and stealth-based games. The player controls the protagonist, Jade, from a third-person perspective.

the planet Hyllis has been bombarded by a relentless alien race. Skeptical of her government's inability to repel the invaders, a rebellious action reporter named Jade sets out to capture the truth. Armed with her camera, dai-jo staff, and fierce determination, she discovers shocking evidence leading to a horrific government conspiracy, and is forced to battle an evil she cannot possibly fathom.

Jade can run, move stealthily, jump over obstacles and pits, climb ladders, push or bash in doors and objects, and flatten herself against walls. As Jade, the player investigates installations in search of the truth about a war with an alien threat.

RTX Remix is a modding platform by NVIDIA, which allows modders to create stunning HD remasters of classic games (see all supported), with ray tracing and DLSS. Playing RTX mods requires a RT capable GPU. Learn more here.

Beyond Good and Evil's compatibility with RTX Remix is:

Status: Partially Playable

RTX Remix Runtime Version: 0.3.0

Conf File: Download - updated 117d ago

Captures: 0 captures - add new

Assets: 0 assets - add new

Mods: 0 mods - add new

Hide: This dialog

Additional installation instructions: d3d8to9

Install from GOG

Run SettingsApplication.exe to choose res + refresh rate, untick autogen mipmap

Copy in dinput8.dll to main dir from Ultimate-ASI-Loader, then rename it to dsound.dll

Create the "scripts" folder in the game's directory

Copy in RTX remix 0.2.2 files to "scripts", renaming d3d9.dll to RTXRemix.asi

Copy in D3DWindower files to "scripts"

Copy in widescreen fix to "scripts", then rename d3d9.dll to d3d9_proxy.dll

Rename BGE.exe to BGEt.exe

Run D3DWindower and add the BGEt exe

Add the (updated) rtx.conf attached to main dir

Done! Run BGEt.exe

Issues:

Light sources are not passed through

Decals are not displayed properly, leading to odd visual glitches

Notes:

None