General Information About the Airport London Biggin Hill

The airport London Biggin Hill is located near the city of London Biggin Hill in United Kingdom.

The international name of the airport London Biggin Hill is London Biggin Hill .

You can find the location of the airport London Biggin Hill on maps using the geographic coordinates:

Latitude: 51.33, Longitude: 0.03.

You can get more information about the airport London Biggin Hill on their website at http://www.bigginhillairport.com

The runway length is 549 meters.

The runway elevation is 182 meters.

Individual Identifiers of the Airport London Biggin Hill

The IATA code of the airport is BQH

The IATA code consists of 3 letters, developed by the International Air Transport Association, and is used by airlines and booking systems. You can enter the airport code in the search form for cheap airline tickets on the Aerotur.aero website.

The ICAO code of the airport is EGKB

The ICAO code consists of 4 letters:

The first letter represents the geographic region of the airport.

The second letter represents the country United Kingdom.

The last letters represent the airport.

Nearest Airports to London Biggin Hill

IATA code: BBS, Airport: Blackbushe, Distance: 61 km.

IATA code: CBG, Airport: Cambridge, Distance: 98 km.

IATA code: ESH, Airport: Brighton, Distance: 59 km.

IATA code: FAB, Airport: Farnborough, Distance: 57 km.

IATA code: HYC, Airport: High Wycombe, Distance: 66 km.

IATA code: KRH, Airport: Redhill, Distance: 18 km.

IATA code: LCY, Airport: London City, Distance: 20 km.

IATA code: LGW, Airport: Gatwick, Distance: 24 km.

IATA code: LHR, Airport: Heatrow, Distance: 37 km.

IATA code: LTN, Airport: Luton, Distance: 66 km.

IATA code: LYX, Airport: Lydd International, Distance: 76 km.

IATA code: NHT, Airport: Northolt, Distance: 40 km.

IATA code: ORM, Airport: Northampton, Distance: 123 km.

IATA code: QFO, Airport: Duxford, Distance: 85 km.

IATA code: QUG, Airport: Chichester, Distance: 76 km.

IATA code: RCS, Airport: Rochester, Distance: 33 km.

IATA code: SEN, Airport: Southend Municipal, Distance: 54 km.

IATA code: STN, Airport: Stansted, Distance: 64 km.

IATA code: WXF, Airport: Wethersfield, Distance: 78 km.

IATA code: XQE, Airport: Railway station, Distance: 24 km.

Important Information for Departures from/Arrivals at the Airport London Biggin Hill (London Biggin Hill )

Please note that local time is always indicated in airline tickets. Local time in London Biggin Hill (London Biggin Hill ) is +1 GMT.

Contact Us

If you have any questions about selecting, booking, or purchasing cheap airline tickets, please contact the support service at Aerotur.aero, or email us at help@aerotur.aero. For questions related to departures from/arrivals at the airport, you can write to our online chats on Telegram and WhatsApp.