Community Involvement

Salvation Army

Kendall Law Firm is proud to sponsor the Salvation Army. The Salvation Army, an international movement, is an evangelical part of the universal Christian Church. Its message is based on the Bible. Its ministry is motivated by the love of God. Its mission is to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ and to meet human needs in His name without discrimination.

Directions, Accessibility, and Parking

The Kendall Law Firm has a local office in Staunton where we can meet with you, or you can schedule a discussion by phone. We can begin your claim with a free case review.

Our Staunton office has ample parking and is located at:

1600 N Coalter St Suite 303-A

Staunton, VA 24401

The office is near Staunton High School and a short, five-minute drive from central Staunton.

Contact our Staunton Law Firm Attorneys

At Kendall Law Firm, we are proud of our track record of success, and we like to think that our case results speak for themselves. David Kendall launched the firm with the aim of providing personalized legal service to every one of his clients after serving as a Judge Advocate General (JAG) in the U.S. Marine Corps.

David Kendall will bring the same integrity and dedication to your case that he showed to the country during his years of service. The Kendall Law Firm handles personal injury cases on a contingency basis so you will not have any upfront costs. We only receive a legal fee if we win a settlement for you.

In addition to our Staunton office, we have four other conveniently located offices in Virginia, including Charlottesville, Winchester, Woodstock, and Harrisonburg. Call Kendall Law Firm at (434) 326-4350 today to schedule a no-obligation, free case review.

Please contact us to set up a meeting for our Staunton location.

Staunton Law Firm Practice Areas

With each case he handles, Mr. Kendall’s aim is to maximize the compensation that you and your family receive from the at-fault party. Every accident has a unique set of facts that affects a victim’s right to compensation. If you or a family member has been injured in any of the following kinds of accidents – or any other type of accident that was caused by a negligent party – you should contact a Staunton VA personal injury attorney.

Car accidents. Unfortunately, we all know how dangerous a car can be when an irresponsible driver gets behind the wheel. David Kendall can help you prove that the driver who caused your injury was reckless and therefore needs to pay for your medical bills, the damage to your car, the income you missed, and your pain and suffering.

Pedestrian accidents. When a driver hits a pedestrian, injuries can be quite serious because walkers are unprotected from the full force of the car or truck that hit them. Extensive injuries result in expensive treatment, so don’t wait to contact a qualified attorney.

Motorcycle accidents. Motorcyclists are vulnerable to serious injuries in collisions. Since their vehicles are so much smaller than other vehicles on the road, motorcyclists may be at risk for catastrophic injuries such as paralysis and brain injuries. Many accidents are caused by other drivers who fail to stay alert for motorcycles or violate riders’ right of way. If this has happened to you, you and your family may have a right to seek fair compensation.

Nursing home abuse. You entrust a long-term care facility or nursing home with your family member’s care. It can be horrifying to learn that your loved one has been neglected or abused by those entrusted with your loved one’s care. If that has happened to you, David Kendall will zealously advocate on your behalf to make sure that the person or business responsible pays for the pain they caused.

Slip and fall. Many people are surprised by how dangerous falls are. They are a leading cause of serious injury and death for adults in the United States. For that reason, Virginia state law requires individuals and businesses to keep their premises reasonably safe. If a business leaves trip hazards or conditions that cause slips, like spills or leaks, they may be held liable for your injuries.

Truck accidents. Tractor-trailers and even smaller trucks like delivery vehicles can cause serious damage to other vehicles in crashes. Since trucks have large blind spots and take longer distances to stop, truck drivers have to be vigilant to avoid collisions. When a truck driver speeds or drives carelessly and causes a crash, the driver may be held liable for the injuries they cause.

Truck accident injury claims are often more complicated than other kinds of crashes because multiple parties may potentially be held responsible, including the driver’s employer, the truck’s owner, the trailer’s owner, and the driver. Attorney David Kendall knows how to navigate these complicated cases and how to fight deep-pocketed insurance companies.

Wrongful death. It is every family’s worst nightmare to lose a loved one. When a death is caused by a preventable accident due to recklessness or negligence, such as a car crash, you may seek compensation. David Kendall will treat you with the compassion you deserve. He can review the details of your loved one’s death and help you understand whether a wrongful death lawsuit may be in order.

Personal Injury Lawyers in Staunton, VA

In the moments after you or your family member is injured, contacting an attorney may be the farthest thing from your mind. Taking legal action won’t undo what happened to you, but it can help you seek compensation for the medical bills and financial losses you’ve incurred through no fault of your own. To hold the at-fault party accountable, you need the services of a qualified Staunton personal injury lawyer.

At Kendall Law Firm, we have extensive experience helping accident victims in central Virginia. Our Staunton attorneys have spent years helping people work through extremely difficult situations. David Kendall cares about Virginians because he is one, born and raised. His experience as a lawyer in the United States Marine Corps has made him ready and able to take on the toughest cases.

No one should struggle to pay their bills because they were hurt due to someone else’s recklessness or negligence. Virginia’s laws allow accident victims to demand that the responsible party pays for their losses and pain and suffering. David Kendall is the Staunton personal injury lawyer to turn to for help when the going gets tough.

Over the years, the Kendall Law Firm has dealt with a wide range of personal injury cases. With so much experience under our belts, we’re often able to resolve many claims without going to court. We start by investigating the circumstances of your injury, whether a negligent driver caused it in a car crash, a property owner failed to keep their premises safe, or a medical professional failed to adhere to the recognized standard of care and caused you harm.

Once we have an understanding of the facts and have gathered evidence to support your claim, we’ll calculate your losses and send a demand letter to the insurance company of the responsible party seeking compensation for your losses. We’ll ask that they compensate you for the cost of treating your injuries, both past and future treatment, the income you have lost, and any property damage or other financial damages. We’ll also incorporate an amount to account for the non-monetary damages you suffered, such as pain or mental anguish.

At this point, the at-fault party and their insurance company may agree to a settlement that covers what you are owed. But in many cases, the insurance company will try to deny liability to protect their profits. When that happens, injury attorney David Kendall is prepared to take your case to court. We’ll stand up for you and seek to prove that the person or entity that hurt you is legally responsible, or liable, for your injury.

If your case proceeds to trial, your case may be held at one of Staunton’s courts. They are:

Staunton General District Court

25th Judicial District of Virginia

113 E. Beverley Street, 1st Floor

Staunton, VA 24401-4390

Staunton Circuit Court

25th Judicial Circuit of Virginia

113 E. Beverley Street, 2nd Floor

Staunton, VA 24401-4390