Staunton's turning points

I belong to a lunch group that frequently discusses Staunton's history.

OK, it's just Don and Harold Reid and myself, but it's still a group, and Staunton's history is frequently a topic of conversation. One of the observations we most often make is that this modest community tucked away in the southern reaches of the Shenandoah Valley has experienced an extraordinary confluence of people and events.

Or, as the boys so succinctly put it, "A heck of a lot has happened here."

Which makes it dicey to pluck a few events from a 282-year lifespan and slap a "most important" label on them.

But because I've written about Staunton's history for some years in both newspaper and book form, I've developed fairly concrete ideas about what might or might not have been important, so here goes:

Capital of Colonial rebellion

Until 1781, Staunton was pretty much just another rough-hewn Virginia settlement. Being the seat of Augusta County didn't confer upon it much glory, and nearly all early accounts of visits to the town indicate it was a pretty dreary place, with a preponderance of taverns and mud.

The town would remain rough-hewn and muddy for many years, but an event in June 1781 would propel it to a higher prominence, at least in the public's imagination. The Virginia General Assembly, fleeing advancing British troops under Banastre Tarleton, scurried across the Blue Ridge Mountains to the safety of Staunton, which had seen no armed action during the war for American independence.

Their presence here and the work they conducted in what is now Trinity Episcopal Church made Staunton the capital of a government in rebellion. It would not remain the capital for long — on June 10 a false alarm that the British were coming sent the assembly fleeing to all corners of the map — but it gave us historical bragging rights that no one could take away.

Railroad comes to Staunton

Before the Virginia Central Railroad came in 1854, Staunton was a prosperous and relatively quiet community where the noisiest events were the setting off of firecrackers at Christmas and the booming of militia weapons on the Fourth of July. The stagecoach rattling into town just didn't set up that much of a stir.

In 1850, the Louisa Railroad, which had pushed east to Richmond and west to Charlottesville, changed its name to the Virginia Central Railroad. Prospects for the Virginia Central were so good that the state owned stock in the company and helped finance its push westward through the Blue Ridge Mountains to Staunton in 1854 and on to Clifton Forge in 1856.

Staunton Mayor Nicholas Trout was one of leading proponents of laying the Virginia Central's tracks to the town and worked assiduously to grease the rails, so to speak. He had public opinion behind him, as well; few people objected to the economic growth the railroad would bring.

Between its arrival in Staunton in 1854 and the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861, the Virginia Central carried hundreds of thousands of passengers and untold tons of produce, merchandise and equipment into Staunton. The American Hotel was constructed at the Virginia Central's depot solely to accommodate the influx of travelers, and the Virginia Hotel two blocks away handled what the American could not.

Overnight, Staunton went from being merely prosperous to an economic powerhouse, all because of the railroad. And it would not stop there. In 1861, the railroad's presence would change Staunton overnight all over again — and not in a good way.

City becomes Confederate stronghold

Arguably, had it not been for the Virginia Central Railroad, Staunton would not have been as valuable to the Confederacy and, by extension, not such a juicy target for the Federals. But because the railroad was in Staunton, the town became one of the Confederacy's most prized possessions, serving as a staging depot, prison camp, supply center, manufacturing site, hospital and barrack. During the 1862 Shenandoah Valley campaign, "Stonewall" Jackson actually used the rail line as a way to outmaneuver and outfight the Union armies bent on his destruction and Staunton's capture.

The town's sudden importance as a Confederate outpost changed it in ways no one could have foreseen. Saloons, houses of prostitution and gambling dens proliferated. Incidents of crime soared; thefts and break-ins were common, while soldiers shot and killed both each other and civilians in many alcohol-fueled rampages.

People who had been accustomed to a genteel way of life now had to deal with street brawls, property damage and — once the battlefield fighting really got underway — the thousands upon thousands of wounded and dying soldiers that flowed into the town for treatment at the hospital, which was located in what is now the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind. At times, so many wounded men arrived in Staunton by foot, cart, horse and rail, that they were simply left to lie on the streets because there was no room for them in homes or hospital.

Invasion by Federal forces in 1864 stripped Staunton of its war-making capacity and left its residents destitute. By war's end, the once peaceful town was a shambles, its residents gaunt and bitter. The Civil War changed Staunton in ways that it would never have changed otherwise.

T.J. Collins put his stamp on Staunton

In 1891, a number of businessmen in Staunton were embarking on a venture designed to turn the city into one of the East Coast's most vibrant manufacturing and business hubs. As part of their plan, they enticed Washington, D.C., architect Thomas Jasper Collins to Staunton to design buildings for the Staunton Development Company.

As luck would have it, the Staunton Development Company went bust, but T.J. Collins decided to stay. That decision and the resulting work Collins did over the next 20 years would help transform the city into a visually appealing hilltop citadel that has few peers.

He is credited with the design of more than 200 buildings in Staunton from 1891 to 1911, including the current Augusta County Courthouse, the gatehouse at Thornrose Cemetery, Breezy Hill at 1220 N. Augusta St., the C&O Train Station, the Stonewall Jackson Hotel, the St. Francis of Assisi Catholic Church and numerous structures in the Beverley and Gospel Hill historic districts.

After Collins retired in 1911, his son, Sam, picked up where his father left off and designed hundreds more buildings in the Staunton area until his retirement in the 1950s. T.J. Collins' grandson continued the firm until the 1990s when he closed the doors for good and donated the firm's architectural drawings to Historic Staunton Foundation — itself located in a building designed by the original firm, now known as the R.R. Smith Center for History and Art.

Urban 'renewal' leads, eventually, to preservation

Just as T.J. Collins is on my top "events" list for physically turning Staunton into one of the most visually appealing cities in Virginia, the federally spawned "urban renewal" project is on my list because it came within a hair of knocking it all down – and, more importantly, because it gave rise to the preservation movement.

In the 1960s, Staunton condemned as "blighted" a three-block area between Central Avenue and Augusta Street. Forcing business owners and residents out, the city demolished the area hoping a developer would build there. But none did, and the area sat like an open sore for years, occupied only by the rescue squad as a parking lot.

Further plans to bulldoze huge swaths of the downtown and thereby destroy a significant portion of the city's historic architecture gave rise to Historic Staunton Foundation and a vocal, sometimes militant group who fought the city tooth and nail. The battles were frequent and the war lengthy, but eventually the preservationists won against those who considered the historic downtown a pile of old bricks and wanted them gone.

Today, the downtown that attracts so many tourists and preservationists from all over the country is a direct result of the "urban renewal" debacle. Without it, the city might have knocked down its buildings one at a time until, without anyone realizing what was happening, the historic districts we so prize today would have been gone.

Honorable mentions

Five seems like a good overall number at which to end a quick list, but of course there were other events in Staunton's past that had far-reaching effects. Among those were the establishment of institutions and schools such as Western State Hospital, the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind, Stuart Hall Academy and Mary Baldwin College; the creation of the city-manager form of government in 1908; the arrival of the interstates in the 1960s; and the Statler Brothers' Happy Birthday U.S.A. celebrations, which for 25 years sent untold numbers of dollars pouring into charitable coffers and raised the city's profile like never before.

Of course, probably no one will agree with my list. But that's the beauty of history and of a city as historic as Staunton. You can draw up your own list from a well that is as deep as it is wide. And who's to say you're wrong?