Joe Flizzow aka JFK, born in Kuala Lumpur on 16 October 1979, is one half of the internationally renowned Malaysian hip hop duo, Too Phat - the first Malaysian Hip Hop act to impact upon the Malaysian music scene.

As Too Phat, their multi-platinum albums have won numerous awards locally as well as achieving recognitions from MTV Asia and Channel V. Asian collaborations with pop acts from Singapore, Thailand, Philippines, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Australia, Sweden, Canada and United States have allowed for an all access pass in Asia. Regional appearances and performances are reflective in their album sales with over half a million records sold to date. As Malaysia's ambassador of Hip Hop few are not aware of Joe Flizzow's contribution especially with credentials that list international artists like Linkin Park, Black Eyed Peas and Kanye West as the few he's performed for.

As an individual Joe Flizzow arguably the nicest Malaysian MC to ever grip a mic, is a talented writer, lyricist and producer. Forever pushing his boundaries and artistry into new areas and development; a pattern familiar since the late 90's, where he revolutionised the Malaysian underground Hip Hip scene and forced the music industry to recognise it as a serious music genre. Hip Hop had arrived in Malaysia.

Strong in beliefs and culture, Joe Flizzow proudly wears 'KL' on his head - introducing yet another nation pride - The KL cap. It is because of his tremendous reach and individual stand, that he was selected as ambassador for Marc Ecko and Nike Air Force Ones Malaysia. The latter included him in Nike's "A List" of celebrities around the world as stated in TIME Magazine (February 2007). http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1594132,00.html

A fine start to 2007; a year set as the new chapter in his music career as a solo artist. He is the revolutionist of Malaysian underground Hip Hop, he is the founder the KL cap, he is the head of Kartel Records, he is the mind behind talent, Joe Flizzow has done Asia, the world beckons. The chapter begins...