TVGuide.ca: I can’t believe this is the first time I’ve interviewed you. You are one of the last, great divas of the soap world. And by diva, I don’t mean the modern, elastic version stating an actress is difficult, or high maintenance. Diva, as in divine.

Robin Strasser: Well, thank you. That’s certainly how the Greeks defined diva. Divinity…

TVG: Are you staying out of trouble?

RS: Dorian keeps me in trouble, so I don’t have to! [Laughs]

TVG: Dorian is marrying my future husband, David Vickers, next week. I hate you, by the way. I’ll order a dish of greens with envy on the side!

RS: And you should, because Tuc Watkins is not only a phenomenal human being, but he’s also a great actor. They’re tying the knot after all these shenanigans in which Dorian is pretending to give up all her wealth for David. Dorian’s psychology is all about, “how to get more; how to get more.”

In the interest of keeping scripted drama on the air, they’ve had to tighten everything, especially production, which means less rehearsal time. Now, this is Robin talking Daytime 101: You must come with a point of view before you tape your scenes. The fabulous part of being in soaps is it becomes easier over time, because you know your character inside out. You earn the distinction of knowing your character. It’s almost a job requirement. To have that investment allows you to provide a delicious contribution to the meal. Daytime TV is a lot like attending a potluck dinner. It’s easy for me to have a point of view, because I have a point of view on everything! [Laughs] It’s my blessing and my curse.

TVG: Tell me about it! [Laughs]

RS: Working with Tuc makes it all so much easier. He's a superb comedian. Through all our recent onscreen madness, I said to Tuc, “what is most important in these scenes is that we strengthen the love story between David and Dorian.” These are two highly mismatched people who are attracted to each other like magnets. And Tuc understands that, which is why I think our relationship works onscreen. In this business you have to work very quickly, so when you are as blessed to have worked opposite leading men like Tuc, A Martinez [Ray] and Stephen Markle [ex-Mel], it makes the day much easier. I’ve been on the opposite end of a long list of high IQ-reading men. This storyline means a lot to me, because I spent a lot of time at an ashram doing yoga. Having said that, fasten your seatbelts… because there will be big karmic payback and a lot of surprises in the next few weeks and months. It’s our beautiful Ron Carlivati at his unpredictable best. How’s that for a tease?

TVG: [Joking] Who’s Ron Carlivati? [Laughs] Ron writes you beautiful, poetic and dramatic scenes, but he also balances that all out by giving you hilarious, LOL-scenes.

RS: That’s the best way to put it, yes. Oh, yes. Sometimes it’s almost within a day when Dorian is doing comedy, and the next day, Dorian’s on the edge! Ron keeps me on my toes. Every time I open the script, I’m surprised with how intense or light the material can be.

TVG: It takes a master. You never seem to age. In fact, I don’t think you’ve ever looked more beautiful, especially recently in your Buddhist costume and makeup. I love the earthier Robin Strasser and Dorian Lord Cramer.

RS: It’s more about what you don’t do, than what you do. Your readers can log on to my website for my beauty and fitness secrets. Luckily, I’ve avoided many things, mostly for a variety of complicated reasons. I’m seriously allergic to a lot of things. I stay away from wheat, dairy, smoking and heavy alcohol. I’m forced to stay on the straight and narrow. [Laughs] I’m the only person I know who went into botox once, and instead of my face going up, it went down! [Laughs] So, I’ve stayed away from cosmetic procedures because my body rejects anything foreign. I don’t want to look like Goldie Hawn in First Wives Club!

TVG: Never. You’re a dame through and through.

RS: I am. The Imperial Court of New York knighted me as Dame Robin Strasser. I’m co-chairing a fundraiser this year for them. And guess who my other co-chairs are? Sir Elton John, Joan Rivers, and Patti LuPone! Two years ago, I wrote and performed, “Yep, I am a drag queen!” The piece was about how long it takes Robin to turn into Dorian. It takes two hours to become Dorian-ready. This year, I’m writing a piece on how honoured I am to be referred to as a gay icon.

TVG: Well, you are, Blanche, you are! Clint Ritchie just passed away, as well as James E. Reilly, who created one hell of a role for you in Hecuba on Passions. [Phil Carey died the night of this interview; call her entertaining hotline at 212-414-5300 to hear her thoughts on his passing]

RS: [quietly] I didn’t know James E. Reilly died. You know, I left One Life the last time because my contract negotiations went so wrong, so wrong in fact, that I was out the door! I clutched my little possessions as I was leaving, hoping someone would shout, “Wait, come back. There’s been an awful mistake!” During the three years I was off the show, someone noticed I didn’t take time to grieve the loss of Dorian. So, after buying a house for my mother in L.A., and redecorating my house in California, I decided to go to France. I ended up spending a year in Paris. In essense, I got to do it all during my hiatus from One Life, including finding a new passionate outlet on Passions as Hecuba. There was no effort involved in playing that witch. I wanted to act since I was 3, so that was a childhood fantasy come to life. Playing dress-up with a grown-up paycheque! What more could you ask for? I was so happy. I’ve been cast as a witch since I was in pre-school. I’ve never been cast as Cinderella in my life. I’ve always been the wicked stepmother or the troll under the bridge. And you know what? I’ve never fought that typecasting. If you’ve got a talent, you’ve a got a talent. If the costume is great, then forget about it. I had a troubled, complicated childhood, so acting helped me through it.

TVG: Ah, the power of make-believe.

RS: What comes to mind when I think of him is Clint being on horseback, riding free in some open space, out in the middle of nowhere. He was a complicated man. He had a lot of issues. But he loved his horses. It was a simple, uncomplicated and unconditional love for those gorgeous animals. I do believe in passing to another side, to another energy, so as far as I’m concerned, he’s with a horse somewhere grand.

TVG: This past summer, I was left scratching my head when Dorian was masquerading as a cartoon version of Alexis Colby from Dynasty. However, the Dorian on my screen today is much more recognizable. I especially love Mel popping up to act as Dorian’s conscious.

RS: By the way, Stephen Markle [ex-Mel] is available! Anybody who thinks he is not, is mistaken. I would love to have Stephen back as Mel, whether he visits in spirit form, or he returns from the dead.

TVG: You won the best actress Emmy in 1982. Where do you keep the award?

RS: It’s on the mantle in my library, with all my treasured books. It looks perfect there. My one Emmy is right next to my golden mirror and two golden candlesticks. The Emmy has a little patina on it. Winning the Emmy Award once is enough. The next Emmy I want is the lifetime achievement award. I am happy to accept any and all lifetime achievement awards [Laughs].

TVG: Recently, Dorian performed oral sex on David in an effort to test his loyalty to Buddhism. I loved the scene, but a few critics and fans were offended, claiming it contradicted Dorian’s character and classy nature. How did you feel about the scene?

RS: It was my idea! I know there was some fuss on the Internet, but it was all me. We had cryptic material in the script noting how Dorian was doing a variety of things that cause David to chant and moan. As we were blocking the scene, I thought why not have Dorian start massaging David at the top and continue all the way down. Since most of it happened on camera, we allowed the imagination of the viewer to kick in. It wasn’t spelled out. If someone didn’t see it, they didn’t see it. If someone did see it, they saw it. It was my idea. No one wrote the [oral sex] in the script. Everyone agreed that the [oral sex] made sense. Dorian desperately wanted to get his attention. Dorian and David are highly charged and adventurous people, especially sexually. There has not been a moment since they met that their sexual [lust and love] for each other didn’t factor into their relationship. Remember when they were at the Buchanan ranch after she found Clint kissing Nora? Immediately, David and Dorian cradled each other passionately and lovingly in bed. That scene spoke volumes about their relationship. So, Dorian performing on David was born from a naughty twinkle in my eye. Since it was in the right context, I thought it worked. As for [the sex act] demeaning Dorian because she’s too classy, talk to your partner about your sex life. I wanted to clear that up just in case Ron had taken any heat for what I had done. I didn’t want someone unfairly blamed for my decision. Creatively, I thought Dorian had every reason to go in that direction.

TVG: How do you feel about actors like Susan Lucci [Erica, All My Children] taking pay cuts and superstars like Deidre Hall [ex-Marlena, Days of our Lives] being fired?

RS: I took a huge pay cut six years ago, so I don’t think anyone should whine. I think it was TV Guide’s Michael Logan who said, “no one should bring Susan a casserole; she doesn’t need it.” [Laughs] This is the good part — a soap creates 1000 jobs in New York City. Agnes Nixon is responsible for all these jobs, thanks to the soaps she created. I took a healthy pay cut, and I was happy to be taking one for the team. Listen, I get it — times have changed. It’s survival time. Let’s not have a pity party. I would hate to see the cameramen, the teamsters, and our security guards out of work because the headliners didn’t want to do the right thing. We all need to display some judgment and think about the big picture.

TVG: The depression/recession could be the lifeline soaps have been looking for since historically daytime has always prospered during hard times. But the quality has to be there. Luckily, One Life is one of the best shows on daytime.

RS: Isn’t our show and cast amazing?

TVG: I’ve always compared One Life, when it’s written well, to a Broadway play. The Cramer women are one of the most authentic and unique families on daytime. For so long, Dorian didn’t have a viable family on the canvas. Are you happy with La Cramers: hear them roar?

RS: Yes! Robin and Dorian both love the Cramer women. I don’t have to work hard at establishing a connection with these women. I can’t tell you how much joy I have working with our younger actors. You know, people like to think when you’re an older diva, you’ll become threatened by your younger co-stars, but I’m the opposite. When I work with younger actors, I feel like I just got a vitamin shot! Give me more!

TVG: Recently, that little boy playing Jack Manning actually tried to steal a scene from La Strasser! Talk about balls.

RS: I know! And guess what — I’m still talking to him! [Laughs] We’ve got a little relationship going. The other day, we were rehearsing and he came up with a great suggestion. And then when we taped, he nailed it. I told him, “Good for you! You came to the set with a point of view and you nailed it.”

When Michael was head-writing our show, Viki and Dorian had been simmering on the back burner. They didn’t quite know what to do with us at that time. At the time, I was doing research on multiple personalities for an acting class, which prompted me to suggest to Erika Slezak that over 90 per cent of DID cases have multiple personalities, not dual alters. Also, DID almost always results from childhood abuse. The next day, we pitched it to Michael Malone. What ensued was that Michael took the story on, but it was also at that point in which Michael had re-wrote history, revealing it was Viki who had killed Victor, not Dorian. That led to my no-good-deed- goes-unpunished moment. Oh, nuts! But I have quietly held the opinion that that decision was revisionist history, and hopefully one day that will be straightened out. I’m sure you have seen the intensity in which I play Dorian protecting and guarding the Cramer women. That’s the luggage I bring to the show. You can’t erase that kind of history because it’s embedded in the tapestry of the show. I always played that Dorian killed Victor because she knew he was a pedophile and suspected him of abusing Viki.

TVG: In a way, Viki owes Dorian for defending her like that, along with saving her life this past summer. I think Ron needs to cast Charles Keating [ex-Carl, Another World] as Victor Lord and do a series of flashbacks to finally explain what really happened all those years ago.

RS: I was verging on love, Nelson, but now I’m all yours. In fact, you’re in my will. How perfect would Keating be as Victor? He’s edgy, dangerous, sexy and so talented.

TVG: It’d be like looking into a mirror — except you’re much prettier!