[From the U.S. Government Printing Office, www.gpo.gov]

SYMPOSIA SERIES FOR UNDERSEA RESEARCH NOAA'S UNDERSEA RESEARCH PROGRAM VOL. 3 NO. 1, 1985 Coasaal �~ne introreat:cn : The Ecology of Coral Reefs U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE NOAA COASTAL SEREVICES CENTER 2234 SOUTH HOBSON AVENUE ---, CHARLEStON, SC 29405-24137 ' ~i~i - ' US DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE - Nationai Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -I '-a.--~j SYMPOSIA SERIES FOR UNDERSEA RESEARCH NOAA'S UNDERSEA RESEARCH PROGRAM, VOL. 3 NO. 1, 1985 The Ecology of Coral Reefs Results of a Workshop on Coral Reef Ecology held by the American Society of Zoologists, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, December 1983 Edited by Marjorie L. Reaka Department of Zoology University of Maryland College Park, Maryland 20742 Washington, D.C. September 1985 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Malcolm Baldrige, Secretary National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Anthony J. Calio, Deputy Administrator Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Ned A. Ostenso, Assistant Administrator Office of Undersea Research Elliott Finkle, Director Symposia Series for Undersea Research The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Office Of Undersea Research provides manned undersea facilities and other research support for investigations of aquatic environments in the areas of biological, geological, and ecological research. There are currently five national undersea research facilities which operate under cooperative agreements between universities and NOAA. These facilities are located at: the West Indies Laboratory of Fairleigh Dickinson University, the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, the University of Connecticut at Avery Point, the University of Southern California, and the University of Hawaii. NOAA's Office of Undersea Research provides facilities for scientists to conduct research supporting NOAA's mission objectives in the areas of: marine fisheries, marine pollution, sea floor properties and processes, and ocean services. Since its inception, NOAA also has encouraged and supported the use of submersibles to perform in-situ underwater observations and data gathering. Many shallow-water submersible missions have been supported, including the use of the Johnson Sea-Link, the Nekton-Ganmma, and the Mermaid, as well as deep-water missions using the Alvin. The goals of the submersible programs are to support the research requirements of NOAA's major program elements and its Sea GrantW College system. This Symposia Series for Undersea Research has been developed specifically to provide a pu Ishi~ng me~Tim for national symposia whose contents have addressed topics related to undersea research activities. Additional information concerning this series and other activities of NOAA's Office of Undersea Research may be obtained by contacting: Director NOAA's Office of Undersea Research Mail Stop R/SE2 6010 Executive Boulevard, Roomi 805 Rockville, MD 20852 Photo Credits: Color photographs are from Bruce Nyden, Marjorie Reaka, Phillip Lobel, or the Office of Undersea Research. ii TABLE OF CONTENTS Chapter I. INTRODUCTION. Marjorie L. Reaka ............................ 1 Chapter II. RESULTS OF A WORKSHOP ON CORAL REEF ECOLOGY: SYNTHESES OF DISCUSSION SECTIONS ......................................7 Overview: The Dynamics of Recruitment in Coral Reef Organisms. William N. McFarland ..........................9 Growth and Life History Patterns of Coral Reef Organisms: A Discussion Group Summary and Overview. Ronald H. Karlson ................................................. 17 Overview: Coral Reef Community Structure and Function. Mark A. Hixon ... .......................................... 27 Some Thoughts on the Past, Present, and Future of Studies on Coral Reef Community Metabolism. S. V. Smith ............. 33 Chapter III. CONTRIBUTED PAPERS .......................................... 35 Recruitment of Young Coral Reef Fishes From the Plankton. William N. McFarland and John C. Ogden .................... 37 Pelagic Duration, Dispersal, and the Distribution of Indo- Pacific Coral-Reef Fishes. Edward B. Brothers and Ronald E. Thresher ........................................ 53 Diurnal Periodicity of Spawning Activity by the Hamlet Fish, Hypoplectrus guttavarius (Serranidae). Phillip S. Lobel and Steve Neudecker ................................. 71 Patterns of Reproduction in Small Jamaican Brittle Stars: Fission and Brooding Predominate. Ronald H. Emson, Philip V. Mladenov and lain C. Wilkie ..................... 87 Reef Zooplankton Collected Along a Depth Gradient at Discovery Bay, Jamaica. Sharon L. Ohlhorst ............... 101 Temporal Patterns of Zooplankton Migration. Sharon L. Ohlhorst and W. David Liddell ............................. 117 Field Analysis of the Dominance Hierarchy of the Bicolor Damselfish Stegastes partitus (Poey) (Pisces: Poma- centridae). Yvonne Sa3ovy .............................. 129 A Comparison of Fore and Back Reef Populations of Diadema antillarum Philippi and Eupomacentrus planifrons Cuvier at St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands. C. Lance Robinson and Ann Houston Williams ......................... 139 Carbonate Sediment Production by the Rock-Boring Urchin Echinometra lucunter and Associated Endolithic Infauna at Black Rock, Little Bahama Bank. Charles M. Hoskin and John K. Reed ................................ 151 Highly Productive Eastern Caribbean Reefs: Synergistic Effects of Biological, Chemical, Physical, and Geological Factors. Walter H. Adey and Robert S. Steneck ................................................... 163 Studies on the Bio-Optics of Coral Reefs. Phillip Dustan ... 189 Preliminary Studies of Denitrification on a Coral Reef. Sybil P. Seitzinger and Christopher F. D'Elia ............. 199 CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION Marjorie L. Reaka Department of Zoology The Universit of Maryland College Park, Maryland 20742 This volume presents the results of a workshop on the ecology of coral reefs that was held at the American Society of Zoologists meetings in Philadel- phia, December 1983. The workshop, which included four symposium presentations, four discussion sections, and presentations of undersea research facilities by NOAA's Office of Undersea Research, was sponsored by the Division of Ecology of the ASZ. The four symposium talks and discussion sections addressed the topics of growth and life history patterns, recruitment, community organization, and community metabolism in coral reef systems. The workshop was unusually well attended (attendance in the Ecology Division of the ASZ was 30% higher than in previous years and two additional contributed paper sessions in the Division of Ecology were devoted specifically to coral reef ecology), and vigorous group discussions continued well into the night. The objective of the workshop was to focus attention on what we do and do not know about the ecology of coral reefs, particularly along depth gradients, and to assess the most important directions for future research on coral reefs. A previous volume in this series (Reaka, 1983), containing symposium presentations and contributed papers in each of the four topical areas, was made available at the Coral Reef Workshop. The present volume presents the main conclusions derived from the discussion sections (Chapter II) and additional contributed papers on the ecology of coral reefs (Chapter III). In Chapter II, the discussion leaders summarize the topics discussed and the conclusions reached in each discussion section. William McFarland points out that astonishingly little is known about recruitment in coral reef species. He identifies some of the reasons for our lack of knowledge in this area, not the least of which is the prevalence of planktonic larvae in reef organisms. The production of hundreds to millions of tiny dispersing planktotrophic larvae distinguishes marine animals from those in every other major environment. Furthermore, the incidence of species with long-lived planktotrophic larvae is inversely related to latitude (Thorson, 1950; Mileikovsky, 1971), so that, in contrast to marine communities from high latitudes, the vast majority of coral reef species produce planktonic dispersing young. This phenomenon has profound implications for the population dynamics, community organization, and even evolutionary patterns of marine species compared to those in terrestrial or fresh water environments. In marine species thousands of recruits may occur in local areas in some years but not in others; planktonic larvae may settle in their parent population, may be carried to distant habitable sites, or even may be swept out to sea without any favorable substrate having been encountered. McFarland discusses several mechanisms that enhance the predictability of local recruitment on coral reefs, including the timing and dynamics of reproduction, currents or eddies that may return larvae to their parent populations, and behavioral patterns of the larvae and settling juveniles themselves. These I mechanisms, as well as fine scale observations of the larvae of species from different reef habitats, deserve extensive research before we will understand this critically important aspect of the biology of coral reef organisms. Ronald Karlson summarizes the conclusions of his discussion section on a related topic, life history patterns. An emerging body of research demonstrates that the observed growth rates, form, and longevity of corals along depth gradients result from complex interactions between physical (e.g., light and wave disturbance) and biotic variables. Recent research shows that sublethal phenomena such as injuries due to physical and biotic agents have significant implications for growth and reproduction in many sessile reef organisms. These processes can vary significantly in different habitats. This discussion group also addressed the important topic of ecological and evolutionary patterns in solitary vs. colonial organisms on coral reefs. The importance of fission, fusion, and fragmentation (and thus of colony size) in both solitary and colonial species received particular attention as a productive avenue for future research. Mark Hixon lead the discussion section on community structure and function. Coral reef ecologists have been in the forefront of the debate on whether communities are organized by stable predictable processes or whether they merely represent independent populations in shifting states of disequilibria. One of the reasons that disequilibrium and stochastic processes have been so apparent in coral reef communities may be because dispersing, feeding larvae engender unpredictable recruitment. However, recent research also has demon- strated the importance of irregular catastrophic perturbations, such as storms (e.g., Woodley, et al., 1981), population outbreaks (e.g., Birkeland, 1982), or diseases (e.g., Lessios, et al., 1984) in the organization of coral reef communi- ties. One of these events-, th-e mass mortality of Caribbean sea urchin populations,W was ongoing at the time of the workshop and was a major topic of discussion. Although the causes and mechanisms of this outbreak still are not well under- stood, Mixon identifies the heuristic value of this "natural experiment" which has removed a major herbivore over large local and geographical areas of reefs. This discussion lead to an evaluation of a more deterministic process, herbivory by urchins vs. fishes, on reefs; this discussion centered on how human activities such as fishing in certain well studied localities can affect our interpretations of the past and present organization of reef communities. Although terrestrial and fresh water ecologists have been concerned about the effects of human inter- vention on natural communities for some time, the pervasiveness of this problem in coral reef communities has attracted attention only recently. Hixon argues that one of the most critical needs for future research is for experimental manipulations and long term comparative studies. The discussion section on community metabolism was led by Stephen Smith. Smith shows how this field has developed from a focus on oxygen and carbon flux to studies of the physical, chemical, and biological variables that control metabolism of the reef ecosystem. The discussion addressed how the quantity and quality of available nutrients affect productivity, how nutrient flux between sub- communities can affect nutrient balance of the overall reef ecosystem, and how new technological approaches can improve our ability to measure community metabolism. Smith stresses that a holistic approach, including comparisons with other ecosys- tems, will represent important avenues for future research in this area. Chapter III includes contributed papers whose topics span those covered Win the four discussion groups. McFarland and Ogden provide a comprehensive review of recruitment in coral reef fishes and evaluate the various hypotheses advanced to account for the presence of planktonic larvae. They conclude that both reduced predation on young and enhanced dispersal favor the development of long-lived larvae which migrate offshore from local reefs. Due to the hetero- geneity in patterns of larval development, however, these authors note that the relative importance of these selective factors must vary among different species of reef fishes. Brothers and Thresher evaluate the relationship between larval durations and the extent of the geographic distributions in 115 species of ree' fishes. Their study yields the new and interesting result that, if larval durations are < about 45 days, the size of the geographic range (usually an indication of dispersal patterns) is not correlated with length of larval life. Larvae which have pelagic phases longer than 45 days, however, all have broad distributions and can transgress oceanic barriers at least occasionally. This work, then, has important implications for patterns of colonization and biogeog- raphy. Lobel and Neudecker analyze another aspect of reproductive biology of reef fishes that can influence dispersal of larvae on reefs: the timing and location of spawning. They describe and compare courtship in several species of hamlets. These fishes spawn at dusk over specific high reef structures, which may reduce predation and facilitate dispersal of eggs. The time and duration of spawning is influenced by depth and/or lunar phase as well as simulated attacks by predators. Emson, Mladenov, and Wilkie provide information on a different aspect of reproductive biology in a reef invertebrate. Various modes of asexual reproduction, including fission, are well known in a number of . relatively sessile invertebrate phyla. However, these authors demonstrate that fission represents the major method of reproduction in many small species of motile brittle stars associated with algae and sea grass in lagoonal habitats. Many of these ophiuroids also apparently produce dispersing planktonic larvae, an unexpected phenomenon because small size usually is associated with brooding. These results again have implications for patterns of recruitment and maintenance of local populations. Both meroplankton (the larvae of benthic reef organisms) and holoplankton (organisms that spend their entire life in the plankton) exhibit diel vertical migrations that are likely to influence their tendency to disperse in currents and their susceptibility to predation. The long term study reported by Ohlhorst also suggests that other factors, such as preceding rain and lunar effects,I can influence abundance of zooplankton above the reef. Ohlhorst further demon- strates that numbers of zooplankton decline significantly with increased depth, and that even in the shallow areas these plankton can provide relatively little of the metabolic requirements for sessile reef organisms. Using frequent collections throughout the day and night, Ohlhorst and Liddell provide the first precise documentation of a predawn surge in abundance of plankton over the reef that complements the postsunset peak of emergence known for these organisms. A swarming holoplanktonic copepod usually W~as the most common zooplankter in both Jamaica and St. Croix, althoukgh other taxa, including meroplankters, became prominent during the hours around sunset. These papers therefore are related to the topics of dispersal and reproductive biology discussed above but also bear on community organization and energy flow among different components of the reef community. 3 The following three papers in the volume deal with damselfishes and/or urchins on reefs. The territorial activities of damselfishes are known to be I significant for the structure and productivity of reef communities (e.g., Brawley and Adey, 1977; Hixon, 1983; and others). Sadovy studied the detailed dominance relations among individuals of bicolored damselfish in the field. Her results showed a linear, size-dependent dominance hierarchy in these fish and revealed some interesting similarities and differences between field and otherwise comparable laboratory studies. Robinson and Williams compare population characteristics of threespot damselfish and urchins (Diadema) in shallow back reef and fore reef environments. They found that urchins are larger, occur in lower densities, and are found higher in coral branches on the back reef than on the fore reef; in contrast, damselfish live at higher densities, have larger lawns, and exhibit less aggression toward urchins on the fore reef than on the back reef. Urchins may remain small and close to the substrate on the shallow fore reef because high wave action inhibits their grazing; thus interference between urchins and damselfish is less strong when mediated by disturbance on the fore reef than in more benign conditions on the back reef. Examining another species of urchin with a different but very significant impact on the structure of reefs, Hoskin and Reed use carefully controlled experimental methods to estimate the rates of bioerosion of carbonate substrates by urchins (Echinometra) and other burrowing infauna. These urchins excavate approximately 8.9 g substrate/m2/day (9 tons/year for the population), while the remaining infauna produces about 5 g sediment/m2/day (6.5 tons/year). This study illus- trates the tremendous amount of sediment that is produced and transported in benthic reef communities. Scouring and burial by this sediment must represent one of the most important agents influencing the structure and dynamics of reef communities, yet the significance of these processes for community organization are almost unstudied. In addition, this study provides new data on the sources and rates of degradation of reef substrates, a significant aspect of long term morphogenesis and diagenesis of reefs. This paper therefore provides a link between the papers on community organization and those on community metabolism. Adey and Steneck show how reef productivity is related to substrate complexity and surface area, light and water flow, and abundance of turf algae. They demonstrate that all of these factors can be understood in the context of geological development of the reefs. Using upstream/downstream flow respirometry techniques on reefs in three different stages of geological development in St. Croix, these authors provide good evidence for some of the highest rates of primary productivity reported for any marine environment. Dustan explores a different method of assessing primary productivity. He provides initial data on the spectral intensities of light impinging on, absorbed, and reflected by different substrates. Dustan suggests that much can be learned about the photo- biology of reef organisms using these nondestructive bio-optical sampling techniques and indicates that we may be able to estimate primary productivity over vast tracts of previously inaccessible reefs if optical signals from these reefs can be detected from orbiting spacecraft. Although we are in the initial stages of interpreting these data, such new technological approaches offer the promise of measuring and understanding productivity on a global scale. Seitzinger and D'Elia present data on another new and potentially important aspect of community metabolism on reefs. While nitrogen fixation on reefs has received well deserved attention, Seitzinger and D'Elia show that some reef habitats, in particular dead coral heads and sediments, may be the sites of extensive denitri- 4 4 ERRATA Several typographical errors were inadvertently included in our publication of The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs [Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 1(1T 71983], anwe wouTlike totake this opportunity to correct them. For Chornesky, E. A., and S. L. Williams, "Distribution of Sweeper Tentacles on Montastrea cavernosa, p. 61, par. 3, line 15 should read "or after contact and recognition;" p. 63, caption for figure 1 should read "For M. annularis, change in number of polyps." For Wolf, N. G., E. B. Bermingham, and M. L. Reaka, "Relationships Between Fishes and Mobile Benthic Invertebrates on Coral Reefs," p. 69, the address of E. B. Bermingham should read "Department of Molecular and Population Genetics;" p. 72, line 3 should read "Although fewer planktivores were recorded on C than on A reefs." For Hay, M. E., and T. Goertemiller, "Between-Habitat Differences in Herbivore Impact on Caribbean Coral Reefs," p. 100, par. 4, line 3 should read "and 12.8% versus 1% on Lighthouse (fig. 1);" p. 101, par. 2, lines 10-11 should read "or motility in sea urchin sperm (Norris and Fenical 1982, Paul and Fenical 1983). The polyphenolic compounds produced by Turbinaria." For Szmant-Froelich, A., "Functional Aspects of Nutrient Cycling on Coral Reefs," p. 136, Table 1, DIN should be TDN. 6 fication, whereby NO2 and N03 are lost from the system as atmospheric N2. Such studies make important contributions to Smith's goal of understanding the overall balance of nutrient flow within and between major components of reef communities. Many people have contributed to the successful completion of this volume. Thanks are especially extended to the authors for their fine contributions and cooperation throughout the editing process. In addition, the reviewers of these papers are gratefully acknowledged for contributing their time and criticisms, all of which improved the volume. Completion of this symposium volume would have been impossible without the expert typing and editorial assistance of Ms. Marcia Collie, Staff Assistant from NOAA's Office of Undersea Research; her cooperation, advice, and assistance through all the stages of publication are acknowledged with heartfelt thanks. Similarly, publication was made possible through NOAA's Office of Undersea Research, and the support of Mr. William Busch and Mr. Elliott Finkle throughout this endeavor are sincerely appreciated. Lastly, I thank my husband, Stephen, and our two little blonde boys, Alexei and Erik, for their sunshine and enthusiasm. LITERATURE CITED Birkeland, C. 1982. "Terrestrial Runoff as a Cause of Outbreaks of Acanthaster planci (Echinodermata: Asteroidea)." Mar. Biol. 69:175-185. Brawley, S. H., and W. H. Adey. 1977. "Territorial Behavior of Threespot Damselfish (Eupomacentrus planifrons) Increases Reef Algal Biomass and Productivity." Environ. Biol. Fish. 2:45-51. Hixon, M. A. 1983. "Fish Grazing and Community Structure of Reef Corals and Algae: A Synthesis of Recent Studies," pp. 79-87. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The EcologY of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs. Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. T7). NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Lessios, H. A., D. R. Robertson, and J. D. Cubit. 1984. "Spread of Diadema Mass Mortality Through the Caribbean." Science 226:335-337. Mileikovsky, S. A. 1971. "Types of Larval Development in Marine Bottom Invertebrates, Their Distribution and Ecological Significance: A Re- Evaluation." Mar. Biol. 10:390-404. Reaka, M. L., ed. 1983. The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs. Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., VolI(1). NOAUnde-rsea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. 149 pp. Thorson, G. 1950. "Reproductive and Larval Ecology of Marine Bottom Invertebrates." Biol. Rev. 25:1-45. Woodley, J. D., E. A. Chornesky, P. A. Clifford, J. B. C. Jackson, L. S. Kaufman, N. Knowlton, J. C. Lang, M. P. Pearson, J. W. Porter, M. C. Rooney, K. W. Rylaarsdam, V. J. Tunnicliffe, C. M. Wahle, J. L. Wulff, A. S. G. Curtis, M. D. Dallmeyer, B. P. Jupp, M. A. R. Koehl, J. Neigel, and E. M. Sides. 1981. "Hurricane Allen's Impact on Jamaican Coral Reefs." Science 214:749-755. 5 CHAPTER II: RESULTS OF A WORKSHOP ON CORAL REEF ECOLOGY: SYNTHESES ion OF DISCUSSION SECTIONS les d I 1 1 Figure 1 Coral reefs have been tremendously important in the history of human civilizations. Reefs support fisheries and provide protected embayments that are essential for food and commerce in coastal cultures. It is critical that we understand the biological dynamics responsible for the formation and degradation of these systems in order to preserve and manage their resources. NOAA's underwater habitat, HYDROLAB (fig. 1), has (continued on next page) Figure 2 Figure 3 7 iN" Figure 5 Figure 4 allowed scientists to conduct experimental field studies on reproduction, recruitment, population dynamics, and community organization of coral reef communities that would have been impossible without the extended diving time made possible through saturation techniques. Here divers study the factors that influence recruitment of fishes and invertebrates (figs. 2, 3, 4), many of them important fisheries and food stocks, on artificial reefs where large predators and grazers are excluded or allowed access. These facilities also have allowed extended study of the life histories, growth, and species inter- actions of the major structural agents on reefs, corals and sponges (fig. 5). The AEGIR, NOAA's mobile underwater habitat that will replace HYDROLAB in 1986, also is shown here (fig. 6). Figure 6 8 discussion section that spawning is a variable act within and between species a nd an activity that involves considerable behavioral plasticity. If the function of casting eggs into the plankton is to rapidly remove them from reef predators, then doing so at dusk (as many fish do) would seem safest. The fact that many fish do not spawn at dusk may relate to the presence of favorable currents that flush the eggs rapidly offshore and out of the reach of abundant small reef predators. Unfortunately, few papers deal simultaneously with spawning and local currents (McFarland and Ogden, 1985). As a result, it is rather difficult to resolve the differences that exist between species (see Robertson, 1983, for spawning variation in several acanthurids). Although recruitment from the plankton occurs at the end of the larval stage, knowing how and when potential propagules are introduced into the plankton is essential for understanding recruitment because the spawning act initiates the recruitment process. The difficulties identified above-could be partly resolved by an integrated study in a local area of the seasonal, monthly, and diel spawnings of many different species of coral reef fishes. Evaluating the function~s) of differential spawning amongst the various species will require that the observations be tightly coupled with analysis of local currents (for example, Robertson, 1983). If this is accomplished in severa~l different areas, it should be possible to sort out the trade-offs that different species invoke in order to "safely" deliver young to the plankton. Once spawned, the eggs of coral reef fishes usually hatch within a day (Thresher, 1984). Although most coral reef fish eggs and larvae are flushed offshore, in some circumstances the eggs and larvae are entrained within lagoons (apparently by local currents). Because eggs and very young larvae cannot swim * ~~and orient actively (Leis and Rennis, 1983), it is generally assumed that, when at sea, larvae are widely dispersed (through diffusional and other processes). As pointed out by Lobel during the discussion, similarly sized larvae of the same species often are taken in the same plankton hauls. In addition, newly recruited fish larvae often appear on reef sites in small groups of 3 or more fish (e.g., pempherids, high hats, grunts, etc.), but may also recruit as individuals, as noted by McFarland at the discussion. The question arose, therefore, as to how valid is the assumption of wide dispersion of individuals at sea? There was general agreement that little is really known about the distribution and dispersion of the eggs and larvae of individual species at sea (but see Leis and Goldman, 1984, for a beginning). Shapiro's paper in volume I of these proceedings develops a model which suggests that the dispersion of eggs resulting from a single spawning act will retain reasonable cohesiveness (after 24 hours of drift in a current; this varies depending on assumed conditions, but could yield as many as I post-.hatchling in each adjacent m3 of water). If newly hatched larvae can swim actively and are mutually attracted, it is at least possible that in the first few days they might form cohesive aggregations. Shapiro's thesis specifically suggests the possibility that young recruiting reef fishes may, in some instances, be kin. Tests of this hypothesis can involve electrophoretic analysis of recent recruits that occur in cohesive groups. A more immediate test involves the aging of all recruits in a group by use of the otolith aging technique (Brothers and Thresher, 1985; Victor, 1983). If spawned simultaneously and dispersed as a group, the cohesiveness of which is retained by active behaviors by individuals in the to OVERVIEW: THE DYNAMICS OF RECRUITMENT IN CORAL REEF ORGANISMS William N. McFarland Section of Ecology and Systemnatics Division of Biological Sciences Cornell University Ithaca, New York 14853 In her introduction to volume 1 of these proceedings, Marjorie Reaka states, "The second set of papers addresses the issue about which we probably know the least in coral reef ecology: what factors control recruitment?" One must conclude from the three contributed papers in volume I of these proceedings (Lobel and Robinson, 1983; Shapiro, 1983; Victor, 1983) and the papers in the present volume (Brothers and Thresher, 1985; Lobel and Neudecker, 1985; McFarland and Ogden, 1985) that data on reproduction, larval development, and recruitment are sparse. This is astonishing when we consider that almost all coral reef fishes, and a great majority of tropical invertebrates too, cast their eggs and larvae into the plankton where they must survive and grow before they can settle again to the reef as juveniles. The discussion held on December 27, 1983, at the ASZ meeting in Philadelphia, dwelled on two aspects of recruitment, what we actually know and what we need to know to better understand the dynamics of reef recruitment. About 20 par- ticipants were involved in the discussion. Here I will summarize the more important trends of the discussion. Given the ubiquity of a planktonic larval phase in so many coral reef0 organisms, why is so little known about recruitment? The answer is multiple. The eggs and larvae of most reef organisms are small, translucent, and difficult to identify to species. They are extremely hard to maintain and study in captivity because they are fragile and nutritional requirements often are either unknown or difficult to adequately provide. In addition, only over the last decade have newer techniques (e.g., otolith aging, increased use of SCUBA and saturation diving for observations, improved methods for measuring currents, etc.) become accessible to reef biologists. The paper by McFarland and Ogden (this proceeding) addresses what is known about why so many fishes cast their eggs and larvae into the plankton. They conclude that there is yet no definitive answer; that the function of a pelagic larval phase for one reef organism may not apply to another species; that in most species multiple functions prevail; and that avoiding predation and dispersal appear to be the most important factors that favor long-lived planktonic larvae. In addition, the times of spawning in most reef species are poorly known. In recent years, however, considerable effort has been placed on in situ observations of where and when reef fish spawn. Lobel and Neudecker's-pape-r(this volume) describes spawning in a hamlet (Hypoplectrus guttavaius) and also reviews important papers on reproduction in other specTies of ishes. Although many reef species spawn at specific *spawning sites and during a rush toward the surface, the time of spawning is variable, often occurring in the late afternoon and dusk (Lobel and Neudecker, 1985). However, spawning also often occurs during midday or midafter- noon (Colin, 1982; Robertson, 1983). It was the general conclusion in the 9 . ~group, then each recruit in the group should be of the same daily age. This specific experiment has not yet been performed. As tantalizing as the possibility of kinship in recruits may be, a larger related question prevails. What do larval fishes do when at sea? It is axiomatic that they feed and grow, but beyond that the discussion group agreed that the behaviors of larval reef fishes remain virtually unknown. Quantitative data on the behaviors of a variety of species of reef fishes are crucial to understanding the recruitment process. Answers will not be easy nor rapidly forthcoming, for they must involve careful, stratified plankton sampling to determine vertical distributions (at different times of the day), and also mus-c include specific experiments in the laboratory and on shipboard to assess the responses of fish larvae to various stimuli. The investigations are greatly complicated by larval growth. Because most reef fish larvae spend from I to 6 weeks and in some instances up to 15 weeks at sea (Brothers and Thresher, this volume), behaviors must change as the larvae grow. It is critical, therefore, to also evaluate the ontogeny of larval behaviors. The central importance of such studies to the overall process of tropical fish recruitment, however, should motivate investigators to overcome the difficulties that the study of larval fish behavior presents. Especially in this area will creative and imaginative investigations help, for they will provide short cuts to what otherwise would be a prolonged undertaking. The lead provided by researchers studying larval fish behaviors in temperate waters, fortunately, can be of great assistance in getting started (e.g., Blaxter and Hunter, 1982; Lasker, 1981; on clupeoid fishes). Since the classic demonstrations of Johannes Schmidt (1922) that the leptocephalus larvae of the European eel can drift at sea for not only months but in some instances for more than a year, the duration of larval life of fishes has provoked constant interest. Knowing how long a larva can exist at sea has been particularly important in explaining long-distance transport of reef fishes, e.g., the presence of Indo-Pacific reef species in the eastern Pacific (Brothers and Thresher, this proceeding). The problem has been frustra- ting because of the lack of methods to age larvae. The "invention" of the daily otolith aging technique (Panella, 1971; Brothers, et al., 1976) and the "discovery" of a transitional check mark in the otolith increments that approxi- mate settlement of the larvae from the plankton to the reef substrate (Brothers and McFarland, 1981; Brothers, et al., 1983; Victor, 1983) have revolutionized the aging of larval fishes and, as a consequence, estimating the duration of larval life of reef fishes. Brothers and Thresher's paper (this proceeding) examines 115 species of Pacific reef fishes. Interestingly, over 80% of these fishes have fairly short larval lives (< 45 days). All fishes with pelagic larval durations in excess of 45 days are widely distributed (as expected). We recognized that the use of otolith aging is an innovation that will assi-st in providing answers to many questions concerning recruitment. Already we have a better understanding of the lengths of larval life for a considerable number of species. In some species the length of larval life can be restricted to only a few days (e.g., French grunts, as noted by McFarland during the discussion) or can encompass a highly variable number of days (from a short number to many days and may show a strongly skewed distribution toward fewer days; Victor * noted during the discussion that this is the case for some wrasses). Given the novelty of the otolith aging techn~ique, a general warning was sounded that care should be taken with generalizations. Nevertheless, it was agreed that few studies on fish recruitment could effectively proceed without the use of this revealing technique. The paper by Lo-bel and Robinson (1983) re~viewed attempts to relate larval drift to mesoscale disturbances in the near surface waters, e.g., local current gy res .For many years various authors have invoked changes in local currents or even steady current conditions to explain how spawning, larval duration, and settlement are integrated to sustain local populations of fishes (Emery, 1972; Johannes, 1978, 1980; Sale, 1970). It is only over thie last decade, however, that oceanographers have begun to develop instrumentation that allows ready determination of local current eddies, shears, etc., on a sufficiently small scale to be useful in biological investigations (see, for example, Robinson, 1983). Techniques include radio-tracked drogues, expendable rapid acting bathythermographs, current meters, and satellite infrared imagery. As deployed in Hawaii, the initial data appear to support the concept that larvae spawned at a particular site can drift in gyres (at certain times of the year only) and could be returned close to their point of departure in times coin- cident with the general length of larval life. We agreed that it was crucial that local current regimes in various areas of the tropics must be carefully measured at different times of the year and during all phases of the lunar month if the potential drift paths of eggs and larvae are to be ascertained. However, as indicated, daily changes in larval behaviors and the ability to swim and orient can place fishes in different local current regimes. It is possible, therefore, that active directed behaviors (such as vertical movements)~ could increase the chance(s) that fishes will be dispersed to suitable reefW habitats for colonization. Thus, it is critical that subsurface currents as well as surface currents be measured. As crucial as the measurements of currents are, they must be coupled to ongoing investigations of spawning, egg and larval distribution, and larval behaviors if they are to result in meaningful conclusions for understanding recruitment dynamics in the tropics. As indicated by McFarland and Ogden (this proceeding) data on the actual settlement of reef fishes are sparse. Observations of settlement on a given day usually record the presence of recruits on a specific reef site, from which they were absent the previous day. Daily observations of this sort are useful in establishing recruitment cycles, but they reveal little about actual settle- ment behaviors of local reef fish. Do most reef fish larvae settle at night, or is there die] variation? And if so, are settlement behaviors species specific or plastic? What specific factors trigger settlement, and what attributes of a reef are attractive to each species? Answers to these questions will not yield to casual observation. As an example, during the discussion I indicated that newly recruited French grunts repeatedly established themselves on the same small coral heads and never recruited on closely adjacent heads that had similar configurations. Choice of a site might, thus, be resolved not only by appropriate substrate requirements but also by microscale differences in currents, as noted by Lobel. To know exactly what factors control site selection by new recruits will require carefully controlled manipulative experiments for a broad spectrum of reef species. Answers are critical before generalizations can be made: if W 12 settlement is to a large degree passive and succeeds only because currents carry larvae over reefs, then the process can be considered somewhat stochastic; if, however, searching and testing behaviors, such as vertical movements in the water column (as observed in many invertebrate reef plankters; see McFarland and Ogden, this volume, for specific references), are widely utilized by larvae to identify suitable substrates on which to settle, then recruitment can be considered as an active determined process. However, even if fish larvae do actively 'search' for specific substrate as they settle from the plankton, or soon after, their success in establishing themselves can be negatively affected by the presence of previously settled juveniles (Shulman, et al., 1983). As a result, even if the act of settlement is deterministic forea-E'-larva, the overall success of individual recruits is infused with a large element of chance (e.g., being in a current that favors transport to native habitat, arriving in a region of native habitat at the appropriate time of day to avoid predation, actually finding an appropriate and 'empty' settlement site within the native habitat). In a very real sense, therefore, settlement can be viewed as partly determined and partly stochastic. Because we remain largely ignorant of the details of the settlement process, and because recruitment is central to understanding coral reef fish community structure (see Helfman, 1978, for review), generalizations about the proximal and ultimate causes of the high species diver- sity of fishes associated with coral reefs remain, at best, first approximations. Although innumerable problems require solution to understand recruitment dynamics in coral reef organisms, it was generally concluded that rapid progress would result by focusing attention on four general areas: (1) the timing and dynamics of reproduction: where, when, and how often; (2) investigation of the fine scale horizontal, vertical, and diel distribution of larvae over a time frame that spans reproduction through recruitment; (3) coincident fine scale measures of local current regimes (at varied depths); and (4) descriptive and experimental investigations of the behaviors of larval coral reef organisms. Furthermore, it is not enough to study only one species, although individual researchers will be hard pressed to examine more than one at a time. Because of the necessary broad scope of recruitment studies, the research will involve planktologists, fish biologists, invertebrate biologists, behaviorists, and physical oceanographers. As a result, interdisciplinary collaborations will be a requirement in understanding and solving tropical recruitment processes. LITERATURE CITED Blaxter, J. H. S., and J. R. Hunter. 1982. "The Biology of the Clupeoid Fishes." Adv. Mar. Biol. 20:1-223. Brothers, E. B., C. P. Matthews, and R. Lasker. 1976. "Daily Growth Increments in Otoliths From Larval and Adult Fishes." Fish. Bull. 74:1-8. Brothers, E. B., and W. N. McFarland. 1981. "Correlations Between Otolith Microstructure, Growth, and Life History Transitions in Newly Recruited French Grunts (Haemulon flavolineatum (Desmarest), Haemulidae)." In: R. Lasker and J. Blaxter (eds.), Early Life History of Fish, II. Rapp. P-V. Reun. Cons. Int. Explor. Mer.:-7T37. 13 Brothers, E. B., D. McB. Williams, and P. F. Sale. 1983. "Length of Larval Life in Twelve Families of Fishes at 'One Tree Lagoon,' Great Barrier Reef, Australia." Mar. Biol. 76:319-324. Brothers, E. B., and R. E. Thresher. 1985. "Pelagic Duration, Dispersal, and the Distribution of Indo-Pacific Coral-Reef Fishes," pp. 53-69. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 3(1). NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., Rockvil-eMd. Colin, P. L. 1982. "Aspects of the Spawning of Western Atlantic Reef Fishes," pp. 69-78. In: G. R. Huntsman, W. R. Nicholson, and W. W. Fox (eds.), The Biological Basis for Reef Fishery Management. NOAA Tech. Memo NMFS-SEFC-T, Nat. Mar. FTis. Serv., Beaufort, NC. Emery, A. R. 1972. "Eddy Formation From an Oceanic Island: Ecological Effects." Carib. J. Sci. 12:121-128. Helfman, G. S. 1978. "Patterns of Community Structure in Fishes: Summary and Overview." Environ. Biol. Fish. 3:129-148. Johannes, R. E. 1980. "Using Knowledge of the Reproductive Behavior of Reef and Lagoon Fishes to Improve Fishing Yields." In: J. E. Bardach, J. J. Magnuson, R. C. May, and J. M. Reinhart (eds.),-lFish Behavior and Its Use in the Capture and Culture of Fishes. Proc. 5th Int.enter Living Auat. Resource Managemt., Minila, Philippines. 512 pp. Lasker, R., ed. 1981. Marine Fish Larvae. Univ. Wash. Press, Seattle. 131 pp@ Leis, J. M., and B. Goldman. 1984. "A Preliminary Distributional Study of Fish Larvae Near a Ribbon Reef in the Great Barrier Reef." Coral Reefs, 2:197-203. Leis, J. M., and D. S. Rennis. 1983. The Larvae of Indo-Pacific Coral Reef Fishes. Univ. Hawaii Press, Honolulu'. 26 pp. Lobel, P. S., and S. Neudecker. 1985. "Diurnal Periodicity of Spawning Activity by the Hamlet Fish, Hypoplectrus guttavarius (Serranidae)," pp. 71-86. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 3(1). NOAA Uned'ersea Res. Fogr., Rockville, Md. Lobel, P. S., and A. R. Robinson. 1983. "Reef Fishes at Sea: Ocean Currents and the Advection of Larvae," pp. 29-38. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 1(TT. NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. McFarland, W. N., and J. C. Ogden. 1985. "Recruitment of Young Coral Reef Fishes From the Plankton," pp. 37-51. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 3(1). NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., RockviTTe, Md. Panella, G. 1971. "Fish Otoliths: Daily Growth Layers and Periodical Patterns." Science 173:1124-1127. 14 Robertson, D. R. 1983. "On the Spawning Behavior and Spawning Cycles of Eight Surgeon Fishes (Acanthuridae) From the Indo-Pacific." Environ. Biol. Fish. 9:193-223. Robinson, A. R., ed. 1983. "Overview and Summary of Eddy Science. 1.1 Eddy Currents in the Ocean," pp. 3-15. In: Eddies in Marine Science. Springer- Verlag, Berlin. Sale, P. F. 1970. "Distribution of Larval Acanthuridae off Hawaii." Copeia 4:765-766. Schmidt, J. 1922. "The Breeding Places of the Eel." Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond., Ser. B, 211:179-208. Shapiro, D. Y. 1983. "On the Possibility of Kin Groups in Coral Reef Fishes," pp. 39-46. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. (1). NOAXUndersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Shulman, M. J., J. C. Ogden, J. P. Ebersole, W. N. McFarland, S. L. Miller, and N. G. Wolf. 1983. "Priority Effects in the Recruitment of Juvenile Coral Reef Fishes." Ecology 64:1508-1513. Thresher, R. E. 1984. Reproduction in Reef Fishes. Tropical Fish Hobbyist, Neptune City, NJ. 399 pp. Victor, B. C. 1983. "Settlement and Larval Metamorphosis Produce Distinct Marks on the Otoliths of the Slippery Dick, Halichoeres bivattatus," pp. 47-52. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 1(1).NOAA Undersea es.7rogr., Roc-' ' lleF. 15 GROWTH AND LIFE HISTORY PATTERNS OF CORAL REEF ORGANISMS: A DISCUSSION GROUP SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW Ronald H. Karlson Ecology and Organismic Biology Program School of Life and Health Sciences University of Delaware Newark, Delaware 19716 I would like to take this opportunity to thank all who attended our late evening discussion group. Although it would have been impossible for us to deal with all major taxa of coral reef organisms, we discussed a reasonably diverse array of colonial organisms and a group of solitary echinoderms. Taxonomic areas of research and a partial list of participants include actinians (Sebens), bryozoans (Jackson), corals (Brakel, Highsmith, Hughes, Hunter, Jackson), echinoderms (Highsmith, Keller, Levitan, Mladenov), gorgonians (Harvell, Lasker, Wahle), sponges (Harvell, Pomponi, Suchanek), and zoanthids (Karlson, Sebens, Suchanek). Six short presentations by Brakel, Hughes, Suchanek, Wahle, Karlson, and Mladenov were given in our discussion session. Each was followed by questions and/or discussion. Each presentation dealt with variability in one or more of the following: growth form, growth rate, overgrowth frequency, fecundity, survivorship, colonial integrity, or reproductive mode. We also discussed size- specific variation in life histories, fission, fusion, and brooding in coral reef invertebrates. Brakel's presentation dealt with depth-related variation in the growth form of Porites astreoides (Brakel, 1983). He noted that much of the literature dealing with coral growth form suggests that there may be a simple monotonic relationship between colony shape and depth. Brakel's analysis indicates that flattened colonies are typical of high-energy, shallow water habitats and of low-light, deep water habitats. Between these two extremes, wave energy and light set upper limits on morphological variation and are not good predictors of mean morphological parameters. Three additional citations to those given by Brakel (1983) on the general relationship between colony morphology and depth are Fricke and Schuhmacher (1983), Chappell (1980), and Stearn (1982). The first is an interesting paper on photoadaptations in deep hermatypic corals found down to 145 m. They noted the prevalence of flat hermatypes in deep water and a great diversity of growth forms in shallow water. This pattern was not observed for ahermatypic corals. Chappell (1980) discussed the effects of light and wave stress on coral growth form and rate and extended these effects to include the growth of coral reefs. Stearn (1982) critically reviewed the analysis of growth form in corals and stromatoporoids. He, like Brakel, concluded that the relationship between growth form and environmental variables is quite complex due to the influences of genetic and developmental processes. The presentation by Hughes (1983) dealt with coral growth rates as well as life history variation over a depth range. The major point of this presentation 17 was that net coral growth rates do not vary much with depth. Although calcification rates decrease with increasing depth, rates of injury to colonies _ are much higher in shallow water. This results in several examples of deep corals at 35 or 55 m growing faster than corals of the same species at 10 or 20 m. These data suggest that we should exercise caution when using calcifica- tion rates to evaluate coral reef growth. In our third presentation, Suchanek discussed the relative abundances and interaction frequencies of corals and demosponges over a 40 m depth range (Suchanek, et al., 1983). He emphasized the high frequency of demosponge-coral interactions at-40 m and the increasing prevalence of demosponges as aggressive spatial competitors with increasing depth. Aggressive interactions in shallow water involved encrusting gorgonians, hydrocorals, and zoanthids. The effect of spatial competition on coral or demosponge growth, depth distribution, and life history variation remains to be determined. Even though deep hermatypic corals experience relatively low injury rates, a significant amount of this injury is caused by sponge overgrowth (Hughes, 1983; Suchanek, et al., 1983; Hughes and Jackson, in review). Lang (1974) has previously noted FiFe prevalence of demosponges in deep fore-reef (below 55 m) and island slope zones off Discovery Bay, Jamaica. Hermatypic corals growing under light-limited conditions near their lower distributional limit may be more susceptible to overgrowth by demosponges than corals growing at shallower depths. Wahle presented his data on the relationship between injury, colony size, and life history variation in the gorgonian Plexaura homomalla (Wahle, 1983). * Between-colony analysis of variation in fecundity indicated that only colonies taller than 20 cm contained eggs. Natural and experimentally induced injuries to large female colonies resulted in physiologically isolated colony branches which exhibited size-related variation in fecundity. This work demonstrates that: 1) "colony size and not age controls both onset and continuation of gametogenesis"; 2) "injury can subtly reduce fecundity without noticeably affecting (colony) size"; and 3) injuries can alter the level of colony integrity and "create mosaics of different life history stages coexisting within the same colony." My own presentation dealt with an analysis of divergent life history patterns in Zoanthus sociatus and Z. solanderi. Since these data do not appear elsewhere, I present them here in more detail than that given to the other five presentations. Both of these zoanthids are very common at several locations throughout the Caribbean Sea. These sessile colonial organisms generally inhabit shallow subtidal and lower intertidal zones where they occasionally are exposed to extreme wave action (e.g., Hurricane Allen, see Woodley, et al., 1981) or to desiccation (Sebens, 1982a; Fadallah, et al., 1984). Boi-i species may successfully escape from such extremes by dispersing gametes and/or fragmented clusters of adult polyps. Highsmith (1982) has suggested that fragmentation is an important part of the life history of many corals, and that one characteristic typical of fragmenting species is delayed sexual reproduction. The data in table 1 were collected from 101 zoanthid colonies to determine if either Z. sociatus, Z. solanderi, or both species delay sexual reproduction. Both species have been _ Table 1.--The frequency of fertile polyps in four colony size classes of Z. sociatus and Z. solanderi. Colonies were collected in June, 1983, at Discovery Bay, Jamaica. Numbers of colonies are given in parentheses. Colony size Polyp class condition Z. sociatus Z. solanderi 2 _ _ ~~~~~~x2 A. < 20 polyps fertile 0 8 9.44 nonfertile 227 (N=31) 188 (N=40) p < 0.005 B. 20 < 40 polyps fertile 0 22 22.12 nonfertile 103 (N=4) 92 (N=4) p < 0.001 C. 40 < 60 polyps fertile 0 9 11.63 nonfertile 58 (N=1) 40 (N=1) p < 0.001 D. very large fertile 105 179 26.93 (subsamples nonfertile 395 (N=10) 321 (N=10) p < 0.001 = 50 polyps per colony) E. < 60 polyps fertile 0 (N=36) 39 (N=45) 21.36 very large fertile 105 (N=10) 179 (N=10) p < 0.001 observed to fragment either as clusters of loose polyps, analogous to the "polyp balls" reported by Rosen and Taylor (1969), or as polyps attached to shifting rubble. The fact that fragmentation occurs, however, does not demonstrate that it is adaptive or an important life history characteristic. The frequency of fertile polyps in ten extremely large colonies of Z. sociatus and Z. solanderi was 21% and 36%, respectively (table 10). These-were sampled during their peak reproductive season, as indicated by Karlson (1981, and unpub. data). None of the polyps in 36 small colonies (< 60 polyps) of Z. sociatus were fertile; 11% of the polyps in 45 small colonies of Z. solanderi were fertile (table 1E). All three small colony size classes exhi ited significantly higher frequencies of fertile polyps for Z. solanderi than for Z. sociatus (table 1A, B, and C). The absence of fertile polyps in small Z. sociatus colonies suggests that this species delays sexual reproduction while Z. solanderi does not. Further examination of the 81 small zoanthid colonies (< 60 polyps) revealed another significant difference between these two species. Colonial growth in zoanthids commonly occurs by the budding of new individuals from stolons. These stolonal connections can degenerate over time (West, 1979), resulting in very loosely organized colonies with extremely low levels of integration and asynchronous sexual reproduction (e.g., table 1D). As a measure 19 Table 2.--Group size as a measure of colonial integrity Colony size Group size class Z. sociatus Z. solanderi t-test < 20 X = 3.6 polyps per group 2.3 polyps per group polyps Range = 1 - 13 1 - 8 3.68 n = 63 groups in 31 colonies 84 groups in 40 colonies p < 0.001 20 < 40 X = 6.9 2.3 polyps Range = 1 - 27 1 - 5 4.40 n = 15 in 4 colonies 49 in 4 colonies p < 0.001 40 < 60 X = 5.3 2.7 polyps Range = 1 - 30 1 - 5 1.25 n = 11 in 1 colony 18 in 1 colony N.S. of colonial integrity, I have counted the number of unconnected polyp groups and the number of polyps within each group. There were a total of 89 polyp groups within 36 colonies of Z. sociatus and 151 polyp groups within 45 colonies of Z. solanderi (table 2). Z3anthus solanderi had significantly fewer polyps pergroup than did Z. sociatus in the two smallest colony size classes. The maximum number of polyps per group was also much higher in Z. sociatus than Z. solanderi. These significant differences in polyps per group may have important life history implications. Variation at this low level of colonial integrity is likely to influence the size of colony fragments and the size frequency distribution of zoanthid colonies. Among colonial species, survivorship, fecundity, fragmentation, and fusion are highly dependent on colony size (e.g., Hughes and Jackson, 1980, and ms. in review; Buss, 1980, 1981; Sebens, 1982b; Hughes, 1984). Small fragments of Z. sociatus colonies have higher mortality rates than do fragments of the same size for L. solanderi (Sebens, 1982a; Karlson, in preparation). In addition, small colonies of Z. sociatus are nonreproductive (table 1). The high level of colonial integrity in Z. sociatus suggests a benefit to large group (and colony) size in this species and, conversely, a cost (e.g., lower survivorship) associated with small size. There appears to be little cost to small size in Z. solanderi. This zoanthid is more resistant to predation than Z. sociatus (�e-bens, 1982a) and does not delay sexual reproduction. Low colonial integrity in Z. solanderi is likely to enhance fragmentation of small clusters of polyps. Higher colonial integrity in Z. sociatus may enhance production of larger clusters by fragmentation or, alternatively, it may enhance resistance to fragmentation. In our last presentation, Mladenov briefly reviewed some of the life history characteristics of seven shallow-water Jamaican ophiuroids. All of the 20 species studied were small cryptic forms. Three species were fissiparous (see also Mladenov, et al., 1983) and produced relatively small eggs; two of these broadcast "exceedingly small numbers of larvae." Two non-fissiparous species produce and brood a small number of relatively large eggs which undergo direct devel opment. Mladenov noted that of approximately 2,000 extant ophiuroid species, only 57 are known brooders (Hendler, 1979) and 37 undergo fission (Emson and Wilkie, 1980; Emson, et al., 1985). While 65% of those exhibiting fissiparity and 12% of the brooders are found in the tropics, brooders like Amphipholis squamata and fissiparous species like Ophiactis savignyl are among the most widespread and abundant" tropical ophiuroids. At Discovery Bay, the three fissiparous ophiuroid species were numerically dominant. Emson, et al. (1985) speculate that populations of these species have been "maintain~e almost solely by asexual reproduction." Among colonial species, growth, fission, fusion, and fragmentation are important asexual life history processes (e.g., Bak and Engel, 1979; Hughes and Jackson, 1980; Karlson, 1980, 1983; Bothwell, 1981; Tunnicliffe, 1981; Lasker, 1983; Rylaarsdam, 1983; Hughes, 1984). More critical evaluation of the importance of sexual reproduction to these colonial species is currently underway. There has been a relatively recent increase in this particular research area. At the Third International Coral Reef Symposium held in 1977, there were no presentations on this topic. Four years later at the Fourth International Coral Reef Symposium, there were six such presentations (Bothwell, unpub. data; Karlson, 1981; Kojis and Quinn, 1981; Richmond, 1981; Van Moorsel, 1981; Yamazato, et al., 1981). Data from the Van Moorsel presentation have now been published--Van Moorsel, 1983). An excellent review of this subject dealing with over 100 scleractinian coral species has also just been published by Fadallah (1983); also see Harrison, et al. (1984). Fadalallah (1983) and Szmant-Froelich, et al. (1983) suggest the neTeior further work on reproductive cycles, reproductive modes, relative fecundity, and reproductive effort in order to satisfactorily evaluate the importance of sex to coral reef organisms. At this point we know virtually nothing about the relationship between reproductive effort and the actual input of settled larvae into adult populations; this point also is stressed by McFarland (1985). The original purpose of this discussion group was to compare growth and life history patterns of solitary and colonial organisms on shallow and deep reefs. We did, in part, deal with depth-related variation in coral growth form, growth rate, and life history patterns. Furthermore, we briefly discussed some general differences and similarities between colonial and solitary species (see Jackson, 1977). The remarkable success of fissiparous echinoderms and colonial corals, sponges, gorgonians, and zoanthids has been noted. This is suggestive of some level of evolutionary convergence favoring asexual strategies even in solitary organisms. My own work with zoanthids emphasized low colonial integrity in two very successful species. These species may be more similar to aggregating solitary organisms (e.g., barnacles, anemones, polychaetes, and mussels) than to more highly organized colonial forms. One curious and potentially significant difference between solitary and colonial organisms is the ability of colonial species to fuse (Teissier, 1929; Stephenson, 1931; Schijfsma, 1939; Ivker, 1972; Hughes and Jackson, 1980; Buss, 1982). It is 21 generally thought that fusion, whether it occurs between clonemates or non- clonemates, results in the formation of a larger colony with higher survivorship_ and/or fecundity (Hughes and Jackson, in review). It also results in a level of physiological continuity which even aggregating solitary organisms cannot mimic. Variation in colonial integrity and the adaptive significance of fragmentation and fusion among colonial species would appear, then, to be an interesting new direction for future exploration. LITERATURE CITED Bak, R. P. M., and M. S. Engel. 1979. "Distribution, Abundance, and Survival of Juvenile Hermatypic Corals (Scleractinia) and the Importance of Life History Strategies in the Parent Coral Community." Mar. Biol. 54:341-352. Bothwell, A. M. 1981. "Fragmentation, a Means of Asexual Reproduction and Dispersal in the Coral Genus Acropora (Scleractinia: Astrocoeniida: Acroporidae) - A Preliminary Report." Proc. 4th Int. Coral Reef Symp. 2:137-144. Brakel, W. H. 1983. "Depth-Related Changes in the Colony Form of the Reef Coral Porites astreoides," pp. 21-26. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs. Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 1i7. NOAA Unhdersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Buss, L. W. 1980. "Competitive Intransitivity and Size-Frequency Distributions of Interacting Populations." Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 77:5355-5359. Buss, L. W. 1981. "Group Living, Competition, and the Evolution of Cooperation in a Sessile Invertebrate." Science 213:1012-1014. Buss, L. W. 1982. "Somatic Cell Parasitism and the Evolution of Somatic Tissue Compatibility." Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 79:5337-5341. Chappell, J. 1980. "Coral Morphology, Diversity, and Reef Growth." Nature 286:249-252. Emson, R. H., and I. C. Wilkie. 1980. "Fission and Autotomy in Echinoderms." Oceanogr. Mar. Biol. Ann. Rev. 18:155-250. Emson, R. H., P. V. Mladenov, and I. C. Wilkie. 1985. "Patterns of Reproduction in Small Jamaican Brittle Stars: Fission and Brooding Strategies Predominate," pp. 87-100. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 3(1). NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Fadlallah, Y. H. 1983. "Sexual Reproduction, Development and Larval Biology in Scleratinian Corals: A Review." Coral Reefs 2:129-150. Fadlallah, Y. H., R. H. Karlson, and K. P. Sebens. 1984. "A Comparative Study of Sexual Reproduction in Three Species of Panamanian Zoanthids (Coelenterata:Anthozoa)." Bull. Mar. Sci. 35:80-89. 0 22 *_ Fricke, H. W., and H. Schuhmacher. 1983. "The Depth Limits of Red Sea Stony Corals: An Ecophysiological Problem (a Deep Diving Survey by Submersible)." Mar. Ecol. 4:163-194. Harrison, P. L., R. C. Babcock, G. D. Bull, J. K. Oliver, C. C. Wallace, and B. L. Willis. 1984. "Mass Spawning in Tropical Reef Corals." Science 223:1186-1189. Hendler, G. 1979. "Reproductive Periodicity of Ophiuroids (Echinodermata: Ophiuroidea) on the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts of Panama," pp. 145-156. In: S. E. Stancyk (ed.), Reproductive Ecology of Marine Invertebrates. The Belle W. Baruch Library in Marine Science, Number 9. Univ. S. Carolina Press, Columbia. Highsmith, R. C. 1982. "Reproduction by Fragmentation in Corals." Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 7:207-226. Hughes, T. 1983. "Life Histories and Growth of Corals Over a Depth Gradient," pp. 17-20. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 1(1). NOAA-Undersea Res. Prog., Rockville, Md. Hughes, T. P. 1984. "Population Dynamics Based on Individual Size Rather Than Age: A General Model With a Reef Coral Example." Amer. Nat. 123:778-795. Hughes, T. P., and J. B. C. Jackson. 1980. "Do Corals Lie About Their Age? Some Demographic Consequences of Partial Mortality, Fission, and Fusion." Science 209:713-715. Hughes, T. P., and J. B. C. Jackson. In review. "Population Dynamics and Life Histories of Foliaceous Corals." Submitted to Ecol. Monogr. Ivker, F. B. 1972. "A Hierarchy of Histo-Incompatibility in Hydractinia echinata." Biol. Bull. 143:162-174. Jackson, J. B. C. 1977. "Competition on Marine Hard Substrata: The Adaptive Significance of Solitary and Colonial Strategies." Amer. Nat. 111:743-767. Karlson, R. H. 1980. "Alternative Competitive Strategies in a Periodically Disturbed Habitat." Bull. Mar. Sci. 30:894-900. Karlson, R. H. 1981. "Reproductive Patterns in Zoanthus spp. from Discovery Bay, Jamaica." Proc. 4th Int. Coral Reef Symp. 2:699-704. Karlson, R. H. 1983. "Disturbance and Monopolization of a Spatial Resource by Zoanthus sociatus (Coelenterata, Anthozoa)." Bull. Mar. Sci. 33:118-131. Kojis, B. L., and N. J. Quinn. 1981. "Reproductive Strategies in Four Species of Porites (Scleractinia)." Proc. 4th Int. Coral Reef. Symp. 2:145-152. Lang, J. C. 1974. "Biological Zonation at the Base of a Reef." Amer. Sci. *s ~62:272-281. 23 Lasker, H. R. 1983. "Vegetative Reproduction in the Octocoral Briereum asbestinum (Pallas)." J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 72:157-169. McFarland, W. N. 1985. "Overview: The Dynamics of Recruitment in Coral Reef Organisms," pp. 9-15. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 3(1). NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Mladenov, P. V., R. H. Emson, L. V. Colpitts, and I. C. Wilkie. 1983. "Asexual Reproduction in the West Indian Brittle Star Ophiocomella ophiactoides (H. L. Clark) (Echinodermata: Ophiuroidea)." J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 72:1-23. Richmond, R. 1981. "Energetic Considerations in the Dispersal of Pocillopora damicornis (Linnaeus) planulae. Proc. 4th Int. Coral Reef S 2mp._21T53-156, Rosen, B. R., and J. D. Taylor. 1969. "Reef Coral From Aldabra: New Mode of Reproduction." Science 166:119-121. Rylaarsdam, K. W. 1983. "Life Histories and Abundance of Colonial Corals on Jamaican Reefs." Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 13:249-260. Schijfsma, K. 1939. "Preliminary Notes on Early Stages in the Growth of Colonies of Hydractinia echinata (Flem.)." Arch. Neerland. Zool. 4:93-102. Sebens, K. P. 1982a. "Distribution and Spatial Patterns of Zoanthids in the Coral Reef Flat Community at Galeta, Panama: The Effects of Desiccation and Predation." Bull. Mar. Sci. 32:316-335. Sebens, K. P. 1982b. "Competition for Space: Growth Rate, Reproductive Output, and Escape in Size." Amer. Nat. 120:189-197. Steam, C. W. 1982. The Shapes of Paleozoic and Modern Reef-Builders: A Critical Review." Paleobiology 8:228-241. Stephenson, T. A. 1931. "Development and Formation of Colonies of Pocillopora and Porites." Great Barrier Reef Expeditions, Sci. Rpts. 3:113-134. Suchanek, T. H., R. C. Carpenter, J. D. Witman, and C. 0. Harvell. 1983. "Sponges as Important Space Competitors in Deep Caribbean Coral Reef Communities," pp. 55-60. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp.Ter. Undersea Res., Vol. 1(1). NOAUndersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Szmant-Froelich, A., L. Riggs, and M. Reutter. 1983. "Sexual Reproduction in Caribbean Reef Corals." Amer. Zool. 23:961, abstract no. 513. Teissier, G. 1929. "L'Origine Multiple de Certaines Colonies d'Hydractinia echinata (Fleming) et ses Consequences Possibles." Bull. Soc. Zool. France 54:645-647. Tunnicliffe, V. J. 1981. "Breakage and Propagation of the Stony Coral Acropora cervicornis." Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 78:2427-2431. 24 Van Moorsel, G. W. N. M. 1981. "Different Reproductive Strategies in Two Closely Related Stony Corals (Agaricia, Scleractinia)." Proc. 4th Int. Coral Reef Symp. 2:193 (abstract). Van Moorsel, G. W. N. M. 1983. "Reproductive Strategies in Two Closely Related Stony Corals (Agaricia, Scleractinia)." Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 13:273-283. Wahle, C. M. 1983. "The Roles of Age, Size, and Injury in Sexual Reproduction Among Jamaican Gorgonians." Amer. Zool. 23:961, abstract no. 514. West, D. A. 1979. "Symbiotic Zoanthids (Anthozoa: Cnidaria) of Puerto Rico." Bull. Mar. Sci. 29:253-271. Woodley, J. D., E. A. Chornesky, P. A. Clifford, J. B. C. Jackson, L. S. Kaufman, N. Knowlton, J. C. Lang, M. P. Pearson, J. W. Porter, M. C. Rooney, K. W. Rylaarsdam, V. J. Tunnicliffe, C. M. Wahle, J. L. Wulff, A. S. G. Curtis, M. D. Dallmeyer, B. P. Jupp, M. A. R. Koehl, J. Neigel, and E. M. Sides. 1981. "Hurricane Allen's Impact on Jamaican Coral Reefs." Science 214:749-755. Yamazato, K. M. Sato, and H. Yamashiro. 1981. "Reproductive Biology of an Alcyonacean Coral, Lobophytum crassum Marenzeller." Proc. 4th Int. Coral Reef Symp. 2:671-678. 25 OVERVIEW: CORAL REEF COMMUNITY STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION Mark A. Hixon Department of Zoology and College of Oceanography Oregon State University Corvallis, Oregon 97331 This paper summarizes an open discussion session which took place during the "Coral Reef Ecology Workshop" held at the annual meeting of~the American Society of Zoologists in Philadelphia on December 27, 1983. Due to either sampling error or a genuine bias in current research emphasis, most of the participants in this session studied herbivory and grazing patterns on reefs. Consequently, most of the discussion centered around two related topics: (1) the recently discovered mass mortality of urchins in the Caribbean and (2) the relative importance of urchins vs. fishes in structuring benthic reef communities in areas facing different fishing pressures. A third more general topic was discussed briefly toward the end of the session: approaches to research on the community structure of reef systems. I will cover each of these topies in turn, extending discussion on the final topic with an overview of future needs in the study of coral reef communities. MASS MORTALITY OF CARIBBEAN URCHINS One of the major herbivores on Caribbean reefs is the long-spined urchin Diadema antillarum. In November 1983, a letter published in Science reported unprecedented mass mortalities of this species that were sweeping the Caribbean (Lessios, et al., 1983). Haris Lessios (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute) attended the session and provided both a description of the effects of the apparent pathogen (the origin or nature of which was currently unknown) and an updated account of the spread of the calamity. The apparent disease runs a 4- to 5-day course, beginning with the urchins emerging from coral cover and climbing up any available substrate. The urchins then discolor, gradually lose their attachment capabilities, and ultimately lose their spines and die. Up to 98% mortality has been reported in some populations, with apparently resistant individuals remaining. Curiously, no other species of urchin has been affected. The outbreak was first noted near the Caribbean entrance of the Panama Canal in January 1983. Urchin mortalities were observed subsequently in Colombia, Costa Rica, and Grand Cayman by June; in Jamaica, Belize, Cancun (Mexico), and Key Largo (Florida) by July; in the Bahamas by August; in the Dry Tortugas and Bermuda by September; in Grand Turk and Haiti by October; and throughout the Greater and Lesser Antilles, including Curacao, Bonnaire, and part of the coast of Venezuela, between November 1983 and January 1984. Initially, the spread of the die-off appeared to follow prevailing ocean currents. However, certain exceptions, such as the outbreak in Barbados in October (a full month or two before the remainder of the Antilles), suggested a 27 more complex situation. At present, Lessios reports that the entire Caribbean except for much of Venezuela, Tobago, and the area between Guadaloupe and the British Virgin Islands, has been affected, although these areas could be affected by the time this report is published. Mark Hay (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) noted that, despite the die-off of Diadema in the Florida Keys, algal abundance on reefs there was not unusually high 2 months after the die-off. He suggested that either herbivorou fishes were sufficiently abundant to check algal growth or 2 months may not have been enough time to detect a noticeable change. Douglas Morrison (University of Georgia) summarized his quantitative data on the effects of the die-off on a Jamaican reef. Mean densities of urchins I year before the die-off were about 15 per m2 at 5 m depth and about 2 per m2 at 16 m. Several months after the die-off, mean densities had declined to about 1 per m2 at 5 m depth, and no urchins were apparent at 16 m. After the urchin die- off at the shallow site, the coverage of crustose coralline algae (an indicator of high grazing intensity) declined from 45% to about 18%. Replacing the coral- lines, coverage by fleshy macroalgae quadrupled (from 7% to about 28%) and coverage by filamentous algae nearly tripled. These patterns were corroborated by earlier urchin-removal experiments conducted before the die-off; in the experimental absence of grazing, crustose corallines were replaced by upright macroalgae. In contrast, the die-off had little apparent effect upon algal growth at the deep site, where urchin densities were normally low, and macroalgal abundance remained relatively high (73% cover). The macroalgae that increased in abundance at the shallow site are known to be resistant to fish grazing but not to urchi grazing. These included members of the genera Lobophora, Caulerpa, and DictyoW Whatever its cause, the mass mortality of Diadema throughout the Caribbean provides an excellent (although uncontrolled) "naturaFexperiment" for determining the impact of urchins on entire reef systems. Where adequate baseline data are available, observations following the die-off will test the widespread applicabilit of previous experimental analyses of small patch-reef systems (e.g., Ogden, et al., 1973) and help to resolve the controversy discussed in the next section. ARE URCHINS IMPORTANT GRAZERS ON UNFISHED REEFS? Hay summarized a study that was in press at the time of the workshop (Hay, 1984). He noted that most of the studies of the impact of urchin grazing on reef benthos have occurred at two sites: Teague Bay, St. Croix (e.g., Ogden, et al., 1973) and Discovery Bay, Jamaica (e.g., Sammarco, 1980). Such studies ~ve--Ted some to believe that urchins are the most important grazers on "typical" coral reefs. However, Hay suggested that these particular sites are atypical in that they have been heavily fished, indirectly resulting in unusually high densities of urchins which have been freed from predation by (and perhaps competition with) fishes. Using pieces of the seagrass Thalassia testudinum as a field bioassay for the intensity of herbivory on macrophytes, he found that eight lightly fished sites scattered throughout the Caribbean (including Salt River on St. Croix) showed decreasing grazing intensity with increasing depth and that almost all herbivory was due to fishes. Moreover, urchin abundances were low at these sites. In contrast, Haiti and Teague Bay on St. Croix, bothF 28 heavily fished areas, showed the traditional opposite patterns. Hixon added that Hay's general observation that urchins are Often rare where large urchin- eating fishes are abundant is evident on Hawaiian reefs. Where fishing is prohibited on marine reserves, such as Hanauma Bay and Coconut Island on Oahu, urchins appear to be relatively rare. Hay stressed that his major point was that many patterns documented on human-impacted reefs may be recent, having prevailed only for the past few hundred years. Because herbivory by fishes may select for different evolutionary responses in algae than herbivory by urchins, attempts to extract evolutionary implications from ecological data gathered on heavily fished reefs is not justified. Les Kaufman (New England Aquarium) objected to a number of Hay's assertions, particularly the idea that urchins on heavily fished reefs necessarily are freed from predation by fishes. He took issue with Hay's data which indicated, on one hand, a decrease in grazing intensity with increased depth at Salt River on St. Croix but, on the other hand, an increase in grazing intensity with increased depth at nearby Teague Bay on the same island. Based on his diving experience at these sites, Kaufman felt that both areas supported fishes capable of eating urchins. Thus, other factors besides the overall abundance of fishes may explain the patterns that Hay attributed to fishing pressure. Further, Kaufman felt that Hay failed to consider the importance of juvenile mortality in urchin populations. He suggested that predation by wrasses on juvenile urchins may be considerable on heavily fished reefs, such as Teague Bay (St. Croix) and Discovery Bay (Jamaica), so that fishing pressure on larger fish * ~~species may not ultimately affect urchin densities. Substantial discussion centered on the adequacy of Thalassia as a bioassay of grazing intensity. Robert Carpenter (University of Georgia) suggested that different measures of grazing could produce different depth profiles of grazing intensity (see also Steneck, 1983). Carpenter felt that the Thalassia technique measured mostly parrotfish grazing and that a more general measure of grazing is provided by counting the number of herbivore bites per unit reef area. Hixon agreed, noting that bite marks by fishes from different families (e.g., parrotfishes vs. surgeonfishes) can be individually identified and counted on flat substrates (e.g., Hixon and Brostoff, 1983). Morrison also concurred and suggested that, instead of Thalassia, a food readily consumed by all herbivores should be used to measure overall grazing intensity. Based on his own and other's work, Morrison indicated that filamentous algae seem to be preferred by urchins and nearly all herbivorous fishes (especially parrotfishes and damselfishes). Sara Lewis (Duke University) noted that some algal species (e.g., Lobophora variegata) are differentially susceptible to grazing on different reefs. She suggested that these within-species differences may represent geographical variation in the development of plant defensive compounds. Hay agreed, noting that herbivory on a local level possibly could induce the production of chemical defenses. He went on to stress the problem of interpreting data from herbivore food-preference observations. Data on food preferences provide information on the responses of herbivores to different plants, but not necessarily on the selective pressure that herbivores impose upon the plants. Clearly, more information will be required to elucidate the reciprocal interactions between reef herbivores and algae. 29 STUDYING COMMUNITY STRUCTURE IN REEF SYSTEMS Eldredge Bermingham (University of Georgia) introduced this general topic toward the end of the session by suggesting what he believed to be a major problem with coral reef community ecology. He felt that reef ecologists were often academic descendants of bird ecologists, but failed to follow their ornithological forefathers' passion for detailed natural history data. He stressed that lack of solid baseline data on coral reefs inhibits our ability to understand these systems. Both John Ebersole (University of Massachusetts at Boston) and Hixon agreed in turn that detailed observational data are essential for any convincing ecological study. In particular, long-term baseline data illustrating the constancy or variability of observed patterns are needed. However, Hixon questioned whether most (or even many) reef ecologists were academic descendants of bird ecologists and, more importantly, noted that reef ecologists have conducted far more rigorous experimental studies than most bird ecologists. This disparity is understandable. On one hand, many terrestrial systems (especially many avian communities) are amenable to long-term observation but not to experimental manipulation. On the other hand, most coral reefs are both geographically distant from most research institutions and difficult to observe for long periods due to diving constraints. However, some reef systems are small enough or the associated organisms sedentary enough to allow direct experimentation, as evidenced by the papers in this symposium. Moreover, artificial reefs constructed from either natural or manmade materials allow researchers to rigidly control the age and structure of reef habitats, allowing powerful experimental designs (e.g., Shulman, et al., 1983; Fitz,,et al., 1983;1W Wolf, et al., 1983). SYNTHESIS AND PROSPECTUS It seem~s appropriate to close this paper with an overview of our future needs in the'study of coral reef communities. It is clear that, despite the knowledge that has accrued since the first professional ecologists donned SCUBA gear in the 1950's, we have only begun to scratch the surface of the complexities of coral reef systems. The number of research possibilities is infinite; the field is wide open. Thus, rather than suggesting what we need to study in particular, I would like to review the ideas suggested during this workshop on how we might improve future studies. Based an criticisms leveled at current studies and pleas for future changes aired at various times during this workshop, three basic needs are evident. First, the complexities of coral-reef community structure cannot be elucidated without more extensive use of properly controlled field experiments. This suggestion is not new (e.g., Connell, 1974), and many reef ecologists have embraced experimentation enthusiastically. However, any experiment, no matter how elegantly designed and executed, cannot stand alone. As discussed above, detailed observational knowledge of a system is essential before field experiments can be properly interpreted. This brings us to a second need: long-tern field studies. Because (1) most coral reefs are located far from universities and other research 30 institutions, (2) most researchers cannot spend large blocks of time away from home, and (3) travel costs are becoming prohibitive, few current studies have followed long-term variations in reef systems. Moreover, current policy dictates that most research grants are limited to durations of several years at most. The net result is that most ecological studies are relatively static "snapshots" of intrinsically dynamic systems. Thus, our ability to understand the long - range consequences of various ecological interactions, and especially major environmental events (such as the urchin die-off discussed above), becomes severely limited. Likens (1983) recently has characterized the establishment and funding of long-term ecological studies in general to be a major priority for the future. Perhaps reef systems will one day be included in the National Science Foundation's Long-Term Ecological Research Program. In any event, the establishment and funding of facilities for detailed studies in prescribed local areas (such as NOAA's HYDROLAB in Salt River Canyon, St. Croix) or in local regions (such as NOAA's MAKALI'I submersible program in Hawaii and Johnston Island, the JOHNSON SEA-LINK submersible program in Florida and the Bahamas, and the submersible now available at the Discovery Bay Marine Laboratory, Jamaica) represent important first steps toward obtaining long-term data on deep reef systems. The third need is for future studies to include several study areas in order to determine the ubiquity of observed patterns. Most present studies occur at single sites, making widespread generalizations about coral reefs based on a single study tenuous at best (although this fact rarely stops us). This problem can be rectified by a single project being conducted at a number of locations, either sequentially by a single research team or simultaneously by several teams using standardized methods. Present controversies, such as the importance of urchins as grazers discussed above, could be resolved by such an approach. NOAAs proposal to establish a saturation facility which can be moved among different geographical locations for comparative surveys of reef biota and processes should facilitate standardized studies. Unfortunately, enacting these last two proposals may require changes in the current policies of granting agencies. The present system seems geared toward a fast-turnover "results-now" policy. While programs such as HYDROLAB provide the potential for long-tern studies of reef systems, few such facilities exist presently, precluding detailed comparative studies among a number of study sites. In any case, should the majority of reef ecologists concur that these needs are important, long-term observational and experimental studies over wide areas will be realized eventually. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Many thanks to the 'U.C. Irvine Committee on Faculty Travel (especially Peter Dixon) for funding my participation in the workshop; to the discussion participants for providing' written summaries of their contributions (my sincere apologies for any misquotes); to Marjorie Reaka and John Ebersole for constructive comments on my manuscripts; and, especially, to Marjorie Reaka for bringing us all together. 31 LITERATURE CITED Connell, J. H. 1974. Field Experiments in Marine Ecology," pp. 21-54. In: R. N. Mariscal (ed.), Experimental Marine Biology. Academic Press, N.Y. Fitz, H. C., M. L. Reaka, E. B. Bermingham, and N. G. Wolf. 1983. "Coral Recruitment at Moderate Depths: the Influence of Grazing," pp. 89-96. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp. SeTr. Undersea Res., Vol. 1T1). NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Hay, M. E. 1984. "Patterns of Fish and Urchin Grazing on Caribbean Coral Reefs: Are Previous Results Typical?" Ecology 65:446-454. Hixon, M. A., and W. N. Brostoff. 1983. "Damselfish as Keystone Species in Reverse: Intermediate Disturbance and Diversity of Reef Algae." Science 220:511-513. Lessios, H. A., P. W. Glynn, and D. R. Robertson. 1983. "Mass Mortalities of Coral Reef Organisms." Science 222:215. Likens, G. E. 1983. "A Priority for Ecological Research." Bull. Ecol. Soc. Amer. 64:234-243. Ogden, J. C., R. A. Brown, and N. Salesky. 1973. "Grazing by the Echinoid Diadema antillarum Philippi: Formation of Halos Around West Indian Patch Reefs." Science 182:715-717. Sammarco, P. W. 1980. "Diadema and Its Relationship to Coral Spat Mortality: Grazing, Competition, and Biological Disturbance." J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 45:245-272. Shulman, M. J., J. C. Ogden, J. P. Ebersole, W. N. McFarland, S. L. Miller, and N. G. Wolf. 1983. "Priority Effects in the Recruitment of Juvenile Coral Reef Fish." Ecology 64:1508-1513. Steneck, R. S. 1983. "Quantifying Herbivory on Coral Reefs: Just Scratching the Surface and Biting Off More Than We Can Chew," pp. 103-112. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol. 1( 1. NOAA Undersea Res. Progr., Rockville, Md. Wolf, N. G., E. B. Bermingham, and M. L. Reaka. 1983. "Relationships Between Fishes and Mobile Benthic Invertebrates on Coral Reefs." pp. 69-78. In: M. L. Reaka (ed.), The Ecologqy of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, Symp. Ser. Undersea Res., Vol.-T1l). NOAAndersea-es. Progr., Tockville, Md. Note added in proof: A recent update on the mass mortality of urchins can be found in: Lessios, H. A., D. R. Robertson, and J. D. Cubit. 1984. "Spread of Diadema Mass Mortality Through the Caribbean." Science 226:335-337. 32 SOME THOUGHTS ON THE PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE OF STUDIES ON CORAL REEF COMMUNITY METABOLISM S. V. Smith Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744 Marjorie Reaka, as editor of these two volumes on The Ecology of Deep and Shallow Coral Reefs, has kindly offered me the opportunit tocment on where I see studies orreef community metabolism to be coming from--and going to. The following thoughts arise as I consider, in particular, the seven papers loosely grouped in "The Organization of Reef Ecosystems" in these proceedi ngs. These papers have some aspect of the metabolic performance of coral reef communities or systems as a broad common theme. Within the context of that theme, all of the papers can trace their ancestry back to the "foundation studies" by Sargent and Austin (1949) at Rongelap Atoll and Odum and Odum (1955) at Enewetak Atoll. Earlier papers in the field of reef community metabolism can, of course, be identified. They have tended to remain lost in obscurity compared to the two I have cited. Over the intervening years, the field has matured and expanded sufficiently that citation of these important papers is beginning to drop off. Instead, I recognize increasing proportions of second (or third) generation citations, both in the papers on reef metabolism in these * ~volumes and in the general literature. These early papers dealt primarily with oxygen and carbon flux of reef- flat communities. Several of the papers in the present volumes and a survey of the literature suggest that we can move beyond a direct concern with average rates of oxygen and carbon fluxes in studies of reef metabolism. We now can speak with some confidence about the typical oxygen and carbon metabolic performance of reef-flat communities. It is, however, worth noting that we remain without a comparable large data base for other parts of coral-reef ecosystems. We are beginning to gain an appreciation for the relationships between variation in reef metabolism and the controlling roles of external physical, chemical, and biological variables. Many casual observations about reef metabolic response to external controls have led to erroneous or trivial conclusions. Clearly, controlled experiments and carefully designed field surveys need to be conducted in order to test hypotheses about metabolic responses to controlling variables. The study of nutrient fluxes in relation to community metabolism has, perhaps, been more extensive than other aspects of controls on community metabolism. This work became prominent during the Symbios Expedition to Enewetak Atoll (Johannes, et al., 1972). Studies of nutrient flux continue, and most of the papers on ree~f m tbolism in these volumes at least touch on this subject. in particular, there is an interest in the effects of both quantity and quality * ~of nutrient supply on reef metabolism and in the interactive roles of various communities (especially macrofauna/meiofauna/microfauna in interreef soft- 33 sediment communities) in nutrient processing of the total system. From my own 1 bias, I perceive the need to "balance the books" of nutrient fluxes in entireW reef systems as a recurrent--and important--theme. Solar radiation is clearly fundamental to the community metabolism of reefs, yet our understanding of metabolic responses to light remains poor. Traditionally, most studies of coral reef metabolism have not adequately considered either the quantity or the quality of incident solar radiation, light attenuation through the water column, or loss of radiant energy through back-scattering. This situation is beginning to change. We see among the papers in these volumes several attempts to evaluate the metabolic response of reefs to light. More work is needed. Finally, I observe that students of coral reefs tend to emphasize the unique characteristics which make reefs such pleasurable places to work. I suggest that we have a great deal more to learn, as ecologists, by considering coral reefs within the spectrum of other ecosystems than we will ever learn by treating reefs as unique. LITERATURE CITED Johannes, R. E., and the Project Symbios Team. 1972. "The Metabolism of Some Coral Reef Communities: A Team Study of Nutrient and Energy Flux at Eniwetok." BioScience 22:541-543. Odum, H. T., and E. P. Odum. 1955. "Trophic Structure and Productivity of a Windward Coral Reef Community on Eniwetok Atoll." Ecol. Monogr. 25:291-320. Sargent, M. C., and T. S. Austin. 1949. "Organic Productivity of an Atoll." Trans. A~mer. Geophys. Union 30:245-249. 34 CHAPTER III. CONTRIBUTED PAPERS Figure 1 Further studies of deep coral reefs and sea mounts have been possible through the use of submersibles such as NOAA's MAKALI'I, which is shown while in transit on its launch, retrieval, and transport (LRT) vehicle (fig. 1). During launch, the LRT is submerged with the submersible; at 50 feet the submersible is released to continue its descent for research (fig. 2). Figure 2 35 Figure 3 Figure 4 NOAA also supports research on the biology of deep water communities in various localities through the deep diving bell facilities operated off the R/V SEAHAWK (figs. 3, 4) which is based at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington. An additional habitat is being constructed for use in research on marine communities off the southern California coast (fig. 5). Figure 5 36 RECRUITMENT OF YOUNG CORAL REEF FISHES FROM THE PLANKTON William N. McFarland Section of Ecology and Systematics Cornell University Ithaca, New York 14853 John C. Ogden West Indies Laboratory Fairleigh Dickinson University Teague Bay St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands 00820 ABSTRACT This paper examines the widely held view that the planktonic eggs and/or larvae of most coral reef fishes represent mechanisms that reduce predation and/or serve for dispersal of the young. Data on spawning, the pelagic phase, and recruitment of coral reef fishes are examined. Recruitment represents the successful end product of a complex suite of adult and larval behaviors and physical conditions that directly affect survival of offspring. Although considerable data are available, in no single species has the cycle from spawning to recruitment been clearly documented. As a result, assessing the various hypotheses that attempt to explain the almost universal presence of a pelagic larval phase in coral reef fishes remains tenuous. Predation on young and ultimate dispersal are both potent selective factors. The high degree of variation in reproduction, larval characteristics, and recruitment amongst coral reef species implies, however, that these two selective factors undoubtedly vary in importance among species. INTRODUCTION Virtually all coral reef fishes produce numerous offspring and release either their eggs or larvae into the offshore plankton (Breder and Rosen, 1966; Ehrlich, 1975; Goldman and Talbot, 1976; Sale, 1977, 1978a; Johannes, 1978; Barlow, 1981). There is one known exception, the pomacen-trid Acanthochromis polyacanthus; members of this species brood their young and disperse them directly onto the reef (Robertson, 1973). Also, some apogonids (mouth brooders) and some brotulids (live bearers) have completely eliminated the planktonic larval phase. Considering the high diversity of reef fishes (Connell, 1978; Sale, 1980) and their numerous ecological roles (Hobson, 1974; Sale, 1978b; Smith, 1978), it is astonishing that so many species use the same reproductive strategy. Indeed, the central position of a larval pelagic existence in coral reef fishes led Helfman (1978) to wonder whether answers to the high species diversity of coral reef fish assemblages "lie in the plankton." One major hypothesis favors the view that community composition is dependent on the chance recruitment of each species from the plankton when space becomes available (Russell, et al., 37 1974; Sale and Dybdahi , 1975, 1978; Sale, 1977, 1978a). Thus, species compositI on a reef should change through time, but over years as opposed to centuriesV or longer. A contrasting hypothesis suggests that species composition is more deterministic and dependent on competition between adults for resources (Smith, 1973, 1978; Smith and Tyler, 1973). Recruitment from the plankton, therefore, would not primarily affect diversity but the abundance of each species over time. No doubt there is truth in each view, but the controversy continues with additional participants (Gladfelter and Gladfelter, 1978; Holles, 1978; Talbot, et al., 1978; Gladfelter, et al., 1980; Ogden and Ebersole, 1981; Shulman, l98TV-Abrams , 1984). Given the virtually universal use of a pelagic egg and/or larval phase and its potential significance to explanations of the high diversity amongst assemblages of coral reef fishes, investigations of the reproductive activities of adults, the disposition of their eggs and larvae at sea, and the effect(s) of currents on the dispersal of these propagules are, therefore, not inconsequen- tial. If, for example, the recruitment of each species is not consistent over a reasonable time scale, then the high diversity of coral reef fishes could not be maintained. In general, data about recruitment processes in coral reef fishes are sparse and must often be gleaned from literature that primarily deals with other aspects of coral reef fish biology. Over the last few years, however, efforts have been directed toward recruitment in particular species. Given the central importance of recruitment to coral reef fish community structure, we expect that larval biology at sea will be explored in great detail over the __ coming decade. Here we summarize what is presently known about recruitment andV closely related processes in coral reef fishes. REPRODUCT ION Spawning- activities in coral reef fishes vary considerably. Only over the last 10 years have sufficient direct observations accumulated to provide a basis for understanding how the spawning act might be adaptive. Many reef species spawn over long periods of each year, but they usually show maximum reproduction in either spring and/or fall (Munro, et al.,, 1973). In Munro's study, which examined the state of the gonad as annde~x of reproductive potential, over half of the species were active for longer than 6 months. Labrids (Warner, et al., 1975) and somne haemulids (McFarland, 1980, 1982) spawn over the entire y`iar-,-ut many species have highly restricted spawning seasons. Between these extremes, however, some species produce all of their eggs in a single or in very few reproductive acts, while others rely on a more consistent release which involves the release of fewer eggs during each 