Julia Roberts is an American actress and producer. An Academy Award-winning actress and one of Hollywood’s top stars, she is one of the most profitable actresses in the industry. She is known for her films such as ‘Steel Magnolias’, ‘Pretty Woman’ and ‘Erin Brockovich’.

Roberts is also known for being a fan of purchasing real estate. She has two homes in the desirable Point Dume area of Malibu, California, a Victorian Revival-style home in San Francisco and a house in Kauai, Hawaii. The two houses in Malibu are 20 minutes away from each other and are located in an area that is much sought after.

The Houses in Hawaii

In the year 2011, Julia Roberts bought a house in Kauai, Hawaii for a little over 13 million dollars. She sold the house after 5 years, in 2016 for 28 million dollars.

The property comprises not one but two houses, detached from one another. The estate sits on a site with more than 2 acres of land. Together, the two houses offer a living space of 3800 square feet. The houses are referred to as the main house and the guest house. And each house has a covered porch overlooking the scenic views the land offers.

The main house is painted red and has three bathrooms and six bedrooms, while the detached guest house has a single bathroom and one bedroom.

The property has 213 feet of beach frontage. The guest bathroom is also aided with an outdoor shower.

The main house offers a spectacular view of mauka and makai, meaning the sea and the mountains. The house’s design was borrowed from Mabel and Elsie Wilco’s Mahamoku. The kitchen is galley styled which means it consists of two parallel runs of units forming a central corridor for work.

The high beamed ceiling and big sash windows give the whole space a very spacious look. There are a lot of windows in the house and the big sash openings drop down into a double wall. Simultaneously the upstairs utilizes screed windows and doors.

Along with many amenities, the property offers enough space to expand according to the user’s preferences.

The Houses in Malibu

The dwelling is approximately 6200 square feet in area. Featuring five floors, the house has five bedrooms and four and a half bathrooms. Roberts also owns the house that is just across the street.

The second home is located about 20 minutes away and has three bedrooms and one bathroom.

The interiors of the house are very vibrant. Inside the front entryway is all cleaned line. The house is fitted with hardwood floors and has stark white walls. Custom mouldings and coffered ceilings, along with the bay windows add the to home’s historic charm. The fireplace of the living room is flanked by built-in shelves. The second fireplace is in the formal dining room, situated in one of the ends.

The kitchen features a long banquette style breakfast bar and delightful custom cabinetry in the pop of olive green. Additionally, there are two cosy lounges, other fun features of the residence. Both of them with marble fireplaces and views of the hilly neighbourhood. Furthermore, the all-white home office has walls of built-in shelves and cabinetry.

The master bedroom is located on the top floor. And is adorned with a skylight as well as a bay window, perfect to capture the scenic sunset in the hilly site. Several balconies are provided in the house to arrest the views of the beautiful neighbourhood. Extra outdoor space is also offered and the back tiered patio, which has a spacious outdoor dining space.

The Houses in San Francisco

The place Julia Roberts bought is a residence that was designed by the architect Sylvian Schnaittacher. The house was built in the 1900s and was remodelled later by John Wheatman. The layout features the views of the Golden Gate Bridge and the San Francisco Bay from the family room, kitchen, and master bedroom suite.

Julia Roberts purchased this century-old Victorian-style home in San Francisco in the year 2020. The house sits on a plot roughly one acre and is situated across the street from her other home.

Initially listed for 10.25 million dollars. A trust tied to her paid 8.3 million dollars for this old Victorian Revival-style home in Presidio Heights neighbourhood. The same trust purchased most of her country spanning collection of real estate, including a scenic ranch in Malibu and a West Village cop in New York.

This 6245 square foot space includes a two-car tandem garage, five bedrooms, four and a half bathrooms across five storeys along with a wine room, an outdoor dining space and a garden. Additionally, there is a bonus room on the top floor.

The shingled exterior and partial slate roof offer a different feel. The interiors are brim with coffered ceilings and coffered ceilings.

References: