If you are curious about where to watch and stream 101 Dalmatians 2: Patch’s London Adventure online for free, then your search ends here. Patch is a Dalmatian puppy who belongs to the Radcliffe family of 101 Dalmatians. He wishes to be different and looks up to his hero Thunderbolt. He faces danger soon. What will he do to survive?

Here’s where you can watch 101 Dalmatians 2: Patch’s London Adventure online.

Where can you watch and stream 101 Dalmatians 2: Patch’s London Adventure?

You can watch and stream 101 Dalmatians 2: Patch’s London Adventure on Disney+. This action-adventure movie is directed by Brian Smith and Jim Kammerud and is currently available for streaming on Disney+ through a subscription.

Sign up for Disney+

The cast includes Bobby Lockwood as Patch, Barry Bostwick as Thunderbolt, Susanne Blakeslee as Cruella de Vil, Jason Alexander as Lil’ Lightning, Martin Short as Lars, Samuel West as Pongo, Kath Soucie as Perdita, Tim Bentinck as Roger Radcliffe, Jodi Benson as Anita Radcliffe, Jeff Bennett as Jasper, Maurice LaMarche as Horace Baddun, Mary MacLeod as Nanny, Ben Tibber as Lucky, Eli Russel Linnetz as Rolly, Kasha Kropinski as Penny, Michael Lerner as Producer, Jim Cummings as Dirty Dawson, Michael Gough as Sergeant Tibbs, Frank Welker as the Captain, and more.

How to watch 101 Dalmatians 2: Patch’s London Adventure and stream online

You need to buy a Disney+ subscription to watch and stream the above-mentioned movie.

Sign up for Disney+

The ad-supported Disney+ subscription plan costs $7.99 a month. You can also opt for an ad-free plan which costs $10.99 a month and $109.99 a year.

The official synopsis for 101 Dalmatians 2: Patch’s London Adventure reads:

“Being one of 101 takes its toll on Patch, who doesn’t feel unique. When he’s accidentally left behind on moving day, he meets his idol, Thunderbolt, who enlists him on a publicity campaign.”

For more Disney+ updates, check out where to stream Inhumans. Also, how to watch The Incredibles online.