What’s it like to live in Stretford? If you’re considering a move to the south Manchester suburb, whether you’re buying through Shared Ownership or just checking out the location, we’re here to help you get a sense for living in the area.

Recently ranked among the coolest neighbourhoods in the UK by The Sunday Times, Stretford is fast developing a reputation as a great place to live for both young professionals and families. With a £4bn investment in regeneration, now’s the time to get into this up-and-coming suburb of Manchester.

There are the obvious advantages – great connectivity to the city centre via tram and bus, plenty of green open spaces, plus property without the premium price tag. But what is there to tempt you to put down roots in Stretford?

Ways to spend your free time outdoors in Stretford

Whether you’re a young professional who wants ways to spend your free weekends in the fresh air or a young family looking for activities, Stretford has plenty to offer.

There’s beautiful Longford Park, the largest in the Trafford area, which is home to plenty of good walks, playgrounds, plus sports facilities like a basketball court, bowling green and athletics stadium. There’s even a café and community allotment.

In Victoria Park, Stretford’s other major green space, you’ll find more sports facilities, including hockey, a football field, climbing wall and scooter track. You could join the Pétanque club – a French game a bit like boules. The local club has represented the UK internationally. There’s another café plus a community space for hire here too.

If sports are your thing, in addition to the park facilities there’s Stretford Sports Village which provides gym, fitness suite and swimming plus the odd roller disco.

There’s been plenty of investment in the Bridgewater Canal recently, creating beautiful spaces along the basins in the city centre. The canal stretches through Stretford, providing peaceful walks and footpaths for riding your bike. You can even step straight out of your Shared Ownership home at GECKO’s Edgewater development and on to the footpath.

Stretford events

You’ve got easy access to Old Trafford Cricket Ground, used as a stadium for a range of all-star events, from Foo Fighters to Green Day in 2024. Or grab your picnic and have an afternoon watching international cricket just a stone’s throw from home.

The Stretfest is organised each year and provides a real reason to head into the centre, with activities from family craft sessions to local history talks spanning the shopping area, parks and “the strip”. In 2024 for the second time, the festival featured a popular “pump track”, creating a place for BMX-ers to ride and fine-tune their skills.

Stretford Socials are held each month in the town centre, attracting even more independent retailers and plenty of other activities.

Stretford Public Hall is a space for a range of events, from community cinema to yoga, dance classes and children’s theatre lessons. You’ll also find live music nights and arts activities at this thriving community hub.

Eating, drinking and shopping in Stretford

A revamp of the old Arndale Centre gifted the area Stretford Mall. It mixes the usual high street names with local independents, and covers clothes shopping, places to stop for food and drink, plus well-known supermarkets. The current regeneration work is focused on this part of the centre, improving the public spaces and attracting new businesses to make this a thriving part of the neighbourhood.

And of course, you’re just a couple of miles from the Trafford Centre, where you can eat, drink and shop the day away.

If you’re looking for places to eat and drink, try Stretford Canteen. Think of it as a posh but not snobby place serving bar snacks and small plates. Keep an eye out for its Prix Fixe (that’s fixed price to you and me) menu, which is great value.

For a place to grab a drink after work or at the weekend, BrewChimp has opened its largest location in Stretford. They serve great beers, wines and spirits so there’s something whatever your usual tipple. Atmosphere comes courtesy of live music, and they host quiz nights, poker nights and nominate Fridays for dancing!

On Stretford’s doorstep

One of many brilliant things about Stretford is its connectivity to the city. With the bright lights of Salford Quays and Media City on your doorstep – as little as 19 minutes away by Metro – you can take advantage of the day- and nightlife there. From culture at The Lowry to beer and booze at The Dockyard or Joule, you’ll never be short of entertainment.

Foodies should try Kargo Mkt at Quayside, a food hall which features 20 independent kitchens showcasing food from around the world. Or head to The Black Friar for traditional pub vibes and amazing Sunday roasts.