1. STRONG COMMUNITY TIES

Stretford has become more and more popular over the last few years as the place to be for young professionals or young families who want a bit of outside space for the kids.

It’s known for being a one-time home of Morrissey, but Stretford is so much more than that. Best known for its brilliant location on the ford of the River Mersey - hence the name, street-ford), the town has an outstanding sense of community everywhere you look.

It’s a town where locals know one another and meet up to host events, protect local landmarks or decorate the advent calendar every year.

Plus, the town has a claim to fame as the famous artist, L.S.Lowry, was born in Stretford back in 1887.

2. AN ARRAY OF ACTIVITIES AND SPORT

Manchester United and Lancashire County Cricket Club have had their home in Stretford since the late 1800s, so any football fanatics will

have a ball with all this on their doorstep. The Emirates Old Trafford houses a museum and offers stadium tours too.

When it comes to shopping, Stretford really does have the cream of the crop in the north west with intu Trafford Centre located close by. With free parking, restaurants, a cinema and much more, it’s a great day out for everyone. Next door is Sea Life Manchester and there’s even a Legoland Discovery Centre to keep the kids entertained.

3. GREEN OPEN SPACES AND CANALS

Locals are lucky as there’s plenty of green, open spaces around Stretford, from Moss Park, Victoria Park to Longford Park on the border of Chorlton and Stretford. The town was originally an agricultural village due to the close proximity of the town to the Manchester Ship Canal, then with the development of Trafford Park, the town substantially grew.

The Bridgewater Canal also runs through the town, so there’s plenty of walks and green space to keep locals active.

4. YOUR PICK OF GREAT PLACES TO EAT AND DRINK

On top of the well-known food restaurants you can find at intu Trafford Centre, there is also a thriving food and drink scene in Stretford, from

the popular Barton Road pubs such as The Melville Pub to the independent Italian restaurant, Emilia’s Della Roma on Davyhulme Road East, with the Brew Chimp on Barton Road.

5. POPULAR AREA WITH GREAT TRANSPORT LINKS

There are a range of houses to choose from in Stretford, with detached, semi-detached, terraced homes and flats / apartments all on offer. The area is popular with city commuters and young couples due the great transport links into Manchester city centre. For the most up-to-date knowledge on the area and to find out what properties are on the market now, please feel free to call us 0161 865 9220.