Regarded as one of the greatest singers in American history, Otis Redding met a horrific end when his plane crashed ferrying him from one performance to another.

The Dock of the Bay hitmaker was travelling from Cleveland, Ohio, to Madison in Wisconsin after stopping for a TV appearance in the city back in 1967, playing two nights at Leo’s Casino nearby.

His ill-fated final television appearance was on the Upbeat show, before Otis and his band took his private Beechcraft H18 airplane to their next gig at the Factory nightclub in Wisconsin.

READ MORE: Steven Spielberg’s daughter ditches 'embarrassing' adult career her dad 'expected'

Before take-off, the star – who was only 26 years old when he lost his life – called his wife and children to update them on his location and plans.

Redding was just 18 when he met his future wife Zelma Atwood. The pair tied the knot in 1961 and welcomed four children together – Dexter, Demetria, Karla and Otis III.

But Zelma would soon be left a widow as Otis died in a truly horrific way.

On that fateful night, Otis’ plane took off despite heavy rain and fog plaguing the area. Four miles from its destination at Truax Field in Madison, everything was running smoothly, and the pilot radioed ahead for permission to land.

But it was not meant to be. The plane nosedived into Lake Monona, killing everyone on-board except Ben Cauley, member of the band Bar-Kays.

Ben, who was sleeping just before the crash, woke to see one of his co-stars shouting: “Oh no!” while looking out of the window. Cauley unbuckled his seat belt and was plunged into the freezing lake, clutching hold of a seat cushion to stay afloat in the frigid waters.

But Ben couldn’t swim, and therefore couldn’t rescue anyone else. Instead, he watched them slowly drowning and freezing to death, screaming for help.

Along with Otis, guitarist Jimmy King, saxophonist Phalon Jones, organ player Ronnie Caldwell and drummer Carl Cunningham also lost their lives, along with the band’s valet, Matthew Kelly.

Pilot Richard Fraser also died in the accident.

Unsurprisingly, the accident traumatised Ben, who had nightmares about the incident for 50 years afterwards. He admitted to Memphis Commercial Appeal that he still “feels the rush of the lake’s icy water, the chill of fear, and the helplessness and hurt that followed”.

He told the publication: “I didn’t know it, but my head was swollen and bleeding, and I remember I had only one shoe.”

Have you joined Threads? Follow Daily Star to keep up to date on all things showbiz here

Explaining: “I saw Carl come out of the water, I saw Matt come up on the other side.” While Ronnie cried out for help, the stars eventually succumbed to the icy depths.

The rescue crew made it to the site of the accident in 17 minutes – quick enough to save Ben but not the others.

The cause of the crash was never determined.

Otis Redding’s family has sadly continued to be besieged by tragedy, with his son Otis Redding III passing away in April 2023 aged just 59.

His family confirmed the star lost his cancer battle, branding it a “huge loss” for the family and the world.

Otis had formed funk band The Reddings with his brother Dexter and cousin Mark Lockett, recording six legendary albums over the years after following in Otis Jr’s footsteps.