1892 – The Felton Covered Bridge Was Built

In 1892, the Felton Covered Bridge was built through a Brown truss structural system that is approximately 80 feet long. The Felton Covered Bridge became a California Historical Landmark in 1957, was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1973, and had a major restoration in 1987 after being damaged in storms in the winter of 1982.

1880 – Camp Felton Was Founded

In 1880, Camp Felton was founded. Over time the original camp location has changed to a Felton Grove Auto Camp In 1922, to the Felton Grove Resort In 1937.

The Founding Of Felton, California

In 1868, the town of Felton, California, north of Santa Cruz in the redwood forest, was founded by Edward Stanly and Isaac Graham. Historians believe that the town was named by either Charles Norton Felton (1828-1914), a businessman and civic leader from Yuba County, and others offer evidence it was John Brooks Felton (1827-1877), a lawyer and mayor of Oakland.

Mountain Charlie Helped John Frémont Pass Through Mexican Authorities In Big Trees And Monterey

In 1847, Charles Henry McKiernan, who had gotten his nickname of “Mountain Charlie” from engaging in hand to hand combat with a California grizzly bear and winning, helped guide John Charles Frémont from the Big Trees wooded area in the future town of Felton to the capital of Mexican California in Monterey.

The Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary Exploration Center Of Santa Cruz, California

The Monterey Bay Marine Sanctuary is funded through the federal s, which is run by the U.S. Department is Commerce.

The Seymour Marine Discovery Center

The Seymour Marine Discovery Center is a musuem, which was formed as the public education component of the Joseph M. Long Marine Laboratory and the Coastal Science Campus of the University of California Santa Cruz.

The Santa Cruz Musuem Of Art And History

The Santa Cruz Musuem of Art and History is located in downtown Santa Cruz, next to the original 1972 location of the Santa Cruz History Museum, within the former Santa Cruz Hall of Records building called “The Octagon”. The Santa Cruz Historical Society, which was founded in 1954, and the Art Musuem of Santa Cruz County, which was formed in 1981, decided to build a joint art and history musuem, originally called the McPherson Center for Art and History, at the site of the former Santa Cruz jail that was destroyed by the 1989 Loma Pieta Earthquake.

The Santa Cruz Museum Of Natural History

The Santa Cruz Museum Of Natural History is within a former Carnage Library.

The Santa Cruz Surfing Musuem – The World’s First Surfing Musuem

In 1986, the Santa Cruz Surfing Musuem, the world’s first surfing musuem, was established inside of the Mark Abbott Memorial Lighthouse in Santa Cruz, California.

The cliff outside of the musuem grounds hosts various surfers throughout the day.

Outside of the musuem is a plague that honors the three Hawaiian Princes whom were the first people to ever surf in Santa Cruz, California.

1954 – The Santa Cruz Historical Society Was Formed

In 1954, the Santa Cruz Historical Society was formed. In the 1970s, the Santa Cruz Historical Society Establishment their first musuem within the former Santa Cruz Hall of Records building.

June 22, 2019 – The 25th Anniversary Of “Woodies On The Wharf”

On June 22, 2019, the Santa Cruz City Parks and Recreation hosted the 25th Anniversary of “Woodies on the Wharf”.

The festival hosted hundreds of custom made antique cars called “Woodies”.

One of the custom cars was a parody U.S. Mail vehicle that was redone as “U.S. Male”.

Another mini vehicle featured was the 1947 Crosley. The “Crosley Cars” were a series of vehicles that were developed by Ohio businessman Powell Crosley, a man who made his success through radio and appliance manufacturing.

In 1939, Powel Crosley began having cars manufactured in Richmond Indiana. Another plant was established to develop vehicles. However, sales began to decline in 1950, to only seven thousand vehicles, and when demand dropped to only two thousand vehicles in 1952 production on the “Crosley Cars” ceased.

I got to meet Bob Pearson who created various surfboards for the actors of the movie “Chasing Mavericks”.

William “Bill” Maher At The Santa Cruz Civic Auditorium

On Febuary 9, 2019 I got to see political commentator and comedian William “Bill” Maher at the Santa Cruz Civic Auditorium.

The Santa Cruz Civic Center has been the host of several other events over the decades such as one with the Dali Lama.

The 150th Anniversary Of The Founding Of The City Of Santa Cruz, California

October 2016, marked the 150th Anniversary of the City of Santa Cruz, California. During that year, the author Philip Andrew Hamilton worked as an office assistant for Santa Cruz City Parks and Recreation and assisted with the 150th celebrations by applying for Cal-Fire, and various other permits for the event.

The 100 Year Anniversary Of The Santa Cruz Wharf

The year of 2014 marked the 100 year anniversary of the Santa Cruz Wharf.

1965 – The University Of California Santa Cruz Began It’s First Classes

In the 1950s, planning for the University of California Santa Cruz chapter began. Planners traveled to the redwood forest in Felton, California to the beaches in Western Santa Cruz. After witnessing a scenic view from the top of a hill, in Western Santa Cruz, it was decided that the campus would be developed there. In 1964, construction began and in 1965 classes were first held, with 650 students, in the eastern athletic field area.

The first UC Santa Cruz class participated in a protest against the ongoing Vietnam War.

1958 – A Levee Was Constructed In Santa Cruz, California

1950s – The Wetsuit Was Invented By World War II Veteran Jack O’Neill

In the 1950s, after serving as a U.S. Navy fighter pilot during World War II, Jack O’Neill developed a wetsuit which made “cold-water surfing” popular. In 1959, after acquiring word wide acclaim for his invention, Jack O’Neill opened a surf shop in Santa Cruz, California.

The building where the original O’Neill surf store was located was demolished. In the place of the former surf shop a Jack O’Neill Restarunt was established.

On June 7, 2017, Jack O’Neill passed away, at the age of 94, at his beachfront home in Santa Cruz, California.

1937 – Larry And Ruth Lane Purchase The Quail Hollow Ranch Of Santa Cruz, California

In 1937, Larry and Ruth Lane, the owners of the Sunset Magazine, purchased the Quail Hollow Ranch Of Santa Cruz, California.

August 14, 1936 – The Theatre Del Mar Opens To The Public

On August 14, 1936, the Theatre Del Mar of Santa Cruz, California opened its doors to the public.

1936 – The Founding Of The Santa Cruz Surfing Club

In 1936, fifty one years after three Hawaiian Princes surfed in Santa’s Cruz California for their first time, the Santa Cruz Surfing Club was established.

The Santa Cruz Surfing Club is still organized in present day and is one of the oldest continually running club of Santa Cruz.

A statue was built, near the lighthouse on Westcliff, in honor of the Santa Cruz surfers and the local Surfing Club.

1914 – The Opening Of The Santa Cruz Wharf

In 1914, the current Santa Cruz Wharf was constructed. The city has three wharfs in the 1880s which fell into disuse over the decades.

1911 – The Sesnon House Of Was Built By William And Mary Porter Sesnon

The Sesnon House was constructed in 1911 in Santa Cruz County, California.

Inside the home are various historical photos of the building.

In the backyard the remnants of the Chinese temple remain.

In present day, the Senson Historical House is part of Cabrillo College.

1911- The Porter Memorial Library Was Established

The Porter Memorial Library was constructed in 1911 to honor the legacy of the Pioneer Porter family that inhabited parts of Santa Cruz, California.

George Keating Porter moved moved to California in 1849 and arrived in Soquel in 1853.

Benjamin Franklin Porter established a tannery with his cousin and became director of the Santa Cruz National Bank.

The Pino Alto home was built in 1911 and is still at Cabrillo College In present day.

1907 – One Of The First Amusement Parks In California Established At The Santa Cruz Beach Boardwalk

In 1907, the Santa Cruz Beach Boardwalk was built as one of the first amusement parks in the state of California. In 1911 a carousel was established within the park, and in 1924 the Giant Dipper Roller Coaster was added to the park’s attractions. The Santa Cruz Beach Boardwalk is one of a few amusement parks, such as the one in Santa Monica, that still exist on the coast of California.

June 22, 1906 – The Neptune Casino Of Santa Cruz, California Burnt Down

On June 22, 1906 the iconic Neptune Casino of Santa Cruz, California burnt down less than two years after the structure was built.

1904 – The First Neptune Casino Was Constructed

In 1904, the Neptune Casino of Santa Cruz was designed by Fred Swanton and constructed. This structure was the first grande casino of the beach town.

1885 – Three Hawaiian Princes Become The First People To Ever Surf In Santa Cruz, California

In 1885, David, Edward and Jonah, were three princes who were all adopted sons of the Hawaiian King David Kalakaua and Hawaiian Queen Consort Esther Julia Kapi’olani, came to Santa Cruz, California to surf, for their first time, in the continental United States.

1882 – The Santa Cruz Hall Of Records Was Established In “The Octagon”

In 1882, a Hall of Records was established in Santa Cruz, California within “The Octagon”; which was modeled after a monetary gold piece first minted in San Francisco in 1851.

“The Octagon” served as the Santa Cruz Hall of Records until the 1968, the year the records was moved to the new Santa Cruz County Government Center.

1866 – The Chartering Of The Town Of Santa Cruz, California

Santa Cruz was incorporated in 1866 as a town under the laws of the State of California and received its first charter as a city in 1876. At that time the city was governed by a Mayor and Common Council consisting of four members.

In 1907, the citizens voted for a new charter designating a Mayor as chief executive and a City Council consisting of seven members. Subsequent charters gave a Mayor and four Commissioners both executive and administrative powers. At that time the city was divided into five departments: Public Affairs, Revenue and Finance, Public Health and Safety, Public Works, and Streets and Parks.

In 1948, the City of Santa Cruz adopted a new City Charter. This charter established a Council-Manager form of government, with a Mayor and six Councilmembers setting policy for the city and a city manager serving as the chief administrator of those policies. The Charter, with amendments, is still in existence today.

1850s – The Evergreen Cemetary Of Santa Cruz, California Was Established

In the 1850s, the Evergreen Cemetery, one of the oldest continually operating cemeteries in the state of California, was established.

1791 – Misión la exaltación de la Santa Cruz Established By Father Fermín Francisco de Lasuén

1769 – Spanish Explorer Don Gaspar de Portola Explores The Area Of Santa Cruz, California

In 1769, the Spanish explorer Don Gaspar de Portola discovered the land area which is now known as the City of Santa Cruz. When he came upon the beautiful flowing river, he named it San Lorenzo in honor of Saint Lawrence. He called the rolling hills above the river Santa Cruz, which means holy cross.

March 21, 1958 – The Almaden Air Force Station Begins Searching For Soviet Nuclear Bombers

On March 21, 1958, the Almaden Air Force Station began the detection of Soviet nuclear bomber planes that were expected to be deployed to the west coast of the United States, in the event a nuclear war began.

During the duration of the base two different types of radar stations were installed.

1890s – The Henry Miller Summer Home Was Built On Mount Madonna

In the 1890s, the Henry Miller Summer home was built towards the summit of Mount Madonna.

Presently, the ruins of the former Henry Miller House is in the grounds of the Mount Madonna Park.

George Lewis Colegrove – A Union Veteran Who Was Formerly A Stagecoach Driver Over The Santa Cruz Mountains

George Lewis Colegrove served in the Illinois Infantry as a wagoner for the Union Army. However, a broken leg shortened his term of military service to less than a year. In 1863, George Lewis Colegrove moved to California and on July 15, 1869, he drove his first stagecoach over the Santa Cruz Mountains.

Mountain Charlie Road – One Of The First American Roads Built Along The Santa Cruz Mountains

In 1858, the Mountain Charlie Road was one of the first American roads built along the Santa Cruz Mountains, after the Mexican-American War, after the Santa Cruz Turnpike Company awarded a contract to Charles Henry McKiernan. After Charles Henry McKiernan built a home and a road in the Santa Cruz Mountains, he engaged in a bear fight, and became known locally as “Mountain Charlie”.

Settler Charlie Henry McKiernan’s Cabin In The Santa Cruz Mountians

In 1850, settler Charlie Henry McKiernan, also known as Mountain Charley, built a cabin in the area that would become known as Patchen, California.

The Amah Mutsun Native Americans Of Mount Umunhum

The Amah Mutsun Native Americans named one of the Santa Cruz Mountains “Umunhum” after the hummingbirds that they saw within the landscape. Various religious ceremonies were held by the natives at the summit of the mountain.

On June 18, 1452, during the Age of Discovery, Pope Nicholas V issued to King Alfonso V of Portugal the papal bull Dum Diversas, which instructed the Portuguese crown “to invade, capture, vanquish, and subdue all Saracens, pagans, and other enemies of Christ, to put them into perpetual slavery, and to take away all their possessions and property.”

In 1454, another bull titled Romanus Pontifex furthered that thinking, ordering the crown of Portugal to conduct the seizure of non-Christian lands in parts of Africa and restating the legitimacy of enslaving non-Christian people.

In 1823, the United States Supreme Court unanimously decided in Johnson v. McIntosh (8 Wheat., 543) that the United States of America had garnered dominion over all native lands.

In 1850s, during the “Gold Rush Era”, California Governor Peter Burnett continued the centuries old notion that Indians were unworthy of basic human rights, after he issued extermination orders targeting the Amah Mutsun, and other tribes throughout the state that were recently subjected by the Spanish led California Missions.

In 1990, the Amah Mutsun Tribal Band was formed and is recognized by the California state government.

The Formation Of The Santa Cruz Mountain Range

The Santa Cruz Mountains are largely the result of compressive uplift caused by a leftward bend of the San Andreas Fault. The Salinian Block basement rocks are overlain by Miocene rock strata of the Lompico Sandstone, the Vaqueros Sandstone and the Santa Margarita Formation.

California Pioneers Of Santa Clara Screening Of Documentary On The San Jose Electric Tower

Pedro de Saisset was a Frenchman who moved to America and saw the San José Electric tower before designing the Eiffel Tower. Thomas Wohlmut, a San José historian, created a documentary on the connection between the San José Electric Tower and the French Eiffel Tower which was first premiered at a meeting of the California Pioneers of Santa Clara on June 1st, 2019.

The Intel Museum

In the 1990s, Jean Jones, an employee of the Intel Corporation, founded the “Intel Museum”. The museum was placed within Intel’s Robert Norton Noyce Building, a structure with their corporate headquarters in Santa Clara, California.

In 1957, physicist Robert Norton Noyce founded Fairchild Semiconductor. A decade later, in 1968, physicists Gordon Earle Moore and Robert Norton Noyce founded Intel with a staff of fifty employees.

Robert Noyce stayed with the Intel company as they progressively created faster computer chips.

In 1981, Robert Noyce argued that devices such as calculators and computers enhance peoples’ lives, rather than making people less intelligent, ad some argued since a machine is doing work for the person. Robert Noyce worked with Intel until his passing in the 1990s.

Robert Noyce left a legacy in the computing industry through the invention of the integrated circuit.

Gordon Moore left a legacy through his creation of “Moore’s Law”.

The museum outlines the progress of the company through the decades, since its founding in the 1960s.

In 2015, During the 50th Anniversary of the integrated circuit, Gordon Moore discussed the accuracy of the “Moore’s Law” that he formulated.

Charles Harmon’s Painting Of The Santa Clara Valley Shown At The “1915 World’s Fair” In San Francisco

In 1915, Charles Harmon was commissioned to paint the Santa Clara Valley for the upcoming World’s Fair in San Francisco. The painting has moved to various locations since the end of the fair.

Currently, the painting is displayed within the jury room within the Santa Clara Courthouse in San Jose, California.

1866 – Gold Rush Pioneer Samuel Jamison Built The Jamison-Brown House In Santa Clara

In 1866, Samuel Jamison, who arrived in California during the Gold Rush, constructed the original house, a vernacular Italianate style home, on 50-acres on Coffin Road (near Great America Boulevard. and Highway 101). The original distinctive corner quoins still remain after several additions and remodels.

Jamison served as County Sheriff, County Supervisor and State Assemblyman, as well as the President of the Bank of Santa Clara. Following his death in 1914 Jamison’s heirs sold the house and 14 acres to Alfred I. Brown, a neighbor and notable rancher. In 1919 Brown added the distinctive pillars and balustrade of the veranda that encircles one half of the home. These architectural features came from “New Park,” the residence of James Pierce and later Judge Hiram Band, which had been demolished three years earlier to construct the Carmelite Monastery. Since Jack London was a friend of Judge Bond’s sons and visited “New Park” while he was writing “Call of the Wild,” popular myth says he wrote much of this book on this veranda.

In 1936 Alfred Brown modernized his home by completely updating the kitchen and two bathrooms. During this remodeling, craftsmen from a Santa Clara mill works, Pacific Manufacturing Company, used over 100 different kinds of wood from all over the world to panel a magnificent room on the second floor. Among the rare and unusual wood used are, zebra wood, hat berry, Brazilian rosewood, Burma ironwood, Mexican laurel, boxwood, East India rosewood, Cuban mahogany, satinwood, sandalwood, teak and cascara.

After Brown died in 1943, his nephew’s family, George M. and Lois Brown, moved into the house and lived there until they sold the land to an industrial developer in 1970. George and Lois donated the house to the City of Santa Clara, which allocated $10,000 to relocate the Jamison-Brown House to its present site, the grounds of the Triton Museum.

1863 – The Santa Clara Train Depot Was Built By The San Francisco And San Jose Railroad Company

In late 1863, the Santa Clara Train Depot was constructed by the San Francisco and San Jose Railroad Company as one of two “way stations” built between San Francisco and San Jose, the original 24 foot by 50 foot passenger portion of the depot was built on the east side of the tracks. The first regular through passenger service to San Francisco started on January 17, 1864. When the transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, the first shipment of fresh fruit, a carload of pears from the Santa Clara depot, was sent from California to the eastern states in October, 1869.

In 1985, the South Bay Historical Railroad Society was established. The historical society manages the Edward Peterman Railroad Museum within the depot, which is next to an active Cal Tran line.

1856 to 1860 – James Lick Had A Mansion Built In Santa Clara, California

From 1856 to 1860, the eccentric businessman James Lick had a mansion built in Santa Clara, California.

1852 – Santa Clara, California Incorporated As A Town

Santa Clara, California incorporated as a town on July 5, 1852, and became a state-chartered city in 1862.

Battle of the Mustard Stalks – The Only Mexican-American War Battle Fought In Northern California

On January 2, 1847, the Battle of the Mustard Stalks, more commonly known as the Battle of Santa Clara, began on a mustard field near Mission Santa Clara de Asís. The battle continued until February 7th and was the only battle of the Mexican-American War in northern California.

On February 8th, 1847, an armistice between Mexican forces, led by Francisco Sanchez, and the Americans was signed by an Oak tree. The Mexican revolt was the last of its kind in Northern California until California became a state in 1850.

In present day, historical markers indicate a site of the battle and of the armistice, by the Santa Clara City Hall.

The original historical marker for the armistice was moved when the El Camino Real Road was modified.

The Berryessa Adobe

Experts believe that the Berryessa Adobe was built in the 1840s by Juan Chrisostomo Galindo, one of the first Spanish colonists to arrive to the Santa Clara Valley with the Juan Bautista de Anza Expedition.

However, in “Old Santa Clara Valley: A Guide to Historic Buildings from Palo Alto to Gilroy” by Phyllis Filiberti Butler, it says, “According to local lore the building was once a mission jail for unruly Indian field hands. And since it has an outside staircase leading to an upstairs garret, not unlike Vancouver’s description of the Indian ‘apartments’ of 1792, the structure may in fact have been constructed earlier than is generally supposed.”

The Berryessa Adobe has changed ownership a multitude of times over the past two centuries. It was first sold to Maria Zacharias Bernal y Berryessa.

Berryessa then gave the home to her son, Fernando, who was later killed in San Rafael on the order of John Charles Frémont during the Bear Flag Revolt.

In 1970, a historical marker was placed by the Berryessa Adobe.

In 2002, the adobe was dedicated as a musuem with descendants of the families who once lived in the structure present. The musuem consists of the histories of the families that once lived there.

The Mission Period In The Santa Clara Valley

In 1769, Ohlone Indians first encountered Spanish travelers in the bay area. A few years later, on January 12, 1777, Mission Santa Clara de Asis became the eighth of the Catholic California missions founded in California.

The plaques associated with “Stroll into the Past”, next to the the Santa Clara City Hall Building, where part of the city’s 150th anniversary celebration in 2002.