On a recent Bay Area trip I visited the Felton Covered Bridge located on the San Lorenzo River in the Santa Cruz Mountains.

The Felton Covered Bridge specifically is located in the community of Felton and was constructed between 1892 to 1893. The Felton Covered Bridge was the first modernized road crossing of the San Lorenzo River into Felton which spans 80 feet. The Felton Covered Bridge is typically cited as the tallest Covered Bridge in the United States and stayed in service as a roadway until 1937 when a new crossing was built directly to the north. The Felton Covered Bridge was converted to a pedestrian structure and is now part of Covered Bridge Park. The Felton Covered Bridge was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1957 and underwent restoration which was completed by 1987.

The Felton Covered Bridge can be accessed from both sides of the San Lorenzo River via Covered Bridge Road. The photos below are from the western bank of the San Lorenzo River.

The tall height of the Felton Covered Bridge is best observed from the east bank of the San Lorenzo River.

This 1896 Area Map of the Santa Cruz Mountains and San Francisco Bay shows the Felton Covered Bridge crossing the San Lorenzo River in Felton.

1896 Area Map

The 1935 California Divisions of Highways Map shows the route over the Felton Covered Bridge just a couple years prior to it being replaced upstream.

1935 Santa Cruz County Highway Map

The above map shows a Southern Pacific Spur Line between Santa Cruz and Boulder Creek. Said SP line would have crossed the San Lorenzo River just south of the Felton Covered Bridge. According to bridgehunter.com the SP bridge over the San Lorenzo River was Pratt Truss that was built in 1908.

The 1937 bridge carries Graham Hill Road to CA 9 in downtown Felton. The 1937 bridge is an arch concrete design just north of the Felton Covered Bridge.

Labels

2023 and the first half of 2024 have seen continued growth in North Carolina's passenger rail system. From increased daily trains from Raleigh to Charlotte, federal funds for studying additional corridors, and receiving a historic grant to begin the construction of high-speed rail between Raleigh and Richmond, the last 18 months have been a flurry of activity at NCDOT's Rail Division. And that's just the tip of the iceberg. As ridership and routes increase - the engine of North Carolina passenger rail trains will become a more common sight. (Adam Prince) Increased Passenger Train Service: On July 10, 2023, a fourth Piedmont round-trip rail service between Raleigh and Charlotte commenced. The four Piedmont trains plus the daily Carolinian (to Washington, DC, and New York) bring the total of trains serving the two cities daily to five. The current daily Piedmont and Carolinian schedule between Charlotte and Raleigh (NCDOT) The result was over 641,000 passengers utilized pa

The Panhandle Freeway was an approximately two-mile limited access corridor which was once proposed in the city of San Francisco. The Panhandle Freeway conceptually would have connected US Route 101 at the Central Freeway west to the planned Interstate 280 freeway by way of Panhandle Park. The concept of the Panhandle Freeway was added to the State Highway System as Legislative Route Number 223 during 1947. The adopted alignment of the Panhandle Freeway corridor rescinded in 1955 and was never reestablished. Between 1964-1968 the Panhandle Freeway was planned as Interstate 80 and later as the second iteration of California State Route 241 circa 1968-1972. The history of the planned Panhandle Freeway The beginnings of the Panhandle Freeway and Central Freeway being added to the State Highway System came with the addition of LRN 223 by way of 1947 Legislative Chapter 11. LRN 223 was defined as "a point on LRN 2 near Division Street to LRN 56." LRN 223 appears as a prop

The Arroyo Seco Parkway is an 8.16-mile section of freeway which traverses from the FourLevel Interchange in downtown Los Angeles northward to Pasadena. The Arroyo Seco Parkway is currently designated as part of California State Route 110 but is more widely known as being a classic component of US Route 66. While US Route 66 used the entirety of the Arroyo Seco Parkway the freeway also carried US Route 6, US Route 99 and California State Route 11 at different points throughout its long history. The Arroyo Seco Parkway is one of the oldest freeways in the United States. Featured as the blog cover is Figueroa Street at Solano Avenue in 1940 before the Figueroa Street Tunnels were converted to northbound service on the Arroyo Seco Parkway. Part 1; the development of the Arroyo Seco Parkway and attempting to resolve the early western terminus points of US Route 66 The earliest route description of US 66 by the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO) has the highway