Billy Joel was joined by his stylish wife Alexis Roderick at the star-studded Grammys 2024 held at the Crypto.com Arena in Los Angeles on Sunday.

The Piano Man hitmaker, 74, looked dapper in an all-black suit, which he accessorized with a silver lapel pin, and sunglasses.

Meanwhile Alexis, who at 41 is 33 years his junior, stunned in a sleeveless gown with a silver bedazzled top and flowing black bottom. The dress featured a sizzling side slit and a train, and the equestrian added height to her look with a pair of heels.

The pair were also joined by their adorable daughters Della Rose, eight, and Remy Anne, six. The girls wore matching black sequin and tulle gowns for music's biggest night.

Joel is set to perform at the awards show for the first time in 30 years just days after he announced that he will be releasing his first song since 2007.

Joel met Roderick, who is his fourth wife, at a restaurant in 2009. The pair married during a surprise Fourth of July ceremony in 2015.

Joel also shares older daughter Alexa Ray, 38, with ex-wife Christie Brinkley, 70.

The musician was married to Brinkley from 1985-1994. He was also previously wed to Elizabeth Ann Weber from 1973-1982, as well as Katie Lee from 2004 until 2009.

The music icon has joined the list of performers on music's biggest night The Recording Academy announced on Wednesday.

He has not performed solo at the annual event since 1994 where he performed The River Of Dreams.

Joel joined Tony Bennett on stage for a performance of New York State Of Mind at the event in 2002.

No doubt he will be performing new single Turn The Lights Back on which is set for release on Friday.

Joel will be joining an impressive list of performers including Dua Lipa, Olivia Rodrigo, Billie Eilish, Burna Boy, Luke Combs, and Travis Scott.

He has a long history on the show as he has been nominated for 23 Grammy Awards and won six of them including top honor Album Of The Year for 52nd Street in 1979.

He also earned Song Of The Year for Just The Way You are that same year then two years later he won Best Rock Vocal Performance - Male for Glass Houses in 1981.

As if that wasn't already enough, Joel was given the Grammy Legend Award at the 1991 show.

The star took to social media on Monday to reveal to his 684,000 followers that his first single in 17 years will be released on February 1.

Turn the Lights Back On, which he teased with a few notes on the piano in a short video clip, will follow his 2019 song Christmas in Fallujah and 2007 tune All My Life.

It will be released alongside a lyric video and available on limited-edition 7-inch vinyl.

He wrote in the caption of the post: 'It’s time to TURN THE LIGHTS BACK ON. Brand new single coming February 1st. Pre-order now at the link in bio!'

The New York native had previously retired from songwriting aside from his two most recent singles.

He explained to Vulture in 2018, 'When I stopped writing songs it was time. I couldn’t be as good as I wanted and that was driving me crazy.

'I was driving my loved ones crazy. I thought, "This is ridiculous." So I stopped.'

The We Didn't Start the Fire hitmaker told Billboard in 2007: 'I'm not ruling out the possibility of writing songs again.

'I suppose if I had the motivation to write a song, I'm not gonna stop myself from doing it.'

'I just haven’t felt the compulsion to write songs in pop form. I guess these days I just think of myself as a composer.'