She was a successful Wall Street executive; he is a legendary singer-songwriter and pianist – 33 years her senior. (Could we make it any more obvious?)

Nobody thought their relationship would last, but 14 years on, Billy Joel and Alexis Roderick are still going strong.

So, who is the woman who captured the heart of the “Uptown Girl” musician? Meet Roderick, the former businesswoman who refused Joel’s romantic gestures … at first.

Alexis Roderick was a Wall Street businesswoman

The couple confirmed their relationship in 2010 after being spotted out together on numerous occasions. According to Business Insider, they met at a New York restaurant near Morgan Stanley, where Roderick worked at the time. She had also previously worked at Merrill Lynch, per Deal Breaker.

Billy Joel and his wife Alexis Roderick were friends first

During their meet-cute, Joel, 74, and Roderick, 41, were at separate tables with friends when he approached her table, according to US media reports. The musician apparently asked for her number and then called while they were both still at the restaurant. Joel needed a ride home and offered to sing a song on the piano for Roderick as payment. Roderick reportedly refused, but the two stayed in contact and became friends.

Their surprise wedding

They dated for six years before stunning friends and family with a surprise wedding at Joel’s Oyster Bay estate on Long Island, New York, in 2015. Those close to the couple joined them for their annual Fourth of July party – which turned out to include their nuptials too. Former governor of New York Andrew Cuomo presided over the ceremony.

Roderick was actually pregnant with their first child at the time. She gave birth to baby Della a month after the wedding. The pair welcomed their second daughter Remy in 2017. At the time of their wedding, Joel was 66 and Roderick was 33.

Who was Billy Joel married to before his current wife?

The couple quickly became gossip fodder after their relationship became public. Not only because of their age gap, but also because the “Piano Man” had been married three times before.

Joel was married to Elizabeth Weber – the inspiration for “Just the Way You Are” – between 1973 and 1982; supermodel Christie Brinkley between 1985 and 1994; and cookbook author and TV food critic Katie Lee between 2004 and 2009.

The singer has one other daughter, Alexa, 38, whom he shares with Brinkley. Alexa gave a speech at her dad’s wedding to Roderick, and her mum wished the newlyweds the best. Brinkley said that her daughter had a “wonderful friend in Alexis” in a post on Instagram.

Roderick loves horses – and has Joel’s support

Roderick is a former competitive equestrian and a member of the United States Equestrian Federation. Supporting his wife’s love of horses, Joel bought a two-hectare ranch in Wellington, Florida, for US$3.5 million in 2018, per British media. The estate has a 12-stall barn, a tack room, five paddocks and a dressage ring with mirrors.

Although Joel and Roderick generally keep a low profile, the musician has shared photos of their daughters in their riding gear, hinting that they may be following in their mum’s footsteps.

What are Billy Joel and Alexis Roderick’s daughters, Della and Remy, like?

Della, eight, and Remy, six, made a rare appearance with their father on stage at his Madison Square Garden show in December 2023. The performance was part of the music icon’s annual residency, which began in 2014. The girls wore matching green leather dresses and black tights while singing “Jingle Bells” with their dad.