Ashton Kutcher Was ‘F—-ing Pissed’ About Demi Moore’s Memoir

Ashton Kutcher recently reflected on how his eight-year marriage to Demi Moore changed his life. In a recent interview with Esquire published Tuesday (January 31), the That ’70s Show star became a stepdad to three young girls.

When Moore would go on location to film, Kutcher stayed home and took care of her kids. And as she revealed in her bombshell 2019 memoir, Inside Out Moore began drinking for the first time in twenty years during their union. After suffering the loss of a late-term pregnancy, the couple pursued IVF to try and conceive again for several years. Kutcher admitted that all together, it was “a lot.”

He said of the miscarriage, “Losing a kid that you think you’re going to have, and that close to thinking you’re going to have a kid, is really, really painful. Everyone deals with that in different ways. I love kids. I wouldn’t have gotten married to a woman that had three kids if I didn’t love kids. The idea of having another kid would have been incredible. For whatever reason, I had to have that experience.”

Sharing his feelings on the couple’s divorce, the Your Place Or Mine actor said, “Nothing makes you feel like a failure like divorce. Divorce feels like a wholesale f—ing failure. You failed at marriage.” However, he said he has tried to learn to “own the s—” he did wrong and “go forward,” amid a “tattered” reputation at the time over his alleged infidelity.

He admitted that he was “f—ing pissed” when Moore published her book and a media frenzy invaded his quiet life. “I’d finally gotten to a place where the press had really laid off me and [wife] Mila [Kunis], and my life and my family. And then the next day, [the paparazzi] are at my kids’ school,” Kutcher recalled. He did clarify that he did not have any ill will towards Moore.

Two years after his divorce, he married Kunis, his longtime co-star on That 70s Show. They now share two children together, daughter Wyatt, 8, and son Dimitri, 6. “The thing about Mila that made our relationship accelerate was that I had always admired her,” he said. “Her talents, her skills, her gifts. But I knew that she didn’t need me. And she knew that I didn’t need her.”

Since it has been nine years since Kutcher’s last starring feature film and three years since his last recurring TV role, Kutcher admits he thought about retiring from acting. However, he can next be seen starring in the romantic comedy opposite Reese Witherspoon titled, Your Place or Mine.

Your Place or Mine streams on Netflix February 10. Watch the trailer below:

These Celebrities Have February Birthdays

Laila Abuelhawa is the Top 40 and Hip-Hop pop culture writer for Beasley Media Group. Being with the company for over three years, Laila's fierce and fabulous red-carpet rankings have earned her a feature on 'The Late Show with Stephen Colbert!' Her favorite stories are those surrounding the latest in celebrity fashion, television and film rankings, and how the world reacts to major celebrity news. With a background in journalism, Laila's stories ensure accuracy and offer background information on stars that you wouldn't have otherwise known. She prides herself in covering stories that inform the public about what is currently happening and what is to come in the ever-changing, ever-evolving media landscape.