Ashton Kutcher’s marriage with Demi Moore was one of the most popular relationships widely discussed in tabloids. They have hit the bumpy roads on several occasions and Kutcher and Moore have different opinions of each other.

Advertisement

The duo got divorced in 2013. For Moore, Kutcher was not faithful in their relationship and she prioritized him throughout the relationship. But following their divorce, Kutcher went on to find his true self in isolation amidst nature.

Also read: “I studied Ashton Kutcher”: X-Men Star Michael Fassbender Ridiculed His Predecessor For Steve Jobs Biopic After 2013 Film Flopped Hard at the Box Office

Advertisement

Demi Moore Said Ashton Kutcher Was Not Faithful in Their Relationship

Following their divorce, Demi Moore, 60, claimed that her former husband Ashton Kutcher was not entirely faithful in their relationship. In 2019, Moore went on to reveal great details of their relationship in her memoir Inside Out. She revealed that the Two and a Half Men actor asked for a threesome to spice things up.

“I put him first, so when he expressed his fantasy of bringing a third person into our bed, I didn’t say no. I wanted to show him how great and fun I could be. They were good people, but it was still a mistake. I was strangely flooded with shame, I couldn’t shake the feeling that this whole thing was somehow my fault,” Moore wrote in her memoir (via Evening Standard).

The former couple were together for eight years including their six years of marriage. When she got a Google alert on her phone saying her husband was cheating, Moore immediately called the actor and she said that the actor admitted to it.

Also read: “Oh, rude, rude little boy”: Ashton Kutcher Gets Labeled the Rudest Hollywood Celebrity After Crossing a Reality TV Star With His “Bad Attitude”

Advertisement

Ashton Kutcher on Demi Moore’s Divorce Ordeal

When Moore’s memoir came out, Kutcher, 45, was married to Friends with Benefits and his That ’70s Show co-star Mila Kunis. Although the actor wanted to reveal his side of the story, ultimately decided to keep quiet and focus on his current relationship.

“I was about to push the button on a really snarky tweet. Then I saw my son, daughter, and wife and I deleted it,” Kutcher wrote (via People).

Of course, Kutcher went on a road to self-discovery after the divorce staying away from urban lifestyle and electronics. However, following Moore’s announcement, The Ranch star took to X to comment on the matter.

“I will forever cherish the time I spent with Demi. Marriage is one of the most difficult things in the world and unfortunately, sometimes they fail. Love and Light, AK,” he wrote on the platform (via The Guardian).

Kunis and Kutcher got married in 2015, and share two children together, Wyatt Isabelle and Dimitri Portwood.

Advertisement