Ashton Kutcher and Demi Moore finalized their divorce in 2013 after eight years of marriage. Kutcher and Moore, and much of the early-aughts gossip that surrounded them, are long over, but until recently, one thing apparently remained: a home that Kutcher and his former stepdaughter Rumer Willis bought together in 2009.

The two-bed, four-bath, 1,800-square-foot ranch-style home in the Hollywood Hills, which the two purchased for $971,500, per legal documents obtained by the Blast, now belongs solely to Willis. In the years after the two purchased the home, Kutcher and Willis’s mother, Moore, broke up, and Kutcher married his That ‘70s Show co-star Mila Kunis. And yet the house still remained in both Kutcher and Willis’s possession (and, by marriage, Kunis’s).

But on August 3, the documents state, Willis signed papers terminating the co-ownership of the home and Kutcher filed a grant deed turning over his 50 percent ownership to Willis. Kunis had to file a quitclaim deed (a fancy term meaning she relinquished the property) in which she also signed over the rights of the home to Willis.

There is no specific record of whether Willis paid Kutcher and Kunis to gain 100 percent of the rights to the home. But the house recently “sold” for $572,500 at the same time the paperwork went through, according to the Blast. Basically, this points strongly to the guess that that chunk of cash went from Willis’s pocket to Kutcher’s.

The house seems to be the last remaining thread of a relationship that defined the mid-2000s. As for the divorce, Kutcher made clear in a speech at Drake University that he had come to terms with the split.

“I had the great fortune of getting a divorce because I felt the impact of it and I felt how much loss is in there and how much love is in there and that it’s not neat or clean or messy,” he said.

Getting rid of a half-a-million-dollar home five years after your divorce was finalized appears to be a little easier (especially if it stays in the family).