Ashton Kutcher has finally aired his feelings about ex-wife Demi Moore's explosive memoir from back in 2019 – detailing the pair's messy marriage.

The Two and a half Men star, 44, admits feeling "f***ing p****d" at his former spouse for revealing their marital problems in her bombshell book Inside Out.

Despite previous reports suggesting that Ashton "knew what was coming" in the page-turner, the Hollywood star has now spoken up in a new interview.

Gracing the first-ever digital cover of Esquire this month, he explains exactly what was going on four years ago when the couple's private life hit the headlines.

"I'd finally gotten to a place where the press had really laid off me and [current wife Mila Kunis], and my life and my family. And then the next day, [the paparazzi] are at my kids' school," he said.

Demi had claimed Ashton cheated on her multiple times and pressured her to have threesomes during their eight-year marriage.

They began their relationship in 2003 and grew stronger together as they suffered a miscarriage soon after.

They married in 2005 and Demi had IVF treatments in the hope of starting a family with Ashton but ultimately it failed.

Claiming how Ashton looked to make threesomes part of their sex life, Demi stated in her new book that she went along with it to show she was a 'cool wife'.

She wrote: "I wanted to show him how great and fun I could be." Demi split from Ashton at the end of 2011, and they divorced two years later.

Fast-forward to Ashton's new interview, he details the heartbreak following their devastating miscarriage which occurred six months into her pregnancy.

"Losing a kid that you think you're going to have, and that close to thinking you're going to have a kid, is really, really painful," he said.

Ashton added: "I love kids. I wouldn't have gotten married to a woman that had three kids if I didn't love kids. The idea of having another kid would have been incredible.

"For whatever reason, I had to have that experience."

Speaking of their subsequent divorce, Ashton explained how he felt like a "failure".

"Nothing makes you feel like a failure like divorce," he said. "Divorce feels like a wholesale f**king failure. You failed at marriage."

Follow Mirror Celebs on Snapchat , Instagram , Twitter and Facebook