Despite their 16-year age distinction, Demi Moore and Ashton Kutcher were smitten with each other the minute they met back in 2003. It didn’t take lengthy for the former couple to shape a relationship, with things turning severe between them somewhat briefly; they tied the knot two years later and lasted a whopping six years prior to things began to crumble of their marriage.

In 2011, Moore’s relationship with the previous Punk’d megastar had been plagued through studies that the latter had cheated on his wife with multiple women, and whilst that used to be to begin with believed to be nothing extra but a rumor, her determination to finish their marriage in a while after was once all of the confirmation fanatics needed to know that the allegations had been factual after all.

In September 2019, the mother-of-three dropped her bombshell memoir, Inside Out, where she discussed her time with Kutcher in great detail, however where does their relationship stand today?

Is Demi Moore Still Close To Ashton Kutcher?

According to Kutcher, who has since married his former That 70’s Show co-star Mila Kunis, having additionally welcomed two kids in combination — Wyatt, 6, and Dimitri, 3 — he’s remained on pleasant phrases with his ex-wife.

In February 2020, he took phase in an interview on Marc Maron’s WTF podcast, insisting that each one was well between him and Moore before including that whilst they percentage a “just right” relationship, they no longer “hang out” with one some other.

RELATED: Demi Moore Reveals Who Her ‘Women Crush Wednesday’ Is In Her Recent Instagram Post

The 41-year-old actor-turned-tech entrepreneur further revealed that he still cares a lot for the actress’ three children, Rumer, 31, Scout 28, and Tallulah, 26 — whom Moore shares with Hollywood veteran Bruce Willis — making an allowance for he helped lift the trio right through their teenage years.

And while they are now not as close as they was once, Kutcher says he has a genuine bond with his ex’s kids, such a lot that in the event that they ever wanted him, the father-of-two wouldn’t hesitate to make himself available to their needs.

“Tallulah was 8 or nine, she was once the youngest. Rumer used to be 12 or Thirteen when we first started dating. When we had been getting divorced, Tallulah used to be graduating high school,” he gushed. “I was helping lift teenage girls via their formative years.

“I like them. I’m by no means going to prevent loving them and respecting them and honoring them and rooting for them to achieve success in whatever they are pursuing. I used to be never looking to be their father. I always had appreciate and commemorated Bruce [Willis], and I believe he’s an excellent human being and a gorgeous guy.”

RELATED: Demi Moore Shares Fond Memories Of Joel Schumacher After News Of His Sudden Passing

His certain phrases about Moore’s children had been somewhat the distinction to the tweet he shared after studying one of the excerpts from his ex-wife’s debatable memoir ultimate yr, during which she detailed how she realized about the actor’s secret affairs.

From allegations that Kutcher asked for threesomes with his spouse to struggling a miscarriage at six months into the being pregnant, there have been a variety of things mentioned that lovers unquestionably weren’t acutely aware of — at least no in such great detail.

In response to what was once written in the e-book, Kutcher tweeted and deleted: "I was about to push the button on a really snarky tweet. Then I saw my son, daughter, and wife and I deleted it.”

The comment appeared to insinuate that the 42-year-old would have shared his side of the story — which apparently wouldn’t have been a pleasant one — but considering that he has a family to think about before anything else, he decided not to share the snarky tweet after all.

RELATED: Here’s How Much Mila Kunis Makes Voicing Meg Griffin On ‘Family Guy’

Whatever it is that Kutcher would’ve wanted to tell the world, it wouldn’t have changed the fact that Moore lost their baby and that he appeared to have cheated on her.

Speaking about the heartbreaking miscarriage in her book, the Charlie’s Angels star explained: “I can’t even bring into words how lost, empty, desperate, confused [I was]. I really lost sight of everything that was right in front of me, which was the family I had.

“And I think that the weight that it put on Ashton, it’s kind of a natural thing to pull back, when somebody’s clinging too tight.”

And while both parties have moved on with their lives, Moore and Kutcher continue to collaborate on their human rights company Thorn: Digital Defenders of Children, which is helping address the sexual exploitation of minors.

While she’s been on dates here and there, Moore, for the most part, has chosen to remain single for the foreseeable future, and by the look of things, that decision has certainly worked in her favor as she’s not only managed to end her drug addiction but, as revealed in her book, she’s also learned to find peace with herself.

NEXT: Fans Are Divided Over Ashton Kutcher’s Post About Science Vs Fiction

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGiuoZ2imnqlu8SsZJ2dnZ56rrvOq5ysZaKauaLAyKilrKCZpXq4tdOhZJqrmKm8r3nKrqucoJWnerTAwKebZqyfma66ew%3D%3D