BBC Worldwide has awarded the UK master toy and gift licence for a brand new Ragdoll show The Adventures of Abney & Teal to Rainbow Designs.

The Adventures of Abney & Teal is the latest series from the award-winning Ragdoll Productions and launches on CBeebies on 26th September. The series will broadcast Monday to Friday at 5.45pm and is aimed at 3-6 year old boys and girls.

The creator of the series is Joel Stewart, an established artist, author and musician. Anne Wood, founder and creative director of Ragdoll Productions, states, "I have long been an admirer of Joel’s picture books with their distinctive drawing style and Ragdoll were delighted therefore when he accepted my invitation to work with Ragdoll to create something entirely new for children's television."

Abney and Teal are two friends who live on an island in the middle of a lake in the middle of a park surrounded by the background hustle and bustle of the big city. Their lives are full of discovery and exploration and they share their island with unusual and funny characters who also observe and take part in Abney and Teal’s adventures.

The Adventures of Abney & Teal combines a unique hand-drawn style with contemporary animation techniques and the programmes are about adventure and storytelling and are warm, light- hearted, silly and timeless.

Julie Kekwick, Senior Licensing Manager at BBC Worldwide said: "The Adventures of Abney & Teal has a beautiful animation style which we're sure will appeal to adults and parents as well as children. We’re delighted that Rainbow is on board to help us create premium products that reflect the unique nostalgic and literary feel of the show."

In Autumn 2012, Rainbow will launch a brand new range for widespread distribution for the show that will include art & craft, role-play toys, traditional toys soft toys, puzzles and games.

Anthony Temple, MD Rainbow Designs said: "It is very exciting for Rainbow to be appointed by BBC Worldwide as master toy licensee and a great honour to be working with Ragdoll Productions for the first time. The Adventures of Abney & Teal is a delightful effervescent new character property with inherent values of quality and tradition. Combined with Ragdoll’s unprecedented reputation for creativity and success, the show is a natural fit to the Rainbow portfolio and a perfect match for our core customer base, the quality toy, book and gift retailers."

Emma Burch