DHX Media is acquiring Teletubbies owner Ragdoll Worldwide from BBC Worldwide (BBCWW) and founder Anne Wood for £17.4m (US$27.7m).

DHX gets its hands on 12 series, including 365 episodes of Teletubbies, 52 episodes of Teletubbies Everywhere and 100 episodes of In the Night Garden.

Popular UK series The Adventures of Abney & Teal and Bafta-winning Dipdap and Brum are also part of the deal.

Canada-based DHX will pay C$28.4m in cash for Ragdoll Worldwide, which was established in 2006 as a joint venture between the BBC’s commercial arm and Wood’s own prodco.

Wood – one of the UK’s best-known and critically renowned children’s television producers – together with her son, Christopher, will continue to manage and operate their own company, Ragdoll Productions, serving as founder and creative director.

“The sale of Ragdoll Worldwide will procure future growth for Ragdoll Productions and, with the passing of creative control for the future development of our catalogue of award-winning programmes to DHX Media, we are confident of their continued success for many years to come,” said Wood in a joint statement with Teletubbies and In the Night Garden co-creator Andrew Davenport.

Davenport last year struck out on his own and to set up a joint venture with Shine Group. It’s not yet clear whether the pair will reunite on future projects.

For DHX, the deal means the company now claims one of the the largest independent libraries of children’s TV content in the world.

“Teletubbies and In the Night Garden are worldwide phenomena. These globally recognized brands will be highly complementary to the DHX Media library,” said CEO Michael Donovan.

“We are uniquely positioned to continue to develop these evergreen children’s properties in exciting new ways and we also look to maintain a continuing link with Anne Wood, one of the most experienced and passionate producers in the business.”

BBCWW UK and Australia MD Marcus Arthur added: “Finding the right new home for these beloved children’s properties was incredibly important for BBC Worldwide as we have worked hard over the years with Ragdoll to nurture them and build their popularity and commercial success both in the UK and internationally.”