Get set to head back to an arcade later this year! Last week's Amusement Machine Show offered a hot lineup of titles that should make hardcore and casual gamers alike stop by for a sampling at a game center.

Held from the 11th through the 13th at the Makuhari Messe just outside of Tokyo, the 46th Annual Amusement Machine Show gave the likes of Sega, Bandai Namco, Taito and more a chance to show off their top upcoming arcade machines. As always, the show was opened exclusively for press and buyers on the first two days, with general audiences lining up on the last day.

SEGA

Sega lead the way at this year's show thanks to two deluxe racing units, Hummer and Harley Davidson.

The Hummer machine is particularly notable. Developed under license from GM, the unit features a Sega-style recreation of a Hummer vehicle. But more than just looks, the tech Sega has packed into the unit is going to draw players in. The entire cabinet moves on a 2-axis movement system. The movement is so pronounced that this is one of the rare cases where you'll actually want to make use of the seatbelts.

Sega has made some interesting moves even in the gameplay area. The cabinets house two players, each with their own wheel and pedal units. Races can be played cooperatively, with each player alternating between driver and passenger. The switch takes place at checkpoints, or whenever one driver bumps into a wall or other car.

Based on our limited play time, this system is put to use heavily through the game, with players switching off every few seconds. There's even a competitive aspect to the co-op play, as the game ranks players on how much they contribute to the race.

Sega's Harley machine is all new and not to be confused with the Model 3 Harley-themed game. This new machine sports a 62-inch wide-screen monitor and another awesome bike recreation from Sega's talented cabinet makers. As with the Hummer machine, the bike shakes violently as you play. It also immerses you in the experience, as your feet rest on the bike rather than touching the ground.

The driving model here is pure arcade, with blazing fast bike movement that only gets faster as you accumulate boosts. Thankfully, the game is pretty forgiving with collisions, so you won't get penalized too harshly if you nudge a wall or other bike.

Sega packed its booth full of new cabinets, including House of the Dead EX, Touch Striker, and an Answer X Answer update, but the above two were the main selling points. They'll likely suck up quarters... assuming an arcade operator can afford them. Sega had the Hummer machine listed at $35,000, with Harley running $18,000.

Cheaper offerings were found just down the hall. Turn the page for a look at the Bandai Namco booth.

BANDAI NAMCO

Across the AM Show event space, Bandai Namco had a mix of original titles and sequels. The sequels included Taiko no Tatsujin 12, Wangan Midnight 3 DX, and Tekken 6 Bloodline Rebellion. See IGNPS3 for full coverage on that title

Drawing particular attention in the sequel lineup were two games with Gundam in the title. Gundam VS Gundam Next makes use of the System 256 hardware once again and features over 50 Mobile Suits from 16 Gundam properties. The original is set for PSP.

More significant was the latest update to Gundam: Senjo no Kizuna, Bandai Namco's virtual reality Gundam machine. The new update includes a speaker system built into the seat and a new communication system where your voice commands are replaced with classic lines from the anime titles.

Two new new titles made it into the booth. Offering a simpler experience than Sega's Harley game was Nirin, a motorcycle game that appears to use a version of the Wangan engine, with night-based street racing. In addition to a boost system that encourages you to lean tightly into turns, the game adds a new competitive element to bike racers: other players can challenge you while you're in the middle of a CPU race.

Bandai Namco announced one new title on the eve of the show. Razing Storm is a gun shooter with a few twists. First and foremost, the game uses the PS3 hardware for its arcade board, ala Tekken 6. It's definitely the finest looking gun shooting game yet, and with its mix of terrorists, monotone desert environments, and giant mechanized beasts, it looks, from afar, a bit like Metal Gear Solid 4.

Also sure to draw attention is the game's gun, which is said to offer powerful feedback. Unfortunately, we weren't able to try the gun out for ourselves, as Bandai Namco made this title playable exclusively for business partners.

Leaning further to the casual side than either Sega or Bandai Namco was Taito. Turn the page for a look at a new series of titles designed for casual gamers.

TAITO

The big title at this year's Taito booth was actually a series of titles known as "No Kou Game." This translates to "No Thought" game.

As detailed by Taito amusement business chief Riichi Kojima during a stage presentation, the No Kou Game lineup will consist of titles that anyone can play without consulting a manual. Players who aren't good at games can enjoy themselves due to the simple mechanics, as can core users due to an abundance of content. Finally, a major point that's sure to please smaller arcade operators: the machines will be offered at "relatively cheap" pricing.

Three games were announced at the event: Hopping Road, Senor Nippon! and Elevator Action Death Parade.

Hopping Road looked like the most interesting of the bunch. Players select one of eight animals as their in-game counterpart, then race through a cartoon-like course. The cabinet consists of a hopping pad, which requires that players jump up and down. It's a simple control system, and the site of people jumping around is sure to draw people in.

Elevator Action Death Parade, developed by Paon, is a unique take on the classic action title. The cabinet is meant to look like an actual elevator, complete with doors that open and close! Sadly, the unit on display at the show was a non-functional model.

While those two titles have a good chance of making it out of Japan, you're probably going to have to head to Japan for Senor Nippon! This quiz game is themed around the mistaken view foreigners have of Japan -- hence the name, consisting of "Senor" (as in Spanish for Mr.) and "Nippon!", which is Japanese for Japan.

Taito may have been content with the casual masses, but there were some major hardcore offerings at this year's AM Show. Turn the page for everyone else.

Fighter Rebirth Part 2

The AOU expo in February was said to have been the revival of the fighter, with BlazBlue and Street Fighter IV seeing their playable debuts. Well nothing let up for the AM Show. Fighters -- the 2D kind -- were abundant, with new titles seeing playable or video debut.

The biggest of the pack was no doubt King of Fighters XII in its playable debut. In addition to offering 11 of 20 playable characters up for sampling, the demo version showed off three new gameplay systems: Critical Counter, Guard Attack, and Sousai. The latter blocks damage when players attack one another simultaneously.

Producer Masaki Kukino appeared at a stage event to discuss the title. Of particular note is the change to high-resolution visuals, with Kukino joking that four times the resolution meant four times as much work.

SNK Playmore showed KOFXII in the AMI booth, which also housed the latest playable build of BlazBlue. Far across the hall, Capcom showed off a new rev of Tatsunoko VS Capcom, just as news of a Wii version of Tatsunoko VS Capcom began to leak out. Beside the Capcom booth was the Examu booth with Sugoi Arcana Heart 2, and Daemon Bride, both of which run on the EX Board.

It may be for these fighters, or it may be for the high priced Sega deluxe units. Or perhaps you'll just see someone hopping around and feel the need to try out one of Taito's No Think series games. Whatever suits your fancy, with a lineup as varied as what was shown at the AM Show, we have a feeling you'll end up in an arcade once some of these games make the trip outside of Japan.