Edward Henry Garnier, Baron Garnier, is a British barrister and former Conservative Party politician in the United Kingdom. A former lawyer for The Guardian newspaper, Lord Garnier is on the socially liberal wing of his party and was the Member of Parliament for Harborough in Leicestershire from 1992 until 2017. He most recently served as Solicitor General for England and Wales from the election of 2010 until the 2012 ministerial reshuffle. He stood down from the House of Commons at the 2017 general election before entering the House of Lords in 2018.

Edward Garnier was born on October 26, 1952, in Wuppertal, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany. His birth geographical coordinates are 51° 15’ 23” North latitude and 7° 8’ 53” East longitude. Edward Garnier is currently 71 years old.

Astrologically, Edward Garnier falls under the Sun sign of Scorpio, with Sagittarius as his Ascendant, Aquarius as his Moon sign, and Leo as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Scorpio Moon Aquarius Mercury Scorpio Venus Sagittarius Mars Capricorn Jupiter Taurus Saturn Libra Uranus Cancer Neptune Libra Pluto Leo Ceres Gemini Chiron Capricorn Eros Sagittarius Hygiea Taurus Juno Aquarius Pallas Pisces Vesta Scorpio Ascendant Sagittarius Black Moon Lilith Leo Midheaven Libra North Node Aquarius South Node Leo Part of Fortune Pisces Vertex Leo

Sunin Scorpio2° 58’ 57”

The Sun in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you enigmatic and sexually expressive. You are empowered and self-confident. You seek unique ways to express […] Read more »

Moonin Aquarius7° 9’ 6”

The Moon in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you a humanitarian with instincts related to fairness and equality. You are intuitively attracted to group […] Read more »

Mercuryin Scorpio22° 11’ 15”

Mercury in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and focused. You are thoughtful and communicate your strategic ideas. You are determined to succeed […] Read more »

Venusin Sagittarius5° 12’ 12”

Sagittarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you intense and open in love. You are social and go to extremes to show someone special you […] Read more »

Marsin Capricorn10° 18’ 28”

Capricorn Mars in the Natal Chart makes you eager to thrive. You are intense and can be persistent. You are patient and willing to face […] Read more »

Jupiterin Taurus17° 37’ 59”

Jupiter in Taurus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that relates to having a materialistic vision. You are part of a generation that […] Read more »

Saturnin Libra19° 48’ 5”

Yet, when you face challenges, you can be a staunch advocate for others. You have a feisty side and can be passionate about your mission. […] Read more »

Uranusin Cancer18° 31’ 56”

Cancer Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that dramatically changes society. Your breakthroughs and epiphanies help redefine home and […] Read more »

Neptunein Libra21° 53’ 1”

Libra Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that craves connection. You want intellectual and emotional intimacy. You are artistic […] Read more »

Plutoin Leo23° 3’ 52”

The Pluto in Leo generation empowers celebrities, giving those with status the authority to lead. Society is materialistic during this transit, and you are part […] Read more »

Ceresin Gemini17° 3’ 43”

Ceres in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates your generation is thoughtful and conscientious. You are eager to explore your higher mission and can be […] Read more »

Chironin Capricorn8° 0’ 0”

Chiron in Capricorn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for healing from subconscious wounds related to work, money, and security. You are productive […] Read more »

Erosin Sagittarius9° 53’ 25”

Eros in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a daring and bold approach to intimacy. You seek a partner who shares your carefree attitude toward […] Read more »

Hygieain Taurus24° 17’ 32”

Hygiea in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to pursue beauty and strength. You are helpful and use your nurturing gifts to encourage […] Read more »

Junoin Aquarius11° 54’ 21”

Aquarius Juno in the Natal Chart indicates you have an intellectual and creative connection to your love interest. You have a rebellious spirit and can […] Read more »

Pallasin Pisces22° 7’ 59”

Pallas in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a generous and compassionate leader. You mentor others and can help create a path to success. […] Read more »

Vestain Scorpio14° 59’ 22”

Vesta in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and sensual. You are devoted to your sexual fantasies and eager to explore your fantasies. […] Read more »

Ascendantin Sagittarius24° 49’ 48”

Sagittarius Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you daring and passionate. You are intense and can be determined to succeed. You can be enthusiastic and […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Leo23° 30’ 31”

Leo Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you spontaneous and impulsive. You are dramatic and use your creative gifts to compensate for fears […] Read more »

Midheavenin Libra28° 57’ 8”

The Libra Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you an ideal marriage and relationship counselor. You are imaginative and help others express love and beauty. […] Read more »

North Nodein Aquarius17° 36’ 8”

Aquarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you rebellious. You break from tradition, and your destiny involves leading others in grassroots campaigns. You are […] Read more »

South Nodein Leo17° 36’ 8”

Leo South Node in the Natal Chart makes you born with passion and desire to succeed. You are confident in your abilities and have a […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Pisces28° 59’ 57”

Part of Fortune in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you spiritual and compassionate. You are most successful when sacrificing selfish ambitions to elevate others. […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon First House Mercury Eleventh House Venus Eleventh House Mars First House Jupiter Fourth House Saturn Ninth House Uranus Seventh House Neptune Ninth House Pluto Eighth House Ceres Sixth House Chiron First House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Fifth House Juno Second House Pallas Second House Vesta Tenth House Black Moon Lilith Eighth House North Node Second House South Node Eighth House Part of Fortune Third House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 15 major aspects, alongside 11 minor aspects, as well as 7 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Mercury Square Pluto Jupiter Sextile Uranus Saturn Square Uranus Neptune Sextile Pluto Moon Sextile Venus Jupiter Quincunx Saturn Saturn Conjunct Neptune Saturn Sextile Pluto Uranus Square Neptune Sun Square Moon Mercury Trine Uranus Jupiter Quincunx Neptune Mercury Opposite Jupiter Jupiter Square Pluto Mars Trine Jupiter

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Edward Garnier’s life journey.

Moon Sextile Venusorb: 2°

When the Moon is sextile Venus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is a kind and loving person. They tend to […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Saturnorb: 2°

Jupiter quincunx Saturn in a chart indicates that a person may struggle to prioritize and find work-life balance. People with this aspect in their charts […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Neptuneorb: 2°

Saturn conjunct Neptune in a chart can create the potential for both stability and instability. Someone with this aspect in their chart may lean more […] Read more »

Sun Square Moonorb: 4°

The Sun square Moon in a Natal Chart is more potent than this aspect in a Transiting Chart. You inhibit your growth and block yourself […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Neptuneorb: 4°

Jupiter quincunx Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person has a vibrant, lively personality. They are optimistic and tend to dream big. They […] Read more »

Mercury Opposite Jupiterorb: 5°

What does a Mercury-Jupiter opposition mean? When this appears in a Natal Chart, it can cause a person to be interested in various topics. Someone […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mercury Trine Pallas Jupiter Square North Node Jupiter Square South Node Neptune Quincunx Pallas Pluto Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Mercury Square Black Moon Lilith Mars Quincunx Vertex Uranus Quincunx North Node Pluto Square Hygiea Pluto Quincunx Pallas Pluto Trine Ascendant

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Edward Garnier’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Pluto Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 0°

Pluto conjunct Black Moon Lilith in a chart can bring intensity and passion to someone’s personality. It may allow them to liberate themselves by connecting […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Vertexorb: 1°

Mars quincunx the Vertex in a chart can be challenging because it creates a disconnect between a person’s ambition and the people they attract. People […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Eros Trine Vertex Midheaven Quincunx Part of Fortune Ceres Trine North Node Ceres Sextile South Node Hygiea Quincunx Ascendant Hygiea Square Black Moon Lilith Ascendant Trine Black Moon Lilith

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Edward Garnier’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.