BURBANK, Calif., Nov. 16, 2017 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Condusiv® Technologies Corporation has been recognized as one of the elite group of companies that are featured in the Virtualization special edition of CIOReview magazine.

“We are glad to announce Condusiv Technologies Corporation in our annual ranking list of 20 Most Promising Virtualization Solution Providers 2017,” said Jeevan George, Managing Editor of CIOReview. “This recognition will bring more popularity to Condusiv Technologies Corporation and positive attention from the IT industry.”

Condusiv’s selection as an elite provider is based on its unique solution to the challenge faced by any organization virtualizing. Since virtualization introduces complexity to the data path, system performance is dampened. Thus, when it comes to a server virtualization investment, it would be counter-intuitive to perform such an upgrade only to end up with slower application performance than before. Moreover, these issues are further exacerbated by Windows which doesn’t play well in a virtual environment, resulting in a surplus of excessively small writes and reads that chew up performance.

Oftentimes, businesses are unaware of the I/O degradation that occurs in a virtual environment nor are they aware of the significant I/O tax that steals performance. Condusiv’s V-locity® I/O reduction software provides virtualized servers with core patented technologies that offload I/O from underlying storage and streamline whatever I/O traffic remains, and comes with a money-back guarantee to solve the toughest application performance issues like MS-SQL and more.

“Unbeknown to most organizations, the aforementioned inefficiencies mean that 30-40% of all I/O traffic is entirely unnecessary - it’s just “noisy I/O” that dampens overall performance and unnecessarily chews up IOPS. Condusiv’s I/O reduction software runs automatically in the background, eliminating those inefficiencies, which not only provides an immediate performance boost but hands back all those IOPS to storage that can now be used for other things. By guaranteeing to solve sluggish application performance, our customers have been able to leverage our software to get more from their hardware infrastructure,” said Brian Morin, SVP, Sales & Marketing, Condusiv Technologies.

About Condusiv Technologies

Condusiv® Technologies is the world leader in software-only storage performance solutions for virtual and physical server environments, enabling systems to process more data in less time for faster application performance. Condusiv guarantees to solve the toughest application performance challenges with faster than new performance via V-locity® for virtual servers or Diskeeper® or SSDkeeper® for physical servers or PCs. With over 100 million licenses sold, Condusiv solutions are used by 90 percent of the Fortune 1000 and almost three-quarters of the Forbes Global 100 to increase business productivity and reduce datacenter costs while extending the life of existing hardware.

For more information, visit www.condusiv.com

Follow us on Twitter and Like Us on Facebook

About CIOReview

Published from Fremont, California, CIOReview is a print magazine that explores and understands the plethora of ways adopted by firms to execute the smooth functioning of their businesses. A distinguished panel comprising of CEOs, CIOs, IT-VPs including CIOReview editorial board finalized the “20 Most Promising Virtualization Solution Providers 2017” and shortlisted the best vendors and consultants. For more info, visit: www.cioreview.com

© 2017 Condusiv Technologies Corporation. All rights reserved. Condusiv, the Condusiv Logo, V-locity, Diskeeper, SSDkeeper are registered trademarks or trademarks owned by Condusiv Technologies Corporation. All other trademarks and brand names are the property of their respective owners.