BURBANK, Calif., Jan. 30, 2017 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Condusiv® Technologies, the world leader in software-only storage performance solutions, today launched SSDkeeper software that guarantees to deliver “faster than new” Windows PC and physical server performance while also extending the life and longevity of solid-state drives (SSDs).

“Every Windows PC or physical server fitted with a solid-state drive suffers from very small, fractured writes and reads, which dampen optimal SSD performance and ultimately erodes the longevity of solid-state drives from write amplification issues. SSDkeeper’s patented software ensures large, clean contiguous writes and reads for more payload with every I/O operation, reduced Program/Erase (P/E) cycles that shorten longevity, and boosts performance even further with its ability to cache hot reads within idle, available DRAM,” said Brian Morin, SVP, Sales and Marketing, Condusiv Technologies.

Solid-state drives can only handle a number of finite writes before failing. Every write kicks off P/E cycles that shorten SSD lifespan otherwise known as write amplification. By reducing the number of writes required for any given file or workload, SSDkeeper significantly boosts write performance speed while also reducing the number of P/E cycles that would have otherwise been executed. This enables individuals and organizations reclaim the write speed of their SSD drives while ensuring the longest life possible.

Patented Write Optimization

SSDkeeper’s patented write optimization engine (IntelliWrite®) prevents excessively small, fragmented writes and reads that rob the performance and endurance of SSDs. SSDkeeper ensures large, clean contiguous writes from Windows, so maximum payload is carried with every I/O operation. By eliminating the “death by a thousand cuts” scenario of many, tiny writes and reads that slow system performance, the lifespan of an SSD is also extended due to reduction in write amplification issues that plague all SSD devices.

Patented Read Optimization

SSDkeeper electrifies Windows system performance further with an additional patented feature - dynamic memory caching (IntelliMemory®). By automatically using idle, available DRAM to serve hot reads, data is served from memory which is 12-15X faster than SSDs and further reduces wear to the SSD device. The real genius in SSDkeeper’s DRAM caching engine is that nothing has to be allocated for cache. All caching occurs automatically. SSDkeeper dynamically uses only the memory that is available at any given moment and throttles according to the need of the application, so there is never an issue of resource contention or memory starvation. If a system is ever memory constrained at any point, SSDkeeper's caching engine will back off entirely. However, systems with just 4GB of available DRAM commonly serve 50% of read traffic. It doesn't take much available memory to have a big impact on performance.

SSDkeeper is a lightweight file system driver that runs invisibly in the background with near-zero intrusion on system resources. All optimizations occur automatically in real-time.

Enhanced Reporting

If you ever wanted to know how much Windows inefficiencies were robbing system performance, SSDkeeper tracks time saved due to elimination of small, fragmented writes and time saved from every read request that is served from DRAM instead of being served from the underlying SSD. Users can leverage SSDkeeper’s built-in dashboard to see what percentage of all write requests are reduced by sequentializing otherwise small, fractured writes and what percentage of all read requests are cached from idle, available DRAM.

While SSDkeeper provides the same core patented functionality as the latest Diskeeper® 16 for hard disk drives (minus defragmentation functions for hard disk drives only), the benefit to a solid-state drive is different than to a hard disk drive. Hard disk drives do not suffer from write amplification that reduces longevity. By eliminating excessively small writes, IntelliWrite goes beyond improved write performance but extends endurance as well.

Available in Professional and Server Editions

SSDkeeper Professional for Windows PCs with SSD drives greatly enhances the performance of corporate laptops and desktops.

SSDkeeper Server speeds physical server system performance of the most I/O intensive applications such as MS-SQL Server by 2X to 10X depending on the amount of idle, unused memory.

Options include Diskeeper Administrator management console to automate network deployment and management across hundreds or thousands of PCs or servers.

A free 30-day software trial download is available at http://www.condusiv.com/evaluation-software/.

Additional Resources

Details on new SSDkeeper product features and benefits are available at www.condusiv.com.

About Condusiv Technologies

Condusiv® Technologies is the world leader in software-only storage performance solutions for virtual and physical server environments, enabling systems to process more data in less time for faster application performance. Condusiv guarantees to solve the toughest application performance challenges with faster than new performance via V-locity® for virtual servers or Diskeeper® and now SSDkeeper, for physical servers or PCs. With over 100 million licenses sold, Condusiv solutions are used by 90 percent of the Fortune 1000 and almost three-quarters of the Forbes Global 100 to increase business productivity and reduce datacenter costs while extending the life of existing hardware.

For more information, visit www.condusiv.com

Follow us on Twitter and Like Us on Facebook

Contact at 7590 N Glenoaks Bl, Burbank, California 91504, USA; 818-771-1600, custinfo@condusiv.com

© 2017 Condusiv Technologies Corporation. All rights reserved. Condusiv, the Condusiv Logo, Diskeeper, IntelliMemory, IntelliWrite, Set It and Forget It are registered trademarks or trademarks owned by Condusiv Technologies Corporation. All other trademarks and brand names are the property of the respective owners.