JoTo PR features Condusiv Technologies, an industry pioneer in software-only storage performance solutions for over three decades. Advances in data creation and analysis bolsters the need for I/O reduction software to maximize the performance of sizable applications run on SQL Servers.

(Tampa Bay, Fla.) September 18, 2018 – 43 trillion gigabytes of data will be created by 2020, an increase of 300 million times the data circulation in 2005.1 Additionally, reports indicate the growth of data center space is increasing “20 percent a year.”2 JoTo PR client, Condusiv Technologies, is a world leader in I/O reduction software and SQL database performance and joins JOTO PR‘s client roster to emphasize major contributors towards the expansion of data collection and analysis—the Internet of Things and cloud computing3—along with the changes of digital infrastructures within various industries.

Personal devices such as refrigerators, automobiles and health monitors are communicating with one another via computer systems in the IoT era. In a study by Gartner, the revenue from IoT-enabled services and products will exceed $300 billion and result in $1.9 trillion in global economic value-add through sales into diverse end markets.4 In response to the demand for data storage space, Google and Microsoft have accelerated data center growth plans to ensure operations for cloud computing to keep up with market leader, Amazon Web Services.5,6 Condusiv Technologies’ software-only storage performance solutions for virtual and physical server environments enable systems to process more data in less time−resulting in customers experiencing a minimum of 50% faster performance gains on their heaviest workloads.7

Karla Jo Helms, Founder and CEO of JoTo PR, states that CIO’s are seeking best practices in optimizing data storage, performance and applications. “Big data is changing attitudes of IT executives who want to select a comprehensive approach within their respective IT budgets.” She also notes it can be a tough endeavor as global IT spending is projected to increase 6.2% this year, per Gartner.8 Another option for IT executives is to implement an all-software solution to run larger applications on SQL servers, without purchasing additional hardware.

V-locity, Condusiv Technologies “set and forget” I/O reduction software, eliminates severe inefficiencies on Windows virtual servers, leading to a 30-40% reclaim of their IOPS. “As companies purchase new hardware to deal with the influx of data, Condusiv Technologies is implementing software that reduces input and output to boost the proficiency of data aggregation,” added Helms. “This helps corporations save millions to billions of dollars—that can be put back into their expansion and boost the economy.”

With over 100 million licenses sold, Condusiv solutions are used by 90% of Fortune 1000 companies and almost three-quarters of Forbes Global 100 companies to increase business productivity and reduce data center costs while extending the life of existing hardware. Condusiv guarantees to solve the toughest application performance challenges with faster-than-new performance via V-locity® for virtual servers and Diskeeper® or SSDkeeper® for physical servers and PCs.

Condusiv CEO Jim D’Arezzo has had a long and distinguished career in the high-tech arena. Condusiv was founded in 1981 by Craig Jensen as Executive Software. Over 37 years, he has taken the thought leadership in file system management and caching and transformed it into enterprise software.

JoTo PR has a history of innovative PR services that demonstrates their ability in gaining consistent news traction within the media for national and international organizations—helping provide front-line information to the media about industry disruptions and technological solutions aimed at making markets better for consumers. The firm is a trailblazer in the PR industry, blending traditional PR expertise with disruptive digital media to harness the advantages of the current media landscape. JoTo PR specializes in the healthcare, finance and technology sectors, but has worked for a variety of industries and non-profits, using a proprietary process to consistently identify, communicate and distribute to the press the newest news that’s most valuable to its readers, viewers and listenership.

About JoTo PR:

After doing marketing research on a cross-section majority of 5,000 CEOs of fast-growth trajectory companies and finding out exactly how they used PR, how they measure it and how they wanted the PR industry to be different, PR veteran and innovator Karla Jo Helms created JoTo PR and established its entire business model on those research findings. Astute in recognizing industry changes since its launch in 2009, JoTo PR’s team utilizes newly established patterns to create timely PR campaigns comprising both traditional and the latest proven media methods. This unique skill enables JoTo PR to continue to increase the market share and improve return on investment (ROI) for its clients, year after year—beating usual industry standards. Based in Tampa Bay, Florida, JoTo PR is an established international public relations agency. Today, all of JoTo PR’s processes are streamlined PR services that have become the hallmark of the JoTo PR name. For more information, visit JoTo PR online at https://www.jotopr.com.

Lambert, Liam; “Transformation Will Sweep Information Technology,” Market Mogul; August 21, 2017.

Miller, Rich; “Can Data Center Builders Keep Up with the Cloud Arms Race?” Data Center Frontier; May 11, 2018.

Miller, Rich; “Can Data Center Builders Keep Up with the Cloud Arms Race?” Data Center Frontier; May 11, 2018.

Gartner; “Gartner Says the Internet of Things Installed Base Will Grow 26 Billion Units By 2020,” Gartner; December 12, 2013.

Miller, Rich; “As Cloud Wars Intensify, Google Adds More Data Centers,” Data Center Frontier; March 22, 2016

Miller, Rich; “Microsoft Accelerates it’s Cloud Growth with Data Center Deals,” Data Center Frontier; April 13, 2016.

Silicon Review Team; “The World Leader in I/O Reduction Software: Condusiv Technologies,” The Silicon Review; 2017.

Gartner; “Gartner Says Global IT Spending to Grow 6.2 Percent in 2018,” Gartner; April 9, 2018.

###

Media Inquiries:

Ash Richardson

JoTo PR

727-777-4621