The most successful tech company in the Czech Republic brings Silicon Valley to Prague

Prague, Czech Republic, January 21, 2016 - Avast Software, maker of the world's most trusted PC and mobile security software, today announced and celebrated the opening of its new headquarters into the Enterprise Office Center building in Pankrac, Prague. The need for more space was a result of Avast's significant growth and success in recent years. Avast has more than tripled in staff in the past five years and is now in a building that will support the next phase of its growth. To celebrate, Avast hosted a Gala Grand Opening today with a special guest, former world chess champion Garry Kasparov, tours of Avast's new office space, and live demonstrations of Avast's applications for home, mobile, business and enterprise.

"Avast has chosen a building that reflects its open, innovative, and inspirational company culture. We selected Erste Group Immorent to construct our new home as they are the leader in building modern infrastructure in Central Europe,” said Vince Steckler, chief executive officer of Avast. “With this move we plan on continuing to grow in the mobile sphere, to further expand our SMB and enterprise business and to provide consumers with innovative security they will need in an “Internet of Things” world."

"Avast is a remarkable company. Its success springs from innovations, comprehensive technology and creativity of top experts. We are honored that such a top tech company has chosen our Enterprise Office Center building as its new headquarters,” said Tomas Veleminsky, CEO of Erste Group Immorent. "For us this proves our ability to meet up the highest standards and provide the most demanding tenants with desired comfort and top level service."

Garry Kasparov spoke at the Gala Grand Opening about moments from his remarkable chess career, human psychology and decision making, and how these relate to computer intelligence. Mr. Kasparov subsequently challenged ten guests to a simultaneous chess match. Also as an honored guest, Andrew Schapiro, U.S. Ambassador to the Czech Republic, spoke about Avast's success in the United States.

Silicon Valley inspired space

Avast brought the ideas and design principles popular in Silicon Valley for inspiring excellence and collaboration, to its new 15,000 square meter office space. Avast currently occupies seven floors, which each have stairways that are six meters wide making it easy to mingle with colleagues as you come and go. There are 45 meeting rooms where employees can get together to strategize and collaborate. Avast employees also have a Silicon Valley style cafeteria, which serves fine food for free from morning until late afternoon. The cafeteria is furnished with picnic-style tables and benches, supporting coincidental meetings among employees who normally may not sit together.

The office's fitness area gives employees the chance to have a healthy work-life balance. In addition to the fitness room, employees have the opportunity to meet and get to know each other in other relaxing and fun areas in the building such as in the hammock room, by the pool tables, near the golf simulator, in the cinema, or at the library. The kid's room serves as support to the parents of Avast.