Maranello the Land of Ferrari. Sounds sexy, right?

We all know the monk who sold a Ferrari, but you know what? I would become a Monk if I am promised to get a Ferrari!!! LoL…

Maranello – this is the land of Ferrari, where these beasts are manufactured. And it sits right in the middle of a region in Italy called, Emilia Romagna. It extends from Piacenza on the west to the Adriatic Sea on the east. But our area of interest is Modena which is the heart of this region, where my favourite Land of Ferrari is situated.

Do you know this region is the home of most of the luxury cars like Lamborghini, Maserati, and Ducati? They say dreams are not the one that comes in sleep, but the one that does not allow you to sleep. Yes, this is the place where Enzo Ferrari‘s dream came true.

Although originally the factory was started in Modena, it was moved to Maranello during World War II. Since then, it has been the Mecca of petrolheads and F1 race fanatics.

How to reach Maranello the Land of Ferrari

Maranello is a small town which hosts the Ferrari museum and has minimum connectivity with the external world if you want to use public transport. To visit this place, you need to fly down to Bologna airport and reach Modena, the nearest big town.

Are you looking for how to choose Hotels for your stay? Do not miss to read my tips here.

From here you can catch a bus to Maranello. Do expect a very low frequency of public transport.

But if you are planning to visit the Ferrari Museum, you are lucky. Yes, you have a paid shuttle bus link between Modena Railway Station and the Ferrari Museum in Maranello (20 km away) and is available exclusively for visitors to the Museums and runs 90 minutes.

The special shuttle bus also connects the Ferrari Museum in Maranello with the Museo Enzo Ferrari in Modena, which is around 1 km from the Modena station. Tickets are available on the bus, in the Museums or online.

Welcome to Maranello

Well just because you press your pedal on the Ferrari, does not mean that you can floor to the pedal. You need to stick to the official speed limit of the urban roads, 50KMPH.

Tips to save some buck: You can have a clear view of the F1 testing track from this place where the Maranello town starts. There is a small bridge which provides a good view. If lucky, you can see those red machines zooming across the test track.

Museo Ferrari

The Ferrari Museum in Maranello also offers visitors exclusive shuttle bus tours to the Fiorano track along with the Viale Enzo Ferrari in the factory complex. The 45-minute bus tour takes visitors into the Ferrari factory site and around the Fiorano track and the Company facilities. But you are not allowed to get off the bus. All you can do is peep into the manufacturing of the Ferraris.

During my first visit, the museum displayed the 500th production unit of La Ferrari. The car was supposed to be auctioned. With those lines so sleek and sexy, LaFerrari is the first Ferrari not to have a design from Pininfarina, which is a very surprising move from Ferrari.

If you have not heard of it, the car was auctioned for a price of 7 million dollars! Do you think this was exorbitant? Hold your breath. The Open Coupe version of this La Ferrari was auctioned for 10 million dollars!!!

Once you are inside the Museum, I am sure you will have no clue where to begin.

Welcome to the Land of Ferrari – Maranello.

There are literally Ferarri everywhere you look. The 1950s, F1 models and other cars are showcased in here. It would definitely be a wonderful treat for the eyes of the fans.

Personally, my camera was on heavy duty clicking every Red, Green, and Yellow. Especially that sea of Red!

Take it for Spin

Yes, you heard it right. Close to the museum and in fact, all over Maranello, you will find rental offices renting the Ferrari and other luxury cars for feeling the driving pleasure. All for less than 100 Euro. Of course Plus the insurance.

Even a casual walk around the Maranello will certainly prove to you why I said this is the Land of Ferrari. Yes, there are many who take this car for a spin and love the pleasure of being behind the wheels of the Ferrari for a short period! Who can miss the chance, right?

Are you ready to grab a RED!!!

Happy Driving.