Overview

August is a good time to visit Freiburg im Breisgau. The weather is usually mildly cool, humid but cool, with temperatures ranging from 55—75°F (13—24°C). There are plenty of events to check out and activities to try in Freiburg im Breisgau during this time. Some of our top recommendations: take a bike tour of the Black Forest, explore the Freiburg Münster market, visit the Schlossbergbahn funicular, and more!

Freiburg im Breisgau has plenty to offer for visitors of all ages and interests. In this article, we tell you the top things to see and do for your August trip to Freiburg im Breisgau. Get inspired by the events, activities, attractions, and experiences unique to August. We’ll let you know where to explore events based on your interests, whether that’s food, culture, art, music, sport or others.

We’ll let you know everything you need to prepare for the weather in Freiburg im Breisgau in August. Learn about what to wear and pack for your trip, the average temperatures throughout August, temperature changes from morning to evening and much more.

Visiting Freiburg im Breisgau? See our Freiburg im Breisgau Trip Planner.

Weather in Freiburg im Breisgau in August

Temperatures on an average day in Freiburg im Breisgau in August

The average temperature in Freiburg im Breisgau in August for a typical day ranges from a high of 75°F (24°C) to a low of 55°F (13°C). Some would describe it as mildly cool, humid but cool.

For comparison, the hottest month in Freiburg im Breisgau, July, has days with highs of 76°F (24°C) and lows of 55°F (13°C). The coldest month, February has days with highs of 39°F (4°C) and lows of 25°F (-4°C). This graph shows how an average day looks like in Freiburg im Breisgau in August based on historical data.

Visiting Freiburg im Breisgau? See our Freiburg im Breisgau Trip Planner.

General weather summary

Mildly cool, humid but cool

Feels like

37%

Chance of rain

0.161 in

Amount

8.3 mph

Wind speed

73%

Humidity

14.3 hrs

Daylight length

6:22 AM

Sunrise

8:41 PM

Sunset

52%

Cloud cover

T-shirt

What to wear

What to wear in August

With an average high of 75°F (24°C) and a low of 55°F (13°C), it generally feels mildly cool, humid but cool. There might also be a small chance of rain. With that in mind, most people would dress in something light like your favorite t-shirt