What’s the climate like in Freiburg?

The current climate in Freiburg features temperatures ranging from a high of 23°C to a low of 5°C throughout the year. The average yearly temperature is around 15°C. At night, temperatures in the colder months average around 1°C and in the warmer months around 14°C.

The highest temperature recorded in Freiburg in recent years was 36°C in July 2022. The lowest daytime temperature recorded was -9°C in January 2014.

On average, Freiburg gets 828 mm of precipitation each year, including rain, snow, and hail. Of this, about 12 cm is snowfall. For comparison, New York gets 833 mm of precipitation each year.

Click on the month name to see more weather details, like daily averages, temperatures, and precipitation for the past years in that month.

The best time to visit Freiburg for sunny weather is June through September. During this period, you'll have good temperatures and not too much rain, making it a great time to visit Freiburg. In the other months of the year, there's too much rain or the temperature isn't ideal for a visit if you want sunny and pleasant weather.

Climate Table of Freiburg

The climate table of Freiburg shows the average temperatures, rainfall, snow, and UV index per month. The table gives an overview of the average day and night temperatures in degrees Celsius, the total amount of rainfall in millimetres, the total snowfall in centimetres, and the UV index for each month. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it's snow or hail.

Click on the month name to see more weather details, like daily averages, temperatures, and precipitation for the past years in that month.

Average yearly temperature: 15°C

Highest temperature: 23°C in July and August

Lowest temperature: 5°C in January

Precipitation*: 828 mm per year, averaging 69 mm per month

Snowfall: 12 cm per year

Driest months: 42 mm in April, 54 mm in May and 55 mm in March

Wettest months: 91 mm in July, 88 mm in October and 83 mm in December

*Precipitation is measured as a combination of rain, snow, and hail

Average Temperature per Month in Freiburg

This graph shows the average maximum temperatures per month in Freiburg, Germany. The temperatures are shown in degrees Celsius and the average is calculated based on the recorded temperatures per month from past years.

Average Rainfall per Month in Freiburg

This graph shows how much rainfall Freiburg, Germany, gets on average per month. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it's snow or hail. This makes it easy to compare how much has fallen, regardless of the form of precipitation. The amount of rainfall is measured in millimetres and the average is calculated based on the recorded rainfall per month from past years.

Average Snowfall per Month in Freiburg

This graph shows how much snow Freiburg, Germany, gets on average per month. The amount of snowfall is measured in centimetres and the average is calculated based on the recorded snowfall per month from past years.

Average UV Index per Month in Freiburg

This graph shows the average UV index per month in Freiburg, Germany. The UV index indicates the intensity of ultraviolet radiation and ranges from 0 to a maximum of 11.

Yearly Temperature in Freiburg

This graph shows the average yearly temperature in Freiburg, Germany. The yearly temperature, expressed in degrees Celsius, is the average of all twelve monthly temperatures summed up for that year.

Total Yearly Rainfall in Freiburg

This chart shows the total yearly rainfall in Freiburg, Germany, over the past few years. The total yearly rainfall, measured in centimetres, is the sum of all the rain that fell in the twelve months of that year.

Total Yearly Snowfall in Freiburg

This chart shows the total yearly snowfall in Freiburg, Germany, over the past few years. The total yearly snowfall, measured in centimetres, is the sum of all the snow that fell in the twelve months of that year.