By landing investor Frank Giustra, launching a joint venture with Hollywood heavyweight Lionsgate (NYSE:LGF) and setting up a Los Angeles office, Vancouver-based Thunderbird Films has hit its biggest milestones in eight years of business.

Thunderbird finances, produces and distributes television programming.

Company president Michael Shepard told Business in Vancouver that the last major spike in the company’s trajectory occurred about five years ago, when Thunderbird secured mass U.S. TV syndication for Da Vinci’s Inquest.

“No Canadian show had ever done anything like that.”

But Shepard added that the recent series of deals, announced between late February and late March, eclipse that achievement. He said the three developments are all rooted in the company’s decision, approximately a year ago, to buy a 50% stake in the Blade Runner film franchise.

He said Blade Runner, in tandem with Giustra’s longtime friendship with Thunderbird CEO Tim Gamble, drew the financier to buy into Thunderbird. “We’re all Blade Runner fans in the organization, but I think Frank has seen the film 64 times or something,” Shepard said. “So he, more than anyone, is aware of what an important science-fiction franchise [it is]. It’s one franchise movie that is outside of the studio system, and the opportunity to do sequels and many sequels for years to come – it’s a huge opportunity.”

Shepard said Giustra’s involvement in the company is also what has positioned Thunderbird to land Lionsgate as a partner in launching joint-venture Sea to Sky Entertainment.

“We wouldn’t be here if it wasn’t for Frank,” he said. “[Lionsgate is] very keen to be in business with Frank. He’s a business legend, and he’s a philanthropist, and everyone at Lionsgate has a tremendous amount of respect for the person who put their company together.”

Shepard didn’t detail what Giustra’s role will be with Sea to Sky, but he characterized him as “a godparent” to the company.

Giustra couldn’t be reached for comment.

Shepard said Sea to Sky will focus on acquiring deals with A-list Hollywood talent to produce scripted TV programming. He added that the new company allows Thunderbird to move into a different sphere of programming than the Vancouver-shot Canadian productions that have been its bread and butter.

“With A-level talent in Hollywood we’re dealing with the biggest U.S. networks – broadcast, cable, pay,” he said.

“And it’s a broader group of people that we haven’t been dealing with and Lionsgate is in that world and it allows us to be in the same business and get to be in a theatre that’s totally separate.”

He said the new company has no dedicated physical space, but will be largely run out of L.A. between Lionsgate and Thunderbird’s new office. •