News on Shania Twain, Who, Brian Eno, Bad Moon Music

Shania Twain will stage a free concert July 27 at Hutchinson Field in Chicago’s Grant Park. died June 27, 2002, in Las Vegas on the eve of the band’s North American tour kickoff.

Like the concerts and the DVD, proceeds from the CD set will benefit the Teenage Cancer Trust.

— Barry A. Jeckell, N.Y.

Experimental composer, artist, and producer Brian Eno has released a new album, “January 07003, Bell Studies for the Clock of the Long Now.” The content is culled from his synthesizer experiments inspired by a 10,000-year clock that is being developed by the Long Now Foundation, of which Eno is an active board member.

“This record has grown out of the Long Now Foundation’s project — the Clock of the Long Now,” Eno said in a statement. “This is an idea to create a working clock which will mark time for ten thousand years — not really because we need more clocks in the world, but because we need more encouragement to start contemplating the possibility of a distant human future.”

Eno describes the album’s music as an interpretation of the possible sounds of futuristic bells “with quite different physical properties from those we now know.” The 15-track disc is available from the Long Now Foundation’s official Web site, Eno’s online store, and the Science Museum of London.

— Troy Carpenter, N.Y.

Trending on Billboard

Bad Moon Music, a new band featuring former Chamberlain guitarist Adam Rubenstein and drummer Charlie Walker, will make its live debut with two shows this weekend. The group, which also features bassist Ryan Everitt, will play tomorrow (June 7) at CBGB Gallery in New York and Sunday at North Six in Brooklyn.

Since Chamberlain disbanded in fall 2000, Rubenstein recorded a solo album, “Aftershock,” under the moniker Adam Dove for Doghouse. Walker has recorded and toured with New End Original, and recently played on recordings with Oslo, a project led by No Doubt keyboardist Gabriel McNair.

Bad Moon Music is planning to record an album in the near future. The group’s members previously played together in Six On Sleaze, which also featured former Chamberlain bassist Curtis Mead.

— Jonathan Cohen, N.Y.

Get weekly rundowns straight to your inbox

Sign Up