By Cristina Kinon, New York Daily News

"High School Musical 2" star Ashley Tisdale wants all the teen magazines to get one thing straight — she and co-star Vanessa Hudgens are not rivals.

They're actually best friends.

"People always try to compare me and Vanessa to each other, and it's so weird," Tisdale told the New York Daily News. "We're always laughing when people pit us against one another in magazines, like Vanessa versus Ashley: The Feud!' We call each other twin sisters. She's one of my closest and bestest friends."

The BFFs appear in the second installment of the "High School Musical" franchise, which premiered Friday on the Disney Channel.

"The first one we did two years ago, and the songs have played over and over again, so I'm excited for the sequel to come out with the new music," said Tisdale.

Since "High School Musical's" debut, Tisdale's visibility has grown steadily, and her recent Malibu beach romps have caught the attention of the paparazzi.

For some young stars, that might signal the beginning of the end, but Tisdale says she's not headed for Hollywood-hellcat infamy.

"It's kind of funny, because some comments on the Internet sites are, She doesn't act her age. She acts so young,' " said Tisdale. "I definitely am different from any 22-year-old, but is it because I'm not drinking and I'm not smoking like a party animal? I know how to have fun doing just normal things."

Tisdale, a New Jersey native, said her own high school experience as the new kid in California classrooms was nothing like "High School Musical," and she's a far cry from the character she plays, mean girl Sharpay.

"I'm more sarcastic and funny, and I would hope that I'm sweeter than Sharpay," she said.

In "High School Musical 2," Sharpay pulls out all the stops to get her crush — Troy Bolton (Zac Efron) — to sing with her in a country-club talent show.

"I've always figured, if I didn't get his attention already, it wasn't worth it," Tisdale said.

Next up for the bubbly blond is a father-daughter film called "Picture This."

"(My character) will be totally opposite from Sharpay, but it's not anything superserious," Tisdale said "She works at Petco and is definitely the girl that's not popular and doesn't know how to put herself together. It's kind of cool to play that character that's not the popular girl with the coolest clothes."

As for doing a "High School Musical 3," Tisdale said she's up for it, but "I definitely want to read the script first."