High School Musical 2 is the second film in the High School Musical series. The World Premiere took place on August 14, 2007,[1] at Disneyland, in Anaheim, California. The primary cast, including Zac Efron, Vanessa Hudgens, Ashley Tisdale, Lucas Grabeel, and Corbin Bleu attended the event. The film debuted on television on August 17, 2007, on Disney Channel in the U.S., and on Family in Canada.

In the second installment of the Disney franchise, high school student Troy Bolton stresses over getting a job, with the price of college expenses looming on his mind, as well as trying to make sure he and Gabriella Montez are able to stay together all summer. This situation attracts the attention of Sharpay Evans, who attempts to steal Troy for herself by hiring him at her family's country club.

The premiere was seen by a total of over 17.2 million viewers[2] in the United States which is almost 10 million more than its predecessor, making it the highest-rated Disney Channel Movie of all time as well as the highest-rated basic cable telecast at the time.[3][4][5]

Plot[]

The school year ends with everyone at East High School looking forward to summer vacation ("What Time Is It"). Troy Bolton is still dating Gabriella Montez, who decides to stay in Albuquerque with her mother. Troy eventually decides to look for a summer job to gain money for college.

Sharpay and Ryan Evans plan to spend part of the summer at their family's country club, Lava Springs ("Fabulous"), but Sharpay's summer plans also include pursuing Troy, whom she has arranged to be hired at the club. However, Troy convinces the club's manager, Mr. Fulton, into hiring Gabriella and their close group of friends as well; including Taylor and Chad. Sharpay is enraged upon learning that Gabriella is working as one of the lifeguards, but is unable to get her fired. So she orders Fulton to give them difficult tasks so they would be best to quit. Fulton attempts to intimidate the group, but Troy rebuilds their confidence and convinces them that they can persevere ("Work This Out").

Troy continues to worry about funding for college. Sharpay senses his need and arranges for Troy to be promoted, hoping that this will convince him to sing with her at the talent show. Meanwhile, Kelsi writes a ballad for Troy and Gabriella. Troy agrees to sing with his friends in the show ("You Are The Music In Me"), not knowing that Sharpay is vying for his attention. (In the extended version, Sharpay and Ryan trap Troy as he prepares for a date with Gabriella, and perform their potential show-stopper ("Humuhumunukunukuapua'a").

Ryan realizes he does not mean much to Sharpay anymore, as she is ready to blow her brother aside for the opportunity to perform with Troy. This leads to tension between the twin siblings and Ryan angrily informs Sharpay that he will no longer obey her orders. Taylor and Gabriella invite Ryan to the baseball game, where he persuades the Wildcats to take part in the talent show ("I Don't Dance").

Troy and Gabriella's relationship is strained when Troy sees Ryan with Gabriella, sparking jealousy. Owing to a "promise" from Troy, he and Sharpay practice their song for the Midsummer Night's Talent Show ("You Are The Music In Me (Sharpay Version)").

When Sharpay discovers that Ryan and the Wildcats are putting together their own performance in the show, she orders Mr. Fulton to ban all junior staff members from performing. Gabriella angrily confronts Sharpay about her interference and quits her job at Lava Springs. Troy overhears the exchange and tries to persuade Gabriella to change her mind. Gabriella expresses her loss of trust with Troy ("Gotta Go My Own Way") and leaves Lava Springs, and gives him the necklace back. It also seems that they broke up.

Troy returns to work the next day to find that his friends refuse to talk to him. Kelsi silently shows Troy the notice from Mr. Fulton, causing Troy to question his own motivations ("Bet On It"). He begins to reconcile with Chad and his other friends. Then Troy confronts Sharpay, informing her that he will not sing with her because of the way Sharpay and Troy himself have been treating tbe junior staff earlier. The Wildcats and Chad forgive Troy for his absence and convince him to sing in the talent show, which he does only under the condition that they are all allowed to perform as well.

At Sharpay's supposed instruction, Ryan gives Troy a new song to learn moments before the show. As Troy goes onstage, he asks Sharpay why she switched the song, and Sharpay is shocked to find that her brother tricked her. Troy sings the song ("Everyday") alone until Gabriella surprisingly joins him onstage. In the end, Sharpay proudly presents her brother, Ryan, with the award for the talent show. After the talent show, all the Wildcats go to the golf course to enjoy the fireworks.

Everyone celebrates the end of the summer with a pool party ("All for One") which features a cameo appearance by Miley Cyrus.

Cast[]

Zac Efron as Troy Bolton

Vanessa Hudgens as Gabriella Montez

Ashley Tisdale as Sharpay Evans

Lucas Grabeel as Ryan Evans

Corbin Bleu as Chad Danforth

Monique Coleman as Taylor McKessie

Mark L. Taylor as Mr. Fulton

Bart Johnson as Jack Bolton

Robert Curtis Brown as Vance Evans

Jessica Tuck as Mrs. Evans

Alyson Reed as Ms. Darbus

Chris Warren Jr. as Zeke Baylor

Ryne Sanborn as Jason Cross

Olesya Rulin as Kelsi Nielsen

KayCee Stroh as Martha Cox

Tanya Chisholm as Jackie

Miley Cyrus as Girl at Pool

Kelli Baker as Lea

McCall Clark as Emma

Leslie Wing as Mrs. Bolton (credited as Leslie Wing Pomeroy)

Jaymz Tuaileva as Javier

K. Danor Gerald as Player

Release[]

Disney Channel aired a weekly program called Road to High School Musical 2, beginning on June 8, 2007, and leading up to the premiere of High School Musical 2 in August. The show offered viewers a behind-the-scenes look into the production of the movie. The world premiere of the opening number "What Time Is It" was on Radio Disney May 25, 2007,[6] and similarly "You Are The Music In Me" premiered on July 13, 2007.[7]

On December 11, 2007, the movie was released on DVD and Blu-ray titled High School Musical 2: Extended Edition. On September 15, 2008, a 2-disc special edition of the movie was released titled High School Musical 2: Deluxe Dance Edition. In fact, this was the first Disney Channel Original Movie to get a Blu-Ray release.

Songs[]

Song Chiefly sung by Other singers Scene What Time Is It? Troy, Gabriella, Sharpay, Ryan, Chad, Taylor Wildcats East High's Classroom, Hallways, Cafeteria What Time Is It (Reprise) Troy, Gabriella, Sharpay, Ryan, Chad, Taylor Wildcats East High's School Grounds Fabulous Sharpay Ryan & Sharpettes Lava Springs Pool Work This Out Troy, Gabriella, Chad, Taylor, Kelsi, Zeke, Martha, Jason Wildcats and Kitchen Workers Lava Springs Kitchen You Are the Music in Me Troy and Gabriella Kelsi and Wildcats Lava Springs Dining Room Humuhumunukunukuapua'a Sharpay and Ryan Sharpettes Lava Springs Backstage Room I Don't Dance Chad and Ryan Baseball Players, Wildcats, and Company Lava Springs Baseball Field You Are the Music in Me (Reprise) Sharpay and Troy Sharpettes Lava Springs Stage Gotta Go My Own Way Gabriella Troy Lava Springs Pool, Locker Room, Grounds Bet On It Troy None Lava Springs Golf Course Everyday Troy and Gabriella Wildcats and Company Lava Springs Stage All for One Troy, Gabriella, Sharpay, Ryan, Chad, Taylor Kelsi, Zeke, Martha, Jason, Wildcats, Company Lava Springs Pool

Reception[]

The first broadcast of the film on August 17, 2007 broke records, receiving 17.2 million viewers.[4] This number made it, at the time, the most-watched basic-cable telecast in history (the previous record was held by an edition of ESPN's Monday Night Football between the New York Giants and the Dallas Cowboys on October 23, 2006, which attracted 16 million viewers), the most-watched made-for-cable movie ever (the previous record was held by TNT's January 21, 2001 airing of Crossfire Trail, which brought in 12.5 million viewers), and the largest audience of any program on broadcast or cable in the 2007 summer television season, along with Friday nights for the past five years. Ratings for the second showing of the movie fell to 8.4 million, and the third showing fell to 7.4 million, totaling the premiere weekend to 33.04 million viewers.[8]

In Latin America, the premiere of High School Musical 2 was seen by 3.3 million viewers in the north region. The film was the most-watched in its schedule, among all cable channels, and produced the highest rating of the channel, surpassing all original films of Disney Channel. Among other records, the premiere in Argentina surpassed the debut of High School Musical the last year, in a 107 percent, while in Brazil the sequel reached 208 percent, and Mexico did so with 61 percent.[9] In the United Kingdom, the movie became Disney Channel UK's most viewed program ever, totaling 1.2 million viewers in its first showing.[10]

The film received mixed to positive reviews from critics, gaining a score of 57% on Rotten Tomatoes while gaining a score of 72/100 at Metacritic.[11][12] USA Today's Robert Bianco awarded the film three stars out of four, saying High School Musical 2 was "sweet, smart, bursting with talent and energy, and awash in innocence".[13] While critics enjoyed the film, they noted that the timing of the movie's premiere seemed odd, premiering just when school was about to start up again, while the movie's plot involved the gang going on summer vacation.[14] High School Musical 2 won the "So Hot Right Now" award at the Nickelodeon Australian Kids' Choice Awards 2007, in which High School Musical castmate Zac Efron hosted with The Veronicas.

High School Musical 2: On Stage![]

Main article: High School Musical 2: On Stage!

Like the original High School Musical, the sequel has been adapted into two different theatrical productions: a one-act, 70-minute version and a two-act full-length production. This stage production includes the song "Hummuhummunukunukuapua'a" that was left out of the original movie but included in the DVD. Through Music Theater International, Disney Theatrical began licensing the theatrical rights in October 2008. MTI had originally recruited 7 schools to serve as tests for the new full-length adaptation, but due to complications with multiple drafts of both the script and the score, all but two schools were forced to drop out of the pilot program.

On May 18, 2008, Woodlands High School became the first school to produce High School Musical 2.

From July 17-August 3, 2008, Harrell Theatre, in Collierville, Tennessee, was the first community theatre to perform the production, which featured both a senior cast and a junior cast.

From January 15 - February 15, 2009, the West Coast premiere production was presented by Pacific Repertory Theatre's School of Dramatic Arts. The production was directed by PacRep founder Stephen Moorer, who previously directed the California premiere of the first High School Musical.[15]

From 6–18 April 2009, the UK Premiere was performed by StageDaze Theatre Company in Cardiff.[16]

Trivia[]

Zac Efron finally sings with his own vocals starting with this film, after his singing voice was substituted with Drew Seeley's vocals in the first movie. This is because the songs for the second film were written to suit his baritone range.

Considering that this film is summer themed, majority of it took place at Lava Springs Country Club.

This is the only film where it doesn't predominantly take place at East High.

The Lava Springs Country Club scenes were filmed at an actual resort, The Inn at Entrada, located in St. George, Utah.

The cast and crew were lodged in the resort's villas during filming.

Like East High, the resort became a popular tourist destination.

It's been revealed in the film that the entire East High student body were all hired at Sharpay and Ryan's resort.

Troy and Gabriella have their first onscreen kiss in this film.

Table tennis balls filled in for real golf balls in the golf course scenes. This was done for the safety of the cast and crew and to ensure no filming equipment gets damaged.

This is the only High School Musical film that doesn't have a basketball championship game.

This movie premiered on the same day as the series premiere of Phineas and Ferb.

Miley Cyrus, who is known for playing Hannah Montana, makes a cameo in the finale as one of the dancing pool party attendees. She was voted by Disney fans through a poll by Disney Channel on which Disney star would make a cameo.

Gallery[]

Posters[]

Awards[]

Year Award Category Result 2007 American Music Award Favorite Soundtrack

(High School Musical 2 (soundtrack)) Won Bravo Magazine Award Bravo Otto for TV Star – Male

(Zac Efron) Won CMA Wild and Young Awards Best Single International

(You Are the Music in Me by Zac Efron and Vanessa Hudgens and written by Jamie Houston) Won Family Television Awards Best Actor

(Zac Efron) Won Nickelodeon Australian Kids' Choice Awards Fave Movie Star

(Zac Efron) Won So Hot Right Now! Won Nickelodeon UK Kids' Choice Awards Best TV Actress

(Ashley Tisdale) Won Best TV Actor

(Zac Efron) Nominated People's Choice Awards Favorite Star Under 35

(Zac Efron) Won Teen Choice Awards Choice TV: Movie Won 2008 ALMA Award Outstanding Director of a Made–for–TV Movie

(Kenny Ortega) Won ASTRA Awards Favourite International Program Won Favourite International Personality or Actor

(Zac Efron) Nominated Cinema Audio Society Awards Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing for Television Movies and Miniseries

(Douglas Cameron, Terry O'Bright and Keith Rogers) Nominated Directors Guild of America Award Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Children's Program

(Kenny Ortega) Nominated Golden Reel Award Best Sound Editing – Music for Long Form Television

(Michael Dittrick and Amber Funk) Won Image Award Outstanding Children's Program Nominated PGA Awards Outstanding Producer for Long–Form Television

(Bill Borden and Barry Rosenbush) Nominated Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Choreography

(Kenny Ortega, Bonnie Story and Charles Klapow) Nominated Outstanding Children's Program

(Don Schain, Bill Borden and Barry Rosenbush) Nominated Television Critics Association Awards Outstanding Achievement in Children's Programming Nominated

References[]

[]

Official Movie Website

This page uses content from the English Wikipedia page High School Musical 2. The list of authors can be seen in the . Text from Wikipedia is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.

Media Films: High School Musical • High School Musical 2 • High School Musical 3: Senior Year • Sharpay's Fabulous Adventure

TV Series: High School Musical: Get in the Picture • High School Musical: The Musical: The Series

Video games: Sing It! • Sing It! 3 • Sing It • Disney Sing It: Pop Hits • Disney Sing It: Party Hits • Disney Sing It: Family Hits

Music: High School Musical (Soundtrack) • High School Musical 2 (soundtrack) • High School Musical 3: Senior Year (soundtrack) • Sharpay's Fabulous Adventure (soundtrack) • High School Musical: The Musical: The Series (soundtrack) • High School Musical: The Musical: The Series (season 2 soundtrack) • High School Musical: The Musical: The Series (season 3 soundtrack) • High School Musical: The Musical: The Series (season 4 soundtrack) • High School Musical: The Concert • High School Musical Hits Remixed • High School Musical 2: Non-Stop Dance Party • High School Musical: Be Mine • High School Musical: The Collection • High School Musical: The Musical: The Holiday Special (soundtrack) • Music from High School Musical (Original Score)

Characters HSM: Troy Bolton • Gabriella Montez • Sharpay Evans • Ryan Evans • Chad Danforth • Taylor McKessie • Kelsi Nielsen • Zeke Baylor • Jason Cross • Martha Cox • Ms. Darbus • Jack Bolton • Mrs. Montez • Lucille Bolton • Principal Matsui

HSM2: Thomas Fulton • Vance Evans • Darby Evans • Boi • The Sharpettes

HSM3: Tiara Gold • Jimmy Zara • Donnie Dion • Charlie Danforth • Mrs. Danforth

SFA: Peyton Leverett • Roger Elliston • Tiffani Destin • Amber Lee Adams • Gill Samms • Neal Roberts • Berry Taylor • Mr. Gonzales • Mrs. Gonzalez

HSMTMTS: Ricky Bowen • Nini Salazar-Roberts • E.J. Caswell • Gina Porter • Ashlyn Caswell • Big Red • Kourtney Greene • Carlos Rodriguez • Seb Matthew-Smith • Miss Jenn • Mr. Mazzara • Natalie Bagley • Mike Bowen • Carol Salazar-Roberts • Dana Salazar-Roberts • Malou • Principal Gutierrez • Lynne Bowen • Terri Porter • Emily Pratt • Kalyani Patel • Zack Roy • Lily • Howie • Antoine • Cash Caswell • Michelle Greene • Jack • Jamie Porter • Jet • Maddox • Channing • Dewey Wood • Alex • Emmy • Marvin • Val • Madison • Dani• Mack Alana • Krystal • Quinn Robbins • Harper

Locations East High School • Bolton Household • Mountain Ski Resort • Lava Springs • Stanford University

Songs HSM: Start of Something New • Get'cha Head in the Game • What I've Been Looking For + (Reprise) • Stick to the Status Quo • When There Was Me and You • Bop to the Top • Breaking Free • We're All in This Together • I Can't Take My Eyes Off of You

HSM2: What Time Is It? • Fabulous • Work This Out • You Are The Music in Me + (Reprise) • Humuhumunukunukuapua'a • I Don't Dance • Gotta Go My Own Way • Bet On It • Everyday • All for One

HSM3: Now or Never • Right Here, Right Now • I Want It All • Can I Have This Dance • A Night to Remember • Just Wanna Be with You • The Boys are Back • Walk Away • Scream • Senior Year Spring Musical • High School Musical • Just Getting Started

SFA: Gonna Shine • My Boi and Me + (My Girl and Me) • Walking on Sunshine • Baby • New York's Best Kept Secret • The Rest of My Life

HSMTMTS (season 1): I Think I Kinda, You Know • Wondering • A Billion Sorrys • All I Want • Born to Be Brave • Truth, Justice and Songs in Our Key • Out of the Old • Role of a Lifetime • Just for a Moment • The Medley, The Mash-Up

HSMTM (holiday special): This Christmas (Hang all the Mistletoe) • The Perfect Gift • Feliz Navidad • Hanukkah Medley • Last Christmas • White Christmas • Little Saint Nick • Believe • What Are You Doin' on New Year's Eve? • River • Something in the Air • That's Christmas to Me • Christmas (Baby Please Come Home)

HSMTMTS (season 2): Something in the Air • The Perfect Gift • High School Musical 2 Medley • Belle • 1-2-3 • YAC Alma Mater • Beauty and the Beast • Even When/The Best Part • Red Means Love • Granted • A Dancer's Heart • The Climb • Home • The Rose Song • Around You • The Mob Song • Gaston • If I Can't Love Her • Let You Go • You Ain't Seen Nothin' • In a Heartbeat