MINNEAPOLIS (AP) — Al Jefferson could have waited until next summer to sign a contract extension with the Minnesota Timberwolves.

In fact, that was what his agent advised him to do, hoping that a big season and his status as a restricted free agent would have brought the 22-year-old power forward the highest contract allowable under league rules.

Jefferson ignored that advice and signed a US$65-million, five-year deal just before the deadline Wednesday night. In the era of "Show me the money!" and "bling bling," Jefferson’s reason was stunningly humble.

"I didn’t even think I was worth max (money) this year anyway," Jefferson said at a press conference on Thursday. "I would’ve been a fool to go up there and ask for max, having not really proved myself for that. So the number I got was the number that was my goal from Day 1. And I think it was a win, win situation."

At an average salary of $13 million per season that starts next year, Jefferson certainly won’t be starving. But Timberwolves vice-president of basketball operations Kevin McHale said that had Jefferson signed a max deal, he would have been entitled to 25 percent of Minnesota’s salary cap.

Depending on where the cap is set in each of the next six years, Jefferson likely would have made more than $15 million per season.

"I can tell you around the league, 85 per cent of the people feel they’re worth max," McHale said with a chuckle. "Al’s in the minority of 15 per cent that doesn’t believe he deserves max."

The young Timberwolves desperately need Jefferson to evolve into the max-contract type of player if their massive rebuilding project is going to succeed.

Jefferson was acquired at the end of July from Boston along with four other players — Ryan Gomes, Gerald Green, Sebastian Telfair and Theo Ratliff — and two first-round draft picks for Kevin Garnett, the only superstar the Timberwolves have ever had.

After 12 years of trying, and failing, to surround Garnett with veteran talent to get them to the NBA finals, McHale decided it was time to let the face of the franchise go and start over.

So he pulled the trigger on the unprecedented seven-for-one trade, with Jefferson being the lynch pin of the deal. The six-foot-10, 265-pounder has been a beast on the low block for the Wolves in the pre-season, leading the team with 17.9 points and 13.4 rebounds per game.

McHale adoringly calls him "truly a throwback, low-post, offensive rebound, punch-you-in-the-mouth and score around the paint type guy."

He has long had an affinity for Jefferson’s game, but it took some convincing before McHale decided to sign him long term. Jefferson’s agent, Jeff Schwartz, pushed for an extension as soon as the trade transpired, but McHale didn’t bite.

After eight pre-season games, a training camp trip to Europe, and countless hours on the practice court, McHale is sure now was the right time.

"I knew Al was good," McHale said. "Al’s better than I thought he was. When you’re around him every day, you see his character, you see his personality, you see his work ethic and you see his ability. It’s really a package that’s very, very impressive.".

Establishing a young core including Jefferson, Randy Foye, Corey Brewer and Rashad McCants, McHale has completely revamped a team that has missed the playoffs for three straight seasons. He traded veterans Mike James, Trenton Hassell, Ricky Davis and Mark Blount and bought out the contracts of Troy Hudson and Juwan Howard.

With KG gone to Boston, it’s Jefferson’s team now. After four years with the Celtics, Jefferson thinks he is ready to become a star.

"I told Kevin. I’m prepared for this. I’m ready for this," Jefferson said earlier in training camp. "This is what I want. Every guy in the NBA wants to get the opportunity that I have right now and I want to take advantage of it."