This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now. Have an account? .

"The Walking Dead" star Jeffrey Dean Morgan and "One Tree Hill" alum Hilarie Burton met in 2009.

They have two children together, a son and daughter, and got married in October 2019.

Burton is set to play Morgan's on-screen wife on a season 10 episode of "TWD."

Visit Insider's homepage for more stories.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Burton said that Morgan "pursued her."

"When he came along, he was so sure of himself," Burton told People in 2020. "I was not a girl anyone pursued. I've always been alpha. And Jeffrey was like, 'You're going to be my girlfriend.'"

She added: "It was so nice to be pursued. He's a cute dude! And I liked that he knew exactly who he was. His confidence was intoxicating."

In her 2020 memoir, Burton would go on to say that she and Morgan "weren't made for dating."

"He was the man I was gonna get old and boring with," the actress wrote. "Instead of late nights out at clubs or wining and dining, at night we'd settle in and watch an episode of 'Lonesome Dove.'"

Advertisement

March 14, 2010: The couple welcomed their first child together, son Augustus "Gus" Morgan, but fans didn't find out until months later.

Burton's pregnancy was kept entirely under wraps and out of the public's eye.

News of the couple's baby was first reported by Us Weekly in May 2010, with the publication saying that the actress welcomed the child months prior.

April 20, 2010: The stars made their relationship red-carpet official.

Burton and Morgan posed together at the Los Angeles premiere of the movie "The Losers," which starred him, Chris Evans, Idris Elba, and Zoe Saldana.

Advertisement

For years, it was incorrectly reported that the couple got married in 2014.

Publications referred to the actors as husband and wife, citing 2014 as the year they wed, but it was untrue.

"For years, publications have reported that we got married in 2014 or 2015 and that I've been married and divorced before," Burton said in a 2019 Instagram post, referring to rumors she was married to "OTH" assistant director Ian Prange from 2004 to 2009.

"All untrue," Burton said. "But WE knew our truth. So it felt silly to try and correct anything."

2015: Burton appeared on a few episodes of CBS' "Extant," which Morgan starred on.

She guest-starred as Anna Schaefer on season two of the series. Her "OTH" costar Tyler Hilton also had a recurring role on the show.

Advertisement

February 16, 2018: Burton and Morgan welcomed their second child, daughter George Virginia Morgan.

Burton revealed the news in an Instagram post shared in early March of that year and spoke candidly about their conception challenges.

"It took a long time for Jeffrey and I to have this baby," the actress said. "The first time I got pregnant, it took a year and a half. I surprised him on Christmas with baby Seahawk booties. We cried. We celebrated. We picked out names. And we lost that baby."

Burton said that "more losses followed" in the years it took for her to have another baby.

Because of her past experiences, she said they were "cautious" when she became pregnant with their daughter.

"I didn't want to celebrate for fear of jinxing it," she said. "I didn't want a baby shower. I checked her heartbeat every day, up until the day she was born. And now that she is here, I just stare at her in wonder all day. I see her in her daddy's arms and I don't take any of it for granted."

Morgan also delivered both of their children.

"We didn't use doctors, we used a midwife, so I delivered both of my kids," he told People in 2018. "The first time I didn't know, I was shocked that I was part of it… [The second] time I was a little bit more prepared and got in and got her out immediately."

Advertisement

May 13, 2018: In a Mother's Day tribute, Morgan praised his wife for being "the best, smartest, prettiest, funniest, meanest, most amazing mom ever."

"On behalf of myself, Gus, and George... we all want to thank you," the actor wrote. "With every ounce of who we all are... for being the best mom in the whole world. For making our lives the best, and most special they could ever be."

He continued: "You've created and molded the family I figured I could only dream of... I figured wrong. I love you. I love you for everything. But how I love you for this family you've given us."

Advertisement

March 31, 2019: Morgan celebrated their anniversary with a sweet post on Instagram.

"To my one and only... @hilarieburton there are no words to express to you, both my love... and incredible luck in fooling you into diggin me... 10 years ago we met and that was that," he said.

Advertisement

July 1, 2019: On Burton's birthday, Morgan called the actress "the greatest mom, partner, and best friend a fella could ask for."

"I have to pinch myself constantly because I just can't believe how lucky I got with you," the "Supernatural" alum wrote.

Morgan went on to credit Burton for raising their kids to be "good," "smart," and "caring."

"We are who we are because of you. Better. All that you come in contact with are blessed. The world is so much cooler because of you," he said.

Advertisement

October 5, 2019: Burton and Morgan got married "for real" after 10 years together.

Burton shared details about the wedding in a heartfelt Instagram post.

"We've lived as husband and wife for a decade," she said. "We've built a family and a farm, and found our community."

The actress continued: "From the moment I met @jeffreydeanmorgan, he was my husband. Rather than make vows right out of the gate, we lived them. For over 10 years. The good times and the bad."

In her book, Burton said that they picked New York City's Bowery Hotel as their event location because they were "drawn to the history and mischief of the neighborhood."

The couple was joined at the wedding by their children, select friends and family, and some of their former costars.

"OTH" stars Sophia Bush, Bethany Joy Lenz, and Danneel Ackles were in attendance along with "Supernatural" actors Jared Padalecki, Jensen Ackles, and Norman Reedus. Jensen and Reedus performed the ceremony.

Guests were also given packets of marigold flower seeds straight from the couple's garden.

Burton described the occasion as "private and magical and everything I dreamed" and Morgan called himself the "luckiest man in the world."

In addition, Burton, who calls herself "Mrs. Mischief Morgan," got a tattoo as a "wedding souvenir" that reads "mischief."

Advertisement

December 31, 2019: Burton reflected on her decade-long relationship with Morgan.

"Ten years ago, I was pregnant, unemployed, unsure about where I was gonna live or give birth and despite the bravado I may have projected, I was scared," the actress captioned an Instagram post.

Burton went on to say that her life didn't turn out the way she originally thought, but "2019 was incredibly good to our family."

"The wedding I thought I wanted when I was 26 was made so much sweeter by waiting," she continued. "My love for @jeffreydeanmorgan has evolved into something so much deeper and golden. Our children participated and were at our sides for all of it. It was the celebration of an entire decade."

Advertisement

April 17, 2020: The couple launched a talk show called "Friday Night In With the Morgans."

Filmed via video chat from their upstate New York home (known as Mischief Farm) Morgan and Burton hosted conversations with famous friends like Paul Rudd and Kelly Ripa, plus actors from "The Walking Dead."

"The plan is to maybe smile and laugh in a time that has been very hard to smile, much less laugh," Morgan said of creating their show amid the coronavirus pandemic.

In an Instagram post shared around the same time, Burton also praised Morgan for "being the rock of our family. The calm in the storm" during a year of unrest.

Advertisement

April 22, 2020: Burton called Morgan "electric" and "dynamic" in a post honoring him on his 53rd birthday.

"He laughs hard and can curse a blue streak, and has a heart bigger than most," she wrote. "He takes on responsibility and fights for others, and works hard."

Burton went on to say that Morgan brings his work ethic to his home life as well, as "the pony that our kids hop on," "the cuddler of donkeys," and "the dreamer who pulls a log out of the woods and makes a table or art or mountains of firewood."

"I met him when I was 26, and he saw me for who I wanted to be," she said. "And then he kicked down every obstacle to get us here."

Advertisement

May 5, 2020: Burton released a book titled "The Rural Diaries: Love, Livestock, and Big Life Lessons Down on Mischief Farm."

The book chronicled different stages of her career, her fertility challenges, how her relationship with Morgan evolved, and how they built a farm together in Rhinebeck, NY.

"Being your teammate makes all the unexpected turns manageable," Burton said of Morgan in a post shared about the novel. "You have given me a life worth writing about, and I love you. Plain and simple."

In the memoir's preface, Burton wrote about the impact of Mischief Farm on the couple.

"Our life at Mischief Farm demanded better of us," she said. "We'd found a sanctuary where authenticity mattered. The truths at the far were concrete."

Advertisement

May 10, 2020: Morgan gushed over his wife's "magical self" in a Mother's Day post.

"There really are no words," the actor said. "I've tried so many times in the last 11 years to find em. I can't. No words can do justice to someone that kinda swayed into my world... turned it upside down for the best... and is the greatest partner and mom a fella could ever dream up."

"I'm just gonna acknowledge your magical self... and how lucky we three are," he added.

Advertisement

Advertisement

November 3, 2020: It was announced that Burton will play Morgan's on-screen wife on season 10 of "TWD."

The news was shared by ComicBook.com's Brandon Davis, who said that Burton will be guest-starring as Negan's wife named Lucille on one of the additional episodes set for release on AMC in 2021.

"Been pretty hard to keep this a secret," Burton tweeted after the news came out. "But I love working with @JDMorgan. I love watching him become #Negan and take on that swagger. And I love the @TheWalkingDead family. They've been a part of our family for ages and I'm so grateful for their kindness."

Advertisement

November 12, 2020: Burton posted non-spoiler behind-the-scenes photos from the set of "The Walking Dead" and wrote a heartfelt message about their relationship.

"This month I've gotten to act with my husband @jeffreydeanmorgan for the first time in our life together," she said, explaining that they both appeared on "Extant" but never shared any scenes together.

"And when I tell you it has been a JOY, I'm saying it with tears in my eyes," the actress said of working with her husband on "TWD."

Burton also spoke about how Morgan's character, Negan, has "permeated so much of our life" and they've experienced support from the fandom.

"The flood of generosity and thoughtfulness never ceases to catch us off guard," she said.

In addition, Burton thanked "TWD" showrunner Angela Kang and writer-producer Scott M. Gimple for "believing in me"

"Jeffrey Dean. I am so proud of you. This week has been really f---ing fun. I love you," she added.

Burton also told Interview magazine that in order for them to stay safe while filming during the pandemic, their family lived in "TWD" character Rick Grimes' house in the neighborhood where the show is filmed.

"Alexandria is a little subdivision of houses with a big, huge wall, and it's apocalyptic. There's trash everywhere, and the water tower and all the sets that you see on television. We lived in Rick Grimes' house. There were bullet holes in my child's closet door."

Advertisement

April 4, 2021: Burton will guest-star as Lucille on "TWD."

Episode 22, titled "Here's Negan," will also be available to stream early on AMC Plus on Thursday.

"I might be biased, but I always enjoyed the levity hat Negan brought to the Walking Dead," Burton said in a teaser for the episode.

"He's so good-looking and really charming," she joked. "I would love to know what makes that dude tick."

Read next

Celebrities Celebrity Couples The Walking Dead

Advertisement