The Walking Dead's Jeffrey Dean Morgan has married One Tree Hill actress Hilarie Burton "for real".

Following years of false reports and speculation that the couple were already married, Hilarie has now confirmed that they officially tied the knot on Saturday (October 5).

Taking to her Instagram account to share a picture of them kissing on their wedding day, Hilarie explained that they'd already been living their vows for the ten years they've been together.

Related: The Walking Dead's Jeffrey Dean Morgan says he delivered his newborn daughter

"This past weekend was the best of my entire life," she wrote. "There are dozens of thank yous I need to make. But before we do any of that, Jeff and I just want to put it out there that WE GOT MARRIED! For real.

"We've lived as husband and wife for a decade. We've built a family, and a farm and found our community. For years, publications have reported that we got married in 2014 or 2015 and that I've been married and divorced before. All untrue."

She continued: "From the moment I met @jeffreydeanmorgan , he was my husband. Rather than make vows right out of the gate, we lived them. For over ten years. The good times and the bad.

"Standing up there with our children at our sides – celebrating all that has been – was bliss," she added, before declaring her love for their supportive group of friends.

"So yeah. I'm Mrs. Morgan.10.5.19," she concluded.

Jeffrey also revealed the ceremony was performed by his Supernatural co-star Jensen Ackles and Walking Dead co-star Norman Reedus as he confirmed the marriage on his own Instagram account, sharing photos of himself and Hilarie celebrating with their children – nine-year-old Augustus, and one-year-old daughter, George.

"I'd say words... but there aren't any. Mrs Morgan... I love you. Thank you for making me the luckiest man in the world," he wrote.

We earn a commission for products purchased through some links in this article.

"Thank you to all our friends and family," he added in a follow-up post. "It was, without a doubt... the best day of our lives. Ever ever. Just never knew that it could be so damn perfect. It was. And more."

The Walking Dead airs October 7 at 9pm on FOX in the UK. You can also catch up on the show via . In the US, the show airs Sundays at 9/8c on AMC.

Digital Spy is launching a newsletter – sign up to get it sent straight to your inbox.