This article is about the actor portraying Negan. For other pages with the same name, see: Jeffrey

Jeffrey Dean Morgan is an American actor who portrays Negan Smith in AMC's The Walking Dead Universe.

Biography[]

Jeffrey Dean Morgan was born on April 22, 1966, in Seattle, Washington. While in school, he played football and captained the basketball team. He became one of the star players in the school team, before being sidelined by an injury. Disheartened by this, he decided to pursue a career in graphic designing.

In the late 80s, he decided to move to Los Angeles and learn acting. He soon started auditioning for TV and film roles. His natural charisma and acting skills managed to get him a few minor roles by the early 90s.

In 1996, he played the first major role of his career in the science-fiction series The Burning Zone. His performance was appreciated and by the mid-2000s, he finally started getting major films and TV series roles.

Other Works[]

Dillinger and Capone

Undercover Heat

In the Blink of an Eye

Road Kill

Days of Wrath

Watchmen

The Losers

Jonah Hex

Heist

Desierto

Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice

The O.C.

Rampage

Supernatural

Grey's Anatomy

Shameless

Texas Rising

The Good Wife

Tekken 7

The Boys

Trivia[]

His former manager (who happened to be a very good friend of his) dropped him because he just wasn't getting work just the day before he got his role on Supernatural (2005), claiming she couldn't resurrect his career.

Stated that many people who recognize him mistake him for Javier Bardem.

He had to lose 40 pounds in a short period of time to play a man with tuberculosis in Texas Rising (2015). He lost the weight by eating only a can of tuna per day.

He played the father of 2 unrelated superheroes. He played Thomas Wayne, father of Bruce Wayne/Batman, in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), and he played The Comedian, father of Laurie Juspeczyk/The Silk Spectre, in Watchmen (2009).

He starred alongside Lauren Cohan in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.

His wife in real life, Hilarie Burton Morgan, portrayed Negan's wife, Lucille.

Their son, Gus Morgan, portrayed a walker in "Out of the Ashes".[1]

He stars in The Boys[2] alongside Laila Robins (Pamela Milton), Colby Minifie (Virginia), Jessie T. Usher (Davon) and Laurie Holden (Andrea Harrison).

[]

on

at the

on

on

on

References[]

v · TV Series CastMain CastAlso StarringCo-StarsSpecial GuestsCast Guide: Fear • World Beyond • Tales • Dead City • Daryl Dixon • The Ones Who Live • Webisodes

v · Dead City CastMain CastAlso StarringCo-StarsSpecial GuestsCast Guide: TV Series • Fear • World Beyond • Tales • Daryl Dixon • The Ones Who Live • Webisodes