ACTOR Jeffrey Dean Morgan is famously known for his recurring roles on Grey's Anatomy and The Walking Dead franchise.

His wife, Hilarie Burton, has starred alongside Jeffrey in various projects, and fans are eager to know more about their love life.

Who is Jeffrey Dean Morgan's wife, Hilarie Burton?

Hilarie Burton is an American actress born on July 1, 1982, in Sterling, Virginia.

Hilarie rose to prominence while she was working as a VJ on MTV's show TRL, which paved the way for her successful acting career.

In 2003, she landed a recurring role on One Tree Hill as Peyton Sawyer.

Her additional acting credits include The Secret Life of Bees, Lethal Weapon, and Surprised by Love.

As of 2024, Hilarie co-hosts the Drama Queens podcast alongside her One Tree Hill co-stars Sophia Bush and Bethany Joy Lenz.

The podcast sees the three stars relive and dissect previous episodes of the hit show.

When did Hilarie Burton and Jeffrey Dean Morgan get married?

Hilarie Burton and Jeffrey Dean Morgan tied the knot ten years after they began dating on October 5, 2019.

The two were set up on a blind date on May 8, 2009, after friends Jensen and Danneel Ackles set them up.

In an Instagram post, Hilarie reflected on their first date, saying: "Twelve years ago today, @jensenackles and @danneelackles512 made me go on a blind date. The smokin hot @jeffreydeanmorgan showed up and it was game over."

She later spoke with People, saying that his confidence was what sealed the deal.

His confidence was intoxicating.

Hilarie Burton on dating Jeffrey Dean Morgan

"When he came along, he was so sure of himself," she told the outlet. "I was not a girl anyone pursued.

"I've always been alpha. And Jeffrey was like, 'You're going to be my girlfriend.' It was so nice to be pursued.

"He's a cute dude! And I liked that he knew exactly who he was. His confidence was intoxicating."

Since the pair began dating, Hilarie and Jeffrey have partnered on multiple ventures, including buying a New York-based candy shop with Paul Rudd.

They also own a 100-acre farm in Rhinebeck, New York.

In addition to their businesses, Hilarie and Jeffrey have also starred alongside each other on The Walking Dead, Grey's Anatomy, and Extant.

Do Jeffrey Dean Morgan and Hilarie Burton have children?

Less than a year after Jeffrey and Hilarie went on their first date, the pair welcomed their first child, a son named Augustus.

Agustus Morgan was born on March 14, 2010, followed by their daughter, George Virginia, on February 16, 2018.

A month after George was born, Hilarie got candid about their struggle with infertility over the years.

"It took a long time for Jeffrey and I to have this baby. The first time I got pregnant, it took a year and a half. I surprised him on Christmas with baby Seahawk booties. We cried. We celebrated. We picked out names. And we lost that baby," she wrote in an Instagram post.

"More losses followed, and as so many couples know, it was heartbreaking. It still is heartbreaking."

She went on to say how cautious she had been when she found out she was pregnant with their daughter.

"So when this pregnancy started, we were cautious.

"I didn't want to celebrate for fear of jinxing it. I didn't want a baby shower. I checked her heartbeat every day, up until the day she was born. And now that she is here, I just stare at her in wonder all day."

She concluded the post by revealing that Jeffrey was the one who delivered George.