DUBAI: The Saudi Press Agency was honored on Wednesday at the 8th Arab Media Excellence Awards in the Crisis, Disaster, and Risk Media section of the digital media category.

The agency’s winning entry was an investigative report titled “King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Center works to deliver aid to Gaza Strip within three priorities: food, shelter, and health.”

Fahd Al-Aqran, the president of the SPA, accepted the trophy during an awards ceremony on the sidelines of the 54th session of the Council of Arab Information Ministers in Manama.

Organizers said they received more than 100 entries for this year’s awards across television, radio, newspaper and digital media, the SPA reported.

The awards were introduced in 2015 by the Council of Arab Information Ministers to encourage creativity, innovation and media excellence among government and accredited media institutions, Arab organizations, federations with observer status within the Arab League, and media personalities.

DUBAI: Rotana has appointed Reem Hiasat as the director of content marketing for the group across the Middle East, Africa, Eastern Europe, and Turkiye.

Hiasat has worked with Rotana for over seven years, most recently as corporate e-commerce manager.

In her new role, she will lead the development and implementation of Rotana’s website content strategy and oversee the creation, management and distribution of content for the group.

Hiasat said she’s “looking forward to collaborating with the team to develop impactful content” and a user journey that showcases Rotana’s offerings while engaging audiences.

Amal Harb, corporate vice-president of marketing at Rotana, added: “Her (Hiasat’s) contributions to our organization have been significant, and we are excited to see her continue to excel in this elevated position.”

Hiasat holds a bachelor’s degree from the University of Jordan and a diploma in digital marketing and social media from the German Jordanian University in Jordan.

Rotana currently operates 80 hotels in the Middle East, Africa, Eastern Europe, and Turkiye, serving more than 6 million guests each year.

LONDON: A performance by renowned pianists Jayson Gillham was canceled by an Australian orchestra after he dedicated a new piece of music to journalists killed in Gaza.

Gillham was scheduled to perform with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra on Thursday, but it was announced on Tuesday that he had been removed from the program due to remarks he made during a previous show.

Gillham’s comments, made during a Sunday recital at MSO’s Iwaki Auditorium, were described by the orchestra as “an intrusion of personal political views” during a program intended to focus on solo piano works.

In a statement, the MSO expressed regret and said it “does not condone the use of our stage as a platform for expressing personal views. The MSO understands that his remarks have caused offence and distress and offers a sincere apology. It has been a priority for us to address this difficult situation today.”

Gillham introduced a five-minute world premiere piece for piano by Australian composer Connor D’Netto, titled “Witness,” during Sunday’s performance. D’Netto had previously explained that the piece was dedicated to journalists in Gaza, whose “bravery and sacrifice” had deeply affected him.

Reports indicate that Gillham referenced the specific targeting of journalists by Israeli forces when introducing the piece.

In an email to patrons, the MSO clarified that “Witness” was included in the program at Gillham’s request as a “short meditative piece,” but noted that his personal remarks were made “without seeking the MSO’s approval or sanction.”

Gillham also performed a piece by Gyorgy Ligeti during the recital, discussing the Hungarian-Austrian composer’s background as a Holocaust survivor and the political context of the composition.

Gillham expressed surprise at the orchestra’s reaction, saying he “wasn’t made aware of anything that I wasn’t allowed to say or do, and it was normal to introduce the works.”

He added: “Over the last 10 months, Israel has killed more than 100 Palestinian journalists. A number of these have been targeted assassinations of prominent journalists as they were travelling in marked press vehicles or wearing their press jackets.”

The decision to cancel Gillham’s upcoming performance has sparked criticism from some of the orchestra’s patrons, who argued the comments were contextual and the MSO’s response was an overreaction.

LONDON: The Committee to Protect Journalists expressed concern on Tuesday for the safety of Gaza-based reporter Anas Al-Sharif following Israeli allegations that he was “covering up” the activities of “terrorists.”

The controversy arose after an Israeli military strike targeted a school in Gaza City over the weekend, which killed nearly 100 people, according to the local health ministry.

Al-Sharif, a reporter for Al Jazeera, covered the aftermath of the strike, and reported that the Israeli army had targeted the building while people were holding dawn prayers inside.

His colleague, Tamer Almisshal, praised Al-Sharif online, describing him and his fellow journalists as “knights of audio and video.”

In response, Israeli military spokesperson Avichay Adraee accused Al-Sharif of covering up alleged crimes committed by Hamas and Islamic Jihad.

Adraee alleged that Al-Sharif knew the identities of several Hamas militants killed in the strike but chose to “present a lie.”

“Of course you’re proud of them,” Adraee responded on X. “He’s covering up the crimes of Hamas and (Islamic) Jihad taking shelter inside schools.

“I am convinced that he knows the names of a great number of the Hamas terrorists among those killed in the school. But he presents a lie, the motivation for which has nothing to do with the residents of Gaza.”

These accusations were condemned by the CPJ’s Program Director Carlos Martinez de la Serna, who stated that the organization was “deeply concerned” for Al-Sharif’s safety following the army’s claims.

“Al Jazeera journalists have been paying a devastating price for documenting the war. They and all journalists should be protected and allowed to work freely,” he added.

The allegations were also condemned by the Qatari network, which called the statement made by the Israeli military spokesperson as a “blatant act of intimidation and incitement against our colleague Anas Al-Sharif.”

“Such remarks are not only an attack on Anas’s character and integrity but also a clear attempt to stifle the truth and silence those who are courageously reporting from Gaza,” Al Jazeera added.

Al-Sharif has previously faced threats because of his reporting, and his father was killed in December by an Israeli airstrike that hit his family home in Jabalia.

The CPJ has documented the killing of at least seven journalists and media workers affiliated with Al Jazeera, which Israel has banned from operating inside the country since its latest war on Gaza.

Since the beginning of the conflict, the CPJ has documented the killing of at least 113 journalists and media workers, mostly Palestinians.

The situation highlights ongoing tensions between the Israeli government and international media.

On Monday, Israeli government spokesperson David Mencer accused BBC presenter Mishal Husain and the network of displaying pro-Palestine bias during a heated exchange.

Mencer questioned the accuracy of casualty figures reported from Gaza, and sarcastically remarked that Husain deserved the “pro-Palestinian reporter of the year award.”

ANKARA: A Turkish court on Monday ordered the arrest of a woman on charges of inciting hatred and insulting the president after she criticized a ban on social media platform Instagram, broadcaster Haberturk and other media said.

Turkiye blocked access to Instagram on Aug 2 for failing to comply with its “laws and rules” and public sensitivities. It removed the ban on Saturday, after it said the Meta Platforms-owned app agreed to cooperate with the authorities to address the government’s concerns.

In an interview posted on YouTube channel last week, when the app was still blocked, the woman was one of several passers-by who were asked what they thought about the ban.

“This is wrong. The president cannot ban Instagram as he wishes,” the woman said. She also criticized President Tayyip Erdogan and those who supported the ban.

Meta did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the arrest.

Monday’s arrest, ordered by a local court in the western city of Izmir, came after the head of Turkiye’s broadcasting watchdog RTUK criticized street interviews aired on social media, saying they “manipulate public opinion.”

The Instagram access ban came after a top Turkish official accused the social media platform of blocking posts expressing condolences over the assassination of Ismail Haniyeh, a leader of Palestinian militant group Hamas.

keywords

LONDON: Israeli government spokesperson David Mencer accused BBC presenter Mishal Husain and the broadcaster of exhibiting pro-Palestine bias.

In a heated exchange during an interview with BBC Radio 4’s Today program on Monday, Mencer criticized the broadcaster for its coverage of the war in Gaza, which began following the Oct. 7 attacks last year by Hamas on Israel.

“So is this your impression of impartial news coverage, Mishal? Because I think you just warrant the pro-Palestinian reporter of the year award, and I congratulate you for that,” he said.

“So these are the facts: We were attacked on Oct. 7, not in a war that we wanted; we were invaded; they (Hamas) want to destroy our country; it’s being controlled by IRNA (the Islamic Republic News Agency); we have a duty to defend our own people.”

A BBC spokesperson defended Husain and said the questions she posed to Mencer were “legitimate and important” and conducted “in a professional, fair and courteous manner.”

Throughout the interview, Mencer repeatedly defended Israel’s actions and dismissed criticisms of the actions of the nation’s military forces during the conflict.

Asked about an airstrike on a Gaza school on Saturday, which Palestinian health authorities said killed almost 100 people, Mencer expressed skepticism about the reports, arguing that the casualty figures have been inflated by “pseudo-medical staff” throughout the conflict in Gaza.

He said that the strike on the school had targeted 19 Hamas fighters and there were “no women and children present.”

Mencer added that while Israel is winning the war on the battlefield, it was losing the media battle, and blamed the BBC for playing a part in that.

“You, as the BBC, you do no credit to ordinary Gazans by just blindly repeating what terrorist organizations, (Daesh-like) organizations, the information which they feed you. It simply doesn’t bear any resemblance to the truth,” he said, adding that there was “no justice” in journalists “parroting” the numbers they are given.

Challenged on the ban imposed by Israeli authorities on international journalists that prevents them from reporting from Gaza and seeing the situation for themselves, Mencer said that unrestricted media access could hinder efforts to rescue Israeli hostages still held by Hamas and other groups.

A British media and public relations specialist, and a former director of the British parliamentary group Labour Friends of Israel, Mencer has been the Israeli government’s spokesperson since last fall.

During her interview with him, Husain also asked about a recent report by B’Tselem, a human rights organization in Jerusalem, which included allegations of abuses against Palestinian detainees carried out by the Israeli military.

Mencer dismissed the claims, saying there was “no such thing” and the Israeli government had to “make accommodations … for tens of thousands of terrorists.”

He added: “You pandering to fringe elements within Israeli society, that have every right to speak their minds, … that doesn’t make it fact, that doesn’t make it so. You guys just parroting it just produces radicalism that makes Jews in the UK afraid to walk the streets.”