Carlos Boozer Jr. proved himself to be an exceptional basketball star with the Cleveland Cavaliers, Utah Jazz, Chicago Bulls and L.A. Lakers, and as the son of Cruise Planners travel advisors, he also has a lot of Cruisitude. Boozer Jr. spoke to hundreds of Cruise Planners travel advisors at the CPCON18, sharing his motivational speech on ‘Focus.’

The gold medal-winning athlete started his speech with how his coaches always made sure he zoned in on his games even at his toughest moments, advising travel advisors to gain inspiration from the incredible Cruise Planners network they are a part of to help propel their success. He shared many NBA highlights with the audience on playing against numerous legendary players during his career and how playing with the best, such as Cruise Planners top producers, leadership team and travel partners, helps you be the best.

“Playing in the Olympics is such a feat and clearly his parents instilled a strong work ethic and desire to be the best,” said Michelle Fee, CEO and founder of Cruise Planners. “At Cruise Planners, we are a sales organization with a passionate team spirit and family atmosphere that helps our agents become skilled successful travel experts.”

Boozer Jr. expressed how his parents came from very little and worked hard to support their family. The Duke University graduate shared how his father, Carlos Boozer Sr. served in the military and has always been the foundation for his basketball career, and how his mother, Renee Boozer, has always been a support system. A touching moment for Boozer Jr. and his parents was when Boozer Jr. announced how proud he was of his parents for joining Cruise Planners as travel franchise owners in 2013 and becoming experts in the travel industry, selling travel and being their own boss while being able to travel the world.

Travel advisors jumped at the chance to snap a photo with Boozer after the session, but the happiest travel advisors of all were by far Carlos Sr. and Renee who were beaming with pride as they saw their CP Family smiling with their son.