Carlos Boozer is headed to the Chicago Bulls.

A person familiar with the negotiations told The Associated Press that the two-time All-Star forward agreed to a deal on Wednesday and is leaving the Utah Jazz after six seasons. The person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the contract doesn't become official until today, did not reveal the terms.

Boozer becomes the latest chip to fall on a day when Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh confirmed they will play in Miami next season.

While everyone awaits LeBron James' announcement, the Bulls at least know they're not coming away empty-handed after landing Boozer.

With about $30 million in salary-cap room, the Bulls were looking to make a big splash in free agency after back-to-back first-round playoff exits. Adding Boozer strengthens their standing in the Eastern Conference - and maybe makes them more attractive to James, his former teammate.

Boozer averaged 19.5 points and 11.2 rebounds last season. His arrival gives the Bulls a formidable pair in the frontcourt with Joakim Noah, not to mention a good pick-and-roll partner for All-Star point guard Derrick Rose.

There is some irony to this. Bulls executive vice president of basketball operations John Paxson's brother, Jim, was Cleveland's general manager when Boozer left the Cavaliers following the 2003-04 season.

Cleveland, which could have exercised a one-year option after Boozer's second season, thought they had a six-year, $41 million agreement in place and let him hit the market. Boozer wound up accepting a six-year, $68 million dollar contract as a restricted free agent that Cleveland chose not to match.

Jim Paxson is now a consultant and scout for the Bulls.

Durant signs extension with Thunder

Kevin Durant didn't go for a spectacle in announcing where he'll be for the next five years.

Instead, Durant simply posted an update on his Twitter page, saying he'd agreed to a five-year contract extension with the Oklahoma City Thunder. Durant can't sign the deal until today, and team spokesman Brian Facchini said he could not confirm the deal under NBA rules.

"Exstension for 5 more years wit the thunder....God Is Great, me and my family came a long way...I love yall man forreal, this a blessing!" Durant tweeted.

Another post soon followed, presumably about the contract: "First time i cried n a while ... RIp Chucky, we doin wat we dreamed about..i swear i love all my bros!! yessir!!!

"Chucky" is one of Durant's former coaches, Charles Craig, who was shot to death in Maryland in 2005.

The reigning NBA scoring leader is signed with the Thunder through next season under his original rookie contract, which would pay him about $5 million next year. Oklahoma City, which is well under the salary cap, could offer Durant more than two times that much, depending on where the cap is set for next season.

Official: Nets still in hunt for ex-Gator Lee

With Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh going to Miami, the New Jersey Nets don't see their hopes for the future as being reduced to a LeBron-or-bust scenario.

Far from it.

An official within the league who is close to Nets management said the team is still in the hunt for New York Knicks forward David Lee, a former Florida standout. The Nets believe they are going to get other players at bargain rates once the initial phase of free agency passes.

Del Negro to coach Clippers

The Los Angeles Clippers introduced Vinny Del Negro as their coach, two months after he was fired by the Bulls.

He takes over a Clippers team that went 29-53 last season and missed the playoffs for the 15th time in 17 years.

Del Negro replaced Kim Hughes, who finished the season as interim coach after Mike Dunleavy stepped aside in February to focus on his GM duties before leaving for good in March.

Kings sign Cousins

The Sacramento Kings signed rookie center DeMarcus Cousins to a contract.

Cousins, the No. 5 pick in the draft, can earn about $7 million in the first two years of the deal, and the Kings have separate team options for the third and fourth seasons.

Warriors pick Udoh has wrist injury

Golden State Warriors top draft pick Ekpe Udoh has a wrist injury that will keep him out of the team's summer league.

The team said the No. 6 overall draft pick out of Baylor was hurt during a supervised workout Sunday at Golden State's practice facility.

Udoh will undergo further evaluation this week to determine the severity of the injury and the next step.