The sound system cut out during the news conference the Trail Blazers held at the Regence Boys & Girls Club in North Portland on Monday, but the message still came through loud and clear.

The Blazers were happy to have point guard Raymond Felton, and he was happy to join them.

The team introduced Felton – acquired from Denver in a draft-day trade Thursday – and draft picks Nolan Smith and Jon Diebler. After they traded veteran Andre Miller for Felton, Blazers official talked about Felton being a much-sought long-term solution for them.

Felton, who turned 27 Sunday and was serenaded with "Happy Birthday" by a group of children when he arrived, was quickly asked about staying with Portland after he becomes an unrestricted free agent after the 2011-12 season.

"I definitely want something long-term here," Felton said.

Blazers interim general manager Chad Buchanan said Portland, under current collective bargaining rules, would have an advantage in trying to retain Felton after he becomes a free agent next summer. The Blazers would hold what's called "early Bird rights" to Felton, which would allow them to raise his salary 10.5 percent each season, whereas other teams would only be able to increase it by 8 percent each season. The Blazers would also be allowed to sign Felton to one more season than other teams.

However, it remains unclear if the next CBA would hold similar exceptions. The current CBA expires Thursday.

Felton said he believed he was good fit with the Blazers, with whom he considered signing as a free agent last summer before inking a two-year deal with the Knicks, who in February dealt him to New York as part of the mammoth Carmelo Anthony deal.

In Denver, he came off the bench behind Ty Lawson, whom the Nuggets had considered a starter-in-waiting behind veteran Chauncey Billups, who went to New York as part of the Anthony deal. Felton said the opportunity to be the starter with Portland is attractive.

"I wanted to be in a situation where I could run a team," he said.

The Oregonian's Jason Quick will have more on Felton later today.

Other quick bits:

• Felton had high praise for the Blazers' starting forwards. He played with Gerald Wallace in Charlotte, and while he hasn't spoken to Wallace since the deal (Felton guessed Wallace was off fishing), he said he enjoyed playing with Wallace.

"Gerald is a guy that plays hard, brings it every night," Felton said. "You love to play with a guy like that."

Felton also praised LaMarcus Aldridge, saying, "My opinion: should've been an All-Star this year."

• Blazers coach Nate McMillan said he has a mostly-free summer for the first time in a while. Team USA, for which he is an assistant coach – the duties for which have taken up much of his recent summers – already is qualified for next year's Olympics, so he has no USA Basketball duties.

"I'm going to rest and spend some time with my family, which I haven't had a chance to, to take a vacation with, the last couple of years," he said.

Son Jamelle won't be able to join the family for the whole time as he recently got a job in his father's profession, taking an assistant coaching job at Drake, where he will also work on a master's degree.

"It's a good opportunity," Nate McMillan said.

• Playing on the East Coast at Duke, Smith admitted he didn't get many chances to see the Blazers play. He has, however, played at the Rose Garden when the Blue Devils played Oregon this past season.

Smith said of the Blazers: "I watched some games, but they always come on late out here. I know LaMarcus Aldridge, Brandon Roy, watching those guys, they're All-Star players."

• Diebler knows one current Blazer well: Greg Oden. Diebler, who played at Ohio State, got to know Oden when the center would return to Columbus during the summers to work out.

"Greg is great," Diebler said. "He's a very personable guy. He's very funny. Once you get to know him, he's a great guy to be around. I know I'm wishing the best for him."

Diebler said he planned to spend part of the summer working out at Ohio State, where he expects such NBA players as Mike Conley, Evan Turner, B.J. Mullens and Daequan Cook to be. All are former Buckeyes.

• Buchanan said Minnesota has not asked for permission to speak to assistant coach Bernie Bickerstaff.

Several media reports this past weekend suggested that the Timberwolves – who still have not fired coach Kurt Rambis, as many expect – would hire Bickerstaff and have him run the team for several seasons, then hand the reins over to son J.B., a current Minnesota assistant.

-- Mike Tokito

Follow @mtokito