Raymond Felton is currently in his sixth year in the NBA and playing with the fourth team in his career, the Portland Trail Blazers.

Felton has started the year off fairly slowly but we saw last year in New York with the Knicks that he can play really well in an up-tempo offense like the offense coach Nate McMillan is trying to run with the Blazers.

At the beginning of the season, the Blazers were not expected to make much in the Western Conference.

This was due to Brandon Roy retiring, Greg Oden having another setback with his knee and LaMarcus Aldridge announcing he would need a procedure done on his heart.

But Felton and the rest of the Blazers have surprised a lot of people.

Last year, Felton was considered a “snub” from the All-Star game, so this is a redemption year of sorts for the underrated point guard.

Felton has the ability to make others around him look and play better. He does this through his team-leading assists (6.7) and the number of plays that he is able to orchestrate.

Although his assists this year with the Blazers are down from his average of nine assists per game last year, he is still able to contribute through his rebounding and ability to steal.

He can also provide a burst of positive energy when no one else on the team seems to have the motivation or willingness to do so.

So far this season, Felton has usually taken a back seat and helps run the offense through LaMarcus Aldridge. But when nothing is falling for Aldridge or the rest of the team, Felton has the ability to take over the game, and make something out of nothing.

Whether he is running down the lane and throwing up a nasty little floater that seems to always fall, or making better shots available for the other four men on the court, Felton is always making contributions.

Felton is they type of player that coaches want to have on their team. After all, it is the coaches that will be picking the remaining All-Stars.

Felton is a favorite among coaches for his great personality.

Felton is usually a nice guy on the court but he will stick up for a teammate if need be. He also has the capability of being a leader on the team, which at times can prove invaluable.

With Chris Paul as the starting point guard, Raymond Felton deserves to be the guy to back him up.