A whole lot to unpack from today's introduction of the newest Portland Trail Blazers. In case you missed it earlier, here's a link to a few pictures. We'll start with new starting point guard Raymond Felton, acquired from the Denver Nuggets in a draft day trade for Andre Miller.

Raymond Felton

The headline from today was that recently acquired point guard Raymond Felton, who is set to become an unrestricted free agent at the end of the 2011-2012 season and cannot be offered a contract until the completion of next season, said he is interested in remaining with the Blazers going forward.

"I definitely want something long-term here," Felton said. "I definitely look forward to that situation when the time comes. I have one year left on my deal. That's all I'm worried about. I'll worry about this season. I'll let my agent deal with all the rest of that. I'll just come out and play basketball and help this team win.

"I wanted to be in a situation where I can run a team and I wanted to lead my team. I'm still young in my career."

Felton said he thinks the Blazers fit that bill. "The fit is great. We're a very young team, athletic. We can really get up and down the court. We've got a great post man who can put the ball in the basket, just in case we have to play some halfcourt basketball. I look forward to everything."

Blazers Acting GM Chad Buchanan reiterated that the organization has followed Felton's progress for years, and thinks the sitaution is a win-win for both team and player.

"We've been tracking Raymond for quite some time, all the way back to his days at North Carolina," Buchanan said. "National champion. Had a great start to his career in Charlotte. Showed great improvement each year in Charlotte and had a tremendous year last year -- started in New York and was traded to Denver. We've been big fans of Raymond for quite some time. We're fortunate to add Raymond to our core moving forward. We feel like he's a player entering the prime of his career. Matches up a with a lot of the guys on our roster as-is. I think it's a great opportunity for Raymond as well."

Last summer, Felton signed a two-year contract with the New York Knicks. He said on Monday that the Blazers had been the other finalist for his services.

"It was definitely between here and New York," Felton said. "It was a tough decision. I guess this is where I was supposed to be from the beginning, and now I'm here."

"Back in free agency last year, we talked to him a little bit, his price tag was going to be more than we had available," Buchanan added. "He understood where we stood with him, that we saw him as a good fit here possibly at some point. It has to be the right timing on both ends."

With no other proven point guards on the roster, Felton could be in line for a big pay day from the Blazers if he performs up to expectations, especially if the Blazers advance in the playoffs.

"I'm a point guard who is able to push the ball up and down the court but who can also run a team as well," Felton said.