1980[]

Sign-on[]

This is WHKY-TV, Hickory, North Carolina, signing on channel 14. WHKY is owned and operated by Catawba Valley Broadcasting Company, Incorporated, with studio and transmitter located at 526 Main Avenue Southeast, Hickory, North Carolina. WHKY-TV utilizes an effective radiated power of one quarter million watts visual, and 55,000 watts aural. WHKY-TV is a member of the National Association of Broadcasters and proudly displays the Seal of Good Practice, the symbol of the programming standards set forth in the Television Code. We invite you now to stay tuned for another day of programming on WHKY-TV 14, Hickory, North Carolina.

Sign-off[]

This is WHKY-TV, Hickory, North Carolina, signing off channel 14. WHKY is owned and operated by Catawba Valley Broadcasting Company, Incorporated, with studio and transmitter located at 526 Main Avenue Southeast, Hickory, North Carolina. WHKY-TV utilizes an effective radiated power of one quarter million watts visual, and 55,000 watts aural. WHKY-TV is a member of the National Association of Broadcasters and proudly displays the Seal of Good Practice, the symbol of the programming standards set forth in the Television Code. We will return to the air at 7AM this morning.

1989[]

Sign-on[]

This is WHKY-TV, Hickory, North Carolina, signing on channel 14. WHKY-TV is owned and operated by the Long Family Partnership, with studios, offices, and transmitting facilities at 526 Main Avenue Southeast in Hickory. WHKY-TV utilizes an effective radiated power of 656 kilowatts visual, and 66 kilowatts aural. We invite you now to stay tuned for another day of programming on WHKY-TV 14, Hickory, North Carolina.

Sign-off[]

This is WHKY-TV, Hickory, North Carolina, signing off channel 14. WHKY-TV is owned and operated by the Long Family Partnership, with studios, offices, and transmitting facilities at 526 Main Avenue Southeast in Hickory. WHKY-TV utilizes an effective radiated power of 656 kilowatts visual, and 66 kilowatts aural. Have a pleasant night tonight and a great day tomorrow. This is WHKY-TV 14, Hickory, North Carolina.