HICKORY — WHKY-TV, the oldest independently owned TV station in the state, marks its 50th anniversary today.

Like the radio station that preceded it by more than two decades, WHKY-TV has been owned and operated throughout its existence by the Long family.

Station manager Jeff Long said the station was built by his father, Tom Long Sr. and grandfather, Ed Long, both now deceased.

Though Jeff Long was only 9 when the station started broadcasting, he still has some vivid memories from around the time the station was created.

Long recalled seeing the pieces of the 500-foot tower being unloaded across from what is now City Hall.

The tower had been used at a station in Texas owned by Lady Bird Johnson and was shipped by rail to Hickory.

The station did face some challenges being a UHF channel that was not affiliated with one of the three major networks.

“And so we found a niche that worked with local television, of showing local people, the religious programs, gospel groups that we had that came in and sang live in the studio,” Long said.

“That was very popular and that helped make it survive and become what it has today.”

In the early days, the station focused heavily on a variety of local programming, including a children’s show called “Circus Party,” Friday-night horror movies and a Thursday-night segment with drivers and officials from Hickory Motor Speedway, Long said.

Ned Jarrett, then the racetrack manager, had his first television appearances on the network through appearances on the racing segment, Long said.

Though programming has changed over the years, the one constant has been the TV newscast, which began as a 10 p.m. newscast and later expanded to include a 5:30 p.m. broadcast.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

Over five decades, some of the biggest changes have been technological, from the switch to color television in the 1970s to the adaption of high-definition television in the mid-2000s.

One of the keys to the station’s longevity and success has been the connections to the people, Long and several on-air personalities said.

News anchor Ralph Mangum and reporter Fentress Chestnut Fountain said they are both often approached by fans in public.

“A lot of people, they think because the local station is smaller, that you wouldn’t get a lot of publicity, but it’s exactly the opposite,” Fountain said.

“No matter where you are, there’s someone who says, ‘Hey I watch the show every night for either the crime report’ or ‘I watch you on TV,’ or they come up to me and say, ‘Hey you’re the WHKY girl,’ as opposed to just ‘Hey, you’re Fentress,’ or whatever.”

For the reporters and anchors, the family ownership of the station has provided a sense of stability that is often lacking in the world of broadcasting.

“People get fired for any and every reason, and yet here it’s a different attitude,” Mangum said. “Once you’re in here, you’ve got a job, and you’ve got some sense of security, so that’s nice.”

Mangum attributes that attitude to the longtime family ownership of the station.

Fountain recalled the support she received from the Long family and her colleagues when she gave birth several months ago.

“The whole station really crowded around me,” Fountain said. “That’s when I knew this was a family-type thing, not just an employee.”

As the station celebrates its past, it’s also looking to the future.

In the next few years, the station will be replacing its current HD equipment with newer HD equipment, Long said.

“I see us continuing on, never forgetting that localism, because that’s what got us to where we are, but always adapting to change,” Long said.

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

Subscribe to our Daily Headlines newsletter.

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

Kevin Griffin

Reporter

Get email notifications on {{subject}} daily!

Your notification has been saved.

There was a problem saving your notification.

{{description}}

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Followed notifications

Please log in to use this feature

Log In

Don't have an account? Sign Up Today