PORTLAND, Ore. – The boos are expected to rain down on former Trail Blazer Zach Randolph at the Rose Garden tonight with the same fury as the droplets that always welcome the Knicks to this saturated city.

One Blazers official said there’s no escaping it, based on massive boos Rasheed Wallace and Bonzi Wells received upon their first Portland returns.

If the Trail Blazers fans ever want to blame someone for the team stinking out the Rose City the prior three seasons, Randolph is an easy foil. After posting records of 27-55, 21-61 and 32-50, the Blazers, without Randolph, are an impressive 26-19 with the same cast. They are the Jail Blazers no more. Nevertheless, former-Knick Channing Frye has not made a significant impact.

Randolph’s addition hasn’t helped the Knicks, who are more decrepit than last seasons 33-49 club. The Knicks are 14-31 and are 0-3 on this West Coast swing.

Randolph said this is not the way he wanted to return to Portland.

“Them having a better record and winning more than us, yeah it will be tough,” he said.

Tonight is a referendum on the Draft Night blockbuster that sent Randolph, Dan Dickau (no longer with the Knicks) and Fred Jones to the Knicks for Steve Francis (no longer with the Blazers) and Frye. It will be rendered tonight when the Blazers play host to the Knicks for the first time since the trade.

“I’m going to be pumped,” said Randolph, who played his first six seasons with Portland. “It’s my home. I was here seven years. So I’m going to be pumped, excited, because I’ve never been on the opposite end when I’ve been in the Rose Garden. It will be a fun experience.

“Coach (Nate) McMillan probably will have a couple of schemes up his belt,” Randolph added.

Randolph said he doesn’t know what to expect from the crowd.

“We get booed at home,” Randolph said. “What’s worse than getting booed at home. That should answer your question. I played hard here. I had a good career.”

Randolph has not meshed with Eddy Curry and didn’t come into training camp in good shape, as was reported in The Post and denied by Thomas at the time.

But this week, Thomas said Randolph recently has started to take care of his body.

“He’s starting to get into weights, getting into better shape,” Thomas said. “He can walk on the floor and get 20 points and 10 rebounds and looks like he’s having a terrible game. If he commits to working, his future is very bright.”

Thomas already has tried to trade him and had a run-in on the bench with Randolph three weeks ago. The good news is Randolph hasn’t been arrested for marijuana possession, as he was in Portland.

Randolph played the first two months hoisting contested jumpers and retarding the ball movement, which didn’t sit well with Curry. At times Randolph has wondered why Thomas traded for him and has been perplexed by the Garden boos and the occasional benchings when Thomas goes with a small lineup. Randolph has said the Knicks shouldn’t react to small lineups.

“Regardless of who they are, coming to New York, any person moving to New York, its a big adjustment and it takes time,” Thomas said of Randolph’s fitting in with the Knicks.

That’s seems like a simplistic answer to Randolph’s presence throwing off team chemistry, despite averages of 17 points and 10.3 rebounds. Though he’s starting to get it, Randolph hasn’t played team ball.

Thomas has harped on Sunday’s Golden State game as an example of the good-and-bad Randolph. He had five assists in the first half, one in the second half.

“He almost had a triple-double, and he didn’t really understand how a good game he was having, drawing double teams,” Thomas said. “Like all great scorers, he judges it on points. He has to refine that to how well your team plays, not necessarily what’s on the stat sheets.”

Randolph supporters will suggest the Blazers are better because LaMarcus Aldridge made a massive jump from last season and guard Brandon Roy continued to improve. The loss of potential franchise center Greg Oden hasn’t hurt them. But Randolph, the black hole, is missing, as is the black cloud over the franchise.