Tomas Thomas

·

Follow

5 min read

·

Jul 14, 2021

--

Doctor Who in 1964 telling non-European stories (admittedly, not without a few missteps)

Describe Marco Polo in six words:

Assassin heads towards their Final Destination

This is… the one with Marco Polo

Why was this made?: John Lucarotti had previously written a radio series about Marco Polo’s adventures and was recommended by Head of Drama, Sydney Newman. Heather Hartnell (William Hartnell’s wife) would later claim it was her husband’s idea to do a story about Marco Polo. All of this is part of Doctor Who’s original educational remit: It was a children’s program that would use science-fiction stories to explore scientific concepts and historical stories to educate viewers on historical events and figures.

Waris Hussein, who had directed 100, 000BC, returned to direct the serial with the exception of the fourth episode which was directed by John Crockett.

First UK broadcast: 22 February — 4 April, 1964

What Happens:

The TARDIS lands in the Himalayas. Thinking that it would make a perfect gift for the Khan, Marco Polo claims it, hoping that the Khan will be pleased with it and allow Polo to return to Vencie. He allows the travellers to travel with him to Cathay.

Tegana the Mongol warlord is also travelling with Polo to negogiate a truce with the Khan. However, Tegana’s true motive is to assassinate the Khan.

After a series of incidences such as running out of water in the Gobi Desert, bandit attacks, and Ping-Cho’s disappearance (another companion of Polo), Polo meets the Khan.

The Khan likes the TARDIS but refuses to allow Polo to return home. Tegana makes an assassination attempt, fails, so kills himself. In the chaos, the travellers get the key from Polo and make their escape.

Observations / Things to Say:

Much better at seamlessly including education among the drama (Barbara on Marco’s life, Ian explaining high altitude, condensation, bamboo)

Marco’s objective feels real making the TARDIS out of bounds for a genuine story reason, rather than contrivances (although they don’t feel like contrivances just yet, particularly after two episodes stuck on the TARDIS).

Zienia Morton, first Asian and non-European guest actor. Brilliant as Ping-Cho. And doesn’t Darren Nesbitt (Tegana) have such a lovely voice?

Jarring to hear Barbara call the TARDIS, “Tardis”.

Love the Barbara/Susan scene in Ep 2 (Would love to know what the Hartnell-filled Ep 2 would have been like. How would this scene have played?)

The Doctor isn’t a Doctor of Medicine, and he hasn’t met Genghis Khan yet (although he will encounter the combined hordes of Genghis pre-Rose).

Tegana calls the Doctor a “magician”, calls Susan “cunning”.

Hot Takes:

Totally want to see some Barbara/Marco flirting. I feel like she tries it in Ep 1 but Marco doesn’t pick up. Seriously, though? How good looking is Mark Eden as Marco?

After commenting about the lack of music, we now have some great pieces, especially in the water rationing/Gobi desert scene, and Marco/Tegana fight at the climax. So, it can be done. Trust Waris to get it right. (in fact, some of the telesnaps look like attempts at giving depth-of-field, Tegana steps over a camera on the floor in Ep 7, some dynamic stuff happening. Not just Waris relying on good sets)

Ep 1 cliffhanger about poison leads to nothing. Come on, David (or John). You normally pick these things up.

Love the Doctor getting on with Kublai Khan, and Susan’s friendship with Ping-Cho. We see them rehearse their farewells, so Susan running at the end doesn’t feel like a missed opportunity. Clever work there, David (or John).

What Are We Missing?:

Due to the BBC’s archival policy (or lack of policy) and their purges, all seven episodes of Marco Polo are missing. What does exist are off-air soundtracks recorded by fans during the original broadcast. Also in existence are six photos taken of the broadcast from an Australian fan, as well as John Cura’s professional photography of the broadcast (called Tele-Snaps) for all episodes directed by Waris Hussein (all except Ep. 4).

Things that are missing from the DVD abridged reconstruction that really make their absence felt: Nearly all of Ep 4 putting the emphasis on getting back to the TARDIS. The previous two eps have our team enjoy sight-seeing with Marco Polo. Ep 4 makes it centre-stage, makes the cliffhanger in Ep 5 all the more powerful. AND: Khan and Tegana attacking Marco for his conscience sparing the Doctor and co. means that his decision to give them the key is earnt, not random like the abridged-recon makes it seem.

Would love to see this animated in the style of Avatar: The Last Airbender. Of course, really, I’d like it found. We’re missing just how dynamic Waris’ shots were. Did the TARDIS photo blow-up look better than the Dalek extras? Ping-Cho’s story about the Hashashins! Countless scenes of Hartnell laughing! Marco and Tegana’s fight! Nearly all of Ep 4!

Between You and Me:

Missed by majority of fans. It’s easy to see why: the photographs make it look GORGEOUS! Finding it probably won’t be too disappointing even if the story is very simple.

Recommend/Further Reading:

BBC One - Doctor Who, Season 1, Marco Polo - The Fourth Dimension

WHICH WAY NOW? To illustrate the route taken by Marco Polo's caravan and to mark the passage of time, a map was shown…

www.bbc.co.uk

A Brief History Of Time (Travel): Marco Polo

Serial D: Marco Polo The TARDIS lands in 1289 China. There it is seized by explorer Marco Polo, who intends to present…

www.shannonsullivan.com

BBC - Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide - Marco Polo - Index

All about Classic Doctor Who story - Marco Polo - Travelling with Marco Polo, the Doctor must thwart an assassin. …

www.bbc.co.uk

BBC Online - Cult - Treasure Hunt - About Archive

About - Treasure Hunt - can you help with the BBC Archives?

bbc.adactio.com

Marco Polo (TV story)

Marco Polo was the fourth serial of season 1 of Doctor Who. This was the first occasion in which a famous person from…

tardis.fandom.com