Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll is a hugely successfully Colombian pop singer and dancer born on February 2, 1977, in Barranquilla, Colombia with a Lebanese father and Colombian mother.

She is a well-respected rich woman though it is not how her life has been from the start.

She was born in a middle-class family, where her father owned a small business selling clothes. One day his father’s business went bankrupt and they were left in debt, poor Shakira was sent to live with his uncle for some time.

When she came back to her home Shakira found their home empty, they had sold a lot of things including home furniture to pay the debts his father had borrowed. Shakira started complaining and asked her father why they were living such a poor life?

Her dad took her to a place where homeless street kids used to sit begging for food and told her that “even if we are poor look around you there are other kids who are poorer than you”. Shakira was touched and from then decided to work hard so that she can rise from that poverty.

She always dreamed of becoming a great singer hoping that one day she will help the street kids to find a home and education.

At eight years when she was a singer in a choir, she was stopped from singing in the choir by one of the leaders complaining that her voice was very strong and bad enough to be a singer. From then she wasn’t allowed to sing with others. She was very hurt, frustrated, and discouraged. But her dad encouraged her to continue to do what she loved and never listen to what people say.

She wrote her first song at eight years and she had already decided what she wanted to be in the future and that was to become a singer. At 13years she signed her first record deal.

She released her first album at 18years but it wasn’t a success and that happened with the second album as well but she never stopped working.

Her third album, becoming involved in every aspect of its production was released in 1996 called pies Descalzos, meaning “bare feet” which sold more than 3 million copies. it became a huge success. She got a lot of money and that’s when her life started turning around.

At the age of 20 in 1997 when her family moved to Miami, Florida she taught herself to write songs in English in an attempt to increase her American fan base.

In 2010 her hit “waka waka” from 2010’s sale el sol became the theme song for the 2010 FIFA world cup. By January 2016, the video for “waka waka” had been viewed more than a billion times.

By 2012, Shakira’s U.S album sales had reached nearly 10 million and her worldwide album sales had reached more than 70 million, making her the highest-selling Colombian artist of all time, and second most successful female Latin singer after Gloria Estefan.

Shakira reached her dream when she created the pies Descalzos foundation to help children (and street kids) in her native Colombia to receive a quality education. She later opened branches in other countries. She is also a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and was honored by the United Nations International Labor organization for philanthropic efforts in 2010.

Though she was called a bad singer before, the fact that she didn’t give up made her be one of the judges and coaches in the popular singing competition The Voice season 4 and 6.

She has won a lot of awards including Latin Grammy, American music awards, MTV Unplugged 2000.

Shakira and her lover Gerard Pique

Shakira is in a relationship with Spanish soccer player Gerard Pique. The couple welcomed their firstborn and son Milan on January 22, 2013. They gave birth to their second son Sasha on January 29, 2015.

She is a happy mother, a good lover, and a famous singer with an estimated net worth of $300 million.

Shakira, her lover, and their two sons

Doesn’t matter what life you might have encountered in the past, as long as you can dream there’s hope that you can achieve. And no matter the obstacles, it is still possible for you to become that person you always dreamt of.