Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll (Shakira) is a Colombian singer-songwriter, musician, choreographer, model, record producer, dancer and philanthropist who came to the limelight over the world after the song “Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)” during the football World Cup in South Africa. The song “Waka Waka” was the the best selling World Cup song of all time with sold 60 million albums over the world, She is the highest selling Columbian artist of all time. She made her debut as a singer at the age of 13 by sung her own written song what she wrote at 8 years old.

Shakira

Born: February 2, 1977

Birth name: Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll

Birth place: Barranquilla, Colombia

Height: 1.57 m (5’2”)

Weight: 130 lbs

Zodiac sign: Aquarius

Partner: Gerard Piqué

Shakira Early Life:

Shakira was born on February 2, 1977 in Barranquilla, Colombia to Lebanese father, William Mebarak Chadid and Colombian mother, Nidia Ripoll. She has eight older half-siblings from her father’s previous marriage and she is the only of her parents. Her paternal grandfather was Lebanese, who immigrated to New York City. Only at 4 she showed dance performance in a restaurant and Shakira was invited to various program in Barranquilla eventually gained some recognition in the area.

Shakira Career:

At the age 14 years old she made her debut in album with Magia, which only sold 1200 copies in Colombia and her first two albums was flopped. However, her third album Pies Descalzos (barefeet) (1995), sold more than three million copies. Then she released “Dónde Están los Ladrones”in 1998, which sold ten million copies worldwide eventually Shakira received her first Grammy Award nomination in 1999 for Best Latin Rock/Alternative Album. Followed by Shakira began to work on English crossover album, finally released “Laundry Service” with the help of Ricky Martin. Without flopped first two albums her rest of the eight albums sold more than 70 million copies over the world. Her video for “Waka Waka” is the ever most visited video on You Tube. Shakira performed on inauguration ceremony of President Barack Obama in 2009.

Shakira Personal Life:

Shakira’s first boyfriend was Antonio De la Rúa, but currently she is engaged with Gerard Piqué, centre back for FC Barcelona and the Spanish national football team. On March 29, 2011 Shakira exposed their relationship on facebook and twitter. At present she is pregnant and wants more than one child.

Shakira Awards:

In early 2008, Forbes ranked Shakira as a fourth top-earning female artist in music industry. Shakira has won two Grammy Awards, seven Latin Grammy Awards, twelve Billboard Latin Music Awards, and has been nominated for Golden Globe. She is the second most successful female Latin singer behind Gloria Estefan and highest-selling Colombian artist of all time.

Shakira Albums:

Magia (1991), Peligro (1993), Pies Descalzos (1995), Dónde Están los Ladrones? (1998), Laundry Service (2001), Fijación Oral Vol. 1 (2005), Oral Fixation Vol. 2 (2005), She Wolf (2009), Sale El Sol (2010), TBA (2012/13).

Shakira Remarkable Facts:

✔ Desire for children without marriage

✔ She is well-known for “Waka Waka”, official anthem for the 2010 World Cup.

This Post Was Written By Rasel Mahmud

Hi I am Rasel Mahmud, Author of this Blog. I am 25 years old and originally from Natore, Bangladesh. I love blogging and helping people. I write about Blogging, Social Media, SEO, Adsense, WordPress, Technology Review on this blog.

Follow Me On : | Google Plus | Facebook | Twitter