Shakira is born Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll in Barranquilla, Colombia. At 13, she gets a record deal with Sony Music – the first step on her path to becoming a worldwide superstar. More

14-year-old Shakira releases her debut album, Magia. Though sales are dismal, the collection of Spanish-language pop tunes boosts her visibility in her native Colombia. Two years later, she releases its followup, Peligro.

Colombian singer-songwriter Shakira wins her first (US) Grammy Award when her live MTV Unplugged release wins Best Latin Pop Album. The performance, filmed at the Grand Ballroom in New York City, featured acoustic-rock renditions of her Spanish-language tunes, including "Octavo Dia," "Ojos Asi," and "No Creo."

With the help of Gloria Estefan, Colombian-born songstress Shakira releases her first English-language album, Laundry Service. It features the Top 10 hit "Whenever, Wherever."More

Shakira releases the Spanish-language portion of her double-album project, Oral Fixation, which is joined by its English counterpart in the fall. The two-part project is a followup to her first English-language album, Laundry Service, and reflects the singer's evolution from a Colombian pop princess to an international superstar.More

Shakira lands her first #1 hit on the Hot 100 when her single "Hips Don't Lie," featuring Wyclef Jean, reaches the top of the tally. It also breaks the record for the most-played pop song in a single week when it's aired on American radio 9,637 times.More

Surprising no one, Shakira is the big winner at the seventh annual Latin Grammy Awards, taking home four statues during the ceremony at Madison Square Garden. The Colombian pop star wins song and record of the year awards for "La Tortura," a duet with Spaniard Alejandro Sanz. She also receives trophies for female pop vocal album and album of the year for her Spanish-language Fijacion Oral, Vol. 1.

Beyoncé's "Beautiful Liar," featuring Latin-pop star Shakira, breaks the record for the highest leap on the Billboard Hot 100 when it jumps 91 places to #3. The record was previously held by Akon, whose "Smack That," featuring Eminem, rose from #95 to #7 (ultimately peaking at #2) in 2006.

A wide range of top musicians including Mary J. Blige, U2, Beyoncé, Bruce Springsteen, Garth Brooks, Sheryl Crow, will.i.am, James Taylor, John Legend, John Mellencamp, Pete Seeger, Shakira, Usher and Stevie Wonder, perform at a concert in Washington, DC, to celebrate the upcoming inauguration of Barack Obama as President of the United States of America.More

Shakira releases the electro-pop album She Wolf. The singer was in a bad mood when the disco-influenced title track roared out of her consciousness: "The image of the she wolf just came to my head, and when I least expected it I was howling and panting."

Shakira guest stars on Ugly Betty in the episode "The Bahamas Triangle." The "Hips Don't Lie" singer steps in to save Betty's swimsuit photo shoot.

Antonio de la Rua, former boyfriend (and former business manager) of Latin pop star Shakira, files a lawsuit for $100 million against her. The suit alleges that Shakira wouldn't have had the success she'd had without his help, and Rua seeks compensation for his management work.