E. M. S. Namboodiripad Biography

E. M. S. Namboodiripad was a leader of Indian Communist party and served as the first Chief Minister of Kerala. He was the first non-Congress chief minister in India after independence. He is a well known socialist and Marxist theorist. He became the leader of the first communist government in the world that was elected in democratic way.

He was born on 13th June 1909 at Elamkulam in Perinthalmanna taluk of Malappuram district. Her father is Parameswaran Namboodirippad. The full name of E. M. S. Namboodiripad is Elamkulam Manakkal Sankaran Namboodiripad. He joined V. T. Bhattathiripad and M. R. Bhattathiripad and fought against casteism and conservatism in Namboothiri community. He was greatly associated with Indian National Congress and Indian Independence Movement when he was at college. He was a writer and had written many literary works. The book, The History of Kerala, which he wrote is notable.

He founded the Congress Socialist Party in 1934 together with some others. He was elected as the All India Secretary of the party in served in this position from 1934 to 1940. He was also elected to Madras Legislative Assembly during this time. He was committed to socialist ideals and worked for the downtrodden people. He is one of the founders of the Communist party in India. During the split of the party in 1964, he stood with the CP I(M). He served as the member of the Politburo. He became the General Secretary of the party in 1977 and was in this position until 1992. He remained a member of the party until his death.

On 5th April 1957, he was appointed as the first chief minister of Kerala. During his tenure, he introduced Land Reform Ordinance and Education Bill. He became the Chief Minister of Kerala for the second time in 1967. He served as the Leader of Opposition in the Kerala Legislative Assembly from 1960 to 1964 and from 1970 to 1977. He married Arya Antharjanam and had two sons and two daughters. His books were published by Chintha Publication under the title E M S Sanchika. He died on 19th March 1998.

Published: N/A