COPASI (4.0 Build 12 test version)

New Features

Sliders for interactive parameter changes and simulation

COPASI now lists all reactions that a metabolite enters, when in the metabolite widget.

Particle numbers are now counted on 64 bit integers

COPASI's SBML files now indicate in a comment that they were written by COPASI.

The directory structure of COPASI installations was unified to be consistent across all systems

A Linux dynamic library build is now being distributed, this avoids some problems with Linux installations that have older glibc libraries.

Bug Fixes

If a report for a time series was created and then deleted, COPASI would crash leaving an incomplete file.

COPASI would crash when trying to open a non-existing file.

Sometimes there would be big rounding errors when changing initial concentrations (e.g. 4.0001 instead of 4.0).

A dialog box saying "no output specified" would be displayed even if a report had been defined.

SBML export was broken when some special characters were included in notes or names.

SBML export was not fully compliant with schema (<body> tag, and constant metabolites)

Importing some SBML files would crash COPASI.

COPASI was leaving out the comments in an SBML file on import.

A plot title would not be updated in the plot, after a change in the plot definition.

The special identifier Pi in sbml files was incorrectly handled by COPASI.

After pressing enter in a listview, the focus was not consistent.

Reaction parameters could not be selected in the object browser.

Compartments were deleted without confirmation; since this is potentially a of compartment delete.

When a steady state was not found, there was no clear indication on the front-end. Now COPASI clearly indicates that no steady state was found.

COPASI now only requires a single environment variable (COPASIDIR) on all platforms.

COPASI was allowing several object browser windows to open simultaneously. Only one object browser window can be open at any single time.

In some rare conditions an object could be created in duplicate (eg by trying to save as, canceling and only then comiting a new object.

If an object was used in more than one plot, COPASI could plot the wrong curve.

If COPASI was called on the command line with a file name as argument, when that file would not exist, COPASI would crash.

The steady state widget would not commit changes when the user left the widget.