Location: Syntagma

The Arch of Hadrian in Athens is a triumphal arch which lies in proximity to Syntagma Square, right between the Acropolis and the Temple of Olympian Zeus. On the northwest, this monument faces the Monument of Lycicrates in Plaka. The construction of this temple started in 131 AD when the people wanted to celebrate the arrival of the Roman Emperor Hadrian and thank him for his benefactions to the city. The architect and builders of the arch are unknown to this day.

Its location is not random, but rather symbolic. In fact, it was strategically selected to mark the line between the ancient part of Athens and Hadrian's new city.

TAKE A SIGHTSEEING TOUR OF ATHENS!

With this walking tour, you have the chance to discover the most important historical landmarks in the center of Athens, including the Arch of Hadrian.

Book the tour!

Made of fine Pentelic marble, this arch is 18 meters high, 12,5 meters wide and 2,3 meters deep. Its architecture is similar to other Roman arches and it is crowned by pilasters of the Corinthian rhythm. Its design is fully symmetrical.

The monument has two layers. At the center of the lower layer, there is an arched gate through which people can pass. Also, there were two columns, which do not exist anymore and are connected by architraves between the two layers.

Two inscriptions are carved in the architrave, one on each side: the first, on the side towards the Acropolis, reads "This is Athens, the ancient city of Theseus", while the second, on the side facing the new city, reads "This is the city of Hadrian and not of Theseus".

It is obvious that the ancient city formed new districts due to the expansion that was made by the Emperor.

Given that the monument was never fully protected, it has survived time in extraordinary condition. Unfortunately, in recent decades, pollution has caused extensive discoloration of the original material and degradation of the inscriptions.

Top Tours and activities

Best Seller -10.00%

Special Offer: 10.00% discount for early booking (-60 days).

Sightseeing tour with Acropoli...

Category: City

This tour allows guests to visit the Acropolis and the New Acropolis Museum after passing by some of the most impressive and interesting sights around the city!

4 hours Map

from € 71.10

Book now

Best Seller

Full-day Athens tour with Cape Sounion

Category: City, Day Trips

Do not miss out on this incredible full-day tour of Athens, which includes visits to the Acropolis, the New Museum of Acropolis, the otherworldly Cape Sounion, and a lunch break in between!

1 Day Map

from € 142.00

Book now

Walking tour with Acropolis and city tour

Category: City, Walking

Hop on this fascinating walking tour around the centre of Athens, starting from the Greek Parliament and finishing at the majestic Parthenon atop the Acropolis Hill.

3 hours & 30 min Map

from € 39.00

Book now

How to get there

There are many ways to reach the Arch of Hadrian from any location in Athens.

Tours: Discover the Arch of Hadrian with an organized tour.

Private transfers: We recommend using an online pre-booked transfer service, which provides transfer by taxi, minibus, or private VIP car and arranging a pickup directly from the port, airport, or your hotel. Alternatively, there’s the option of arranging a pickup by a local driver directly at the following numbers: (0030) 18288, (0030) 18222, (0030) 18180. You can also book your taxi online.

On foot: As the Arch of Hadrian is located in a central area of Athens, it can be easily reached on foot from Syntagma Metro Station in approximately 10 minutes.

By metro: The closest metro station is Akropoli (Red Line). Note that the Arch of Hadrian is located within a 5-minute walking distance from the metro. Get a map of the metro here.