Not many people see their life story told at the cinema. But widower St John Greene’s account of his wife’s death from breast cancer, and the bucket list of things she wanted their two kids to do, was so inspiring that their real-life story has been transformed into an emotional film, Mum’s List, starring Emilia Fox as wife Kate.

"I wept when I saw Emilia on screen," says St John (known as Singe), because the actress really had done justice to his and Kate’s love story, and the battles they went through.

Singe and Kate were teenage sweethearts. They shared a passion for outdoor activities, and were determined to grab as much out of their young lives as they could.

"We travelled the world together, we were in each other’s pockets," Singe recalls fondly. "When you’re that much in love with each other, it’s the only way to be."

Singe became a paramedic, while Kate got a job in insurance. By 2003, the couple had married and became the proud parents of their first son Reef. Only 18 months after Reef’s birth, Singe remembers how delighted Kate was to discover she was pregnant again, with another boy. Their family would be complete – until their happy bubble burst, when the new parents discovered a lump on little Reef’s stomach.

It was a rare form of cancer and Reef was only given a 6% chance of survival. He was put on an immediate course of chemotherapy to shrink the tumour. Surgeons had to operate on his leg and part of his sciatic nerve, and they warned his parents that Reef may not have any feeling left in his legs. A distraught Kate went into early labour in shock and baby Finn was delivered two months prematurely.

"We had two children, each with life hanging by a thread," says Singe. Kate spent anxious days at two different hospitals.

On New Year’s Eve, while they were keeping a vigil at Reef’s bedside, Kate turned to Singe and said, "I would swap places with Reef in a heartbeat."

The horrible irony is that is what actually happened.

Heartbreaking news

While Kate was doing her best to remain upbeat for the sake of her children, in August 2008, she noticed a lump in her breast that turned out to be cancerous. Thankfully, the doctors gave her an 80% chance of survival, so everyone was hopeful for a good outcome.

Kate was always positive about celebrating birthdays and special events, ‘big time’, as she would call them.

"Even before she or Reef were ill, on Mother’s Day, we would always visit one of our favourite places near our home in Clevedon, near Bristol, or do something memorable," recalls Singe. "We’d go caving, out on the boat, or rock pooling on the beach."

So Kate stayed upbeat while she underwent six rounds of chemotherapy, five weeks of daily radiotherapy and six months of a chemical trial. Meanwhile, Reef’s health improved so much that he learnt to ride a bike and run around.

But Kate didn’t seem to be getting better. In October 2009, she got the devastating news that the cancer had spread to her bones. She was diagnosed as terminal and given just months to live.

"It was as if someone had said, 'We’ll let you have Reef, but you can’t have both,'" says Singe.

But even in the face of such shattering news, Kate was as positive as she could be, and she started to write her bucket list.

"Even when she lay dying, she used her very last reserves of energy to do something life-changing," says Singe.

Kate left instructions on how Singe should bring up their sons. In her final weeks, she had started jotting down notes on Post-its and in text messages, and in her last few hours Kate kept scribbling away, even though she could barely lift a pencil.

Some things were practical, like, "Go to as many school assemblies as possible." Singe says, "Kate was a brilliant mum, and she wanted me to do the things she would have done herself, had she lived. She also knew I was really scared of how I would cope on my own, and she wanted to give me as much guidance as she could."

But other things like diving, going back to Switzerland where the couple got engaged, or cheering on England at an international rugby match were more like a bucket list.

"Kate’s thinking was that if she couldn’t do the things we had planned, at least I could do it with “bits of her”, meaning our boys," Singe reveals.

The list also included little wishes, like, "would love the boys to find their own four-leaf clovers," and, "would like to go on top of the wardrobe, with the cuddly toys, to be with the boys a bit longer".

By that Kate meant her ashes. She even planned her own funeral. It helped Singe get through that awful day knowing he was doing what she wanted.

Scattered throughout Kate’s notes were memories she wanted to share, to help the boys remember her, like, "Mummy loved how sparkly Reef and Finn’s eyes were in Lapland," and, "Loved guinea pigs and butterflies, Walnut Whips, strawberry cheesecake".

Saying goodbye

In the last few weeks before Kate died, she was too ill to stay at home, so was admitted to Weston General Hospital, in Weston–super–Mare. On the morning of January 20, 2010, Singe got the call he had been dreading:

"Kate’s taken a very bad turn for the worse," a nurse told him.

"I drove like a maniac," he recalls. "Kate was in a private room. All I could think was, 'Thank God I wasn’t too late."

Kate had lost her blonde hair, her blue eyes had lost their sparkle and she couldn’t talk properly. Singe held her hand and heard her last word, ‘Sorry’. Then her breathing stopped. She was just 38.

Singe says telling the boys, who were just five and four, that their mother had died was one of the hardest moments.

"A bereavement specialist had advised me to use honest words, no 'Mummy’s gone to sleep,' or, 'Mummy’s on a cloud,'" he says.

"I drove us to one of our favourite seaside spots, and said simply, 'Mummy has died. She won’t be coming home from hospital again.' There were lots of tears."

Being a widower with two young children, Singe admits it was a struggle to stay positive. ‘You lose somebody who is that important in your life, it’s just horrendous. I’d sob my heart out alone and then share some tears with the boys.’

In the months following Kate’s death, Singe and his mother-in-law gathered up all of Kate’s messages and they came up with an idea to create a book out of them. It gave Singe something to focus on.

"It was always an effort to stay upbeat," says Singe.

He didn’t realise then that it would be such an empowering thing to do, or that his book – Mum’s List – would inspire so many people and be turned into a film.

Mother’s Days are hard for Singe and the boys, but they continue to celebrate in a special way.

"We go to the grave and put flowers on it, but try and keep that quite a happy affair, and then go off and do an activity that Kate would’ve approved of, or something the boys would be excited to do.

"Their school was very good, when all the other kids were making Mother’s Day cards they’d call and ask what I wanted them to make, like a Happy Nanny’s Day card, so they didn’t feel left out."

There’s a scene in the film that’s set on a Mother’s Day after Kate died. Singe explains that, "We went to the supermarket and bought all of Kate’s favourite foods. Then watched her on video at home, so the boys could experience not just the memory and the pictures, but also the treats Kate really enjoyed. We had lemon curd, Walnut Whips, strawberries and cream and everything that would make Mother’s Day special," says Singe. "Now when the boys smell strawberries, they think: Mum."

Singe is pleased the film means his boys will have an extra special memory of their mum.

"I wanted them to get an idea of what she was like – she was pretty cool!" he says.

He plans to show Mum’s List to Reef and Finn when they’re older. Reef’s health has now improved.

"He’s fantastic. There are a few health hurdles to climb over but he’s up for it. I’m proud of both of my sons," says Singe.

Moving on

One of Kate’s instructions was especially poignant – for Singe to fall in love again.

"I always knew I would have to find somebody who would look after me and look after the boys," he admits.

And after seven years without Kate, he has.

"The boys call my new partner Lindsey “Mum” now. When we first met, I just knew she was The One. It was like a puzzle with a piece missing, and then Lindsey and her son Alex, now 12, came along and slotted straight in. The boys are so close.

"She’s great with the kids, she’s a real mummy figure to them, just like Kate wanted me to find," he says.

The family celebrated Mother’s Day early, when they went to Dublin last weekend to see England play the last game of the Six Nations rugby.

"It’s another massive tick off Kate’s list," says Singe.

"Ten years ago, when we were going through the treatment, I never dreamed it would be like this. I’ve managed to turn my life around and find love, happiness and the family that we’ve got now."