She reprised her role as lead forensic investigator Dr Nikki Alexander as the 24th series of Silent Witness began airing this week.

And Emilia Fox cut a jovial figure as she got into character once again as she continued to film scenes for the much-loved BBC crime drama in Liverpool on Tuesday.

The actress, 47, donned a white forensic suit and blue disposable gloves and was seen opening a silver briefcase as cast and crew milled around her.

Emilia appeared in a jovial mood as she smiled and chatted to her colleagues on the set of the series.

Among her co-stars joining her for filming were actor and director Ian Poulton Davis, who plays a forensic officer on the show.

Emilia swept her blonde tresses into a loose bun for the scenes, while she donned a pale pink T-shirt beneath her suit.

The star, part of the Fox acting dynasty, was also seen later wearing a long black padded jacket as she stood about on set in between scenes.

The filming snaps comes after Emilia looked to have found love again, 16 months after her split from fiancé Luc Chaudhary.

The actress put on a loved up display on Sunday as she strolled hand-in-hand with her new man - TV producer Jonathan Stadlen - on a romantic dog walk in leafy London.

The Mail on Sunday revealed this weekend that Emilia was dating handsome, well-heeled television producer Jonathan, 43, and has been telling friends that she thinks he is 'the one'.

On Friday, Jonathan, who owns a successful production company called Knickerbockerglory, walked his new girlfriend's two dachshunds near her home in West London. And on Saturday the couple went out together, this time without her beloved pooches.

On Sunday, they were spotted in casual attire, laughing and gazing adoringly at each other for a morning stroll.

Emilia recently broke her silence on her new romance, telling The Times recently: 'I am with someone and I am very happy and that's a really lovely thing to be able to say.'

Referencing her break-up with Luc, she continued: 'We ended on very good terms, but that was quite a long time ago. Then I had more time alone and I met someone new quite recently. Hopefully, I'm now able to share life with someone with a better sense of self.'

She added: 'All I can say is he is someone with understanding, kindness, thoughtfulness and a good moral compass.'

Friends say they got together in June after meeting through mutual pals. They are understood to have met members of each other's families and are said to be 'besotted'.

Jonathan is a divorcé who lives three miles away from Emilia – a member of the famous Fox acting dynasty. He was the man behind the recent hit Netflix series An American Murder: The Family Next Door.

In July, he joined Emilia on a podcast about crime in lockdown. One friend told The Mail on Sunday: 'Both Jonathan and Emilia are totally besotted, they might have only been together for a few months but they are very happy.

'Jonathan has been excitedly telling his friends about his new girlfriend. It is all very sweet.'

Emilia, who has a ten-year-old daughter named Rose from her relationship with actor and activist Jeremy Gilley, split from her talent agent fiancé Luc in October last year, 18 months after they met on the exclusive celebrity dating app Raya.

Before that she dated controversial TV chef Marco Pierre White from 2012 to 2016 after she and Mr Gilley went their separate ways. At the time, he was still married to his wife, Mati Conejero, with whom he has three children, and their relationship was said to have been a tortuous, on-off one.