A brand new season of the hit drama Silent Witness kicks off tonight on BBC One (September 6).

Thankfully, all of our favourites will be returning to our screens once again for this series including Emilia Fox, David Caves, Jason Wong, Elliot Tittensor, Kevin Eldon, Divian Ladwa andKevin Doyle.

Fiery Emilia Fox plays heroine Dr Nikki Alexander in the crime drama and made her first appearance as her character back in series eight.

READ MORE: BBC Countryfile: Anita Rani's life off-camera from starting presenting at just 14 to the painful experience of miscarriage

This series follows Nikki and Jack paying a visit to a high security prison to investigate the suspicious death of one of it's inmates.

What many people might not know is that Emilia has a connection to a certain former London mayoral candidate.

Her cousin and political activist, Laurence Fox, has been subjected to a good deal of public scrutiny over the last few years, specifically to do with his often controversial opinions and damning indictments on "woke" culture.

Laurence has also stirred the pot with tweets about the Covid lockdowns since last year.

Emilia recently spoke out about her cousin in an interview with The Times saying that she ignores comments about his actions and doesn't let that get in the way of their relationship.

She said in the interview: "I don’t know what emails you’ve had, but Laurence is my cousin, he’s family and I love my family.

"I think he’d be the first to advocate that people can have different opinions on things.

"We’ve had very different life experiences and Laurence’s political life is nothing to do with my relationship with him. We’ve had some amazing times together and we’ve been very mutually supportive of our personal lives."

However, this is the only famous person who the star is linked to.

She is thought to have dated famous actor The Crown and Mad Men actor Jared Harris who is the son of his equally famous dad Richard Harris, who appeared as Dumbledore in the first two Harry Potter films.

Sadly Richard Harris passed away in October 2002 at the age of 72.