Alongside the usual crime-drama storylines, Dr Nikki Alexander (Emilia Fox) and Jack Hodgson (David Caves) are continuing to navigate their relationship whilst working with each other.

The opening two episodes deal with a murder in a church which sparks similarities to a case that was undertaken 20 years earlier.

Meanwhile, across the rest of the series, there will be death on a university campus, a mummified corpse will be uncovered, multiple bodies are found entombed beneath a train station in a makeshift mass grave and "the Lyell is infiltrated by a malevolent force," the Radio Times reports.

Guests stars in the latest series of Silent Witness include John Hannah (Four Weddings and a Funeral, Sliding Doors, The Mummy) and Kevin McNally (Pirates of the Caribbean series).

BBC Silent Witness series 27 full cast

The regular members of the cast of Silent Witness are:

Emilia Fox as Dr Nikki Alexander

David Caves as Jack Hodgson

Alastair Michael as Velvy Schur

Aki Omoshaybi as Gabriel Folukoya

Rhiannon May as Cara Connelly

Guest stars for series 27 will include:

John Hannah as Dr Charles Beck (Episodes 1 and 2)

Josette Simon as DCI Ford (Episodes 1 and 2)

Leo Staar as Calvin Dunn (Episodes 1 and 2)

Kevin McNally as Professor Peter Cherry (Episodes 3 and 4)

John Thomson as DI Warren Bull (Episodes 3 and 4)

Isobel Wood as Celeste Locke (Episodes 3 and 4)

Nadine Marshall as DI Sarah Torres (Episodes 5 and 6)

Julie Graham as Elinor Shaw (Episodes 7 and 8)

Sean Pertwee as DI John Flynn (Episodes 7 and 8)

Molly Harris as May Lwin (Episodes 7 and 8)

Cavan Clerkin as Ian Fish (Episodes 7 and 8)

Hermione Norris as CS Sheila Court (Episodes 9 and 10)

Neil Pearson as DI Steve Tudor (Episodes 9 and 10)

Recommended reading:

ITV After the Flood: Full cast list and how to watch

Mr Bates vs The Post Office: cast, when to watch and more

BBC The Tourist series 2 full cast and when it is on TV

When will Silent Witness series 27 be on TV?

The first episode of series 27 of Silent Witness aired at 9pm on Monday, January 8 with the second following on Tuesday, January 9 in the same timeslot.

Following that episode 3 will air at 9pm on Monday, January 15 but due to FA Cup football airing on Tuesday, January 16 episode 4 will be pushed back to Monday, January 22.

After that, the episodes will go back to their normal schedule briefly with episodes 5 and 6 airing on Monday, January 29 and Tuesday, January 30.

Episode 7 will air at the usual time on Monday, February 5 but due to FA Cup football being aired on the BBC again episode 8 is delayed to 9pm on Wednesday, February 7.

Episodes 9 and 10 are currently scheduled to air in the regular timeslot on Monday, February 12 and Tuesday, February 13.

Alternatively, episodes 1 and 2 are available to watch on the BBC iPlayer right now, with each two-parter being available from the respective Monday at 8am on the service in the week they are set to air.