Emilia Fox with Professor David Wilson

TV sleuths are investigating a theory that the disappearance of an Archway man a decade ago could be linked to a similar case two years earlier.

Channel 4 will screen the ideas of criminologist Professor David Wilson and Silent Witness star Emilia Fox in the latest episode of In The Footsteps of Killers next week, focusing on what might have happened to Robert Duff.

He has not been seen since 2013, when he was aged 37, and detectives have upgraded their investigation to a murder inquiry.

During the show, Prof Wilson stands in Bredgar Road – the street where Robert lived – and declares that somebody still there must know what happened to him.

He suggests it is worth police looking at the case alongside the disappearance of Lana Purcell, a mother-of-one from Queen’s Crescent who went missing in the Blackstock Road area in January 2011. Our sister paper, the Camden New Journal, campaigned for several years for the case to be given more attention. What began as a missing person case has been turned into a murder investigation.

The idea of the documentary series is to look for new information and angles on historical cases and the programme also reflects on the unsolved disappearance and presumed murder of Mr Duff. Both Robert and Lana had been struggling with substance addiction and had mutual acquaintances.

Robert Duff

The idea that the cases are connected has been dismissed by detectives close to the cases and police say they do not believe they are linked in any way. But Lana’s family say, either way, they will not be unable to rest until they have discovered the truth about what happened to her.

“I never saw Lana with him or heard her mention Robert,” said her sister, Davina Purcell. “But people do all know each other round here and in those circles and other people have said they did know each other.”

She added she was told they had been spotted together in the months before Lana was reported missing, adding: “Two people told me they were seen together, so yes, I think they did know each other, but there is little evidence their disappearances are linked somehow.”

For both families, the lack of any new leads is heartbreaking and that frustration means any scenario or any lead is worth pursuing, added Davina.

Lana’s father John Purcell revealed in the programme he had received an anonymous phone call in the days before Lana disappeared from a man who said he was trying to keep an eye on his daughter and that she was in danger. Mr Purcell told Prof Wilson the warning could have come from Mr Duff.

Lana Purcell

Over the years, Lana’s family have searched for answers themselves, ranging from producing their own missing persons posters to investigating a possible sighting of her months after she went missing.

Davina added: “Anything that keeps people thinking about Lana is a good thing.

“We know someone out there has the answer.”

A police spokesman said officers had been following a variety of leads since Lana disappeared in January 2011.

“Police in Camden conducted numerous lines of enquiry over the intervening period and the investigation was both complex and protracted. In February 2014, police in Camden passed the file to the MPS Homicide and Serious Crime Command for review and further investigation.

“In April 2020, a full review of the investigation was undertaken by the Specialist Crime Command with all material being assessed, witnesses revisited. This was followed by a media appeal released with a £20,000 reward for information in September 2020. Sadly, this has not resulted in any new lines of inquiry or any clarity around what happened to Lana Purcell.”

• Anyone with any information regarding Lana Purcell or Robert Duff can call the incident room on 020 8345 1570, or 101 quoting Op Kagal. Alternatively, tweet @MetCC, or to remain anonymous, contact the charity Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.