Emilia Fox has learned a lot about forensics and criminal behaviour playing a pathologist in Silent Witness – and now she is using her knowledge to investigate the horrific crimes of Jack the Ripper.

Together with Prof David Wilson – a criminologist who has met almost every recent UK serial killer – they have reopened the case 130 years after the Ripper’s reign of terror in the East End of London began.

Like Dr Nikki in the hit BBC series, Emilia recreates his crime scenes and even carries out a digital autopsy, using a virtual dissection table.

She and David believe their evidence shows the Ripper had six victims, not five, and the name of Martha Tabram can be added to his toll as she was the first women he murdered.

Emilia says: “There is a sensationalised story around Jack the Ripper – the myth, the legend of Jack the Ripper. But what I found is that these women were victims of circumstance. They had such tragedy in their lives, poverty and alcoholism made them vulnerable to a man who has become beyond famous.

“That’s why it’s so important that we focus on the women. There is so much discussion about him, so I think that’s why it’s so important to focus on them.”

She and David also think they know the Ripper’s true identity – and that he was Polish barber Aaron Kosminski.

In their investigation, they used state-of-the art technology, including the Home Office Large Major Enquiry System – HOLMES.

Developed in 1985 in the wake of the Yorkshire Ripper’s crime spree, the computer system detects patterns in criminal activity and evidence.

Revealing his findings, David says: “Having walked the streets of Whitechapel, having looked at the modus operandi and in particular having seen the evidence presented from HOLMES, I’ve got absolutely no doubt, no doubt, that Martha Tabram is the first Jack the Ripper victim.”

Like the other victims – Mary Ann Nichols, Annie Chapman, Elizabeth Stride, Catherine Eddowes and Mary Jane Kelly – Martha was estranged from her husband and funded her alcoholism by selling sex.

David says Martha and the others were all killed with a brutality that left them “disfigured, dehumanised and obliterated”.

Martha had been out drinking with two soldiers on the night of August 6, 1888, before being stabbed 39 times, including in the breasts and genitals.

Less than a month later, the Ripper’s first reported victim Mary Ann Nichols was stabbed to death, suffering a huge wound in her stomach.

A few weeks later, Annie Chapman’s body was found, her abdomen slashed open entirely with her uterus removed.

Emilia says: “I found it fascinating how the Ripper’s pattern of killing evolved and how you could then look at the Martha Tabrum killing and see that it was beginning of what became his overkill. And that he learned from that killing.”

Speaking ahead of the release of their BBC One documentary, Jack The Ripper – The Case Reopened, David says: “I always try to put victims in the centre of the narrative about serial murder.

“I think it’s really important to show there is a strange persistence in the vulnerability of the people who fall victims to serial killers.

“We’re often talking about women living in poverty who have addictions and sell their bodies. And it’s important that we can do something about the phenomenon of serial killers – if we tackle misogyny, poverty, provide more help for addictions and work out how we go about policing people who sell sexual services.”

David, 61, concluded that Martha was a Ripper victim because, while her throat was not cut in the same way as his later victims and she was not eviscerated, the killer’s methods developed over time.

The final victim, Mary Jane Kelly, whose body was discovered in November 1888, was horrifically mutilated, her nose, cheeks, eyebrows and ears partly removed.

David, who helped convict Suffolk Strangler Steve Wright, says: “The modus operandi can change and develop, but the signature stays the same.”

The Ripper’s “signature” was the hacking and mutilation of the bodies. David and Emilia believe the evidence points to Aaron Kosminski as the killer.

Kosminski’s house was in Whitechapel, a few hundred metres from where Martha was killed. Geoprofiling indicates that serial killers live very close to the site of their first murder.

This month, fresh DNA tests found Kosminski’s blood and semen on Catherine Eddowes’ shawl. He had mental health problems, suffered hallucinations and heard voices in his head telling him to act in violent ways.

Emilia says: “There is such a big business around Jack the Ripper. I am sure the Jack the Ripper industry won’t like that at the root of it is a very uncelebrity, unwell man.”

Glamorous suspects over the years have included Queen Victoria’s grandson Prince Albert Victor, painter Walter Sickert and Alice in Wonderland author Lewis Carroll.

David says: “We want to say it’s Prince Albert rather than a man whose mental health has disintegrated.

“Whether I am dealing with serial killers in 1888 or serial killers today, that’s often what I am dealing with: not the celebrity, not the Hollywood film version. Serial killers are very damaged, hollow characters. I don’t need to be convinced any longer about the Ripper. We could go no further in terms of that case.”