News & Press Releases

Solar Energy

Solar Turbines: Delivering Rugged and Reliable Industrial Gas Turbines

Solar Turbines is one of the world’s leading manufacturers of industrial gas turbines. Their turbines are used in electric power generation, gas compression and pumping systems. You can see how the turbines work in the video.

Did you know…

Solar’s customers put the company’s products to work in many areas. Just where? Turbines are used in production, processing and pipeline transmission of natural gas and crude oil, and generation of electricity and thermal energy for processing applications, such as manufacturing chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and food products.

Solar provides lifecycle service and support. Selling a piece of machinery is only the beginning of a relationship with a customer. The support relationship can last for many decades.

Solar’s foundation is people. Individual contributions are valued, diversity in the workplace is encouraged and safety is emphasized in all aspects of the business.

There are six families of gas turbine engines. What are they? The Saturn®, Centaur®, Mercury™, Taurus™, Mars® and Titan™.

The turbines are rated from 1,590 to 30,000 horsepower.

The turbines can operate on a wide variety of fuels, including natural gas, distillates, NGL, LNG, coal-seam methane, hydrogen, and renewable fuels, such as landfill and sewage gases.

Solar’s gas turbines provide electricity and heat to universities, hospitals, industrial sites and more. And, they provide applications for gas transmission/compression, storage/withdrawal, power generation, off-shore platforms and more.

3-D printing is starting to increase. While most parts are still made through molding and casting, Solar is also incorporating 3-D printed parts where it makes sense.

Solar was founded in 1927. They were known as their start as the “Prudden-San Diego Airplane Co.”. Solar celebrated its 90th birthday in 2017.

OVER 90 YEARS STRONG AND LOOKING FORWARD TO #POWERINGTHEFUTURE

Their gas turbine engines provide clean, sustainable energy solutions that power customer needs throughout the world. We’re proud of how Solar has delivered high-value products and services to customers for over 90 years – and will for many years to come.

To learn more about Solar, please visit solarturbines.com