Thomas Lane Sielert, 66, of Judsonia, passed away Monday, April 8, 2024. He was born in Los Angeles, California to the late Norman and Daisy (Bolin) Sielert.

Tom and his sister, Sharon, mom, and dad moved to Tulsa when Tom was about 8 while his father finished out his aviation career with North American Rockwell. As with all kids back in that day and time, Tom spent hours outside with friends, playing, exploring, and riding bikes. Only going home at the last minute to not get in trouble. Years later when the family moved to Searcy, Tom and his dad started spending all the extra time they could fishing. Tom’s great love of fishing continued throughout his life.

Tom and his family ran two restaurants while living in Searcy; then downsized to just one in Judsonia. After graduation Tom went to school to become an Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Technician, working for a company out of Little Rock. Tom began working at Sperry Vickers in 1983 and was employed there for 40 years as a machinist through numerous name changes, buyouts, etc. He retired from the now Dan Foss in early 2023.

Tom’s proudest moments were the birth of his 2 sons, Jeff and Chris. He recently told his sister that he was so proud of his 2 sons and the men they grew up to be, working hard to take care of their families. He enjoyed every second of the time he got to spend with them and their families. He loved their wives, Adrianne and Brittany and he was so happy that his sons had such loving, good, women in their lives.

He is survived by his sons, Jeffery Sielert and wife Adrianne and Chris Sielert and wife Brittany; grandchildren, Jackson and Lilyanna; sister, Sharon Shireman; niece, Alicia Shireman; great-niece, Cat Slater; as well as longtime friends Mark and Ricky.

Tom’s love and kindness will be missed by all who knew him.

He was preceded in death by his parents.

Visitation will be held Saturday, April 13, 2024 from 1:00-2:00 p.m. at the Searcy McEuen Funeral Home with services to begin at 2:00 p.m. Arrangements have been entrusted to Searcy McEuen Funeral Home.

Share A Memory: www.SearcyMcEuenFuneralHome.com