[Translation] “The first Catholic to settle in Rawdon did so around 1824. Ths Lane—that was his name—was an interesting individual. This figure was endowed with qualities and titles that very few suspect. Ths Lane was a native of Dublin, thus Irish, a graduate from the university of the same name, a distinguished linguist, speaking at least eight languages: Gaelic, English, French, Latin, Italian, Spanish, Greek, German…and, above all, a committed and fervent Catholic, who had to fight hard against Lord Rawdon and his protégés, and who fought so well that, to his credit, he was dubbed ‘The Pope Lane.’

“It was he who chopped down the first tree to build the primitive church, around 1828.”

A prominent figure among the families who contributed to the creation of Rawdon, Thomas Lane actively participated in the establishment of the Catholic Church in Rawdon. The note mentioning that he had to fight hard against Lord Rawdon and his protégés was likely meant in the figurative sense. An article in the newspaper The Vindicator and Canadian Advertiser dated January 13, 1835, reported a series of events that took place in Rawdon starting on December 6, 1834. Following a meeting held at the Anglican church rectory, resolutions were adopted to build a school and change the name of the village. In response to these resolutions, Thomas Lane and a group of citizens opposed them and adopted seven resolutions demonstrating the spirit of collaboration that reigned between Protestants and Catholics. The first resolution stipulated that Rawdon’s public schools should not be controlled by any stranger having drawn a line dividing the Protestant and Catholic residents of this township and sowing discord between them. Out of the seven resolutions adopted at that meeting, Thomas Lane proposed three and seconded two. The others who contributed to the adoption of these resolutions included Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Griffith, Major Robert Bagnall, Edward McGie, Edward Corcoran, John Carroll, Patrick O’Neal and John Woods.

In his book Up to RawdonIn his book Up to Rawdon, Daniel Parkinson relates another event representing a fine example of the good will and tolerance that existed between Protestants and Catholics in Rawdon. Following what Daniel suspects was a typhus or scarlet fever epidemic and the quarantining of the Burns family, three young daughters of John Burns died between December 12 and 23, 1872. Neighbours of the Burns who lived on lot 21 of range 3, the Lanes (John and Thomas, son) brought the three girls’ bodies to the Methodist cemetery and had them buried by the pastor.

An article from the book Up to Rawdon (pages 1087 to 1112) entitled “And the Boys are at the Barracks” identifies the principal members of the Rawdon militia. Citing the Répertoire des officiers de milice du Bas-Canada, 1830-1848 by Denis Racine and the Société généalogique du Québec (1986) as a source, this article indicates the different ranks obtained by Thomas Lane over the years. He was first an ensign as of 1836, became a lieutenant in 1846, and was then captain from 1856 to 1862.

At the time of the 1861 census, Thomas Lane and Margaret Wood were still living with Catherine, Thomas, Edward and James. Their eldest daughter Mary (1825-1915) had joined the Sisters of St. Anne. Known as Sister Marie-de-la-Conception, she worked in Western Canada. Their eldest son John (1824-1908) had married Catherine Price, the daughter of Thomas Price and Briget McGrath, in Rawdon on February 10, 1852. Catherine, mistakenly identified as Prince in Marcel Fournier’s book, was in fact named Price, as specified in the book Up to Rawdon. The name Price is confirmed by the compilation of the list of concessions available in the Registry of the Surveyor General of Quebec. Thomas Price, Catherine’s father, had obtained the letters patent for lot 25 south of range 8 on October 24, 1831. At the time of the 1861 and 1871 censuses, John Lane and his wife Catherine Price had at least ten children (Margaret, Thomas, John, William, James, Edward, Mary, Catherine, Ambroise and Charles). A document provided by William’s family indicated nine children.

Thomas Lane passed away on February 18, 1864, at age 72, and was buried on February 20 in Rawdon’s Catholic cemetery. In his will, drawn up on December 15, 1863, and available in the acts (no. 966) of the notary John Horan, he left his properties to his sons Thomas, Edward and James. These properties included lot 25 of range 3 and the southwest half of lot 24 of range 2. He gave Thomas the use of the farm, known under the name of McDermott, along with the 50 adjoining acres. He left James the 50 acres that included all the buildings, with the obligation to provide housing and a means of transportation to his mother and his sister Catherine, who also received a financial allowance. As for his daughter Mary, who had entered a religious community, he felt that she had received fair compensation through the education that she had received. Lastly, for John, whom he had named executor, he deemed that he would be amply compensated by any share that he might receive from his inheritance. An act (no. 85) of the notary Horan signed on August 4, 1852, indicates that Thomas Lane and his wife had already given John his inheritance while they were alive.

His wife Margaret Wood survived him by many years. She died on June 19, 1890, at the age of 90. She was also buried in Rawdon’s Catholic cemetery. Several of Thomas Lane’s and Margaret Wood’s many descendants still live in Rawdon.