Servis C60185NFC Fridge

Servis C60185NFC Freestanding Retro FridgeFreezer Cream Right Hand Hinge

Bought a servis retro fridge freezer and it's so noisy. Clicks all day long. I've never heard a fridge make this kind of noise before, it's not ambient so you can't even subconsciously tune it out.

They did provide a 5 year warranty and a service person did visit, but these are just your bog standard generic fridge mechanics that do not have any specific knowledge or tools, and cannot fix any complicated issues.

If you google up the company history you'll not buy from them. Sadly I did this after purchasing.

Won't ever buy a servis product again.

Date of experience : 21 August 2017

Never buy a Servis product (especially through Wrightbuy!)

We bought a servis range cooker through Wrightbuy and within 6 months it developed a fault. After repeated phone calls to Servis and wrightbuy it still hasn't been fixed after 6 weeks. Servis customer services are awful and totally disinterested.They do not ring back when they promise to and the manager is always 'too busy in a meeting' to talk. They have sent an engineer twice but have ordered the wrong parts. Totally incompetent. They seem to think it's acceptable for a family with 3 young children to manage without an oven for 6 weeks. Avoid a Servis appliance and Wrightbuy who are equally disinterested.

Date of experience : 05 September 2018

Inadequate products backed up by a truly dreadful repair service

My dishwasher is less than 2 years old, just out of warranty and broke down so that pretty much tells you what you need to know about the products. However, trying to get it fixed means you come into contact with the same people who would deal with the repair if it were in warranty. Everything they’ve told me has been either incorrect or an outright lie. It’s the worst customer service I’ve experienced for some time and I’ve spoken to at least one different members of their North East staff every day for the last 8 days so I’m afraid it’s not one bad apple. Avoid at all costs

Date of experience : 04 November 2018

never buy a servis product

we purchased a servis fridge freezer just over a year ago - it has stopped working and makes an awful noise (we couldn't eat in the kitchen because of it).

When we contacted the seller (The Wright Buy) they were totally unhelpful and referred us to Servis. Servis were also totally unhelpful and suggested that we switch the appliance off for 48 hours (this was over the New Year period). When asked what we should do with food that would then be wasted their female representative said "eat it"!

They have refused to examine the appliance (it is still within the 5 year warranty) and have refused to offer compensation to cover the cost of the wasted food.

Never use The Wright Buy or Servis.

Date of experience : 04 January 2017

Perverse warranty terms and poor supply of spare parts

My tall retro fridge started collecting water condensing inside . It was just within the 5 year warranty and the engineer came out promptly and found that the door hinges had dropped. A week later Servis contacted me to say that they could not supply the door hinges within 90 days and the warranty terms were that if they could not supply the parts to that timescale I would be getting a new fridge. I questioned with Servis why they would not give me the market replacement price but I was told that the warranty was based on the purchase price.The Servis warranty terms are very unfair as I am being penalised financially for their problems with spare parts. The fridge had to date been working perfectly and I had hoped to get many more years out of it. I really did not need a new fridge!

Date of experience : 21 September 2020

Servis dishwasher

I purchased a servis dishwasher a couple of years ago. It suddenly stopped working conveniently right after the warranty ended. I decided to call the support and they sent an "engineer" to diagnose the issue, letting me know I would be charged €75 for the call, seen as the dishwasher was not under warranty. Fine, as long as it is fixed, I thought. Only, the engineer was not able to understand what the issue was, so he randomly tried something and let me know that I should have to wait a couple of hours to test if it worked. Then he took his €75 and left. Of course, he fixed nothing and I had to call the service again cause he refused to come again to my house on the day we agreed on. Understandably, I asked for another engineer, someone more professional, but the rude representative at the phone told me he is the only one available in the area and would not let me speak to a supervisor. Now I am still waiting for this genius engineer to call me back, and it has been one hour since my last call. DO NOT PURCHASE SERVIS PRODUCTS! IF THEY BROKE THEY WON'T BE ABLE TO FIX THE ISSUE AND THEIR SERVICE IS AWFUL!

Date of experience : 26 September 2018

SERVIS C60185 RETRO FRIDGE FREEZER: POOR QUALITY AND SERVICE

SERVIS C60185 RETRO FRIDGE FREEZER:

Don’t be fooled by the looks of this fridge freezer… After purchasing this product in 2015 I have only had problems so far. EVERY 4-5 months ice builds up in the duct at the back of the freezer and blocks it so that cool air does not reach the fridge compartment. As a result the fridge compartment stops cooling and reaches room temperature; at this point the whole fridge-freezer requires defrosting. The technicians has been multiple times and all they were doing was defrosting the fridge with handheld steamers. They said that this could be due to leaving the freezer door open for a prolonged period of time, or opening the fridge too often. I have never experienced this problem with any of my previous fridge-freezer and my usage has not changed so I cant see how this point can be valid. They also advised me to get one one of those steamers and do it myself as nothing else could be done! After a point I gave up calling Servis technicians and bought one myself for frequently defrosting of my supposedly "No frost" fridge freezer. Until... the radiator of the freezer compartment died and now I am waiting for a replacement part. Which will probably be a long wait, as, according to the repair company the part is not available and could take 40 days!!! Until then… I guess I ll have to live without a fridge.

What a sad Servis product and appaling repairs service.

Date of experience : 20 October 2018

Servis WP1249F2W Washing Machine

Bought this model of washing machine in November 2013. Not used every day as there is only me and the wife here.

January 2017 it is on it's way out. The drum rocks wildly when spinning and sounds like a rocket launching. The drum bearings haven't smashed yet but they soon will. I suspect the fault is either the dampeners (rather like small shock absorbers underneath the drum) or the suspension springs (at the top of the drum), or both.

I couldn't source the spares at a reasonable price. Espares.co.uk are usually great but they don't do Servis washer spares. The prices from Servis for the parts are horrendously expensive. It isn't worth doing.

So I've ordered a new washer, a Hotpoint. You can't go wrong with Hotpoint or Hoover. The spares are easy to get and reasonably priced.

I should have bought a Hotpoint in the first place. Serves me right.

Moral of the story: Don't buy a Servis washing machine. Three years light use and it's knackered. Speaks volumes on the quality.

Date of experience : 17 January 2017