There are basketball reasons (no Stern-o) to love Ian Mahinmi. The 25-year-old Frenchman has provided largely solid two-way play as part of the Dallas Mavericks' big-man rotation this season, kicking in 6.4 points and 4.8 rebounds in a career-high 19.3 minutes per game for a Mavs team taking a center-by-committee approach to replacing Tyson Chandler. While Mahinmi's game certainly remains rough around the edges, he's remarkably athletic and fluid on the floor for a 6-foot-11, 230-pounder, and given a defined role and extended playing time, he's proven to be both a talent worthy of nurturing for the future and a valuable contributor in the here and now.

Today, though, none of that matters, because now we have this video, which gives us all the non-basketball reasons we'd ever need to love Ian Mahinmi.

[Related: Michael Jordan, David Beckham among athletes with hot clothing lines]

The clip, posted to the "ianmahinmiTV" YouTube channel, features Mahinmi walking around a hotel in a plush blue robe, working out shirtless in hipster glasses and a bracelet, getting a massage on what appears to be the roofdeck of a luxury hotel, and coming face to smiling face with five doppelgangers, each of whom gives the blue-robed Mahinmi a hearty thumb's up. The whole shebang is soundtracked by a slick disco-remixed lounge groove, which makes everything infinitely more hilarious.

If you're someone who had no idea that Mahinmi had any personality or style — a share of the population that probably includes just about everybody except his friends, his family and total Mavs diehards, since he's never gotten significant time until this year and he's still one of the least publicly recognizable figures on a Dallas team that features Dirk Nowitzki, Jason Kidd, Vince Carter, Lamar Odom, Jason Terry and Shawn Marion — this provides an amazing introduction. To answer your questions: Yes, we love blue robe; yes, we love man working out; yes, we love sunset; yes, we love smily [sic] face. Yes, we love Ian Mahinmi.

[Related: New Laker Ramon Sessions enjoying celebrity life in Los Angeles]

Important additional note: The short was produced by One Million Dollar Film, a French production company that has also created comedic spots for former NBA player Alexis Ajinca and Arsenal left-back Bacary Sagna, and boasts relationships with several other pro athletes, including NBA players Boris Diaw, Ronny Turiaf and Kevin Seraphin. I think I speak for everyone affiliated with the basketball Internet when I say that we very badly need to see one of these shorts starring each of those players immediately.

I'm thinking Diaw would make an excellent spy (or villain) in a Bond-esque piece, and it'd be very interesting to see Turiaf reinterpret Mickey Rourke's work in "The Wrestler." Those are just ideas, though; I'm only spitballing. I'm very open to your suggestions for French NBA comedy video premises, so feel free to leave them in the comments.

Hat-tip to friend of the program Rob Mahoney at Mavs-focused blog The Two Man Game.

More news from the Yahoo! Sports Minute: