Dallas Mavericks' forward Ian Mahinmi was this week's guest on the Tony Parker Show. Currently playing for French team Le Havre because of the lockout, the frenchman won the NBA championship last year but he is still waiting for his ring.

How did you feel in your first game with Le Havre? Is it strange for you to be back in France?

Honestly, the French Pro A is nothing like the NBA. It’s so different. But I’m happy to be playing in France. I know some of the players, like Ricardo Greer whom I played with years ago. I’m really glad I’m back.

How are things going with your new team mates?

It’s all good. We don’t have a lot of training behind us so we still need to learn to play together. We are far from 100% but I have a good feeling. The team is great. There’s still a lot of work of course but I’m happy to be here.

What do you think about the level of play here in France?

I'm surprised! The level is really good. I left the Pro A years ago, now I’m back and the level is still there. It’s a great thing for me to play in these conditions so I can be ready for a possible return to the NBA. I made a good decision by coming here. I’m really happy.

And what about winning the NBA championship with the Mavs? It had to be crazy in Dallas?

It was epic! What I’ve experienced here in Dallas is something I will never forget. You know what I’m talking about Tony, you won three titles. I remember my first official game in the NBA, I was with the Spurs and it was just after you’ve won the championship. During the ring ceremony, I was looking at you, dreaming about being able to experience the same thing during my career. And four years later, there it is. I’m so proud.

However, with the lockout, you might not get your ring any time soon?

It’s really a bummer! I hope the lockout ends soon. I’ll be very disappointed if there is no NBA season. As you know, if there is no agreement before January, the entire season will be cancelled. So I hope they're going to find a deal because I want my ring! That’s really the main thing for me.

When you think about your time in San Antonio, what are the things you remember the most?

It was a good experience for me. My first year was hard, I was sent to the D-League and it was really hard to accept. Fortunately, Tony was there for me in the bad moments. And my second year was difficult too, I suffered an ankle injury and missed a lot of games. In my third year, just as I was starting to feel good in San Antonio, I was traded to Dallas. I would have liked to stay with the Spurs but that’s how things work in the NBA.

Last question, are the Olympics a goal for you this year?

Of course! As I said before, every athlete dreams about the Olympics. It’s the ultimate goal. However, I don’t have control on that. The coach is the one who will have the final decision. But yes, of course, it’s a goal for me.