INDIANAPOLIS – The Indiana Pacers are sending point guard Darren Collison and wing player Dahntay Jones to the Dallas Mavericks for center Ian Mahinmi, according to the agent for one of the players.

Mark Bartelstein, who represents Jones, confirmed Thursday that the deal is in place.

‘That’s going to happen,’ Bartelstein said.

The Mavericks are adding 7-foot center Chris Kaman, a step forward for a team that failed to persuade guard Deron Williams to leave the Brooklyn Nets and play in his home town. Dallas is also losing guards Jason Kidd and Jason Terry in free agency.

Collison lost his starting job to George Hill late last season after starting 135 games for the Pacers in two seasons. He averaged 13.2 points and 5.1 assists two years ago and 10.4 points and 4.8 rebounds this past season.

Jones, a defensive stopper, joined the Pacers for the 2009-10 season and started 31 games in three years. He averaged 5.3 points in 16.2 minutes per game last season.

Mahinmi, an athletic Frenchman, started 12 games for the Mavericks last season and averaged 5.8 points.

Jones was considered a key part of Indiana’s rebuilding effort, but he couldn’t get much playing time. Danny Granger was entrenched at small forward, then Paul George emerged as a budding star at shooting guard. Now, Lance Stephenson is playing well in summer league, and the Pacers picked up Orlando Johnson on draft night, leaving few minutes for Jones.

‘I think there was a logjam at the wing spots,’ Bartelstein said. ‘He’s a proven player in this league. He has the opportunity to go somewhere where he can get more playing time.’

Jones sent out his thoughts in two tweets:

‘Thanks Pacers fans for all the support over the past 3 years. I gave my heart and soul on the court and in the community,’ he wrote. ‘Indiana is definitely a place I will always remember. Happy to see my guys (at)StephensonLance and (at)King24George grow into great players &men.’

Collison was considered a key building block for the Pacers when they picked him up in a trade, but he became expendable when the Pacers traded for Hill during the 2011 drafted. Collison kept his starting job for most of the season, but after a groin injury late last season, coach Frank Vogel moved him to a backup role for good. Hill started throughout Indiana’s run into the second round of the playoffs.

Mahinmi will have a chance to back up Roy Hibbert, a restricted free agent who reportedly will re-sign with the Pacers. Indiana drafted Duke center Miles Plumlee in the first round last month, so Mahinmi’s addition solidifies the position.

Mahinmi also sent out his thoughts on Twitter:

‘Hey PacerNation I’m very excited to start a new journey with indy, looking forward to get to work!!! thanks for the warm welcome pacer fans!’ he wrote.?