By Joseph Allen

May 26 2021, Published 10:05 a.m. ET

Following months of keeping it hidden, Emmy Rossum recently revealed that she gave birth to a daughter on the morning of May 24. “5.24.21 On a sunny Monday morning, at 8:13AM, we welcomed our daughter into the world,” she wrote in the caption to an Instagram post with photos from her pregnancy. Now that the baby has been born, many are hoping to learn more about Emmy's husband, Sam Esmail.

Article continues below advertisement

Who is Emmy Rossum's husband?

Emmy is married to Sam Esmail, who is best known as the creator of the critically acclaimed series Mr. Robot, which ran for 4 seasons on USA. Sam also runs a production company and was responsible for directing both seasons of the Amazon series Homecoming, which starred Julia Roberts and Janelle Monáe. Although he doesn't have a ton of roles on screen, Sam has become well-known behind the scenes in Hollywood.

Article continues below advertisement

Sam and Emmy got engaged after two years of dating in 2015 and were married in 2017. Although they appear to have a loving relationship, Emmy has opened up about the difficulties of balancing their work lives with their relationship.

“We are both equally committed to our art, as we always have been, and to each other,” she told Extra in September of 2017 when they were managing a long-distance relationship.

“We text multiple times a day, all day long, send little videos back and forth on set, try to share as much of our lives as we can so we don’t feel that disconnect," she continued. "There are times that that happens and that’s tricky. But I think that we love each other and we were lucky enough to find each other and get married and we’ll hopefully be together for many, many years and forever. So, you know, just commit to each other and commit to communication. I just feel lucky and happy.”

Article continues below advertisement

What is Emmy and Sam's baby's name?

Although Emmy announced that they had a daughter, she didn't disclose what the baby's name is yet. For now, fans will have to speculate about what they're calling her.

Emmy has opened up in the past about growing up with a single mother and explained how much she appreciates her mom in a 2017 Facebook post.

Article continues below advertisement

“I had a single mom. I have a single mom. This isn’t a secret,” she wrote. “Growing up in a school — and a world — filled with mostly two parent units was difficult for me. Father’s Day still is difficult for me. I’m not really sure how to celebrate. In the weeks leading up to it, I sense it coming like a wave approaching. Sometimes I try to ignore it. … Sometimes, I take my mom to brunch and get her a present, to show her how much I value her.”

“She really was both a mother and a father for me,” the Shameless star continued. “I don’t like her to know that it still causes me pain — 30 years later — lest she feel somehow that she wasn’t enough. She was always enough. She is enough. She wasn’t perfect, no one is, but for me she was the best mom ever.”