A Note From Maria Cooper Janis:

Dear Friends,

It is always a treat when I have the opportunity to visit the Smithsonian and May 30th marked the second of two very special occasions.

The Smithsonian National Museum of American History hosted a special free screening of my father’s iconic film High Noon at their newly refurbished Warner Theater with Dolby technology.

After the screening, the audience was able to participate in a panel discussion featuring Amanda Foreman, acclaimed author and daughter of Screenwriter Carl Foreman, myself and Glenn Frankel, author of the meticulously researched and fascinating book, High Noon: The Hollywood Blacklist and the Making of an American Classic. This was our third panel together and we look forward to bringing it to more venues around the world.

After gifting a portion of Gary Cooper Collection to the University of Southern California, School of Cinematic Arts, Television’s Library and archives where students, scholars and researchers are able to study Gary Cooper’s contributions to cinema, his daughter, Maria Cooper Janis established the Gary Cooper Endowed Fund for Student Support for Indigenous Cultures in 2005. Gary Cooper had a passionate respect Native Americans from his youth in Montana and sparked a lifelong interest in Indigenous Cultures. Traveling to their native homes and learning about their specific traditions, culture and lifestyles.

This fund provides financial assistance for those students from Indigenous cultures who want to pursue a career in the entertainment industry. The Gary Cooper Endowed Fund for Student Support for Indigenous Cultures is an integral part of SCA’s efforts to recruit and educate storytellers from all walks of life to contribute to diversity of storytelling in our classrooms and on our sets.

Over the past two years, personal items including: Personal correspondence, telegrams, studio communications, original stills, notes on movies, (in Coop’s own handwriting), set props he saved and a treasure trove of archival family & Hollywood photos and film footage as well as other personal furniture and home décor items including artwork from the Cooper home in Brentwood & Holmby Hills, California & Southampton, New York were sent to USC. Some things were sent to auction, the proceeds of which provided a gift to the fund from his daughter Maria in the spring of 2021. In April of 2022, an installation of an exclusive exhibition and film screening is planned at USC, School of Cinematic Arts. The Gary Cooper Exhibition for all to visit and enjoy will remain in place until the Fall of 2022.

Whether a direct donation through the link below or the purchase of Maria’s incredible book, a rare and touching tribute to her father, all the proceeds will go directly to the fund for student support for Indigenous Cultures.

To donate please visit cinema.usc.edu/garycooper, and you will receive a tax deductible receipt for your generosity.