Donohue Square is located at the intersection of Mill and Methuen Streets. It is dedicated to Private Patrick J. Donohue who served in Company G of the 328th Infantry, 82nd Division (All American) during World War I. Private Donohue was one of a group of seventeen soldiers, including the famous Sargent Alvin York, who were assigned to take down a nest of enemy machine guns holding up their regiment’s advance in Argonne Forest. The Germans withdrew after 25 Germans were killed, 132 captured, and 35 machine guns silenced.

In 1941 a movie starring Gary Cooper as Sgt. York won an Academy Award. In 2008 The French government unveiled a monument in honor of these seventeen men, Donohue’s among them.

“There were 16 other soldiers with York, who held those Germans captive all that time. Only 16 guys. And they were young guys. Kids, really.” – Patricia Waters (Niece)

Patrick J. Donohue did not seek the spotlight, nor did he want to speak about his time in the Great War. However, people wanted to know his story with the celebrated individual who was the focus of a major motion picture – “Sergeant York” – and parades and tributes across the country. Sergeant Alvin York was one of the most decorated United States Army soldiers of World War 1. On October 18, 1918, he led an attack on a German machine gun nest, gathering 35 machine guns, killing at least 25 enemy soldiers, and capturing 132 prisoners. He received the Medal of Honor. What is lost to history is that Donohue was one of the “16 others” who joined York to bravely encounter the enemy machine gun nest. Of those 16, six were killed in action. Donahue fought, was injured, and survived. As a member of Company G of the 328th Infantry, 82nd Division he crawled through the thick underbrush in the rain to circle the enemy and their weapons. (1) Donohue described his role in the legendary battle: “During all the shooting I was guarding the mass of Germans taken prisoners and devoted my attention to watching them. When we first came in on the Germans I fired a shot at them before they surrendered. Afterwards I was busy guarding the prisoners and did not shoot. From where I stood I could see only Privates Willie, Sacina and Sak. They were also guarding prisoners.” (2) He received the Silver Star for his heroism and the Purple Heart for his injury. (3) He was a 28-year-old Lawrence mill hand at E. Frank Lewis mill, who immigrated to Lawrence when he was 17 years old, when he was called to serve. It was fate that called on him to act on that mid-October day in Chatel Chehery, France. Sadly, Donohue returned home shellshocked – today it is called “post traumatic syndrome disease” – living in a boarding house when he died with little money and few personal possessions. (3) by Marc Laplante

(1) Lawrence Eagle Tribune February 8, 1962

(2) SERGEANT YORK AND HIS PEOPLE, by Sam K. Cowan, GROSSET & DUNLAP PUBLISHERS NEW YORK

(3) Eagle Tribune April 16, 2016

A special thank you to City Council President Marc Laplante for his research on the topic.

updated 6.29.2023