It was 1935 when Giuseppe Olmo, known as Gepin, made history by setting the Hour Record. Olmo knew the value of hard work; like any athlete, he knew that every goal is the fruit of sacrifice and tenacity. He came from a modest family, he knew how to make his own way. The land was for him refuge and sustenance, beauty and responsibility. When he bought the Artimino Estate in the 1980s, he was a successful entrepreneur who looked to the future with foresight.

The estate had an important history behind it: a land already inhabited by the Etruscans, then a turreted medieval village and in the late 16th century a place beloved by the Medici family. Ferdinando I de’ Medici in 1596 decided to build his hunting lodge here, now the Villa Medicea La Ferdinanda, a Unesco heritage site. As illustrious testimonies confirm, this land has been a true cradle of arts, good living, and wine for centuries, making the Medici Villa of Artimino a unique place.

The Medici loved Artimino. In particular Ferdinando I who wrote on January 19, 1596 to his wife Cristina of Lorraine, “I was at Artimino today and believe me your Highness, here I found Spring”.

Villa La Ferdinanda was built in just four years, designed by the famous architect Bernardo Buontalenti. Also known as Villa dei Cento Camini (Villa of One Hundred Chimneys), it has always been the epitome of a noble country residence.

If there is a place where wine was born in Carmignano, it is certainly Artimino.

Dated back in 1680, for example, the land works around the Villa, ordered by Cosimo III de’ Medici, the man who a few years later created the first “ante litteram” disciplinary in history. In the estate’s ancient archives, in the basement of the Villa, there are still preserved ancient documents related to the work in the vineyards and the countryside.

On a morning in 1924, someone noticed Giuseppe Olmo, on his way back from school, with his books tied to his bicycle frame. Those were the years of the great champions, Binda, Guerra, Bini, Bartali: Olmo with flair and unpredictability managed to achieve increasingly brilliant sporting results, which earned him call-ups to the national team for the ’31 World Cup in Denmark and the ’32 Olympics in Los Angeles. Many have been his achievements, up to the historic Hour Record in 1935, during which he set a new record of 45.090 km/h.

World War II ended his racing career, but certainly not his resourcefulness and desire for cycling. Having hung up his bicycle, he began his own bicycle production in the Celle Ligure factory. At the end of the conflict, he added tire and tubular production to the Ligurian industry, creating from scratch companies that are today internationally renowned.

The greatest legacy that Gepin was able to leave to his family is the gift of timeless values: the importance of family, the value of hard work, but also the value of the land as a place of refuge and sustenance.

Giuseppe Olmo bought the Artimino Estate in the 1980s: he loved the Tuscan countryside, the land and its fruits, the history and the beauty of the landscape.

He knew, as a man and as an entrepreneur, that no one could ever take them away from us, while companies could relocate to new locations and the Wars could affect production.

Today, the Artimino Estate is for the Olmo family a home, a place to be preserved, a treasure to be valorized. For the past few years, the company has been run by Annabella Pascale and Francesco Spotorno Olmo, the third generation of the family.