MINNEAPOLIS — Every bar in downtown Minneapolis was doing brisk trade on Wednesday, as well they should, given the announcement by Minnesota governor Tim Walz that it was officially “Wolves Back Day”.

The Minnesota Timberwolves, an NBA team widely accepted as a byword for incompetence over the whole of their 35-year existence, were opening the Western Conference Finals. The city was in the throes of the sort of love affair normally reserved for European football teams.

Masterminding the Wolves’ best-of-seven series against the Dallas Mavericks is Chris Finch, a 54-year-old American who spent the first decade of his playing and then coaching career with the Sheffield Sharks around the turn of the century, before returning to the UK to coach Team GB at the 2012 Olympics. He proudly displays on his desk a photograph of his meeting with the Queen at the London Games.

“Minneapolis is a city with more of an agricultural than an industrial past, but it’s similar to Sheffield in a lot of other ways,” Finch tells i.

“People are super-proud of their city, proud of their region, and they like their sports a lot, even though they might not have had a ton of success. It’s a great sports town – like Sheffield.

“When you are hired to these jobs, oftentimes they’re not good; the circumstances surrounding them aren’t good, the challenge is to improve everything along the way. It’s a step-by-step process so we take pride in the fact that it’s getting a little bit better all the time.”

Perhaps true to their history, the Wolves lost Wednesday’s Game One against Dallas, although that narrow 108-105 defeat could not dampen civic pride, as downtown was transformed into a “party zone”.

Minnesota – “the land of 10,000 lakes” as it calls itself – is used to basketball frustrations; in 1960 their original NBA team relocated to the west coast to become the LA Lakers, now the greatest name in the sport’s history.

After 20 years of abject failure since their one and only other Conference Finals appearance – they lost to the Lakers – the team’s star player Anthony Edwards has become an internet sensation, sparring with TV pundit Charles Barkley who joked he had not been to Minneapolis in two decades.

“Bring ya ass!” Edwards instantly retorted, live on national TV, spawning a catchphrase that was latched onto by the state’s tourism board, who set it up as an alternative web address.

Governor Walz’s press release declaring “Wolves Back Day” also featured a 10-point proclamation, the first letters of which spelled out “Bring ya ass”.

“It’s pretty cool how people have taken to Anthony,” Finch says. “Since I got here, he’s been extremely popular with the media and it’s his genuine personality that people are drawn to. Something like this catches on and it’s fun to watch people embrace it.”

The city, and beyond, has certainly embraced Edwards and his team, particularly in the wake of a historic come-from-behind series win over the champions Denver Nuggets in the last round.

Minneapolis has been in obvious economic and public-image distress, the legacy of the murder of George Floyd – four miles from the Timberwolves’ Target Center stadium – in 2020, then ravaging riots and Covid lockdown.

“The combination of George Floyd and Covid killed interest in downtown in different ways,” says Britt Robson, doyen of Minnesota basketball writers who has covered the team for their entire history.

“The stain of racial fear and animosity out of George Floyd, and the social cleavage between anti-vaxxers and people scared to go there because they didn’t want to die – between those two things happening, plus the fact that for three to six months of the year the weather makes it hard to commute, downtown took the hit.

“But Chris Finch always says he wants to have a team that people like to watch, and that is this team.

“We have this great mix of people. You have the people who are diehards, the people who want to remember the bad times and the semi-good times. For some, it’s this cool, temporary thing; for others, it’s the pot at the end of the rainbow of seeing the Timberwolves in the NBA Finals.”

Not that sport has offered much gold in recent decades. The Twins, the city’s baseball team, won the 1991 World Series but the 33-year wait for another trophy in any sport is the longest barren streak of any US city.

“Minnesota sports fans, in general, are great martyrs,” Robson jokes.

Now, one round from the NBA Finals, it appears that misery may have been lifted by the hiring of Finch three years ago and the squad brilliantly assembled by his general manager Tim Connelly.

It has helped that Edwards, who arrived in Minneapolis a few months ahead of his coach, has developed into arguably the best young talent in the world, and while comparisons with Michael Jordan are obscenely premature, they are being made. Edwards is only 22 and in his fourth NBA season, while Jordan did not even make his debut until the age of 21.

“Stylistically, I can see why people make that comparison,” Finch says. “Success as a young player, hunger as a young player, fast development as a young player – all those things I can see.

“He has a long, long ways to go to match up the resumes but Anthony is certainly a very exciting player.”

The Timberwolves will need all of Edwards’s precocious brilliance if they are to bounce back against Dallas and reach their first NBA Finals, where either the Boston Celtics or Indiana Pacers await.

For Finch, years of the hard grind in British, German and Belgian basketball are finally paying off. Last week Edwards called him the NBA’s best coach, praising his willingness to crack the whip when appropriate, no matter the level of the star player.

To add to Finch’s lustre, he is currently on crutches after a freak in-game collision with one of his players left him with a torn patella tendon. Less than 24 hours later, he was back taking practice and refusing to take prescription painkillers for fear it would cloud his thinking.

It was the sort of no-nonsense approach his old friends in Yorkshire would have appreciated, and explains why his public dressing-down of his players after the Game One loss has carried so much impact.

“The Western Conference Finals started,” Finch said. “I’m not sure if they got the memo. But they got it this afternoon.”