International airports near Nhill, Australia

362 km to: Adelaide, Australia (ADL / YPAD) Adelaide Airport

373 km to: Melbourne, Australia (MEL / YMML) Melbourne Airport

Domestic airports near Nhill, Australia

211 km to: Mount Gambier, Australia (MGB / YMTG) Mount Gambier Airport

253 km to: Portland, Australia (PTJ / YPOD) Portland Airport

311 km to: Mildura, Australia (MQL / YMIA) Mildura Airport

362 km to: Adelaide, Australia (ADL / YPAD) Adelaide Airport

365 km to: Avalon, Australia (AVV / YMAV) Avalon Airport

Local airports near Nhill, Australia

74 km to: Horsham, Australia (HSM / YHSM) Horsham Airport

Map of airports near Nhill, Australia

Click here to show map

More trip calculations

Hotels near Nhill, Australia

Cities near Nhill, Australia

Location of Nhill, Victoria

Airports in Australia

Cities in Australia

Major airports near Nhill, Victoria

The nearest major airport is Mount Gambier Airport (MGB / YMTG). This airport has domestic flights from Mount Gambier, Australia and is 211 km from the center of Nhill, Australia.

Another major airport is Portland Airport (PTJ / YPOD), which has domestic flights from Portland, Australia and is 253 km from Nhill, Australia.

Mildura Airport (MQL / YMIA) has domestic flights from Mildura, Australia and is 311 km from Nhill, Australia.

Search for direct flights from your hometown and find hotels near Nhill, Australia, or scroll up for more international airports or domestic airports. You can also browse local airports if you're a pilot.

Nhill, Victoria

City: Nhill

State: Victoria

Country: Australia

Category: cities

Nearest airports

Travelmath helps you find the closest airport to any city, as well as a list of smaller local airports. You can use these pages to plan your trip and figure out the easiest way to get to your destination. Many times there are multiple airports near the city you want to visit, so you can often find a cheaper flight into a different airport. This is especially useful if you are getting a rental car, since it might be better to drive a bit farther in order to save money on airfare. If you're booking an international flight, you probably want the closest major airport, otherwise if you're a pilot you may be looking for a local airport. Use this tool along with the flight distance pages to plan your travel.