Faced with the major economic and environmental challenges of the 21st century, organisations and their employees need to gain new skills quickly. While skills acquisition is not a new phenomenon, it has never been needed so rapidly or on such a massive scale. Companies are involved in an innovation race to find ways to tackle these challenges, and learning tech tools play a central role in this. Patrick Benammar, VP learning & development at Renault Group, presented his vision for skills transformation at the Learning Technologies Conference. He identified three indicators, three technological benefits, and three changes that affect training managers.

In order to tackle these challenges, the Renault Group drew up a strategic plan, the RENAULUTION, which includes a deep-dive into changes to job roles and the organisation. Its purpose is to create a mobility service for the future. This starts with new electric and hybrid vehicles, which are already being produced. Next comes a “new complete service offering in mobility,” built on partnerships with technology firms, as part of the Software République.

For Patrick Benammar, learning and development needs to “support our employees through these changes, develop their employability by enabling them to gain new skills and help them to visualise the careers of the future” to encourage them to engage in training.

But the challenge is also in developing the training provided in order to meet these new needs. In terms of the circular economy, for example, “There are lots of general training courses around, but very few that focus specifically on careers within the industry and on design.” Therefore, these need to be created to train the Group's employees and other actors in the automotive sector, as well as other industries involved in the mobility of the future. This is the role of ReKnow University, which is headed up by Patrick Benammar.

Developing this new training offering is essential for Renault and for the rest of the industry. “If we don't do it,” Patrick Benammar continues, “We run the risk of being in the same situation that cybersecurity is in at the moment, with 15,000 job openings and no suitable candidates.” The need for upskilling and reskilling is, therefore, a strategic one.

Renault has included its teams' capacity to learn and develop in the five principles of the Renault Way. The ReKnow University is, logically, managed by HR but with ongoing support from the departments on the ground. For us, this is an indication of a new learning and development model which is being implemented in companies, particularly those that are most immediately affected by the environmental shift. And this transformation is largely made possible thanks to the power of digital tools.