The fact that you are reading this tells me you are interested in a career with Renault.

Let me introduce you to our company. We are the world’s largest automotive alliance and have been manufacturing cars since 1898. For over 120 years, we have shaped the global automotive industry with unmatched passion and breakthrough innovations.

We are one of the youngest automotive brands in India, with a long-term commitment to the country. This is reflected in our investments which include design studios, a technology center, a manufacturing plant and logistics channels.

Our employees have the opportunity to work with 16,000 talented people across our Alliance in India, who are committed to revolutionize the automotive industry, locally and globally.

Talent today, combined with drive, integrity and passion can take you farther than ever before. Let me tell you a bit about my own journey. I was born in Andhra Pradesh and educated in Tamil Nadu. I have held leadership positions across several geographies. Before coming to Renault India, I was head of Renault-Nissan-AVTOVAZ in Russia, steering growth and

profitability for the company.

Like me, there are several examples of talent from Renault India who have moved across different business verticals and entities in India and then to global roles across the Alliance. At Renault, we offer our employees tremendous opportunity to maximize their potential. Moreover, we

equip them with every skill needed to excel in the automotive business.

Groupe Renault views India as a key market and gives it a broad platform to develop its own strategy for growth and innovation. Our India-centric operations are uniquely shaped for this market.

When we revealed Kwid in India, it was the first time that a global concept car had been unveiled outside Europe. Similarly, our latest game-changer Triber was developed and manufactured in India, for Indian customers first, before we took it to the world. Clearly, India is becoming a lead market, which offers our workforce unlimited opportunities for growth.

Our global expertise coupled with our India-centric strategy and penchant for innovation has enabled us to make quick progress in India. We have surpassed the 6,00,000 sales milestone in India and are one of the fastest global automotive brands to do this. We have also consistently featured amongst the top 10 markets, in the global sales rankings of the group. This demonstrates our laser-sharp focus on strategic and operational excellence, with an unrelenting pursuit for growing the Renault brand in India.

We pride ourselves as being ‘One Team’ driven by ‘One Ambition’ and an organization where the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. We foster a spirit of collaboration, encourage new ideas, and believe in constant and continuous learning. The ideal environment to nurture the best talent!

Here’s wishing you the best in your professional career, and hopefully you have an opportunity to experience the ‘Renault Way’.

Best Regards,

Venkatram M.