Welcome to the LinkedIn community of Nikon India, a 100% subsidiary of Nikon Corporation, Japan, a global leader in digital imaging, precision optics and photo imaging technology. Carrying forward a legacy of over 100 years, we are committed to exceeding customer expectations through innovation, leading-edge technology, and bespoke craftsmanship. Built upon the core philosophy of “Trustworthiness & Creativity”, the company aims to deliver innovative products crafted with the highest standards of reliability and precision. With over a century experience in optical technology Nikon has developed revolutionary, future ready Z mount. The new mount features a 55mm inner diameter and short 16mm flange focal distance. With this innovation, NIKKOR Z lenses can deliver low-light performance and edge-to-edge detail in both stills & video. NIKKOR Z 58mm f/0.95 S Noct is one of the top in the line lens with f/0.95 maximum aperture unlocking full potential of the Z mount. Over the years, Nikon has garnered strong base in India with Offerings of distribution and services for complete range of Nikon imaging products, Sport Optics & Instruments. Nikon Imaging includes Mirrorless series, D-SLR, COOLPIX range of compact and all-weather camera & range of NIKKOR lenses & accessories. Headquartered in Gurgaon, Nikon has branch offices in Mumbai, Kolkata, Bengaluru and Delhi. Nikon India has total of 23 Service Centers and 23 Nikon Collection Centers and over 1500 dealer base for complete service & support for Nikon customers. Nikon has also set up 142 Experience zones pan India which showcases the entire product range. Through LinkedIn, we aim to highlight the work of Nikon photographers, build a community of experts, and inspire the next generation to express themselves through the lens. Join our community to stay abreast of the latest corporate news, industry updates, product launches, and get access to an ocean of inspirations, insights, and opportunities. CIN: U74999HR2007FTC036820

Website

https://www.nikon.co.in

External link for Nikon India Private Limited

Industry

Computers and Electronics Manufacturing

Company size

51-200 employees

Headquarters

Gurugram, Haryana

Type

Privately Held

Founded

2007

Specialties

Photography , Imaging, and Videography