Achieving a high cost-performance ratio with a bright open F-value of 1.4.

June 26th, 2024 PRESS RELEASE

Nikon Imaging Japan Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of Nikon Corporation, will release a wide-angle single focus lens "NIKKOR Z 35mm f/1.4" compatible with full-size/FX format mirrorless cameras adopting the Nikon Z mount. With an open F-value of 1.4, this wide-angle single focus lens realizes an easy-to-reach price. It can be easily enjoyed with soft expression utilizing a large bokeh and a stereoscopic representation to make the subject stand out. With a wide-angle 35mm angle of view, it is possible to shoot a wide range of scenes and subjects, such as landscapes, snaps, people, flowers, and pets only with this lens. Taking advantage of the shortest shooting distance of 0.27m, it is possible to take pictures of subjects such as cuisine and flowers by getting close and emphasizing the main subject by greatly blurring the background. Although it has an open F-value of 1.4, the total length is about 86.5mm and the weight is about 415g, which makes it a similar size to the NIKKOR Z 35mm f/1.8 S (released in September 2018) and easy to use for everyday use, and allows you to quickly take pictures when you go out. In addition, NIKKOR Z lens provides high optical performance, making it possible to create clear expressions with little coloration and good separation. Bokeh is soft around the face in close-up human photography shot at maximum aperture, and eyelashes have sharp expressions. By narrowing down the focus on landscape photography, sharp expressions can be obtained, which allows for arranged expressions according to the intention of the photographer. As a wide-angle single focus lens that responds to a wide range of scenes with high cost performance, it vigorously supports the shooting of users who want to further expand their expressions and challenge more professional shooting.

NIKKOR Z 35mm f/1.4 is a wide-angle single focus lens which has achieved a bright open F-value of 1.4 and yet is priced affordably. It delivers a soft expression using a large bokeh and stereoscopic representation, making the subject stand out. With a wide-angle 35mm angle of view, it is possible to shoot a wide range of scenes and subjects, such as landscapes, snaps, people, flowers, and pets only with this lens. Taking advantage of the shortest shooting distance of 0.27m, it is possible to take pictures of subjects such as cuisine and flowers by getting close and emphasizing the main subject by greatly blurring the background. Although it has an open F-value of 1.4, the total length is about 86.5mm and the weight is about 415g, which makes it a similar size to the NIKKOR Z 35mm f/1.8 S (released in September 2018) and easy to use for everyday use, and allows you to quickly take pictures when you go out. In addition, NIKKOR Z lens provides high optical performance, making it possible to create clear expressions with little coloration and good separation. Bokeh is soft around the face in close-up human photography shot at maximum aperture, and eyelashes have sharp expressions. By narrowing down the focus on landscape photography, sharp expressions can be obtained, which allows for arranged expressions according to the intention of the photographer. As a wide-angle single focus lens that responds to a wide range of scenes with high cost performance, it vigorously supports the shooting of users who want to further expand their expressions and challenge more professional shooting.*It has a total length of approximately 86.5mm and a weight of approximately 415g, achieving a similar size feeling to the NIKKOR Z 35mm f/1.8 S. It is easy to use for everyday use and can be easily taken out to shoot quickly. In addition, the high optical performance of the NIKKOR Z lens makes it possible to create clear expressions with little coloration and good separation. Bokeh is soft around the face in close-up human photography shot at maximum aperture, and eyelashes have sharp expressions. By narrowing down the focus on landscape photography, you can get sharp expressions, which allows you to arrange your expressions according to your wishes with high cost performance for a wide-angle single focus lens that responds to a wide range of scenes.

Nikon will continue to pursue new dimensions of optical performance and respond to user's needs. We will also contribute to the development of visual culture by aiming to further expand the possibilities of visual expression.

From the lens mount reference plane to the lens tip.

Outline of Release

Reservations in Japan will start from 10:00 a.m. on June 28th.

Key Features

Achieving high cost performance with a bright open F-value of 1.4, allowing for stereoscopic representation that makes the subject stand out with a large bokeh.

With a total length of approximately 86.5mm and a weight of approximately 415g, it is easy to take out and shoot comfortably while holding it by hand.

A wide-angle 35mm angle of view that is easy to use for shooting a wide range of scenes and subjects, such as landscapes, snaps, people, flowers, and pets.

With a shortest shooting distance of 0.27m, you can get closer to the subject such as in cuisine or flower photography, and emphasize the main subject by greatly blurring the background to achieve more impressive results.

NIKKOR Z lens provides high optical performance, making it possible to create clear expressions with little coloration and good separation.

By using the STM (stepping motor), high-speed and quiet AF driving is realized.

Design with attention to focus breathing suppresses focus breathing, making it optimal for video shooting.※1It is a wide-angle single focus lens that responds to a wide range of scenes with high cost performance, and vigorously supports the shooting of users who want to further expand their expressions and challenge more professional shooting.

Designed with sealing all over to prevent dust and dripping.※2

Depending on the distance between the subject and the lens, breathing may be prominent due to the characteristics of the lens.

This does not guarantee full dust and drip protection under all conditions.

Main specifications

Please scroll horizontally to view.

Related links

The information posted here is current as of the date of announcement. Please note that some products may have been discontinued or organizational changes may have been made which differ from what is shown.