TOKYO - Nikon Corporation (Nikon) is proud to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the launch of its NIKKOR lenses. In commemoration of this milestone, Nikon aims to further strengthen and increase awareness of the NIKKOR brand through various promotions.

As part of these promotions, Nikon has created a 90th anniversary logo to commemorate the enduring legacy of NIKKOR. This logo showcases the silhouettes of lenses that have left their mark on the history of imaging since the inception of the NIKKOR brand, as well as symbolic lenses of the present.

Additionally, the logo features the message "A Story in Every Lens." This phrase expresses the unique characteristics and thoughtful dedication found in all NIKKOR lenses, as well as their power to capture precious moments, while preserving history and telling stories that resonate with people's hearts.

A series of short videos that highlight the value and quality of NIKKOR lenses, as well as the achievements they have enabled, will also be released.

The NIKKOR brand

The 90 years of NIKKOR's history began in 1932 with the registration of the NIKKOR trademark by Nikon (then Nippon Kogaku K.K.). A year later, the first shipment of Aero-Nikkor aerial photographic lenses was dispatched. Nikon is unique in that it is one of the few manufacturers in the world that begins its manufacturing process from the production of optical glass. This commitment to excellence is the foundation for the exceptional optical performance of NIKKOR lenses. Over the years, by consistently developing lenses that feature the cutting-edge optical technologies of the time, NIKKOR has grown to be a globally recognized brand known for its high-performance lenses.

NIKKOR has always been at the forefront of innovation. Photographs taken with the Nikkor P·C 8.5cm F2, released in 1948, were featured in the globally renowned LIFE magazine, significantly enhancing NIKKOR's reputation. Subsequently, the New York Times published an article that highlighted the high quality of NIKKOR products, helping to establish the concept of "Made in Japan" quality. In 1963, the Zoom-NIKKOR Auto 43-86mm f/3.5 was the first standard zoom lens to offer practical performance. More recently, in 2019, the NIKKOR Z 58mm f/0.95 S Noct, the flagship lens among NIKKOR Z lenses, achieved the milestone of being the fastest lens in Nikon history with an aperture of f/0.95*1. These lenses, among many others, showcase Nikon's commitment to providing unique and high-quality options that support users in expressing their creative vision.

Another testament to the superior optical performance and reliability of NIKKOR lenses is found in their important role in NASA's space missions. In 1971, the Nikon Photomic FTN (NASA specifications) and NIKKOR lenses were employed on the Apollo 15 mission, while in 2009, the D3S and AF-S NIKKOR 14-24mm f/2.8G ED lenses were ordered to document activities at the International Space Station (ISS). To this day, Nikon continues to play a role in NASA's space missions by regularly supplying cameras and lenses. This relationship with NASA has also contributed to the advancement of Nikon's optical technologies, thereby continuing to improve the quality of photography and research in space.

In 2018, Nikon utilized its extensive knowledge and expertise to launch the Z mount system. This system is comprised of mirrorless cameras that feature a new, largest-diameter mount*2, along with compatible NIKKOR Z lenses and accessories. The NIKKOR Z lenses are designed to continue pursuing a new dimension in optical performance, by taking advantage of the superior design flexibility realized through the combination of the larger Z mount with its inner diameter of 55 mm, and a short flange focal distance of 16 mm. This combination allows for greater design flexibility and opens up new possibilities for image creators.

Inspired by the rich 90-year history of NIKKOR and its endless technological advancements, Nikon remains committed to contributing to the development of imaging culture, with the hope of expanding possibilities for imaging expression.

*1Among interchangeable lenses for Nikon cameras.

*2Among full-frame mirrorless cameras, as of November 16, 2023. Based on Nikon research.

·Trade names (companies, products, services, etc.) are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders.

Related Links