This year, Nikon Corporation is proud to celebrate the 80th anniversary of the launch of its NIKKOR brand of photographic lenses. In commemoration of this milestone, Nikon aims to strengthen and increase awareness of the historic NIKKOR brand through various promotions in 2013, reaffirming NIKKOR’s 80-year commitment as a leader and innovator in optical technologies.

The NIKKOR brand was created in 1932 with Nikon’s (then Nippon Kogaku K.K.) registration of the NIKKOR trademark, followed by the first shipment of Aero-Nikkor aerial photographic lenses in 1933. In 1959, Nikon (then Nippon Kogaku K.K.) released its first SLR camera, the Nikon F, and its first lens for SLR cameras, the NIKKOR-S Auto 5cm f/2. The Nikon F-mount, adopted for the Nikon F, continues to be the mount used for the latest Nikon D-SLR cameras. Since then, Nikon has continued to develop cutting edge lenses for film and digital cameras that feature the latest in optical technologies, consistently reaffirming NIKKOR’s reputation for high-performance lenses.

The release of the Nikon 1 series of advanced cameras with interchangeable lenses and the 1 mount has allowed Nikon to steadily develop and release new dedicated 1 mount lenses, crafted using the advanced and reliable technologies users have come to expect from NIKKOR lenses. As a result, total production of NIKKOR lenses for cameras with interchangeable lenses reached 75 million in November 2012.

NIKKOR lens technology is also integrated into Nikon’s COOLPIX series of compact digital cameras. From entry-level users to professional photographers, NIKKOR lenses help a broad range of users capture moments with clarity and precision. Nikon’s NIKKOR lineup currently boasts more than 80 types of lenses including zoom lenses, ultra wide-angle, super telephoto, specialty fisheye, Micro and PC-E lenses for SLR cameras, as well as 1 NIKKOR lenses for the Nikon 1 System. Nikon will continue to actively develop and release high-performance, high-quality NIKKOR products that meet and exceed user expectations.

The NIKKOR Legacy

The brand name for Nikon lenses, NIKKOR has become synonymous with high-performance, high-quality SLR lenses. The NIKKOR name comes from adding "R"—a common practice in the naming of photographic lenses at the time the name was established—to "Nikko", the Romanized abbreviation for Nippon Kogaku K.K. In 1933, the large-format lens for aerial photography was released with the name Aero-Nikkor.

NIKKOR lenses incorporate optical technologies that are always ahead of the times. The OP Fisheye-Nikkor 10mm f/5.6 fisheye lens for SLR cameras, released in 1968, was the world's first lens to incorporate aspherical lens elements. The Ultra Micro-Nikkor 105mm f/2.8 released in 1962 served as the template for projection lenses employed in Nikon IC steppers and scanners that currently boast the world’s highest level of resolution. What’s more, NIKKOR lenses for the latest SLR cameras utilize a number of cutting-edge technologies that originated with the development of IC steppers and scanners, including Nano Crystal Coat, which virtually eliminates internal lens element reflections across a wide range of wavelengths.

From initial design and development, production and quality is controlled in accordance with Nikon’s strict standards. The superior quality of NIKKOR lenses that fully satisfies users is ensured with the highest quality designs and manufacturing, as well as very strict final inspection.

About the NIKKOR brand With a comprehensive assortment of FX and DX-format lenses and focal lengths, from the ultra-wide 10-24mm to the new super telephoto 800mm VR, Nikon photographers have come to rely upon the NIKKOR core technologies that contribute to their optical superiority. NIKKOR is the brand name for Nikon’s photographic lenses, which are precision crafted to the most exacting standards in Nikon’s own glassworks. In 1933, Nikon marketed its first camera lens under the NIKKOR brand name, the "Aero-NIKKOR” for aerial photography applications. Since then, NIKKOR has been used as a brand name for Nikon’s lenses that symbolizes durability, high image quality and optical excellence.

About Nikon

Nikon, At the Heart of the Image™. Nikon Inc. is the world leader in digital imaging, precision optics and photo imaging technology and is globally recognized for setting new standards in product design and performance for its award-winning consumer and professional photographic equipment. Nikon Inc. distributes consumer and professional digital SLR cameras, NIKKOR optics, Speedlights and system accessories; Nikon COOLPIX® compact digital cameras; 35mm film SLR cameras; Nikon software products and Nikon sports and recreational optics as well as the Nikon 1 advanced camera with interchangeable lens system. In 2012, production of NIKKOR lenses surpassed 75 million, creating a new milestone in Nikon's heritage of superior optics. For more information, dial (800) NIKON-US or visit http://www.nikonusa.com, which links all levels of photographers to the Web's most comprehensive photo learning and sharing communities. Connect with Nikon and other photographers on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/nikon and get the latest news and information from Twitter by following @NikonUSA.