Sweet Land is a 2005 romantic drama film directed by Ali Selim. It follows a young German girl who travels all the way to Minnesota to marry a boy. This marriage was arranged by the boy’s parents but they face troubles with the process and are ostracized by the village.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Sweet Land via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is Sweet Land available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Sweet Land is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

The film follows the story of a young German orphaned girl named Inge from Norway. She arrives in America after the parents of a Norwegian boy arrange her marriage with their son Olaf Torvik. When she reaches the village in Minnesota where Olaf lives, the people there do not react well to her being a German immigrant with no papers. The townspeople do not let them marry each other, which leads them to live together and work on the farm. However, this results in the couple slowly starting to form a bond.

In the lead, the film stars Elizabeth Reaser as a young Inge Altenberg and Tim Guinee as a young Olaf Torvik. We also see Lois Smith and Robert Hogan playing the older versions of Inge and Olaf, respectively.

Watch Sweet Land streaming via Amazon Prime Video

Sweet Land is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video.

It is a very popular streaming platform that offers a quality streaming experience to its subscribers. Hit shows like Fleabag and The Boys are exclusively available on Amazon Prime Video.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

Sweet Land’s synopsis is as follows:

“Set in 1920, Inge travels from Germany to rural Minnesota in order to meet the man destined to be her husband.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.