Presentation on theme: "James Cameron was born in Kapuskasing, Canada Later Cameron’s family moved to Fullerton, California when he was 17. He dropped out of college, married."— Presentation transcript:

1

2 James Cameron was born in Kapuskasing, Canada Later Cameron’s family moved to Fullerton, California when he was 17. He dropped out of college, married and a waitress and drove for the local school district. Has two daughters, a stepdaughter, and a stepson He was married five times in his life After the film Star Wars he discovered his love of filmmaking, he quit his job and followed his own course of study. In the library of the University of Southern California, reading up on the technology of special effects, and projection. He spent most of his time building his own dolly track and experimenting with beam splitters in the living room of his small suburban house.

3 When he saw Star Wars it occurred to him that the possibility of his interests in science and art could come together in a movie Cameron and two of his friends created a ten minute script together. They raised the money to shoot it in 35mm and rented a camera, lenses, the film stocks and a studio. To understand how to operate the camera they simply dismantled it and spent the first half-day of the shoot just trying to figure out how to get it running.

4 When it came to the special effects area, Cameron explains that he was "completely self taught in special effects. I'd go down to the USC library and pull any ideas that graduate students had written about optical printing, or front screen projection, or I’d transfers, anything that related to film technology…if they'd let me photocopy it, I would. If not, I'd make notes." As the future filmmaker continued to educate himself in the techniques, he landed a job as a miniature model maker at the Roger Corman Studios. Making fast, low-budget productions, Cameron was able to pick up the pace efficiently and effectively, moving up his ranking within the studio, soon working as an art director in the sci-fi movie Battle Beyond the Stars (1980), Cameron finally got his big break in 1981 when he got his first shot at directing a film entitled Piranha II: The Spawning

5 *~True Lies-1994 *~The Terminator 2-1991 - Judgment Day ~Abyss-1989 ~Aliens-1986 *~The Terminator-1984 Piranha Part Two-1982 -The Spawning

6 Aliens of the Deep (2005) Ghosts of the Abyss (2004) ~Most Famous Film~ Titanic (1997) Won best director for

7

8

9 Strong female characters. Frequently casts Michael Biehn,Jenette Goldstein, Lance Henriksen, Bill Paxton, and Arnold Schwarzenegger His films frequently feature scenes filmed in deep blues. Likes to make nice/effective cuts Cameron's films tend to include broken, swinging flourescent lights, especially in fight scenes.

10 Often works dreams or characters sleeping into the plot. Likes to show close-up shots of feet or wheels, often trampling things Tight/close-up tracking shots, especially during chase scenes. **Most Known for his special effects, in the Titanic, The Terminator 2, and the Abyss