On Dec. 16, 1958, “A Night to Remember” premiered in theaters, one of seven movies made to that date about the sinking of the RMS Titanic. “A Night to Remember” was critically acclaimed and the most famous version until James Cameron’s 1997 “Titanic.” Like many of the films, “Night” featured a character from Alabama: Archibald Gracie IV.

Gracie was the only known passenger from Alabama aboard the Titanic on the fateful night of April 15, 1912, when the RMS Titanic hit an iceberg and slipped beneath the icy waters of the Atlantic. He survived the sinking but died a few months later at the age of 54.

In “Night,” a movie based on the book of the same name by Walter Lord, Archibald is portrayed by James Dyrenforth. Dyrenforth was a Chicago native whose career began and ended with the film, according to IMDb. He died in 1973. Character actor Bernard Fox portrayed Gracie in the hit 1997 film “Titanic.”

Archibald Gracie IV

Archibald was born January 17, 1858, in Mobile, Ala., a member of the wealthy Gracie family of New York. His father, Archibald Gracie III, attended West Point but later moved to Mobile to become a cotton broker. Archibald III was a Confederate general who was killed in the Civil War.

Encyclopedia-titanic.org says, “On December 2, 1864, General Gracie was killed while observing Union Army movements at the siege of Petersburg, Virginia. Respected by his troops, he was eulogized in a poem ‘Gracie, of Alabama’ by Francis O. Tickner.”

Gracie IV was only five years old when his father died. In his 40s, he began writing about book about his father’s war experiences called “The Truth About Chickamauga.” It was released in 1912 after seven years of work and Gracie’s trip aboard the Titanic was taken as a vacation to celebrate its completion, the Encyclopedia-Titanica said.

By that time, Gracie IV, made wealthy by real estate dealings, had moved to New York and was a colonel in the U.S. Army. He was married to Constance Elise Schack but he was alone aboard the Titanic. (A 1919 article in The New York Times incorrectly states his wife and one daughter were on board with him, leading to continued confusion.)

Followed by tragedy

The Gracies were no stranger to loss, even before the sinking. One of Gracie’s daughters, Constance Julie Gracie, had been crushed to death at the age of 12 in an elevator accident in Paris in 1903. Another daughter, Edith Gracie Adams would die just six years after the sinking. She contracted pneumonia during the worldwide influenza pandemic in 1918.

Gracie himself didn’t fare well after the sinking. He aided many women and children to lifeboats from Titanic. “Gracie .. [helped by] loading the women and children into Lifeboat 4. One of the ladies Gracie lifted into the boat was the pregnant teenage wife of John Jacob Astor,” the Encyclopedia-Titanica said.

As the ship slipped under, Gracie jumped into the frigid water, eventually managing to cling to an overturned collapsible lifeboat until he was rescued and taken aboard the Carpathia. He was traumatized and injured, however; his body covered with cuts and bruised. He never fully recovered from the ordeal and died in Dec. 4, 1912. Before he died, he completed a rough manuscript of a book of his experiences called “The Truth about the Titanic.” It was published in 1913.

Gracie IV is buried in Woodlawn Cemetery in New York. His headstone is etched with the words “Hero of the S.S. Titanic.”