Bhumibol Adulyadej had just turned 18 when he was called upon to be the ninth king of Thailand's Chakri dynasty. Born in the United States, he was studying in Switzerland when his older brother was found dead in mysterious circumstances on 9 June 1946.

Prince Ananda Mahidol death by a fatal shot-wound remains unsolved today.

Even though Bhumibol officially took the throne on the same day, it took another four years until he was actually crowned King of Thailand in 1950. He finished his politics and law studies in Switzerland whilst his uncle conducted the daily business in Thailand.

King Rama IX

The young man returned to his homeland as King Rama IX in 1950. Shortly after the coronation celebrations were over, he married Sirikit whom he had met in Switzerland.

Their wedding hit the headlines across the world. Known for his love of fast cars and women, the young good-looking king soon became the darling of the tabloid press.

But the press was soon to be disappointed by the young monarch. Although he was a passionate sailor, photographer and jazz fan -- even playing saxophone with the likes of Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington and Benny Goodman -- he took his role as Thailand's king very seriously.

Thailand's top development worker

He would spend most of the year travelling across his country, setting up social and development projects.

A water specialist, he took a special interest in making sure there were adequate irrigation facilities.

Health facilities and protecting the environment were also very important to him. He quickly developed a reputation for being Thailand's top development worker.

Critical intervention

Even though Thailand's constitution strictly limits the monarch's rights, Bhumibol has never shied away from getting involved in times of crisis.

In the 1970s, for instance, he gave refuge in his palace to critics of the regime fleeing persecution by the brutal military.

At the beginning of the 1990s, at an audience broadcast on national television, he asked those responsible for the bloody suppression of protests to prostrate themselves publicly -- and to resign.

His last such intervention was in April 2006 -- after the opposition boycotted the parliamentary elections, the controversial prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra was forced to announce his resignation at an audience with the king.

Stabilising factor

Thais agree over one thing -- King Bhumibol is the stabilising factor.

Thailand has survived 24 prime ministers, 18 constitutions and 17 coups.

Even if he stays out of daily politics, his subjects know that the King will intervene if Thailand's democracy is in danger.

But Bhumibol is especially loved and revered for his closeness to his people, which he has got to know during his regular travels to the most isolated corners of his country, as well as for the over 2,000 social projects, which prove that his subjects' well-being is a matter of utmost importance.