White Fang is the story of a half dog, half wolf. It is told from White Fang's point of view as he learns to fend for himself and interact with other animals and with humans. His story is one of survival in the snowy wilderness of North America, but can he ever be tamed? Exciting and powerful classic stories to enrich and extend your children's reading experiences. TreeTops Classics are carefully adapted versions of must-read stories which introduce your readers to significant authors, powerful plots and characters that have stood the test of time. These abridged versions of classics have been sensitively adapted by top children's authors to ensure that language and content is appropriate, but remain faithful to the original. These enchanting stories will appeal to all your junior readers and introduce them to a rich literary heritage. Each book includes author biographies and notes to help with historical and social context and any challenging vocabulary, ensuring the books are easily accessible. Books contain inside cover notes to support children in their reading. Help with children's reading development also available at www.oxfordowl.co.uk. The books are finely levelled, making it easy to match every child to the right book.

This book is part of a book series called Oxford Reading Tree-Treetops Classics .

This book is suitable for Key Stage 2. KS2 covers school years 4, 5 and 6, and ages 8-11 years. A key stage is any of the fixed stages into which the national curriculum is divided, each having its own prescribed course of study. At the end of each stage, pupils are required to complete standard assessment tasks. This book is at level 3a of the National Curriculum. The National Curriculum sets out the programmes of study and attainment targets for all subjects at all 4 key stages. Each National Curriculum level is divided into sub-levels, where Level C means that a child is working at the lower end of the level, Level B they is working comfortably at that level, and Level A means that they is working at the top end of the level. The Government has suggested a child should achieve the following levels by the end of each school year: (i) Level 1b by end Year 1, Level 2a-c by end Year 2, Level 2a-3b by end Year 3, Level 3 by the end Year 4, Level 3b-4c by the end Year 5, Level 4 by the end Year 6. This book is aimed at children in primary school. This book is part of a reading scheme, meaning that it is a book aimed at children who are learning to read. This reading scheme has multiple levels.

There are 80 pages in this book. This book was published 2014 by Oxford University Press .

Caroline Castle is the author of several picture book texts as well as two Jack London (1876-1916) was a journalist, as well as a prolific and best-selling novelist, best known for his novels The Call of the Wild and White Fang. Alison Sage and Susanna Gretz's enormously popular storybooks were first published nearly thirty years ago. These tv tie-ins have the original stories as their basis. Geoff Taylor was born in Lancaster, England in 1946. He studied Graphic Design at Chesterfield College of Art. After five years or so of working in advertising agencies in Nottingham, Geoff turned to illustrating book covers for most of the top fantasy writers of our time, both adult and children's fiction. Geoff was one of the illustrators for the legendary Jeff Wayne's Musical Version of ''The War of the Worlds'' album. Since 1994 he has added to some of the rich imagery of ''Games Workshop'' and the Black Library. Perhaps his true passions are best reflected in his wildlife paintings, especially wolves. He now lives in Cumbria with his wife. Find out more from his website www. geofftaylor. btinternet. co. uk.