There is no one who is watching the playoff series between the Los Angeles Lakers and Utah Jazz with more intense interest, or a greater sense of pride, than the Korver families of Paramount as well as the ones in Pella, Iowa.

You must understand that the Jazz’s top reserve, the deft shooting Kyle Korver, has strong ties to both cities, having spent the first 11 years of his life in Paramount before moving to Pella where he became an extraordinary high school player before going on to star at Creighton University.

“You could see early that Kyle was pretty special when he would just dominate the games he’d play in with other kids his age at Paramount Park,” relates his uncle, Ken Korver, the senior pastor at Emmanuel Reformed Church in Paramount. “It’s not surprising to me that he’s such a terrific shooter. Kyle’s father (Kevin Korver) was the best shooter of all us brothers. And his mother (Laine Korver) once scored 74 points in a high school basketball game and played the sport in college.”

So, it’s not exactly a stunning development that Kyle Korver, born at Lakewood Hospital on March 17, 1981, would excel in basketball, considering his athletic roots.

All the sons of the pastor emeritus of Emmanuel Reformed Church, Harold Korver, who arrived in Paramount with his family in 1971, turned out to be basketball stars at Paramount High.

And all would go on to play after graduating from the school, with Kevin Korver, Ken Korver, and Karl Korver playing at Central College in Pella, Kris Korver at Northwestern College in Orange City, Iowa and Keith Korver at Hope College in Holland, Mich.

“We all played at NAIA Division III basketball schools,” says Ken Korver. “We all loved the sport.”

Kevin Korver would depart Paramount with his family in 1992 for Pella, where he has become a pastor at the Third Reformed Church along with Keith Korver. Kris Korver is now the head basketball coach at Northwestern College. Karl Korver is a school teacher and coach in Pella. An adopted sixth brother, Rick Jones, has been a teacher and football coach at El Dorado High in Placentia.

While Kyle Korver has been etching a niche for himself in the NBA now for five seasons – he was traded last Dec. 26 to the Jazz – with his accurate shooting, the Korvers have etched themselves quite a legacy in Paramount since the family patriarch took over ministerial duties at Emmanuel Reformed Church 37 years ago.

Pat West, city manager of Long Beach who once had a similar position with Paramount, knows the Korvers well and is expansive in his praise of their humanitarian work.

“What an asset they have been to Paramount and the surrounding communities over the years,” he says. “They have done so many great things.

“There was a time when Paramount, was ranked as the eighth worst suburb disaster in America. Well, in 1988 and 1989, we instituted a project called ‘Let’s Get Paramount’s Neighborhoods Looking Good.’ We started putting public work crews on private properties to fix battered neighborhoods.

“And for one day on every weekend for two years, the Korvers would gather up 200 volunteers and, with guidance from members of our public works crews, would go from one house to the next helping out disadvantaged people, painting their homes, fixing their fences, tending to their yards.

“The Korvers’ church received the 1,000 Points of Light award from President George H.W. Bush for its contributions to one of the great neighborhood programs in America. And Paramount wound up receiving the All America City award, a national League of City award and the United States Conference of Mayors award.”

Ken Korver, whose son Kurtis recently led Valley Christian to a CIF basketball title, is proud of that long-ago achievement, but doesn’t look at such a kindly gesture as being unusual, or out of the ordinary.

“It’s just a natural thing for us to help people in need of it,” he says.

“The price tag of living is giving,” says Harold Korver.

“The Korvers aren’t ones to toot their own horns, but, oh, do they do so many charitable things,” says West. “When Paramount changed demographically over the years, the Korvers embraced the change. They welcomed the newcomers, and helped them in many ways. And they never left the city.”

Kyle Korver and his parents did leave 16 years ago, but the Utah guard returns every summer with his younger brother to visit his uncle’s family and his grandparents.

“I’ll always have a special affection for Southern California,” he says. “After all, that’s where I grew up, where I spent so much of my childhood. Love coming back and going to the ocean. Have great memories growing up on Virginia Avenue in Paramount.”

I spoke to the 27-year-old Korver before Wednesday night’s Game 2 match against the Lakers, and he found it ironic to be playing against the team for which he once cheered lustily.

“Oh, I was a huge Laker fan,” said Korver, a bachelor who looks like a tall version of actor Ashton Kutcher and who has a passionate following among the Jazz’s female patrons. “Magic Johnson and Byron Scott were my favorite players. But I never was able to see the Lakers play at the Forum. A couple of nights before we left for Pella, my uncle Ken took me and my cousins to a Clipper game against the Boston Celtics at the Sports Arena.”

A large contingent of the Korvers came out to watch the most famous member of the far-flung family perform against the Lakers in his team’s 120-110 loss, and he scored 10 points in 24 minutes of relief, playing well in the first half when he had nine of his points.

His parents, Kevin and Laine Korver and younger brother Kaleb, his grandparents, Harold and Shirley Korver, and his uncle and aunt, Ken and Lisa Korver and two of their children, Kurtis and Kari, waited patiently in the stands afterward for him.

“You just never expect to have someone in the family playing at this level,” said Harold Korver. “We feel so blessed. There are billions of people around the world, and a little over 400 are able to play in the NBA. And my grandson is one of them. Pretty remarkable.”

Apparently, Kyle Korver is also quite remarkable off the court, too.

He has been involved the past three years in the NBA’s Basketball Without Borders – this year he and a few other players will be giving clinics in India – and also has set up foundation in Philadelphia to aid inner-city children.

Such philanthropy flows in his blood, is in his DNA.

After all, he’s a Korver.