LAS VEGAS -- Could the 76ers land Kyle Korver?

The Sixers, Los Angeles Lakers, and Milwaukee Bucks reportedly are the front-runners to sign Korver after he becomes a restricted free agent on Wednesday. In a cost-cutting move, the Phoenix Suns waived the sharpshooter on Monday.

Korver is 38 years old, but he may be the three-point specialist the Sixers need.

The 16-year veteran shot 39.7 percent on three-pointers last season with the Cleveland Cavaliers and Utah Jazz. Korver has shot 42.9 percent from three-point range through 1,174 career games.

But this isn’t the first time the Sixers have had interest in reacquiring Korver.

The team had discussions about trading Jerryd Bayless to the Cavaliers for Korver last summer. The Sixers also were interested in acquiring him before Cleveland traded him to Utah on Nov. 29.

Getting Korver would enable the Sixers to bring back a fan favorite who’s one of the league’s top three-point shooters. Even at his age, he would be an adequate replacement for JJ Redick, who signed with the New Orleans Pelicans as a free agent.

The Sixers bought the 51st overall pick in the second round of the 2003 NBA draft from New Jersey Nets to select Korver. He averaged 10.5 points and shot 41.8 percent in 337 games in Philadelphia before being traded to the Jazz in December 2007.

Korver would most likely come off the bench as Ben Simmons, Josh Richardson, Tobias Harris, Al Horford, and Joel Embiid are the expected starters. The Sixers’ roster does not have a proven knockdown three-point shooter on Korver’s level.

His rejoining the Sixers would enable him to reunite with former Hawks teammates Horford, Mike Scott, and Elton Brand. Brand, the Sixers general manager, played two seasons with the Hawks.

Sixers point guard Shake Milton will miss Wednesday’s matchup against the Detroit Pistons at UNLV’s Cox Pavilion with a sprained left ankle. Marial Shayok and Norvel Pelle are listed as questionable for the fourth and final preliminary game for the Sixers (1-2). They will play in a consolation game this weekend.

Shayok (left knee soreness) and Pelle (left ankle sprain) participated in Tuesday’s practice while Milton sat out. He and Pelle were hurt in Monday’s overtime loss to the Oklahoma City Thunder. Shayok missed that game after suffering his injury in Saturday’s setback to the Boston Celtics.

The NBA Board of Governors unanimously approved two changes to the league’s instant replay rules.

The NBA is adopting a coach’s challenge that will lead to instant replay reviews in certain instances. Each team is allowed to have one challenge per game. A challenge can be used on a personal foul charged to the coach’s team, a called out-of-bounds violation, basket interference or goaltending.

The second change involves giving the NBA replay center and on-court referees the permission to use instant replays in the first 46 minutes of games and the first three minutes of overtime. They will check to determine whether hard-to-determine shots are two- or three-point baskets and for potential shot-clock violations.