Who is Andriy Hlushchenko? Biography, gossip, facts?

Andriy Hlushchenko (born 18 March 1974) is a Ukrainian football goalkeeper coach at Chornomorets Odessa of the Ukrainian Premier League. Prior to that he played at Torpedo Zaporizhia Zirka Kirovohrad Metalurh Zaporizhya llychivets Mariupol and Chornomorets Odessa and was also a goalkeeper coach at Metalurh Zaporizhya. Andriy announced his retirement as a professional goalkeeper in the spring of 2009.

How does Andriy Hlushchenko look like? How did Andriy Hlushchenko look like young?

This is how Andriy Hlushchenko looks like. The photo hopefully gives you an impression of Andriy Hlushchenko's look, life and work.

When is Andriy Hlushchenko's birthday?

Andriy Hlushchenko was born on the 18th of March 1974, which was a Monday. Andriy Hlushchenko will be turning 51 in only 219 days from today.

How old is Andriy Hlushchenko?

Andriy Hlushchenko is 50 years old. To be more precise (and nerdy), the current age as of right now is 18274 days or (even more geeky) 438576 hours. That's a lot of hours!

What is Andriy Hlushchenko's zodiac sign and horoscope?

Andriy Hlushchenko's zodiac sign is Pisces.

♓

The ruling planets of Pisces are Jupiter and Neptune. Therefore, lucky days are Thursdays and Mondays and lucky numbers are: 3, 7, 12, 16, 21, 25, 30, 34, 43 and 52. Purple, Violet and Sea green are Andriy Hlushchenko's lucky colors. Typical positive character traits of Pisces include: Emotion, Sensitivity and Compession. Negative character traits could be: Pessimism, Lack of initiative and Laziness.

Is Andriy Hlushchenko gay or straight?

Many people enjoy sharing rumors about the sexuality and sexual orientation of celebrities. We don't know for a fact whether Andriy Hlushchenko is gay, bisexual or straight. However, feel free to tell us what you think! Vote by clicking below.

0% of all voters think that Andriy Hlushchenko is gay (homosexual), 0% voted for straight (heterosexual), and 0% like to think that Andriy Hlushchenko is actually bisexual.

Advertisement

Is Andriy Hlushchenko still alive? Are there any death rumors?

Yes, according to our best knowledge, Andriy Hlushchenko is still alive. And no, we are not aware of any death rumors. However, we don't know much about Andriy Hlushchenko's health situation.

Is Andriy Hlushchenko hot or not?

Well, that is up to you to decide! Click the "HOT"-Button if you think that Andriy Hlushchenko is hot, or click "NOT" if you don't think so. 0% of all voters think that Andriy Hlushchenko is hot, 0% voted for "Not Hot".

What is Andriy Hlushchenko doing now?

Supposedly, 2024 has been a busy year for Andriy Hlushchenko. However, we do not have any detailed information on what Andriy Hlushchenko is doing these days. Maybe you know more. Feel free to add the latest news, gossip, official contact information such as mangement phone number, cell phone number or email address, and your questions below.

Does Andriy Hlushchenko do drugs? Does Andriy Hlushchenko smoke cigarettes or weed?

It is no secret that many celebrities have been caught with illegal drugs in the past. Some even openly admit their drug usuage. Do you think that Andriy Hlushchenko does smoke cigarettes, weed or marijuhana? Or does Andriy Hlushchenko do steroids, coke or even stronger drugs such as heroin? Tell us your opinion below. 0% of the voters think that Andriy Hlushchenko does do drugs regularly, 0% assume that Andriy Hlushchenko does take drugs recreationally and 0% are convinced that Andriy Hlushchenko has never tried drugs before.

Are there any photos of Andriy Hlushchenko's hairstyle or shirtless?

There might be. But unfortunately we currently cannot access them from our system. We are working hard to fill that gap though, check back in tomorrow!