Citation preview

Encyclopedia of Ukraine

This page intentionally left blank

Encyclopedia of

UKRAINE VOLUME V

St-Z Edited by

DANYLO HUSAR STRUK under the auspices of the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies (University of Alberta), the Shevchenko Scientific Society (Sarcelles, France), and the Canadian Foundation for Ukrainian Studies

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS INCORPORATED Toronto Buffalo London

© University of Toronto Press Incorporated 1993 Toronto Buffalo London Printed in Canada ISBN 0-8020-3995-2 Collector's Edition: ISBN 0-8020-3010-6

Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data Main entry under title: Encyclopedia of Ukraine Revision of: Entsyklopediia ukrainoznavstva. Vols. 1-2 edited by Volodymyr Kubijovyc; vols. 3-5 edited by Danylo Husar Struk. Includes bibliographical references. Contents: Map and gazetteer volume. V. 1. A-F - V. 2. G-K - V. 3. L-PF - V. 4. PH-SR - V. 5. ST-Z ISBN 0-8020-3995-2 (V. 5)

i. Ukraine - Dictionaries and encyclopedias. 2. Ukraine - Gazetteers. i. Kubijovyc, V. (Volodymyr), 1900-85. ii. Struk, Danylo Husar, 1940-. in. Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies. iv. Naukove tovarystvo imeny Shevchenka. v. Canadian Foundation for Ukrainian Studies. vi. Title: Entsyklopediia ukrainoznavstva. DK5O8.E522131984 fol

947'.7i'oo3

084-099336-6

Design on front cover by Jacques Hnizdovsky

Volodymyr Kubijovyc, Editor-in-Chief, volumes i, 2 Danylo Husar Struk, Editor-in-Chief, volumes 3,4,5

The publication of this volume has been made possible i n part through a grant from the Province of British C o l u m b i a i n recognition of the contribution of Ukrainian pioneers to the development of the province.

Danylo Húsar Struk Editor-in-Chief EDITORIAL BOARD Olexa Bilaniuk Bohdan Krawchenko Danylo Husar Struk Frank Sysyn Arkadii Zhukovsky SUBJECT EDITORS Art Biology Chemistry Church Diaspora

Economics Education Ethnography, Folklore Geography History Law Linguistics Literature Mathematics Medicine Military History Music Philosophy Physics Political Science Press Sociology Sport Theater

Daria Zelska-Darewych IhorMasnyk Swiatoslaw Trofimenko W a s y l Lencyk; A r k a d i i Z h u k o v s k y Ihor Gordijew (Australia); N a d i a Kerechuk (South America); M a n o l y L u p u l (Canada); H a l y n a M y r o n i u k (United States); A r k a d i i Z h u k o v s k y (Europe) V o l o d y m y r Bandera; Bohdan Krawchenko Danylo Husar Struk Bohdan M e d w i d s k y ; M y k o l a M u s h y n k a Ihor Stebelsky John-Paul H i m k a ; A r k a d i i Z h u k o v s k y Theodore Ciuciura Jacob H u r s k y Ivan Koshelivets; Danylo Husar Struk W o l o d y m y r Petryshyn Pavlo D z u l Petro Sodol Roman Savytsky Taras Zakydalsky Olexa Bilaniuk Bohdan H a r a s y m i w Roman Senkus Bohdan Krawchenko Osyp Zinkevych Valerian Revutsky

Cartography Stefania Kucharyshyn M a p s drawn by Rick Checkland; K i m Davis; R o d Dunphy; Ihor Kucharyshyn; Stefania Kucharyshyn; Inge Link-Wilson; Roy Svenson Illustrations Roman Senkus; Danylo Husar Struk; Daria Zelska-Darewych

EDITORIAL STAFF Roman Senkus Taras Zakydalsky Boris Balan; A n d r i j M a k u c h ; Oksana Maryniak; Natalka Stecura Krencil M a r y Pasieka Borysa Struk George Kostiuk A n n a Biscoe; A n d r i j Wynnyckyj

Chief Manuscript Editor Senior Manuscript Editor Manuscript Editors Word Processor and Office Manager, 1984-1990 Word Processor and Office Manager, 1991-1993 Computing Consultant Editorial Assistants

CONTRIBUTORS H . Abramson, M . Antonovych, A . Babyonyshev, I. Bakalo, B. Balan, E. Bej, O. Bilaniuk, S. Bilokin, A . Bilynsky, M . Bohachevsky-Chomiak, P. Bohatsky, B. Boychuk, L . Burachynska, A . Chojnowski, S. C i p k o , V . Derzhavyn, M . Dobriansky, P. D z u l , B. Folusiewicz, C . Freeland, O. G e m s , D . Goshko, F. Haienko, T. H e w r y k , J.-P. H i m k a , M . Hlobenko, V . H o d y s , V . Holubnychy, O. Horbach, M . Hornykevych, S. H r y n i u k , P. Hrytsak, R. Hutton, O. Ilnytzkyj, A . Kachor, H . Kasianov, B. Kazymyra, N . Kerechuk, I. Khoma, T. Kis, Z . Knysh, M . Kobrynska, Z . Kokhanovsky, J. Kolasky, B. Kordan, I. Korovytsky, I. Koshelivets, M . Kovalevsky, L . K o w a l , B. Kravtsiv, B. Krawchenko, B. Krupnytsky, V . Kubijovyč, M . Kuropas, F. Kushnirsky, W . Lencyk, M . L u p u l , J. Mace, P.R. Magocsi, A . M a k u c h , V . Markus, D . Marples, I. Masnyk, M . M u s h y n k a , I. M y h u l , R. M y k o l a i e v y c h , N . M y k y t y n , B. M y n d i u k , H . M y r o n i u k , S. N a k l o v y c h , V . N a u l k o , P. Odarchenko, O . Ohloblyn, L . Okinshevych, L . Onyshkevych, Y a . Padokh, Y a . Pasternak, I. Patrylo, S. Pavlychko, W . Petryshyn, Y u . Pokalchuk, N . Polonska-Vasylenko, S. Protsiuk, P. P u n d i i , S. Rašković, A . Revenko, V . Revutsky, O. Rohach, Ye. Roslytsky, I.L. Rudnytsky, R. Savytsky, R. Senkus, L . Shankovsky, G.Y. Shevelov, M . Shkandrij, D . Shtohryn, O. Shtul, S. Siropolko, O . Skrypnyk, W . Smyrniw, P. Sodol, J. Sokolowski, B. Somchynsky, I. Sonevytsky, P. Sonnenfeld, M . Stakhiv, I. Stebelsky, Z . Stefaniv, D . Stepovyk, D . H . Struk, O.P. Struk, B. Struminsky, V . Swoboda, I. Teslia, D . Tolmazin, S. Trofimenko, O. Trofymovska, M . Trukhan, S. Tyshkevych, H . Vaskovych, A . V e l y k y , S. Voitovych, I. Vytanovych, O . Woycenko, B. Wynar, L . Wynar, W . W y t w y c k y , V . Yaniv, M . Yurkevich, T. Zakydalsky, O. Zalizniak, C . Zelenko, D . Zelska-Darewych, E. Zharsky, M . Zhdan, A . Zhukovsky, A . Zięba, O. Zinkevych, W . Z y l a

S began his career in the Austrian government as a senior civil servant in Stanyslaviv and Rzeszów. In the last years of his life he served as governor of Trieste and Istria (18417) and Galicia (1847-8) and as minister of the interior (1848-9). As governor of Galicia, in April 1848, months be­ fore the imperial law abolishing serfdom was announced, he abolished serfdom and 'hereditary tenancy' in Galicia. A n opponent of Polish irredentism and the Polish Nation­ al Council, he encouraged the creation of the *Supreme Ruthenian Council in Lviv and supported the Uniate clergy and the Ukrainians' demands for equal rights with the Poles and official use of Ukrainian in the schools and government. The Poles accused him of 'inventing' the Ukrainians. Yurii Stabovy

Jaroslaw Stachiw

Stabovy, Yurii [Stabovyj, Jurij], b 2 April 1894 in Kozelets, Chernihiv gubernia, d 10 July 1968 in Kiev. Film di­ rector, screenwriter, and playwright. He worked in the Odessa Artistic Film Studio (1924-34), where as a screen­ writer he was associated with L. Kurbas's Vendetta (1924) and A. Lundin's Lisovyi zvir (A Forest Animal, 1927). He directed Dva dni (Two Days, 1927), Eksponat z panoptykutnu (An Exhibit from a Panopticon, 1929), and the docu­ mentary Vesnianyi bazar (The Spring Bazaar, 1931) and wrote the plays Dusha skhodu (The Soul of the East) and Vyr (The Whirlpool, 1926). In 1934 he was accused of Ukrainian nationalism and arrested. After his release from prison he worked as a screenwriter in Moscow. Stachiw, Jaroslaw (Jerry) [Staxiv, Jaroslav], b 23 May 1931 in Lviv. Ukrainian-American mechanical engineer and designer; fellow of the American Society of Mechani­ cal Engineers (ASME) since 1983; son of M . and F. *Stakhiv. He graduated from Pennsylvania State University. He has been a researcher in the field of ocean engineering with the US Navy since 1951 and a marine materials research engi­ neer with the A S M E Ocean Engineering Division since 1970 (chairman in 1972-3). In 1970 he constructed the first trans­ parent plastic submersible, the N E M O . He is a recognized authority on ceramic, glass, germanium, and zinc sulphide applications in the construction of structural components of external pressure housings. His design standards for acrylic plastic components were adopted in 1978 by the US Coast Guard, the American Bureau of Shipping, Det Norske Veritas, and Lloyd's Ships Register. Stachiw is the author of Acrylic Plastic Viewports: Ocean Engineering and Other Hyperbaric Applications (1982) and has published nu­ merous technical papers on plastic and glass viewports for submersibles, diving bells, and hyperbaric chambers. Stadion, Franz Seraphim, b 27 July 1806 in Vienna, d 8 June 1853 in Vienna. Austrian count and statesman. He

Stadnychenko, Yurii [Stadnyčenko, Jurij], b 15 May 1929 in Kharkiv. Poet and translator. A former civil engi­ neer and an editor of the journal Prapor, he has written the poetry collections Stezhkamy iunosti (Down the Paths of Youth, 1957), Moie nespokiine sertse (My Troubled Heart, 1961), V okeani neskinchennosti (In the Ocean of Infinity, 1965), Smishynky z pertsem (Peppered Jests, 1970), Okhorontsi vohniu (The Fire's Protectors, 1973), Nadiia i virnist' (Hope and Fidelity, 1977), Zorianyi prybii (The Stellar Breaker, 1980), Pidkova i iakir (The Horseshoe and the An­ chor, 1982), and Doroha kriz' dovhe lito (The Road through a Long Summer, 1983). He has translated non-Russian So­ viet and Polish literature into Ukrainian.

Sofiia Stadnyk

Stadnyk, Sofiia (Stadnykova; née Stechynska), b 13 Sep­ tember 1888 in Ternopil, Galicia, d 21 September 1959 in Lviv. Actress and singer (dramatic soprano); wife of Y. *Stadnyk. A teacher by training, she was an actress in the Ruska Besida Theater (1901-13), the Lviv Ukrainian People's Theater (1913-14), Sadovsky's Theater in Kiev (1916-18), Stadnyk's touring theaters (1919-39), the Lesia Ukrainka Theater (1939-41), and the Lviv Opera Theater (1941-4). In the 1928-9 season she was a guest actress in the Kiev Ukrainian Drama Theater. In 1946 she retired from the stage.

2

STADNYK

Good Hope, E. Rostand's Les Romanesques, F. Grillparzer's Des Meers und der Liebe Wellen, F. Schiller's YJilhelm Tell, M . Lysenko's Nocturne, D. Sichynsky's Roksoliana, Ya. Lopatynsk/s Enei na mandrivtsi (Aeneas on a Journey), J. Offenbach's Tales of Hoffman, K. Zeller's Obersteiger, F. Lehar's Die Zigeunerliebe, and J. Strauss's Der Zigeunerbaron. He translated numerous dramatic works into Ukrainian. V. Revutsky

Stefaniia Stadnyk

Yosyp Stadnyk

Stadnyk, Stefaniia (Stadnykivna), b 20 September 1912 in Ternopil, Galicia, d 27 February 1983 in Lviv. Stage and film actress and singer (soprano); daughter of Y. and S. Stadnyk. She completed her education in a Warsaw drama school (1926) and then worked in Stadnyk's troupe (until 1939, with interruptions), the Lesia Ukrainka Theater (1939-41), the Lviv Opera Theater (1941-4), the Lviv Young Spectator's Theater (1944-8), the Kharkiv Ukrainian Drama Theater (1948-57), and the Lviv Ukrainian Drama Theater (1959-78). She acted in the film Viler zi skhodu (Wind from the East, 1941). Stadnyk, Yarema, b 10 September 1903 in Zbarazh, Galicia, d 19 December 1946 in Lviv. Stage actor and singer; son of Y. and S. Stadnyk. He worked in various Ukrainian troupes in Galicia (1922-31 and 1 9 3 5 - 7 ) , Kryve Zerkalo Theater (1932-4), the Lviv Operetta and variety theaters (1938-41), the Veselyi Lviv Theater (1942-4), and the Lviv Young Spectator's Theater (1945-6). tne

Stadnyk, Yosyp, b 18 March 1876 in Valia va, Peremyshl county, Galicia, d 8 December 1954 in Lviv. Theatrical director and actor. After completing a theatrical education he was an actor and director in the Ruska Besida Theater in Lviv (1894-1913), led it in 1906-13, and left it to lead his own troupe, the Lviv Ukrainian People's Theater (191314). He was interned by the Russian authorities during the First World War, and then worked in *Sadovsky's Theater in Kiev (1917-18) and, in 1919, led the Theater of the Western Ukrainian National Republic in Stanyslaviv. Stadnyk directed and administered the reborn *Ukrainska Besida Theater (1921-3); led various *touring theaters - the Union of Ukrainian Actors (1924-6), the co-operative Ukrainskyi Teatr (1927-31), and Stadnyk's Artistic Tour (1935-9) - in Western Ukraine; was appointed artistic director of the Lesia Ukrainka Ukrainian Drama Theater (1939-41); and worked as a director in the Tobilevych Theater (1933-5), the Lviv Opera Theater, the Drohobych Theater, and the Lviv Theater of Miniatures (1945-7). He was subsequently exiled by the Soviet authorities to Uglich, Russia (194754). Stadnyk played over 100 roles, mostly character roles in a realistic style, in plays by M . Starytsky, M . Kropyvnytsky, W. Shakespeare, Molière, F. Schiller, and N . Gogol. As a director he staged over 200 productions of dramas, operas, and operettas, including H . Heijermans's

Georg Stadtmüller

Matvii Stakhiv

Stadtmüller, Georg, b 17 March 1909 in Bürstadt, Hessen, d 1 November 1985 in Munich. German historian of Eastern and Southeastern Europe and Byzantologist; full member of the Shevchenko Scientific Society from 1966. He was a professor at the universities of Leipzig (1938-45) and Munich (from 1950) and became director of the Eastern Europe Institute (1960-3) in Munich. From 1962 he served on the Scholarly Council and the board of trustees of the ^Association for the Advancement of Ukrainian Studies in Munich. He wrote histories of Albania (1942), civil law (1951), Eastern Europe (1950), Eastern European studies (1963), and the Habsburg Empire (1966) and many other works, and received an honorary P H D from the Ukrainian Free University in 1979. Stafiniak, Volodymyr [Stafinjak], b 1884, d 1920. Senior army officer. During the First World War he served in the Legion of Sich Riflemen as chief training officer (1915) and company commander (1917-18). In the Ukrainian Galician Army, he initially defended Ra va Ruska and Uhniv against Polish forces and then commanded the Uhniv Brigade. In January 1919 he was promoted to captain, and in March he was put in charge of training. After being promoted to major in June 1919, he served as commander of the rear in the Red Ukrainian Galician Army (1920). He died of typhus. Stage design. See Scenery, theatrical. Stahl, Pierre-Jules (pseud of P.-J. Hetzel), b 18 January 1814 in Chartres, France, d 16 March 1886 in Monte Carlo. French children's writer and publisher. He befriended Marko *Vovchok in 1865 while she was living in Paris, and published nine of her stories in his journal Magasin d'éducation et de récréation. For many years Vovchok also served on the journal's editorial board and corresponded with Stahl. In 1869 Stahl coauthored Le Chemin glissant... with Vovchok. The novella appeared in Magasin in 1871 and

STAKHIV

then in several separate editions. In 1878 Stahl published Vovchok's French adaptation of her novella Marusia, Maroussia, which gained great popularity in France, was reprinted more than 100 times, and received an award from the Académie Française. A Ukrainian translation appeared in Bratislava in 1965. Vovchok's relationship with Stahl is discussed in considerable detail in B. LobachZhuchenko's Pro Marka Vovchka (About Marko Vovchok, 1979). Stained-glass windows. The term used for windows filled with colored glass, usually built of panels in which the pieces of colored glass are held together with strips of lead. Generally the glass has been colored by such methods as the fusion of metallic oxides into the glass, the burning of pigment into the surface of white glass, or the joining of white with colored pieces of glass. In Ukraine no stained-glass windows from medieval times have survived, but there is mention of them in the Chronicle of 1259 and in the travel accounts of Paul of Aleppo in 1654 and 1656. In the 18th and 19th centuries the art of stainedglass windows declined in Europe and in Ukraine. It was revived at the beginning of the 20th century by such artists as P. Kholodny, Sr (The Dormition Church in Lviv, 1926). In Soviet Ukraine stained-glass windows were used from the 1960s on to decorate palaces of culture, museums, metro stations, pavilions, and hotel lobbies. Among the artists working in stained glass are V. Zadorozhny (Shevchenko Triptych, at Shevchenko University in Kiev) and O. Dubovyk (Wandering Wind and Carnival Windows, at the sanatorium in Teodosia). Among the Ukrainian artists in the West, P. Kholodny, Ir, designed the stained-glass windows for the Ukrainian Catholic Church of St George in New York and Ya. Surmach-Mills designed the windows for St Demetrius's Church in Toronto. M . *Zubar gained national recognition in the United States for his numerous stained-glass windows in churches, synagogues, and community centres. He experimented with special effects achieved by a sandblasting technique used in conjunction with hand-blown glass and invented a new process of painting on glass. In Canada L. *Molodozhanyn has designed numerous stained-glass windows for churches in Manitoba, including 30 windows for the Ukrainian Catholic Cathedral of ss Volodymyr and Olha in Winnipeg. The windows of the chapel were designed by S. Lada. R. Kowal designed the stained-glass windows for St Andrew's and the Blessed Virgin Mary Ukrainian Catholic churches in Winnipeg, as well as others in rural Manitoba. D. Zelska-Darewych

Stakh, Ivan [Stax], b 2 luly 1918 in Blackwood, Pennsylvania, d 29 June 1972 in Philadelphia. Ukrainian Catholic bishop. He studied theology in Innsbruck, Switzerland, and Washington. After he was ordained in 1943, he served as a parish priest and then as secretary to Bishop K. Bohachevsky. In August 1946 he was sent by the Ukrainian Catholic Relief Committee to Germany to assist in the resettlement of Ukrainian displaced persons in Europe. When he returned to the United States in 1952, he was made chancellor of the exarchate (subsequently, eparchy) of Stamford, Connecticut. In 1971 he was consecrated bishop and named assistant to the metropolitan of Philadelphia, A. Senyshyn.

3

Stakhanov, Aleksei [Staxanov, Aleksej], b 21 December 1905 in Lugova, Orel gubernia, Russia, d 5 November 1977 in Torez, Donetske oblast. Miner. In 1927 he began working as a miner in Kadiivka (now Stakhanov, in Luhanske oblast). In August 1935 he allegedly set a personal record by mining 102 t of coal in a single shift of 5 hours and 45 minutes, thereby overfulfilling his quota by a factor of 14.5. In September of that year he set another record by mining 2271 of coal. These deeds were carefully staged by Party authorities and used extensively in propaganda to raise labor productivity (see ^socialist competition). Afterward Stakhanov completed his education and occupied management positions in mining in Central Asia and, from 1957, in the Donbas. Stakhanov [Staxanov]. v-19, DB 11-5. A city (1990 pop 112,000) on the Kamyshuvakha River in Luhanske oblast. It originated in the mid-i9th century, when coal mining was developed in the region, as the workers' settlement of Shubynka. From 1898 to 1978 it was called Kadiivka, and then it was renamed in honor of A . *Stakhanov. It was granted city status in 1932. Today the city has four coal mines and a central coal enrichment plant. It is also an important metallurgical and machine-building center with an iron-ore refinery, ferrous alloys plant, a machine-building factory, a railway-car plant, and a coke-chemical plant. Stakhanovite movement. See Socialist competition. Stakhiv, Franka [Staxiv] (née Nakonechna], b 3 October 1906 in Lviv. Civic and educational activist; wife of M . *Stakhiv and mother of J. *Stachiw. In the interwar period she was active in various Ukrainian organizations in Lviv, as secretary of the Union of Ukrainian Working Women (1931-9) and editor of its organ Zhinochyi holos (1931-9) and as secretary of the Samoosvita popular university (1930-9). In 1949, a refugee in Germany, she emigrated to the United States. Stakhiv, Matvii [Staxiv, Matvij] (Stachiw, Matthew), b 30 November 1895 i Nushche, Zboriv county, Galicia, d 2 June 1978 in San Diego, California. Lawyer, historian, and political leader; full member of the Shevchenko Scientific Society from 1943. He served as an officer in the Ukrainian Galician Army (1918-20) and studied law at Prague University (LLD, 1924). After returning to Lviv he became active in the Ukrainian Radical party, in which he served as general secretary (1925-39) and editor of its weekly Hromads'kyi holos (1929-39). He also directed the Samoosvita popular university and edited its publications (1930-9). As a postwar émigré in Germany he lectured at the Ukrainian Free University and sat on the Ukrainian National Council. After settling in the United States (1949) he edited the weekly *Narodna volia (1949-71), sat on the board of the United Ukrainian American Relief Committee, presided over the Shevchenko Scientific Society (1969-74), and was an executive member of the Ukrainian Congress Committee of America (1951-71) and the World Congress of Free Ukrainians (1967-72). In addition to numerous articles and pamphlets on political and historical subjects, he wrote Zakhidnia Ukraïna (Western Ukraine, 6 vols, 1958-61), Ukraïna v dobi Dyrektoriï UNR (Ukraine in the Period of the U N R Directory, 7 vols, 1962-8), and Ukraine and Russia: An Outline of History of Political and Miln

4

STAKHIV

itary Relations (1967). He also coauthored Western Ukraine at the Turning Point of Europe's History, 1918-1923 (2 vols, 1969, 1971) and Ukraine and the European Turmoil, 19171919 (1973).

Volodymyr Stakhiv

Danylo Stakhura

Stakhiv, Volodymyr [Staxiv] (pseud: Mek), b 1910 in Peremyshl, Galicia, d 25 October 1971 in Munich. Journalist and political activist. After joining the O U N in 1929, he worked in its Berlin office and at the Ukrainian Press Service (1930s). At the same time he studied at the Berlin Polytechnical Institute and was active in the Ukrainian student movement. In mid-1941 he was in charge of external relations for the Ukrainian State Administration before being imprisoned for three years at the Sachsenhausen concentration camp. After the war he settled in Munich, where he was one of the leaders of the External Units of the O U N and a member of the External Representation of the Ukrainian Supreme Liberation Council and of the Political Council of the O U N (Abroad). He also served as president of the Ukrainian Journalists' Association Abroad and of the League of Ukrainian Political Prisoners. He worked as chief editor of the weekly *Ukraïns'ka trybuna and the biweekly Suchasna Ukraxna and as coeditor of *Suchasnist'. Stakhiv, Yaroslav. See Stachiw, Jaroslaw. Stakhovsky, Kostiantyn [Staxovs'kyj, Kostjantyn], b 1882 in Podilia gubernia, d 11 May 1959 in Prague. Sculptor and ceramicist. He studied art in Warsaw, Paris, St Petersburg, Munich, and Berlin. A n interwar émigré, in 1923 he settled in Prague, where he taught at the Ukrainian Studio of Plastic Arts. A specialist in the sculpture of bronze, clay, and plaster animals and busts, he displayed his works in London (1918-19) and in Paris at the Salon des Indépendants and the Salon d'Automne (1919-22). Stakhovsky, Lev [Staxovs'kyj], b 1911 in Vinnytsia, Podilia gubernia, d 1968 in Caracas, Venezuela. Otolaryngologist and community leader; full member of the Shevchenko Scientific Society from 1955; son of M . *Stakhovsky. A graduate of Prague University, he practiced medicine in Czechoslovakia and emigrated in 1947 to Venezuela. He was the founder and first president of the Ukrainian Hrornada society in Caracas. His scientific pub-

lications included scientific articles on tuberculosis of the larynx. Stakhovsky, Mykola [Staxovs'kyj], b 22 May 1879 in Volytsia, Starokostiantyniv county, Volhynia gubernia, d 7 December 1948 in Prague. Physician and civic activist. After graduating from Warsaw University (MD, 1904) he specialized in surgery in Kiev. During the Russo-Japanese War he served as an army surgeon in the Far East. The publisher of BoroVba, an organ of the Ukrainian Social Democratic Workers' party, Stakhovsky was threatened with arrest in 1906 for writing an antigovernment article. He escaped to France. In 1908 he returned to Ukraine and opened a private practice in Vinnytsia. In 1917 he was appointed gubernial commissioner for Podilia under the Central Rada, and at the end of 1919 he headed the U N R diplomatic mission to Great Britain. In the interwar period he worked as a physician and cultural activist in Berehove, Transcarpathia. Stakhura, Danylo [Staxura], b 19 December i860 in Poliany, Krosno county, Galicia, d 20 December 1938 in Prague. Lawyer and civic and political leader. After graduating in law from Lviv University he worked as a lawyer in Ternopil, Peremyshl, and Sambir and was active in Ukrainian organizational life. In 1907 he was elected as a candidate of the National Democratic party to the Austrian parliament. After being deported by Russian authorities to Simbirsk in 1914, he returned to Sambir three years later and was elected mayor and member of the Ukrainian National Rada (1918-19). After emigrating to Czechoslovakia he served as judge of the provincial court in Berehove and worked with the Prosvita society in Uzhhorod. He was also a strong supporter of the Boikivskhchyna society in Sambir and provided it with a home for its ethnography museum. Stalin, Joseph (real name: Yosif Dzhugashvili), b 21 December 1879 in Gori, Georgia, d 5 March 1953 in Moscow. Soviet political leader, first secretary of the C P S U , and absolute dictator of the USSR. Stalin first emerged as a specialist on the nationality question. In 1914, under V . Lenin's guidance, he wrote Natsionalnyi vopros i marksizm (translated in 1942 as Marxism and the National Question), mostly a criticism of O. Bauer's and K. Renner's interpretation of nationalism, which had gained considerable popularity, especially among Georgian socialists. Because of this work and his Georgian origin he was appointed people's commissar of nationalities in the Bolshevik government (1917-22). In 1919 he also became people's commissar of state control. As commissar of nationalities, in 1920 he opposed the separation of the 'border' countries (Ukraine, Georgia, etc), which were important sources of raw materials and food for central Russia. In 1922 he rejected the concept of a union of independent and equal republics and advocated instead the incorporation of the national republics into the RSFSR as autonomous units. Although his idea was rejected, the Russian republic was made the cornerstone of the new union. Stalin relied on the Russian state bureaucracy to convert the USSR into a centralized, totalitarian empire (see ^Nationality policy). His most important post, however, was the general secretaryship of the cc of the Russian Communist Party (Bol-

1

2

4 5

3

6

STAINED GLASS i) M. Zubar: St Josaphat's Ukrainian Catholic Church in Rochester, New York. 2) L. Molodozhanyn: ss Volodymyr and Olha Ukrainian Catholic Cathedral in Winnipeg (1963). 3) M. Shkaraputa: Movement towards Light (Hungarian Consulate, Kiev, 1978). 4) M. Sosenko: St Michael's Church in Pidbereztsi, Galicia (1907-10). 5) O. Melnyk: The Time ofYaroslav the Wise (Historical Museum of Ukraine, Kiev, 1978). 6) I.-V. Zadorozhny: People Save the Earth (Palace of Culture, Bila Tserkva, Kiev oblast, 197&-9).

This page intentionally left blank

5

STAMFORD

shevik) (RKP[B]), which he assumed in 1922. Although his authority was damaged somewhat by Lenin's strong res­ ervations concerning his secretaryship, Stalin used this administrative post to build a firm power base in the Par­ ty. By placing his own supporters in key positions he was able to dominate the entire interlocking Party, state, mili­ tary, and police bureaucracy. After Lenin's death he creat­ ed a mass personality cult that glorified first Lenin and then himself as an all-powerful and all-knowing leader. One by one he expelled his allies and potential rivals - L. Trotsky, G. Zinovev, L. Kamenev, A . Rykov, and N . Bukharin - from the Party and then destroyed them. In the late 1920s he announced the policy of 'socialism in one country,' whereby he abandoned the *New Economic Pol­ icy and embarked on a program of rapid industrialization and ^collectivization, which was enforced by means of widespread *terror. Millions of Ukrainian peasants were starved to death in 1932-3, millions of people were impris­ oned in ^concentration camps, and hundreds of thou­ sands were executed by the secret police. Repeated *purges of the Party and government removed any possi­ ble source of opposition to his power. A favorite tactic was the show trials, such as those of 1936-8, in which former Bolshevik leaders confessed to treason and implicated many others in their crimes. Almost half of the Party membership was destroyed, and 139 members of the CC were executed. Of 1,966 delegates at the 17th Party Con­ gress in 1934, 1,108 had been arrested by 1939. In the armed forces Stalin organized a major purge that de­ stroyed most of the experienced senior officers on the eve of the Second World War. In foreign affairs Stalin pursued an expansionist policy based, for a time, on an alliance with A. Hitler. He occu­ pied Western Ukraine and the Baltic states, Bessarabia, and Bukovyna (see *Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact). Stalin failed to anticipate the German attack on the USSR in 1941, and the Soviets suffered heavy losses in the early stages of the war. At first many Soviet troops, including Ukraini­ ans, had no desire to fight for the Stalinist regime and surrendered en masse. Later, taking advantage of the abominable treatment of the Soviet POWs by the Nazis and of the discontent among the nations subjugated by the Na­ zis, and playing up patriotism, Stalin succeeded in rally­ ing his subjects and, assisted by the Allies, in emerging as a victor from the war. In the postwar settlement he ex­ tended Soviet influence to large new territories in Eastern Europe and the Far East and eventually turned them into Communist-ruled satellite states. After the war Stalin encouraged the growth of Great Russian nationalism and discriminated against the other nationalities of the USSR. Some of the smaller nations, such as the Volga Germans, the Crimean Tatars, and the Che­ chens, were subjected to genocide for their alleged collab­ oration with the Germans. According to N . Khrushchev the Ukrainians were saved from mass deportation only by their large numbers. In 1939-41 and again after the war Stalin Sovietized the newly acquired Western Ukraine by deporting hundreds of thousands of people and destroy­ ing much of the intelligentsia. A t the same time A . *Zhdanov imposed rigid control on Soviet cultural and in­ tellectual life. Stalin concentrated all political power in his own hands. From 1941 he was head of state, commissar of de­ fence, and supreme commander of the armed forces (as­

suming the title of 'generalissimo' in 1945). He built on the traditions of Russian oriental absolutism in creating a to­ talitarian state cemented together by terror. At the end of his life he began a major assault on the Jews, whom he characterized as 'rootless cosmopolitans.' Stalin was not a theoretical thinker, and Stalinism was not a political doc­ trine; it was a political system of ruthless, unrestricted dic­ tatorship by the Party leader over a demoralized, helpless society. After Stalin's death Khrushchev, in his 'secret speech' at the 20th Congress of the CPSU (1956), criticized to a de­ gree the 'cult of personality' that had arisen around the dictator. This de-Stalinization campaign continued at the subsequent congress in 1961, when it was decided to re­ move Stalin's embalmed body from Lenin's mausoleum, rename all the places and institutions that had been named in his honor, and dismantle his statues. With L. Brezhnev's ascension to power in 1964, however, Stalin was partly rehabilitated, and some measures recalled the excesses of his regime - the personality cult, official Rus­ sification, closed trials, and repressions. In its final years the CPSU at last admitted the crimes against humanity committed under Stalin's rule, but it did not accept its re­ sponsibility for them. BIBLIOGRAPHY Souvarine, B. Stalin: A Critical Survey of Bolshevism (New York

1939)

Kostiuk, H. Stalinist Rule in the Ukraine: A Study of the Decade of Mass Terror, 1929-39 (New York i960) Wolfe, B. Three Who Made a Revolution, 4th edn (New York 1964) Deutscher, I. Stalin: A Political Biography, 2nd edn (London 1967) Conquest, R. The Great Terror: Stalin's Purge of the Thirties (Lon­

don-New York 1968) Tucker, R. Stalin as Revolutionary, 1879-1929 (New York 1973)

Ulam, A. Stalin: The Man and His Era (New York 1973)

Tucker, R. (ed). Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation

(New

York 1977)

Staline or Stalino. See Donetske. Stalinsky, Oleh [Stalins'kyj], b 16 January 1907 in Kiev, d 1991 in Lviv. Ballet dancer and ballet master. In 1920 he completed study at Z. Lange's ballet studio and choreo­ graphic training at Tsentrostudiia in Kiev. After working as an actor in Russian theaters, he danced as a soloist in the Kiev Theater of Opera and Ballet (1922-46, with inter­ ruptions in Odessa and Alma-Ata) and was a soloist and ballet master in the Lviv Theater of Opera and Ballet (1946-73). Stamford. A city (1980 pop 102,000) at the mouth of the Rippowam River on Long Island Sound in the state of Connecticut. It is a residential suburb of New York with some industry and research laboratories. Ukrainians, who number about 400 today, began to settle there at the turn of the century. A Ukrainian Catholic parish was estab­ lished in 1916. A minor seminary and high school were opened in Stamford in 1933; they were accredited and named St Basil's College and St Basil's Preparatory School respectively in 1939. The "Ukrainian Diocesan Museum of Stamford was founded in 1935. In 1942 Stamford became the seat of the auxiliary bishop of Philadelphia eparchy of the Ukrainian Catholic church, and later the seat of an ex­ archate (1956) and eparchy (1958) under A. Senyshyn. At Senyshyn's promotion to the office of archbishop of Phil-

6

STAMFORD

adelphia in 1961, his position was assumed by J. Schmondiuk and then B. Losten (1977). Today (1990) the eparchy has 55 parishes served by 57 priests and 20 monks. Stamp collecting. See Ukraine-Philatelisten Verband, Ukrainian Philatelic and Numismatic Society, and Post­ age stamps. Stan. In medieval Rus' a military encampment which was usually set up on elevated ground and surrounded by a makeshift barrier of carts or a palisade and sometimes by a ditch or earthworks. The term was also applied to stopover points on long routes and to places visited peri­ odically by the prince's officials to collect tribute and to hold court over the local population. In the 19th century the stan was a police territorial unit within a county. Standard of living. The goods and services enjoyed or aspired to by an individual or group. In the Soviet econo­ my, where prices bore no relation to value, wages to labor, and consumer goods to quality of life, it was difficult to determine the real standard of living on the basis of statis­ tical data. The task was complicated further by the fact that there were two different prices for goods, and that the buying power of the ruble varied with different categories of the population. Official statistics lacked a sound meth­ odology and accurate measurements. Hence, the official data on the standard of living reflected propositions and tendencies rather than the real standard of living. The standard of living is normally determined by the level of economic development or by the gross national product per capita. It is not to be confused with 'quality of life,' which also includes the cultural, spiritual, and social dimensions of life. In 1989 the gross national product of Ukraine was worth 271 billion rubles, or 29 percent of the Soviet Union's. The gross national products per capita in Ukraine and the Soviet Union were 5,211 and 3,208 rubles respectively. Ukraine's national income per capita was 2,078 rubles, whereas that of the Soviet Union was 2,281. Thus Ukraine's gross national product was 38 percent per capita higher, and its national income per capita was 9 percent lower, than the Union average. The per capita output of basic industrial and agricultur­ al products, such as coal, pig iron, steel, wheat, meat, milk, butter, sugar, and vegetables, in Ukraine exceeded the Union average. Soviet Ukraine's output of many products equaled that of the developed countries. Its per capita out­ put of wheat, for example, was smaller than that of the United States and France but greater than that of Italy, the United Kingdom, and Germany. Its per capita output of butter and milk was second only to France's. Ukraine was ahead of the United Kingdom in electric power and ahead of every European country in pig iron and steel produc­ tion. But in per capita consumption Ukraine lagged be­ hind some developing countries. In 1989 the average monthly wage in Ukraine was 217.7 rubles and in the USSR, 240.4 rubles. In Ukraine expenditures from social funds were 619 rubles per person, in the USSR, 650 rubles, and in the United States, 5,200 dollars. The proportion of social consumption to the gross domestic product of the repub­ lic was 12 percent for Ukraine, 20 percent for the USSR, and 28 percent for the United States. The percentage of wages to national income did not exceed 37 percent in Ukraine, whereas in the developed countries it was 60-70 percent.

The per capita income from private plots was 11 rubles a month. The structure of the Ukrainian population by income was as follows (1989): 3.1 million people (6 percent of the total population) received up to 75 rubles per month, 7.3 million (14.2 percent) received 75 to 100 rubles, 20.2 mil­ lion (37.2 percent) received 101 to 150 rubles, 2.6 million (24.5 percent) received 151 to 200 rubles, and 3.6 million (6.9 percent) received over 250 rubles. Until the dissolution of the USSR 75 rubles per month was regarded as the minimum living standard, but that figure was only a rough estimate without any scientific basis. According to criteria used in other countries, any­ one with a monthly income of under 100 rubles, that is, 20 percent of the Ukrainian population, was below the pov­ erty line. Another 10 million people, with an income of 100 to 125 rubles per month, were on the verge of poverty. Ac­ cording to the criterion of poverty adopted by the Europe­ an Economic Commission of the United Nations (per capita income of under two-thirds of the country's aver­ age), 30.6 million Ukrainians, or 57.4 percent of the popu­ lation, were poor in 1989 (average income = 153 rubles per month). As the economic situation in the USSR deteriorated in 1990-1, the number of people below the poverty line in­ creased. The group with an income of over 250 rubles per month was in the highest bracket. Those with an income of 151 to 250 rubles per month (35.7 percent of the population) could therefore have been regarded as constituting a mid­ dle class. In Japan, by contrast, the middle class consists of 90 percent of the population. In relation to private proper­ ty, the well-to-do group (the equivalent of the American middle class) consists of those who own cars. In Ukraine 3.1 million people, or 6 percent of the population, be­ longed to that category, the same percentage that had an income of over 250 rubles a month. It was the only stratum of Soviet society that had the full range of consumer goods: an apartment or house, modern furniture, a car, and a summer cottage - all the attributes of the middle class. The difference between Ukraine's per capita produc­ tion and consumption was much higher than the Union average. The discrepancy was the result of the 'equaliza­ tion' policy of the central government, which redistribut­ ed the gross national product among the unequally developed republics. The difference also reflected the structure of Ukrainian industry, in which heavy industry and the extractive and processing branches dominated the economy. The raw materials and products in those branches were priced low, and labor in them was poorly paid. The average wage in Russia was higher than that in Ukraine, not only because of regional compensations for severe climatic conditions (in the Far North or Kamchat­ ka) but mostly because 80 percent of the defense industry was located in Russia. Income by itself does not indicate the real standard of living. It must be compared to the prices of consumer goods and to the structure of expendi­ tures. In 1989 average Ukrainians spent a third of their in­ come on food, another third on consumer goods, 3 percent on housing, and 20 percent on other needs, and saved about 10 percent. A family of four with two children spent 52 percent of its income on food, compared to 15.2 percent in the United States and 21 percent in Western Europe. To buy 1 kg of meat the average Ukrainian had to work 10 times longer than an American. Measured in that way, the

STANDARD

price of butter was 8 times higher, of bread, 2 to 3 times higher; of a woolen suit, 15 times higher; of a color T V , 20 times higher; and of a car, 5 times higher in Ukraine than in the United States. In 1989 the per capita food consumption in Ukraine was slightly higher than in the USSR; for example, meat, 69 kg (67 in the USSR); milk, 367 kg (359); sugar, 49 kg (41); vege­ tables, 125 kg (98); fruits, 47 kg (43); and baked goods, 138 kg (130). But the average Soviet citizen was better provid­ ed with consumer goods than the average Ukrainian. In the USSR there were 105 T V sets per 100 families, whereas in Ukraine there were only 100. Similarly, in the USSR there were 92 refrigerators and 72 washing machines, com­ pared to 90 and 67 in Ukraine. For every thousand inhab­ itants there were 60 cars in Ukraine and 56 in the USSR (510 in the United States). The average living area per person was 7.6 sq m in Ukraine, 15.8 sq m in the USSR, 49 sq m in the United States, and up to 36 sq m in Western Europe. The average floor area of a house in Ukraine was 57 sq m, compared to 130-140 sq m in the developed countries. In the U S S R there were 200 separate houses or flats per 1,000 inhabitants, in the United States there are 380, in Canada 351, and in the developed European countries over 400. In 1990, 2.5 million people in Ukraine were inadequately housed by Soviet standards, with less than 5-9 sq m per family member. A wait of about 10 years was required to get the living space guaranteed by the state. Population growth outpaced the building rate of the construction in­ dustry. The construction of private housing accounts for only 1 percent of the new housing in cities and 75 percent in rural areas. In Soviet Ukraine only 3.9 percent of the gross national product was spent on health care. In most developed countries the figure is at least twice as high. The per capita medical service provided in Ukraine amounted to a third of that provided in the United States, although Ukraine had more medical personnel (44 physicians and 118 nurses per 10,000 people). The statistical figures just cited cannot describe the real standard of living in Ukraine, because they do not take into account three important factors: (1) the quality of the consumer goods and services, (2) the hidden price infla­ tion, and (3) the rapidly falling supply of consumer goods. The official statistics on meat consumption (69 kg per cap­ ita per year), for example, included by-products (over 10 kg) and losses in processing and transportation (10-15 percent). Thus, the real figure was 49 kg, which amounted to only 57 percent of Ukraine's meat output. In compari­ son Russia consumed 66 percent and Belarus 63 percent of their meat output. Some Ukrainian economists estimated that the real rate of meat consumption in the republic was closer to 25-32.9 kg per person. The housing statistics did not show that most of the stock had not been renovated or properly maintained for many years. Few of the new rural houses had modern conveniences. Only 5 percent of Ukrainian villages had natural gas. New apartments needed repairs at a cost of 9 rubles per sq m before people could move into them. The number of people waiting for their guaranteed share of living space was two or three times higher than the official number, because various for­ malities made it difficult to get on the waiting list. As to medical care, an internal poll of 11,000 doctors showed that 4 percent of the polyclinics and 7 percent of the hospitals in Ukraine were in a critical condition. A

UKRAINIAN

7

third needed repair. Seven to 8 percent of them had no running water, and 10-14 percent had no sewage system or central heating. In 80 percent of the hospitals there were over six patients to a room. Only 2 percent of the polyclin­ ics and 6 percent of the hospitals in Ukraine had ultra­ sound equipment. Over a third of Ukrainian villages did not even have first-aid stations. The official figures on the standard of living in Soviet Ukraine did not take into account the high inflation creat­ ed by the government in its last few years. In 1990 person­ al incomes grew by 18 percent. Most consumer goods at state-controlled prices disappeared from the shops, and prices on the collective-farm and black markets doubled and tripled. Prices were driven up also by the shortage of consumer goods and services, which intensified steadily for five years and reached alarming levels in 1990-1. Pentup demand for goods, as well as individual savings, in­ creased at a similar pace. The central government printed money without any backing in goods: 11 billion rubles in 1988,18 billion in 1989, and 27 billion in 1990. In 1989 only 25 percent of the money supply was backed by consumer goods; in 1990, only 18 percent. The causes of the sharp drop in the supply of consumer goods and the consumption level of the population in the former USSR lie primarily in the structure of the planned economy, which was designed to satisfy its own needs, not the demands of the consumer. In 1928,60.5 percent of the industrial output was consumer goods, and 39 percent the means of production. In 1940 the proportion was 39:61, and in 1985,25:75. Any improvement in productiv­ ity or any growth of national income, therefore, had little effect on the standard of living. S. Voitovych

Standard Ukrainian. The standard, or literary, version of the Ukrainian ^language evolved through three distinct periods: old (ioth-i3th centuries), middle (i4th-i8th cen­ turies), and modern (i9th-20th centuries). The cardinal changes that occurred were conditioned by changes in the political and cultural history of Ukraine. Old Ukrainian is found in extant Kievan church and scholarly texts dating from the mid-11 th century and the Kievan charter of 1130, in Galician church texts dating from the late 11th century, and in Galician charters dating from the mid-i4th century. There are hardly any literary monuments from Chernihiv, Tmutorokan, and Pereiaslav; hence, we can only make conjectures about the lit­ erary language used in these principalities. In addition to church and scholarly texts, Old Ukrainian is represented by private letters, chronicles, and belles-lettres works. The language of all these genres is basically *Church Slavonic, with an ever-increasing admixture of local lexical, phonet­ ic, morphological, and syntactic features. Although the language was not institutionally regulated, it remained quite stable, because of the patronage of the church and the concentration of literary life around religious centers. Thus, texts created in Kiev do not differ much from those transcribed from the Bulgarian. Some scholars, such as A . *Shakhmatov, have conjectured that this was also the koine of the most cultured intellectual strata. Hypotheses (by S. Obnorsky and, to a certain degree, L. Yakubinsky and I. Svientsitsky) about a local, urban-vernacular-based literary language that predated the widespread use of Church Slavonic have not been confirmed by known facts.

8

STANDARD UKRAINIAN

Only the language of the Galician charters reveals a local character, but data allowing us to date back that tradition do not exist. The decline of Kievan Rus' and later the Principality of Galicia-Volhynia and the resulting annexation of most Ukrainian lands (except for Galicia, Bukovyna, and Transcarpathia) by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania interrupted the literary tradition of Old Ukrainian. This is particularly evident in the rift that occurred between the language of the church and that of government. The language of the religious genres and styles is characterized in the late 14th and 15th centuries by a renewed 'Church Slavonicization.' This so-called second wave of Church Slavonic influences stemmed from the linguistic reforms of Patriarch Euthymius of Türnovo, who introduced artificial archaisms, a syntax and spelling closer to the Greek, and a rhetorical style. At the same time the language of government drew closer to the vernacular and was influenced also by the Latin, German, Czech, and Polish used in the central Eu­ ropean chanceries. The political division of the Ukrainian lands between Poland and Lithuania led to the develop­ ment of two variants of administrative language, Galician and Volhynian-Polisian. The Galician variant, which re­ flected the phonetics and morphology of the southwest­ ern dialects and contained more Polonisms, became obsolete when the government adopted Latin or Polish (1433). The Volhynian-Polisian variant, with its center in Lutske, reflected the phonetics and morphology of the northern dialects and, after becoming the basis of the offi­ cial language of the Lithuanian-Ruthenian state, absorbed more and more Belarusian features, especially those shared by the northern Ukrainian and southern Belaru­ sian dialects (eg, the distinction between e and ë under stress, hardened r, z, c, s). It became a distinctive koine which was used occasionally in Eastern Europe as a lan­ guage of diplomacy. The growth of towns, the rise of a Ukrainian burgher class, and the influence of the Reformation brought about a shift in the language of the higher genres toward the chancery and vernacular languages. There were even at­ tempts at translating the Bible into a language approxi­ mating the vernacular (eg, the Peresopnytsia Gospel [1556-61] and Krekhiv Apóstol [1563-72]). This trend was arrested, however, by the so-called third wave of Church Slavonicization. Polish cultural, political, and economic expansion after the 1569 Union of Lublin led to the Polonization of the Ukrainian nobility and the cultural and po­ litical decline of Ukrainian towns, thereby destroying the ground on which a vernacular-based Ukrainian literary language could rise. It was under these circumstances that the clergy assumed ideological leadership of the Ukraini­ an opposition and propagated the restoration and nor­ malization of Church Slavonic as the vehicle of an older, Greco-Byzantine tradition. The ^grammars and dictionar­ ies produced by L. Zyzanii, M . Smotrytsky, P. Berynda, and others did not revive Church Slavonic in its pure form, but with an admixture of arbitrary changes and with some Ukrainian elements (eg, pronunciation of the nasal vowels 55, A as u, ja; g ash; $ as i; and the nonpronunciation of *jers). The result of this policy was the oppo­ site of what was intended: by severing the literary language from the vernacular and blocking the seculariza­ tion of the literary language, the church in fact facilitated the Polonization process.

In practice even M . Smotrytsky's standards of Church Slavonic could not be maintained, and many vernacular elements and Western influences (especially Latinisms and Polonisms) crept into the literary language. Thus, an eclectic language based on Church Slavonic became the literary medium of the Cossack Hetmán state of the 17th and early 18th centuries. Its variegated composition suit­ ed the prevailing style of the period, the baroque. The lan­ guage was used in homiletics, scholarship, belles-lettres, and, with considerably fewer Church Slavonicisms, offi­ cial communication and private correspondence. Given the artificial nature of the language, it is difficult to speak of its dialectal base; in general, however, southwestern dialectal elements prevailed over northern ones. The decline of the Hetmán state after the Russian victo­ ry at Poltava (1709) interrupted the normal development of the literary language. As baroque culture declined and became secularized, tsarist interference, as in the ukases of 1721,1727-8,1735,1766, and 1772 censoring the language of Ukrainian printed books, as well as the Russification of education and the desire of certain strata of the Cossack starshyna and the higher Orthodox clergy to consolidate their position in the service of the Russian Empire, put an end to the printing of works in the literary language of the 17th century. In the second half of the 18th century the lit­ erary language used in Ukraine (eg, in the late Cossack chronicles, the writings of H . Skovoroda and V. Kapnist, and Istoriia Rusov) was, in fact, Russian. The vernacular was used only in satirical, humorous, intimate, or lyrical works, as prescribed by the classicist theory of low style. The authors of such works did not envision creating a new literary language, but merely recorded various 'Little Rus­ sian' dialects (eg, the northern in I. Nekrashevych, the Pol­ tava in I. *Kotliarevsky, and the Kharkiv in H . KvitkaOsnovianenko). The attitude to the vernacular changed only with the rise of Romanticism, which in Ukraine acquired a distinct­ ly populist flavor. Various writers, such as M . *Shashkevych, A . Metlynsky, and M . Kostomarov, raised the possibility of a serious, full-fledged literature based on the vernacular. They preferred folklore, which was associated with a historical tradition, to colloquial speech as a source of the literary language. Thus, the southeastern dialectal base of Modern Standard Ukrainian became established. But these efforts lacked historicity. Building on the achievements of his Romantic precursors from Poltava and Kharkiv, T. *Shevchenko first met the challenge of forging a synthetic, pan-Ukrainian literary language en­ compassing both the historical (eg, the use of archaisms and Church Slavonicisms) and the geographical dimen­ sion (the use of accessible dialects). P. *Kulish combined the same elements but in different proportions. Shevchenko's and Kulish's contemporaries and immediate suc­ cessors failed to grasp the fact that historical and stylis­ tic synthesis was the essence of language reform. The breadth of the geographic synthesis, however, secured a wide influence for the new literary language. This was the principle which gave direction to the linguistic strivings of the writers grouped around the journal *Osnova. Later it had a determining influence on the character of B. *Hrinchenko's dictionary, which, despite its apparent dialectal nature, played a major role in normalizing the literary language. The new literary Ukrainian began to be used in scholar-

STANISLAUS

ship and publicism in the early 1860s. This development was interrupted by P. *Valuev's circular (1863) forbidding Ukrainian-language printing within the Russian Empire. As Ukrainian publishing shifted to Austrian-ruled Galicia, the new literary language took root there, imposed the Middle Ukrainian-based literary language, and thereby undercut the attempts of local Russophiles to establish Russian as the literary language. In Galicia the new language became strongly influenced by the local vernacular. The impact of the northern dialects was not particularly evident, although they were used by writers living in Chernihiv gubernia (eg, P. Kulish, B. Hrinchenko, M . Kotsiubynsky). In the debate on Standard Ukrainian at the turn of the century, V. Mova, O. Pchilka, and M . Starytsky, and then M . Kotsiubynsky, Lesia Ukrainka, I. Franko, and M . Levytsky, favored a synthesis of the western and eastern vernaculars, while B. Hrinchenko, A. *Krymsky, and I. *Nechui-Levytsky argued for eliminating Western Ukrainian influences. When Standard Ukrainian 'returned' to Russian-ruled Ukraine after the lifting of the ban on the Ukrainian language in 1905, it already had a synthetic character. But its central Ukrainian foundation remained untouched. The expansion of Standard Ukrainian into all social spheres and literary genres in the independent Ukrainian state of 1917-20 and in Soviet Ukraine in the 1920s necessitated its normalization and codification (see lexicology, "Orthography, and Terminology). Two distinct currents of opinion arose in this regard. Supporters of a purist 'ethnographic' orientation (see *Purism), such as Ye. Tymchenko, S. Smerechynsky, O. Kurylo (at first), and V. Simovych, advocated the adoption of the popular vernacular as the standard. It was, however, the school led by O. *Syniavsky, which took into account not only tradition but also the development of the language, that gained the upper hand and determined the norms of orthography, orthoepy, morphology, and syntax. Stalin's abolition of the policy of Ukrainization in the early 1930s and his suppression of Ukrainian national and cultural life were accompanied by bureaucratic attempts to restrict the use of Standard Ukrainian. It was totally eliminated from the military sphere and severely restricted in the scientific and technological spheres. Western Ukrainianisms and European loanwords existing in Ukrainian but not in Russian were expunged, and the language was reoriented toward the eastern Ukrainian dialects and Russian vocabulary and grammar. Changes in orthography, grammar, and lexicon were carried to such an extreme that some of them were to be rejected even in the official orthography adopted in 1946 and in the 1948 Kievan Russian-Ukrainian dictionary. The general direction of Soviet ^language policy, however, has remained unchanged. Despite constantly increasing influence of the Russian language in Ukraine (see ^Russian-Ukrainian linguistic relations), the general character of Standard Ukrainian as it was defined by Shevchenko and Kulish and codified by Hrinchenko, Syniavsky, and the V U A N dictionaries of the 1920s remains intact.

9

Lehr-Splawiñski, T.; Zwoliñski, P.; Hrabec, S. Dziejejçzyka ukraiñskiego w zarysie (Warsaw 1956) Bilodid, I. (ed). Kurs istoriďukraďns'koďliteraturnoďmovy, 2 vols

(Kiev 1958,1961)

Pliushch, P. Narysy z istoriï ukraïns'koïliteraturnoï movy (Kiev

1958) Tymoshenko, P. (ed). Khrestomatiia materialiv z istoriï ukraïns'koï literaturnoï movy, 2 vols (Kiev 1959,1961) Shevelov, G.Y. Die ukrainische Schriftsprache, 1798-1965 (Wies-

baden 1966) Chaplenko, V. Istoriia novoďukraďns'koďliteraturnoďmovy (XVIIst1933 r.) (New York 1970) Shevelov, G.Y. 'Evolution of the Ukrainian Literary Language/ in Rethinking Ukrainian History, ed I.L. Rudnytsky with the assis-

tance of J.-P. Himka (Edmonton 1981) - The Language Question in the Ukraine in the Twentieth Century (1900-1941)/ HUS, 10-11 (1986-7) and as a separate publication (Cambridge, Mass 1989) G.Y. Shevelov

Stanimir, Osyp, b 21 April 1890 in Ladychyn, Ternopil county, Galicia, d 13 February 1971 in Toronto. Military officer. After serving in the Austrian army during the First World War, he joined the Ukrainian Galician Army (UHA) in November 1918. During 1918-19, at the rank of captain, he commanded an infantry battalion of the Sambir Brigade. His unit was the first U H A force to enter Kiev on 30 August 1919. In the Red Ukrainian Galician Army he commanded the Third Brigade, which in April 1920 deserted the Soviet army. After escaping from Polish internment he joined the Kherson Division of the U N R Army and was briefly interned with it in Czechoslovakia. He graduated from the Commerce Academy in Vienna (1924) and was active in the co-operative movement in Galicia. After the Second World War he emigrated to Canada, where he wrote Moia uchast ' u vyzvol 'nykh zmahanniakh (My Participation in the Liberation Struggle, 1966). Stanishevsky, Yurii [Stanisevs'kyj, Jurij], b 28 October 1936 in Kharkiv. Theater historian and critic. He completed study at Kharkiv University in i960, and since 1964 has worked in the A N U R S R (now A N U ) Institute of Fine Arts, Folklore, and Ethnography, from 1974 as head of the theater department. He is the author of many works on Ukrainian theater, including Opernyi teatr Radians'koï Ukraïny (The Opera Theater of Soviet Ukraine, 1988). Stanislaus I Leszczyriski (Stanislaw), b 20 October 1677 in Lviv, d 23 February 1766 in Lunéville, France. Polish magnate and voivode of Poznan. In 1704, with the support of the Swedish king Charles XII, he replaced the deposed * Augustus 11 Frederick as king of Poland. As dissatisfaction with Muscovite rule increased in the Cossack Hetmanate, Stanislaus's negotiations with Hetmán I. Mazepa (through Princess Anna Dolska) to ally with the Swedes in invading Russia culminated in a 1708 treaty. After Charles's defeat in the Battle of Poltava in 1709, Stanislaus left Poland for France. In 1733 he attempted, in vain, to reclaim the Polish throne. His son-in-law, Louis X V of France, granted him the Duchy of Lorraine in 1738. Stanislaus maintained relations with Hetmans P. and H . Orlyk.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Levchenko, H. Narysy z istoriï ukraïns'koï literaturnoï movy pershoï polovyny xix st. (Kiev 1946) Ilarion [Ohiienko, I.]. Istoriia ukraïns'koïliteraturnoïmovy

(Winnipeg 1950) Bulakhovs'kyi, L. Pytannia pokhodzhennia ukraïns'koï movy (Kiev

1956)

Stanislaus II Augustus Poniatowski (Stanislaw), b 17 January 1732 in Wolczyn, Poland, d 12 February 1798 in St Petersburg. Last king of Poland. He was elected in 1764 with the support of Catherine 11 of Russia, who later op-

10

STANISLAUS

posed his parliamentary reforms and pressed for the rights of non-Catholic religious dissenters in Polish terri­ tories. In 1768 Stanislaus faced a revolt by nobles grouped in the Confederation of *Bar, which sparked the *Koliivshchyna rebellion and the haidamaka movement in RightBank Ukraine. The weakened Polish state underwent par­ titioning by Russia, Austria, and Prussia in 1772,1793, and 1795. Stanislaus then abdicated and lived in semicaptivity in Russia. Stanislavivs'ki visty (Stanyslaviv News). A weekly newspaper published in Stanyslaviv (now IvanoFrankivske) from January 1912 to May 1913 (a total of 69 issues). The publisher and editor was V. Ivanytsky.

Stankevych, Sofiia [Stankevyc, Sofija], b 1862 in Ryzhiv, Zhytomyr county, Volhynia gubernia, d 1955 in Warsaw. Painter and graphic artist. She studied in Kharkiv, Warsaw, and Paris. She painted landscapes (eg, Ukrainian Night and Kamianets at Night) and still lifes. Lat­ er she created prints, including a series on the architecture of Warsaw and Pomerania. Stankovych, Vasyl [Stan'kovyc, Vasyl'], b 25 April 1946 in Irshava, Transcarpathia oblast. Fencer. He was part of the USSR teams that won silver medals at the 1968 and 1972 Olympic Games in the team foil event, and the world championships in 1969,1970,1973, and 1974. He was also the 1971 foil world champion and the champion of Ukraine and the USSR many times.

Stanislavova, Oleksandra, b 16 November 1900 in Petropavlovsk, Akmolinsk province, d 20 March 1985 in Kiev. Opera singer (dramatic soprano). A graduate of the Technical School of Music in Moscow (1930), she was a so­ loist on Radio Moscow, with the Saratov Theater of Opera and Ballet, and with the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow (1936) before working at the Kiev Theater of Opera and Ballet (1938-52) and the Kiev Philharmonia (1952-7). Her oper­ atic roles included the name-parts in M . Lysenko's Natalka from Poltava, G. Verdi's Aida, and G. Puccini's Tosca, and Hanna in M . Verykivsky's Naimychka (Servant Girl) and Varvara in K. Dankevych's Bohdan Khmelnytsky. Stanislavsky, Anatolii [Stanislavs'kyj, Anatolij], b 9 September 1905 in Lubni, Poltava gubernia. Architect. He began to lecture at the Kiev Institute of Communal Econ­ omy in 1936 and obtained his candidate's degee from the Kharkiv Institute of Communal Economy in 1941. From 1947 he taught at the Kiev Civil-Engineering Institute. He prepared the general plans for the reconstruction and de­ velopment of Lysychanske (1933), Poltava (1934), A r temivske (1935), Yasynuvata (1936), and Kramatorske (1937); designed residential subdivisions in Poltava (1936), Slovianske (1934), and Vologda, Russia (1936); and wrote studies and articles on architecture and construc­ tion. Stanislavsky, Vasyl [Stanislavs'kyj, Vasyl'], 1870-1927. Literary scholar. In the 1920s he published articles in V U A N serials and collections about a duma on the Sorochyntsi events during the Revolution of 1905, T. Shevchenko's Kobzar of 1867, the life of S. Rudansky (with A . Krymsky and V. Levchenko), the unpublished works of A . Svydnytsky, P. Myrny's letters to M . Starytsky, and memoirs of Myrny. Stanistawski, Jan, b 24 June i860 in Vilshana, Zvenyhorodka county, Kiev gubernia, d 6 January 1907 in Cra­ cow. Polish impressionist painter. He studied under W. Gersonin in Warsaw, at the Cracow School of Fine Arts (1883-5), * under E. Carolus-Duran in Paris (1885-8). From 1896 he taught at the Cracow Academy of Fine Arts, where he had a significant influence on his Ukrainian students M . Burachek, I. Trush, O. Novakivsky, and I. Severyn. He visited Ukraine often and painted many Ukrainian landscapes, such as Dilapidated Windmill (1883), Bila Tserkva (1890), The Dnieper Limans at Dawn (1902), St Michaels Cathedral in Kiev (1903), The Dnieper below Kiev (1905), House by the Dnieper, Haystacks, Sunflowers, and Windmills. a n c

Yevhen Stankovych

Stankovych, Yevhen [Stankovyc, Jevhen], b 19 Septem­ ber 1942 in Svaliava, Bereg county, Transcarpathia. Com­ poser. He studied under B. Liatoshynsky and M . Skoryk and graduated in composition from the Kiev Conservato­ ry (1970). He worked as an editor at the Muzychna Ukraina publishing house in 1970-6 and was deputy head of the Union of Composers of Ukraine. He has written five sym­ phonies and the symphonic works Overture, Sinfonietta, and Fantasia; a concerto for violoncello and orchestra; three symphonies for chamber orchestra; and the triptych In the Highlands for violin and pianoforte. He has com­ posed three sonatas for violoncello and piano. His other compositions include the folk opera Tsvit paporoti (The Fern Flower, 1980); the ballets OVha (1982), Iskra (The Spark, 1983), and Prometheus (1986); the requiem Babyn Yar (1991); pieces for solo voice and for choir; and film scores. Stanove culture. A late Bronze Age culture that existed in Transcarpathia in the 14th to 12th century BC. It was named in the 1930s after a site in the region. The people of this culture lived in surface and semi-pit dwellings and had crematory burial practices. Their major economic ac­ tivities included agriculture and animal husbandry, al­ though hunting and gathering were common. Site excavations revealed bronze and gold items, including implements, armor, and horse trappings, and well-pol­ ished stone items. Some Stanove pottery was distinctively decorated with spirals and meanders. Scholars believe that the people of the Stanove culture eventually played a role in the development of the *Thracian Hallstatt culture.

STARÁ

L'UBOVÑA

11

Stanychno-Luhanske [Stanycno-Luhans'ke]. v-20. A town smt (1986 pop 16,100) on the Donets River and a raion center in Luhanske oblast. The settlement of Luhanske, founded in the second half of the 17th century, was destroyed by the Tatars in 1684. It was rebuilt and, to avoid the frequent floods, moved to higher ground in 1773. From then it was known as Stanytsia Luhanska, which name was later changed to its present form. The inhabitants were Don Cossacks, who served until the end of the 18th century as a frontier guard. Today the town has a food industry and a few enterprises serving the railway industry.

Orthodox church established its own eparchy of IvanoFrankivske and Kolomyia.

Stanyslaviv. See Ivano-Frankivske.

Stanyslaviv oblast. See Ivano-Frankivske oblast.

Stanyslaviv Depression. A land formation in Subcarpathia south of Ivano-Frankivske between the Bystrytsia Solotvynska River in the northwest and the Vorona River in the southeast. The depression is a tectonic formation overlain with thick alluvial deposits. Its elevation rises in a north-south direction from approx 250 to 500 m. The Bystrytsia Nadvirnianska River runs through the depression.

Stanyslaviv Ukrainian Touring Theater (Ukrainskyi peresuvnyi teatr). A n ensemble founded in 1920 under the directorship of I. Kohutiak, with a cast from *Sadovsky's Theater. It toured Galicia and Volhynia, where it performed mainly Ukrainian ethnographic plays - notably S. Cherkasenko's Kazka staroho mlyna (A Tale of the Old Mill) - and H . Sudermann's Johannisfeuer and classical operettas, and helped to organize numerous amateur drama groups. In 1939 it was reorganized as a resident theater in Stanyslaviv (see *Ivano-Frankivske Ukrainian Music and Drama Theater).

Stanyslaviv eparchy. A n eparchy of Halych metropoly created from the eastern part of Lviv eparchy, with its see in Stanyslaviv (now Ivano-Frankivske). Although initial requests by Metropolitans A . Anhelovych and M . Levytsky to establish the eparchy were approved by the Austro-Hungarian authorities and the pope as early as 1850, it was only in 1885 that Yu. Pelesh was ordained and enthroned as the first bishop of Stanyslaviv. He was succeeded by Yu. *Kuilovsky-Sas, A. Sheptytsky (1899-1900), and H . *Khomyshyn (1904-45), with an auxiliary bishop, I. *Liatyshevsky (1929-45). By 1939 the eparchy had 419 parishes served by 541 priests, and over 1 million faithful. Various monastic orders were active in the eparchy, especially the Basilians (in 1938 there were 47 Basilian priests and monks, and 48 nuns), Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate (157 nuns), Myronosytsi sisterhood (59 nuns), Redemptorists, Studites, Sisters of St Vincent de Paul, and Holy Family Sisterhood. A n eparchial seminary and a theological lyceum were established in 1906. The eparchy's official organ was Vistnyk Stanyslavivs 'koï ieparkhiï, published irregularly and then monthly from 1886 to 1939. The eparchy also copublished the religious quarterly *Dobryi pastyr. Under Khomyshyn, Stanyslaviv eparchy was the most Latinized of all eparchies of Halych metropoly. He introduced compulsory celibacy for all new priests in the eparchy in 1921 and attempted unsuccessfully to introduce the Gregorian calendar in 1916. His measures led to considerable dissension in the eparchy. After the Second World War the territory of Stanyslaviv eparchy was incorporated into the Ukrainian SSR. The Soviet authorities arrested Bishops Khomyshyn (who was killed in a Kiev prison in 1947) * Liatyshevsky. The eparchy was forcibly converted to Orthodoxy, and A . Pelvelsky of the Russian Orthodox church was installed as bishop. The Ukrainian Catholic church survived in the underground until 1 December 1989, when it was again legalized. In 1989 S. Dmyterko was formally recognized as the ordinary of the eparchy (now called Ivano-Frankivske eparchy). He is assisted by Bishops P. Vasylyk and I. Bilyk. In March 1990 the eparchy had approx 530 parishes. At the same time the renewed Ukrainian Autocephalous a n c

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Shematyzm vseho klyra hreko-katolyts'koοEparkhiοStanyslavivs'koο

(Stanyslaviv 1938) Melnychuk, P. Vladyka Hryhorii Khomyshyn (Rome-Philadelphia

1979)

W. Lencyk

Stanyslaviv Franko Ukrainian Drama Theater. See Ivano-Frankivske Ukrainian Music and Drama Theater.

Stanyslavivs'ke slovo. See Ukrai'ns'keslovo. Stanyslavsky, Mykola [Stanyslavs'kyj], b 29 August 1892 in Ozerne, Lokhvytsia county, Poltava gubernia, d ? Lexicographer. From 1926 he served as secretary of the Section of Administrative Language at the socioeconomic department of the V U A N ^Institute of the Ukrainian Scientific Language. With M . Doroshenko and V. Strashkevych he compiled a normative Russian-Ukrainian dictionary of administrative language (1930). He also prepared a book of Russian-Ukrainian administrative and newspaper phraseology (unpublished) and wrote several reviews on contemporary Ukrainian orthographic and lexical issues and stylistics and an article on Ukrainian abbreviations (1930). He most likely perished during the terror of the 1930s. Stany tsia (Russian: stanitsa). A n administrative-territorial entity in Cossack territories within the Russian Empire (the Kuban, Don, and Terek regions) from the 18th century until 1920. A stanytsia consisted of several Cossack villages and khutory. Settlements which had fewer than 60 households were governed by *khutir administrations. Except for persons of non-Cossack status (inohorodni), all the inhabitants were members of the stanytsia community, which was governed by an assembly of householders. The assembly distributed the Cossack lands and obligations, and it managed the community storehouses and schools. It elected the stanytsia administration (an otaman, deputies, and a treasurer) and the stanytsia court. The stanytsia court ruled on petty criminal and civil suits. Non-Cossack residents paid a fee per sazhen for their home plot and for the use of farmland, pasture, and forest. After 1929 the term stanytsia was used in the USSR to refer to a rural settlement on former Cossack territories. It was governed by a stanytsia soviet of workers' and peasants' deputies. Stará L'ubovña. i v - i . A village (1961 pop 2,900) on the Poprad River in the Presov region of Slovakia, near the

12

STARÁ

L'UBOVÑA

border of Ukrainian ethnic territory. Twenty-six villages out of 44 in the surrounding area have a predominantly Ukrainian (Lemko) population. Stara Sil [Stara Sil'], iv-3. A town smt (1986 pop 1,300) in Staryi Sambir raion, Lviv oblast. It was founded in 1255, and it received the rights of *Magdeburg law in 1421, when it was called Zaltsbork. For many centuries it was an important salt-mining center. At its peak in the mid-i8th century it produced 39,000 barrels of salt yearly. When the reserves ran out in 1853, the town declined. The wooden Church of the Resurrection dates back to the 17th century. Stara Syniava [Stara Synjava]. iv-8. A town smt (1986 pop 6,500) on the Ikva River and a raion center in Khmelnytskyi oblast. The town of Syniava was founded at the beginning of the 16th century, and received the rights of *Magdeburg law in 1543. In the second half of the century, after Syniava was destroyed by the Tatars, the survivors built a new town and called it Stara Syniava. It was captured by M . Kryvonis in 1648, and belonged to Bratslav regiment before being returned to Poland in 1667. In 167299 it was occupied, along with the rest of Podilia, by the Turks. After the partition of Poland the town was annexed by Russia and assigned to Lityn county in Podilia gubernia. A sugar refinery was built there in 1875, and the local economy grew rapidly. In 1923 Stara Syniava was granted smt status. It is an agricultural town with a sugar refinery and the ruins of a 16th-century fortress.

Stara Ukraïna

Stara Ukraïna. A n illustrated monthly journal of history and culture, published in Lviv in 1924-5 by the Shevchenko Scientific Society. The journal was edited by I. *Krevetsky, and a total of 24 issues appeared. It featured articles by Galician and émigré authors, including the historians B. and O. Barvinsky, E. Borschak, D. Doroshenko, V. Karpovych, M . Korduba, I. Krevetsky, and I. Krypiakevych; the literary scholars Ya. Hordynsky, I. Ohiienko, K. Studynsky, M . Vozniak, and P. Zaitsev; the art scholars M . Holubets, P. Kholodny, V . Sichynsky, and V . Zalozetsky; and other contributors such as V. Hnatiuk, I. Nimchuk, and V. Zaikin. The journal also carried previously unpublished works by I. Franko and O. Konysky. Special thematic issues were devoted to the 350th anniversary of printing in Ukraine, the grave sites of noted Ukrainian activists, Ukrainian memoir writing from the 11th to 20th centuries, and T. Shevchenko. The journal provided a

valuable chronicle of events, reviews, and bibliographies. It was the only Ukrainian historical journal in Western Ukraine. It ceased publication as a result of financial difficulties. Stara Ushytsia [Stara Usycja]. v-8. A town smt (1986 pop 2,200) near the junction of the Ushytsia and the Dniester rivers in Kamianets-Podilskyi raion, Khmelnytskyi oblast. It was first mentioned in the Hypatian Chronicle under the year 1144, as Ushytsia, a fortified town of Halych principality. In 1159 Ivan Rostyslavych Berladnyk laid siege to it and in 1199 it became part of the Principality of GaliciaVolhynia. Ushytsia's fortifications were dismantled on the demand of the Mongols in 1257. In the mid-i4th century it fell under Lithuanian rule, and in the 1430s, under Polish rule. After being driven out by the rebellious townsmen in 1648, the Polish nobles avenged themselves by destroying the town in 1661. After the failed rebellion of 1702 many inhabitants of Ushytsia fled to Moldavia. Ushytsia was annexed by Russia in 1793, and served as a county center (1795-1826) of Podilia gubernia. It was subsequently renamed Stara Ushytsia. Its economy was dependent on farming and the river trade. The settlement was granted smt status in 1980. Starch-and-syrup industry. A branch of industry that produces and processes starch, syrup, glucose, dextrose, and other products for use in the *food, chemical, paper, rubber, and other industries. The major raw materials for the industry are potatoes and corn, but wheat, sugar beets, sorghum, and rice are also used. Starch has been extracted from potatoes since the 17th century and from wheat since the 18th century. Before the 1917 Revolution there were 186 enterprises producing starch and syrup in the Russian Empire. The industry has developed rapidly in the 20th century, and the U S S R became the second-largest producer of starch and syrup in the world. In Ukraine in 1978 there were 18 specialized factories of the industry, the largest of which was the Verkhnodniprovske Starch-and-Syrup Complex (est in i960). As well, some starch and syrup were produced as by-products at other food-processing plants. In total Ukraine produced 97,7001 of syrup, 57,3001 of starch, and 17,500 t of glucose. Ukraine was the second-largest producer of starch products and the largest producer of glucose in the USSR. Starchenko, Vasyl [Starcenko, VasyP], b 20 March 1904 in Temriuk, Mariiupil county, Katerynoslav gubernia, d 17 July 1948 in Kiev. Agrochemist and political figure; corresponding member of the A N U R S R (now A N U ) from 1945. After graduating from the Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute of the Sugar Industry he served as director and research chief of the Myronivka Research and Selection Station (1934-8). From 1938 he was deputy premier of the Council of People's Commissars and then of the Council of Ministers of the Ukrainian SSR. His publications deal with problems of agrotechnology and selection, particularly with problems in increasing the yield of sugar beets. Starchenko, Yosyp [Starcenko] (Startsev, Yosyf), b and d ? Ukrainian architect and builder in the 17th century. He worked in Moscow for Peter I during the 1680s and was recorded as a noted architect. On the special invitation of

STARODUB

Hetmán I. Mazepa he came to Kiev, where he constructed the baroque cathedrals at the *Kiev Epiphany Brother­ hood Monastery (1690-3) and the *Saint Nicholas's (socalled Military) Monastery (1690-6). Starchuk, Orest [Starcuk], b 6 November 1915 in Toporivtsi, Bukovyna, d 14 February 1971 in Edmonton. Slavist; member of the Shevchenko Scientific Society. He graduated from Chernivtsi University (LLD, 1938). He em­ igrated to Germany in 1941 and worked for the British occupational administration in Hannover (1945-8). He settled in Canada in 1948, where he taught Russian and developed a program of Slavic studies emphasizing Ukrainian language and literature at the University of A l ­ berta. He became the first chairman of the department of Slavic languages there in 1964. Starchuk was a founding member of the Canadian Association of Slavists and its president in 1958-9. Stare Lake, vm-14. One of the saltwater *Perekop lakes in the northern part of the Crimea. The lake is 6 km long and 2.5 km wide, with a prevailing depth of 0.2-0.45 m in the summer and 0.6-0.8 m in the spring. Its salinity averages about 28 percent. The deposits around the lake are used for extracting salts, calcium, bromine, and the like. The town of Krasnoperekopske is situated along the lake's southern shore.

13

Starkova, Mariia, b 1 August 1888 in Odessa, d 8 June 1970 in Odessa. Pianist and educator. After graduating from the St Petersburg Conservatory (1912), she lectured at the Odessa Conservatory, where she became a profes­ sor in 1926. In 1933 she was one of the organizers of a 10year music school there, and in 1963 she became a consult­ ing professor in its piano department. She was particular­ ly noted for her methodological work in piano instruction. Starling (Ukrainian: shpak). A chunky, metallic black, vo­ cal bird of the family Sturnidae, especially Sturnus vulgar­ is, with a long, sharp bill, a body length reaching 20 cm, and a weight of 65-85 g. Starlings are found throughout Ukraine in thinned forests, orchards, and parks, where they nest in tree hollows, rock crevices, or ground holes, as well as in man-made bird houses. Starlings feed on in­ sects on the ground and fly in tight flocks. They have been known to damage fruit and grain crops. The pink starling (Pastor roseus) can be found in Ukraine's southern steppes. Starobesheve [Starobeseve]. vi-19, DB 1-5. A town smt (1986 pop 7,400) on the Kalmiius River and a raion center in Donetske oblast. It was settled in 1779 by Greeks from the Crimea, who called it Besheve. The name was changed in 1896, when Novobesheve was founded nearby. In 1958 it attained smt status. The town is the center of an agricul­ tural region. A thermoelectric power station (2,300,00 kw) was built nearby in 1954-8. Starobilske [Starobil's'ke]. iv-19, DB 1-5. A city (1989 pop 24,800) on the Aidar River and a raion center in Luhanske oblast. The site of the sloboda Bilska, founded in the 16th century, became deserted and was resettled by Cossacks from Ostrohozke regiment in 1683. The settlement was wiped out by the Russian army during K. Bulavin's rebel­ lion in 1709. The new sloboda, established in 1732, was called Stara Bila. In 1797 it was promoted to city status, re­ named Starobilske, and designated a county center in Slobidska Ukraine. From 1835 it was a county center in Kharkiv gubernia. Today the city has a food industry, a reinforced-concrete plant, a furniture factory, and a re­ gional museum.

The castle in Stare Selo

Stare Selo. iv-5. A village (1968 pop 2,300) in Pustomyty raion, Lviv oblast. It was first mentioned in historical doc­ uments in 1442. It was destroyed by the Turks in 1498 and by the Tatars in 1648. A fortress was built there by A . Prykhylny for the Ostrozky family in 1584-9 and was ren­ ovated in 1642 and 1654 in the late Renaissance style. Its walls (14-16 m high) and three towers are well preserved. Starkov, Arsenii, b 1874 in the Voronezh region, d 18 December 1927 in Vienna. Anatomist. After being educat­ ed at Moscow University and abroad, he taught at Mos­ cow and Kiev (from 1917) universities and was a member of the U A N in 1918. When the Soviets occupied Ukraine, he fled west. He served as a professor of biology at the Ukrai­ nian Higher Pedagogical Institute in Prague (1923-5) and the Riga Polytechnic. Shortly before his death he was elected a fellow of the Ukrainian Scientific Institute in Ber­ lin. He wrote the textbook Zahal 'na biolohiia (General Biol­ ogy, 1924).

Starodub. 1-13. A town (1975 pop 16,000) in the northern Chernihiv region and a raion center in Briansk oblast, RF. In medieval times it was a fortress on Siverianian territo­ ry. It was first mentioned in the Hypatian Chronicle under the year 1096, when it was part of Chernihiv principality. In 1239 it was destroyed by Batu Khan, and thereafter it was ruled successively by Lithuania, Poland, and Russia. In 1648 the town was taken by B. Khmelnytsky's Cos­ sacks, and in 1654 '''Starodub regiment was set up, first within Nizhen regiment and then (from 1663) separately. The town was destroyed in 1660 by the Tatars and in 1663 by the Poles. From 1782 Starodub was part of NovhorodSiverskyi vicegerency, and then a county center of Little Russia (1797-1802) and Chernihiv gubernias. In the 19th century it was a major trading town dealing mostly in furs, honey, wax, oil, and hemp. By the end of the century its population was 26,000. During the revolutionary peri­ od (1917-18) Starodub was included in the territory of in­ dependent Ukraine. Today, the town has a food and a tobacco industry. Its chief architectural monuments are the Church of St John the Baptist (1720) and the Cathedral

14

STARODUB

of the Nativity of Christ (built in 1617, burned down in 1677, d renovated at the end of the 17th century). a n

Starodub regiment. A n administrative territory and military formation of the Hetmán state. Before becoming a separate regiment in 1663, the Starodub region was an autonomous unit within Nizhen regiment. The regiment started with 7 companies and by the mid-i8th century had 11 companies. Its male population in 1721 was 15,800, in­ cluding 4,100 registered Cossacks. According to the 1764 census it had 172,800 male inhabitants, including 25,200 Cossacks. Its population had not experienced the Cossack rebellions of the 17th century; hence, it offered less resis­ tance to enserfment than did other regiments. It was also under stronger Russian influence than the population of the rest of the Hetmán state. A number of Starodub colo­ nels rose to prominent offices in the Hetmán state: I. Skoropadsky (1706-8) became hetmán, and M . Myklashevsky (1689-1706) and H . Karpovych (1678-80) served on the general staff. Starodubov, Kyrylo, b 19 April 1904 in Moscow, d 8 Oc­ tober 1984. Metallurgist; full member of the A N U R S R (now A N U ) from 1957. He studied at the Dnipropetrovske Min­ ing Institute, and worked at the Dnipropetrovske Metal­ lurgical Plant (1928-38). He held the chair of the thermal treatment of metal at the Dnipropetrovske Metallurgical Institute (1938-79) and headed a department at the A N U Institute of Ferrous Metallurgy (1948-74). During the Sec­ ond World War he developed and put into operation in Magnitogorsk a highly efficient method of casting large metal parts.

and potash. By 1911 its population was about 20,000, in­ cluding 11,800 Jews, 7,200 Ukrainians, and 1,200 Poles. During the war for Ukrainian independence the Ukraini­ an Galician Army fought the Bolshevik army near the town (13-14 August 1919), and later that year the U N R Army broke through the Bolshevik front there to launch its Winter Campaign. Today the city's main industries are food processing, machine building, and metalworking. Its architectural monuments include the remains of the old fortress (1571) and a 16th-century church. Starokursnyky. See Russophiles. Starokyivska Hora. A historically significant area of Kiev, situated on the plateau between the Dnieper and the Lybid rivers and the Khreshchatyi ravine, with an area of about 80 ha. It was settled fairly early in history (late Pale­ olithic), probably because of its naturally protected set­ ting. The northwestern section is purported to be the site of the so-called Kyi's city, established in the late 6th centu­ ry. By the late 10th century the hill was the location of the upper town, known as Volodymyr's city (approx 8 ha), where the prince's palace and the Church of the Tithes stood. In the 11th century all of Starokyivska Hora was settled as the upper town expanded and the city of Yaroslav the Wise was built up. It was encircled by high ram­ parts, which were 3.5 km in length and were studded with towers and gates. The Golden Gate, the St Sophia Cathe­ dral, and St Michael's Golden-Domed Monastery were among the notable structures of the period. The district was almost completely destroyed by the Tatars in 1240. A partial reconstruction of it was effected in the 17th centu­ ry, and since the 19th century it has been known as the Old Town district of Kiev. In 1945 it was declared a histor­ ical Preserve. Starosilia archeological site. A Paleolithic Mousterian culture cave site along the Churuk-Su River near Bakhchesarai, Crimea. Excavations in 1952-6 uncovered a vari­ ety of flint tools and bones of wild animals (including mammoths). The site is best known for the recovery of a Neanderthal burial, one of a dozen such burials known worldwide. Starosolska, Dariia [Starosol's'ka, Darija], b 3 January 1881 in Lviv, d 28 December 1941 in Georgievka, Kazakh­ stan. Musician and civic activist; daughter of V. and H .

Remains of the castle in Starokostiantyniv

Starokostiantyniv [Starokostjantyniv]. iv-8. A city (1989 pop 33,200) on the Sluch River and a raion center in Khmelnytskyi oblast. It was founded in the 1560s by K. *Ostrozky, who fortified Kolyshchentsi village and raised it to the status of a city with the rights of *Magdeburg law. Until the beginning of the 17th century the town was known as Kostiantyniv or Kostiantynivka. In the 16th and 17th centuries it was a major center of *Socinianism in Volhynia. Many battles between Cossack and Polish armies, especially during B. Khmelnytsky's rule, were fought in the vicinity of Starokostiantyniv. After the partition of Po­ land in 1793, the town was annexed by Russia. In the 19th century it was a county center of Volhynia gubernia and a manufacturer of tobacco products, oil, soap, beer, bricks,

Dariia Starosolska

Uliana Starosolska

STAROSOLSKY

*Shukhevych and wife of V. *Starosolsky. After studying piano at the Lviv Conservatory she taught at the Lysenko Higher Institute of Music (1907-40). She was a founding member and president of the Circle of Ukrainian Women in Lviv and editor of its journals Meta (1908) and Nasha meta (1919-20). She was also active in the Ukrainian Social Democratic party. Her articles, sketches, and verses appeared in the journal Nasha khata and the paper Dilo. In 1940 she was deported by the Soviet authorities to Kazakhstan, where she perished. Starosolska, Uliana [Starosol's'ka, Uljana] (pseud: U . Liubovych), b 31 March 1912 in Lviv. Journalist and writer; daughter of V. Starosolsky and D. Starosolska. In 19369 she edited the Lviv periodicals Nova khata, Na slidi, and Hospodars'ko-kooperatyvna chasopys. In April 1940 she, her mother, and her brother Ihor were exiled by the Soviet authorities to Kazakhstan. After being released in May 1946, she was allowed to live in Poland, from which she emigrated to the United States in 1967. There she published her memoirs, Rozkazhu vam pro Kazakhstan (Let Me Tell You about Kazakhstan, 1969); edited the women's monthly Nashe zhyttia (1972-84,1987-90); and contributed stories, essays, and sketches to the émigré press.

Ihor Starosolsky

Volodymyr Starosolsky

Starosolsky, Ihor [Starosol's'kyj], b 3 August 1908 in Lviv, d 10 February 1988 in Lviv. Engineer and restorer; son of V. ^Starosolsky and D. ^Starosolska. A graduate of the Lviv Polytechnic, he was deported to Kazakhstan in May 1940 together with his mother and sister. In 1943-6 he was imprisoned in a labor camp in Siberia. He returned to Lviv in 1946, where he became an assistant in the department of urban construction at the Polytechnical Institute. In the fall of 1949 he was arrested for visiting his uncle, O. Shukhevych (father of R. *Shukhevych), and he languished in labor camps until June 1956. After his release he returned to Lviv. In 1957 initiated the creation of a planning department for the restoration of architectural monuments, which eventually became a branch of the Kiev-based Ukrainian Restoration Planning Institute. He was involved in or supervised the restoration of many edifices, including churches in Drohobych, Lavriv, Lviv, Kamianka-Buzka, Potylych, Chervonohrad, Peremyshliany, Pidhirtsi, Horodok, Sambir, and Radekhiv; the castles in Nevytske, Olesko, Pidhirtsi, Svirzh, and Mukachiv; and the Maniava Hermitage. n

15

Starosolsky, Volodymyr [Starosol's'kyj], b 8 January 1878 in Jaroslaw, Galicia, d 25 February 1942 in Mariinsk, Siberia. Lawyer, sociologist, and civic and political leader; member of the Shevchenko Scientific Society from 1923. He was a founding member of the Moloda Ukraina society and the editor of its journal. In 1902 he helped organize the ^secession of Ukrainian students from Lviv University and the massive agrarian strike in Galicia. He belonged to the External Committee of the Revolutionary Ukrainian party and was a leading member of the "Ukrainian Social Democratic party. After completing his law studies in Vienna, Berlin, Graz, and Heidelberg he practiced law in Lviv and defended political activists (including M . *Sichynsky) in court. He was one of the organizers and the first president of the paramilitary Ukrainian Sich Riflemen society (1913). During the First World War he was a member of the Supreme Ukrainian Council, served on its Combat Board as liaison with the Sich Riflemen units at the front, and co-operated with the Union for the Liberation of Ukraine in Vienna. In 1918 he became a member of the Ukrainian Military Committee. In the fall of 1919 he was appointed deputy minister of foreign affairs in I. Mazepa's U N R government and served at the same time as a professor at the Ukrainian State University in Kamianets-Podilskyi. In the 1920s he lived as an émigré in V i enna and Prague, and taught state law at the Ukrainian Free University in Prague and the Ukrainian Husbandry Academy in Podëbrady. After returning to Lviv in 1927, he reopened his law office and gained prominence defending O U N members. During the Soviet occupation he was appointed a professor at Lviv University, but by December 1939 he had been arrested and sentenced to 10 years of hard labor in Siberia, where he perished. In his scholarly work Starosolsky advocated the sociological approach to legal and political developments. His chief works include Das Majoritatsprinzip (1916), Teoriia natsiï (Theory of the Nation, 1921), Metodolohichna problema v nautsi pro derzhavu (The Methodological Problem in the Study of the State, 1925), Do pytannia proformy derzhavy (On the Question of the Forms of the State, 1925), Bohdan Kistiakowskyj und das russische soziologische Denken (1929), and the textbook Derzhava i politychne pravo (The State and Political Law, 2 vols, 1925). Starosolsky, Yurii [Starosol's'kyj, Jurij], b 28 February 1907 in Lviv, d 21 October 1991 in Washington, DC. Lawyer and civic activist; son of V. Starosolsky; full member of

e

Yurii Starosolsky

l6

STAROSOLSKY

the Shevchenko Scientific Society from 1949. After graduating from the law faculty of Lviv University (1931), he practiced law in his father's office in Lviv and was active in various political and civic organizations. He completed his doctorate at the Ukrainian Free University (uvu) in Prague (1940) and then taught criminal and procedural law. A displaced person in Germany after the Second World War, he emigrated to the United States in 1950, where he studied political science at the American University in Washington, D C ( M A , 1953), lectured on the Soviet social and political system at the Institute of Adult Education of the Catholic University in Washington, D C , and was the longtime head of the Washington branch of the Ukrainian Catholic University. He was elected nachalnyi plastun (Head Scout) of the *Plast Ukrainian Youth Association in 1972. He wrote textbooks on criminal procedure (1947) ¿ commercial law (1947); a monograph on Soviet criminal law (1954); numerous entries on law in the Encyclopedia of Ukraine; and Velyka hra (The Great Game, 1948), a scouting guide for Plast. a

n

Starostvo estates (starostynski maietnosti). In medieval Poland and Lithuania (i4th-i8th centuries), sections of crownlands granted by the ruler to magnates, nobles, or state officials for a fixed period or in perpetuity as a reward for services to the crown. The estates formed a part of the starostvos - hence their name. A l l income from the estates belonged to the starostas. Such estates were abolished in Left-Bank Ukraine after B. Khmelnytsky's uprising (1648), in Galicia after its annexation by Austria (1772), and in Right-Bank Ukraine after its annexation by Russia (1793). Starostvo peasants (starostynski seliany). A category of peasants in Poland and Lithuania during the 14th to 18th centuries who were bound to *starostvo estates. They were obliged to fulfill various obligations to their lords. In the 16th century the crown established a special court to deal with their grievances, but that measure gave them little protection against their masters. With the abolition of the starostvo estates in Ukraine under Austrian and Russian rule, the starostvo peasants became either private or state serfs.

Starosta. In Kievan Rus' the starosta was a lower government official, usually in charge of a certain department of the princely household. In the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Poland the starosta was a representative of the king or grand duke in a voivodeship. In Galicia and Podilia the general starosta was in charge of a whole voivodeship. By the end of the 16th century, as the power of the gentry had increased, the authority of the starosta diminished. In the Russian Empire the village starosta was the head of the lowest administrative unit, the village community. He was elected for three years by the village assembly. In Galicia and Bukovyna during Austrian rule a starosta was a county captain who supervised the county administration, conducted elections to the county council and the diet, headed the county school council, and oversaw the collection of direct taxes. Under the Hetmán government in 1918, gubernial and county starostas were appointees of the central administration. In Polish-ruled Western Ukraine during the interwar period (1919-39), the starosta was an official of the state in the county and the head of the local administration. In Transcarpathia in 1919-39, the starosta was a village head or a city mayor. In addition, elected or appointed officers who conducted the affairs of any type of community (church, artel, etc) were known as starostas. Starostenko, Yurii, b 16 August 1931 in Odessa. Painter, graphic artist, and scenery designer. After graduating from the Kharkiv Art Institute in 1958, he began teaching there. He has designed scenery for the Kharkiv Ukrainian Drama Theater and decorative wall panels for public buildings in Kharkiv and created line engraving series, such as The Carpathians' (1963), 'People and the Sea' (1962), and 'Capital Cities' (1967); engravings of Kharkiv; and book illustrations. Starostvo. A n administrative-territorial and economic unit of state lands in medieval Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and their Ukrainian and Belarusian territories. It usually included one or more cities or towns and some villages and was administered by a starosta, who was a high official of noble birth. In Western Ukraine under Austrian (1772-1918) and Polish (1919-39) rule, the starostvo was equivalent to a county.

Marharyta Starovoit: woodcut (1974) of a wooden church built in 1724 in Loni (now in Peremyshliany raion, Lviv oblast)

STARUKH

Starovoit, Marharyta [Starovojt], b 9 June 1922 in Oren­ burg, Russia. Printmaker. A graduate of the Lviv Institute of Applied and Decorative Arts (1950), she has worked mostly in wood engraving, in which art she has produced bookplates, prints, and print series, such as 'Soviet Lviv' (1953-7), 'The Industrial Lviv Region' (1958-60), and The Hutsul Region under the Soviet Sun' (1962). Starowolski, Szymon (Starovolscius), b 1588 in Starovolia, Br