“Un-ness” is the central theme of Council Bluffs’ new image campaign, developed last spring to replace the city’s worn motto of “Iowa’s Leading Edge.”

Unveiled at Stir Cove at Harrah’s Casino as part of the kickoff to Celebrate CB this past spring, the new image for the city provides an array of logo designs, color schemes and an interactive website where residents and advocates of the Bluffs can share images on social media or otherwise express the new language of the campaign.

Underscored by the campaign is the idea of discovering what Council Bluffs isn’t, not just what it is, because the city is “Unlike Anywhere Else. On Purpose.” – the new slogan to accompany the artwork, fonts and other brand materials. Residents of the community are encouraged to publicly embrace “our un-ness” as Council Bluffs.

“Unashamed of who we are and who we want to be,” the campaign declares. “Undaunted by the challenges of the future. Unstoried no more. It’s time to make the unknown, known. Time to uncover the people, the places, the history and the happenings that make us proud.”

Under a common banner, those working together on the campaign included the City of Council Bluffs, the Council Bluffs Convention and Visitors Bureau, Celebrate CB, Council Bluffs Area Chamber of Commerce, Stir Cove Concert Series, TS Bank, Emspace, Anytime Tees, Google, Buck Christensen Photography, Bluffs Downtown, CBTV Channel 17, Council Bluffs Community School District and Barley’s Bar.

“Unaware of the real Council Bluffs” is how Michelle Bandur, communications director at City Hall, described many who continue to say pejorative expressions such as “Counciltucky.” She said she hopes the public embraces the new campaign: “It is a language built by the community for the community to talk about and celebrate Council Bluffs with pride.”

Unanimous support from the community went into the campaign, Bandur said, with focus groups, community meetings and one-on-one discussions all culminating in the new slogan and iconography. Those with input ranged from teenagers to the senior members of the community, with 2,500 surveys and several opportunities for public engagement.

Unforgotten is the regional branding slogan “We Don’t Coast,” the brainchild of the Greater Omaha Economic Development Partnership. Council Bluffs’ new slogan doesn’t replace the joint effort of the area’s more than 30 communities, but it provides something special for the Pottawattamie County city.

Undeterred by the opinions of some of their peers, Thomas Jefferson High School students Derrick Johnson and Tiana Larsen were among the Yellow Jacket Journalism students who worked with teacher Rob Lindquist to bring a youth perspective to the campaign development.

Underwhelmed, and frankly bored, by the city’s identity being so strongly connected to railroads, Johnson said he’s excited to see a new, clean, fun approach to the city’s identity. “It’s cool,” he said. “Making Council Bluffs somewhere to be proud of makes the youth want to stay here.”

Unhampered as she prepares for college, Larsen, a junior at T.J., received a Pottawattamie Promise scholarship through the Iowa West Foundation. After years of planning to get out of the city, rejecting the notion of attending Iowa Western Community College as a high school freshman, Larsen now says she has found the “good side of Council Bluffs” is shining through and pulling her to stay.

– Nonpareil archive material was used in this story.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.