WASHINGTON — Henry Cuellar, the Laredo congressman carjacked Monday night a mile from the U.S. Capitol, is one of the most senior and most conservative Democrats in Congress.

Who is he?

Cuellar is 68 and one of eight children born to migrant farm workers in Laredo.

He’s the senior Democrat on the Appropriations subcommittee that controls homeland security funds, putting him in an unusually influential position with regard to border policy.

He’s one of many lawyers in Congress, but one of only a handful of Ph.D.s. His doctorate is in government. He got both of those degrees from the University of Texas at Austin, plus a Bachelor of Science from Georgetown University and a master’s from Texas A&M International in Laredo. His official biography calls him “the most degreed member of Congress.”

Related:Texas Congressman Henry Cuellar recounts carjacking at gunpoint outside his D.C. apartment

Just five House colleagues in either party ranked higher on bipartisanship in 2022. But he’s a committed Democrat and serves in the party leadership as chief deputy whip, a post that entails corralling votes. “Born a Democrat, die as a Democrat,” he said as a freshman in 2005. “But I will always vote for my congressional district.”

He’s pro-gun, anti-abortion and especially pro-trade — an issue of vital importance for his border district. He’s an advocate for border security, though he also supports immigration policy reforms most Republicans resist.

Progressive Democrats tried hard to dislodge him in the 2020 primary. Sen. Bernie Sanders and Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez brought progressive firepower to the effort. Among the strange bedfellows who rallied behind the most conservative Democrat in the House: then-Speaker Nancy Pelosi and the ultraconservative Koch brothers donor network.

As a Democrat in the Texas House, Cuellar backed Gov. George W. Bush for president in 2000. Bush’s successor and fellow Republican, Gov. Rick Perry, then tapped him as secretary of state, making him Texas’ elections chief and the governor’s point person on Mexico and the border.

At the 2006 State of the Union speech, Cuellar sat on the GOP side of the House, where Bush spotted him and cupped his face with both hands in a gesture. A rival Democrat called it “shameful.”

The FBI raided his home and office on Jan. 19, 2022. He was never identified as a target of an investigation and reasons for the raid remain murky. The raid cast a pall over his bid for a 10th term. Six weeks later he fell short of winning the primary by about 700 votes, though he won the runoff.

That wasn’t even close to his closest call. In the 2004 primary he ousted Rep. Ciro Rodriguez, a fellow Democrat, by just 58 votes.

Close calls run in the family. Cuellar’s brother, Martin Cuellar, the longtime sheriff of Webb County — which includes Laredo — won the 2008 Democratic runoff by 37 votes. He’s been sheriff ever since.

Related:Fierce S. Texas race brings together Pelosi and the Koch network as the left targets Henry Cuellar

The congressman regularly partners with Rep. Michael McCaul, R-Austin, on border security proposals. In 2014, others in the Congressional Hispanic Caucus shunned him for working with Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, on a bill to speed deportations of Central American children who entered the country illegally.

“I find it interesting that everybody says, ‘Be bipartisan.’ But when you actually do something bipartisan, some people criticize that,” Cuellar told The Dallas Morning News at the time. “I do the talk, and I do the walk.”

He was a fierce critic of Donald Trump’s border wall, calling it a “14th century solution,” and the last Texas Democrat in Congress to sign on to impeaching Trump on abuse of power allegations in 2019.