HENRY Cuellar has been representing Texas's 28th congressional district since 2005.

On Friday, May 3, 2024, Cuellar and his wife were indicted on conspiracy and bribery charges.

Who is Henry Cuellar?

Henry Cuellar is an attorney and politician born September 19, 1955, in Laredo, Texas.

A member of the Democratic Party, he began representing Texas's 28th congressional district in 2005.

The district includes the cities of Laredo, Rio Grande City, and San Antonio.

As one of eight children, he was born to migrant farm workers who met in Guerrero Viejo, Mexico, and later immigrated to the US where they became naturalized citizens.

Cuellar's father used his experience working on ranches in Mexico to find farmworker jobs in Utah, Idaho, and Colorado before finally settling in Texas.

As Cuellar grew up, he says his parents instilled "a passion for education and an unwavering work ethic."

He obtained his Associate's Degree from Laredo Community College and enrolled at Georgetown University in Washington DC to pursue his Bachelor's Degree.

After earning his Bachelor's, Cuellar attended International Trade at Texas A&M International University for his Master's and progressed to the University of Texas at Austin to earn a Juris Doctor and Ph.D. in Government.

Cuellar practiced law throughout the 1980s and 1990s and taught at Laredo State University as an Adjunct Professor for International Commercial.

Was Rep. Henry Cuellar indicted?

In January 2022, Cuellar's home and campaign office in Laredo, Texas, were raided in a federal investigation into Azerbaijan and a group of US businessmen.

Cuellar previously served as co-chair of the Congressional Azerbaijan Caucus.

On Friday, May 3, 2024, Cuellar and his wife were indicted by the United States Department of Justice.

Reporter Max Cohen shared a statement from Cuellar on X, writing: "I want to be clear that both my wife and I are innocent of these allegations. Everything I have done in Congress has been to serve the people of South Texas," Cuellar wrote.

"Before I took any action, I proactively sought legal advice from the House Ethics Committee, who gave me more than one written opinion, along with an additional opinion from a national law firm," he continued.

"The actions I took in Congress were consistent with the actions of many of my colleagues and in the interest of the American people.

"Furthermore, we requested a meeting with the Washington DC prosecutors to explain the facts and they refused to discuss the case with us or to hear our side.

"Imelda and I have been married for 32 years. On top of being an amazing wife and mother, she's an accomplished businesswoman with two degrees," Cuellar continued, referencing his wife, Imelda Cuellar.

"She spent her career working with banking, tax, and consulting. The allegations that she is anything but qualified and hard working is both wrong and offensive.

"These allegations have been difficult on my family. But, with your prayer, we will overcome. As the son of migrant workers, I was taught to wake up early and work hard.

"That's exactly what I've always done for the people of South Texas. I've devoted my life's work to creating jobs here, improving education, and securing our border.

"Let me be clear, I'm running for re-election and will win this November."

What are Henry Cuellar's political views?

Cuellar was re-elected to his seat in 2022 but will be up for re-election once again in November 2024.

He is a self-described moderate-centrist, otherwise known as a conservative Democrat.

The Lone Star State has ample pro-gun rights, and Cuellar's belief systems align with the community's.

He spoke with The New York Times in 2019 in defense of gun use in Texas.

"This is not New York, this is Texas," Cuellar said.

"So you talk about guns, you talk about God, you talk about trucks."

As school shootings have been on the rise, Cuellar said at the time, "I am for reasonable gun reform. But I'm not going to take guns away from people like they want to do."

In September 2021, Cuellar became the only Congressional Democrat to vote against the Women's Health Protection Act.

"It's called conscience," Cuellar told LMT Online.

"I am a Catholic, and I do believe in rights and right to life. … Sometimes people vote because of political (views), they think this is a Democratic or Republican issue. To me, it’s a matter of conscience."

Who is Henry Cuellar's wife, Imelda?

When Cuellar is not in the office, he can often be found at home, spending time with his family.

He has been married to his wife, Imelda, for 32 years.