16th Werner Herzog (after Into the Abyss, Grizzly Man, Lo and Behold: Reveries of the Connected World, My Best Fiend, How Much Wood Would a Woodchuck Chuck, Wings of Hope, Aguirre: the Wrath of God, Last Words, Land of Silence and Darkness, Wheel of Time, The Great Ecstasy of Woodcarver Steiner, Even Dwarves Started Small, Salt and Fire, God’s Angry Man and Heart of Glass)

Herzog once called this "dangerously conventional" cinema and he's quite right. This is made to order film from a source outside Herzog's imaginings (a friend with a disabled child) and consequently the depiction of the disabled is restrained. None of the expressive flourishes that mark Land of Silence and Darkness, those moments of silent contemplation…

A very touching documentary by Herzog on the situation of handicapped children in Germany. As expected from Herzog, the subject is approached with compassion and humanity. It is towards the German people and system that his ire is directed.

There is a whole segment where it is discussed how the children often draw portraits of themselves as segregated from the world. One child flat out draws himself inside a prison. When Herzog is interviewing a child in his home, his parent continues to interrupt the child and correct his statements. Herzog goes with the flow and instead of trying to control the situation he shines light upon the inherent hypocrisy non-handicapped people have. He doesn't hate the mother but her…

Werner Herzog´s short documentary about physically disabled children and their treatment in West Germany. The presentation is very straightforward and without stylizations (Herzog calls it a “report”) but the approach to the subject matter is compassionate, moving, and eye-opening. Giving a voice to outcasts and marginalized people has always been a cornerstone of Herzog´s oeuvre and his ability to ask the right questions and to know when to be silent and let the subject speak also applies to his conversations with children. Some of the responses of the children will definitely stay in my mind. All in all, “Handicapped Future” is a prime example of what Roger Ebert talked about when he said, “Cinema is like a machine that generates empathy”. An interesting fun fact is that during the production of this film, Herzog met Fini Straubinger, which led to his early documentary masterpiece “Land of Silence and Darkness”.

Werner Herzog documentaries ranked

Original Title: Behinderte Zukunft

Year of Release: 1971

Genres: Documentary

Director: Werner Herzog

Writer: Werner Herzog

Main Cast: Rolf Illig

While visiting my grandparents when I was quite young, I remember being in the city centre when I saw a little girl, no older than 10 years old. She was wearing a cloak, which intrigued me a lot. When she turned around, I saw that her face was half missing, nothing in the left eye socket. We stared at each other for no longer than 2 seconds, and I saw a lot of sadness in her only eye. Then her parents put her cloak in a way that her face would be better hidden, and they vanished in the crowd.…

This advocacy doc about the treatment of physically handicapped kids in West Germany may be one of the straightforward "berichts" or "reports" that Herzog and his viewers tend to treat as basically apocryphal, but it's flawlessly executed and serves as definitive proof that Werner isn't the barbarian he pretends to be.

One interviewee describes an "invisible barrier" that keeps abled onlookers from engaging with him - Herzog's open-ended style breaks that barrier and allows the idiosyncratic voices of his subjects to drive the film. A little girl has a fixation with the Indians in American Westerns; a group of teenagers discuss their plans for a radical film action to the demonstrate public bias against them; a brilliant, wheelchair-bound German scientist…

A surprisingly restrictive documentary from Werner Herzog, a production that feels more suitable as a televised report, produced for a friend to help raise awareness of disability and prejudice in Germany, Handicapped Future illustrates the filmmaker's empathy and curiosity towards the marginalised, as he follows disabled children, their parents and teachers at a communal home that offers them education and support away from a judgmental German society.

It's endearing seeing these children play, tease each other, or enthusiastic about their favourite school subjects. I was impressed by seeing the clear resourcefulness of these kids, while also happy to see that, together, they can have the joys we expect children to have. Herzog's documentary recognises that society at the time -…

Werner Herzog shows that it is possible to make a film about disabled children without being exploitative, without doing misery porn - by simply talking to the children rather than just about them, and giving them a voice to speak their own mind.

However there is a very interesting scene when he is asking a young disabled boy questions, and his mother keeps interrupting him to answer the questions herself, as if he wasn't even in the room - to which Herzog reacts by asking the mother questions, but pointing his camera at the son as she answers them and basically reveals how embarrassed she is of having a disabled child.

Later in the film, Herzog interviews a group of…

I appreciate the way Werner Herzog makes documentary films, he never takes over or drives the narrative, he just lets people speak. This works very well here and makes this film about children with disabilities in Germany feel very progressive and not exploitative in any way, which sadly is what I expected going in.

Herzog does such a great job of pulling out what the subjects in each interview really think, never interrupting and allowing them to go exactly where their thoughts take them. The scene about half way through where a mother's only concern seems to be how her son's handicap reflect on her is hard to watch, but also probably the most effective in the film. I'll definitely be thinking about this one for a while.

Coming straight from watching Herzog's Land of Silence And Darkness to watch this, with both films dealing with disability and both show the resilience and strength of those facing adversities. While I found Land of Silence and Darkness very moving, I found this film much more uplifting mostly down to the optimism and maturity of the children. I found the adults the ones who seemed to be suffering more, such as Kurt's mum, who was clearly suffering mentally and probably needed help herself.

That's not to say there isn't some sadness in this, the bigotry discussed is a painful reminder of how cruel people can be. While Herzog seems to allude to backward thinking in Germany compared to the US, I did find that considering this was made in 1971 elements like the school for the children, very progressive.