John Coyne McManus (born 1965) is a military historian, author, and professor of military history at the Missouri University of Science and Technology from St. Louis, Missouri. McManus has published thirteen books on numerous American military history topics, including: the Allied invasion of Normandy, American infantry soldiers, and the 7th Infantry Regiment. McManus graduated from the University of Missouri with a degree in sports journalism. After a short career in advertising and sports broadcasting, he earned a Master of Arts degree in American history from the University of Missouri. Soon after, he completed his Ph.D. in American and military history at the University of Tennessee. While working on his Ph.D., McManus participated in the university's Normandy Scholars program, where he studied the Normandy battlefields firsthand. McManus served as the assistant director of the Center for the Study of War and Society at the University of Tennessee. In 2000, he accepted a position as an assistant professor of U.S. military history at the Missouri University of Science and Technology. McManus currently serves on the editorial advisory board for World War II magazine and World War II quarterly. He is also the official historian of the 7th Infantry Regiment Association. McManus was also a guest on The Diane Rehm Show in a broad discussion on the continued significance of D-Day. Some of McManus's works are composed of several personal stories of common footsoldiers on the battlefield, often facing insurmountable challenges, as demonstrated in Grunts and The Dead and Those About to Die. Reviews of his work have been favorable. His years of research and analysis concerning specific battles such as the Normandy landings has been called "excellent," and that his scenic descriptions are vivid. The Deadly Brotherhood : The American Combat Soldier in World War II, Novato, CA: Presidio (1998) The Americans at Normandy: The Summer of 1944 — The American War from the Normandy Beaches to Falaise, New York: Forge (2004) The Americans at D-Day: The American Experience at the Normandy Invasion, New York: Forge (2005) Alamo in the Ardennes: The Untold Story of the American Soldiers Who Made the Defense of Bastogne, Hoboken, N.