"The World, the Flesh and the Devil" is a 1959 science feature effort directed by "Ranald MacDougall". It holds its exterior narrative within that world, as the premise of the film hinges seemingly on the last survivors after a nuclear doomsday scenario unfolds. While that surface application is present, most of the films purpose is really contemplating interior questions of the human condition, not only when it comes to survival but also questions pertaining to the importance of race and equality. The film begins with Harry Belafonte's character, as a miner who is stuck within a rescue attempt. Hearing his rescue attempt dissolving from a far, his character Ralph questions why work has stopped and in a frenzy with fear…

If any actor can hold your attention for 35 minutes, Harry Belefonte certainly can. He plays Ralph, a miner who thinks he's been trapped and abandoned in a mine shaft. Turns out there's been a nuclear holocaust. He finally rises up and find a deserted Manhattan. Predating the likes of THE LAST MAN ON EARTH and I AM LEGEND, this is an absolutely beautifully shot film. It's in Black & White Cinemascope which vividly captures the isolated concrete canyons of Midtown Manhattan and Wall Street. Every shot is beautiful including the ones that focus on Belafonte's face. In one scene a single tear slides down his cheek as the isolation starts to get to him. He's a resourceful guy who knows…

"Do you know what it means to be sick in your heart from loneliness?"

Harry Belafonte stars as Ralph Burton in Ranald MacDougall's The World, the Flesh and the Devil, a last man on earth story that takes aim at systemic racism and sexism (among other things) through a post apocalyptic lens.

After being trapped in a mine collapse, Ralph digs his way to the surface only to find that everyone else seems to have vanished. The film doesn't feel the need to provide much of an explanation, and in the 1959 Cold War context just hand waving a nuclear aggression went wrong explanation makes sense enough. It's more concerned with Ralph's need to find out what happened than leaning…

Racism Survives the Apocalypse

Because of course it would. But, you'd think that the last two people in New York and, for all they know, the world, would have more to worry about than that, as Harry Belafonte says, "people will talk." Y'know, given that there are no other people. But, she's "free, white, and 21," and the African-American Belafonte likes to sing for a white mannequin couple, the "Snodgrasses."

Regardless, in this post-apocalyptic wasteland where atomic poison has killed everyone else on the planet and, apparently, made their corpses disappear, as well, it turns out there's another man in the world, and he's white. After Belafonte works to save books and art from the library, set up electricity, phones,…

I wasn't expecting too much from this, I watched it for Harry Belafonte and because the concept reminded me a lot of the pilot episode of The Twilight Zone, but I certainly didn't know where this movie would go. The World, the Flesh and the Devil strips modern society down to its anxieties, its fears, its vices, its virtues. The film tells us what makes us human, our connections to others, and it shows how bigotry breaks down those connections, shown both in the scene where Ralph calls out Sarah for her microaggressions, and when Sarah becomes furious with Ben and Ralph for fighting over her like she's an object, ignoring her desires. The film still has some flaws (I'm…