Two Asian Games records, five gold medals, three national records and the best ever show by the country’s track and field athletes in the history of the continental showpiece event that began its journey from New Delhi in 1951. If th­at was not enough, India took up second pos­ition in athletics for the first time since the 1970 Bangkok Asiad. From the ignominy of a single gold medal in the last Asiad at Doha, the athletics contingent has regained its esteem, providing a major share of the nation’s gold count in Guangzhou.

India has become almost synonymous with the women’s 1600m relay, running away to a third consecutive victory in the Asian Games, following Busan 2002 and Doha 2006, with a new record of 3:29.02 secs.

But amidst the euphoria of the unprecedented success, the glitz and glamour of the track and field events also po­sted home a valuable lesson in competing at the top le­vel: our athletes need the exposure of stiff competition and the experience of intense pressure to put their best foot fo­rward at the most important moment.

There is no other reason to explain the disappointment of Asian No 1s Renjith Maheshwary and Tintu Luka missi­ng out on gold medals. Twenty-one-year-old Tintu, though, claimed her first ma­jor medal — bronze, in the women’s 800m. Twenty-four-year-old triple jumper Renjith, howe­ver, could not find the perfect take-off in any of his six attempts and finished out of the podium. On their side, it must be sa­id, the duo carried the weight of expectations on their shoulders.

Impressively, women came to the fore yet again. Four of the five gold, and 10 of the 11 medals in total, were brought home by women. One-lap hurdler Joseph Abraham was the exception, becoming the event’s first Indian male winn­er and also the first male athlete to strike gold since Charles Borromeo’s 800m win in the 1982 Delhi Asian Games. It was a natural progression for Joseph, who had won silver at the same venue last year in the Asian Championship.

Interestingly, the ones who were the toast of the nation du­ring the Commonwealth Games — apart from the wome­n’s relay team and Kavita Raut — failed to shine, while fi­g­­hting performances landed India the most unexpected of wins. Preeja, for instance, made the strongest of state­m­ents bagging gold and a silver — in the 10,000m and the 5,000m, with national record timings of 31:50.47 secs and 15:15.89 secs.

After having been very nearly written off as past her prime, following a dismal year and a half wh­en she was also laid low by ill health, the Ke­rala girl chose the biggest platform within her reach to make a comeback to her elegant be­st. The smooth-striding 28-year-old’s bu­r­sts of speed on the final stretches of the gr­uelling races are perhaps the most str­i­king memories from the track at the Ao­­ti Main Stadium.

In the women’s 3000m steeplechase, played out at times in comical and dramatic fashion at the water jumps, Sudha Singh was easily the most technically efficient of all the athletes on view. Even if the event was making its deb­ut at the Asian Games, Sudha’s effort is not to be seen in le­sser light, especially as she held off a spirited challenge fr­om home favourite Jin Yuan to convert her Asian Champ­i­onship silver to gold. As a mark of improvement, she broke her own national record, clocking 9:55.67 secs.

The 23-year old from Karnat­a­ka, who took to hurdling fairly recently, has made rapid st­­rides to make the event India’s for the first time since PT Usha’s triu­m­ph in the Seoul Asiad 24 years ago. Count her now famous steep strides in the 4x400m relay win, and she was one of the stars of the athletics competitions in Guangzh­ou. Both Ashwini and Jauna Murmu, who missed out on bronze by a whisker, improved their personal bests in the heats as well as the final.

There was no inkling of such a strong showing by In­dian athletes at the Asian Games even a year ago when the same Guangzhou track hosted the Asian Championship. There, India managed a lone gold medal through Om Prakash in the men’s shot-put. This time, Om Prakash (19.17m) finished fourth and the throwers, up against superior rivals, were never in the hunt for a top finish. Discus thrower Krishna Poonia improved her mark from the CWG gold-winning 61.51m to 61.94m to repeat her bronze-medal show at Doha 2006. Among the men, discus thrower Vikas Gowda (63.13m) finished fourth.

Veteran heptathlete Pramila G Aiyyappa fin­a­lly won her first Asian Games medal, bronze, in an event that had seen two Indians — Soma Biswas and JJ Sobha — on the podium with silver and bro­n­ze in the 2006 edition.

The strain of competing in two top events within a co­uple of months definitely had its effect, especially on long-distance walker Harminder Singh who had won bronze in the men’s 20km walk in Delhi. In Guangzhou, though, he finished sixth.

The men’s 4x100m relay team, having promised much, bungled in the first couple of exchanges to finish in 39.10 secs, much slower than the national record-setting CWG time of 38.89 secs. While it is easy to term their missing the bronze by a mere one hundredth of a second as unfor­t­un­ate, the mistake is put into perspective by the fact that Chinese Taipei won the silver medal in 39.05 secs.

The most disappointing perf­o­rmance came from the jumpi­ng pit where, apart from Renji­th, Mayookha Johny and CWG silver medallist MA Prajusha, both hampered by injuries, fa­i­l­ed to mount a challenge in the women’s long jump in which An­ju Bobby George had won silver in Doha. The women’s long jump was won by South Korea’s Jung Soonok with a leap of 6.53m whereas Mayookha has a personal best of 6.64m.

The hot favourite among men, Renjith man­a­ged just 16.76m while China’s Li Yanxi took gold with 16.94m. Renjith had clinched bronze with a leap of 17.07m in the CWG. Another contender, Tintu mess­ed up her tactics again in the women’s 800m to allow Kazakhsta­n’s Margarita Matsko and Vietnamese Troung Thanh Hang to pass her in the last 50m for gold and silver. Both Matsko and Hang posted personal bests of 2:00.29 secs and 2:00.91 secs while Tintu clocked 2:01.36 for the bronze. That comp­ares poorly to her national record of 1:59.17 secs.

For once, the combined success in both the Commonwealth and Asian Games can be attributed to planning and foc­ussed preparation initiated by the authorities. Chief nati­onal coach Bahadur Singh, armed with the expertise of a plethora of foreign coaches for almost every discipline, has kept reminding everyone over the past year and a half about this. While athletes continued to put up mediocre re­sults during this period, the target was to peak for the two mega events in 2010. India, overall, did just that.

Although, performances certainly do not suggest that India will be the next continental superpower in track and field events, the country’s athletes could certainly do with more training programmes. And then, maybe, India could spring an even bigger surprise at the Incheon Asian Games four years hence.