On a day when India's hopes of adding a gold to its medal tally were quashed away following PV Sindhu's loss in the women's singles badminton final, the country found a new hero in Manjit Singh. Rising to glory out of nowhere, Manjit arguably pulled off one of the biggest upsets at the Asian Games this year.

Quietly going about his business in the men's 800 metres race, Manjit ended India's 36-year wait for an Asian Games gold medal in the event. Back in 1982, it was Charles Borromeo who bagged the top-prize for India in the same event, and this time it was Manjit who etched his name in the elite list of Indian sprinters - including legendary Sriram Singh - to have achieved the feat.

But, this was not supposed to happen and Manjit was not supposed to win gold. He hadn't won a single domestic event all year. At best, he was expected to play the second fiddle to his fellow countryman Jinson Johnson - a more celebrated and popular Indian athlete who competed in the same category and finished second. Why, you'd ask? Well, you don't expect an athlete - who was just a pacesetter in someone else's race, a footnote in someone else's record - to dethrone that very guy on the international stage.

Two months ago, the state of affairs at the interstate championship in Guwahati was chaotic. The race had come to an end and the press was now desperate to get a piece of Johnson who broke a 42-year-old national record in the 800m race. With a brilliant finishing time of 1:46.65s, Johnson had also secured his qualification for the 2018 Asian Games. While everyone was busy celebrating the genius of the new national record holder, no one cared about Manjit who came second and within the qualification mark for the Games.

Thus, when Manjit took his mark on the track at the Asian Games, all eyes were on Johnson and few would've expected anything from him. Once again destined for ignominy, Manjit didn't do his reputation any good after barely qualifying for the finals of men's 800m race. But, running his guts out in arguably the biggest race of his life, Manjit didn't just leave his opponents behind, but also left the naysayers hiding in shame.

The 28-year-old trailed the likes of Johnson and Qatar's fancied Abdalla Abubaker for almost three fourths of the race. With Johnson and Abubaker sorting out their own tussle at the head of the pack, Manjit came to the fore with all the energy he had been saving for that very moment. Taking the track by storm, Manjit edged past the leaders and eventually ran across the finish line to realise he had achieved the impossible - a Asian Games gold.

Standing atop the podium with the national anthem running the background, Manjit was the perfect embodiment of a winner who had overcome almost everything life threw at him to rightfully secure his piece of glory. Ignominy wasn't the only thing Manjit fought. He was fighting his own demons - the ones that almost convinced him to quit the sport.

Born into a family of farmers, Manjit was exposed to athletics by his father Randhir Singh Chahal - a former state-level shot putter who now sells milk to sustain the family. "He used to accompany me to different state-level athletics tournaments and saw me win several medals. That's how he got inspired to take up sports. As a child, he used to run with freedom on our farm land. He used to climb hillocks, run to Jind town and bring groceries," Manjit's father told TOI.

Beginning his career in 2008, Manjit represented India as a 20-year-old at the Commonwealth Games in New Delhi. The youngster did qualify from his heats, but eventually failed to progress from the semifinals. In 2013, he went on to secure the fourth position at the Asian Athletics Championships in Pune. While Manjit was still finding it hard to improve his performance, the worst was yet to come.

A hamstring injury kept Manjit away from the track for almost a year and a half. It also meant that his job - offered by Public Sector Unit ONGC - will also be in jeopardy. In 2016, ONGC decided against renewing Manjit's contract which ran its course of two years. If his injuries weren't enough to bog him down, ONGC's decision meant that Manjit will continue remain unemployed since 2016.

As the frustration reached its tipping point, Manjit was hell bent on calling time on his career as a runner. The same year, he told his coach Amrish Kumar that he wanted to quit the sport. But, his coach motivated him and urged him to use all the frustration for his own good. Thus, began the journey of one of the most inspiring comebacks in Indian sports.

Surrendering himself to his coach Kumar, Manjit forgot life as it was. He left his family in Jind and found a new home in his training camp. Such was his commitment to the sport and will to turn things around that Manjit visited his home in Jind only once a year. His busy schedule also meant that Manjit would have to stay away from his five-month old son Abir who is yet to see the face of his father.

He might have sustained injuries, struggled to get a job, stayed away from family and then trained like a warhorse, but when Manjit stood tall at the podium with the ever-shining gold medal across the neck, all his hardships would have surely smiled back at him (as if insinuating "we told you so").

An athlete going through tough times and then managing to overcome all the hurdles on his way to glory is nothing new in the ever-competitive era of modern-day sports. But Manjit's is a journey that surely doesn't end at the Asian Games gold, rather it begins with a promise of much bigger and greater things to come in future.