A Beacon of Hope for Sports in India

A standout sports personality, passionate about extracurricular activities and sports since childhood, Charles Borromeo is a renowned and excellent athlete. Born on December 1st 1958, in Devakottai, Tamil Nadu, he gained his education at De Britto high school and graduated with B.A. Economics and then later on studied in the field of psychology at St. Xaviers College Ahmedabad. He had the opportunity to represent his school and college across varied sports such as football, volleyball, basketball and athletics and brought many laurels to his alma mater. For two consecutive years, he was bestowed with the award of the best sportsperson by his college. During this time he had created several championship records in athletics as well.

Charles got married in 1987 to his loving wife Vency Nirmala Rani and is the father to two caring children Roshni Borromeo and Joshua Borromeo. He presently resides in Chennai and Bangalore and moulds out time to contribute to the field of sports as a sports consultant. In his spare time, Charles likes listening to music and contributing his bit to social work as well.

In 1978, he represented the Gujarat University at the ‘All India Universities athletic championship’ where his raw talent was at the show for all to see in the 400mts and 800mts track and field events and he had won a silver medal in the 800 meters with a new championship record. This later helped him to qualify to represent Indian Universities at the World University Games held in Mexico in 1979 where finished in 7th place in the final.

From the year 1982 to 1987, he was the national champion in 800 meters whilst creating a new national games record. An enigmatic sportsman who had the blessed opportunity to represent India 34 times, he won the nation a total of 31 International medals between the years 1979-1987. Some of his major achievements in life include the following: Gold medalist in the Asian Games, Delhi in 1982 with a new record, first-ever Indian to run below 1 min 47 seconds on Indian soil, represented India at the first World Athletics Championship held in Helsinki, represented India at Los Angeles Olympics in the USA in 1984 and won silver medals 1985 at the Asian track and field SAF games.

The Government of India recognised him with the prestigious ‘Arjuna Award’ in 1983 and the ‘Padma Shri Award’ in 1984. Charles had joined Tata Steel soon after he completed his graduation in 1979. During his tenure of 37 years, he held various positions and was last associated with the firm as the head of the Sports Department. In addition to these, he won the best sportsman of the year in the entire Tata Group of Companies back in 1984 and as well the excellence in sports in 2001 by the Tata sports club Mumbai.

During his tenure, his ability to contribute to sports administration, collaborate and organise national and international sports competitions and as well enhance the brand value and reputation of Tata Steel grew manifold. A strategic approach with plentiful of hard-work helped to encapsulate Tata Steel’s brand value along with community service. Charles has played an immense role by inculcating the value of sports and extra-curricular in a student’s life by organising various sports competitions in schools and colleges. This role extends to him personally devoting a good chunk of his time and career to identifying the right talent and grooming the raw potential of these sportspersons so they later represent India internationally.