Ms Kuttan, who retired from Tata Steel to return to Kerala, feels that Indian athletics could do with much more sponsorship. “Back then, we had only modest dreams of participating in the Olympics,” she says. “Exposure at international levels is very important, and for that, you need long-term support,” she says.

"From my experience as an athlete, as a coach, and as an administrator, we need support from corporates, long-term and in a big way. No athletic achievement is built in a day. There is no reason why we can’t be world-beaters if the right support is available for athletes."

As a prominent voice in athletics administration and coaching in Kerala, she hopes to groom athletes who can be world-beaters. She is presently the president of the Kerala Athletic Federation and runs the Mercy Kuttan Athletics Academy in Kochi.

Charles Borromeo, 1984 Los Angeles

Charles Borromeo competed in the 800m at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics.

Mr Borromeo was already an outstanding athlete before he became an Olympian, winning the gold in 800m in the 1982 Asian Games.

“Winning in the Olympics would have been a dream come true,” he says about the 1984 games. “But representing the country was itself a great achievement, especially since there was no exposure or support. You had to reach out to people, you had to plan, and had to execute everything yourself, including nutrition, training regimes, venues, and that too in a new country.”

Mr Borromeo recalls that JRD Tata gave him a carte blanche to do well in sports. "He asked me to do well for the country and not worry about anything else," he says. Arriving in Los Angeles a few months ahead of the Olympics, he trained alongside the likes of Daley Thompson and Carl Lewis as part of the Nike preparatory program. "It was a great experience and I learned a lot by observing these athletes," he says.

"My mantras are at an individual level and derived from the seven pillars of Tata Steel production quality. In sport, there are four: self-belief, determination, hard work, and consistency. We should also learn from defeats. This will get us anywhere."

Mr Borromeo was named the Tata all-round athlete in 2000 at the Tata Sports Meet and was involved in the Tata Steel sports program. He retired from the company in 2016 as the head of the sports department, but not before overseeing the emergence of archers such as Deepika Kumari and Atanu Das. Mr Borromeo now divides his time between his native Tamil Nadu where he works with schools and colleges spotting and nurturing talent, and Gujarat, where he coaches school athletes.

T C Yohannan, 1976 Montreal

Thadathuvila Chandrapillai Yohannan was first noticed at a national youth meet in 1970 over many other offers he received. Under the tutelage of the TELCO (now Tata Motors) coach Suresh Gujrati, Mr Yohannan started winning and setting national records.

But it was at the Teheran Asian Games in 1974 that he made his mark. He cleared 8.07 metres for a new Asian and national record in a jump that was noted for its technical proficiency. The national record stood for 18 years.

Continuing his spree, he won golds at several invitational Asian meets before being selected for the Montreal Olympics. He finished in fourth place with a jump of 7.67 meters.

“It was a wonderful experience,” recalls Mr Yohannan. “I was performing at the highest level of sports any athlete could have, alongside legends like Sebastian Coe and Alberto Juantorena. I made friends with them too.”

"We don’t lack talent and ambition. We need better infrastructure and facilities. For example, despite the performance of P R Sreejesh in Hockey, we have only one hockey stadium in Kerala and many cricket stadiums. Without these, we can’t advance."

Mr Yohannan’s career was tragically cut short at its peak. In 1978, he sustained a knee injury while training and lack of immediate treatment did much damage. TELCO stepped in to help but despite several surgeries, he could not recover. He never jumped again. “I still cannot bend my knee,” says Mr Yohannan.

Bahadur Singh, 1980 Moscow

There will be few coaches in India as respected and loved as Bahadur Singh. He was chief coach of the Athletics Federation of India (AFI) for over 25 years before he stepped down last year, citing advancing age and inability to travel to the Tokyo 2020 Olympics due to Covid19 restrictions.

The legendary Shot Put and Discus thrower commenced his career with TELCO, Jamshedpur, in 1967. He had already made a mark in sports by then. “I had offers from Punjab Police and the Railways, but I chose Tata. Tata had a reputation for encouraging and nurturing sportspersons and had good facilities. It was an easy choice to make,” says Mr Singh. He became the national champion in Discus Throw that year.

Between 1973 and 1985, he won three gold, two silver, and three bronze at the Asian level, including back-to-back golds in the 1978 Bangkok and 1982 Delhi Asian Games. He represented India at the 1980 Olympics in Moscow and finished 15th.

"Sports must start at the school level. In China, schoolchildren devote half their time to studies and the other half to sports. This is a good model to emulate. We will have a healthy and well-rounded population and our performance at the national level will automatically increase."

In 1991, he joined the AFI as a coach. In 2003, he retired from Tata Motors to concentrate fully on his assignment as the chief coach of the federation. His biggest achievement: during his tenure, India’s medal count increased from three bronze medals at the Asian Games to winning 20 — including eight golds — at the 2018 Asian Games at Jakarta.