Yahoo Inc. increased its ad arsenal today with the announcement of its $300 million acquisition of BlueLithium Inc. The buy comes at a crucial time for Yahoo as it expands its ad firm portfolio in the face of stiff competition from both Google and Microsoft.

The acquisitions of Right Media and Actionality have already bolstered the search giant's ad offerings this year, so this news comes as little shock to anyone who's been following Yahoo's current trends.

CEO Jerry Yang explained the road map for this deal in the company press release:

This acquisition will extend our ability to deliver powerful data analytics, advanced targeting and innovative media buying strategies to our customers, who are increasingly looking for these insights. By leveraging BlueLithium's complementary expertise and tools, we will be able to better address the needs of our performance-based display advertisers and enhance the value of our publishers' inventory.

According to the fine print, the San Jose, California-based ad firm will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Yahoo, with CEO Gurbaksh Chahal staying on-board for the duration of the transition. If the deal is given regulatory approval, we can expect to see it reach fruition around fourth quarter 2007.

See Also:

Confirmed: Yahoo Bolsters Mobile Ad Efforts With Actionality Buy

Yahoo! Acquires Ad Firm Right Media For $680 Million

Spotify, Stop Trying to Become a Social Media App

The music streaming service has added a comment function under podcasts. Who is it for, anyway?

Activists Disrupt Amazon Conference Over $1.2 Billion Contract With Israel

Members of the activist group No Tech for Apartheid interrupted a senior Amazon executive's speech at a conference in Washington, DC, on Wednesday over the company's Project Nimbus cloud contract.

OpenAI Wants AI to Help Humans Train AI

Having humans rate a language model’s outputs produced clever chatbots. OpenAI says adding AI to the loop could help make them even smarter and more reliable.

Tiny Texas Village Seeks Billion-Dollar Bitcoin Miner to Pave Potholes, Scare Dogs Away

In a roundabout bid to win public opinion (and a juicy tax abatement,) Riot Platforms is preparing for its prized bitcoin mine to be annexed by a minuscule village in rural Texas.

YouTube’s Rulings on Gaza War Videos Spark Internal Backlash

Insiders have shared YouTube’s playbook for handling the Gaza crisis. They argue that it shows inconsistent enforcement.

The Architect of Russia’s Google Is Back

Yandex cofounder Arkady Volozh fought off sanctions and kicked anti-war squatters out of his Amsterdam townhouse. Now he is ready to reveal his new AI company in the Netherlands. But can Europe forget his past?

Craig Wright Faces Perjury Investigation Over Claims He Created Bitcoin

By order of a UK judge, Craig Wright can no longer claim he is the creator of bitcoin and now faces the prospect of criminal charges.

Amazon Ramps Up Security to Head Off Project Nimbus Protests

Former Big Tech workers intended to disrupt Wednesday’s AWS Summit in New York to protest the company’s $1.2 billion contract with Israel.