Yahoo announced today it is buying BlueLithium, a digital marketing company with a fast-growing online advertising network for $300 million in cash.

The move strengthens Yahoo’s ability to serve individually targeted display ads – like banners or interactive graphics – and to compete in a growing area of online advertising.

Yahoo stock rose sharply earlier in the day, before the acquisition was announced, after Bear Stearns analyst Robert Peck named Yahoo as his top pick for the next 16 months.

“While we acknowledge that Yahoo! still has plenty of challenges remaining and is clearly not out of the woods, we believe that Yahoo!’s shares represent an attractive risk/reward scenario for investors willing to wait for Yahoo!’s growth initiatives to deliver positive results,” Peck wrote.

Yahoo’s shares increased more than 5 percent close at $23.97 on Tuesday. Last month, Yahoo’s stock dipped to its lowest levels in more than three years, as investors doubted its ability to effectively compete with Google.

Yahoo has also been undergoing severe management turmoil for the past nine months, with key executives, including former chief executive Terry Semel, handing in resignations – sometimes at the request of Yahoo’s leadership and sometimes not.

In June, co-founder Jerry Yang replaced Semel as chief executive while former chief financial officer Susan Decker was named president.

Departing executives have included chief operating officer Daniel Rosensweig, media czar Lloyd Braun, technology chief Farzad Nazem and two top salespeople.

Last week, the company confirmed that Gregory Coleman, executive vice president, global sales, would leave the company in February under a continuing reorganization that was launched in December. Among the changes has been the consolidation of sales forces responsible for search advertising and display advertising into a division that includes HotJobs recruitment advertising, corporate partnerships and the publisher network.

In a recent research note, Lehman Brothers analyst Douglas Anmuth predicted display advertising would grow 23 percent this year, to $6.6 billion, and account for about one third of all U.S. Internet advertising.

Todd Teresi, senior vice president of Yahoo Publisher Network, said BlueLithium specialized in purchasing advertising space from top publishers and using that space to run targeted, results-driven campaigns for large advertisers.

The acquisition will expand Yahoo’s ability to sell advertising off of Yahoo’s own network of sites. “This is core to our strategy,” Teresi said.

He said the 100 employees of BlueLithium, which is headquartered in San Jose, will be integrated into Yahoo, which is headquartered in nearby Sunnyvale.