Franklin Pierce established a law office in Concord in 1838 and remained a resident of that city until his death.

Law Office

Pierce's law office was at one time located in this brick building on North Main Street. Originally the home of Concord's first bank, when this picture was taken (about 1939) the building housed the museum of the New Hampshire Historical Society and Pierce's "shingle" still hung on the outside wall. The museum has since moved and the site of Pierce's law office is now part of a downtown district known as Eagle Square.

Manse

During his thirty-one years of residence in Concord, Pierce occupied a number of homes, but the one below was the only one he owned. Bowing to pressure from his wife, Jane Pierce, who absolutely detested living in Washington, D.C., Pierce resigned from the U.S. Senate and returned to his law practice in 1841. The couple and their two sons (Frank Robert and Benjamin) moved into this house in 1842. Four-year-old Frank died in the house in 1843. When Franklin Pierce left for service in the Mexican War in 1846, Jane and Benjamin went to stay with relatives. There is nothing to suggest that any member of the Pierce family ever returned to the house.

Originally located at 18 Montgomery Street, the house was moved to the north end of Main Street in 1971 after it was slated for demolition as part of an urban renewal project. A group of community volunteers known as The Pierce Brigade secured a land grant and raised the money to move the house and restore it as a memorial to New Hampshire's only President. To differentiate this home from The Pierce Homestead (his birthplace in Hillsborough) and the Pierce Mansion (the Concord home in which he died), the volunteers named it the Pierce Manse. The Salem, Massachusetts, home of Pierce's long-time friend, Nathaniel Hawthorne, named the Old Manse, served as their inspiration.

Mansion

Franklin and Jane Pierce moved into this house at 52 South Main Street in 1856 and it was their on-and-off residence for their rest of their lives. Aside from some interior modifications, the house stood unchanged (and open to visitors) until burning down in 1983. The lot on which it stood is now occupied by a small historical marker.

Grave

Franklin Pierce died at his South Main Street residence on October 8, 1869, and was buried next to his wife in the Old North Cemetery on North State Street within a fenced part of the cemetery owned by his friend Judge Minot and known as the Minot Enclosure. The current memorial marker replaced the original tombstones in 1945. The two Pierce sons who died as youngsters (Frank and Benjamin) are also buried in the Enclosure.

Statue

Pierce was so unpopular when he left the White House that the citizens of Concord actually voted to not give him a "welcome home" parade. And, unlike every other state lucky enough to have produced a President, New Hampshire was not quick to memorialize Pierce after his death, especially since Pierce was a Democrat and the state was at the time controlled by Republicans. It wasn't until Democrat Samuel Felker became Governor (in 1913) that the State Legislature voted to have a statue of Pierce erected on the Capitol grounds. Designed by sculptor Augustus Lakeman, the bronze statue was completed in time for the October 15, 1914, gubernatorial election, and dedicated on November 25, 1914, before Democratic Governor Felker gave way to Republican Governor Rolland Spaulding.