Zach Randolph Biography

Two-time All-Star Zach Randolph is one of the top post players in the NBA. Randolph has helped transform the Memphis Grizzlies into a perennial playoff team. In his first playoff run with the team, the eighth-seeded Grizzlies beat the top-ranked Spurs in the first round, something that had only been accomplished once before in NBA history. Prior to coming to Memphis, Randolph spent two seasons split between the New York Knicks and Los Angeles Clippers. He was initially the 19th overall pick of the Portland Trail Blazers in the 2001 NBA Draft and spent the first six seasons of his career with the franchise. Randolph built his way into a successful pro, winning the NBA’s Most Improved Player Award in his third season with averages of 20.1 points and 10.5 rebounds per game. In his one collegiate season at Michigan State, the Spartans reached the Final Four. Randolph won two Indiana state titles at Marion High School and was MVP of the McDonald’s All-American game as a senior. His Zach Randolph Community Assistance Fund and annual Thanksgiving Turkey and Ham drive benefit the needy in the Memphis area.

Book Zach Randolph for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Zach Randolph for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Zach Randolph. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Zach Randolph, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Zach Randolph's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Zach Randolph, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Zach Randolph for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Zach Randolph for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Zach Randolph for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Zach Randolph’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Zach Randolph for your Virtual Meeting