Zach Randolph didn’t have much of an effect at all on the first two games of the Grizzlies playoff series against the Clippers in Los Angeles. In a must-win Game 3 situation once the series shifted to Memphis, he was the reason the Grizzlies stayed alive.

Randolph finished with a game high 27 points and 11 rebounds as Memphis came away with the 94-82 victory that cut the Clippers lead in the series to two games to one.

The play of the Clippers’ bench had been the story of the series to this point, but as is often the case with role players on the road, those performances tend to disappear. That was certainly the case with Eric Bledsoe, who had sparked the Clippers in each of the first two games, but couldn’t get anything going in Memphis. Bledsoe finished scoreless in 14 minutes of action with three personal fouls, and he probably shouldn’t have been left out there even that long considering the negative impact he was having on the game for his team.

Instead, it was the reserves of the Grizzlies who were able to provide a lift, led by Quincy Pondexter with 13 points in 26 minutes of action.

But even in the first two games that the Clippers won in this series, Memphis largely was able to outplay L.A. when both teams had their starting units on the floor. That was once again the case in Game 3, but it was even more extreme.

In addition to Randolph’s monster performance, Marc Gasol was effective offensively with 16 points, and was consistently free of defenders with plenty of space to shoot. That was helped by Randolph’s presence inside, as well as by Mike Conley’s ability to distribute, which gave him 10 assists against zero turnovers for the game -- numbers that outweighed his lackluster 1-for-9 shooting performance.

Statistically, this was essentially a reversal of Game 1, where the Clippers got everything they wanted and killed the Grizzlies on the boards. In Game 3, Memphis won the rebounding battle 45-33, but more troubling for L.A. was the Grizzlies’ 17-5 edge on the offensive glass that led to a 22-4 advantage in second chance points.

In addition to the Clippers’ bench not providing the spark L.A. has grown accustomed to over the first two games of the series, Chris Paul was completely ineffective in this one in running his team’s offense. He finished with just eight points and four assists, to go along with an uncharacteristically high five turnovers.

It’s funny, because the very first possession of the game for the Clippers was executed to perfection. Blake Griffin posted deep on the low block in isolation, Chauncey Billups found him with a clean entry pass, and Griffin spun toward the basket and banked home a four-footer for the first points of the game. From then on, it seemed as though the Clippers were struggling to even initiate their sets, and possessions became reduced to dribbling misadventures that more often than not resulted in long jumpshots (or heavily contested ones) as the shot clock was about to expire.

A great performance from Randolph came just as his team needed it the most, but overall, in a game that essentially would have meant the end of the Grizzlies’ season had they lost and fallen behind 3-0 in the series, the bounce-back effort from a 56-win Memphis team was to be expected.

The Clippers aren’t expecting to see two subpar games in a row from Chris Paul, and they will likely make adjustments to ensure that Randolph goes back to a closer version of the player they saw in the first two games. The pressure on the Grizzlies won’t be any less in Game 4, however, because a loss would mean an opportunity for the Clippers to close out the series at home next week.