If you have a son and love the night sky, you must explore baby boy names that mean night. Nighttime has always captivated the imagination of people of all ages. But it is especially true for poets and artists. The night is when all life is resting and silent. In this silence lies the beauty and mystical character of the night. You can find this aptly described in the works of multiple influential poets, especially those from the Romantic Era. Poets from Byron and Shelley to Wordsworth and Blake have sung paeans to the nighttime (1). They have considered nighttime a symbol of tranquillity, mystery, and sometimes darkness. The Night has inspired artists from various ages, with Vincent van Gogh’s The Starry Night being one of the most popular visual renditions of the night. To van Gogh, the night was “much more alive and richly colored than the day” (2). Several new and old songwriters have associated the night with dancing and merrymaking, conjuring images of bonfires and parties. They have also used it to connote love, passion, and all the overwhelming emotions that the silence of the night evokes. In actual life, night functions as a respite from broad daylight and the heat of the sun. It brings with it calmness and a refreshing, crisp air. When you give your son a name that captures the nighttime spirit, it can evoke a range of feelings, including wonderment and curiosity. Names that mean night have a pleasant sound and feel. They have ancient origins and a deep history. Many of them belong to Indian, Islamic, Hebrew, and Scandinavian cultures. Some are variants of longer names, while others convey elements we usually see or hear at night. These can include birds, flowers, music, or the beginning of dawn. If you want to discover some great boy names that mean night, scroll down. We have listed the finest ones for your baby boy.

In This Article

Filter Baby Names by Gender

Filter Baby Names by Alphabet

Filter Baby Names by Religion Or Origin

If you were on the lookout for baby boy names meaning night, you may as well do away with your worries now. This detailed list of names would have given you some delightful options for your son. Such names do not just indicate nighttime but also symbolize various natural elements and feelings associated with it. Every name present here has a distinct sound and cultural significance. You may pick one that belongs to your culture or explore those from other backgrounds.