As the consciousness of coloniality, diversity, and the necessity of not only token depictions of otherness but accurate representations of diversity in literature and film has grown, there has been a shift in the processes of adaptation and appropriation used by major film production companies and how they approach representing the other. One clear example of this is the comparison of the depiction of diverse, cross-cultural womanhood between Walt Disney Animation Studio's Mulan (1998) and Moana (2016). This paper will use a cross-period approach to explore the ways in which a global media conglomerate has and has not shifted its approach to appropriation of the multicultural as other and the implications for representational diversity in the context of globalization and a projected global culture. In one case, a cultural historical tale was decontextualized and reframed, while in the other, cultural actors had a degree of input in the film representation. By examining culturally specific criticisms and scenes from each film, I will explore how the legacy of coloniality can still be seen embedded in the framing of each film, despite the studio's stated intentions towards diversity and multiculturalism.

From the days of its inception by Walt Disney, the Disney Company has been known for its classical films. Classics such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Cinderella, Mulan, Pocahontas and others, despite being inspired from universal fairy tales and folk tales, have been molded by the Disney Corporation in order to fit into the American culture. Such fact accounts for the success of Disney’s classics which have become box-office hits, garnering millions of dollars for their production company and serving as a source of inspiration for Americans. Viewers of Disney’s classics, which are chiefly children, are deeply affected by the gender and ethnic stereotypes encompassed in the classics. As a result, these classics turn out to be a teaching tool for children and a major means of shaping child culture, and consequently American culture. This study examines how the gender and ethnic stereotypes embedded in Disney’s classics serve as symbols of their times and stand witness to cultural trends like consumerism, patriarchy, the Sexual Revolution, the Women’s Liberation Movement, the melting pot ideology and multiculturalism. The current research also seeks to prove that the stereotypes permeating Disney’s classics seem to market and promote ideals like cultural imperialism and white privileging, thus victimizing minority groups due to the various ethnic stereotypes they include. An additional objective of the present study is to shed light on the gender stereotypes omnipresent in Disney’s classics as well as on their negative impact on women and on the paramount role these stereotypes play in shaping American culture. Through heavily relying on primary and secondary sources dealing with the classics of Disney, the current research endeavors to offer a qualitative analysis of the stereotypes filling Disney’s classics and to establish a link between the latter classics and American culture as well as the widespread media forms in the US.