Somebody asked me to cover this movie, and considering the annoying fact that people honestly believe the Tarzan/Frozen connection theory to be true, I’m more than ready to nail down every single reason why this movie and Frozen aren’t connected.

Fashion

Tarzan’s mother is wearing her hair in a ringlet ponytail style, which exploded in popularity during the Victorian Era (1837-1901). The father is wearing a simple three piece suit as seen in the official family portrait. Tarzan’s father has the same mustache style as The Grand Duke in Cinderella, an A La Souvarov, named for Alexander Souvarov, a Russian military leader who lived from 1730-1800.

The mother’s dress resembles this one from 1890. Given that Tarzan is about 20 years old and she’s wearing this when he’s a baby, this should place the movie in 1910.

Jane Porter arrives in the Jungle wearing a yellow dress with a prominent bustle which were popular from the 1870s through the 1880s. We can see her wearing short gloves, a collar and ascot of some sort, and what she addresses as her boots, but could potentially be high heel shoes with high spats on them, which emerged in the late 19th century and fell out of fashion in the 1920s.

Technology

Around the human camp, we see many Victorian era inventions. There’s a grandfather clock (invented 1680), a phonograph with a 1907 design, typewriter with a 1911 design, a vanity mirror likely with silvered glass (1835), a blackboard (16th century), a penny farthing bicycle, popular in the 1870s and 1880s, and especially the Magic Lantern, a late 19th century educational tool.

Culture

Jane teaches Tarzan to read English with “See Jane. See Jane Run” an homage to Dick and Jane books used to teach children how to read created by William Scott Gray in the 1930s. Clayton mentions that he taught a parrot to sing “God Save the Queen”, first created in 1745. While flipping through images, we see images of the Statue of Liberty (1886) and the Eifel Tower (1889). When Tarzan agrees to go to England, the Professor and Jane exclaim that many people will want to meet him. Kings, scientists, and famous writers. The professor name drops Darwin, Kipling, and Queen Victoria. He is referring to Charles Darwin (1809-1882), Queen Victoria of England (reign 1837-1901), but the outlier and trouble maker being Rudyard Kipling (1865-1936). If the Professor expects Tarzan to meet Darwin, then Darwin must still be alive (at least when they leave England) but they’re likely not in Africa for more than a year, and even if the movie was set shortly after Darwin’s death, Rudyard Kipling is barely 20 years old himself when Charles Darwin died, and was still in school in the 1880s. His most famous work “The Jungle Book” wasn’t even written until 1894, twelve years after Darwin’s death.

Biology

The gorilla seen in the film seem to resemble the Western Lowland Gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla). Yes, that’s the real scientific name for this subspecies.

The Western Lowland Gorilla is native to Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and the Republic of the Congo. They are also touch slightly into Central African Republic and Democratic Republic of the Congo, but neither of those countries are coastal, and Tarzan clearly takes place in a coastal African rain forest with Western Lowland Gorilla. Jane is chased by a troop of Mandrill Baboons whose habitat is nearly identical to the Western Lowland Gorilla. African Elephants are found in the same area, but most abundant in Gabon, and Hippopotamus used to be found all over southern Africa but now only live in scattered clumps. Nile Crocodiles can be found over most of Africa, and in every country where the Western Lowland Gorilla lives. Leopards like Sabor are also native to this region of Africa, but Mound-Building Termites are native to the south and northeastern parts of Africa, and are not in Tarzan’s neck of the rain forest. We see a Rhinoceros sharpening its horn, but Rhinos don’t live or even wander to that part of Africa. The Black-and-White Colobus monkeys we seen in “Son of Man” are not direct neighbors of Tarzan, but live close enough that him running into them isn’t too far fetched.

While searching for Gorillas, Professor Porter mentions heading west, following the Ganoderma Applanatum, a large fungus that grows on trees. However, it’s clear the Professor doesn’t always know what he’s talking about. When Jane is describing the baboon chase to her father, he cites them as being Theropithecus Baboonus, a scientific name that doesn’t exist, and the only animals with Theropithecus are all extinct.

Conclusion

Due to Professor Porter expecting Tarzan to meet Charles Darwin, the Porter party must have left England in, before, or shortly after 1882 when he passed away. Because of the equatorial rain forest climate, it’s hard to tell the passage of time. They could have been in Africa for a week, a month, or a year. Aside from characters not visibly aging there’s nothing we can really go by in terms of time frame. But unless they’ve been in the jungle for a decade, the Professor would likely know that Darwin was dead before the 1890s. This strongly indicates an 1882 to 1883 time frame. There’s definitely a lot of technological and fashion anachronisms in this movie, but the clearly defined lifespans of real people makes placing an era easier.