The animals roaming Lisa Inman Lee’s expansive Granville property are rarer than tigers, pandas and even lowland gorillas.

But what “endangered species” might be living in central Ohio?

Six of the estimated 500 or fewer Sealyham terriers in the world call Licking County home.

Once the dog of choice for Hollywood legends and European royalty — actors Cary Grant, Elizabeth Taylor and Bette Davis all had one — the small Welsh terrier has declined in numbers since the breed's heyday of the 1930s and '40s, Inman Lee said, because of the growth in designer breeds and the reduced need for hunting dogs.

“People’s lives have changed, and they don’t live on farms,” she said. “It would be such a shame for the Sealys to no longer be around — they have so much to offer people.”

That’s why she and her husband, Geiger Lee, have made it their mission to save the “clownish” white terriers, by breeding them responsibly through her business, Afterglow Kennels, and by educating others about the distinctive dogs’ history and quirks.

The couple and three of their Sealyham terriers — Cinderella; Rapunzel; and Inman Lee’s first Sealy, Pollyanna — will visit the Gateway Film Center Thursday and Friday for its screenings of Alfred Hitchcock’s “ The Birds.”

The famed director, owner of three Sealyhams at one point, showcased his dogs in his movies, including “The Birds.”

The Lees made a similar appearance this month at the McConnell Arts Center, for a screening of “ Rear Window.”

In 2012, Cinderella and Rapunzel portrayed Hitchcock’s dogs in the biopic “Hitchcock” when they were about 7 months old. They appear in scenes with actors Anthony Hopkins and Helen Mirren.

“Producers were having a hard time finding two Sealys, and they were almost going to use two Westies (West Highland White Terriers),” Inman Lee said.

That would’ve been a disservice to viewers, said Mr. Lee, who had long wondered what kind of dogs were featured at the beginning of “The Birds” — until he met his wife.

He was shocked to learn how rare Sealys are.

“Because there are so few in the world, breeders have to send dogs around the world so there is no in-breeding,” he said. Afterglow Kennels has welcomed terriers from Belarus, Russia and Ukraine to breed at their Granville farm.

“All the Sealy breeders around the world know each other, which is why they are pretty sure of the 500 number.”

At its lowest point in 2008, the Kennel Club, of the United Kingdom, registered 44 puppies born, but the number rebounded to 92 in 2014. The American Kennel Club doesn’t report registrations, Mr. Lee said, but does rank breeds based on the number of puppies registered per year.

The Sealyham terrier ranked 158th among 184 breeds in 2015, an improvement from 169th in 2014.

“Last year was one of our best years,” said Sharon Yard, a resident of northern Virginia and president of the American Sealyham Terrier Club. “We registered over 80 Sealyhams with the American Kennel Club. Compared with the thousands of Labradors, for example, that are registered every year, that’s a pretty small number.”

Yard said the “Meet-the-Breed” events that the Lees host help increase awareness of the breed.

The first time Inman Lee met a Sealyham a decade ago, she quickly fell for the dogs, which typically weigh about 20 pounds and can have brown or black markings on their white base. A few years later, she met Charmin — “He’s the No. 1 Sealyham of all time,” she said.

One of the dog’s owners — Margery Good of Pennsylvania — commented on the flawless grooming of her Scottish terriers, which Inman Lee still breeds, and offered to help get her a Sealyham.

Pollyanna, now 7, is Charmin’s daughter.

“I never thought, in a million years, I’d be able to purchase a dog myself,” she said. “There are not a lot who are willing to share them.”

Grooming a Sealyham is important because the breed doesn’t shed. A Sealyham cut requires a shaved body with a 2-inch skirt — and the beard and the fall (hair that runs from the eyebrow to the nose) are never cut.

Already breeding Scottish terriers, Inman Lee took on Sealyhams, too, with the cost starting at $2,000. She has placed dogs all over the world, including one with former NFL tight end Jeremy Shockey.

The Lees typically rear two or three litters of Sealyham puppies a year and always have a waiting list.

Pamela Ignatz-Nowell, a Lorain County resident, had her heart set on another Scottish terrier until she learned about Sealyhams from the Lees.

Gus (show name: Afterglow's Master of Suspense Cary Grant) joined her family this fall, with her neighbors all eagerly anticipating the puppy’s arrival.

“I had people come to my door and say, ‘I couldn’t wait to see him,’” she said. “He’s definitely the talk of the neighborhood.”

Because of the interest, Ignatz-Nowell said, she feels a responsibility to breed him in the future.

The Lees ask those who adopt their puppies to be open to breeding, to ensure the survival of the breed.

“The breed is at risk because people don’t know they exist,” Mr. Lee said. “They can’t make a decision that they want one if they don’t know about them.

“Everyone we meet loves them.”

award@dispatch.com

@AllisonAWard

A "Meet-the-Breed" display will be hosted by Afterglow Kennels and Geiger Lee and Lisa Inman Lee at the 7 p.m. screenings of "The Birds" Thursday and Friday at the Gateway Film Center, 1550 N. High St.

The Lees will have three of their Sealyham terriers with them.

"The Birds" will also be shown at midnight both days and 2 p.m. Saturday.

Tickets cost $12. Call 614-247-4433, or visit gatewayfilmcenter.org