Especially halves. Literally who spends them, and on what? It seems that without halves being spent, then all they're doing is being shuttled from coin roll hunter to coin roll hunter, and the most any of us can hope for is someone interrupting that cycle by doing a collection dump.

Dollar coins - I've seen them used in precisely one place, the automatic car wash. Put in a $20 bill for a $10 car wash, get ten dollar coins in change. Dollar coins must have more uses than halves, because they actually minted dollars for general circulation more recently than halves, but then what about Eisenhower dollars? Who spends them? I go to my banks and the tellers always say that anytime they get Eisenhowers, people snap them up. Well, they ain't snappin' 'em up to spend 'em, that's for sure!

I used to think, because someone said this, that Eisenhowers and halves were popular at casinos for slot machines. But then recently someone told me that slot machines have gone all digital. I don't gamble, but apparently it's a thing where you insert cash into a machine and it spits out a glorified debit card, loaded with that amount of money, and you use that card in the machines. When you're done playing, you take the card back to the machine and it spits back the cash that equals the number stored in the card's memory or whatever it is. So it's not like you're putting coins into a machine and when you hit a big prize, it sounds like you're being circled by Santa's sleigh as the coins come cascading out.

I like dollars and halves - dollars especially tend to yield some cool stuff even if it isn't worth much (circulated proofs, SBA wide rims, NIFCs) - but I really do wonder about whether every roll of halves I get has been mostly picked through because nobody spends these things anymore. Even at the stores, if you get 75 cents in change, you get three quarters. You certainly don't get a half and a quarter. Coin-accepting vending devices have slots no bigger than a quarter. The half seems to have been forgotten, in spite of its long and rich history. Anyone have any light they can shed on this?

Perhaps, but you being here means you are 99.99999% likely to spend only "rejects". That would still make every roll that consists of what you spent turn out to be equivalent to a "searched roll".

Of course it's possible, and it doesn't disappoint me, but I've never seen this happen. I've literally never seen anyone else spend a dollar or a half, except my wife, the exact change queen, who is the occasional recipient of some of my rejects when her supply needs replenishing. I spent three halves the other day as part of a small cash purchase but again, they were common 1970's date rejects. Last box of halves I searched didn't have a single silver or NIFC.

I guess I'm trying to get a bead on whether or not it's basically a waste of time to continue searching halves, and how I end up finding so many NIFCs in dollars when I hardly ever see them being spent. Do people literally order them from the Mint at a premium and then get to the point of, "meh, guess that was a waste, I'll spend 'em on my next case of beer"?

Granted, we do read of the occasional find of 90% and 40% silver half dollars from the CRHers, but that well is surely drying up. I used to search two $500 boxes every week. I didn't look for varieties, just silver, but that was before silver went to almost $50/oz. After that, everyone was looking for silver. So, I took my profit at $45/oz and ran!

But, that doesn't mean that I quit searching half dollars, but what I was looking for were high grades that were worth submitting to the TPG. Now, you RARELY find those grades in circulated coins, but the odds are good that you can find them in Mint bags and rolls. (I prefer bags, myself.) Not just half dollars but dollars and quarters as well.

Many collectors have the mistaken belief that you can only find high grades from the Mint Sets. That isn't true! When I was actively submitting coins for grading, I received dozens that graded MS68. Maybe the average CRHer can't afford it because you are paying a premium for those bags and rolls. The highest premium one would pay is for the mint sets. The lowest premium one would pay is for bags. However, it is very possible to find specimens in MS68 if you take the time to learn about grading. All you need is 5-10 of those high-grade specimens in any one bag to make a nice profit over your total expense.