Henry Thomas is an American actor who rose to fame for his iconic role as Elliott in the 1982 fantasy-drama film, E.T. The Extra Terrestrial. Since then, he has gone on to appear in numerous successful films and television series.

Thomas was born in San Antonio, Texas on September 9, 1971. He began his career as an actor at the age of 9 when he was cast as Elliott in E.T. The Extra Terrestrial. His performance in the film was highly praised and he was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best New Star of the Year.

What has Henry Thomas been up to since E.T. The Extra Terrestrial?

Following the success of E.T., Thomas went on to star in a variety of films and television shows including Cloak & Dagger, Legends of the Fall, All the Pretty Horses, Gangs of New York and The Mentalist. His most recent film credits include the 2022 comedy drama Sam & Kate and the 2022 psychological thriller, Crawlspace.

On television, Thomas has appeared in a variety of shows such as Without A Trace, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and The Haunting of Hill House. In 2020, he was cast in The Haunting of Bly Manner, alongside Victoria Pedretti, Oliver Jackson-Cohen and Amelia Eve. In 2020 he was also cast as Chuck in DC's Stargirl.

The Blue Heelers

Henry Thomas also found success with his own band, The Blue Heelers. The band was formed in the early 90s with Henry on vocals and guitar. They released an album in 1995 entitled “Twister.” In 1998, his song "Truckstop Coffee" appeared on V2's soundtrack for Niagara, Niagara in which Thomas also acted.

In an interview with the San Antonio Current in 2019, Thomas recalled, "Our band was called the Blue Heelers, like the dog. We were sort of a folk-rock band. We had a bluegrass instrumentation, but we played kind of … folksy tunes, with guitar and fiddle and mandolin and drums and bass. We used to play on the St. Mary’s Strip back in the ’90s and a few other towns in Texas. We had an album. We had a little following."

Despite their popularity, the band eventually went their separate ways in 1999. Recently Thomas has returned to music, performing with the band Farspeaker in L.A.

What happened to the other cast members of E.T. The Extra Terrestrial?

Drew Barrymore, played the role of Elliott’s sister, Gertie, in the film. She has gone on to become one of Hollywood’s most beloved actors, starring in films such as Charlie’s Angels (2000), 50 First Dates (2004), and Blended (2014). She has also found success in producing, directing, and hosting her own talk show, The Drew Barrymore Show (2020).

Peter Coyote, who played Keys, the scientist who helps E.T. find his way home. He has continued to act and can be seen in films such as Bitter Moon (1992), Erin Brockovich (2000), and A Walk To Remember (2002).

Dee Wallace, who played Elliott’s mom, Mary, has gone on to star in films such as Cujo (1983) and The Frighteners (1996).

Robert MacNaughton, who played Elliott’s older brother, Michael, has appeared in a few lesser known roles since his time on E.T. such as I Am Cheese (1983) and Laugh Killer Laugh (2015).

Overall, the cast of E.T. The Extra Terrestrial have gone on to have successful and varied careers in Hollywood. While some have continued to act, others have branched out into producing and directing. The film has left an indelible mark on the lives of its cast and its fans alike.

Conclusion

It's been nearly 40 years since Henry Thomas starred in E.T. The Extra Terrestrial and audiences are still wondering what happened to him. Since the release of the film, Henry has starred in a variety of successful films and television shows. He is still loved by his fans and remains an iconic figure in Hollywood.