The Nobel Prize in Literature has been awarded 116 times to 120 Nobel Prize laureates between 1901 and 2023. Click on the links to get more information.

Find all prizes in | physics | chemistry | physiology or medicine | literature | peace | economic sciences | all categories

The Nobel Prize in Literature 2024

The Nobel Prize in Literature 2024 will be announced on Thursday 10 October, 13:00 CEST at the earliest.

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1919

“in special appreciation of his epic, Olympian Spring”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1918

“No Nobel Prize was awarded this year. The prize money was allocated to the Special Fund of this prize section”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1917

“for his varied and rich poetry, which is inspired by lofty ideals”

“for his authentic descriptions of present-day life in Denmark”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1916

“in recognition of his significance as the leading representative of a new era in our literature”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1915

“as a tribute to the lofty idealism of his literary production and to the sympathy and love of truth with which he has described different types of human beings”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1914

“No Nobel Prize was awarded this year. The prize money was allocated to the Special Fund of this prize section”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1913

“because of his profoundly sensitive, fresh and beautiful verse, by which, with consummate skill, he has made his poetic thought, expressed in his own English words, a part of the literature of the West”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1912

“primarily in recognition of his fruitful, varied and outstanding production in the realm of dramatic art”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1911

“in appreciation of his many-sided literary activities, and especially of his dramatic works, which are distinguished by a wealth of imagination and by a poetic fancy, which reveals, sometimes in the guise of a fairy tale, a deep inspiration, while in a mysterious way they appeal to the readers' own feelings and stimulate their imaginations”

The Nobel Prize in Literature 1910

“as a tribute to the consummate artistry, permeated with idealism, which he has demonstrated during his long productive career as a lyric poet, dramatist, novelist and writer of world-renowned short stories”

To cite this section

MLA style: All Nobel Prizes in Literature. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Prize Outreach AB 2024. Sat. 20 Jul 2024. <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/lists/all-nobel-prizes-in-literature>