ALL his life, George Papandreou, the son and grandson of Greek prime ministers, thought of himself as being part of a world that was not confined to the borders of his homeland.

Born in the US and educated in Sweden, Canada and Britain, he identified more with the diaspora, ''the other Greece'' that flourished out of the sight and the minds of most of his compatriots.

Days after his socialist Pasok party's resounding electoral victory, Mr Papandreou is determined that the diaspora - 7 million strong and often highly skilled - should play a role in rescuing Greece from the problems it faces after five years of conservative rule. Australia - partly because of the strength and size of its ethnic Greek community, partly because a Greek-Australian is among the new leader's senior advisers - will be at the centre of that drive.

''I have spent my life in a number of educational systems and countries … so part of my identity is being a Greek of Greece and a Greek of the diaspora,'' the 57-year-old Prime Minister said. ''I think in many ways being Greek is being ecumenical, open to the world.''

Before he even won the election, the Harvard-trained politician announced he would approach international experts for advice on how to ''fix'' Greece's shattered finances, cumbersome bureaucracy and corrupt state system - ills that in the past year have sparked violence, riots and social unrest.

With the economy poised to go into recession, the new government is unlikely to have a honeymoon period.

''The diaspora also has a wealth of untapped talent and that is what we need to move the country forward,'' said Dimitris Dollis, a former deputy leader of the Victorian ALP and one of Mr Papandreou's closest aides. ''There is a lot of talent here, but whether it be the economy, arts or reorganisation of the bureaucracy, we want the diaspora to contribute too.''

Australia stood out because of the role it played during the 1967-74 military dictatorship, when Mr Papandreou's father, Andreas, headed the left-wing resistance movement abroad.

''It is possibly the only country in the world that impounded Greek ships when they reached its ports,'' Mr Dollis said. ''The reception Andreas Papandreou got when he visited Sydney in 1972 was unbelievable. That, and the special place that both George and his father have in the hearts of Greeks in Melbourne, have not been forgotten.''

To lure experts and people with specialist knowledge, the Papandreou Government plans to recognise foreign university degrees, facilitate residence permits and abolish compulsory military service.

''For too long, successive Greek governments have got it wrong,'' said Theodore Kassimis, the outgoing deputy foreign minister in charge of diaspora affairs. ''The diaspora is very dynamic, a great source of strength, but it has been under-utilised because it has never been properly approached. Instead, we gave money to communities to hold events in tavernas.''

Only recently, he said, had Athens created a network of prominent Greek professionals in the diaspora.

''In the case of Australia, I discussed the idea of annual graduate exchange programs with the former government and state governors of Victoria, Perth and New South Wales,'' Mr Kassimis said. ''Papandreou, I know, will want to take things further.''

Mr Dollis said Mr Papandreou would soon act on his pledge to visit Australia.