At its core, the Tim Burton directed and co-written movie Edward Scissorhands (1990) is a romantic love story. So much more comes into play in moving this film into the fantastic and the dramatic that the story of love can be lost, however, my perspective is that we should not lose hold of the movie’s core. That we deal in an incompletely built artificially intelligent man amongst a quirky landscape of people behaving badly gives this film charm.

The movie Edward Scissorhands opens with an elderly grandmother telling her granddaughter the tale of a man, Edward as portrayed by Johnny Depp, with the blades of scissors for hands. The film then settles back into the current day with Peg Boggs as portrayed by Dianne Wiest discovering the young man in a crumbling Gothic mansion while selling Avon cosmetics door-to-door.

Edward is an artificially created man built by an inventor, portrayed by Vincent Price, who had died before giving his creation, the artificially intelligent Edward, hands. Pegs brings the harmless being home to meet her family, including Pegs husband Bill, teenage daughter Kim and young son Kevin as portrayed, respectively, by Alan Arkin, Winona Ryder and Robert Oliveri. Edward comes to love Kim romantically quickly after meeting her.

The Boggs family hosts a barbecue to introduce Edward to the neighborhood. While Edward is generally befriended by the neighborhood, religious fanatic Esmeralda and Kim’s boyfriend Jim, as portrayed by O-Lan Jones and Anthony Michael Hall prove themselves two notable exceptions. Finding himself unique among his neighbors, Scissorhands sets upon an increasingly ingratiating path of using the blades attached to his forearms to perform yardwork, animal grooming and hairstyling for women of the neighborhood.

Joyce Monroe, as portrayed by Kathy Baker, toes the line between friend and enemy when at first she attempts to help Edward open a hair salon. Efforts included attempts to find a loan, locate a physical place for the establishment, and finally an unsuccessful attempt to seduce Scissorhands in exchange for her generosity. Monroe lies about Edward’s actions in the aftermath of the third point, lessening trust in Scissorhands and enabling drama the both discourages the future potential for the movie’s protagonist while also enabling those who actively dislike Edward to pursue their ends. It is in this space that the movie’s drama and romantic aspirations become fully realized in a particularly sweet manner for the grandmother sharing a story with her granddaughter from earlier in the movie.

Beyond Tim Burton‘s writing contribution, additional screenwriting credit for Edward Scissorhands rests with Caroline Thompson. Having particularly been taken with romantic sensibility and sweetness for how the character of Edward Scissorhands is remembered within the movie, I grant Edward Scissorhands as directed by Tim Burton 4.0-stars on a scale of 1-to-5.

Matt – Saturday, April 20, 2024

It was the weekend just past that my parents invited Lynn and me to see the animated movie Minions: The Rise of Gru (2022) in the movie theatre. The movie was directed by the team of Kyle Balda, Brad Ableson and Jonathan del Val. The Minions franchise, when considered in timeline order rather than release order, can be watched as Minions (2015), Minions: The Rise of Gru, Despicable Me (2010), Despicable Me 2 (2013) and Despicable Me 3 (2017).

It is not necessary to have seen the other movies in the Minions franchise to enjoy Minions: The Rise of Gru. Pierre Coffin voices of all the minions in this film, with Kevin, Stuart, Bob and Otto featuring prominently. A prominent set of actors buttress the performance by lending their voices to this movie.

Much of the film features the city of San Francisco, California. Steve Carell reprises his role as Gru as a boy nearly 12-years old with the aspiration of becoming a super-villain. The relationship between the Minions themselves and the Gru are shown following the introduction of a storyline including the Viscious 6.

The story of Gru’s introduction to villainy takes a concrete turn with Minions: The Rise of Gru when Gru is introduced to join the Vicious 6, a group of super-villains founded by Wild Knuckles. A circumstance has occurred that disconnected Wild Knuckles from the group, introducing an opening for new leader Belle Bottom to add to the ranks of Jean-Clawed, Svengeance, Stronghold and Nun-chuck.

An object with powers and relevance to the Chinese New Year (also called Lunar New Year) have put a wedge between Wild Knuckles and the remainder of Vicious 6, with the invitation to join the group as facilitated through Dr. Nefario establishing the child appropriate conflict that informs the movie’s conflict.

Master Chow and a biker become important aids in addressing the movie’s conflict, which includes nearly continuous action, humor and music that offers things to the adults that accompany kids to the show. Humor that at one point invoked Don Rickles was a particularly nice touch for those with a decent recollection of the 1970s and other decades the star worked in.

Death Valley, California also is mentioned within Minions: The Rise of Gru. There is much to enjoy for audiences that welcome movies with a PG (Parental Guidance) rating, which this movie has. This film worked well for Lynn along with my parents, who are in their seventies. I rate Minions: The Rise of Gru as directed by Kyle Balda, Brad Ableson and Jonathan del Val 4-stars on a scale of 1-to-5.

Matt – Saturday, July 9, 2022

Winning Academy Awards for best picture, best writing, and best achievement in film editing, the film Argo (2012) tells a story based on actual events depicted in a book written by a CIA operative and a 2007 Wired magazine article. The underlying events of the story traced back to a three year hostage crisis in Iran that began in 1979. Based on the fact that the end result was something I knew walking in, I found the movie better than it had to be.

(From left, Bryan Cranston as Jack O’Donnell and Ben Affleck as Tony Mendez in Argo).

Argo stars director Ben Affleck as American intelligence officer Tony Mendez, Bryan Cranston as Jack O’Donnell, Alan Arkin as Lester Siegel, and John Goodman as John Chambers. Mendez, O’Donnell, Siegel and Chambers were key members of the American effort to get six members of the American embassy in Tehran in the aftermath of the Iranian Revolution of 1978-1979. The film took pains to provide the historical context of the time, along with the series of bad ideas to get six Americans to safety.

(From left, John Goodman as John Chambers and Alan Arkin as Lester Siegel in Argo).

The six Americans holed up in the Canadian embassy in Tehran were Kathy Stafford as played by Kerry Bishé, Joe Stafford as played by Scoot McNairy, Mark Lijek as played by Christopher Denham, Bob Anders as played by Tate Donovan, Lee Schatz as played by Rory Cochrane, and Cora Lijek as played by Clea DuVall. Mark and Cora Lijek were a couple.

(From left, Kerry Bishé as Kathy Stafford, Scoot McNairy as Joe Stafford, Christopher Denham as Mark Lijek, Tate Donovan as Bob Anders, Rory Cochrane as Lee Schatz, and Clea DuVall as Cora Lijek in Argo).

Argo as a film was praised for its cinematic experience, as well as the acting in particular of Alan Arkin and John Goodman as film producers that helped bring the fiction of a film within Argo called the same thing. Historical complaints of note for the film included that the Canadian embassy’s part in the rescue was larger than portrayed, that British and New Zealand embassies had turned the Americans away, and that the actual danger for the six American captives, Mendez, and Ken Taylor (as played by Victor Garber) may have been less than portrayed.

(From left, Victor Garber as Ken Taylor and Ben Affleck as Tony Mendez in Argo).

The story of the “exfiltration” of six Americans from Tehran, Iran in the midst of a political revolution in the late 1970s during the presidential administration of Jimmy Carter made for good cinema. I appreciated the movie at the time of its release, and I enjoyed it again upon watching the film just recently. My recommendation is that you watch the film. I offer the movie Argo 4.5-stars on a scale of one-to-five.

Matt – Saturday, June 13, 2020

If you take a look at the description listed by the Internet Movie Database for Glengarry Glen Ross (1992), you get one fragment of a sentence. That fragment describing the movie is this: “An examination of the machinations behind the scenes at a real estate office.” Just like that description of the movie, which was adapted for the movie screen by original playwright David Mamet, this review may be merely the fragment of the fuller picture that this movie deserves. Thanks to friend of the blog Cobra for turning us onto this movie in a listing of his favorite movies.

(Al Pacino as Ricky Roma in Glengarry Glen Ross).

Glengarry Glen Ross offers the colorful language of full-throated criticism of the modern American business culture. Highly rated among critics and audience goers alike, the movie begins with the cutthroat declaration that all but two members of the sales staff will be fired at the end of the month based on the meritocracy of closed sales. Hot seller Ricky Roma, as played by Al Pacino, conveniently is missing from that meeting.

(Alec Baldwin as Blake in Glengarry Glen Ross).

In a role created specifically for the movie, the character named in credits as Blake sets the tone as the motivator sent by the home office of Mitch and Murray to abusively, with profane props and profane language, to motivate the salesmen to close sales that simply aren’t there to be closed. As the working class men will attest, the leads rationed out by office manager John Williamson lack either the money or the desire to actually invest in land. Alec Baldwin stars as Blake for a single, devastating, tone-setting scene that establishes the desperation that becomes the commentary of the movie.

(Jack Lemmon as Shelley Levene in Glengarry Glen Ross).

Shelley Levene reacts first and perhaps with the most immediacy in response to the tone offered by Blake of Mitch and Murray. Jack Lemmon portrays the role with an elegant deftness that is the truth of his character. Levene first fails in three separate attempts to get office manager John Williamson to offer him special favors that will help Levene keep his job. Visiting the home of a client that never was going to buy, Levene unbeknownst to others in the office commits the office burglary for the special leads, the real leads, that are going to save his job in some desperate hope of keeping a time that has past from catching up with him.

(Ed Harris as Dave Moss in Glengarry Glen Ross).

As Dave Moss, Ed Harris solicits the confides his frustration with similarly frustrated salesman George Aaronow. The character study in growing desperation between these two grows from mutually agreed upon frustration to actual planning for a burglary of the office. Moss aims to convince Aaronow to break into the office as Moss masterminds the plan. The whole urgency of the plea is misguided as Aaronow is moved by compassion while restrained by the sensibility of a moral compass that says such talk is the moral nonsense that it seems to be.

(Alan Arkin as George Aaronow in Glengarry Glen Ross).

Alan Arkin potrays George Aaronow, who finds the schemes of Mitch and Murray, Williamson, Moss, and the others he only learns of after the burglary as complete nonsense. Aaronow’s desperate meltdown over lunch on day two of the movie, which responds with the humanity and dignity that all these salesmen deserve and are losing, real teeth. Williamson responds to this with perhaps his first loss of professional coldness, or perhaps his first showing of his cold sympathy for the reality his salesmen face, by repeating his invitation to George Aaronow to go to lunch.

(Kevin Spacey as John Williamson in Glengarry Glen Ross).

Kevin Spacey portrays the office manager that blithely follows the rules offered by senior managers, casting aside legitimate concerns among the men whose livelihood will end at the end of the month. The office theft perpetuated between the first day portrayed in the movie and the second is further handled in a ham-handed way with a police detective while further ignoring the moral depravity developing with Ricky Roma, Shelley Levene, and a couple who purchased real estate from Roma while under the influence of alcohol the evening before. The sleazy techniques used by Roma to continue closing the deal, and by Levene through multiple plays through the movie, are perhaps the clearest commentary offered by writer David Mamet through this film. Mamet‘s skill in having George Aaronow’s meltdown almost sidetrack the Roma Levene criminal play was emotionally brilliant.

(Left to Right – Kevin Spacey, Al Pacino, Jack Lemmon, Alec Baldwin, Alan Arkin, and Ed Harris in Glengarry Glen Ross).

The story of this movie is straightforward, direct, and powerful. While the language is graphic and profane, the language seems like a justified usage of the grittiness if there ever is. The feelings and situations present in this movie are substantive, interesting, and satisfying in raising a glimpse into characters reacting authentically to very real stress and frustration.

(David Mamet, the playwright and screenwriter of Glengarry Glen Ross).

There are professional situations I have experienced where that candor of expression is something I’ve craved expressing, albeit with less profanity. This, I think, lends to the credibility of the writing and experience. All this said, I rank the drama and quality of the exposition in this film, at first watching, at 4.5-stars on a scale of one-to-five stars.

Matt – Saturday, April 20, 2019