At its core, the Tim Burton directed and co-written movie Edward Scissorhands (1990) is a romantic love story. So much more comes into play in moving this film into the fantastic and the dramatic that the story of love can be lost, however, my perspective is that we should not lose hold of the movie’s core. That we deal in an incompletely built artificially intelligent man amongst a quirky landscape of people behaving badly gives this film charm.

The movie Edward Scissorhands opens with an elderly grandmother telling her granddaughter the tale of a man, Edward as portrayed by Johnny Depp, with the blades of scissors for hands. The film then settles back into the current day with Peg Boggs as portrayed by Dianne Wiest discovering the young man in a crumbling Gothic mansion while selling Avon cosmetics door-to-door.

Edward is an artificially created man built by an inventor, portrayed by Vincent Price, who had died before giving his creation, the artificially intelligent Edward, hands. Pegs brings the harmless being home to meet her family, including Pegs husband Bill, teenage daughter Kim and young son Kevin as portrayed, respectively, by Alan Arkin, Winona Ryder and Robert Oliveri. Edward comes to love Kim romantically quickly after meeting her.

The Boggs family hosts a barbecue to introduce Edward to the neighborhood. While Edward is generally befriended by the neighborhood, religious fanatic Esmeralda and Kim’s boyfriend Jim, as portrayed by O-Lan Jones and Anthony Michael Hall prove themselves two notable exceptions. Finding himself unique among his neighbors, Scissorhands sets upon an increasingly ingratiating path of using the blades attached to his forearms to perform yardwork, animal grooming and hairstyling for women of the neighborhood.

Joyce Monroe, as portrayed by Kathy Baker, toes the line between friend and enemy when at first she attempts to help Edward open a hair salon. Efforts included attempts to find a loan, locate a physical place for the establishment, and finally an unsuccessful attempt to seduce Scissorhands in exchange for her generosity. Monroe lies about Edward’s actions in the aftermath of the third point, lessening trust in Scissorhands and enabling drama the both discourages the future potential for the movie’s protagonist while also enabling those who actively dislike Edward to pursue their ends. It is in this space that the movie’s drama and romantic aspirations become fully realized in a particularly sweet manner for the grandmother sharing a story with her granddaughter from earlier in the movie.

Beyond Tim Burton‘s writing contribution, additional screenwriting credit for Edward Scissorhands rests with Caroline Thompson. Having particularly been taken with romantic sensibility and sweetness for how the character of Edward Scissorhands is remembered within the movie, I grant Edward Scissorhands as directed by Tim Burton 4.0-stars on a scale of 1-to-5.

Matt – Saturday, April 20, 2024

One shall not trifle with the relationship between a boy and his dog. Tim Burton appreciated the story of Mary Shelley‘s 1881 book Frankenstein; or the Modern Prometheus, which was made into the James Whale movie Frankenstein (1931). Mix these three things together, and we are offered Burton‘s sensibility for story combined with an inclination for stop-motion animation to offer us the comedy drama Frankenweenie (2012).

With a handful of important relationships at the center of Frankenweenie, perhaps the one at the emotional center of the movie is the one of Victor Frankenstein and his bull terrier dog, Sparky. Charlie Tahan voices the boy scientist and filmmaker Victor Frankenstein. Frank Welker voices Sparky, his dog. Frankenstein is a bit quiet and awkward among his classmates, so his parents push him into playing baseball.

It was at the baseball game that Victor’s parents, Edward and Susan as voiced by Martin Short and Catherine O’Hara, respectively, see rejoice turn to sorrow when Victor hits a home run. The sorrow comes in, along with the homage and parody of the Frankenstein movie comes into play as Sparky meets his demise. In true Tim Burton style, what comes next is meant to celebrate the love for a dog in as comedically inappropriate a way as possible.

In the aftermath of Sparky’s death, Victor’s school happens to bring in a new science teacher named Mr. Rzykruski, as voiced by Martin Landau. Mr. Rzykruski demonstrates the effect of electricity on dead frogs to his classroom in New Holland. Victor is inspired to apply this concept on a deceased Sparky, succeeding in bringing his beloved pooch back to life. The occasion of a school science fair, Sparky’s escape from the Frankenstein’s attic, and the ignorance of Victor’s parents releases a drama that more fully brings in Victor’s schoolmates.

Classmates central to the larger story of Victor, his classmates, Sparky, a cat named Mr. Whiskers and, finally, a pair of goldfish include Edgar ‘E’ Gore as voiced by Atticus Shaffer, Elsa Van Helsing as voiced by Winona Ryder, Weird Girl as voiced by Catherine O’Hara, Toshiaki as voiced by James Hiroyuki Liao, Bob as voiced by Robert Capron and Nassor, as voiced by Martin Short. Without heading too specifically into the way the story works out, the notions of competition, friendship, parenting and the blurry lines that can emerge in a PG rated comedy drama are appropriate for this animated cartoon.

Writing credit for the screenplay that became Frankenweenie belongs to Leonard Ripps for the 1984 screenplay, Tim Burton for the idea and John August for this screenplay. The story is charming with its own quirky formula for who the heroes and villains are, without there being a refreshingly clear sense of the villain not being motivated by villainy. I give Frankenweenie as directed by Tim Burton 4.25-stars on a scale of 1-to-5.

Matt – Wednesday, October 12, 2022

With the oddness that has been the year 2020, new movie releases have been few and far between. Matt Lynn Digital continued to look into the past for movies to enjoy and review with you. The year saw us review thirty-six (36) films through the year, which we will share with you by decade, shared from highest rated to lowest.

Argo (2012) leads the way for movies from the 2010s. The film earned 4.5-stars on a scale of 1-to-5 stars, which is the highest rating matched only twice for movies this year. Earning 4.0-stars for the decade were Game Night (2018) starring Jason Batemen and Rachel McAdams, Captain Phillips (2013) starring Tom Hanks and Barkhad Abdi and The Lincoln Lawyer (2011) starring Matthew McConaughey and, for a second time this decade, Bryan Cranston.

Ford v Ferrari (2019) offers the first of two starring roles in the Matt Lynn Digital movie reviews for Matt Damon and Christian Bale. The story of the 1966 24 Hours of Le Mans earn a rating of 3.75-stars along with The Martian (2015), which starred Matt Damon, Kristen Wiig and Jeff Daniels and Gravity (2013) starring Sandra Bullock, George Clooney, and Ed Harris.

The Robert Zemeckis film Cast Away (2000) starts in the holiday season where the character portrayed by Tom Hanks faces tremendous odds while delivering an outstanding movie granted 4.25-stars. The movie Ray (2004), starring Jamie Foxx in the role as Ray Charles and the Ang Lee movie Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000) starring Michelle Yeoh and Yun-Fat Chow each earned 4-stars in their 2020 reviews.

Gangs of New York (2002) leads a stable of five movies to earn 3.75-stars from the decade that began the 21st century. While prominent, the performances by Leonardo DiCaprio, Cameron Diaz, Brendan Gleeson, Liam Neeson and John C. Reilly held sway in part for where the ranking placed. Other films from this decade gaining 3.75-stars included The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford (2007) starring Brad Pitt and Casey Affleck, The Blind Side (2009) starring Sandra Bullock and Tim McGraw, Friday Night Lights (2004) starring Lucas Black, Billy Bob Thornton and Tim McGraw, and Elf (2003) starring Will Ferrell, James Caan and Zooey Deschanel. The Skulls (2000) starring Joshua Jackson, Paul Walker and Craig T. Nelson earned 3.5-stars.

The film Fight Club (1999) and the film Goodfellas (1990) bookend the 1990s with a pair of movies earning the 2020 top rating of 4.5-stars offered by Matt Lynn Digital. The football movie Rudy (1993) starring Sean Astin and Ned Beatty is joined by baseball movie The Sandlot (1993) with Denis Leary and the military, political intrigue movie The Hunt for Red October (1990) starring Sean Connery, James Earl Jones, Alec Baldwin and Sam Neill with ratings of 4.0-stars.

Baseball and borderline romantic comedy film For Love of the Game (1999) earned 3.75-stars from Matt Lynn Digital in 2020. The film Mr. Holland’s Opus (1995) with Richard Dreyfuss and the Ron Howard film Far and Away (1992) with Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman join For Love of the Game with 3.75-stars. Earning 3.25 stars is the film The Usual Suspects (1995), which starred Kevin Spacey, Stephen Baldwin, Benicio Del Toro and Kevin Pollak.

The 4-stars earned by the organized crime movie Scarface (1983) is joined by the Steven Spielberg film Empire of the Sun (1987) starring Christian Bale, John Malkovich and Joe Pantoliano and Tim Burton‘s film Beetlejuice (1988) starring Alec Baldwin, Geena Davis, Winona Ryder and Michael Keaton. The Richard Donner film Scroooged (1988) starring Bill Murray, John Forsythe, David Johansen and Carol Kane completes the decade with 3.75-stars.

Alien (1979) closed out the 1970s with quite the impact, garnering 4.25-stars for a science fiction story that stands on its own. The Martin Scorsese concert goodbye The Last Waltz (1978) with The Band leads three other productions getting 3.75-stars. Joining The Last Waltz with 3.75-stars include the baseball movie The Bad News Bears (1976) with Walter Mathau and Tatum O’Neal, the western movie The Outlaw Josey Wales (1976) starring Clint Eastwood and John Vernon and the comedic war movie Kelly’s Heroes (1970) starring Clint Eastwood, Telly Savalas, Don Rickles, Carroll O’ Connor and Gavin MacLeod.

The John Ford movie The Man Who Shot Liberty Vance (1962) starred John Wayne, James Stewart, Lee Marvin and Vera Miles in a western that earned 3.75-stars. The Lady Vanishes (1938) put Alfred Hitchcock on the proverbial map with a political commentary in the guise of a thriller starring Margaret Lockwood, Michael Redgrave, Paul Lukas and May Whitty. The Lady Vanishes earned 4.0-stars from Matt Lynn Digital.

Matt Lynn Digital also enjoyed sharing a review of Richard Linklater‘s Before Trilogy of movies. Blog friend Cobra reviewed Before Sunrise (1995), Before Sunset (2004) and Before Midnight (2013) in a single review. Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy explore the notion of relationships a bit more fully and cleverly than often happens with any movie franchise. It is with thanks that we look back to this sharing.

Share the Matt Lynn Digital blog with your friends if you see value in what we are doing. We feel these reviews provide excellent content that we would like to continue offering.

Matt – Wednesday, December 30, 2020

The Tim Burton sensibility and style shine clearly in the comedy, fantasy film Beetlejuice (1988). A story told thematically adjacent to the notion of halloween celebrated in the North America and much of Europe.

The charming story of Beetlejuice is the unfortunate tale of a married couple named Adam and Barbara, played by Alec Baldwin and Geena Davis, respectively, who fall victim to a drowning near their home. The couple is bound to their house, when a couple with indifferent to their daughter purchases the home and plans immediate changes.

Jeffrey Jones and Catherine O’Hara portray Charles and Delia, who bring their interior decorator into the home. Intending large changes in their career and their art of frightening taste, Charles and Delia introduces us to Otho, the incompetent friend whose odd tastes and questionable competence makes him a natural fit in the circle of friends. Adam and Barbara, meanwhile, seek the support of their afterlife supporter, Juno, who is portrayed by Sylvia Sidney.

The means of introducing the characters, plus their perspectives in helping us to understand what sympathies exist for the characters of Lydia and Betelgeuse, portrayed by Winona Ryder and Michael Keaton, respectively, offer solid narrative to match what becomes a level of character development for the couples central to the Beetlejuice film. Lydia, we learn, is the daughter of Charles and Delia.

With movie roles for Robert Goulet and Dick Cavett in addition to prominent placements for the songs Banana Boat Song (Day-O) and Jump in the Line by Harry Belafonte, director Tim Burton offered a film that fills his own storytelling strengths as well as that of Michael Keaton while eliciting performances from Alec Baldwin and Geena Davis that at minimum buck some of their performance stereotypes. For example, it wasn’t long ago that a friend mentioned that Baldwin tends to play particularly antagonist roles that tend portray unpleasant people. The role of Adam misses that description here.

I was taken in many respects by the film Beetlejuice. The film works. My rating for Beetlejuice is 4.00-stars on a scale of one-to-five.

Matt – Saturday, October 17, 2020