It’s 2015. Kirsten Dunst and Jesse Plemons have just met on the set of Fargo. For the next few months, while working on season two of the series, they play a married couple. They kiss, they cuddle and they argue, just as real couples do. Their onscreen chemistry is enough to make you forget they are acting at all.

But then again, perhaps they weren’t acting? This week, the couple announced they have married in Jamaica, six years after their onscreen romance and nine months after their film The Power of the Dog premiered, in which they once again starred as a couple.

Dunst and Plemons are by no means the first Hollywood pairing whose love story started on screen. Of course, the infamous romance between Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie began on the set of Mr and Mrs Smith in 2005. Even though Pitt was married to Jennifer Aniston at the time of filming, Jolie has since admitted that it was while they were working together on set that they first fell in love.

Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson know the feeling. Branagh famously ended his marriage with Thompson in 1995 after falling in love with Helena Bonham Carter on the set of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. She was playing his love interest at the time.

And the scandals continue: Last October, Dominic West and Lily James were spotted kissing in Rome after filming TV drama The Pursuit of Love, despite West’s 11-year marriage to landscape designer Catherine FitzGerald.

Then there’s Robert Pattinson and Kristen Stewart, whose relationship began while playing tortured high-school lovers in the Twilight films, creating a real-life relationship that lasted for four years.

There was Johnny Depp and Winona Ryder, who met on the set of Edward Scissorhands. Depp was so infatuated with his onscreen girlfriend that while filming he got the tattoo “Winona Forever”. Let’s also not forget Ryan Gosling and Rachel McAdams, who dated for three years after playing The Notebook’s doomed protagonists.

And Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton; Ryan Gosling and Eva Mendes; Rachel Weisz and Daniel Craig; Kit Harington and Rose Leslie; Emma Stone and Andrew Garfield; Freida Pinto and Dev Patel; Jennifer Garner and Ben Affleck. The list goes on and on.

Yet the link between romance and acting is still understudied, as it were. Researchers Thalia Goldstein, an assistant professor of psychology at George Mason University, and Paul Bloom, professor of psychology at Yale University, are some of the first cognitive scientists to investigate what happens to the brain while performing theatre. They have found that when preparing for a role, actors usually spend a lot of energy rearranging their mental state to fit the character they are playing.

So what about when actors have to pretend to fall in love? “They are putting their bodies and words into positions and interactions that are fictional, but their bodies and actions mimic reality,” Goldstein tells i. “So it may be that actors are reading fictional behaviours as real and therefore following suit with their emotions.”

Similarly, actors are also trained to be open and emotionally intelligent in order to play a variety of characters. “They may be more likely to be open to the possibilities of emotional connections with others who are also emotionally intelligent and open,” Goldstein suggests.

The phenomenon of actors falling in love is well known by those in the industry. “It’s referred to as a mild form of possession,” says Dr Glenn Wilson, a psychologist and author of Psychology for Performing Artists. While it is extremely common, it is still viewed as an occupational hazard for directors.

Zendaya and Tom Holland were warned about keeping their relationship professional before playing MJ and Peter Parker in Spider-Man: No Way Home. “I took Tom and Zendaya aside, separately, when we first cast them and gave them a lecture,” Spider-Man producer Amy Pascal told The New York Times last year. “Don’t go there – just don’t. Try not to. I gave the same advice to Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone. It can just complicate things, you know? And they all ignored me.”

One assistant director on an upcoming big-budget Hollywood film, who asked to remain anonymous, says that there is nothing contractually to prevent actors getting involved with their co-stars. “There’s only a conflict-of-interest clause in contracts. So maybe if you hooked up with another crew member or actor, it would become a conflict of interest if it impeded you from doing what you have been contracted to do but there is nothing specific saying you can’t hook up.”

This can mean film sets are littered with inappropriate relationships. “There’s nothing to stop older actors from hooking up with younger actors – I’ve watched it happen,” he says.

Wilson says that the actors who end up falling in love with their co-stars often want the part to take them over. “They give themselves over to the character, immersing themselves in the feelings of the character,” he says. “The more they can make it real, the more convincing that performance will be. Often there is a kind of chemistry that comes out of that that would be hard to replicate by a more technical approach to acting.”

Technical actors maintain more detachment from their character, maintaining a clearer sense of self throughout their performance, Wilson explains. Immersive actors, however, are more likely to live and believe the emotions of their part, making them vulnerable to romantic “possession”.

“It can be terribly destructive. For Method actors, the greater the immersion, the more likely it’s going to become real for you, even though from the external point of view, it might be a fantasy,” Wilson explains.

Often the romantic relationships conceived on screen do not last; take the off-then-on-then-off-again couple Miley Cyrus and Liam Hemsworth, who met while filming The Last Song in 2009. Or Blake Lively and Penn Badgley, who met and then ultimately broke up on the set of Gossip Girl. And the Big Bang Theory’s Kaley Cuoco and Johnny Galecki who after two years together broke up as the series was about to go into its 10th season.

“I think this is why we see so many divorces in Hollywood. Couples that are actors are often possessed by the characters that they are playing, and really do feel in love, if only temporarily. Often it’s not until the couple gets married before they discover that it’s a bit of a fantasy or an illusion,” says Wilson.

But let’s not dwell on unhappy endings when we could be congratulating the new Mr and Mrs Plemons on their big day. Here’s hoping their union is a blockbuster hit rather than going straight to DVD.