Tag: shaun livingston

The Roller Coaster Career of Shaun Livingston

This year’s NBA Finals have been an instant classic so far with two superstars in LeBron James and Stephen Curry going at. While both teams have great players, there is one in particular I want to talk about. His name is Shaun Livingston and is currently a key player off the bench for the Warriors. Long … More The Roller Coaster Career of Shaun Livingston

VIDEO: James Harden, Stephen Curry duel in Game 1 of West Finals

Stephen Curry got the best of James Harden and the Rockets in Game 1. Basketball fans were treated to an exciting first game of the Western Conference Finals on Tuesday night, as Stephen Curry and the Golden State Warriors edged James Harden and the Houston Rockets 110-106 in a thriller. Curry and Harden, who finished 1st … More VIDEO: James Harden, Stephen Curry duel in Game 1 of West Finals

Andre Iguodala Might Come Off The Bench For The Warriors

Andre Iguodala Might Come Off The Bench For The Warriors The Golden State Warriors are still a work in progress under first-time head coach Steve Kerr. The talent and offense available to Kerr with this roster is well known, but he’ll have to impose his own vision in order to help this team get over … More Andre Iguodala Might Come Off The Bench For The Warriors

2014-15 Sixth Man Of The Year Preview

“Spark plug.” “Energy man off the bench.” “Captain of the second team.” All of these phrases and terms are used to describe some of the players who went on to win the Sixth Man of the Year award. The Sixth Man has increasingly become an important position in today’s game. A lot of the guys coming … More 2014-15 Sixth Man Of The Year Preview

Shaun Livingston out 6-8 weeks after toe surgery

The Warriors guard had successful toe surgery and is expected to miss 6-8 weeks. On Friday afternoon the Golden State Warriors announced that guard Shaun Livingston is expected to miss 6-8 weeks after having arthroscopic surgery on his right big toe. The procedure, a debridement (cleaning out of debris) in his right big toe, was performed … More Shaun Livingston out 6-8 weeks after toe surgery