OAKLAND – In the immediate aftermath of the Clippers’ Game 4 playoff catastrophe in Portland – a night when the team lost Chris Paul, Blake Griffin and any hope for a deep postseason run in minutes, the question was posed – was it the worst night in Clippers history?

Then, someone brought up Shaun Livingston’s name.

For an organization that’s had an owner banished, a 3-1 series lead squandered, no trips to the conference finals and every other imaginable calamity, one play, a moment in a meaningless game for a sub-.500 team in February of 2007 rated at the top.

It was that bad.

He tries not to think about the gruesome injury, when the then 21-year-old landed so awkwardly after a shot during a February 2007 game that his leg snapped sideways, resulting in torn ligaments, a dislocated kneecap and fears the leg would need to be amputated. He said he’ll stay in the moment.

But when the moment is big, and the pressure is great, the Golden State Warriors know Livingston, perhaps more than anyone in their organization, will have the proper perspective.

“Shaun’s a guy who has battled through much more than having to step up in a game,” Golden State forward Draymond Green said. “He’s been from the top to the bottom and back. And when you go through so much in life and his career, I mean, it makes stepping up in the game easy.”

Thursday in Game 1 of the NBA Finals, Livingston made it look easy.

With Steph Curry and Klay Thompson struggling to hit shots, a player who once suffered one of the league’s most grotesque knee injuries was there to pick up the slack.

Unstoppable with mid-range jumpers – what he called “my bread and butter” – Livingston, Curry’s 30-year-old, 6-foot-7 backup at point guard, was 8 for 10 from the field to lead seven Warriors in double figures with a playoff career-high 20 points in 27 minutes.

“He got to his spots, to the free-throw line, 12 feet and in on the baseline, and he hurt us with that,” Cavaliers coach Tyronn Lue said.

It was the most Livingston has scored since March 8, 2015 when he had 21 against his old team, the Clippers, and he added four rebounds, three assists and zero turnovers.

“Obviously, the game ball goes to Shaun Livingston,” Cleveland’s LeBron James said. “Came in, gave them a huge spark.”

Livingston gave the Warriors a strong start while surrounded by those thousands of golden yellow “Strength in Numbers” T-shirts worn by the raucous fans throughout sold-out Oracle.

“That’s our motto. That’s what we believe in,” Livingston said. “We pick each other up. We believe in each other and we just fight.”

The No.4 pick in the 2004 draft, Livingston’s road back has been detailed in countless features along the way – the stops in Miami, Oklahoma City, Washington, Charlotte, Milwaukee and Cleveland before he eventually found stability in 2013 in Brooklyn.

He tries not to focus on the past. Like the way he works on his mid-range jumper, he’s had to train his mind to do it.

But his teammates can’t help but remember.

Even a memorable Game 1 performance like this won’t erase what happened that night at Staples Center. The screams were too loud. The pain was too great. The injury was too awful.

Before Thompson could escape the Warriors’ locker room, he stopped to speak with some reporters. Unprompted, he brought up the injury that will always be associated with Livingston’s name.

“He’s a real pro,” Thompson said. “What he’s come back from, that’s probably one of the hardest things any athlete’s ever gone through. So adversity? When they make a run? That’s nothing to Shaun.

“He’s an amazing player.”

On the NBA’s biggest stage Thursday, he had an amazing game and an amazing moment to get lost in.