LeBron James has been spotted at Game 4 of the second-round matchup between the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Boston Celtics on Monday night -- an appearance certain to drive conversation about the superstar's future.

James, who can opt out of his contact with the Los Angeles Lakers and become a free agent this summer, played two stints in Cleveland. He led the Cavs to their only NBA championship in 2016 before leaving two years later. Cleveland lost on Monday night, 109-102, despite battling valiantly without its injured star, Donovan Mitchell.

The league's all-time scoring leader, James still has a home near his hometown of Akron. He's come back to Cleveland many times since leaving in 2018 but has not attended any Cavs games.

James arrived just as the game began and took a courtside seat along with his wife, Savannah, who noticeably wore a faux fur hat, and agent Rich Paul.

He received a thunderous ovation when shown on the Rocket Mortgage FieldHouse scoreboard during a timeout. James acknowledged the crowd and then King James mimicked putting a crown on his head.

The 39-year-old had a short postseason this year as the Lakers were eliminated in the first round by the defending champion Denver Nuggets.

James made it clear following the series that he was leaving his options open and had made no decisions about his next move.

In the past, James has talked about playing alongside his oldest son, 19-year-old Bronny, who played at USC last season and recently declared for this year's draft.

On Monday, the younger James, 19, was cleared by the league's doctors to participate in the pre-draft combine in Chicago after going into cardiac arrest last summer. His draft chances are slim, but if he does pave his way into the league than he is expected to be taken in the second round at the earliest.

James is a 20-time All-Star, four-time league MVP and champion.

He was drafted No. 1 overall by Cleveland in 2003 and spent seven seasons with the Cavaliers before signing as a free agent with Miami in 2010.

He returned to the Cavs in 2014 and led them to four consecutive NBA Finals appearances - all against Golden State.

James previously revealed his desire to play alongside his son but has distanced himself from his dream scenario in the last few weeks.