2015 October Bowling Tournament

The Austin Chapter of Credit Unions had a very successful day celebrating International Credit Union day with our annual bowling tournament. We had a total of 10 teams represented by several different credit unions in the Austin area. This year, we were able to raise $2,000 for the Cornerstone Credit Union Fund.

We successfully raised $420 for the Texas Cornerstone PAC (Political Action Committee). Thanks to everyone who came out and supported us!

Leveraging Exceptional Service to Sell the Credit Union

Dean Borland, VP of Credit Union Resources, Inc. visited the UFCU Events Center to give our participants an industry perspective on companies that have proven track records of leveraging exceptional service into sales. Along with several examples, Mr. Borland provided us immediate actionable insights on how these some concepts can be applied at our credit unions.

October Bowling Tournament

The Austin Chapter of Credit Unions had a very successful day celebrating International Credit Union day with our annual bowling tournament. We had a total of 10 teams represented by several different credit unions in the Austin area. This year, we were able to raise $1,057.09 for the Cornerstone Credit Union Fund. The winners of the tournament were as follows:

First Place Team - University FCU: Jason McGee, James Palmer, Jay Delgado, Kathryn McCoy, Lynn Harlen

Most CU Spirited Team - Greater Texas FCU as the Texas Flag: Brandy Conway, Rachel Fausett, Ken Gardner, Amanda Carthel, Tammy Carter

Highest Individual Score - Randolph-Brooks FCU, Steven Flores

This year, in addition to the annual bowling tournament, we hosted a cake auction with cakes donated both by credit union employees and bakers with-in the community. The cake auction successfully raised $1,826 for the Texas Cornerstone PAC (Political Action Committee).

Thanks to everyone who came out and supported us! The highest PAC donation went to Tracy Mastrangelo Smith on behalf of A+ FCU!

20th Anniversary Kids Classic

The Austin Chapter of Credit Unions hosted the 20th Anniversary for Kids Classic on September 14-15.

Over the past twenty years, Kids Classic has raised more than $4 million dollars to support the healthcare needs of Central Texas children. Through the generous support of sponsors within the Austin community, this event has raised funds to help Children’s Medical Center of Central Texas and the children and families it serves.

One hundred percent (100%) of the proceeds from the event goes directly to Dell Children’s Medical Center to benefit children in the forty-six (46) county Central Texas region.

Jewelry Party benefiting Austin Children Services

On August 7th, we hosted a Premier Designs Jewelry Party benefiting Austin Children’s Services (ACS). Forty percent of proceeds from sales were donated. Several local credit union representatives and others attended and purchased jewelry to support. The final amount raised for ACS was $244. ACS provides residential and non-residential services to children, youth, and families. Since 1984, ACS has been committed to ensuring the safety and well-being of children who have experienced abuse or neglect.

The Magic Touch

Billy Riggs, the dis-illusionist, helped a group of almost 70 credit union staff break through their own personal illusions to raise the bar on member service using both fun and magic. The team was given pointers on how to engage members, make great first impressions, turn satisfied members into loyal ones, and disarm angry people. The program contained well performed magic focusing on member service and communication skills.

Below are some of the comments attendees had to say:

"It is not always easy to convince someone that they will have fun at a training or seminar but when you have speakers that are as engaging and humorous as Billy was it makes me feel bad for anyone that missed out on the opportunity to hear him speak!"

"I walked away ready to start the day, didn't know how much I needed the laugh and the motivational part of his presentation."

"At first I thought it might be boring but it was very good and I thoroughly enjoyed it and gained some valuable information on dealing with people."

"the speaker was phenomenal, everyone in attendance was engaged because the topic was relevant and interesting.....AND you had breakfast tacos!"

Vendor Expo

On May 14th, eight vendor partners and credit union professionals came out to the Norris Conference Center for our annual Vendor Expo. The Expo also included Casino Knights for a relaxed evening for everyone. This event allowed vendors to showcase their services to employees of the area credit unions. Everyone was able to enjoy great food, poker and network with vendors. The Austin Chapter of Credit Unions would like to welcome three new vendor partners Achieva Mortgage, CUNA Mutual Group, and Members Private Sale.

The Chapter was also able to nominate Tracy Mastrangelo-A+ FCU and Cory Bailey-Texell CU as new board members to the Austin Chapter.

ACCU Market Advertising

April - June 2014

ACCU is pleased to announce that in 2014 we will be running several advertising spots to increase credit union brand awareness in and around the Austin area. Our commercial will begin airing on April 4th, and the radio spot will begin April 7th. Be sure to keep your eyes and ears open for these, share them, and of course let us know what you think!

Radio will play on the following stations:

BOB FM - 103.5

KLBJ FM - 93.7

KAMX (Mix) FM - 94.7

TV will play on the following channels in the AT&T Central North & South Zones:

E!

TLC

MTV

FX

ESPN2

A+ FCU's R.O.A.R Team

A+ Federal Credit Union has organized a credit union R.O.A.R team. The team’s first meeting was on 4/10/14. The CU ROAR program is a political engagement program designed to get credit union staff more involved in credit union advocacy. The program is supported by the Cornerstone Credit Union League, and has had much success throughout other credit unions around the nation.

R.O.A.R. stands for:

Ready - Staying informed on credit union political issues

Organized - having a team of politically active individuals

Active - taking action when there is a call to action

Responsive - contacting lawmakers

Each team member on the ROAR team at A+ has committed to being the grassroots advocate for each of their respective departments and branches. These advocates have united for good with other credit union ROAR team members throughout the country to ensure that the industry stands strong when there is a political call to action. For more information on the CU ROAR program, please visit: http://www.cornerstoneleague.coop/cu_roar.html

Creativity Inside the Box!

Blue Sky thinking and imagining ideal worlds are great for visioning and identifying where we want to go. But the realities of budget reductions, compliance, risk reduction, and time and resource constraints can make it a real challenge to be creative and think outside the box. These very real complexities require us now more than ever to think creatively and generate new ideas within the confines of our environment. Real innovation happens when vision and constraint intersect.

In our March training we explored ways to embrace constraints and use them as a starting point for new thinking. Creativity doesn’t have to mean throwing out all the rules or pretending they don’t exist. We learned how to get inside the box and how to problem-solve our way through the constraints we're confronted with allowing us to think about possible real outcomes.

Flashback Fundraiser

On February 21st the Austin Chapter of Credit Unions helped sponsor the Flashback fundraiser benefiting the Austin Children’s Shelter.

The Flashback helped raise over $84,000 for the Austin Children’s Shelter.

The Austin Children’s Shelter helps provide residential and non-residential services to children and families recovering from abuse. The Austin Children’s Shelter provides a much-needed service to our community and has helped thousands of children through its work.

This has been the third year that the Austin Chapter of Credit Unions has helped sponsor the event and we are incredibly proud to help support such a deserving and beneficial organization.

February Social Mixer

On February 11th, over 40 vendor representatives and credit union professionals came out to Cover 3 to enjoy an evening of socializing and networking. Chapter President Jason McGee addressed the group and thanked everyone for their participation with chapter events in 2013.

The chapter was able to recognize three credit unions for their service during 2013. Randolph Brooks Federal Credit Union was awarded for the most PAC funds collected during 2013, University Federal Credit Union was awarded for the most involvement in chapter events and Greater TEXAS Federal Credit Union was recognized for the most community involvement.

Everyone in attendance enjoyed some great food, great conversation and above all, a great way to remain involved in your local credit union chapter. Thank you to all who braved the weather that evening and came out to mix it up with us.

Get your game on!

At our November Luncheon, Courtney Moran, Executive Director with the Cornerstone Credit Union Foundation and Young Professionals Liaison, shared with us how we as credit union professionals can catalyze change and spark positive growth in our communities.

Courtney taught the message that in order to defend our unique, not-for-profit cooperative structure, it is essential that credit union professionals are actively engaged in their local communities. Such involvement will help to ensure that elected officials, and the general public, truly appreciate the “Credit Union Difference” and the positive impact it has made in the financial lives of Americans for over 100 years.

In addition to the training Jason Mcgee, Vice President was able to present Courtney with the check for funds raised at our October bowling tournament.

Bowling Tournament benefiting Cornerstone Foundation

The Austin Chapter of Credit Unions held its Annual Bowling Tournament to raise funds for the Cornerstone Credit Union League Foundation (CSCUF). Through the generous support of the Austin Area Credit Unions, this event raised $1,679 for CSCUF. One hundred percent (100%) of the proceeds from the event went directly to the CSCUF to provide education, training, and advocacy to over 700 credit unions.

Ten teams of bowlers enjoyed an exciting Bowling Tournament at the Main Event in Cedar Park, Texas. This Bowling event included awards for Highest Individual Score, Lowest Individual Score, Highest Team Score, and Most Spirited Team.

Advocacy 101- How to be heard on Capitol Hill

ACCU hosted Jim Phelps, Vice President - Advocacy, from the Cornerstone Credit Union Leage. At our Advocacy 101 training Austin credit union employees learned that aside from the economy, the landscape that most affects the operation of credit unions is the political one. Whether it's proposed legislation or recommendations of a government regulator, the end result can change our fundamentals. Jim taught it's vital that we develop an understanding of the system and the most effective strategies for advancing credit union's political influence.

The highlights of Jim's training were:

The basics of advocacy - what it is, and how it works.

CU Advocacy Issue Review - overview of key issues of interest to your credit union

Becoming a "Player" - discussion of how you can elevate your political power

How to conduct a meeting - experience the do's and don'ts of a meeting with an elected official.

Austin Children's Shelter Reality Fair

Austin Chapter of Credit Unions (ACCU) hosted a Reality Fair for approximately 20 young adults for our community partner, Austin Children's Shelter. Additionally, ACCU was also able to donate several items on the Austin Children's Shelter's wishlist.

The Reality Fair consisted of 3 upfront classroom financial education classes given by ACCU's training coordinator Matt Schweitzer, TruWest CU. After the classroom instruction, the remainder of the board participated in a fun and exciting simulation of spending & budgeting based on career & lifestyle choices.

ACCU would like to thank Lindsay Contreras of Austin Children's Shelter for helping coordinate the event and the Cornerstone Credit Union Foundation for the grant making this event possible.

June Luncheon & Training

Austin Chapter of Credit Unions (ACCU) hosted it’s June 18th training event at the Norris Conference Center. Employees from seven Austin area credit unions, as well as representatives from ACCU vendor partners, were in attendance to participate in the election of the ACCU’s newest board member, Ashley Pierce of A+FCU. Robert Finch (RBFCU), a member of the ACCU’s Nominating Committee, introduced Ashley, who was unanimously voted-in as the PAC Representative. Ashley’s duties will include working with ACCU credit union partners for PAC fundraising activities, and providing legislative updates to the board.

Attendees also enjoyed a motivational presentation from Michael Woolstrum, CEO of Touch International. Michael’s energetic and enthusiastic presentation was interactive, asking assigned groups to define goals, values, mission and vision, and share their thoughts with all. Michael emphasized how the values and goals of an organization help to shape its vision and define its mission statement. Austin-based Touch International is the leading manufacturer of specialty touch screens and display enhancement windows, and is the largest touch producer in North America.

Other announcements were made by ACCU President, Kolleen Quinlan, about an upcoming CU4 Reality Fair benefiting the Austin Children’s Shelter on July 25th, and the 19th annual Kid’s Classic Golf Tournament, benefiting Dell Children’s Medical Center, happening on Monday, September 16th.

2013 March Luncheon and Training

The March Luncheon and Training started off with Austin Chapter of Credit Union board President, Kolleen Quinlan presenting a check to the Muscular Dystrophy Association for door prize ticket sales at the February Social Mixer. Thanks to everyone who purchased tickets at the mixer, allowing us to make this donation on behalf of all Austin area credit unions.

Next, Paul Trylko, CEO of Amplify CU and Chairman of the Texas Credit Union League (TCUL) board spoke to the Austin Chapter of Credit Unions regarding the 3-State (Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas) League Regionalization Proposal to be voted on at the TCUL membership meeting the first week of April here in Austin. If you were unable to attend and hear about the future structure and formation of Cornerstone Credit Union League, you can visit the Voters Guide Website to catch yourself up.

After Paul presented, Jill C. Shah, LPC and Frank Delano, LMSW, from Professional Package Training addressed the supervisory relationship, POWER in the supervisory relationship, ways to constructively balance that power, games people play in supervision, characteristics that make a supervisor a "leader", and structuring the supervisory session. The session was full of deep thought provoking discussion that resulted in several key takeaways for those who attended.

2013 New Wave Ball

The Austin Chapter of Credit Unions showed their support to the Austin Children’s Shelter (ACS) by sponsoring their New Wave Ball. This annual event is a fundraiser for the ACS. As a second year sponsor, the Austin Chapter of Credit Unions helped ACS raise $77,280 with this fun 1980’s dance party event. This awesome event featured great 80’s music from 2 DJs, special drinks, photo booth, video arcade, live auction and raffle, a Delorean auto exhibit plus a spectacular costume contest! Since 2010, this event has raised over $140,000 for ACS!

Austin Children's Shelter protects and heals children, young adults and families in need. Established in 1984, ACS provides emergency shelter and long-term residential care for children and youth who have experienced abuse and neglect or are at extreme risk. Through a variety of critical services designed to reduce emotional trauma, a teen mother program and services for youth aging out of foster care, ACS can have a sustaining, positive effect on young lives.