• Susannah Harker is an actress with an estimated net worth of over $10 million

• She is from a family well-versed in the entertainment industry, with her mother being actress Polly Adams

• Her most notable role was in the original BBC version of “House of Cards”, for which she was nominated for a BAFTA TV Award in 1990

• She is divorced from actor Iain Glen and was in a relationship with actor Paul McGann

• She has worked in films, television, and stage productions since 1985

Who is Susannah Harker?

Susannah Harker was born on 26 April 1965, in London, England, and is an actress, perhaps best known for playing Mattie Storin in the original production of the show “House of Cards”, which aired on the BBC. Her role gained her a nomination for a BAFTA TV Award in 1990.

The Riches of Susannah Harker

Susannah Harker has a net worth estimated to be over $10 million, as of mid-2024, primarily earned through her work in the entertainment industry, in which she has been active since 1985.

She’s done work in films, on television and in stage productions during her career.

Family, Education, and Career Beginnings

Susannah came from a family well-versed in the entertainment industry, as her mother is actress Polly Adams who is best known for her work in the television show “Just William”, playing the character Mrs. Brown. Along with her sisters, they would all pursue careers in acting, with one of her sisters being Caroline Harker who would later work on roles in projects such as “The Railway Children”, “Middlemarch”, and “A Touch of Frost”.

Along with her younger sister Caroline, Susannah attended an independent convent boarding school in Sussex run by nuns. She described her experience there as strict, though their parents wanted them there as they were brought up as Catholics. After matriculating from high school, she then trained in North London at the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama, known for training its students in drama since 1906. It is a constituent of the University of London, becoming integrated with it in 2005. Following her graduation, she began her career in 1985, appearing in films such as “Burke & Wills”.

Rise to Prominence

After a few years of taking on projects in various media, Harker started gaining more notable roles in 1990, beginning with “Chancer” in which he worked alongside Clive Owen. The show follows the story of a conman in the 1980s who helps a problematic car firm before he’s forced to reveal his shady past. The show aired for two seasons, with the second season revealing more of the main characters actual identity in a new crisis.

Afterwards, she played a journalist in the original BBC version of “House of Cards”;the political show is based on the novel of the same name written by Michael Dobbs, and is set after the tenure of Margaret Thatcher as the Prime Minister of the UK. The show proved to be one of the most popular programs in the country over the years, which lead to a Netflix US adaptation commissioned in 2013. In 1991, she had the role of Dinah Morries in “Adam Bede”, which is based on the novel of the same name written by George Eliot, who wrote the book under the pen name Mary Ann Evans.

Continued Acting Career

Susannah subsequently worked on an adaptation of the Jane Austen novel “Pride and Prejudice”, which was aired on television in 1995. The show proved to be a huge success both commercially and critically, leading to several awards. In 1998, she played the role of Emma Fitzgerald, a love interest of Trevor Eve’s character in the series “Heat of the Sun” playing. The show tells the story of an investigating officer who goes to Kenya to explore the expatriate community in the region, as crime rates there rise sharply.

She then worked on the stage play “On the Shore of the Wide World”; written by Simon Stephens. It focuses on the story of three generations of a family as they tackle their dreams and struggles, and was inspired by the John Keats poem entitled ‘When I Have Fears That I May Cease to Be”. She then participated in an audio revival of the “Sapphire & Steel” adventure series, which would become the start of more recording work for her.

She also worked on the audio version of “Shada”, which is a part of the “Doctor Who” franchise, before appearing in “Young James Herriot”. Two of her latest acting projects include “The Vortex” which premiered in Dublin, and the radio production of “John Gabriel Borkman”. She also continues to guest star in series such as “Grandchester”.

Personal Life

Harker married actor Iain Glen in 1993 in a marriage that lasted for 11 years before both decided to divorce; they have a son, Finlay.

Two years after their divorce, she started a relationship with actor Paul McGann, who is known for being the eighth Doctor in the “Doctor Who” franchise. The two stayed together for two years before calling it quits. Since then, there have been no relationships made public on her side. Her former husband rose to fame playing the character Ser Jorah Mormont in the HBO series entitled “Game of Thrones” which ran from 2011 to 2019.