When rumours began to circulate that her husband and Nicole Kidman had become ' more than just friends', Susannah Harker bravely brushed them aside.

For more than a year, the actress stuck by her film star partner Iain Glen, claiming his relationship with the Australian actress was all above board.

But all the time the strain of the ongoing speculation was taking its toll, and last night the couple announced that their eight-year marriage was over.

After they made repeated attempts at saving their relationship, Mr Glen's agent announced the split, later confirmed by Miss Harker's spokesman.

News of the separation comes as no surprise to friends of the couple, who said they never fully recovered from the speculation surrounding the nature of the relationship between Mr Glen and Miss Kidman.

It was in September 1998 that the Scottish actor, who starred in Tomb Raider and Beautiful Creatures and was tipped as a future James Bond, first began playing opposite Miss Kidman in the raunchy West End production of The Blue Room.

With the pair both performing naked and with a growing closeness off set, rumours began that they had started an affair.

Although they were swiftly dismissed by Mr Glen, speculation resurfaced last year when the actor began 'comforting' Miss Kidman following the break up of her marriage to Tom Cruise.

Miss Harker, 36, best known for her roles in the political drama House of Cards and the period production Pride and Prejudice, continued to give her husband her full support.

Even when he jetted off on holiday without her she loyally maintained that his relationship with Miss Kidman was strictly platonic.

She said at the time: 'It's something I approve of. He's a friend of hers, so it's all positively okay. He may have spoken to her but so what?'

However, friends now admit that the relationship with Miss Kidman, 34, did indeed put a severe strain on the couple's marriage.

They say that two months ago, Mr Glen in particular was beginning to show clear indications it was drawing to a close.

'I could say that I am happily married and always will be,' he had said. 'But I'm tired of painting a rosy picture. In any relationship you have good times and bad times.

'Both Susie and I would definitely say that we have no idea whether we will be together for the rest of our lives.'

Mr Glen, 40, a former Edinburgh Academy student, first met Miss Harker in 1987 on the set of the television series The Fear. They have a seven-year-old son, Finlay.