The Union Trade : Why we need Night.

Cinematic post-rock. The Union Trade follow the contours of proven terrain and map the outlines of an evolving sound. In moments throughout, the band strips away the epic layers of their first album to expose the intimacy of a beautiful guitar line, the gravity of a simple piano progression, or the emotion and lyricism of a vocal performance. Energized by dynamic rhythms, the EP progresses from the familiar into new territory marked by a broader range of analog and acoustic keyboards, electronic elements and The Union Trade's most concise song structures to date. "Why We Need Night" captures The Union Trade as they continue to define the space where instrumental rock influences meet a more mainstream indie rock sound. Songs:

1. Why We Need Night

2. Headlands

3. Hawk vs Crow

4. This is what Happens

5. Aurelia

Listen to: the entire album.

License Cinematic post-rock by The Union Trade for your project.

Play the music of The Union Trade in your restaurant or store.

Release date: 2/11/2011

The Union Trade lives in California USA

Tagged as: Alt Rock, Other, Indie Rock

Recommended albums:

Centuries by Destroy The Colossus: Technical Death Metal

Spectra by Terracotta Blue: Hip-hop-infused, electronic chill music... with a dash of everything else!

10 Raptures by The Rapture: Electronica with a heart

A Lestampida by Dufay Collective: instrumental and vocal music from the Middle Ages and Reniassance

Hurricane Tide by The Dirty Love: rock and roll from the heart

Singles (Instrumental) by Thirty Day Notice: Somewhere Between Pleasantly Hypnotic and Slightly Disturbing

Francesco Barsanti Sonatas for Recorder and Basso Continuo by Ensemble Electra: electrifying music from the Italian Baroque

La Superbe by Thomas Walker: Lute music of 17th century France and Italy

Seasons by Eternal Jazz Project: gentle jazz from Sweden

Uncle Mean by Thursday Group: melodic composed progressive Jazz

Genuine by Eternal Jazz Project: gentle jazz from Sweden

Pictures of Silence by Tilopa: healing magic of the japanese zenflute

The New Art Of Urban Flamenco by Eric Kamen: Urban Flamenco

JS Bach Laboratory by Takashi Matsuishi Spark: flautists with finesse, intelligence and grooves

Crowd of Reeds by Emmalee Crane: ambient, orchestral drone music

Idea of Alice by Tiny Little Blackouts: dreamy, slightly mournful indie pop

Fever Dreams by Endless Blue: Trashy Beats, Melancholy Keys, Sultry Vocals

Quintuplet by Tokee: dark ambient with an alchemical twist

Wood by Ernesto Schnack: solo guitar and other madness

Tokyo507 Instrumental by Tokyo507: downtempo groovy electro-pop

Downloads:

MP3: High quality MP3 variable-bit-rate files. Most people download these: they are audiophile files that play everywhere.

ALAC: Perfect quality Apple Lossless format files. If you use iTunes or an iPod, get these. They're an exact audio copy of the original CD, and include the CD artwork and artist info. This is the same format as High Definition audio provided by the iTunes store.

AAC: High quality Apple Audio Codec files. If you use iTunes or an iPod, these files sound great and include CD art and artist info. This is the standard format provided by the iTunes music store.

WAV: Perfect quality WAV files. This format works everywhere, and is an exact audio copy of the original CD. It sounds fantastic. Album art and artist info is unfortunately not possible with this format.

FLAC Perfect quality open source FLAC files. This is an open source audio format. It is an exact copy of the original CD, and includes CD artwork and artist info. Works great on Linux, VLC and many audio players based on open source.

OGG: High quality open source OGG files. This is an open source audio format. It is a compressed (smaller file size) version of the original CD, and includes CD artwork and artist info. Works great on Linux, VLC and many audio players based on open source.

128k: Medium quality 128K MP3 files. These are medium audio quality MP3 files that will work on every device. The audio quality is good enough for most uses. These files are intended for cases where you want to conserve disk space.