Last Thursday, Israeli cable modem manufacturer Terayon (Nasdaq: TERN) published its second profit warning in two months. Terayon revised second quarter sales downward from $50-60 million to $21-30 million. While that might be the immediate financial announcement, there was also a technological announcement that could affect the next quarter as well – Terayon’s failure to win Cable Television Laboratories (CableLabs) certification for its DOCSIS 1.1 standard modems.

CableLabs is comprised of representatives from US cable companies. Its certification is valid only for the US, and products without its certification can be sold in other countries. However cable modem sales in the US accounted for 70% of the 2.1 million sales worldwide in the last quarter, and therefore affect buyers in the rest of the world. US sales create economies of scale, reducing the cost of cable modems, thereby influencing the choice of non-US buyers.

Not all is black for Terayon. Firstly, CableLabs will hold another certification round in three months, which might bring salvation. Secondly, one of the companies that won certification is Joohong, a customer of Terayon subsidiary iMedia.

Two other companies that won new or renewed cable modem certification were Motorola (NYSE:MOT) and Texas Instruments (NYSE:TXN) (TI). These longstanding rival recently began cooperating. David Shamir, the director of TI Broadband Communications Israel division said that after Broadcom (Nasaq:BRCM) longstanding de facto chips monopoly for Motorola modems, TI’s new connection with Motorola will benefit both parties. TI wins a new customer – Motorola – while Motorola now has two suppliers, and can negotiate better prices for chips.

Shamir joined TI 18 months ago, after 14 years at Motorola. TI founded its landline and wireless broadband division, which now employs 700 people, at the same time. The move followed a series of acquisitions including Israeli company Libit, which developed cable modem technologies.

TI wooed Motorola for 18 months, but Shamir believes Motorola requited only after TI won certification for its DOCSIS 1.1 standard cable modems. TI’s announcement that it would supply chips to Motorola caused Broadcom’s shares to plummet, even though Motorola defined TI as a secondary supplier, and Broadcom claimed its orders backlog from Motorola was unaffected. TI’s revenue from the Motorola contract is unclear. 14% of Broadcom’s first quarter 2002 $240 million revenue came from Motorola, and half of that amount – $14 million – were from sales of chips for cable modems. Shamir believes TI will equal Broadcom’s sales, i.e. supplying half of Motorola’s orders.

However, shortly after the contract was signed, the US cable modem market was overturned. Motorola’s cable modem sales were more than halved, allowing its competitor Toshiba to grab first place with 29.5% market share, compared with 22.5% for Motorola (430,000 and 330,000 cable modem sales, respectively). Worldwide, Motorola was still ahead, with 600,000 sales, accounting for 28.2% market share.

Shamir is unconcerned, because Toshiba was TI’s first customer. At the moment, LSI Logic (Nadaq:LSI) is Toshiba’s second-largest supplier for DOCSIS 2.0 standard modems, but Shamir believes TI will retain its dominance, and expand its sales to the world’s two main cable modem manufacturers. Broadcom is out of the picture.

Shamir says, “Apparently, there is a bad blood between the companies, and I don’t know how it started.”

DOCSIS 1.0 was the first agreed-upon standard for voice and information transmission over cable. DOCSIS 1.1 certification sets download speeds at 30 Mbps, uploads at 10 Mbps, and improved quality of service, making the platform more reliable for voice transmission. Security against hackers, exploiting a customers’ modem to penetrate operators’ central offices was also improved. These two standards are the basis of TDMA technology, which is also used for cellular networks.

DOCSIS 2.0 already considers future conditions of symmetrical surfing, i.e. equal amounts of incoming and outgoing material. Higher speeds will not be achieved through the allocation of more frequencies, but by improving existing algorithms to exceed 30 Mbps. This is where the technology battle was joined, with TI and Broadcom promoting Advanced TDMA, while Terayon was urging CDMA. CableLabs decided to certify both technologies.

This means that the parties are now trying to develop the missing half to meet the standard. TI and Broadcom need to integrate CDMA technology, while Terayon has to supplement TDMA to its existing CDMA system. A few years ago, such a situation might have led TI to acquire Terayon, but Shamir believes there is no point in mulling an acquisition just a few months before TI completes its development process. “It might have made sense 18 months ago, since it’s not something that is given away for free,” he said.

“Next year, we’ll see enough DOCSIS 2.0 capable systems, both in terms of modems and central offices, but I think deployment in the field will start only toward the end of 2003. When will customers demand it? No one knows. Maybe some Internet service will cause everyone to demand broadband, and we’ll suddenly see increased demand.”