The former St. David’s Church building on Caernarfon Road in Bangor is up for sale by auction.

The Grade II Listed Church was built in 1888 by Sir Arthur Blomfield, an architect from London, at an original cost of £8,000. Built in an early English Gothic style and initially intended as a church for the railway community, the once thriving church closed in 2013 due to a falling congregation and increased running costs.

The online auction has a suggested opening bid of £50,000 and Guide Price of £60,000 (Unless Sold or Withdrawn Prior). Proposed online bidding ends on 2nd February 2023. Bidding usually opens around 1 hour before end time.

The property, described by agents Williams and Goodwin, “Benefits from a good sized plot, and retains many of its original features such as the stained glass windows and vaulted ceiling. The property serves in our view as an excellent opportunity for developers and could be utilised for a wide range of uses (subject to planning permission).

“Located in a prime road front site on Caernarfon Road – one of the main roads leading to Bangor City Centre and Railway Station. The former Church is located approximately 1 mile from Bangor High Street offering a range of shops and local amenities, and some 1.5 miles from the A55 Expressway. We have been informed that within the grounds is the site of the former church hall which has been demolished/removed.”

Property offers the Church area that comprises:

Ground Floor: Entrance Vestibule; Church & bell tower.

Lower Ground Floor: WC & boiler room (not tested); hall, kitchen, office, 2 rooms.

Outside: Good size grounds mainly laid to rear.

Please note that Former Church and Site must not be used for:

Manufacture, distribution or sale of alcohol.

Religious use.

Immoral, sacrilegious, offensive or noisy purposes; use for the occult or psychic mediums; use as a club or any use which may cause nuisance or annoyance to the vendor; weddings.

The property must cease to be called St David’s Church and must not be called by any name that is associated with its use as a church or the dedication ‘David’.

The purchaser must agree:

To give the vendor notice of any listed building consent application to remove where present any stained glass, fonts, altars, organs, bells, wall memorials or plaques from the property and to forward a copy of the decision notice upon receipt. If permission is granted, the items must be offered to the vendor who must be given three months from the date of removal to respond and collect the items.

To comply with all planning and listed building legislation and with other relevant legislation.