In pictures: Lou Reed

Lou Reed, the legendary US singer, songwriter and guitarist whose hits included Walk on the Wild Side and Perfect Day, has died aged 71.

Pete Noble, his British publicist confirmed the news to The Telegraph after it was initially reported by Rolling Stone Magazine. An official statement from management will be released shortly.

The Brooklyn native, who embarked on a long solo career after initially finding fame with the band Velvet Underground, was widely regarded as one of the most influential rock musicians of the last half century.

Reed was believed to have been in poor health since he underwent a liver transplant in May. "It's as serious as it gets," his wife Laurie Anderson, the performance artist and musician, told The Times. "He was dying."

Tributes poured in on Twitter from friends, fans and fellow musicians praising his influence on their work. "Without Lou there is no Bowie as we know him. Me? I'd probably be a maths teacher," wrote Lloyd Cole, a chart-topper in the 1980s.

"My friend Lou Reed came to the end of his song," said the author Salman Rushdie. "So very sad. But hey, Lou, you'll always take a walk on the wild side. Always a perfect day."

Several quoted his most famous descriptions of his music. "One chord is fine," he said. "Two chords are pushing it. Three chords and you're into jazz."

Reed quit the Velvet Underground in 1970. His 1972 album Transformer, co-produced by David Bowie, introduced him to a worldwide audience.

"Glam, punk and alternative rock are all unthinkable without his revelatory example," Rolling Stone wrote in its tribute.

Born on March 2, 1942 in Brooklyn, New York, Reed spoke extensively of his problems with drugs and alcohol over the years.

"I tried to give up drugs by drinking," he wrote in 1992. "It didn't work."

Reed's work with both the Velvet Underground and as a solo artist, influenced generations of musicians. He once said: "In the late '70s I started to search for the perfect sound - whatever that might be, before that I was mainly interested in drugs, insanity and the rock 'n' roll lifestyle."

Here are some of the online tributes so far:

&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Salman Rushdie - My friend Lou Reed came to the end of his song. So very sad.But hey, Lou, you'll always take a walk on the wild side. Always a perfect day.&lt;/noframe&gt;

&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Ricky Gervais - RIP Lou Reed. One of the greatest artists of our time.&lt;/noframe&gt;

&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Ryan Adams - Lou Reed.&lt;/noframe&gt;

&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Elijah Wood - May you forever walk on the wild side, Lou Reed. Terribly sad to hear of your passing.&lt;/noframe&gt;