Hello world-changers! Welcome to another episode of Movers and Shakers: who they are and what we can learn from them.

Today, we talk about the life of one of the greatest innovators and entrepreneurs of all time - Steve Jobs.

Born on February 24, 1955, Steve was an American businessman and inventor who co-founded Apple Inc., the company that brought personal computers into our homes and revolutionized the way we live, work, and communicate with each other.

Early Life

Steve Jobs was born in San Francisco, California and, as a young boy, was greatly interested in electronics. He was only 13 when he met Steve Wozniak, who later became his partner in creating Apple. Steve Jobs attended Homestead High School in Cupertino, California, and after graduation from high school, started to attend lectures at Reed College in Portland. However, he soon dropped out and pursued his passion for technology instead.

Apple Inc. and The Journey to Success

In 1976, Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak created their first computer - the Apple I. It was a high-end computer for its time, costing around $666.66. It was a success, and the seed of Apple was planted. They followed up with the Apple II, which was a massive success - it is estimated that over 6 million units were sold. In 1985, Steve Jobs was ousted from Apple by the board of directors, but he didn't let that get in his way. In the years that followed, he founded NeXT Inc. and also Pixar Animation Studios, which went on to create some of the biggest animated movies of all time, including Toy Story and Monsters INC.

The Return to Apple Inc.

After 10 years away from Apple, Steve Jobs returned to the company in 1996 to become its interim CEO. The company was in dire straits, and Jobs had a big job ahead of him. One of the first things he did was to redesign Apple's product line completely and also create the iconic 'Think Different' ad campaign. The turning point for Apple came with the launch of the iPod in 2001, which revolutionized the way we listen to music and transformed Apple into the powerhouse we know today.

The Legacy of Steve Jobs

Steve Jobs was a visionary who transformed the world we live in today. During his time at Apple, he was involved with the creation of iPods, iPhones, and iPads - the devices that we can't imagine living without now. His impact goes beyond Apple; his Pixar Animation Studios created some of the most successful animated movies of all time. He also had a considerable influence on the music industry through iTunes, and on the phone industry through the iPhone. He was one of the people who made sure that technology works and looks good at the same time.

Steve Jobs' Commencement Speech, 2005

In 2005, Steve Jobs gave a now-famous commencement speech at Stanford University. In his speech, he shared his life experiences and offered advice to all those who strive to achieve success. There are three key points that he made in his speech.

Connect the dots

The first is 'Connect the Dots.' Steve begins his story with an experience he had as a young man where he dropped out of college, but much later, he realized that the classes he took, including calligraphy, helped lay the groundwork for the design of Apple's computers. Steve points out that we all have experiences or dots that we don't understand, but eventually, these pieces will come together and create a masterpiece.

Love What You Do

The second point is to 'Love What You Do.' Find something that you truly love and are passionate about, and do it. Steve jobs had a deep love for technology and making it accessible to the masses. His love for his work was apparent, and that resulted in the creation of these iconic devices we now know. Do what you love, and success will follow.

The Momentary Vanity

The last point that Steve Jobs made is 'The Momentary Vanity.' He shares that when he was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, he knew he had to live for the day and not worry about what others think of him. We all have a limited time on this Earth, and it is essential to live life to the fullest. Make every day count, and don't get wrapped up in what other people think of you. Life is too short to worry about those things.

Lessons to learn from Steve Jobs' Life

With all that said, here are 5 critical lessons we can learn from Steve Jobs' life and apply it to ours.

Lesson 1: Never Give up on Your Dreams

First and foremost, Never Give Up on your dreams, regardless of how challenging it may seem. Steve

Jobs was forced out of Apple Inc. after a decade of struggling to make it successful. But he didn't let that set him back, and instead, he chose to start NeXT Inc. and Pixar Animation Studios. His passion for innovation and his commitment to his dreams were so strong that it paid off, and he was eventually brought back to Apple Inc., where he revolutionized the technological world.

Lesson 2: Do What You Love

Second, Do What You Love. It's vital to do what you're passionate about because it's your passion that will keep you going, even during tough times. When Steve Jobs first founded Apple Inc., his mission was to create user-friendly products that were both beautiful and useful. His passion for design and technology shone through in every product he created, and we see that passion in the design of Apple products even today.

Lesson 3: Innovate

Thirdly, Innovate Constantly. Steve Jobs was a pioneer in the world of technology. He had a knack for anticipating what consumers wanted in design and functionality, and he used that to develop revolutionary products like the iPod and the iPhone. Innovation is all about staying ahead of the game and predicting where the world is going.

Lesson 4: Focus on Quality

Fourthly, Focus on Quality. Steve jobs was passionate about creating design-centric products, but he was just as passionate about the quality of those products. You'll find that even the smallest of details were not overlooked; everything about an Apple product, from its sleek design to its user interface or texture has been carefully crafted. Steve Jobs stressed the importance of delivering a high-quality product.

Lesson 5: Have the Courage to Change the World

Lastly, Have the Courage to Change the World. Steve was a man who believed that he could change the world with his products. He believed in his vision and had the courage to act on it. He created things that had never been done before, and that were meant to change how we interacted with technology. He was fearless in his pursuit of innovative technology, and he never compromised on his vision. Steve Jobs inspires us to take our bold ideas and bring them to life - to not be afraid of change but to embrace it.

His Favorite Quotes

Without doubt, Steve Jobs is an inspiration to us all, reminding us to follow our passions, innovate boldly, love what we do, and never give up our dreams. Let's leave you with two of his most famous quotes.

One was an except from his 2005 Stanford speech:

“Stewart and his team put out several issues of The Whole Earth Catalog, and then when it had run its course, they put out a final issue. It was the mid-1970s, and I was your age. On the back cover of their final issue was a photograph of an early morning country road, the kind you might find yourself hitchhiking on if you were so adventurous. Beneath it were the words:

“Stay Hungry. Stay Foolish.”

It was their farewell message as they signed off. Stay Hungry. Stay Foolish. And I have always wished that for myself. And now, as you graduate to begin anew, I wish that for you. Stay Hungry. Stay Foolish.”

The second quote is fitting for all of you, world-changers:

"The ones crazy enough to think they could change the world are the ones who do."

Thank you for watching today’s episode of Movers and Shakers: who they are and what we can learn from them. In what way has Steve Job’s story inspired you? Tell us in the comment section. Take action now.

Remember, we are not just making videos, we are changing lives and helping people live well. When you re-share these videos, you are taking action as a world-changer and helping make a difference. Subscribe for the next episode of Movers and Shakers.

Finally, if you have a favorite famous person that you want us to feature in Movers and Shakers, leave us a note in the comment section.

You can also subscribe to our YouTube channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCMHZVusB16K19gOGdAv_gCg/