Speaking

Photo via Dmitry Novikov

17 Surprising Facts About Apple Inc

This story is 100% reliable.

8 mins speaking time.

Add a comment in the Comments

Apple Inc. is a leading multinational technology company that generates billions of dollars every year.

In this article we will go through the top 17 facts you didn't know about Apple Inc.

Read on to see all 17 facts about technology giant Apple.

Apple Inc. is a leading multinational technology company that generates billions of dollars annually, provides jobs worldwide, and introduces innovative new technologies and products. The company has experienced significant up-and-down battles with fierce competitors, government regulations, and more. Nevertheless, it remains a leader in innovation and originality.

Here are 17 fun facts about Apple:

The name 'Apple' came from founder Steve Jobs' love of the fruit.

Apple originally had three co-founders, including Ronald Wayne, who left the company only 12 days after it was founded. He sold his 10% share for only $800, but if he had stayed, his shares would be worth around $60 billion today.

Image credit: Ronald Wayne

Apple has a ‘no smoking’ ban regarding their computers. If you smoke while using an Apple computer, you void the warranty.

Apple employs over 90,000 people.

The first Apple iPod had an Easter Egg implanted. The way to access it was to go to the 'About' menu and hold down the center button for a few seconds. Users could then see and play a game called Breakout.

Apple is so successful that it has twice the amount of money than the U.S. Treasury.

The creator of the iPod, Tony Fadell, had originally offered the device to both Real Networks and Philips, but both companies turned it down.

Image credit: iPhone Islam

Apple launched its Lisa line of computers in 1983, but it failed. Word is that around 2,700 of the devices are buried in a landfill in Utah.

In the first quarter of 2014, Apple made more money than Amazon, Google, and Facebook combined.

Image credit: The Economist

Apple has around $150 billion in excess capital. It could buy companies like Netflix, Twitter, Tesla, and Facebook.

Steve Wozniak changed the price of the Apple I to $666.66 because he liked repeated numbers.

Apple's first company logo featured a drawing of Sir Isaac Newton.

To raise capital for Apple, co-founder Steve Wozniak had to sell his scientific calculator.

Apple was the first to make a digital color camera.

The name iPod was inspired by the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey.

Image credit: WSJ

Apple is the largest publicly traded company in the United States.

CEO Steve Jobs was only paid $1 for the last 15 years with the company so he could qualify for the company's health benefits.

Overall, Apple’s history is one of astonishment. It’s now one of the most powerful players in the computing and mobile fields. Apple continues to surprise the world with its innovative products and services. With over 2 million jobs credited to the company, a current market cap of over $2 trillion, and a cash reserve of $155 billion, Apple's future is looking bright.

Recommended by the editors:

Secrets Revealed: Surprising Facts About the Creation of the Apple iPhone

Apple's Secret Projects: What's Cooking in Cupertino?

Today is Steve Jobs 68th birthday

Tap here to explore more news and insightful journalism from Apple Scoop — America's most-beloved independently operated source for all things Apple

Thank you for visiting Apple Scoop! As a dedicated independent news organization, we strive to deliver the latest updates and in-depth journalism on everything Apple. Have insights or thoughts to share? Drop a comment below—our team actively engages with and responds to our community.

15th March, 2023 at 4:39 pm by Flynn