Apple Inc. was founded on April 1, 1976, as a business partnership by Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, and Ronald Wayne. which was initially incorporated as Apple Computer, Inc. The company began as a computer manufacturer and has since expanded to include consumer electronics, software, and online services. The company is known for its innovative technology and sleek design, as well as its strong brand and loyal customer base.

The story of Apple Inc. gives us a clue as to its evolution into becoming the first company to be valued at $1 trillion and what it looks like to attain a trillion-dollar valuation. To take a deep dive into history, let’s take a look at Apple as a company.

What’s Apple Inc?

Apple Inc. is a multinational technology corporation headquartered in Cupertino, California. Apple is one of the largest technology companies by revenue, and it is currently one of the world’s biggest companies by market capitalization. Apple is said to be the fourth-largest personal computer vendor by unit sales and the second-largest mobile phone manufacturer. It is also regarded as part of the five most powerful tech companies on the market, known as FAANG, which is an acronym that represents Facebook (now Meta), Apple, Amazon, Netflix, and Google (Alphabet).

Some of Apple’s most notable products include the Macintosh computer, the iPod, the iPhone, and the iPad. Apple has also developed and sold a variety of software, including the macOS and iOS operating systems, the iTunes media player, the Safari web browser, and the iLife and iWork creativity and productivity suites.

Origin of Apple Inc.

Apple Computer Inc. was incorporated on January 3, 1977. The initial Apple office was located in Steve Jobs’ family home’s garage. The Apple 1 was marketed as a motherboard that included a CPU, RAM, and simple text-video chips. Then, it was devoid of any internal keyboard, display, casing, or other human interface devices (which were later added in 1977).

The Apple 1 first went on sale in July 1976 and cost $666.66. However, only a few weeks after the business was established, Ronald Wayne made the decision to quit. Wayne then accepted an $800 check to sell his shares.

Mike Markkula, the multimillionaire who had taken an interest in the Apple-1 provided the company required funding and business expertise. Mike Markkula was the 3rd employee with a one-third share in the company. He suggested a man named Michael Scott be the company’s first president and CEO.

In 1977, the Apple II was introduced, also by Wozniak. VisiCalc (the world’s first “killer app”), a ground-breaking spreadsheet and calculating software, helped the Apple II computers stand ahead of market leaders. VisiCalc gave users an additional reason to buy the Apple II because of its office compatibility. With the introduction of color graphics, the Apple II was able to revolutionize the computer industry.

In 1980, the Apple III was introduced. For this new computer, Apple designed a new operating system, though it also offered a capability known as “emulation” that allowed the machine to run the same software, albeit much slower, as the Apple II.

In 1982, Apple introduced its Lisa computer, a much more powerful computer with many innovations. The Lisa used a more advanced microprocessor, the Motorola 68000. It also had a different way of interacting with the user, called a graphical user interface (GUI). The GUI replaced the textual command lines that were typical of earlier computers with graphical icons on the screen that were activated by a mouse, a portable pointing device. Although the Lisa was a failure, Apple was already working on the Macintosh, a more affordable, scaled-down counterpart. The Macintosh, which was introduced in 1984 and enjoyed tremendous success, helped boost the popularity of personal computers by making desktop computers simpler to use. did

In 1985, John Sculley, the company’s then-CEO, had a different vision from Steve Jobs, which led to his departure. The start of Apple’s post-Jobs era was initially successful. But in the 1990s, Apple made limited waves in the computer world, and as Bill Gates and Microsoft went from techie favorites to household names, Apple became a much less relevant force.

In late 1996, Apple purchased NeXT, Steve Jobs’ follow-up project after he left the company, and the purchase restored Jobs’ status within the company. Apple then began implementing the NeXT operating system into its hardware. Soon, Jobs took over as CEO when the then-interim CEO, Gil Amelio, was removed.

Jobs started working immediately to bring the business and its computers back to their former splendor. His first significant move was to strike an agreement with Microsoft (MSFT), so that Microsoft Office would be made available for Macintosh computers. Over the next several years, Jobs would start putting together the pieces of what Apple is now recognizable for.

The late 1990s also saw the release of Apple’s first laptop, the iBook, in addition to a new desktop computer called the iMac. The 2000s, though, were the decade that saw an Apple explosion. The iPod changed Apple completely. A portable music player, the first model of which was released in 2001, and the iTunes Store was released in 2003, at a point when Apple’s computers now ran on MacOS. Then the first Macbook was released on May 16, 2006, and used the Intel Core Duo processor and 945GM chipset, with Intel’s GMA 950 integrated graphics on a 667 MHz front-side bus.

In 2007, the first iPhone was released, followed by new models in 2008 and 2009. When the iPad was introduced to the market, Apple products were in high demand, and all of these products were for sale in the ever-expanding Apple Stores. Apple’s success in mobile devices effectively changed the way people used the internet with their mobile operating system, iOS.

In 2011, Steve Jobs resigned as CEO of Apple due to health concerns, and Tim Cook, a longstanding employee and former COO was then named as Jobs’ successor. and remains the CEO to this date.

Apple has maintained its position at the top of the tech sector in Tim Cook’s era. Even more recent like the Apple Watch, have done well on the market. New and improved models of iPhones, MacBooks, and iPads are continuously released, and the iOS and MacOS operating systems are updated as well.