Apple TV+‘s new science fiction series Foundation is one of the most visually gobsmacking shows ever made. Set thousands of years in the future in a galaxy that has been conquered by humanity, Foundation takes us to technologic super cities, gorgeous ocean-covered worlds, and far-flung colonies on the edge of it all. While green screen and computer-generated sets have become the norm in prestige television, most of Foundation‘s sets were…actually there.

Apple spent the money building practical sets and shooting all over the world in order to bring Foundation showrunner David S. Goyer‘s vision for the series to life. “I wanted the show to feel different than a lot of the shows that were being filmed today that tend to be the standard for science fiction,” he said. “I’ve worked a lot with Chris Nolan and he loves to do things in camera and for real, and that tends to be my ethos as well.”

Foundation was filmed in Tenerife in the Canary Islands, the deserts of Malta, the snow fields of Iceland, Ireland, and even Berlin. The whole world acted as a filming location for Apple TV+’s Isaac Asimov adaptation.

Goyer explained: “I wanted these different countries to be representative of the different worlds we were in, I wanted the cast and crew to be experiencing the wind and the cold and the wetness. And I thought that would seep into the reality. I wanted the show to feel very real.”

Lee Pace, who plays Brother Day, the central figure ruling over the Galactic Empire told Decider that he relished working on physical sets. “Speaking as someone who’s spent a lot of time in front of blue screens, it was incredible to be able to shoot a character that is big like this character in real locations,” Pace said. “You know, anything that I as an actor can use to take it away from ‘Lee Pace’ and get it closer to ‘Kleon,’ I’m eager to have.”

Leah Harvey, who plays Salvor Hardin, the rough and ready Warden of Terminus, agreed, noting: “When we first started filming, we were shooting in Iceland, and the first scenes I actually filmed were just walking across a landscape, just purely walking across a landscape in Iceland in blistering snow. And that was — as my first introduction to the real world of the character — that just solidified everything. It showed how robust she had to be in order to withstand that kind of snow and that cold and to really feel like I owned it.”

“And that’s all just normal, that’s natural Iceland. Really great,” Harvey said.

“There were — no question — times when I was on a mountain side in Iceland or I was on a raft on open water outside the Canary Islands getting seasick that I questioned myself and was wondering, you know, why the hell I forced all of us to do it,” Goyer said. “But, once we got in the editing room I was really happy and I think the work shows.”

However some of the Foundation cast was as blown away by the extraordinary architecture they got to work in as they were by the natural elements. Alfred Enoch plays Raych Seldon, the adopted son of revolutionary Hari Seldon (Jared Harris), was particularly struck by an opera house in Tenerife and the architecture of Berlin.

“Yeah, there were some amazing locations. I think we were in Tenerife, and there was this beautiful new concert hall and the shapes of it… It looked incredible, it was just sort of by the sea. I spent all day taking pictures from various different angles of it,” Enoch said. “Also in Berlin, we shot in this wonderful room where they had the court scene. I think it’s in the first episode, and again, it’s just such a dramatic space and looked fantastic.”

Lou Llobell, who plays narrator Gaal Dornick, was instead blown away by the Foundation crew’s work building sets from scratch. In particular, the interstellar ship Gaal travels from Synnax to Trantor in Episode 1.

“It was just so beautiful! Because that set was genuinely built like that. So when you walk onto it you’d like walk into like a semicircle so you’d have to hold onto the edges and like…it was, it was built like a semicircle and that was insane!” Llobell said. “Because it wasn’t like tricks or anything. It was a real set that looked exactly like that, and it was so, so wonderful. Yeah, that was pretty amazing. That was the first set I ever went on as well.”

That said, one member of the Foundation cast teased the best is yet to come.

“You haven’t seen it yet,” Jared Harris said. “Yeah, I’m not going to say anymore because you haven’t seen it yet.”