Hungry Horse

Set the scene surrounded by some of Western Montana's most spectacular mountains. Only a few minutes from Glacier National Park and the communities of Whitefish and Kalispell, this small town sits on the edge of scenic Hungry Horse Reservoir and the majestic Hungry Horse Dam with views of the park’s snowcapped peaks in the background. The Middle Fork of the Flathead River runs adjacent to town, making access to the river easy.

The scenic Hungry Horse Reservoir, a popular nesting spot for bald eagles, is fed by the South Fork of the Flathead River, stretches 34 miles long and boasts about 170 miles of shoreline. More than 25 towering peaks surround the reservoir, making this an unrivaled mountain-meets-lake location.

At 564-feet high, Hungry Horse Dam is one of the largest concrete arch dams in the United States, and its morning-glory spillway, with water cascading over the rim and dropping 490 feet, is the highest in the world. The dam is set in a dramatic, narrow canyon about 5 miles southeast of the South Fork's confluence with the main Flathead River. Hungry Horse Dam is named for two freight horses that wandered off from their logging shed during the severe winter of 1900 –1901 and almost starved to death.

The historic Spotted Bear Ranger Station, which is located 55 miles south of Hungry Horse down a dirt road, features breathtaking scenery, including a swinging bridge over the South Fork of the Flathead River along with a scenic beach. There’s also an airstrip here (Spotted Bear USFS Airport).

In Hungry Horse, Wi-Fi can be spotty, though general amenities and services are available. This is mostly a seasonal community, popular in the summer months. A notable Hungry Horse event includes with wildly spirited Cabin Fever Days—an ode to small-town charm.

Climate

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Average High

30

34

43

53

64

72

82

81

68

52

38

31

Average Low

17

18

24

32

39

46

51

50

42

33

26

19

Public Lands

Bureau of Land Management, Missoula Field Office

Flathead National Forest Supervisor’s Office

Glacier National Park

Glacier View Ranger District

Hungry Horse Ranger District

Montana Department of Natural Resources & Conservation (DNRC)

Montana Fish, Wildlife & Parks, Region 1 Headquarters

Spotted Bear Ranger District

Accommodations

The surrounding area offers a wide array of accommodations, including bed and breakfasts, chalets, hotels, motels, lodges, resorts, vacation homes and RV parks.

Film + Television Credits