One of my favorite singers is Jeff Bates whom I've talked with since 1997 about how much he sounds like Conway Twitty.

Like Ronnie McDowell who didn't just want to be identified with Elvis Presley, Bates has wanted fans to know that he is a great singer in his own right but is flattered being compared to the great Twitty Bird.

And he's proven that with his own hit singles like Long Slow Kisses co-authored with former Evans High School baseball player Ben Hayslip.

Much to the enjoyment of both Bates and Twitty fans, Bates has caved in to popular demand and recorded an album that is pretty much half Twitty's classic hits and half new songs that Bates co-wrote; many in Twitty's special style. One of those original Bates songs is Me and Conway, which is the title of the CD released a few weeks ago.

Bates was a guest artist on WKXC-FM's Guitar Pull in November 2003 at Bell Auditorium, and I told him at intermission that Twitty himself had performed several times on that same Bell stage both solo and with his singing partner Loretta Lynn.

Bates then went out for the second part of the Guitar Pull and delivered a mind-blowing version of Twitty's ballad (It's) Goodbye Time. He got a standing ovation, not only from the audience but also from the other singers onstage.

In 2005, it wasn't Bates who had a hit single with the same song but Blake Shelton.

Bates returned for another Guitar Pull in November 2006 and this time did Twitty's I'd Love to Lay You Down and again got standing ovations from the audience and the singers on stage with him.

On his new CD, Me and Conway, there are seven classic Twitty songs including the powerful Don't Take It Away co-authored by Troy Seals and Max D. Barnes and which Twitty originally recorded in 1975. Lynn herself joins Bates for a re-make of the Twitty/Lynn duet After The Fire Is Gone.

Showing his own best efforts, Bates co-wrote five songs on the CD including the title cut and the ultra sexy number Sleepin' In.

Interestingly, Bates did not include Goodbye Time on the CD. Anyway, if you are a Bates or Twitty fan, this is one CD you will want to add to your collection.

JUDGE LANDIS AND WWI VETERANS: Just two weeks after he stepped down as a federal judge in Chicago and became the first commissioner of baseball, Kenesaw Mountain Landis came to Augusta in March of 1922 to visit with Ty Cobb and the Detroit Tigers team who were in Augusta for spring training at Warren Park. It would be his only visit to Georgia as commissioner.

During his visit, Landis and the Tigers were guests of the Augusta Rotary Club for a barbecue dinner at Carmichel's entertainment place south of the city. The chef of the barbecue pits was none other than Clem Castleberry, who became the founder of Castleberry's food products distributed internationally.

Landis took the opportunity to not only praise Cobb, then player/manager with the Tigers, but also to urge employers to hire World War I veterans.

"Give the ex-service man a chance if it asks for it," Landis was quoted in The Chronicle as saying. "Work him in some way, and remember your promises in 1917.

"I have known employers to sneer at the American Legion and what it stands for in American life. They had it in their soul not to deal leniently with the ex-service man."

The Chronicle reporter who covered the event wrote, "He then earnestly urged that Augusta would not be known as a city that had refused the ex-service man work and ended by saying, 'In God's name, give him a chance.' "

Landis had a personal stake in supporting American servicemen since his only son, Col. Reed G. Landis, was a World War I flying ace credited with destroying 12 enemy aircraft.

It would take 22 years, however, before U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt on June 22, 1944, signed the Servicemen's Readjustment Act providing veterans of World War II with funds for college education, unemployment insurance and housing.

American Legion publicist Jack Cejnar is credited with dubbing it "the GI Bill of Rights."

I thought of Landis' visit and his remarks in planning to attend the Birthday Anniversary Dinner of my own Jesse C. Lynch Memorial American Legion Post 71 in North Augusta on Friday, March 13. The post was organized in 1931 and received its charter in 1932.

The post was named for a former member of the North Augusta City Council, former deputy clerk of Aiken County and former member of the South Carolina state legislature who was the composing room foreman of The Chronicle in the 1930s.

STARS COMING TO NEWBERRY: Coming to the Newberry (S.C.) Opera House are: Joe Diffie, 8 p.m. March 20, $45; Elizabeth Von Trapp (Remember her great Westobou concert in St. Paul's in 2009?) 3 p.m. March 22, $25; Kim Carnes, John Ford Coley, etc., songwriters show, 8 p.m. March 28, $40; call (803) 276-6264 or visit newberryoperahouse.com.