Biographies

Barnwell County - South Carolina Genealogy Trails

BROWN, CLINTON CAPERS, D. D.,

preacher and author, was born in Barnwell, South Carolina, February 2, 1852. His parents were Col. B. H. and Clementine H. Brown. His father was a farmer, who was noted for his common sense and good humor, and who at one time represented the county of Barnwell in the state senate. His mother was held in high esteem by her acquaintances and friends, and exerted a strong influence for good upon the moral and social life of her son. The earliest known ancestors of the family in this country came from England in 1700 and settled near Charlottesville, Virginia. Two of their descendants were colonels in the Revolutionary war.

During his boyhood Clinton Brown lived in a village. He was interested in books, and was also fond of outdoor sports, horses, and guns. His health was good, and he had no tasks involving manual labor to perform. His father had both the means and the inclination to give him a good education. His fondness for reading is shown by the fact that before he was eighteen years old he had read all the novels of Scott and Bulwer. After attending the high school at Barnwell he had a private tutor for two years to prepare him for college. His father hoped he would become a physician, but the son, wisely, as his professional life has proved, preferred to enter the ministry. He spent two years at Washington and Lee university, two years at Furman university, and then entered the Southern Baptist Theological seminary, at Greenville, South Carolina, where he remained for two years, but from which he was not graduated. The active work of life was commenced January 1, 1875, as pastor of the First Baptist church at Sumter, South Carolina. This church he has served continuously and acceptably for more than thirty three years. He has taken a deep interest in education and for eight years he was a prominent member of the board of trustees of Furman university. In 1896 this institution conferred on him the honorary degree of D. D. As a writer, too, he has won recognition. Among his published works are "Uncle Daniel and His Friends" and "Themes and Texts of South Carolina Preachers." A South Carolina romance, entitled "Sherman's March to the Sea," is now in course of preparation. He is a member of the leading fraternities and orders. In politics he has always been a Democrat. He still retains his youthful fondness for outdoor sports, and finds in hunting his principal means of relaxation.

Doctor Brown has been twice married: First, in 1874, to Corrie Montgomery; and second, on November 26,1879, to Sallie Wright. Of his six children, one is living in 1908.

For the sake of helping young people who read this sketch of his life, Doctor Brown says that any falling short of what he had hoped to do can be traced to a failure to hold on and an "unwillingness to convert one talent into two." And in response to a request for suggestions drawn from his own experience and observations as to principles and methods which will help the young to attain true success in life he says: "Keep step with the progress of the world. Be willing to try the untried. Look on the bright side of life, and maintain faith in God."

The address of Doctor Brown is 107 East Liberty street, Sumter, South Carolina. (Men of Mark in South Carolina By James Calvin Hemphill Published 1907 - transcribed and contributed by Barb Ziegenmeyer )

Howell, Clark editor-in-chief of the Atlanta Constitution, was born in Barnwell district, S.C., Sept. 21, 1863. He is a son of Capt. Evan P. and Julia (Erwin) Howell, the former of Welsh and the latter of French Huguenot descent. The Howells came from Wales about 1750 and settled in North Carolina, several representatives of the family serving as soldiers in the Revolutionary war. The paternal great-grandfather of Clark Howell settled in Milton county, Ga., in 1820. Capt. Evan P. Howell was a prominent figure in Georgia politics during his life and achieved distinction in the Civil war as the commander of “Howell’s battery.” A sketch of his life appears in this work. Although Clark Howell was born in South Carolina, it was one of the exigencies of war, as his parents’ home was in Atlanta, his mother being at the time of his birth a refugee from Sherman’s army, which was then on its march toward Atlanta. After completing the course in the public schools of Atlanta he became a student in the University of Georgia at Athens, and graduated with distinction in the spring of 1883. Manifesting a decided talent for journalism, and wielding a pen of force and power, even at that immature age, he went to New York, where he became a reporter on the Times, and later served another newspaper apprenticeship on the Philadelphia Press. In 1884 he returned to his home in Atlanta and became night editor on the Constitution, under Henry W. Grady, whose assistant as managing editor he became in 1887, at a time when Mr. Grady was so occupied as an orator as to be away much of the time. Upon the death of Mr. Grady in 1889, Mr. Howell was made managing editor. Before reaching his majority Mr. Howell was nominated for the legislature and elected a few days later. He was reelected in 1888 and again in 1890, and for the term of 1890-91 was speaker of the house, being the youngest presiding officer in the United States. In 1900 he was elected to the state senate from the Atlanta district; was returned at the next election and for five years served as president of the senate with the unanimous consent of that body. In 1892 he was elected as Georgia’s member of the Democratic national committee, and in 1906 is serving his twelfth year in that capacity. In 1894, at the annual convention of the International League of Press clubs, he was unanimously elected president of that representative press organization, succeeding Col. John A. Cockerell, of New York. As a parliamentarian Mr. Howell is ready, concise and skillful; as a speaker he is fluent, eloquent and convincing; and as a writer he is at once forcible and brilliant. In 1887 he was united in marriage to Miss Hattie Barnett, of Augusta, Ga., and to this union was born one daughter and one son. In 1900 Mr. Howell married Miss Annie Comer, of Savannah, and two sons have been born to this marriage.

(Source: Georgia Sketches of Counties, Towns, Events, Institutions, and Persons, Vol II, by Candler & Evans, Publ. 1906. Transcribed by Kim Mohler)

REV. JOHN R. SOJOURNER

Rev. John Reddick Sojourner, son of Mr. D. E. and Mrs. Rachel Sojourner, was born in Barnwell County, S. C, September 24, 1866. Young Sojourner's parents died while he was quite young, leaving a large family. This greatly interfered with his early educational advantages. He made a heroic struggle, however, and the Lord helped him. By his own labors, he was enabled to enter Wofford College Fitting School, in 1888. By hard work there, he was able to enter Wofford College the next year, pursuing the studies through the Sophomore class. He taught school for three years after leaving college, and while teaching others, he learned a great deal himself. Brother Sojourner joined the Church at the age of twelve years, but was not converted until about two years later. His conversion was thorough, and changed the whole current of his life. He was licensed to preach in 1888, and served as a local preacher several years. In December, 1894, he joined the Conference, with Martin L. Banks, Jr., Connor B. Burns. Robt. C. Boulware, Henry J. Cauthen, Waddy T. Duncan, William S. Goodwin, E. S. Jones, W. A. Kelly, S. A. Nettles, W. A. Pitts, W. J. Snyder and P. B. Wells. He has served as follows: South Aiken Circuit, 1895; Bayboro Circuit, 1896; Loris Circuit, 1897-8: Lewiedale Circuit, 1899; Johnsonville Circuit, 1900-1901. Also, in all subsequent fields of labor, much good has been done by our brother. The Lord has blessed his labors to the upbuilding of the Church, and the salvation of souls. He is a good preacher and helpful pastor. On December 27, IS98, Brother Sojourner was married to Miss Blanche Beaufort Browning, daughter of Mr. T. S. and Mrs. Ellen Crawford Browning, of Berkeley County, S. C. They have happily entered together upon the great work of life. May our Heavenly Rather grant them abundant success!

[Source: Twentieth century sketches of the South Carolina Conference, M. E. Church, South By Watson Boone Duncan]James Hayes Roberts, M. D.

The veteran physician and surgeon of Ehrhardt is Dr. James H. Roberts, who began practice there nearly thirty years ago. He has had much to do with the professional, business and civic life of this community.

Doctor Roberts was born at Allendale in old Barnwell County March 2, 1863. His grandfather, Richard Roberts, according to the best information obtainable, was a native of France. The father, Dr. Richard Creech Roberts, was a native of Barnwell County, was reared and educated there, and for fifty years practiced dentistry. He served as a lieutenant of cavalry in the Confederate army and was at one time a member of the Legislature and in other ways prominent in local affairs. He was a major in the State Militia. He died at the age of sixty-nine.

His wife was Sarah Emily Dunn, of Barnwell County. Her father was born in Ireland and came to Barnwell County when a young man and was a contractor and built many of the early houses in that county.

Dr. James Hayes Roberts was the second in a family of six children, five of whom reached mature years and two are still living, the other being Boyce H.

Doctor Roberts was liberally educated, attending the Porter Military Academy and The Citadel at Charleston, and graduating from the South Carolina Medical College on March 4, 1887. For three years he practiced in his native town of Allendale, and in 1890 located at Ehrhardt. During 1906-07 he was in practice at Great Falls, but then returned to Ehrhardt. He is a member of the Bamberg County Medical Society, the State Medical Association, is vice president of the Farmers and Merchants Bank of Ehrhardt, and is affiliated with the Masonic order, the Knights of Pythias and the Woodmen of the World.

February 25, 1891, Doctor Roberts married Lottie O. Barber. She died July 18, 1895, the mother of two children: Sarah Elizabeth, wife of B. D. Carter, a Bamberg attorney, and Lottie, who died at the age of nine months. October 9, 1901, Doctor Roberts married Laura Dunbar, widow of James Dunbar. They have had seven children: James Heyward, Richard C, Furman, Catherine, Lucile, deceased, Louise and Carlisle.

[History of South Carolina, Volume 5, Edited by Yates Snowden and Harry Gardner Cutler, 1920 – Transcribed by AFOFG]

Jesse Francis Carter

After working his way through school, paying expenses of his living and of his education and with the aid of his versatile and brilliant talents, Jesse Francis Carter has won an enviable position as a lawyer at Bamberg.

He was born near the little town of Lodge in Colleton County, September 12, 1873. His father, Miles McMillin Carter, was a native of the same county and spent his active life as a farmer. He is of an old South Carolina family of English descent. He married Janie Irene Kinard, a native of Barnwell County, and daughter of Jacob Francis Kinnard, also an old South Carolina family of Scotch-Irish descent. Miles Carter after his marriage moved to a plantation in Colleton County where his six sons were born, all of whom are still living, named: Jesse Francis and Bert Dean Carter, attorneys at law in Bamberg under the firm name of Carter, Carter & Kearse; Joseph Edgar Carter of Wilmington, North Carolina; Alonzo B. Carter of Maxton, North Carolina; Wilbur Lee Carter of Greensboro, North Carolina; and Miles J. Carter of Florence, Alabama, all of whom are engaged in some phase of insurance work, Wilbur Lee and Miles J. owning controlling interests in the business which they conduct.

Jesse Francis Carter as a small boy had opportunities to occasionally attend a log cabin school in Colleton County, a term of only a few weeks each year. He was thirteen when his father died, at which time he took charge of the farm and assisted his mother in rearing his infant brothers. His mother died when he was twenty years of age, after which he attended the graded schools at Bamberg, also a classical institute, and as a means of support taught a number of summer terms. He finally entered Peabody College in Nashville, Tennessee, where he graduated in 1900, and after teaching for a while, he graduated with the degree A. B. from the University of Nashville in 1903. In 1904 Mr. Carter entered the Law School of the University of South Carolina and took two years' work in one, receiving his LL. B. degree in 1905. He then located at Bamberg, and has rapidly made his way to the front as a lawyer. In 1908 he again took special post-graduate work in Chicago. He is engaged in general practice and is a member of the firm Carter, Carter & Kearse of Bamberg, South Carolina. Mr. Carter owns and as a means of recreation conducts some small farming interests in the neighborhood of Bamberg.

In college and university Mr. Carter gave all the time he could to literary and debating societies. He won several debates, including the debater's medal of his society at the University of South Carolina. He was also a winner in the oratorical contest, and was president of his literary society in the University of Nashville and was made permanent secretary of his class at graduation.

He is affiliated with the Masonic order and the Knights of Pythias, and has held many of the offices in both orders. He is a member of the State Bar Association and was attorney for the local board of Bamberg County during the war, also government appeal agent, a member of the State Council of Defense, and a leader in the second Red Cross campaign and in many other war activities. He is a member and deacon of the Missionary Baptist Church and teacher of its Men's Bible Class. Mr. Carter has never been a seeker for political honors, but is one of the most influential men in his party in Bamberg County and is the present chairman of the democratic county committee, serving his second term in that office. Mr. Carter is president of the Home Building & Loan Association, which has an issued capital of $200,000. This is a recently organized company, Mr. Carter being one of the organizers. The company starts off with bright prospects.

In 1911 Mr. Carter married Lydia Jenkins, a daughter of B. M. Jenkins of Kline, South Carolina. They have three daughters: Lydia Frances, Janie Elizabeth and Martha Jaudon Carter.

[History of South Carolina, Volume 5, Edited by Yates Snowden and Harry Gardner Cutler, 1920 – Transcribed by AFOFG]

George Felder Hair

The Hairs are an old and prominent family of the old Barnwell district. While farming has always been a dominant interest in the family, the present generation is numerously represented in the professions, several of the sons having been physicians or dentists, including Dr. George Felder Hair, who for twenty years has been a resident of Bamberg and is a former president of the State Dental Society.

The remote ancestry of the Hairs is German, though members of the family have lived in the South since colonial times. The late Judson E. Hair was born in Barnwell County June 30, 1847, and died June 16, 1919. He was a student in the University of Georgia at Athens when the War Between the States broke out, and he and the other members of his class volunteered and went to Charleston to enter the Confederate service. He was with Lee's army for eleven months, and was a musician in the hand. His mature years were spent as a farmer and merchant in and around Blackville. He was one of the prominent Baptist laymen, being one of the founders and leaders of the church at Blackville and a deacon. Judson E. Hair married Maggie Capres Felder, who was born near Branchville, South Carolina, in 1850, and is still living at Blackville.

When she was a small girl her father died as a result of hardship and exposure endured while a Confederate soldier. The family of Judson E. Hair and wife comprised twelve children, seven of whom are living: Lorena Blanch, who was married to Thomas J. Martin, of Anderson, in 1886; Dr. George F.; Arthur B., a hardware merchant and farmer at Blackville; John Pinckney, deceased; Joseph Roger, deceased; Dr. Isaac Murray Hair, a dentist at Spartanburg; Dr. Harry B., also a dentist practicing at Columbia; Mary E., deceased; Mrs. D. D. Walters, of Columbia; Mrs. Maggie E. Still and Mrs. Abigail Sanders, of Blackville; and Dr. Judson E., deceased. Of the younger generation some mention should be made of the two sons of Mrs. Lorena Blanch Martin, of Anderson. These sons, Haskell Hair and Rhett Felder Martin, are both married, but when the war came on and they were called in the draft they claimed no exemption. The older went overseas as a lieutenant, and saw much of the front line service with the Expeditionary Forces. He was at Chateau Thierry and other historic points on the French front. He is now practicing as an architect at Greenville. The other, Rhett Felder Martin, who is in the coal and wood business at Anderson, was on a transport bound for France when the armistice was signed, and the boat was then turned about and landed him in America. Earl Walters, a son of Mrs. D. D. Walters, of Columbia, was a volunteer at the age of eighteen in the World war and was overseas with the first forces sent to France and remained throughout the war. He was a sergeant and participated in all the important engagements of the Expeditionary Forces. Like all the others he had many narrow escapes from death, but he escaped without a mark.

George Felder Hair, who was born at Blackville October 31, 1870, was liberally educated, attending the common and high schools of his native town, graduated in a business course at Newark, New Jersey, in 1888, and during the following year was employed by the S. S. White Dental Manufacturing Company at Staten Island, New York. This experience aroused his interest in the dental profession and he entered the oldest dental college in the world, the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery, where he was graduated with the class of 1892. Doctor Hair practiced at Anderson for ten years, and since 1901 has been busy in his profession at Bamberg. He has filled all the important offices in the State Dental Society, including the office of president, and is now a member of the State Board of Dental Examiners. He is also affiliated with the National Dental Society. Doctor Hair is a Scottish Rite Mason and Shriner, also a member of the Knights of Pythias, Independent Order of Odd Fellows, Woodmen of the World and Improved Order of Red Men. He has never been active in politics, and is a leader in the Baptist Church at Bamberg, being a deacon and a teacher in its Sunday school. On May 5, 1892, he married Miss Leila E. Boylston, of Blackville. Her father is a veteran ex-Confederate soldier, George W. Boylston, for many years a prominent citizen of Blackville. Doctor and Mrs. Hair have two children. Blanche, the daughter, is the wife of J. J. Cudd, a financier and farmer at Spartanburg. The son, P. Belton Hair, received his A. B. degree from Furman University at Greenville, and while there served as a volunteer for three months in the Students Army Corps until the signing of the armistice. He is now in his third year of the Atlanta Dental College of Georgia, preparing for the profession in which his father and some of his uncles have done such distinguished work.

[History of South Carolina, Volume 5, Edited by Yates Snowden and Harry Gardner Cutler, 1920 – Transcribed by AFOFG]Aldrich, James, jurist and statesman of Barnwell, S. C., was born July 25, 1850. in Barnwell, S. C. He was a member of the South Carolina legislature in 1878-89. [Herringshaw's American Blue-Book of Biography By Thomas William Herringshaw, 1914 – Transcribed by AFOFG]

William Elliott Spann

Those who note the notable figures in Bamberg County agriculture have no hesitation in pronouncing William Elliott Spann one of the most enterprising factors and one of the ablest cotton growers in the state. It is said that Mr. Spann had only seventy-five cents to his name when he came to Bamberg County, and he has used his opportunities and abilities so wisely as to accumulate a large plantation and has been one of the premier cotton growers of the county for a number of years.

He was born near Leesville in Lexington County, South Carolina, November 29, 1859. His grandfather was Henry Spann, a native of South Carolina, and one of the early circuit rider Methodist preachers of the state. His father was Philip C. Spann, who served as a Confederate soldier during the war and otherwise spent his time as a farmer. He married Jane Steadman, of Lexington County.

William Elliott Spann is the oldest of a family of nine children, all of whom are still living. He grew up on a farm and was twenty-two years of age when he came to that portion of old Barnwell County now Bamberg County. He soon distinguished himself by his ability to make a farm produce maximum crops of cotton and grain, and has greatly extended his possessions until he now has about 1,200 acres, mostly all of which is devoted to cotton, corn and tobacco. In several different years he has gathered 350 bales of cotton from 350 acres of land. Mr. Spann is a leader in agriculture, has considerable interests in local banks, and is known to have invested a large sum in Liberty bonds.

He married Miss Minnie Hutto, now deceased, and she was the mother of three children, Elliott I.eland, Eva May and Blanche. Mrs. Spann came from one of the old South Carolina families.

The Spanns are an old South Carolina family and besides his father, the subject had three uncles in the Confederate army, one of whom lost his life in one of the engagements. The family is of old Revolutionary stock and of English descent. At an early age William E. Spann had to start in to make his own way, as the war had destroyed the wealth of the Spann family. He is a member of the Knights of Pythias fraternity.

[History of South Carolina, Volume 5, Edited by Yates Snowden and Harry Gardner Cutler, 1920 – Transcribed by AFOFG]

Tuten, James Greene, M. D.

Tuten, James Greene, M. D., is one of the able and popular representatives of the medical profession in Wayne county, [Ga] being established in an excellent representative practice at Jesup. He was born near Staffords, Hampton county, S.C., Feb. 15, 1870, and in the same locality his father, John Asa Tuten, was born, Feb. 22, 1846. His mother, whose maid­ en name was Susan Catherine Dowling, was born near Blackville, Barnwell county, S.C., Jan. 31, 1845. John A. Tuten was a valiant and Loyal soldier of the Confederacy in the war between the states, having enlisted, in 1862, as a member of Kanta Paux artillery, a fine South Carolina command with which he was in active service until the close of the war, taking part in a number of important engagements incidental to the campaigns in the Carolinas, including the battles of Honey Hill, Orangeburg and Buford's Bridge, S. C., and Columbia, Averasboro and Bentonville, N. C. He was paroled, at Salisbury, N.C. in April, 1865. The father died in 1891 and the mother in 1899. Dr. Tuten secured his preliminary educational training in the schools of Hampton county, S. C., and his technical discipline, preparing him for the work of his exacting profession, was gained in the medical department of the University of Georgia, in which he was graduated March 3, 1890. He has been unswerving in his devotion to his profession and has gained marked prestige as a physician and surgeon, while he is one of the popular citizens of Jesup, commanding the uniform confidence and esteem of the community. He is a member of the American medical association, the International association of railway surgeons and the Medical Association of Georgia. He has twice had yellow fever and is thus immune, while it has been his privilege to render most valuable service in epidemics of this dreaded scourge of the south. He was acting assistant surgeon in the United States marine-hospital service, at Jesup, during the epidemic of 1893; was similarly engaged at Scranton, Miss., in 1897; and at the soldiers' home in Hampton, Va., in 1899. He is affiliated with the Masonic fraternity and the Knights of Pythias, is a stanch advocate of the principles of the Democratic party, and both he and his wife are members of the Methodist church. On Dec. 10, 1891, he was united in marriage to Miss Minnie Lee Walters, daughter of Charles W. and Augusta Walters, of Montezuma, Ga., and the children of this union are: Mamie Louise, born Oct. 21, 1894, and James Greene, Jr., born Dec. 20, 1897. [Source: Comprising Sketches of Counties, Towns, Events, Institutions, and Persons, Arranged in Cyclopedic Form Transcribed by Kristen Bisanz]

WOODBERRY, ROSA. Principal, Woodberry Hall School for Girls, Atlanta. President, Church Women of Georgia, 1926. Daughter of Stratford Benjamin and Victoria Ida (Cocroft) Woodberry. Born in Barnwell Co., S. C. Graduated Houghton Inst., Augusta, Ga., and Lucy Cobb Inst., Athens, Ga. Special student in Sciences, University of Georgia, 4 years. Teacher, Science Department, Lucy Cobb List., 1895-190S. Founder, 1908, Woodberry Hall School for Girls, Atlanta. Active church and club worker; Chairman, Missionary Committee, Atlanta Jubilee Union of Churches since 1912; Secretary, Woman's Auxiliary, P. E. Church, Diocese of Atlanta. Parliamentarian, Georgia Federation of Women's Clubs and Atlantic City Federation. Member, Atlanta Woman's Club. Address: 149 Peachtree Circle, Atlanta, Ga. ['Georgia Women of 1926', Compiled by Ruth Blair]

Buckingham, Eugene Randolph, farmer; born at Ellenton, S. C., August 22, 1871; son of Clinton E. and Ellen (Dunbar) Buckingham; attended the Citadel; owner and manager of large plantations on the Savannah River; member of the S. C. House of Representatives, 1918-20, and re-elected in 1920 for two years; married Florence Dunbar, Barnwell County, S. C., June 7, 1893; member of Masons, Christian Church. Home, Ellenton, S. C. [Source: Who's Who in South Carolina, 1921, tb Donna Gurr]

Buckingham, Perry M., banker; born at Barnwell, S. C., November 6, 1862; son of J. C. and Esther Rebecca Buckingham, attended common schools, St. Paul's School, Concord, N. H., graduate of, 1881; cashier of the Citizens Savings Bank, Barnwell, S. C., until 1890, cashier of the Bank of Barnwell until 1908, when he became president of that institution, in 1909 became vice president of the Bank of Western Carolina and manager of its branch at Barnwell, S. C.; for eighteen years a member of the Barnwell school board of trustees, in 1918 a member of the Barnwell County Board of Education; during World War treasurer of the Barnwell Chapter of the Red Cross Society, chairman of Liberty Loan campaigns; married Daisy Duncan, October 5, 1892; member of Episcopal Church. Home, Barnwell, S. C. [Source: Who's Who in South Carolina, 1921, tb Donna Gurr]

Calhoun, Harry DeSaussure, banker; born in Barnwell County, S. C., October 31, 1869; son of William B. and Annie Walton (Owens) Calhoun; attended county schools; president of the Home Bank of Barnwell, S. C., a member of the Board of Trustees of the Barnwell city schools; married Eva Duncan, Charleston, S. C., 1901; member of the Masons, Elks, W. O. W., K. of P., Farmers Union, United Commercial Travelers and the Travelers Protective Association; Episcopal Church. Home, Barnwell, S. C. [Source: Who's Who in South Carolina, 1921, tb Donna Gurr]

Cope, Johnson Heyward, planter, manufacturer; born in that part of Barnwell district since erected into Bamberg County, June 30, 1851; son of Jacob Martin and Mary (Burnett) Cope; attended Moore's Business College, Atlanta, Ga., graduate of, 1879; president of the Bamberg Banking Co, president and treasurer of the Bamberg Cotton Mills, president of the Santee Cotton Mills, Orangeburg, S. C.; served as Mayor of Bamberg; married Hattie Antley, 1884; member of K. of P., Methodist church. Home, Bamberg, S. C. [Source: Who's Who in South Carolina, 1921, tb Donna Gurr]

BENJAMIN BROWN KIRKLAND is head of two large business houses of Columbia vitally connected with and performing an important service to the entire state. One is the B. E. Kirkland Seed Company and the other is The Kirkland Distributing company.

Mr. Kirkland was born in Barnwell County, April 17, 1870, a son of Col. B. B. and Margaret A. (Dunbar) Kirkland. His father was for many years a successful planter. Benjamin Brown Kirkland was educated in the public schools and at an early age entered upon his business career. He clerked in a general store for fifteen years and for eight years was merchandise broker at Columbia. He established The Kirkland Distributing Company in 1908 and is the chief owner of this corporation. The business is that of wholesale distributing of flour, feed, grain, produce, and the company manufactures a line of special flours, particularly self-rising flours, the use of which is by no means confined to the State of South Carolina. The business is housed in a large plant and warehouse at the corner of Lady and Lincoln streets. This company began business in 1900 and was incorporated in 1908. Mr. Kirland is also owner of the B. B. Kirkland Seed Company, handling feed, agricultural and garden seeds, supplies for poultry and livestock breeders and raisers. He is also a director in the Carolina National Bank and is affiliated with the Knights of Pythias and the Independent Order of Odd Fellows.

Mr. Kirkland built the handsome Kirkland Apartments, comprising six modern apartments on Pendleton Street. He is a deacon in the First Christian Church of Columbia. He has ever taken an active and lively interest in public and community affairs; is a member of Columbia Chamber of Commerce, also the Rotary Club. While a resident of Eauclair he served as alderman, also as mayor, and was chairman of the board of trustees at the time of the construction of the handsome school building at Eauclair.

July 25, 1895, he married Evelyn Ella Ceruti of Nassau, West Indies. They have seven children, Evelyn E., Benjamin Brown, Catherine, Elizabeth, Elsie, Wilbur and Martha Ann. [South Carolina, Special Limited Edition, 1920] Robert M. Mixson

AS president of the South Carolina Cotton Association, Colonel Mixson of Williston is distinctively a man of the new era in South Carolina southern agriculture. However, while his vision, his purposes and his activities are concentrated on the present and the future Colonel Mixson has an interesting task, and by personal experience he knows the heavy burden and handicaps borne by the southern farmer during the last half century He was born on a farm near Rarnwell, September 14, tS.i4, son of John H. and Martha (Boylston) Mixson, also of Barnwell County, and moved to Williston in 1868. He attended school at Barnwell and at Williston, but his friends and associates know him as a man of education in the best sense, with a wide range of knowledge gained by private study and reading carried on from boyhood to the present and by intimate conduct with men of affairs. He was only twelve years of age when he began following the plow on his father's farm and at the age of twenty was farming on his own account. Colonel Mixson is a man of sturdy mold, direct and forcible, and does his work without pretence. It is indicative of his character that he prefers to be known as a farmer rather than as a planter or business man. Early in his career Colonel Mixson realized the limitations by which southern agriculture was beset. While for himself he was able to extricate himself from many of those hardships, his public spirit has kept him constantly planning and working to ameliorate the conditions of the southern farmer, and for many years he has been a real leader in the forces looking to liberation, In 1903 he attended the first cotton convention in the state, and since then has been identified with every movement to secure better prices for cotton and the general improvement of farm and rural life. In 1904 he was one of the southern farmers who led the attack on the commissioner of agriculture at Washington, charging that speculators on the New York Exchange were being furnished with advance information as to reports covering the condition and probable yield issued by the Department. Investigation substantiated his charge. In 1919 Colonel Mixson was elected a member of the Central Committee of the South Carolina Cotton Association and also became a member of the committee to organize the American Cotton Association. He was a member of the World Cotton Conference held in New Orleans and assisted in organizing Florida, Texas, Louisiana and Alabama. Then in November, 1919, he was elected president of the South Carolina Cotton Association. At that time Mr. B. Harris, commissioner of agriculture for South Carolina, said of him: "The first time I ever met Mr. Mixson was at the convention in 1903. I remember well the stand he took in defending the rights of the farmers and condemning the alignment against them. His services were sought by farmers in the states of Texas, Arkansas, Alabama and Louisiana, and he rendered valuable service in organizing the association in those states. I always found him with his fighting clothes on, when it was necessary for him to defend the rights of a farmer and he was not afraid to do it. I feel assured that under his leadership and with the co-operation of his associates on the General Committee, the American Cotton Association of South Carolina is in good hands and is bound to win in all undertakings."

In order to do his best for the great cause in which his heart is enlisted, Colonel Mixson has established his office at Columbia. The American Cotton Association and its state affiliations constitute one of the most promising movements in American agricultural history. To no small degree its success has been due to the fact that it is not altogether a farmers' organization, but also includes bankers, merchants, financiers and all others interested in the cotton industry, even including, as Colonel Mixson is now trying to do, the women, at least to the extent of securing their moral support.

Colonel Mixson was a member of the Legislature representing Barnwell County in the sessions of 1913-14. At the age of twenty-five he married Miss Sarah D. Loud of Georgia, and their daughter is now the widow of A. E. Owens, and the mother of two daughters and one son. [South Carolina, Special Limited Edition, 1920]

Daniel M. Ellis, M.D.

PROFESSIONAL success results from merit. Frequently in commercial life one may come into possession of a lucrative business through inheritance or gift, but in what are known as the learned professions advancement is gained only through painstaking and long-continued effort. Prestige in the healing art is the outcome of strong mentality, close application, thorough mastery of its great underlying principles and the ability to apply theory to practice in the treatment of diseases. Good intellectual training, thorough professional knowledge and the possession and utilization of the qualities and attributes essential to success, have made the subject of this review eminent in his chosen calling and he stands today among the scholarly and enterprising physicians in a community noted for the high order of its medical talent.

Daniel W. Ellis was born in what was formerly known as the Allendale District, now Barnwell County, South Carolina, on May 30, 1853, and is the son of Dr. William D. and Susan Emily (Hay) Ellis. William D. Ellis, who died at the comparatively early age of thirty-four years, was a native of the Beaufort District of South Carolina. He graduated from medical college and practiced his profession about twelve years prior to his untimely death. His father, Isaac Ellis, was a native of Virginia and the first of his family to settle in South Carolina. The family is originally of Welsh origin and is possessed of those sturdy qualities which are characteristic of that nationality.

The subject's mother, whose maiden name was Susan Emily Hay, traced her ancestral line back to Scotland, where was born William Hay, the first of the family to cross the Atlantic and establish a home in the new world. Among his sons was Michael Hay, who was the father of Col. Ann Hawks Hay, who was born on the Island of Jamaica and who held the rank of colonel in the patriot army during the War of the Revolution. Among his children was Lewis Scott Hay, a native of New York State and the father of the subject's mother. The latter was born at Boiling Spring, Barnwell County. The subject of this review is the sixth child in order of birth of the seven children born to William D. and Susan E. Ellis.

Daniel W. Ellis is mainly indebted to his brother. Judge W. D. Ellis of Atlanta, for his educational training, and he made the best of his opportunity, gaining a good practical general knowledge. Though without means, he was ambitious for a professional career, and having decided to make the medical science his life work, he matriculated in the Medical College of Charleston in 1886. He graduated at that institution in 1888 and at once located at his present home on James Island and began active practice. During the years which have elapsed since that time Doctor Ellis has stood as one of the most successful, best known and most popular physicians in this section of the state. As a natural sequence his success as a practitioner has brought with it financial gain and he is today in very comfortable circumstances. He owns a fine plantation of six hundred acres, which he has devoted very largely to the raising of Sea Island Cotton, and also has large interests at Atlanta, Georgia, and other places.

Dr. Daniel Ellis was married twice, first to Rena L. McLeod, to which union was born one daughter, Rose M. The doctor's second marriage was with Mary S. Rivers, the daughter of Capt. E. L. Rivers, of James Island, who during his lifetime was one of the principal planters of that locality. Mrs. Ellis is of the tenth generation of her family to live on James Island. She is the mother of two children, namely: Kate, the wife of George L. Dickson, of Greenwood, and Daniel W., Jr., ten years of age. Doctor Ellis takes a deep interest in all those things which look to the advancement of the highest and best interests of the people among which he lives and has membership in the Episcopal Church, of which he has been a vestryman for many years. Not only in his profession has Doctor Ellis been accorded evidences of popular confidence and regard, but also in other directions, while he has ever ordered his course according to the highest principles and ideals, so that he has been found true to himself and to all men. [South Carolina, Special Limited Edition, 1920]