Records are available for marriages between July 1950 and December 2023. For marriage records prior to or after these dates, you will need to contact the Probate Court that originally issued the marriage license. Find the Probate Court in your county.

What marriage records are available?

Certified copies of marriage records from July 1950 to December 2023 may be obtained from the Vital Records Office in Columbia, South Carolina, 2600 Bull Street, Columbia, SC 29201.

Copies of marriage records that occurred PRIOR to July 1950 and after December 2023 may be obtained from the Office of the Probate in the county where the original marriage license was issued. Fees charged by DHEC for these services do not apply to copies obtained from the Office of the Probate Judge.

Request a Copy of a Marriage Certificate

1. Online or by phone through VitalChek

Average processing time is 5-7 business days.

Visit VitalChek on the web or call 1-877-284-1008, 7 days a week, 24-hours-a-day. Only the persons named on the marriage certificate, their adult children or a present or former spouse may order through VitalChek.

You will need to provide:

A $17 non-refundable expedited searching fee

$3 for each additional copy

$12.85 additional charge to pay for the services of VitalChek

Shipping fees should you choose to have your record sent to you by UPS rather than regular U.S. mail

Only the person named on the marriage certificate, their adult children or a present or former spouse may order through VitalChek.

2. In-Person

Average processing time is 30-45 minutes.

Same day service is a goal of Vital Records; most requests can be processed the same day. For services that require additional processing time such as paternity affidavits, corrections and amendments; please arrive early to ensure adequate time to process your request. Same day service is not guaranteed for requests such as paternity affidavits, adoption processing, corrections and amendments.

You will need to provide:

A completed application form

A $17 non-refundable expedited searching fee

$3 for each additional copy

A valid government, school or employer issued photo ID.

Where to Go:

DHEC State Vital Records Office, Columbia

Office Hours: 8:30 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.

Telephone: (803) 898-3630

Address: 2600 Bull St., Columbia, SC 29201

3. By Mail

* Mail requests are only accepted at the state office in Richland County.

Average processing time is 4 weeks.

You will need to send:

A completed application form

A $12 non-refundable standard searching fee ($3 for each additional copy)

A photocopy of a valid government, school or employer issued photo ID. When we receive applications without proper identification, we reject them automatically; we do not process them.

Mail to:

DHEC Vital Records

2600 Bull St.

Columbia, SC 29201

Mail requests are only accepted at the state office.

4. Drop-off

* Drop-off requests are only accepted at the state office in Richland County.

You will need to provide:

A completed application form.

You may select a standard $12 non-refundable search fee with a processing time of 4 weeks or an expedited $17 non-refundable search fee with a processing time of 5 business days or less (search fee includes one certified copy of the marriage certificate).

$3 for each additional copy

You must pay with exact cash, money order, or cashier's check made payable to S.C. DHEC.

A valid government, school or employer-issued photo ID.

Additional information:

We'll give you a receipt when you drop off your request.

We can mail your marriage certificate to you or you can pick it up at the Columbia state office.

Where to Go:

DHEC State Vital Records Office, Columbia

Office Hours: 8:30 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.

Telephone: (803) 898-3630

Address: 2600 Bull St., Columbia, SC 29201

Who can obtain a certified copy of a marriage certificate?

You are entitled to obtain a certified copy of a marriage certificate if you are:

One of the married party (bride or groom)

The married party's adult child(ren)

A present or former spouse of either married party, or

The married party's legal representative.

Other applicants may be provided with a statement that the marriage occurred, including the date and county in which the marriage license was issued.

How do I amend or change the information on a marriage certificate?

To amend or change any information on a marriage certificate please visit the Probate Court in the county where the marriage occurred.

How do I apply for a license to marry in South Carolina?

A couple planning to marry in South Carolina must apply for a license at a South Carolina county probate court.

What information is needed to apply for a marriage certificate?

Full name of the groom

Full name of the bride

Full date of marriage (month, day, year)

County where the marriage license was issued

Signature of the person requesting the marriage certificate and their current mailing address

The relationship between the married parties and the person requesting the certified copy

Full name and complete mailing address of the person to whom the certificate is to be mailed

Area code and daytime telephone number of the person requesting the marriage certificate

How can I check on the status of a marriage certificate request?

If you have not received any response to your request within 30 days of submission, you may call 803-898-3630 or e-mail us (vrrequeststatus@dhec.sc.gov) for an update.

What marriage records are available?

Certified copies of marriage records from July 1950 to December 2018 may be obtained from the Vital Records Office in Columbia, South Carolina, 2600 Bull Street, Columbia, SC 29201.

Copies of marriage records that occurred PRIOR to July 1950 and after December 2018 may be obtained from the Office of the Probate in the county where the original marriage license was issued. Fees charged by DHEC for these services do not apply to copies obtained from the Office of the Probate Judge.

For more information, contact Constituent Services.