The goal of every actor to work often, hone their craft and find those dream roles along the way. To accomplish this you can never limit yourself or become discouraged in any way. A great example of that attitude is Musto Pelinkovicci. Musto began his acting career at age 42, after studying acting four years at The College of Staten Island with a special emphasis on Improvisation. He was born in Monte Negro, an eastern European country bordered by Albania and Croatia. Its beautiful shorelines hug the Adriatic Sea, just across from Italy.Musto speaks all the Slavic languages and a bit of Italian as well! To begin a career in acting takes true conviction or as Musto says, "My entire life is an act." As a child Musto played with his siblings and kept them amused by acting like a drunk, axe wielding maniac. Recently RG Magazine's Talent Co-ordinator, Fred Coscia, was out and about looking for talent to feature in his cable show, Who Do You Like TV? and knew immediately that meeting Musto was, to use a cliché, like 'catching a rising star.' Just go to IMBD and have a look at Musto's resume and you'll see that early on he was cast in film's such as Alex Baldwin's Shortcut To Happiness and The Disappearance of Eleanor Rigby. Most recently Musto was featured in the CBS hit TV series Limitless as Stavros Antonopolos, 'The best janitor in the world'.That featured role has led Musto to five more episodes of Limitless playing Stavros Antonopolosis , which led to him being invited to be a regular on the show and to quote writer Amy V of TV Tyrant ( an interactive fan publication and a true fan of the show) - "We're waiting for a Stavros backstory, guys. (For the uninitiated, Stavros is the best janitor in the world0"

So one casting call is all it takes to reach a new plateau in your career, one without any limits.Of course you have to be prepared and truly be in the moment but it's obvious that Musto is a natural. In simple terms, be seen more and you will be noticed more, than you will get more work. RG Mag sat down with Musto and asked him a few candid questions.

RGM: Musto, you say your life has been an act, what do you mean by that?

MUSTO: My entire life has been an act by never taking life seriously and by always living a playful and a joyful life RGM: You started acting at age 42 , what did you do before that?

MUSTO: I was a real estate investor before becoming an actor.

RGM: What Film(s) have moved you the most and who is the actor that you look up to the most?

MUSTO: Escape from Alcatraz is the movie and actors Kirk Douglas and Steve McQueen are two great actors that inspired me to becoming an actor

RGM: What can we expect in the future from you? MUSTO: Well, now that I am a working actor, I am hoping to be able to find a reputable talent agent who can get me more roles in films and television and in which I can finally be able to truly reveal my potential, as well as, my character range in portraying stories as to what they truly are intended to reveal.

RGM: Thank you Musto, RG Mag is a huge fan of the show and now that we know Stavros we have a real personal connection. BTW you got any of those clear genius making NZT pills? If you have not seen Limitless , first of all where have you been? And well watch it this week (check your local listings or stream it) and you'll know find out!

And be sure to check Musto out in the CBS hit series Limitless and like him on Facebook and the Limitless Facebook page as well.

Click on the links in purple and like away!!!