Jason Biggs

On 12-5-1978 Jason Biggs (nickname: Jason ) was born in Pompton Plains, New Jersey, United States. He made his 12 million dollar fortune with American Pie, Guy X, My Best Friend's Girl & Orange Is The New Black. The actor is married to Jenny Mollen, his starsign is Taurus and he is now 46 years of age.

Jason Biggs Facts & Wiki

Where does Jason Biggs live? And how much money does Jason Biggs earn?

Birth Date 12-5-1978 Heritage/origin American Ethnicity White Religion - believes in God? Roman Catholic Residence He lives together in a house in Los Angeles, California, United States.

Jason Biggs Net Worth, Salary, Cars & Houses

Estimated Net Worth 12 million Dollar Celebrity Net Worth Revealed: The 55 Richest Actors Alive in 2024 Yearly Salary N/A These Are The 10 Best-Paid Television Stars In The World Product Endorsements Time Magazine Colleagues Mircea Monroe & Diane Neal

Houses

Los Angeles house ($2.99 million) (Swimming Pool • Home Office • Parking Lot • )

Cars

CTS - manufactured by Cadillac ($80.000)

RELATED:These 10 Whopping Homes & Cars Of Celebrities Look Amazing!

Jason Biggs: Wife, Dating, Family & Friends

Who is Jason Biggs dating in 2024?

Relationship status Married (Since 2007) Sexuality Straight Current Wife of Jason Biggs Jenny Mollen Ex-girlfriends or ex-wives Tara Reid

Lindsay Zir Has any kids? Yes, father of: Sid

Will the marriage of American actor Jason Biggs and current Wife, Jenny Mollen survive 2024?

These Are The 15 Hottest Wives And Girlfriends Of Hollywood!

Family

Family photo of the actor, married to Jenny Mollen, famous for American Pie, Guy X, My Best Friend's Girl & Orange Is The New Black. Names of father, mother, kids, brothers & sisters:

Gary Louis Biggs (Father) Angela Biggs (Mother) Sid Biggs (Son)

Friends

Seann William Scott

Skin, Hair & Eye Color

This handsome actor originating from Pompton Plains, New Jersey, United States has a thin body & long face type.

Hair color Brown/Black Hair type Wavy Hair Length short hair Hairstyle urban Distinct feature cheeks Skin Tone/Complexion Type II: Fair skin Skin Type Normal Beard or Mustache Beardless Eye Color Brown Does Jason Biggs smoke? No, never Caught Smoking: These Are The 60 Most Shocking Celebrity Smokers

Jason Biggs - 2024 Brown/Black hair & urban hair style.

Height, Weight, Body Measurements, Tattoos & Style

Height 175 cm Weight 73 kilo Clothing style trashy trendy Favorite colors green Feet size N/A Does Jason Biggs have a tattoo? NoThese 50 Celebrity Tattoos Went Horribly Wrong

Official websites/fansites: www.jasonbiggs.fan-site.hu

Does Jason Biggs have official Social Media profiles?

Follow this page to stay up to date about the latest gossip and rumors (plastic surgery, scandals, new photos or videos and so on) of Jason Biggs!

Trending

Lo and behold, this is our Top 60 of celebrities that have been caught smoking or

Celebrities don’t always wear makeup anymore. In fact, many of them lately like to show off

40/ 40Cardi B’s dream mansion in Atlanta rap-up.com After two years of house hunting Cardi B

55/ 55Sean Penn – $70,000,000 via bz-berlin.de Sean is a dinosaur in Hollywood, but he manages

A lot of celebrities do not know what to do with their money anymore in 2022.