The network of national museums has 61 museums that are characterized by the holding, preservation and enhancement of national collections. National collections cover works of art, cultural, scientific or technical objects belonging to the State.

These collections, with 80.6 million objects, are exceptional in their diversity and richness. Of these, 83% of the objects are in the collections of the Museum of Natural History, 11% in the field of archaeology (collections of the National Archaeological Museum, the National Museum of Prehistory, etc.), and 6% or 4.28 million objects, fine arts and technical, industrial and other heritage.

The status of national museums

The list of national museums was originally established in Decree No. 45-2075 of 31 August 1945 implementing the Ordinance on the Provisional Organization of Fine Arts Museums. Article R 421-1 of the Heritage Code states that "the list of national museums shall be established by decree on the proposal of the Minister responsible for Culture". Two decrees have been issued fixing this list: Decree no. 2011-574 of 24 May 2011 to articles D 421-2 to D 421-4, as amended by decree no. 2014-119 of 11 February 2014 in articles D 421-2 to D421-4. 41 national museums come under the Ministry of Culture. This list of national museums must be supplemented by that of museums under the control of the State and whose supervision is provided by other ministries than the Ministry of Culture in particular in the fields of military, scientific, industrial and natural heritage (museums under the Ministry of Armed Forces, Research, Ecology, etc.). In total, these «state» museums form a group of 66 museums.

All national museums are also known as the Musée de France. As such, national museums must comply with the criteria set by this designation (scientific and cultural project, public development, etc.).

Among the national museums concerned with culture, institutions are also distinguished according to their status: 18 national museums belong to institutions holding the status of public institution (15 institutions)This gives them administrative and financial autonomy; 17 national museums are part of 13 institutions with national competence service status (SNA) which links them directly to the central administration.

The missions of national museums

Whatever their status, national museums develop common missions:

to preserve, protect, restore on behalf of the State and to present to the public the works of the collections inscribed on the inventory of which it has custody;

contribute to the enrichment of national collections by the acquisition of cultural goods on behalf of the State, for payment or free of charge;

to ensure the reception of the widest possible audience, to develop its attendance, to promote knowledge of their collections, to design and implement educational and dissemination actions aimed at ensuring equal access to culture for all;

Ensure the scientific study of its collections;

Contribute to education, training and research in the field of art history, archaeology and museography;

Preserve, manage and develop the buildings they own.

Origin and typology of national museums

Many of the current national museums are former royal residences: Louvre, Fontainebleau, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Compiègne, Pau. Transformed into national museums over the course of history, they hold the double characteristic of castle and museum.

Other museums are dedicated exclusively to an artist, often by the very will of this artist: Delacroix, Henner, Moreau in Paris, Picasso in Paris and Vallauris for example.

Others finally bear witness to moments of history: Saint-Germain-en-Laye and prehistory, Cluny and the Middle Ages, or Ecouen and the Renaissance.

Two of these museums are dedicated to extra-European civilizations: Africa, Americas and Pacific at the Quai Branly Museum, Asia at the Guimet Museum.

Attendance at national museums

In 2019

The national museums under the tutelage of the Ministry of Culture had 33.5 million admissions in 2019. Free entries represent 34% of attendance.

In 2019, the national museums welcomed 7.5 million visitors under the age of 18 and visitors between the ages of 18 and 25, including 1.8 million students.

The attendance of international tourists is high in museums with a high reputation abroad. In 2019, for example, the Louvre Museum welcomed 71% of foreign visitors.

In 2020

In 2020, the health crisis affected all visitors to the territory’s heritage facilities, including the national museums under the supervision of the Ministry of Culture (Galeries nationales du Grand Palais and Musée du Luxembourg included). This year’s attendance figures reflect the impact of the closure of cultural institutions as a result of government directives. They are down by almost 70% overall compared to 2019.

The national museums under the supervision of the Ministry of Culture achieved 9.6 million admissions in 2020. Free entries represent 46% of attendance.

As a result of the health crisis, the number of foreign tourists has declined at an unprecedented rate. The share of free audiences increased compared to 2019 (+12 points).

Free

Free museums are an important aspect of the policy of cultural democratization.

National museums are free for priority audiences: under 18, 18/25 EU nationals, students in art history, people with disabilities (and a possible accompanying person) and job seekers, holders of an education pass (card issued to all staff of the Ministry of National Education), the ICOM card, the Culture card (card issued to staff of the Ministry of Culture), Press, Guide-speakers, etc.

Access to the Louvre’s permanent collections is free on the first Saturday evening of the month, while access to the collections of other national museums is free on the first Sunday of each month.

National Museums under the Ministry of Culture

Public institutions

Services under national jurisdiction

National museums under the supervision of other ministries

Chancellery

Ministry of Education

Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation

Ministry of Armed Forces

Ministère de l'économie, des finances et de la relance

Ministère des sports