All God's Children

All God's Children presents a political, social, and religious analysis of sexual orientation within the context of the traditional African American values of freedom, inclusion, and the Christian ethic.

We have made a streaming version of the film, in its entirety, available here for viewing:

More about this Film:

Overview | Awards | Film Credits | Discussion Guide

Overview

Through the voices of politicians, religious leaders, academics, family members, and activists, All God's Children vividly illustrates the human toll exacted upon society by the unspoken stigmatization and alienation of lesbians and gay men.

Interwoven with music, the intricately layered stories unfold on the screen creating a tapestry with the theme of spiritual understanding. Respected religious and political leaders Rev. Jesse Jackson, Rev. James Forbes, Rev. Carol L. Murray, Congresswoman Maxine Waters, Senator Carol Moseley-Braun, Mayor Ken Reeves, and Cornel West call for spiritual reconciliation and a commitment to equal rights and social justice for all people.

This film is part of the Unlearning Homophobia series.

Format: VHS/DVD

Year: 1996

Running Time: 26 minutes

Awards

Best Documentary, 1996 National Black Arts Film Festival

Best Film on Matters Relating to the "Black Experience", 1996 Black International Cinema Competition

Special Merit Award, 1996 National Black Programming Consortium

Prized Pieces Film and Video Competition

Apple Award, 1997 National Educational Media Network

Lambda Liberty Award, 1997 Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund

Screening Honoree, 1997-1998 Council on Foundations Film Festival Series

Jury's Choice Award, University of Oregon Queer Film Festival

Film Credits

A Woman Vision Production in association with The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force and The National Black Lesbian and Gay Leadership Forum.

Producer and Director: Dr. Dee Mosbacher & Frances Reid and Dr. Sylvia Rhue

Editor: Lori Szybist

Cinematography: Frances Reid

Discussion Guide

All God's Children: A Discussion Guide written by Sylvia Rhue, Ph.D., and Linda Alband

All God's Children was produced to facilitate discussions on:

homophobia and heterosexism

race equity

AIDS and the role of the church

social justice

lesbian, gay, and bisexual people in history

constructs of heterosexism and heterosexual privilege

sexual orientation

cultural diversity

familial and community ties

spiritual issues among gay people

This guide provides a framework upon which to base discussions, and the Appendix provides a list of recommended resources for those who wish to delve further into the issues touched upon in All God's Children.

Content Highlights: