Drummer, Producer, Drum Farm Studio Owner

Born in Champaign, IL, John is a life-long drummer who works in rock, power pop and alt-country with such artists as Tommy Keene, Gin Blossoms, Badfinger, Eddie Money, Shoes, Will Hoge, Wilco guitarist Jay Bennett and others. He has toured extensively throughout the United States, Canada, Japan, England, Ireland, France, Spain, Holland, Belgium, The Phillippines, Brazil, Kuwait, Iraq, El Salvador and Honduras.

John is the owner of Drum Farm Studio in Menomonie, WI, and brings his veteran experience in the music business to pastoral Wisconsin to build a relaxing environment for musical inspiration and creation. Since opening the studio in 2010, John has produced, arranged and performed on tracks by numerous artists recording at the studio. With strong regional connections, as well as artists from abroad, John’s vision for the studio has become reality.

Career

The Martyrs

John started his professional career in 1980 with seminal Champaign-Urbana band The Martyrs.

Tommy Keene

On the release of Tommy Keene’s Based on Happy Times in 1989, Richardson was recruited to play drums for the subsequent tour (along with Brad Quinn on bass) opening for The Replacements. He played on all Tommy Keene’s following albums and tours from 1992 to 2009.

Joey Molland of Badfinger

John was tagged to play drums for Joey Molland (Badfinger) in 1990. He has toured the US, Canada and Europe with Molland/Badfinger and played drums on Joey’s solo album, The Pilgrim, released in 1992.

Gin Blossoms

From 2008-2012, John played drums for the Gin Blossoms, touring all over the world and recording on their 2010 album, No Chocolate Cake.

The Small Square

John joined longtime friend and bandmate Paul Chastain to record and tour as The Small Square. Their debut album, which was co-produced by Richardson and Chastain, was released in 2015. The Small Square toured Japan in 2015.

Associations

Touring

John has toured with many bands including Gin Blossoms, Badfinger, Tommy Keene, Eddie Money, Shoes, Catchpenny, Adam Schmitt, Garrison Starr, Tim Easton, Will Hoge, Kalisa Ewing, Clare Dunn, Chris Hawkey, The Bad Examples, Ralph’s World, Three Hour Tour, Weird Summer and the Bay City Rollers. He has toured throughout the United States and in Canada, Japan, England, France, Ireland, Spain, Holland, Belgium, The Philippines, Brazil, Kuwait, Iraq, El Salvador and Honduras.

Recording

In the studio, John has played drums for Gin Blossoms, Joey Molland (Badfinger), Paul Chastain (Velvet Crush, Matthew Sweet), Tommy Keene, Shoes, Adam Schmitt, Keene Brothers (Robert Pollard and Tommy Keene), Garrison Starr, Robynn Ragland, The Bad Examples, Three Hour Tour, Weird Summer, Jay Bennett (Wilco), Billy Davis (Foghat), Randy Forte & the Reconstruction and numerous other recordings.

John has worked with producers Jonathan Pines and Adam Schmitt (Champaign); Mark Rubel, Ken Coomer, Tom Bukovac and Joe Baldridge (Nashville); R. Walt Vincent (Los Angeles) and Phil Solem of The Rembrandts and Brad Matala (Minneapolis); Otto D’Agnolo (Phoenix); Willie Wells (Woodstock, NY) and Jeff Murphy of Shoes (Chicago).

Fellow Musicians

John has performed and/or recorded with musicians including Tom Bukovac, Audley Freed (Black Crowes), John Lancaster (Gary Allan), David LaBruyere (John Mayer), Brad Rice (Keith Urban), Brad Jones (Matthew Sweet, Tommy Keene), Ethan Pilzer (Billy Joe Shaver, Jewel, Big & Rich), Jay Bennett (Wilco), Paul Chastain (Velvet Crush, Matthew Sweet), Cory Wong (Ben Rector) and Ryan Liestman (Jonas Brothers).

Media

Television Appearances

Richardson has performed on Fox News All-American New Year’s Eve and 12 News Phoenix – Downtown Goes Live (with Gin Blossoms), Late Night with Conan O’Brien (with Tommy Keene), WGN News (with Shoes and WGN Morning News (with Ralph’s World).

Equipment Endorsements

John is currently sponsored by:

Mapleworks Drums | John Louis Richardson profile

Paiste Cymbals

Evans Drumheads

Vic Firth | John Louis Richardson profile

Groove Juice

Slug Percussion

Alclair Custom In-Ear Monitors

Contact Information

T: 715-441-1406

E: john@drumfarmstudio.com

Discography