John (Uncle David) Roberts, 70, of Champaign passed away on October 6, 2018, at 7:32 p.m.

John was born on September 26, 1948, in Champaign, a son of Delmar Eugene Roberts and Anna Rosella Knott Roberts. He was preceded in death by his parents, his sister Carol Sue (Jerry) Hatmaker of Ohio and infant brother Thomas Edward. He is survived by his wife of 49 years, Kay Roberts; three children, Troy Damon (Nikki) Roberts of Sidney, Jamie Elizabeth (Terry) Lenox of Pontiac and Rebecca Marie Roberts of Champaign; six grandchildren, Ileana Lindy Roberts, Dalton Troy Roberts, Haley Elizabeth Lenox, Johnathan Dean Lenox, Layla Marie Roberts, Colton Travis Roberts; two siblings, Theodore Eugene Roberts of Shorewood, Vicki (Larry) Rogers of Monticello; brother-in-law, Robert (Sue) Richardson of Champaign and many beloved nieces, nephews, cousins and friends including his lifelong pal and confidant Bill Gentry.

John was a townie, a lifelong resident of C-U. He was proud to be a Champaign Maroon, even though married to a lifelong Urbana Tiger. He graduated High School in 1966. He was passionate about his career as a meat cutter. He started his career as an Apprentice in 1965 at Eisner Food Stores in C-U. He served in the Army National Guard of Illinois from 1968-1974 and was honorably discharged on August 23, 1974. He owned two White Hen Pantry stores (Hometown Pantry) in Champaign. He held many positions as a meat cutter throughout the years and was currently employed at Schnucks in Savoy.

John (Papa) and his grandchildren shared a special love. He was greatly and dearly loved by those who knew him. He never knew a stranger and would talk to anyone about anything. He was always willing and ready to debate any subject, especially politics, which caused him and his brother Gene to spend "many hours" depleting cellphone batteries.

The visitation will be from 6 to 8 p.m. Thursday, October 11 at Owens Funeral Home, 101 N. Elm St., Champaign. Funeral Mass will begin at 10:30 a.m. Friday, October 12 at Holy Cross Church, 405 W. Clark St., Champaign. Burial will be at Mt. Olive Cemetery in Mayview, IL.

Donations may be made to the American Heart Association or the Rheumatoid Arthritis Foundation.

To send flowers to the family or plant a tree in memory of John D. Roberts, please visit our floral store.