CHAMPAIGN -- He wore a pair of black and gray gator-skin wing tips to Big Ten Conference media day, so everyone who didn't know it learned one thing about Illinois junior guard D.J. Richardson. He likes to dress to impress.

"He's got all the outfits,'' said Illini coach Bruce Weber.

Just don't ask Richardson to borrow those gators, unless you're assistant coach Wayne McClain.

"That's one fly brother,'' said Richardson.

The Illini ask for as much substance as style from Richardson, the former Big Ten freshman of the year who endured the sophomore slump last season. Whether it was defenses paying more attention or Richardson not extending his game, he went from the league's best freshman to just another sophomore.

"I don't know if you want to call it a sophomore jinx,'' Weber said. "A lot of people forget he was freshman of the year. What happened, if he was honest with you, he didn't work at it as hard as he should. You have to keep improving your game every year. All of a sudden, he thought it would come easy. It didn't.''

Richardson's scoring averaged fell from 10.5 points per game as a rookie, when he was Big Ten Conference freshman of the year in the coaches vote, to 8.4 last season.

During a span of seven games late in the season, he made more than one shot in a game just twice and was 7 of 33 in the stretch. When his shooting slumped, Richardson's confidence sagged, and the rest of his game deteriorated.

"I'm a junior now,'' Richardson said. "There are a lot of fingers pointing at me for having a bad season last year. I have to overcome that. I have to do other things besides put the ball in the basket. I have to be a leader. I have to guard the best players again.''

Weber and the staff work to boost Richardson's confidence.

"I hope he's one of the best 3-point shooters, one of the best shooters in the Big Ten,'' Weber said. "We just talk to him. Tell him he's one of the best shooters in the country. If you're open, shoot the ball. He's doing it at this point.

"He's been our most consistent player in practice. There's no doubt about it.''

Players from Peoria normally have the edge, that toughness to keep from losing confidence. With Richardson, it's missing.

"When it comes down to it, D.J. is a lovable kid,'' Weber said. "He lost a little bit of confidence (last year). We would have hoped he'd be a little tougher to fight through it. He's worked much harder. His priorities are much more in line to having success.''

His outgoing personality comes in handy on recruiting weekends. Richardson plays the role of lead recruiter on the Illini roster. Called a "social butterfly'' by Weber, the communications major finds it easy to strike up a conversation, and he's not afraid to give his time.

"College is important,'' he said. "It's something that a lot of people can't really experience. I got a lot of friends that went to junior college. They can't really experience the university life. It's important to talk to young guys and show them the ropes around college.''

He's also the last player in the Peoria Pipeline, something that bothers him.

"There will be a long time before you see another one,'' he said. "Hopefully, we get (a player) to bloom and step into an Illinois uniform.''

This winter, Richardson wants to look good in that orange-and-blue outfit.

John Supinie can be reached at Johnsupinie@aol.com. Follow him on Twitter @JohnSupinie.