Programmes made in the recent past are always disconcerting. They look almost like today's … but not quite. The acting style is almost the same … but not quite. The scene lengths, the number of punchlines per minute (if it's a comedy) are almost the same … but not quite. By some strange quirk, it's far more distracting than total unfamiliarity.

Shine on Harvey Moon, ITV's hit show about an RAF clerk from London's East End piecing his life back together after the second world war, suffers badly from this at first. Written by legendary sitcom duo Laurence Marks and Maurice Gran (Goodnight Sweetheart, Birds of a Feather), the show ran for four series between 1982 and 1985. Not only do the production values look low to the spoiled modern viewer, but a fair percentage of the Cockney accents would make Dick Van Dyke weep for shame; and some of the lines (especially when the increasingly politicised Harvey delivers one of his impassioned socialist rants) clunk so heavily you start checking your ears for blood. "I can't understand your working-class Toryism!" he yells at his poor mother. "What have they ever done for the likes of us?"

But by the time you're halfway through the first series, all such distractions have fallen away. Harvey, played by Kenneth Cranham, returns to find his house is rubble, his children barely recognise him, jobs are scarce, and his wife Rita has been having a whale of a time helping the war effort in her own special way. But gradually the family Moon coheres and so, round it, does the audience. There are lovely lines ("'Course it's boring! All honest jobs are boring!" explains the patriarch to his newly employed offspring) and exchanges that far outnumber any clunkers. "I don't see how you manage to shave in that broken bit of mirror," says Violet, the formidable nan, to Harvey. "I've got a good memory for faces," he replies.

Then there are the tiny touches that conjure up that frequently misremembered postwar world: the birthday cakes planned weeks in advance, the gathering of everyone in the house to admire a piece of steak brought to the table, the shaving mirror that, of course, stays broken – all testifying to how long things took to improve. Brownshirts recruit at the local market. The installation of a telephone in the Moon household is almost as transformative as the penicillin that cures Violet's pneumonia. Antisemitism is still rife, as Harvey realises when he begins a relationship with his Jewish landlady, an Austrian refugee. And the nation's wallpaper, as Violet points out, is uniformly terrible.