Maurice Gran & Laurence Marks

Interview by Jenny Itzcovitz

Maurice Gran and Laurence Marks are BAFTA award winning scriptwriters with Shine On Harvey Moon, Birds of a Feather, The New Statesman, Goodnight Sweetheart, Mumbai Calling and Cluedo 2, to name a few of the wonderful scripts they have written.

We caught up with the super talented writing team to find out how they first met, the inspiration for their scripts, some of the highlights of their career, and what they are working on now.

Can you tell us a bit about yourselves and where you come from?

“We were both recruited into the newly formed Finsbury Park Company of the Jewish Lads Brigade, in 1960. We’d joined for the football, but found there was rather more marching up and down than we had bargained for.

“We graduated to the local youth club a few years later, where there was table tennis, girls, a record player and very little marching. As the 1960s developed into the greatest decade ever, we played together and separately in a number of football teams and pop groups, and both dreamed of lives that were other than nine-to-five.”

How did you first start writing together?

“In 1973 we had the good fortune to stumble upon Player-Playwrights, a scriptwriting club that met in central London and still meets, most Monday nights up in Kilburn. Over the subsequent months, in a semi-derelict theatre in Fitzroy Square, we were exposed to short plays, long plays, good plays and bad plays, written and performed by members of the club, professional and amateur.

“Although by then Laurence was a journalist, and Maurice was selling the occasional short story to top shelf magazines, neither of us even fantasised about a career as a playwright, although we were both enthusiastic fans of radio and television comedy and drama. But after a few months hearing other members’ scripts, we decided separately to take the plunge, and to enter the regular sketch-writing competition.

“To our surprise, one or the other of us won the next half dozen contests. At that point, Don West, the Secretary, a gifted playwright and a very nice man, asked us if we’d ever considered writing together. We hadn’t, but the idea appealed. Our comedy heroes included the writing partnerships of Galton and Simpson (Hancock, Steptoe and Son), Clement and La Frenais (Likely Lads, Porridge), and Barry Took and Marty Feldman (Round the Horne, The Army Game).

“With these titans in mind, we took a day off work and wrote our very first script: a half hour comedy monologue, entitled The World’s Not Ready For You Yet, Sylvester, about a failing inventor who attempts suicide via his own inventions, and of course, fails.

“We had no idea how long it should take to write a half-hour script. We finished the first draft by lunchtime, and the rewrite in time for afternoon tea. The script generated a satisfying number of laughs from the Player-Playwright membership, so we put it in an envelope and sent it off to James Gilbert, BBC Head of Comedy, expecting a large cheque and a series commission by return of post.

“What we did receive, a few weeks later, was an encouraging letter, inviting us to Television Centre for a chat and a cup of tea with Mr Gilbert. We were slightly disappointed, not realising that if TV comedy writing is a version of Snakes and Ladders, then we had reached square 93 with our first throw of the dice.

“We arrived at Television Centre on Friday, October 11th, 1974. We’re sure about the date, because it was the day after the second General Election of that year. In the BBC lobby we found ourselves sharing a banquette with Miners’ Union Leader Joe Gormley, and eccentric Tory peer Lord Hailsham. They were about to go into the post-election studio as political pundits, but they looked more like a rival comedy writing team.

“We were thrilled and overawed when we were ushered up to the comedy department, past photographs of most of our comedy heroes. Jimmy Gilbert was a charming and knowledgeable enthusiast, producer of such classics as Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads and The Two Ronnies. Although we quickly realised he wasn’t about to buy our script, he gave us much wise advice about how we could improve it. We rushed back to North London to carry out his instructions. He didn’t buy the rewrite either.

“Over the next few years we wrote and submitted several sit-com scripts, all of which were turned down by BBC and ITV, but always with words of encouragement. But you can’t eat words of encouragement, and by 1977 we had accepted we were unlikely to become well paid jokesters. Maurice decided to concentrate on his secure if dull Civil Service career, while Laurence moved from local journalism to an enviable researcher’s job with This Week, ITV’s flagship current affairs programme.”

I understand that you were given an early opportunity to write together on a radio show for Frankie Howerd after a chance meeting with Barry Took. Can you tell us about this and how it got you started in your career?

“Laurence was due to fly up to Manchester to carry out an interview for a high-profile edition of This Week, but he overslept for the first time in his life, and missed the flight. He phoned his boss, expecting to be fired. Instead he was told to get himself to Euston and take the next available train up North.

“When Laurence sank into his first-class seat (those were the days), sitting opposite him was none other than the aforementioned comedy legend, Barry Took. Laurence was star struck and dumbstruck. Luckily Barry began a conversation, and Laurence mustered his courage to reveal himself to Barry as a frustrated comedy writer. To Laurence’s amazement Barry offered to read our rejected sit-com scripts, and on his return to London Laurence dumped a foot-high stack of manuscripts on Barry’s doorstep.

“We heard nothing from Barry for several months. Then one afternoon Laurence’s phone rang and a mellifluous voice said, “Hello, this is Barry Took. I don’t suppose you remember me?” Which must be one of the daftest statements ever made. Barry followed this up with the even dafter statement, “I’ve read your scripts and I think it would be a great loss to British comedy if you two didn’t persevere.”

“Barry emphasised that this was just his opinion, and he had no power or position within TV to help us. Thankfully, this statement wasn’t quite accurate. A month later he told us to expect a phone call from Richard Willcox, the producer of the Frankie Howerd Variety Show, a prestigious series for Radio 2. Richard was looking for new writers, and Barry had championed our cause. Richard asked us to write a sample monologue. He was rightly underwhelmed with our effort, but gave us a second chance because Barry believed in us.

“With Barry’s considerable guidance, our second attempt made more of an impact, and Richard commissioned us to write twenty minutes of banter, sketches and monologues for each of the six hour long episodes. We were delighted, verging on ecstatic. But we still had our day jobs, the workload was heavy, and for the next two months we found ourselves toiling into the small hours. It was all worth it for the indescribable thrill of hearing an audience of strangers laughing at our jokes.

“By the end of the series we were both exhausted, and suffering from stress induced psychosomatic ailments, known in comedy circles as Howerd Syndrome. We were also wondering – what next, if anything? Then, to our amazement, Frankie asked us to write his script for the Royal Command Performance, which that year was honouring the Queen Mother’s 80th birthday. Frankie’s eight minutes provided the hit of the night. Everybody was talking about it the next day, but we daren’t bathe in the glory – our bosses knew nothing of our secret lives.

“Our relative success with Frankie led to an offer to do a similar job for Marti Caine, this time on BBC TV. Marti was a popular singer and comedienne, who had stumbled to fame when she deliberately fell down the stairs on ITV’s New Faces, the X-Factor of its day. We liked Marti, but realised that we didn’t enjoy being two of a rabble of writers all contributing ideas and gags to a variety show – especially when the star of the show usually forgot the script and fell back on her club act.”

Over the years you have written some wonderful scripts for TV shows together. One of my favourites is Shine On Harvey Moon. Can you tell us about this and your inspiration for the programme?

Laurence explains, “One summer’s day in the mid-1970s I was wandering along Camden Passage, a maze of little antique shops in Islington. There was a stall selling old magazines and the cover of a Picture Post from 1945 caught my eye. “How much?” I asked.

“The dealer said that the magazine was one of a bundle, and he wasn’t prepared to split it. I’d have to buy the lot for, “What shall we say? Thirty-five pence?” Even 45 years ago that wasn’t a great deal of money.

“The black and white photograph that so enthralled me showed a British soldier coming home from the war. His wife, daughter and little boy wait outside their flag draped prefab, arms outstretched, joy on their faces. I loved that photograph. It made me smile and it made me wonder. What happened after the man of the prefab returned to Blighty? Did he manage to put his terrifying experiences behind him? Were they happy? Did they prosper?

“Then my comedy writer’s instinct kicked in. While most returning soldiers were hailed as heroes, I couldn’t help wondering, “What if this housewife was hoping her old man had been tortured at the hands of the Japanese?” The thought compelled me to add a line of my own at the bottom of that iconic photo. I’ve still got that old Picture Post. My caption reads, “Oh s***, he survived!”

“My caption didn’t come out of nowhere. The woman in the photograph had put me immediately in mind of my Auntie Miri, a spirited woman from an impoverished background who found the War intoxicatingly liberating. It allowed her to leave her restrictive family home, get work in a Piccadilly bar serving allied soldiers, to go dancing, have fun, and sleep in the Underground if she didn’t have a better offer from an American, Canadian or Free Polish airman. Not that I was imagining that Auntie Miri harboured murderous thoughts, she was far too kind-hearted, but all the family knew that the day Miri’s husband returned from the war was the day her life turned from technicolour back into black and white.”

Shine On Harvey Moon has a marvellous cast including Pauline Quirke, Linda Robson, Kenneth Cranham, Nigel Planer, Maggie Steed, Nicky Henson and Elizabeth Spriggs – to name a few! What did it mean to you to have such a stellar cast in the show, and for them to go on and become such a success in their careers?

“The stellar cast was assembled by our brilliant producer Tony Charles, formerly an agent. We were overawed by the quality and virtuosity of the cast, whom we knew from the serious theatre. The first read through in 1981 remains to this day the finest script reading we have ever attended. They brought our characters to life. This is also where we met Linda Robson, who we went on to work with in Birds of a Feather.

“Of course, Nicky Henson was not at that read. He took over the role of Harvey Moon when the show was revived in 1995, as Kenneth Cranham was pursuing a film career.”

Are you pleased to see that Shine On Harvey Moon is now going to be screened on the new Rewind TV Sky Channel?

“We’re delighted. It has been a very long time since we have watched it from beginning to end, and there are episodes of the first series we haven’t seen since the evening it was transmitted.”

Another of my favourites is The New Statesman, popular in the late 1980s and early 1990s, satirising the UK’s Conservative government of the time and starring the talented Rik Mayall – quite a different role for him after The Young Ones. What motivated you to write the show and why did you decide to cast Rik Mayall in the key role?

“We had been working in Hollywood on a new comedy series called Mr. Sunshine, at what seemed to us to be stunningly generous rates of pay. It’s a cliché to say working in Hollywood amounted to a culture shock, only because it is so true. Comedy writing in Britain was a cottage industry, in the USA it was more like working in a factory. We were expected virtually to clock on and off.

“At home we were used to working on several projects at different stages of development; in America we were expected to devote every moment to servicing one show. It was normal to work way beyond midnight before a studio recording, obsessively tinkering with every line of the script.

“Quite soon we both were counting the days to the end of our contracts, as if we were prisoners. Yet during our six month ‘incarceration” at the legendary Paramount Studios we learned most of what made our next fifteen years so successful. The American way of team writing was revelatory, as was the serious and hard-working attitude of everybody in the industry.

“We left America feeling rather deflated, but back home we were greeted like conquering heroes. Philip Jones, Head of Comedy at Thames Television, (another of ITV’s Big Five) invited us to take the stage at an important conference on the future of TV comedy, where we spoke about our American experiences and how they could be applied at home. We talked about the importance of longer-running series, written by writing teams. Most of our audience smiled in patronising disbelief.

“Among the delegates was a young actor called Rik Mayall, famous for co-writing and starring in The Young Ones. Rik asked us if we would consider creating a series for him? As Rik was wearing a Homburg hat and an astrakhan coat at the time, indoors, as a tribute to Tony Hancock, we brushed him off. But when a few months later we were invited onto the Terry Wogan chat show, to our embarrassment Rik was on the show too. When he asked us why we hadn’t been in touch as promised, we had no choice but to agree to have lunch with him. He turned up to that lunch in a smart suit, and we realised for the first time that he was a charming, handsome adult.

“Over coffee (us) and large brandies (Rik) we asked him what sort of character he envisaged playing. Rik told us he was drawn to exhibiting what he considered to be his own worst traits – cowardice, cruelty, depravity and greed. It was 1986, the apogee of Thatcherism, and we realized Rik had just described a composite Thatcherite backbencher. Thus was born Alan B’Stard, the member with the biggest majority in Parliament.

“We pitched the project to Vernon Lawrence, Head of Comedy at Yorkshire Television. We had met the affable Vernon at that same Cheltenham conference, and knew he was a big fan of Rik’s. Vernon loved the idea and bought it almost immediately. We then exercised our constitutional rights and asked our local Tory MP, Michael Portillo, to show us around Parliament. This he did, willingly and charmingly. We became friends, even though he was an arch-Thatcherite.

“However, several other Tory MPs were publicly hostile, so much so that before the series even aired, we found ourselves on BBC radio, debating the programme with some angry political ‘Rent-a-Quotes’ who we knew hadn’t even seen the show they were condemning. The New Statesman was transmitted at 10pm on Sunday nights, already established by Spitting Image as ITV’s “satire slot”.

“Audiences seemed to like this late night dose of establishment bashing. The press got the joke too. A few weeks into the first series, the Daily Mirror exposed a philandering Tory MP with the front page headline, “What a B’Stard”. Alarmingly, quite quickly certain young Tory wannabes started emulating Alan B’Stard’s Savile Row image. The New Statesman ran to four seasons, and was awarded an International Emmy. There was also a feature length special, which won us a ‘Best Comedy’ BAFTA in the UK.”

You went on to write the incredibly successful sitcom Birds of a Feather in 1989, starring Pauline Quirke, Linda Robson and Lesley Joseph. What inspired you to write the show? And why do you think it was so popular?

“The 1990s were the most intense and productive years of our career as TV writers, and probably the most satisfying. Birds of a Feather had been an instant hit for the BBC, and they quickly ordered a second season for 1990. We had long wanted to make series in longer runs than the conventional six or seven, and the BBC showed their confidence in the show by asking for fifteen episodes!

“We set up a writing team, recruiting several writers we had worked with previously on Relative Strangers and Roll Over Beethoven. We also decided to give several new writers “a break” on Birds – with mixed results. Some of the new writers developed into mainstays of the Alomo team. Others didn’t quite make it, and the process of making series two of Birds was sometimes rather stressful.

“Nevertheless the second run was even more popular than series one. It established Birds of a Feather as a key BBC comedy show, and Alomo as a major comedy producer. By the end of the decade we made over a hundred episodes, including a Christmas special nearly every year. “Birds” was always among the highest rated programmes of the year – at times attracting an audience of almost twenty million.

“Why do we think the show was so successful? It’s impossible to conclude why one show is a hit and another, which we’ve written with as much care and love, may not be. A great deal of luck is involved; casting, timing, scheduling, promotion, what’s on the other channels. Perhaps Birds was more truthful in reflecting how real women talk and behave. Furthermore, the cast had incredible rapport and chemistry. Linda and Pauline had been friends since primary school and virtually were sisters. This came across powerfully and gave the show heart and authenticity.”

Later on you wrote Goodnight Sweetheart, a science fiction time travel sitcom, starring Nicholas Lyndhurst as Gary Sparrow, who leads a double life travelling from London in the 1990s to London of the 1940s during the Second World War. How did you cast Nicholas Lyndhurst? And what topics did you explore in the series?

“When we realised Gary Sparrow was essentially an adulterer, we knew we needed an actor the audience would sympathise with and forgive. Nick Lyndhurst was number one on a shortlist of one. We met his agent, arranged a lunch, Nick was intrigued and said he’d do it if he liked the script. The rest is time travel.

“We didn’t set out to explore topics in the series. Our method was to follow the events of the Home Front in World War II and involve Gary Sparrow in them. His present day adventures generally reflected what he was up to in the past.”

More recently you wrote Mumbai Calling, starring the super talented Sanjeev Bhaskar, set in the fictional Teknobable call centre in Mumbai. I understand the series was shot on location in India. How did this help with the writing and authenticity of the story? What it was like to work with Sanjeev? And can you share some of the themes you covered in the series?

“Working with Sanjeev was great. We shot the pilot episode in Mumbai and spent several weeks out there in his company. He is someone we hope to work with again. However, we found the process of working in India exhausting – the traffic jams, the heat, the extremes of wealth and poverty – so were not very much involved in the writing and shooting of the subsequent episodes.”

What are you both working on at the moment? Do you have any exciting projects we can look forward to?

“Our stage play Cluedo 2 is currently touring the nation and well may be coming to a theatre near you.”

How do you tend to write together? Do you have a meeting place or a setting where you both write and discuss ideas and storylines?

“One room. One computer. One bottle of ink. Lots of arguments.”

How do you both like to spend your spare time when you are not working? What are your hobbies and interests?

“We are both keen Arsenal fans. We are both zealous readers and viewers and follow the political landscape. We both like fine wine. Maurice has grandchildren. Laurence has a dog.”

Do you meet up together socially for a meal or drinks?

“Not as much as we did when we weren’t working together every day, over 44 years ago. Thus, we are both hungry and thirsty!”

What would you recommend to others who are looking to get into script writing? Or try a creative pursuit later on in life?

“Find a writers’ group or a drama group, where you can try your work out, hear and see what it sounds like, and learn from your mistakes. And don’t forget that radio is a much bigger buyer of new work than TV. It’s a hard path and you need determination even more than you need talent.”

Do you have a special message for Sixtyplusurfers readers?

“Yes, our message is, don’t forget how lucky you are. You probably own a house, have a decent pension, and didn’t have to pay to go to university.

“And you are young enough to get the most out of new technology, otherwise you’d be called SixtyplusLuddites!”

* Images are courtesy of Laurence Marks and Maurice Gran.