At 72 stories, 921 feet above the streetscape of downtown Dallas, Bank of America Plaza instantly achieved landmark status as the city’s tallest building and the most recognizable silhouette on the skyline. By day, it is a magnet for activity in the Central Business District (CBD) as home to a wide array of the region’s most prestigious businesses. And by night, outlined in two miles of radiant, signature green LED.

With its clean lines and crystalline exterior, Bank of America Plaza is at once classic and contemporary. Itself a sculpture on the horizon, its magnificent signature green silhouette, the Grand Plaza and spacious lobby are a garden of modern American art.

As a focal point of both downtown Dallas and the Metroplex, Bank of America Plaza provides tenants with excellent visibility and accessibility. Rising majestically from the northwestern quadrant of the CBD and bounded by Elm, Griffin, Main and Lamar streets, the Plaza is a superior location for conducting business. Easy access to all area freeways makes both the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport and downtown Fort Worth effortless destinations. Dallas Love Field, the city’s regional airport, is only 10 minutes away. North Dallas and Las Colinas business centers are also a short drive via the adjacent downtown freeway loop.

Bank of America Plaza is also a convenient commute by public transportation. From street level or underground tunnel, the building is a short walk from light-rail train and bus service at the Dallas Area Rapid Transit Transitway Mall. Just a few blocks from Dallas City Hall, the Dallas Convention Center, municipal district, federal courthouses, and world-class hotels, the Plaza gives tenants a strategic advantage.

For shopping, dining and entertainment selections, the Plaza’s location is unparalleled. Near the restaurants of the West End Historical District, Main Street Gardens, Victory Park and the western hub of the two-million square feet underground tunnel system, Bank of America Plaza brings all of the CBD’s abundant amenities to the tenant’s doorstep.