QUITE early in ''House of Games,'' David Mamet's entertaining, deadpan, seriocomic melodrama about con artists, there's a back-room poker game that sets the tone for everything that comes after.

Though the players could withdraw at any point, they don't, this being a serious game. Raises are seen, and raised again. The pot accumulates. ''Everybody stays. Everybody pays,'' says the dealer. Tensions mount and tempers shorten like fuses burning in slow-motion. Somebody must be bluffing, and somebody must lose, though there's nothing in the book that says the bluffer must lose or that the best hand wins.

That's the fascination of this insidiously addictive game in which the loser, if he plays his cards right, takes all. It's also the fun of the film with which Mr. Mamet, poker player and Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright, makes a fine, completely self-assured debut directing his original screenplay. Sometimes he's bluffing outrageously, but that's all right too.

In movies, as in poker, it's not always what you do but the way you do it. Or, as they say around the poker table, ''A man with style is a man who can smile.''

In ''House of Games'' a lot of other things are said, some of them unintentional howlers. ''You need joy!'' says a psychoanalyst to a woman in need, as if prescribing a detergent. But there's also the scam expert who reasons: ''We all gotta live in an imperfect world. I acted atrociously, but I do that for a living.'' The movie never goes so far wrong that it can't retrieve its illusions.

''House of Games'' will be shown tonight at 8 at Avery Fisher Hall, closing the 25th New York Film Festival with a presentation in which expectations are fulfilled. The film begins its regular commercial engagement here Wednesday at the D.W. Griffith Theater. With ''House of Games'' it's clear that Mr. Mamet not only knows exactly how he wants his work to sound, but also how it should look. Though photographed on location in Seattle, ''House of Games'' contains no easily identifiable landmarks, no tourist attractions.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.