by Susan Flantzer © Unofficial Royalty 2015

The first wife of King Alfonso XII of Spain, Maria de las Mercedes of Orléans, was born at the Royal Palace of Madrid on June 24, 1860. She is one of only three queens consort of Spain born in Spain. The other two are Archduchess Anna of Austria (born in Badajoz, Spain), fourth wife of King Philip II and Letizia Ortiz Rocasolano (born in Oviedo, Asturias, Spain), wife of King Felipe VI. Known as Mercedes, the princess was the seventh of the ten children of Antoine of Orléans, Duke of Montpensier (son of King Louis Philippe of France) and Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain (daughter of King Ferdinand VII of Spain). Mercedes was both a French princess and a Spanish Infanta. Her maternal aunt Queen Isabella II of Spain and Isabella’s husband Francisco, Duke of Cadiz and King Consort of Spain were her godparents. At her baptism, Mercedes was given a very long name: María de las Mercedes Isabel Francisca de Asís Antonia Luisa Fernanda Felipa Amalia Cristina Francisca de Paula Ramona Rita Cayetana Manuela Juana Josefa Joaquina Ana Rafaela Filomena Teresa Santísima Trinidad Gaspara Melchora Baltasara et omni sancti.

Mercedes had nine siblings:

Maria Isabel (1848–1919), married her first cousin Philippe, Comte de Paris, had issue

Maria Amelia (1851–70), unmarried

Maria Cristina (1852–79), unmarried

Maria de la Regla (1856–61), died young

Fernando (1859–73), died young

Felipe Raimundo Maria (1862–64), died young

Antonio, Duke of Galliera (1866–1930), married his first cousin Infanta Eulalia of Spain, had issue

Luís (1888–1945), married Marie Charlotte Say, no issue

Luis Maria Felipe Antonio (1867–74), died young

Mercedes spent the first eight years of her childhood in Spain, but her family was forced into exile in 1868 when her maternal aunt Queen Isabella II was deposed. When the Spanish monarchy was restored in 1874 and Queen Isabella’s son Alfonso became king, Mercedes and her family returned to Spain and lived in the Palace of San Telmo in Seville, Spain.

In 1872, Mercedes and her first cousin Alfonso, son of Queen Isabella II, started a romance. Queen Isabella II opposed the match because of confrontations with Mercedes’ father. The Spanish government preferred that the young King Alfonso XII marry some other European princess. One of the marriage candidates was Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom, the youngest daughter of Queen Victoria. Nevertheless, Alfonso and Mercedes married on January 23, 1878, at the Royal Basilica of Our Lady of Atocha in Madrid, Spain. At age 17, Mercedes was the youngest Queen Consort of Spain.

In June 1878, it was announced that Mercedes was pregnant and the country rejoiced. However, the joy was short-lived as Mercedes suffered a miscarriage. Shortly after the miscarriage, Mercedes became suddenly ill. Within hours, she was at death’s door with typhoid fever. Mercedes died two days after her 18th birthday, on June 26, 1878, at her birthplace, the Royal Palace of Madrid. She was buried in the Pantheon of Infantes at the Monastery of El Escorial as she could not be buried in the Pantheon of Kings because she was not a mother of a king. On November 8, 2000, Mercedes’ remains were re-interred at the Cathedral of Santa María la Real de La Almudena in Madrid, Spain. Despite her short time as Queen Consort, Mercedes had been a driving force for the construction of the cathedral. In 2004, King Felipe VI and Letizia Ortiz Roscalano were married at the Almudena Cathedral.

This article is the intellectual property of Unofficial Royalty and is NOT TO BE COPIED, EDITED, OR POSTED IN ANY FORM ON ANOTHER WEBSITE under any circumstances. It is permissible to use a link that directs to Unofficial Royalty.

Kingdom of Spain Resources at Unofficial Royalty