Collapsin response mediator proteins (CRMP; CRMP-1 to -5) are multifunctional proteins, highly expressed in the developing brain and contribute to neuronal polarity establishment (5). Altered CRMP levels where detected in several cancers, including breast, colorectal, prostate, pancreatic, and neuroendocrine lung carcinoma (6). CRMPs are found broadly expressed within tissues and the understanding of their cellular functions is expanding. In dividing cells, such as lung cancer cells, CRMP2, the best-studied isoform of the family, has been involved in cell division alteration and growth control (7). The most recently identified CRMP, CRMP5 (8–10), is widely expressed in adult brain regions of neurogenesis (11). We previously described that CRMP5 protein expression in peripheral tumors causes the development of paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes (10, 12, 13). Furthermore, we proposed CRMP5 protein expression as a marker for high-grade lung neuroendocrine carcinomas, a very aggressive and treatment-resistant lung tumor (14) and observed its expression in GBM cells (15). However, no specific role has been proposed for CRMP5 protein in GBM, or, more broadly, in the cancer process. Interestingly, in Drosophila, a CRMP homologue was recently described as promoting Notch signaling during asymmetric division of sensory progenitors (16), suggesting the possibility that CRMP5 and the Notch signaling pathway may converge in GBM proliferation.

CRMP5 protein immunohistochemical expression in GBM tumors was obtained from 183 GBM biopsies using a CRMP5 polyclonal antibody previously validated with lung tumor biopsies (14). Two CRMP5 expression patterns emerged: low CRMP5 expression (CRMP5LOW: N = 23, 12.6%) was characterized by weak, heterogeneously dispersed CRMP5 staining in 0% to 10% of cells, and high CRMP5 expression (CRMP5HIGH: N = 160, 87%) was characterized by highly diffuse cytoplasmic staining of CRMP5 in approximately 90% of tumor cells (Fig. 2A). The clinical characteristics of the patients did not differ significantly between the CRMP5LOW and CRMP5HIGH groups (Supplementary Table). Although analysis of CRMPs mRNA expression in 173 GBM using the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) did not reveal any correlation with patients survival (Supplementary Fig. S2A–S2F), the CRMP5HIGH protein expression pattern was associated with a lower median overall survival compared with the CRMP5LOW expression pattern (7.14 vs. 9.98 months; P = 0.0257 log-rank; Fig. 2B). Quantifying mitotic activity in both groups revealed a significantly lower mean mitotic index in the CRMP5LOW group compared with the CRMP5HIGH group (8.67 ± 1.19 vs. 18.05 ± 2.43 cells per 10 high-power fields (HPF); n = 183, P < 0.0009, t test; Fig. 2C). These data confirm a proliferative advantage and an aggressive signature in GBM samples with homogenous CRMP5HIGH versus CRMP5LOW expression. This suggests that CRMP5 protein expression could be a prognostic indicator in GBM.

The potential role of CRMP5 in GBM proliferation was further evaluated in GBM primary cultures and cell lines after CRMP5 knockdown or overexpression using the 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation assay. Two completely different CRMP5 siRNA sequences (siRNA1 and siRNA2) knocked down CRMP5 expression in a GBM primary culture SC1 and in GL15 and A172 cells. CRMP5 silencing by CRMP5-siRNA1 led to a significantly lower mean proliferation index, which was decreased by 74.3%, 59.4%, and 89.7% in the GBM primary culture, GL15 and A172 cell lines, respectively, compared with control (Fig. 3A and B). Similar results were obtained CRMP5-siRNA2 (Supplementary Fig. S3A and S3B), validating the specificity and lack of off-target effect of the knockdown. As a corollary, CRMP5 overexpression in GL15 and A172 cells increased their proliferation index by 55% and 45%, respectively, compared with control cells transfected with empty plasmid (Fig. 3B). Because a defect of proliferation could be caused by an alteration of cell-cycle progression, we measured the DNA content of GL15 cells after CRMP5 knockdown. We observed an increase of the number of cells in the G0–G1 phase while the number of cells in the S-phase was decreased (Fig. 3C). This suggests a blockade of the G1- to S-phase transition, confirmed by the loss of cyclin D1 expression, a marker of G1- to S-phase transition, in the GL15 cell line transfected by CRMP5-siRNA1 (Fig. 3D). These results were reproduced using CRMP5-siRNA2 (Supplementary Fig. S3B and S3C). Finally, we did not observe any significant effect on apoptosis using a TUNEL assay on GL15 cells after CRMP5 depletion (Supplementary Fig. S4A–S4C).

GBM cell proliferation has been extensively correlated to Notch signaling pathway activation (32–34). Because Notch controls cyclin D1 expression and Akt activation to promote GBM proliferation (34), we examined a possible connection between CRMP5 expression, Notch receptors expression and Akt activation. First, using calcium depletion by EDTA as previously documented (35), we observed efficient, endogenous activation of Notch signaling in GL15 cells, as evidenced by increased nuclear Notch localization (Supplementary Fig. S5A). After treatment with DAPT, a γ-secretase inhibitor, Notch accumulated at the cell membrane (Supplementary Fig. S5D). CRMP5 knockdown resulted in a loss of Notch1 and Notch2 expression in the GL15 cell line (Fig. 4A). We next tested whether Akt activation could be impaired by concomitant loss of CRMP5 and Notch receptors. Although Akt expression was not affected, its activation, monitored by detecting the S473-phosphorylation site, was lost. Identical results were obtained using A172 cells (Fig. 4A). In contrast, overexpression of a GFP-tagged CRMP5 in GL15 and A172 cells induced robust Notch1 and Notch2 expression that was concomitant with an increase of Akt phosphorylation (Fig. 4B). Our findings suggest that CRMP5 regulates the expression of Notch1 and Notch2 receptors and controls Akt activation as a Notch downstream target. Corollary to these results, we showed in GBM_SC1 xenograft cells grown in neurospheres that the CRMP5+ cells coexpressed both Nestin+ (by 94.7%) and IQGAP1+ (by 98.6%), as well as Notch1+ that are GBM stem cells markers (Supplementary Fig. S8A). IQGAP1 specified a subpopulation of amplifying tumor cells with proliferative features in GBM-like tumors (36). Although the GBM_SC1 neurospheres expressed neural stem cell markers such as CD133, Musashi1, IQGAP1, Nestin, Notch1, Notch2, as well as CRMP5, we observed the extinction of these proteins expressions when neurospheres shifted to differentiated non-stem cells in differentiation medium (Supplementary Fig. S8B and S8C). The concomitant loss of CRMP5, Hes, and p-Akt expressions in differentiated non-stem cells grown in differentiation medium showed that Notch signaling activation and Akt phosphorylation were positively correlated to CRMP5 expression in GBM_SC1 stem cells (Supplementary Fig. S8C).

To further investigate the relationship between CRMP5 and Notch in tumors, we assessed Notch expression in lysates from CRMP5LOW or CRMP5HIGH GBM frozen biopsies. Consistent with these in vitro data, Notch1 and Notch2 were mostly detected in the CRMP5HIGH GBMs, in which Akt phosphorylation was found to be strong compared with CRMP5LOW GBMs. However, Akt total expression was similar in both GBM subtypes (Fig. 4C) immunohistochemical characterization of Notch1 expression in GBM biopsies revealed two different Notch1 expression patterns that paralleled the two CRMP5 expression patterns (Fig. 4D). The percentage of GBM tumors expressing Notch1 was higher in the CRMP5HIGH group than in the CRMP5LOW group [94% (15 of 16) vs. 46% (10 of 22); P = 0.0018, χ2 test; Fig. 4E, top]. Interestingly, all GBMs with nuclear Notch1 staining also displayed cytoplasmic staining; however, the opposite scenario did not hold true. Therefore, we assessed the fraction of GBM tumors with Notch1 nuclear staining showing activation of the receptor (37). The percentage of GBM tumors with Notch1 nuclear staining was also higher in the CRMP5HIGH group than in the CRMP5LOW group [88% (14 of 16) vs. 23% (5 of 22); P < 0.0001, χ2 test; graph not shown]. Furthermore, the percentage of GBM tumors with Notch1-positive mitotic figures was also significantly higher in the CRMP5HIGH group than in the CRMP5LOW group [75% (12 of 16) versus 9% (2 of 22); P < 0.0001, χ2 test; Fig. 4E, bottom]. Collectively, these data show that the proliferative advantage of CRMP5 expression in human GBM is related to Notch pathway and Akt activation.

In order to evaluate in vivo the consistency of the above in vitro results, we compared Hes1 protein expression levels in CRMP5HIGH and CRMP5LOW GBM tumors. First, by Western blot analysis, we were able to detect Hes1 expression only in CRMP5HIGH tumor biopsies, not in CRMP5LOW GBMs. Similarly Hes1 expression was higher in CRMP5 positive xenografts GBM_SC1 than in CRMP5 negative GBM_SC2 (Fig. 5E). Second, by immunochemistry, we found that Hes1 protein expression levels in GBM tumor cell nuclei paralleled CRMP5 expression (Fig. 5F). The proportion of Hes1-stained nuclei in CRMP5LOW GBM tumors was approximately 2-fold lower than that in CRMP5HIGH GBM tumors (P < 0.0001 t test; Fig. 5G). To further study the direct correlation between CRMP5 and Hes1 protein expression in human GBM, we performed a costaining using an immunofluorescence technique. We observed a coexpression of Hes1 and CRMP5 at the cellular level in CRMP5HIGH GBMs while none of CRMP5-negative cells expressed Hes1 in CRMP5LOW GBMs (Fig. 5H). These data confirm that Notch signaling pathway activation in GBM tumors is dependent on CRMP5 expression.

To explore the effect of CRMP5 on Notch protein proteolysis, we used the proteasome (MG132) or lysosome (Bafilomycin A1) inhibitor to assess Notch receptor degradation after CRMP5 knockdown. The inhibitors had no effect on cells transfected with control-siRNA, with no degradation of Notch receptors (Fig. 6B and C). When CRMP5 was depleted in GL15 or in A172 cells, application of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 did not affect Notch1 or Notch2 degradation. In contrast, lysosome inhibitor treatment of CRMP5-depleted GL15 or A172 cells counteracted Notch1 and Notch2 receptor degradation (Fig. 6B and C). These results demonstrate that CRMP5 regulates Notch1 and Notch2 lysosomal degradation, a step controlled by the E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch (39). To confirm that effects of CRMP5 on Akt activation and Notch-dependent proliferation were controlled by Itch-dependent Notch degradation, we bypassed the Notch degradation mechanism via Itch knockdown. Itch silencing had no effect on Akt activation; however, codepletion of both CRMP5 and Itch rescued CRMP5-dependent Akt activation, Notch receptor expression and Hes1 levels in GL15 and in A172 cells (Fig. 6D). Notch signaling activation in the absence of both Itch and CRMP5 indicated that Notch was no longer targeted for lysosomal degradation, and CRMP5 might protect Notch receptors from Itch-mediated lysosomal degradation.

We demonstrated a significant correlation between the mitotic index and CRMP5 expression in GBM biopsies and that CRMP5 positively modulates human GBM proliferation in GBM cell lines. Surprisingly, we previously reported an increase in neural cell proliferation in brain neurogenesis zones of adult CRMP5-deficient mice (11). This discrepancy may indicate a different role for CRMP5 in cancer versus neural cells. The increased proliferation index observed in neuroblastoma cells after CRMP5 overexpression supports this hypothesis (15). CRMP5 mRNA expression using human GBM transcriptomic analysis gave contradictory results. Using GBM TCGA data including 173 GBM, we could not measure any difference between patient survival and CRMP1-5 mRNA expression (Supplementary Fig. S2A–S2F). However, in a cohort of 20 patients, CRMP5 emerged in a cluster of genes whose overexpression resulted in shorter patient survival (40). These contradictory observations may result from the strong expression of CRMP5 observed in glial reactive cells unrelated to tumor cells found around any brain lesions (Supplementary Fig. S2G and S2H). The careful selection of the tumor component required is more feasible in a mono-centric setting than a multicentric study. Our results on 183 GBM biopsies show that CRMP5 protein expression is related to a poorer prognosis and parallels Notch expression. Cell proliferation and cell-cycle progression are regulated by cyclin proteins. In GBM, we demonstrated that CRMP5 depletion induced G0–G1 phase cell-cycle arrest concomitant with a drastic reduction in the expression of cyclin D1 protein, and Notch protein expression. In human GBM, it is known that Notch promotes proliferation through cyclin D1 and Akt (34). Here, we found that CRMP5 controls both Notch and Akt pathways. Thus, CRMP5 expression, by posttranslational control of Notch and Akt activation, has a key role in GBM proliferation and cell-cycle progression. Consistent with our observations, Notch protein expression has been largely described in GBM cell lines, stem cells, and human surgical biopsies (41). In our experiments, the gain or loss of CRMP5 expression in GBM cells demonstrated a direct effect on Notch levels, which was confirmed in human GBM samples by a strong immunohistochemical correlation between Notch1, mitotic index, and CRMP5 expression. These results suggest that CRMP5 and Notch expression can be used to identify an actively proliferative cell population with an aggressive signature in GBM patients. At this level, it is of great interest to show the direct role of CRMP5 in tumor initiation and growth. However, the lack of stable CRMP5-deprived GBM cells was a limitation for initiation studies in vivo. Interestingly, Notch signaling in GBMs maintains in vivo and in vitro proliferation and stem cell characteristics (34). This subpopulation of stem-like cells is involved in treatment resistance (42). Thus, the CRMP5–Notch axis, may be driving the growth of a subset of GBM tumors involving cancer-stem/progenitors cells with a significant clinical impact. Hence, in a context of developing clinical trials targeting Notch pathway like gamma-secretase inhibitors (43), CRMP5 expression may identify patients with GBM characterized by a Notch-dependent proliferative/stem-like cell population who may benefit of such targeted therapies.

Notch is activated by canonical and noncanonical pathways, each of which is stimulated by different ligands. Some of these ligands, such as DNER, are involved in GBM progression (44). CRMP5 depletion did not alter DNER, DLL1, or Jagged 1 protein expression levels (Supplementary Fig. S5), indicating that CRMP5 regulation of the Notch pathway occurs specifically at the level of the Notch receptors. In GBM biopsies and GBM stem cells, Notch signaling activation is often related to Akt activation (34, 45). The dependence of Notch signaling pathway activation on CRMP5 expression was evidenced by increased levels of Hes1 or Hey1, which are markers of the canonical Notch pathway at the transcriptional and activity levels. Accordingly, Hes1 protein expression was increased significantly in CRMP5HIGH GBM specimens compared with CRMP5LOW and in SC1_stem cells. Residual Hes1 expression in CRMP5LOW GBM could be due to noncanonical activation of the hes1 promoter through other pathways such as the NF-κB pathway (46), which has been implicated in GBM pathogenesis. These results show a correlation between CRMP5 and Notch1 expression in GBM and Notch1 pathway activation. In addition, CRMP5 protein provides a possible mechanistic link between the intermingled pathways combining Notch and Akt activation to support sustained GBM cells proliferation and survival.

Many studies have suggested that both entry and trafficking of Notch within the endocytic pathway are important in regulation of its activity (47). Notch trafficking after the early steps of Notch endocytosis requires the E3 ubiquitin ligase AIP4/Itch allowing its final targeting to the lysosome for degradation (39, 48). We demonstrated that Notch1 and Notch2 receptors are targeted for lysosomal degradation in GBM cells in agreement with other studies on mammalian cells (49). Although Itch is required for Notch receptors degradation, we demonstrated in GBM cells that CRMP5 controls Notch receptor activation. Knockdown of both CRMP5 and Itch rescued the CRMP5-dependent loss of Notch receptor expression, Akt activation and Hes1 protein as well as GBM proliferation suggesting that CRMP5 can be part of Notch receptors activation mechanism (Supplementary Fig. S7). Interestingly, few studies have shown that Notch signaling drives short-period oscillatory expression of Hes called ultradian oscillations (50). CRMP5 could be related to the control of Notch signaling ultradian oscillations by periodically protecting Notch receptors from degradation. In GBM, this control could be lost because of a pathologic event engaging CRMP5 in the protection of the Notch receptors exclusively, such as the aberrant posttranslational modification described for CRMP2 (51).