MISS REPRESENTATION

Written and directed by Jennifer Siebel Newsom, Miss Representation exposes how mainstream media and culture contribute to the under-representation of women in positions of power and influence in America.

The film draws back a curtain to reveal a glaring reality we live with every day but fail to see – how the media’s limited and often disparaging portrayals of women and girls makes it difficult for women to feel powerful and achieve leadership positions.

In a society where media is the most persuasive force shaping cultural norms, the collective message we receive is that a woman’s value and power lie in her youth, beauty, and sexuality, and not in her capacity as a leader. While women have made great strides in leadership over the past few decades, the United States is 75th among 193 countries when it comes to women in the national legislature. And it’s not better outside of government. Women make up only 7.4% of Fortune 500 CEOs and 21% of directors, executive producers, writers, cinematographers, and editors working on the top 250 domestic grossing films.

Stories from teenage girls and provocative interviews with politicians, journalists, entertainers, activists, and academics, like Katie Couric, Rosario Dawson, Gloria Steinem, Margaret Cho, Condoleezza Rice, Rachel Maddow, and Nancy Pelosi, build momentum as Miss Representation accumulates startling facts and statistics that will leave the audience shaken, but armed with a new perspective.

BRING MISS REPRESENTATION INTO YOUR CLASSROOM, NONPROFIT OR CORPORATION

For schools, nonprofits, community organizations and corporations, learn more about our screening licenses available HERE.

Classroom Screening License: $49

Campus-wide Screening License: $99

Nonprofit Screening License: $295

Corporate Screening License: More info HERE

In a society where media is the most persuasive force shaping cultural norms, the message that young women and men overwhelmingly face is that a woman’s value and power lie in her youth, beauty, and sexuality and not in her capacity as a leader. Help challenge this status quo by hosting a screening of Miss Representation. With the right screening resources, you can arrange a screening in a few easy steps. Total Running Time: 1h 25m

THE ISSUE

The media is selling the idea that girls’ and women’s value lies in their youth, beauty, and sexuality and not in their capacity as leaders. Boys learn that their success is tied to dominance, power, and aggression. We must value people as whole human beings, not gendered stereotypes.

WHAT OUR VIEWERS SAY

RATINGS