As its title suggests, Easy A is a partial riff on The Scarlet Letter, one of the most influential of American novels. In the film, Emma Stone, always known for her ability to craft compelling and morally complicated (and compromised) characters, plays Olive Pendergast, a young woman who embraces her identity as the most promiscuous girl in school, even though doing so comes with more than its share of perils.

There is, moreover, a deeper irony at work, as the entire plot was set in motion by a lie: Olive told her friend she lost her virginity to a guy in college, even though this wasn’t the case. The rumor spread throughout the school and, as a result, her reputation, and the lives of many people in her vicinity, are irrevocably changed. As such, Easy A is not only a fascinating look at the way high schools are often incubators for this sort of toxicity, but also a critical examination at the way American culture writ large is still very fixated, and yet unsure about, the nature and power of human sexuality.

The 2000s was a very good period for Jack Black, who appeared in a number of fascinating and hilarious comedies. One of the most enduringly popular is School of Rock. It has all of the ingredients one expects of a comedy of this type: a lovable underdog, a group of talented students, and a music contest.

However, the entire plot is set in motion by a lie told by Black’s character, Dewey Finn, who masquerades as his roommate in order to get the position of a substitute teacher at a local prep school. While his time as a teacher might start as a deception, it’s not long before Dewey realizes the true potential in his students, leading to all sorts of typical comedy hijinks. While his deception is ultimately unveiled, School of Rock nevertheless manages to be the sort of heartfelt and sincere comedy one would expect of the early 2000s.

The Birdcage remains a beloved comedy for many, particularly because it is such a sensitive and surprisingly warmhearted portrayal of a gay male couple in a decade that wasn't particularly well-known for its acceptance of LGBTQ+ people. In the film, Nathan Lane and Robin Williams star as Albert and Armand, a gay couple living in South Beach, whose lives are turned upside down when their son becomes engaged to the daughter of a notoriously conservative politician.

Very early in the film, the fiancee, Calista Flockhart’s Barbara Keeley, lies to her parents about the true nature of her betrothed’s parents, claiming Albert is a diplomat. Hilarity, of course, ensues, as Armand and Albert do everything in their power to maintain the pretense, even at the cost of their own sense of comfort. Beneath the hijinks, however, there is a powerful and resonant message about the importance of family and about the acceptance of oneself, no matter how harsh the world may be.

The classic story of Cyrano de Bergerac – based on the play by Edmond Rostand – has been adapted many times, one of the most prominent of which arrived in 2021, in a musical version starring, among others, Peter Dinklage (fresh off his success as Tyrion Lannister in Game of Thrones). He is perfectly cast as the title character, who is madly in love with his childhood friend, Roxanne, who is, in turn, in love with Christian, the mysterious and handsome new soldier in town.

Unfortunately for all of them, Christian is hopeless at expressing his feelings in the way Roxanne expects, so Cyrano, noble and gallant as always, feeds him words and writes letters on his behalf, allowing his own feelings to suffuse these testaments of love. Things get more complicated when a lascivious duke (Ben Mendelsohn), who has his won (very entitled) sights set on Roxanne, sends Christian and Cyrano to war, where the former, realizing his friend is truly in love with Roxanne, sacrifices himself in battle. Later, Cyrano finally demonstrates his feelings for Roxanne, but he dies before they can consummate their love. Poignant and tragic in all the best ways, Cyrano is a fitting adaptation of Rostand's equally heartbreaking play.

Though he was arguably best known for his comedic roles, Robin Williams was also tremendously talented as a dramatic actor, and he particularly excelled in roles that called for him to toggle between pathos and humor. One such role was Lance Clayton, the tragic main character of World’s Greatest Dad. When the film begins, he’s an English teacher yearning for literary fame, who finds himself presented with a sort of opportunity once his son accidentally dies from autoerotic asphyxiation.

Determined to protect his son’s posthumous legacy, he stages his death as a suicide, but things get quickly out of control, particularly once he publishes a fake diary his son supposedly wrote before his passing. Soon, Lance is awash with praise – and his son is recognized as something of a saint, despite having been, we know, mostly friendless and rather unpleasant. Of course, Lance knows it's all a sham, too.

Ultimately, he comes clean about what he’s done, and though he is rejected by those who had seemed to embrace him, he can at least take comfort from living an honest life. World’s Greatest Dad is macabre and unsettling look at the power of honesty and the pernicious allure of lying.

There’s a certain genius underlying The Invention of Lying, which takes place in a world in which, as the title implies, the concept of lying simply does not exist. The film’s main character is Mark Bellison (writer/director Ricky Gervais), who becomes the very first person in this world who can tell a falsehood. This spark of dishonest inspiration initially comes as he's trying to get together enough money to pay the rent. The computers aren't working at the bank, so they ask him how much money he has, and he simply… tells them the wrong (and much higher) number.

As is so often the case, one lie begets another, and it’s not long before Mark is telling all manner of lies both big and small. He even becomes a messiah figure of sorts, claiming he can speak to a man in the sky. Because everyone in this world takes his statements at face value as a matter of course, he becomes wealthy, famous, and worshipped. Ultimately, however, he chooses truth when it matters most, allowing his love, Anna (Jennifer Garner), to decide for herself whether she loves him or not. At times predictable in its use of romantic comedy plot elements, The Invention of Lying is nevertheless a philosophically rich film.