“You boys are black, and don’t you forget that.”

From an early age I was taught that both my black identity and my white-Irish identity were important, and that I was never to relinquish either from my understanding of who I was. Watching Lacey Schwartz’s thought-provoking documentary Little White Lie— now in limited release and airing on PBS March 23—I was reminded of this formative experience, the wisdom of these seemingly competing messages and the diverse range of biracial narratives out there.

Little White Lie traces the story of Schwartz’s discovery of her mixed-race heritage after 18 years believing she was the product of two white, Jewish parents. After submitting a photo of herself with her undergraduate application to Georgetown and being contacted by their black student alliance, she begins to question the story she’s been told about who she is and that of her parents’ picture-perfect marriage. Ultimately she’s forced to confront her mother about a secret affair with Schwartz’s biological father, a black man and longtime family friend, and reexamine who she is as person.

From the film Belle to Helen Oyeyemi’s passing novel Boy, Snow, Bird to National Geographic’s controversial series The Changing Face of America, stories about biracial identity have been percolating throughout culture in recent months. But Little White Lie is a true story and unique in that Schwartz’s belief in her whiteness was affirmed by her entire community despite her visibly mixed appearance. The film stands in revealing contrast to a larger body of mixed-race narratives, which often have someone who knows they are mixed and passes as white (as in One Drop), or a mixed-race character driven to self-destruction, as in 1842’s The Quadroons. Schwartz’s documentary instead focuses on the nature of family secrets and how the white lie on which hers is predicated remained intact for so long.

“I think [the documentary] raises themes that are fairly universal, about family secrets and denial,” Schwartz told me by phone while showing the film at various festivals. “It’s a coming of age story as well. I feel like people can enjoy the narrative as a film, but connect to different pieces based on their personal experiences. It can be used as a tool to work through their own family secrets.”

Born into upper-middle-class New York, it’s clear from the old family photos and home videos that provide the framework for much of the film that Schwartz—a beautiful light-brown-skinned child with ample curls—does not look like the offspring of two white parents. But the not-so-little lie of her true parentage, carefully preserved by Schwartz’s family and their predominantly white community, is at the core of her family’s picturesque, suburban storyline. “We were living in an upper-middle-class, all-white community with very few, if any, other people of color,” Schwartz says, explaining the literal colorblindness that kept her family’s secret intact.

Ultimately Schwartz uncovers the truth and is brought into the fold of the black student alliance at Georgetown, her freshman year. She recounts being nervous in this black space, wondering, “Will I say the right thing?” But says she wasn’t worried about being “black enough,” an experience many biracial people, myself included, grapple with. She insists that, while she owned her privilege, “by the time I discovered who I was I was already in college and other people were beyond challenging your ‘blackness,’ it was about building community and meeting people where they were.”

The other two stars of Schwartz’s documentary are naturally her mother and father. She admits, “in the end, it would be very hard to tell my story without telling my parents’ stories. We are a natural extensions of our parents.”

Schwartz’s father is forced to come to terms with the previously unspoken (if tacitly understood) truth that not only was Schwartz not his biological daughter, but could neither completely share in whiteness. In what feels like the climax to the film, Schwartz’s mother offers the most satisfying explanation for her choice to conceal the truth for so long: “Lacey, you have to realize, before I was your mother, I was a person, and I was a girl and I was a woman.” Indeed it is hard to imagine, given how early we are indoctrinated, what other choice her mother could have realistically imagined making in her situation: a white woman with a black lover and a child conceived outside of her marriage.

“In society there is an overwhelming pressure to conform,” Schwartz says. “Even within families it’s very comfortable to appear to like the same things and look at yourselves in comparison. You want to appear united. It’s great to share what we have in common, but it’s equally important to celebrate our differences . . . families are building blocks of society so how can we make social change if families aren’t able to talk about these issues?”

Schwartz has launched a companion Web site for the film, with the goal of giving people a safe place to talk about just these kinds of issues. Personally, I can only be thankful for having learned early on what I think Schwartz’s journey confirms—that the complex story of who we are cannot be interpreted as a strictly black or white matter.