Prince Ferdinand Philippe of Orléans — Royal Prince and heir to the throne of France — was a person of hope for the July Monarchy. On the one hand, his young age and his military experience offered an assured succession to King Louis Philippe, already 57 years old in 1830. On the other hand, popular with the French people, his liberal political convictions made him the icon of the Dynastic Opposition and his chief Odilon Barrot. His sudden death in a carriage accident on 13 July 1842 was a shock that affected all strata of French society. It deprived the July monarchy, which was beginning to face social problems, of a reformer, charismatic prince, patron of the arts who repeatedly expressed his opposition to the conservative policies of the various governments since the Revolution of 1830.

In the absence of an adult heir the French monarchy finds itself shaken in its foundations, Louis Philippe aged and unpopular has therefore as heir to his grandson Philippe, Count of Paris aged 4 years on the death of the Prince Royal. In addition, the economic, social and political developments of the constitutional monarchy come crashing down against the growing authoritarianism of the Bourgeois King. In February 1848, after the failures of the government led by the former Marshal of the Empire, Jean-de-Dieu Soult and the conservative François Guizot, to face the pauperization of the working classes and the demands of the small bourgeoisie, the Revolution bursts putting an end to the reign of the last French King and giving birth to the Second French Republic.

So for many people of the time the death of Prince Ferdinand Philippe condemned the monarchy.

The writers confirmed this analysis:

Henri Heine noted: «Never has the death of a man caused such general mourning. It is a remarkable thing that in France, where the Revolution has not yet ceased to ferment, the love of a prince has been able to lay such deep roots and manifest itself in such touching ways. Not only the bourgeoisie, which placed all its hopes in the young prince, but also the lower classes regret his loss.»

Charles de Rémusat, in his Mémoires de ma vie, wrote: «I am not fatalist and do not mean that from 13 July 1842, the monarchy was irrevocably condemned, but I say that without this fatal day, it would not 'would not have perished.»

Alfred de Musset affirmed: «An hour has hijacked a whole century.»

But what would happen if Ferdinand Philippe had not died and he was able to reform the monarchy in crisis? ...

Point of Divergence[]

At the beginning of July 1842, the prince accompanied his wife Helene of Mecklenburg-Schwerin to Plombières, where she had to undergo a spa treatment to restore her fragile health. After making sure that his wife is well installed, the Duke of Orleans returned to Paris for a few days and settled in the Tuileries before his departure for the camp of Saint-Omer where he was to take command of a corps of 'army. On 13 July, Ferdinand decided to leave for the Château de Neuilly, a favorite property of the royal family, where his parents and some of his brothers and sisters resided at the time.

Around 11 am the next day, the duke decides to go back and say goodbye to his family. He is accompanied by a man in a row and a postilion. As the team draws closer to park of Neuilly, the Prince realizes that his coachman «is no longer master of his horses; there are quite deep ditches here, which make any car accident dangerous; and as the horses were led by a young postilion, the Duke of Orleans rose to his feet in his carriage, to give him some advice.» We do not know if Ferdinand, seeing that the danger is becoming real, decides to jump, or if a shock throws him out of his car. Still, he fell «full chest on the wheels, before going to give his head on the pavement.» The mad car is stopped at the end of the driveway. Warned in haste, the royal family went to see the injured. The Duke of Orleans «had his eyes open, his gaze fixed, but he was not speaking ». When he recognizes his own, «big tears escape from the glassy eyes of the prince, still unable to utter a sound.» We still hope for a cure. Unfortunately, the doctors called in hastily “recognized and declared from the first diagnosis that the disaster left no hope. The cerebral congestion was already declared ”. Ferdinand died a few moments later. But what would happen if Ferdinand Philippe to get out of this accident alive with non-fatal injuries?

Surviving his accident, Ferdinand Philippe like Louis Philippe would become aware of the disaster that could have occurred. Popular emotion following news of the accident, making the Prince Royal - and Odillon Barrot - confident of his popularity and advised by his wife Princess Helene of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the faction led by the prince will gain momentum . In reaction, the conservatives of the Parliaments and of the royal court will be worried about the future with a too popular and liberal prince. He will be able to strengthen the young constitutional monarchy, sparing France a new revolution and an authoritarian regime which will lead to the disaster of the Franco-Prussian war of 1871.

1840s[]

1842, 13 July — carriage accident of Prince Ferdinand Philippe, Duke of Orleans in Neuilly-sur-Seine. After 4 days of coma, the Prince Royal wakes up with only one broken arm.

1842, 26 July — meeting of the Chambers in extraordinary session to settle the question of the regency in reaction to the Prince Royal accident.

1842, July — August — popular demonstrations in support of the Duke of Orleans. General strike in the United Kingdom.

1842, 29 August — signing of the Treaty of Nanjing, which ends the first opium war after the defeat of China and opens the country to foreign influence.

1842, 30 August — law fixing the organization of the regency, on the request of Prince Ferdinand Philippe still convalant the Duchess of Orleans is appointed regent in case of necessity.

1842, 30 September — creation of the Société des amis du Prince Royal (Society of Friends of the Prince Royal). Charity company created to help victims of carriage accidents but also for the renovation of roads.

1850s[]

1850, 26 August — death of Louis Philippe I. The Duke of Orleans takes the throne under the name of Ferdinand Philippe I.

1850, 30 August — Ferdinand Philippe I is sworn in before the Chambers.

1860s[]

1870s[]