Category: Czech Republic

Prague – Returning to the magic Prague for another womens tennis show!

THE TOURNAMENT: ITF WOMEN Advantage Cars Prague Open 2017 by Zenova

From 07/24 to 07/30

Surface: Clay outdoor

Prize money: $ 80,000

Tournament location: I.Czech Lawn Tennis Klub Praha – Stvanice 38, PRAGUE, 17000, Czech Republic

How to get: Tennis club is far about 3.1 km and 12 minutes driving from Old Town. Vaclav Intl Airport is situated at 17,5 km from venue (30 minutes taxi ride).

Past champions: 2016 Antonia Lottner (Ger) – 2015 Maria Teresa Torro Flor (Esp)

Entry list: Marketa Vondrousova (Cze) – Evgeniya Rodina (Rus) – Richel Hogenkamp (Ned) – Denisa Allertova (Cze) – Irina Khromacheva (Rus) – Jasmine Paolini (Ita) – Dalila Jakupovic (Slo) – Elitsa Kostova (Bul) – Rebecca Sramkova (Svk) – Lucie Hradecka (Cze)

THE TOWN: Prague is the capital and largest city of the Czech Republic. Founded during the Romanesque and flourishing by the Gothic, Renaissance and Baroque eras, Prague was the capital of the kingdom of Bohemia and the main residence of several Holy Roman Emperors, most notably of Charles IV. It was an important city to the Habsburg Monarchy and its Austro-Hungarian Empire. It is home to a number of famous cultural attractions and from 1992 the extensive historic centre of Prague has been included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites.

Lonely Planet’s writer explains the reasons why he loves so much this town: “How can you not love a city that has a pub with vinyl cushions on the wall above the gents’ urinal, so you can rest your head while you ‘go’? Where you can order a beer without speaking, simply by placing a beer mat on the table? And where that beer is probably the best in the world? But it’s not just exquisite ale and a wonderfully relaxed drinking culture that keep bringing me back to Prague. There’s also wit and weirdness in equal measure: a public fountain where two figures pee in a puddle, spelling out literary quotations; a 1950s nuclear bunker hidden beneath a city centre hotel; and a cubist lamppost. Quirky doesn’t even begin to describe it.”

TOP 5 ATTRACTIONS:

Charles Bridge

Old Town Square

St. Vitus Cathedral

Prague Castle

Astronomical Clock Tower

BEST PLACES TO STAY:

Cloister Inn Hotel. Excellent 3 stars hotel, rated 8.8 on Booking and located 5 min walk away from Charles Bridge, which provides air conditioned rooms, free wifi and free coffee and tea in the lobby. A 25 mq2 double room costs 113€ per night with good breakfast included.

Unitas Hotel. Exceptional **** hotel rated 9.5 on Booking and located at just 244mt from Charles Bridge. It offers safe courtyard parking and air conditioned rooms with free internet, a DVD player and a movie library. The building represents Czech history in a unique way. Built by the Jesuits, it was later transformed into a nunnery, during the Communist period it housed the secret police and finally it was transformed into a hotel. The daily rate for a classic double room is 143€ per night with incredible breakfast included in the price.

Radisson Blu Alcron Hotel. Located right in the heart of Prague, only 100 m from Wenceslas Square, this wonderful 5-star Art-Deco hotel, first opened in 1932, provides rooms with Nespresso coffee machine, free WiFi, pay-per-view channels and a 24-hour room service. It features a well equipped fitness center with sauna and two prestigious gourmet restaurants. The Alcron received the prestigious Michelin Star in 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016. The price for a standard guest room with marble bathrooms is 208€ per night.

USEFUL LINKS:

Tournament Official Site

Visit Prague Official

Your Hotel in Prague

Enjoy another fantastic TennisTrip in Prague!

Prague – The best of Czech tennis talents will face in this intersting Wta tournament

THE TOURNAMENT: WTA INTERNATIONAL J&T Banka Prague Open

From 05/01/ to 05/06

Surface: Clay outdoor

Prize money: $ 226,750

Tournament location: TK Sparta Praha – Za Císařským mlýnem 2/1115 17000, Praha7

How to get: Tennis club is far about 5.6 km and 17 minutes driving from Old Town. Vaclav Intl Airport is situated at 20 km from venue (34 minutes taxi ride).

Past champions: 2016 Lucie Safarova (Cze) – 2015 Karolina Pliskova (Cze)

Entry list: Karolina Pliskova (Cze) – Caroline Wozniaki (Den) – Samantha Stosur (Aus) – Barbora Strycova (Cze) – Ana Konjuh (Cro) – Shuai Zhang (Chn) – Lucie Safarova (Cze) – Katerina Siniakova (Cze) – Lesia Tsurenko (Ukr) – Christina McHale (Usa)

THE TOWN: Prague is the capital and largest city of the Czech Republic. Founded during the Romanesque and flourishing by the Gothic, Renaissance and Baroque eras, Prague was the capital of the kingdom of Bohemia and the main residence of several Holy Roman Emperors, most notably of Charles IV. It was an important city to the Habsburg Monarchy and its Austro-Hungarian Empire. It is home to a number of famous cultural attractions and from 1992 the extensive historic centre of Prague has been included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites.

Lonely Planet’s writer explains the reasons why he loves so much this town: “How can you not love a city that has a pub with vinyl cushions on the wall above the gents’ urinal, so you can rest your head while you ‘go’? Where you can order a beer without speaking, simply by placing a beer mat on the table? And where that beer is probably the best in the world? But it’s not just exquisite ale and a wonderfully relaxed drinking culture that keep bringing me back to Prague. There’s also wit and weirdness in equal measure: a public fountain where two figures pee in a puddle, spelling out literary quotations; a 1950s nuclear bunker hidden beneath a city centre hotel; and a cubist lamppost. Quirky doesn’t even begin to describe it.”

TOP 5 ATTRACTIONS:

Charles Bridge

Old Town Square

St. Vitus Cathedral

Prague Castle

Astronomical Clock Tower

BEST PLACES TO STAY:

Cloister Inn Hotel. Excellent 3 stars hotel, rated 8.8 on Booking and located 5 min walk away from Charles Bridge, which provides air conditioned rooms, free wifi and free coffee and tea in the lobby. A 25 mq2 double room costs 96€ per night with good breakfast included.

Unitas Hotel. Exceptional **** hotel rated 9.5 on Booking and located at just 244mt from Charles Bridge. It offers safe courtyard parking and air conditioned rooms with free internet, a DVD player and a movie library. The building represents Czech history in a unique way. Built by the Jesuits, it was later transformed into a nunnery, during the Communist period it housed the secret police and finally it was transformed into a hotel. The daily rate for a classic double room is 134€ per night with incredible breakfast included in the price.

Radisson Blu Alcron Hotel. Located right in the heart of Prague, only 100 m from Wenceslas Square, this wonderful 5-star Art-Deco hotel, first opened in 1932, provides rooms with Nespresso coffee machine, free WiFi, pay-per-view channels and a 24-hour room service. It features a well equipped fitness center with sauna and two prestigious gourmet restaurants. The Alcron received the prestigious Michelin Star in 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016. The price for a standard guest room with marble bathrooms is 185,2€ per night.

USEFUL LINKS:

Tournament Official Site

Visit Prague Official

Your Hotel in Prague

Enjoy a tennis week in the wonderful Prague!

Ostrava – This cute Czech town will host the traditional “Prosperita Open” challenger event

THE TOURNAMENT: ATP CHALLENGER Prosperita Open 2017

From 05/01 to 05/07

Surface: Clay outdoor

Prize money: $ 75,000

Tournament location: SC Ostrava – Budecska 4, Ostrava 70200, Czech Republic

How to get: SC Ostrava is centrally located in the town at just 2,5 km (25 minutes walking) from stunning Stodolni Street. If you arrive directly from Janacek Airport Ostrava you will need of a 30 minutes taxi ride because tennis courts are located at 29 km.

Past champions: 2016 Constant Lestienne (Fra) – 2015 Inigo Cervantes (Esp) – 2014 Andrey Kuznetsov (Rus) – 2013 Jiri Vesely (Cze) – 2012 Jonathan Dasnieres de Vegy (Fra) – 2011 Stephan Robert (Fra) – 2010 Lucas Rosol (Cze) – 2009 Jan Hajek (Cze) – 2008 Jiri Vanek (Cze)

Entry list: Adam Pavlasek (Cze) – Norbert Gombos (Svk) – Roberto Carballes Baena (Esp) – Marco Cecchinato (Ita) – Lukas Rosol (Cze) – Jan Satral (Cze) – Simone Bolelli (Ita) – Marco Trungelliti (Arg) – Vincent Millot (Fra) – Stefano Napolitano (Ita)

THE TOWN: Ostrava is a city in the north-east of the Czech Republic and is the capital of the Moravian-Silesian Region. In terms of both population and area it is the third largest city of the nation. The city in the past was considered especially an industrial centre but since the 1990s it has been transformed into a modern cultural city, with numerous theatres, galleries and other cultural facilities. It hosts a wide range of cultural and sporting events throughout the year. Among the best known are the Colours of Ostrava multi-genre music festival, the Janáček May classical music festival, the Summer Shakespeare Festival.

TOP 3 ATTRACTIONS:

New City Hall Tower

Ostravice River

Silesian Ostrava Castle

BEST PLACES TO STAY:

Hotel Villa Ostrava 3+. Showcasing a terrace and views of the city, *** Hotel Villa Ostrava is located in the heart of the town, just 1.1 km from Stodolní Street. Private parking is available on site. The hotel, rated 9.2 on Booking, provides bike rental, free wifi and a tennis court available for customers. A small but cozy and modern twin room costs 60€ per night with good breakfast included.

Mercure Ostrava Center. Located right in the center of Ostrava and rated 8.9 on Booking, the faboulous **** Mecure Center hotel offers elegantly, air conditioned rooms with LCD TV, free Wi-Fi and tea/coffee making facilities, a steam bath, a fitness center and an onsite restaurant which servers Czech and international cuisine. The daily rate for a standard 22 mq2 double room starts from 56€ per night (which increase to 102€ with free cancellation and breakfast).

Park Inn by Radisson Hotel Ostrava. This excellent **** hotel, rated 8.8 on Booking, offers bright, colourful rooms with free WiFi and a wellness centre with a large steam bath, sauna, and hot tub. It is located within a walking distance to the Ostrava city centre, close to the Ostrava Castle and the bustling Stodolní Street. Guests can enjoy a menu filled with international dishes as well as traditional Czech specialities in the Bamboo Restaurant. The price for a standard double room is 101€ per night with good breakfast buffet included.

USEFUL LINKS:

Tournament Official Site

Ostrava on Czech Tourism Portal

Your Hotel in Ostrava

Enjoy a Tennis Trip in the real heart of Moravia!

Last Second Tip – Do you have free time to enjoy an Urquell Beer in Plzen?

Now it’s time to pack again your bags, leave your little room in a 3stars hotel near Karl Bridge, and go to Plzen, just 90 km from Golden Town. The easiest way is to take a bus from Prague Zlicin bus station and get the yellow ones marked Student Agency. Of course, in alternative, car rental is always a good but more expensive option.

In Plzen you will find a compact historical centre where you can have all important sites concentrated in one place: the monumental Gothic cathedral with the tallest spire in the Czech Republic, the second biggest Synagogue in Europe, several museums and galleries and a number of beautiful historical buildings. A pleasant stroll through the historical centre may be finished in some of local cafés or restaurants, in summer relaxing directly in the garden with an amazing view of blossoming parks.

But Plzen is especially known because is the capital of beer and home of the Pilsner Urquell Brewery. It made the city famous around the world. In Plzen you will have chance to taste the best beer. When visiting the brewery will find out how such a miracle is brewed and then you will understand easily that Plzen is beer and beer is Plzen.

Plzen offers also entertainment for the whole family. The wide choice of attractive places intended for childern includes Plzen ZOO with the adjacent DinoPark, the Techmania Science Centre and the Muzeum of Marionettes and Ghosts.

Besides tomorrow it will be held in Plzen the third edition of Bolevák Music Festival, the biggest dance festival of Bohemia. The entire open-air event takes place on the bank of the Bolevecký Pond. The participants surely appreciate additional cultural programme such as water attractions, dance performances and relax on the beach.

But as you know there isn’t a tennis trip without a tennis event. And so I’m proud to tell you that tomorrow two fantastic young tennis players will face (at 12:00 am) for the first semifinal of the Tennis Arena Cup, an important woman ITF event with 25,000$ money prize. These players are:

Anna Kalynskaya born in Russia on 12/02/1998 now at 256th position of Wta ranking and already able to win in 2016 two 25,000 $ ITF tournaments in Minsk and Aschaffenburg.

Michaela Bayerlova born in Czech Republic just twelve days after Kalynskaya on 14 Dec 1998. She is the absolute surprise of the tournament because this is just the second professional tournament played in her short careeer.

Very intersting will be second semifinal too in which will face the russian 19 year’s old Natalia Vikhlyantseva (nr. 236 of Wta ranking) and local star Tereza Smitkova already able to climb until 57th position of Wta ranking in spite of she was born just in 1994.

Tournament is being played on clay courts of Tk Slavia Plzen located just 2,5 km from Plzen central station. The best hotel solution to follow closely tennis matches is the GOLDEN FISH HOTEL APARTMENTS. This is far just a few metres from tennis club and offers fantastic junior suites at 114€ for Saturday night with breakfast included. If you want to be in city centre to enjoy Plzen nightlife i suggest you the very central 4**** HOTEL ROUS which offers large and modern rooms from 79€ breakfast and Wi-Fi included.

However in Plzen there are other good possible accomodations. Check them here!!!

TOURNAMENT INFO:

Tennis club: TK SLAVIA PLZEN

Address: U Borského parku 21, PLZEN, 30100, Czech Republic

Official site: http://www.tennis-arena.cz/

And so….are you ready for this new tennis&beer combination?

Last Second Tip – A Tennis Excursion In Prague

It’s possible that you are already there because this is one of the most charming town of Europe; it is possible that you are already there to enjoy a romantic walk on Karl Bridge; it’s possible that you are already there to taste an exquisite trdlo in the cobbled streets of Stare Mesto. If all this is possible it means that you are in the fantastic Prague to spend your next weekend. Of course the Golden Town no need of my presentation or my good words since it is one of the most beautiful and visited cities in the world, but there is an event currently taking place in Prague which can represent an additional element of interest for lovers of travel…and tennis. This is the Advantage Cars Prague Open 2016, a main tournament of ITF women calendar with 75,000 USD prize money, hosted by Tennis Club CLTK PRAHA. Tomorrow will take place these semi-finals with this order of play:

ALLIANZ COURT from 11:00 am REBECCA SRAMKOVA – CARINA WHITTOEFT

COURT 2 from 11:00 am REBECCA PETERSON – ANTONIA LOTTNER

Among these names my attention will be focused especially on Slovak 19 year’s old Rebecca Srmakova

Infact this year, this very talented young player has already won two $ 25,000 events (in Karshi on hard and in Rome on clay), showing a complete tennis, very powerful shots and a remarkable capacity to adapt to different surfaces. Thanks to these and other good results (for example a semifinal in Trnava $ 100,000 tournament) she has been able to climb WTA ranking moving from 312th position of last 2015 to actual 175th position.

German contender 21 year’s old german Karina Witthoeft is a bit older than Rebecca but she is an intersting player too.

Her best year has been 2015 in which she was able to win 3 ITF tournament (especially the Cagnes-Sur-Mer one with 100,000 USD money prize) and reach the 65th position in Wta ranking. Now, after a crisis period that has sent down over the 90th position of WTA ranking, she will try to recover some useful positions just starting from Prague.

The Prague Open is taking place on clay courts of CLTK Praha in Stvanice Island . This is far about 4 km from Nove Mesto. The best accomodation solution for tennis lovers, at just 300 mt from courts, is undoubtely the fantastic 5***** HILTON PRAGUE HOTEL which offers large, bright and airy deluxe rooms of 28 mq at a price of 117€ without breakfast (140€ with breakfast included). The free wi-fi connection is included. Remarkable is the award-winning Cloud 9 Sky Bar from where you can enjoy amazing panoramic views.

Of course Prague has thousands of other possibile accomodations. Choose here you favourite one!

About tournament:

Tennis Club: I.CLTK PRAHA

Address: Stvanice 38, PRAGUE, 17000, Czech Republic

Official Site: http://www.pragueopen.net/

And so….are you ready for this new tennis excursion?

Liberec – One Day Tennis Excursion from Prague

From 1st to 7th August it will return in Liberec a new edition of traditional Svijany Open, which, with a 42,500$ money prize, it’s one of the most important tennis event of Czech Republic. Liberec is a little beautiful town far just 109 km from Prague and 150 km from Dresden and could be a right idea for a one day excursion from one of this two cities. During morning you could be on clay courts following tennis action live, afternoon and evening you could discover the unknown beauties of this town.

The entry list of the tournament sees sa possible protagonists rumenian Radu Albot, local star Adam Pavlasek, japanese Taro Daniel, serbian Filip Krajinovic and spanish Jordi Samper Montana, often very competitive on clay courts. Possible outsider is the former 28th atp ranked colombian Santiago Giraldo who, after a very negative period, would like to improve his ranking.

Liberecky Tenisovy Klub is located less than two km from city center that is about 20 minutes walking. If hungry at the club there is a restaurant too, where you can eat something good.

LIBEREC TOP THINGS TO SEE:

JESTED TV TOWER – This unique structure (height is 93m) on the top of Mount Ještěd is considered the dominating feature of Liberec and the region. There is a funicular to the top of Mount Ještěd.The covered gallery on the ground floor is open to the public. Other spectacular views of the area are offered from the restaurant or the café on the first floor. On higher floors there is an hotel.

LIBEREC TOWN HALL – It’s the symbol of this Czech town, well known for its similarity to Vienna Town Hall. During summer is opened every day from 9:00 to 15:00 except on Saturday from 9:00 to 11:00. Closed on Sunday. Full entrance fee is 70,00 CZK reduced at 35,00 CZK for children under 15 years.

IQLANDIA – The ultramodern science centre with 3D planetarium, interactive exhibitions and hundreds of original exhibits which involves the whole family. You can meet the talking humanoid robot, experience authentic astronaut training, simulation of windstorm or earthquake, you can travel to the bowels of our planet and a lot of other interactive exhibits from astronomy, nanotechnology, physics, chemistry or technology. Full ticket costs 9€ for adults and 5,5€ for children over 3 years and disabled. Click here for more info on Iqlandia Official Site.

LIBEREC TOP PLACES TO STAY:

JESTED HOTEL. This 3 stars hotel is very difficult to book because it’s very requested by tourists for its unique architectural structure and amazing location on the top of Mount Jested. There are three kinds of room: economy (16 mq2 rate from 56€ per day), standard (20 mq2 from 96€ per day) and suite (40 mq2 from 133€ per day). The design of the standard rooms and suites is incredibly futuristic. The prices include always buffet breakfast, wi-fi and free parking.

CLARION GRANDHOTEL ZLATY LEV. This beautiful hotel, a few steps from the castle of Liberec, is located in a historic building in the historic center and is privileged to mix historic charm with modern design of its rooms. There are various different types of room but already with standard one you have good spaced rooms (20 mq2) with wi-fi and breakfast included. Rate starts from 86€ per day. If you need some space more and a little living area you could choose the Deluxe Room for just 10€ daily more than the standard one.

PYTLOUN DESIGN HOTEL. Nice boutique hotel in a calm zone of Liberec not far from city center, the Pytloun Design Hotel get an incredible value for money. A superior room costs just 58€ per day with breakfast and wifi included. The room is already large 20 mq2 but if you need more space and a Jacuzzi in the room you could book a Deluxe room adding 6€. The hotel is an intersting solution for families too because there is a beatiful garden with a fantastic playground for children just behind the hotel. Free parking area and an international restaurant ore other important services that the Hotel offer to its customers.

Useful links:

VISIT LIBEREC

TOURNAMENT OFFICIAL SITE

ADDRESS LTK LIBEREC:

Fibichova 929 – 460 01, Liberec – Czech Republic

Enjoy!!!