This morning’s name: Rob Ford. Oh my, who would have thought this would happen in Canada?

From Wikipedia, the beginning of the story:

Robert Bruce Ford (born May 28, 1969) is a Canadian politician and businessperson and is currently a Toronto City Councillor. He was Mayor of Toronto, Ontario, from 2010 to 2014. Prior to being mayor, Ford was a city councillor. He was first elected to City Council in the 2000 Toronto municipal election, and was re-elected to his council seat twice. At first discounted as a potential mayor, Ford was elected mayor in the 2010 mayoral election on a platform of reducing the “gravy train” of government expenses and taxes.

During his political career, Ford has been the subject of a number of personal and work-related controversies and legal proceedings, including a conflict of interest trial that nearly resulted in his being removed from office. In 2013, he became embroiled in a substance abuse scandal, which was widely reported in the national and international media. Ford initially denied the allegations, but after a 2013 Toronto Police Service gang investigation led to police discovering videos of Ford, he admitted to all of the incidents, including public drunkenness, drinking and driving, and illegal drug use. Ford admitted to smoking crack cocaine “probably in one of my drunken stupors”.

And it goes on from there. The man:

I expected there to be other Rob Fords around, and there are some, but not a lot. Here are two:

a politics lecturer at the University of Manchester and the author, with Matthew Goodwin of Revolt on the Right, a forthcoming book on Ukip and the BNP (link)

a photographer in Bradford UK (link)

And most interestingly, the outlaw Robert Ford (but known as Bob rather than Rob):

Robert Newton “Bob” Ford (December 8, 1861 – June 8, 1892) was an American outlaw best known for killing his gang leader Jesse James in 1882 to collect a reward. He was not yet 21. For a time he and his older brother Charles made a living doing re-enactments of the killing. Later he drifted around the West, operating saloons and dance halls.

Ford was shot to death at the age of 30 in Creede, Colorado by Edward Capehart O’Kelley, who attacked him in Ford’s temporary tent saloon. (link)

Given the solidly masculine name Rob Ford, I would have expected some actors to have adopted the name, but I haven’t found any.