Barry BottleContributor I

It's time for Elton Brand to leave the City of Brotherly Love.

Brand, who stands at 6'9" and weighs in at 254 pounds, simply does not fit with the Philadelphia 76ers, who have evolved into an up tempo team thanks to the athleticism of Louis Williams, Andre Iguodala, Thaddeus Young, Marreese Speights and others.

What Brand needs is a team that runs a half court offense that requires a big man who can provide 20 points and 10 rebounds from the low blocks. The No. 1 overall draft pick in the 1999 NBA Draft joins Kevin Garnett, Tim Duncan, and Shaquille O'Neal as the only active players to have a career average of over 20 points and 10 rebounds. That's pretty good company to keep.

So, let's take a look at some teams that could use Brand.

Toronto Raptors

It might not seem like it at first, but if you look closely, Brand could be a tremendous fit for the Raptors.

The team's big free agent addition over the summer was Hedo Turkoglu. At 6'10", the forward operates at his best when he's outside on the perimeter, capable of handling the ball and shooting it as well. It was clearly evident that he did some of his best work when there's a dominating presence in the low post (Dwight Howard).

Chris Bosh, the franchise player, is 6'10" and plays the interior positions for the Raptors. However, he's always been more like a Kevin Garnett than a Shaquille O'Neal. He's capable of producing away from the basket. His versatility can mesh well with Brand's interior presence.

Detroit Pistons

If there was a team in the league that needed an inside presence, it's the Pistons. They can return to being one of the elite teams if they can somehow manage to acquire Brand.

The Pistons have an abundance of talent on the perimeter with Rodney Stuckey, Ben Gordon, Rip Hamilton, and Tayshaun Prince. Having an inside guy that can command defensive attention will only make life easier for those guys.

Brand should also be able to fit in well with the interior players that are already on the Pistons roster right now. Ben Wallace is a defensive player, so he doesn't need the ball much. Charlie Villanueva is a guy that shows flashes of brilliance on offense, but he's versatile enough to move out of Brand's way. Reserve forward Chris Wilcox is already familiar with Brand from their days down in Los Angeles together.

Atlanta Hawks

While it might take a major adjustment to do so, the Hawks can be one of those teams that Brand can thrive in.

Josh Smith, Marvin Williams, and Al Horford are athletic front court players, but they don't have the bulk that Brand can provide. They're also nowhere near as consistent of an offensive player as the former Clipper is, too.

Joe Johnson is extremely talented and versatile, so he should be able to still do what he does even if Brand is added to the team. Mike Bibby has shown in the past that he can play with interior players who need the ball (Chris Webber and Vlade Divac).

Charlotte Bobcats

The Bobcats are a franchise that so desperately needed a consistent scorer that they even bothered to take the time to flirt with Allen Iverson, a malcontent that very few GMs are willing to touch right now, over the summer.

Brand would easily be able to provide his 20 points and 10 rebounds on this time. His presence inside should make life a whole lot better for the likes of DJ Augustin, Raymond Felton, Flip Murray, Gerald Wallace, and Vladimir Radmanovic. Boris Diaw should love it as well because he doesn't have to do nearly as much of the dirty work as he used to.

Sacramento Kings

The Kings have Kevin Martin as their franchise player. While he does put up good numbers, he doesn't seem like the type that can carry an entire franchise on his back.

Enter Brand.

Rookie guard Tyreke Evans can do even more damage on the perimeter if he had someone like Brand to watch his back inside. Andres Nocioni can combine with Brand to provide some leadership and toughness for the team. Young big men like Jason Thompson and Spencer Hawe can learn a thing or two from Brand.

A player as dominating as Brand is doesn't deserve to be the 5th leading scorer on a team. He needs to be somewhere that he can be productive and help a team win games.