Philadelphia 76ers General Manager Elton Brand has been wrong on nearly every wrong decision he’s made since Kawhi Leonard’s legendary jumper bounced in to elevate the Toronto Raptors past the Sixers in last year’s Eastern Conference semifinals.

Choosing to let Jimmy Butler go to the Miami Heat in free agency, signing Tobias Harris to a five-year, $180 million contract and signing Al Horford to a four-year, $109 million deal are the three biggest reasons Philly got swept by the Boston Celtics in the first round of this year’s NBA bubble playoffs in Orlando. Even waived guard Trey Burke is having a great first round series with the Dallas Mavericks, complementing the legendary Luka Doncic (though drafting Matisse Thybulle in the first round of last year’s draft was nice work).

After the Sixers fired head coach Brett Brown, Brand did a media Zoom press conference to announce that change and other possible front office and organizational restructuring, he also discussed The Process.

Because of the current situation the team is in, with Joel Embiid, Ben Simmons and two of the worst contracts in the NBA signed by Brand, he said that The Process was a failure. But just because Brand desecrated what The Process built over his last two years as general managers after succeeding the scandal-ridden Bryan Colangelo doesn’t mean The Process failed. It meant that Brand was the one who failed himself.

The overarching point of The Process spearheaded by Sam Hinkie was to lose as many games as possible to have the opportunity to draft as many superstars as possible and to build up a war chest of assets in the quest to have more shots and drafting or trading for a superstar. The fact that the Sixers were able to draft Embiid and Simmons meant that The Process worked. Philly obtained two of the top 20 players in the league and would’ve had a third had it drafted Jayson Tatum first overall instead of Markelle Fultz.

Where the Sixers failed was taking what The Process had delivered and converting it into a title contender. Instead of being patient with things, Brand traded Robert Covington and Dario Saric to Minnesota for Butler, dealt Landry Shamet and two first-round picks for Harris, let Butler leave in a sign-and-trade for Josh Richardson and signed Harris and Horford to immediately regrettable deals.