Kwame Brown Biography

Kwame Brown is best known as the number one overall pick in the 2001 NBA Draft. Brown was selected by the Washington Wizards and became the first high school player ever taken with the top selection. He spent the first four seasons of his career with the Wizards. Brown ended up playing for six other NBA franchises. Most of his career, he was utilized as a valuable bench asset. At Glynn Academy, he became a McDonald's All-American before jumping to the NBA. He left as the school's leading rebounder, shot blocker and second leading scorer all-time. As a senior, he was the Georgia high school player of the year.

Book Kwame Brown for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Kwame Brown for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Kwame Brown. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Kwame Brown, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Kwame Brown's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Kwame Brown, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Kwame Brown for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Kwame Brown for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Kwame Brown for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Kwame Brown’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Kwame Brown for your Virtual Meeting