Washington

Kwame Brown Undergoes Successful Surgery

Philip Maymin

Basketball News Services

Kwame Brown's surgery yesterday was successful, according to the team doctors. Brown is expected to be ready for training camp in October. No reports on whether anybody is willing to place money on it or what kind of odds they would give.

I think it would be pretty amazing if Brown were at full strength by then.

The Wizards also signed free agent Michael Ruffin to a contract yesterday, guaranteeing the 6-8 forward who led the team with 7.3 rebounds over the summer at least a year with the team. Ruffin was a second-round pick by the Bulls in the 1999 NBA draft and has made three stops in his four years in the league, starting with Chicago, then moving to Philadelphia, and finally Utah. He now makes Washington his home.

His career high in rebounding came on November 9, 2000 against the Magic when he pulled down 18 boards in 43 minutes of action. That same game, he also hit 8 of 16 free throws, both career highs. His career free throw percentage hovers around the fifty percent mark.

TEAM NOTES

The Washington Wizards have released their complete 2004-2005 regular season schedule.

You can shop at the Wizards team storewhere you can personalized jerseys with your name and number.

NEWSLINES

The United Press International writes inThe Washington Times: Washington Wizards forward Kwame Brown underwent successful surgery Tuesday to repair a fracture in his right foot injured while playing basketball."The surgery went as expected and was successful," said President of Basketball Operations Ernie Grunfeld. "Our doctors foresee no problems for Kwame's healing process, and feel that he will be ready for training camp in October."

The Washington Postreports: Michael Ruffin signed a contract with the Washington Wizards yesterday, rewarding him for solid play with the team during summer league games.Ruffin, a 6-foot-8 forward, averaged a team-high 7.3 rebounds over the summer. He has averaged 2.2 points and 4.5 rebounds in a four-year NBA career with stops in Chicago, Philadelphia and Utah.