The author considers copper coins of the so-called “archaic” type minted in Bulgar. According to the author, they were issued in the mid – late 1230s. The main feature of these coins is a kind of legend handwriting and great weight. The... more

The author considers copper coins of the so-called “archaic” type minted in Bulgar. According to the author, they were issued in the mid – late 1230s. The main feature of these coins is a kind of legend handwriting and great weight. The work is the Corpus – the publication of all copies of the “archaic” dinars known to date. In addition to weight and diameter, the article provides photo images of most of the coins presented in the table. Materials are presented from the funds of the National Museum of the Republic of Tatarstan, State Historical Museum (Moscow), ZENO database. Coins from the Bolgar State Historical and Architectural Museum-Reserve are first presented. After analyzing the weight histogram compiled from materials of weight 84 dinars, the author calculates the average weight – 6.01 g. Later, in the 1240s, copper coins with a weight of 3.1–3.3 g began to be issued in the Bulgar region. The article also provides rare versions of heavy-weight dinars minted, according to the author, immediately after the “archaic” type.

The frescoes in the Basilica of Acheiropoietos in Thessaloniki are located in the south aisle, above the colonnade. The ensemble represents the images of the Forty Martyrs of Sebastia, depicted full length and in medallions. The... more

The frescoes in the Basilica of Acheiropoietos in Thessaloniki are located in the south aisle, above the colonnade. The ensemble represents the images of the Forty Martyrs of Sebastia, depicted full length and in medallions. The Acheiropoietos frescoes are traditionally dated after 1224, when Thessaloniki was liberated from the Latins. Another important date for the study of the ensemble is 1230, when, on the day of the Forty Martyrs, the Bulgarian Tsar Ivan II Asen defeated the Epirus ruler and emperor of Thessaloniki Theodore Komnenos Doukas. According to contemporary researchers, the frescoes in Acheiropoietos could have been ordered by Manuel Komnenos Doukas (1230—1237), the next ruler of Thessaloniki and son-in-law of Ivan II Asen. A.Xyngopoulos, the first researcher of these frescoes, singled out the hands of three artists: a master of medallions, a master of full-length figures and a master of clothes. However, such a strict separation seems

practically impossible. Moreover, an analysis of the style of the frescoes shows that all the figures were painted in almost similar manner, which can be seen in the interpretation of details (the shape of the ears, collarbones, eyes, hairstyles, details of clothing, etc.). Due to the volumetric interpretation of the faces in Aheiropoietos, they

are often compared with the frescoes of Mileševo and the church of Sts. Peter and Paul in Tarnovo. These three monuments represent one and the same stage in the development of style and of the search for new imagery in the 13th-century Byzantine art. In this paper we tried to trace the path of this process through the ensembles from the first decades of the 13th century in Greek and Slavic Macedonia and Bulgaria.

The paper is a voice in the discussion on the founders of the Dominican monastic complex in Sandomierz. As a consequence of dating its 13th-century construction phases, the hypothesis popular in literature on the subject has been refuted,... more

The paper is a voice in the discussion on the founders of the Dominican monastic complex in Sandomierz. As a consequence of dating its 13th-century construction phases, the hypothesis popular in literature on the subject has been refuted, namely the claim that the alleged founder of the monastery Bishop Iwo Odrowąż brought a construction workshop responsible for raising the walls and executing a rich ceramic decoration. The involvement in the founding of the first stage of works has been attributed to Duchess Adelaide, daughter of Casimir the Just, buried in the Church of St James "in medio ecclesiae", and venerated by the Sandomierz Dominicans as the

"fundatrix istius conventus". Furthermore, attention has been drawn to the fact that the date of the Duchess's death provided in her tomb inscription has been to-date erroneously identified as 1211, while it

should be read as 1240. It has also been suggested that the construction stage connected with the ceramic decoration of the nave body and the Monastery's eastern wing should be associated with Bishop Prandota, while the raising of the belfry with Duke Leszek the Black.

Artykuł jest głosem w dyskusji dotyczącej fundatorów dominikańskiego zespołu klasztornego w Sandomierzu. W konsekwencji korekty datowania XIII-wiecznych faz budowy odrzucono popularną w literaturze przedmiotu hipotezę, jakoby fundator klasztoru, biskup Iwo Odrowąż, sprowadzić miał z Lombardii warsztat budowlany odpowiedzialny za wzniesienie murów oraz wykonanie bogatych dekoracji ceramicznych. Jako fundatorkę związaną z pierwszym etapem prac wskazano księżniczkę Adelajdę, córkę Kazimierza Sprawiedliwego, pochowaną w kościele św. Jakuba "in medio ecclesiae" i czczoną przez sandomierskich dominikanów jako "fundatrix istius conventus". W tekście zwrócono uwagę, że data śmierci księżniczki podana w inskrypcji na jej nagrobku była dotychczas odczytywana błędnie jako rok 1211, podczas gdy odczytywać ją należy jako rok 1240. Ponadto wskazano, że z fazą budowy, w której powstały ceramiczne dekoracje korpusu nawowego i wschodniego skrzydła klasztoru wiązać można biskupa Prandotę, a z budową dzwonnicy księcia Leszka Czarnego.

The compilations of Bartholomew the Englishman, Thomas of Cantimpré, and Vincent of Beauvais (Speculum naturale) manifest in some manner how perception was considered during the first half of the 13th century. To properly understand... more

The compilations of Bartholomew the Englishman, Thomas of Cantimpré, and Vincent of Beauvais (Speculum naturale) manifest in some manner how perception was considered during the first half of the 13th century. To properly understand perception, though, one has to first deal with the different conceptions of the soul. Two different views of the soul have often been distinguished in these encyclopaedias: one « physiological-medical » and the other « functional-philosophical ». In this paper, I offer an alternative interpretation based on a systematic analysis of the powers of the soul and the various explanations of their faculties. This leads to the conclusion that there are at least four different, yet interconnected views of the soul in the encyclopaedias. In addition, cognition itself is considered a process that encompasses several faculties. These faculties account either for an ascending path towards God or for intellectual knowledge (by means of abstraction). //

Les compilations de Barthélemy l'Anglais, de Thomas de Cantimpré et de Vincent de Beauvais (Speculum naturale) montrent comment la perception était considérée pendant la première moitié du XIIIe siècle. Mais pour bien comprendre cette conception de la perception, il faut d'abord s'intéresser à celle de l'âme. Deux conceptions différentes de l'âme ont souvent été distinguées dans ces encyclopédies: l'une "physiologico-médicale" et l'autre "fonctionnaliste-philosophique". Cet article propose une interprétation alternative basée sur une analyse systématique des pouvoirs de l'âme et des diverses explications de ses facultés. Cela conduit à la conclusion qu'il existe dans les encyclopédies de cette époque au moins quatre conceptions de l'âme, différentes mais interconnectées. En outre, la cognition elle-même est considérée comme un processus qui englobe plusieurs facultés. Ces facultés constituent soit un chemin ascendant vers Dieu, soit une connaissance intellectuelle (par le biais de l'abstraction).

Since the expansion of the Kingdom of Aragon towards the south from the 11th century, the cattle breeders colonised and cultivated the new lands conquered from the Muslims. The kingdom's orography favoured transhumance between the regions... more

Since the expansion of the Kingdom of Aragon towards the south from the 11th century, the cattle breeders colonised and cultivated the new lands conquered from the Muslims. The kingdom's orography favoured transhumance between the regions of the Ebro Valley, where the cattle remained in winter and the rich summer pastures of the Pyrenees and the Iberian System. Since 13th century, the advantageous privileges of the Casa de Ganaderos de Zaragoza soon came into conflict with those of the Comunidad de aldeas de Daroca, resulting in countless and costly lawsuits. The arbitration award of 1501 was an unsuccessful attempt to bring peace between two powerful institutions eager to defend their rights at all costs.

Desde la expansión del Reino de Aragón hacia el sur a partir del siglo XI, los ganaderos fueron colonizando y poniendo en cultivo las nuevas tierras conquistadas a los musulmanes. La orografía del reino favoreció la trashumancia entre las regiones del valle del Ebro, donde los ganados permanecían en invierno y los ricos pastos de verano de los Pirineos y el Sistema Ibérico. Los numerosos privilegios reales que desde el siglo XIII obtuvo la Casa de Ganaderos de Zaragoza entraron pronto en conflicto con los de la Comunidad de aldeas de Daroca, dando lugar a innumerables y costosos pleitos. La sentencia arbitral de 1501 fue un intento infructuoso de poner paz entre dos poderosas instituciones deseosas de defender sus derechos a toda costa.

Abstrakt: Ve 13. století bylo nad soutokem Vltavy a Sázavy v těsné blízkosti Ostrovského kláštera založeno řemeslnické městečko. Předpokládá se, že jeho zhruba třicetiletou existenci ukončil vpád Braniborů, po němž městečko zůstalo v... more

Abstrakt: Ve 13. století bylo nad soutokem Vltavy a Sázavy v těsné blízkosti Ostrovského kláštera založeno řemeslnické městečko. Předpokládá se, že jeho zhruba třicetiletou existenci ukončil vpád Braniborů, po němž městečko zůstalo v troskách a nebylo v žádném rozsahu obnoveno. Revize hlášení a nálezových zpráv archeologického výzkumu, probíhajícího v minulém století, však odhaluje celou řadu zajímavých detailů, kterými lze dosavadní pohled na historii městečka korigovat. Jedno ze zjištění vedlo k nové interpretaci tzv. zásobnicových jam, nacházejících se zejména na východním svahu ostrožny, představujících doklady hornické činnosti. Z polohy objektů a minimálně jednoho druhotného využití lze alespoň jejich část datovat do období před vznikem pravidelného půdorysu městečka. Klíčová slova: 13. století-Sekanka-Jablonná-těžba zlata-lokační sídliště-hornické sídliště. Traces of mining activities connected with the prospection for gold on the site of a deserted medieval town Abstract: A craftsmen's town was established in the 13th century above the confluence of the Vltava and Sázava rivers, in close proximity of the Ostrov Monastery. It is presumed that it existed for approximately thirty years and was wiped out by the invasion of Brandenburg troops which left the town in ruins; it was never restored in any form. However, the revision of records and find reports from excavations taking place in the last century brought to light a number of interesting details which modify the existing view in the town's history. One of the findings led to a new interpretation of storage pits located, in particular, on the eastern slope of the promontory and confirming mining activities. Based on the location of these features and at least one example of secondary use, part of them can be dated to the period before the origination of the town's regular ground plan.

Abstract: The scarcity of Castilian documentary sources relating to the Christian presence in the region of the Bay of Cádiz and the countryside of Jerez de la Frontera in the second half of the 13th century considerably limits our... more

Abstract: The scarcity of Castilian documentary sources relating to the Christian presence in the region of the Bay of Cádiz and the countryside of Jerez de la Frontera in the second half of the 13th century considerably limits our knowledge on the issue. Fortunately, the finding of previously unpublished documents allows us to contribute to the specification —chronological, of boundaries and of territorial jurisdiction— of the alfoces of El Puerto de Santa María, Sidueña and Cádiz and the relationship that existed among them. Novel aspects, such as reflections on a very probable distribution of Sidueña or tenure in the hands of Cádiz of possessions on the mainland beyond the segregation of El Puerto de Santa María are also included in this research that is now presented, which aims to provide new explanatory hypotheses about the territorial organization of the area during the first decades of Castilian domination.

Resumen: La escasez de fuentes documentales castellanas referentes a la presencia cristiana en la región de la bahía de Cádiz y campiña de Jerez de la Frontera en la segunda mitad del siglo XIII limita considerablemente nuestros conocimientos al respecto. Afortunadamente, la localización de documentos inéditos hasta ahora permite contribuir a la concreción cronológica, de términos y de jurisdicción territorial acerca de los alfoces de El Puerto de Santa María, Sidueña y Cádiz y de la relación que hubo entre ellos. Aspectos novedosos, como reflexiones sobre un muy probable repartimiento de Sidueña o la tenencia en manos de Cádiz de posesiones en tierra firme más allá de la segregación de El Puerto de Santa María quedan incluidos también en esta investigación que ahora se presenta, que pretende aportar nuevas hipótesis explicativas sobre la organización territorial de la zona durante las primeras décadas de dominio castellano.

Abstract: The region of La Janda, especially its three main population centers Vejer de la Frontera, Medina Sidonia and Alcalá de los Gazules, witnessed a permanent conflict between Christians and Muslims during the 13th century, when... more

Abstract: The region of La Janda, especially its three main population centers Vejer de la Frontera, Medina Sidonia and Alcalá de los Gazules, witnessed a permanent conflict between Christians and Muslims during the 13th century, when Christians were made captive in Moorish land every single day. This article, based on the Milagros romanzados de Santo Domingo de Silos by the monk Pedro Marín, presents the testimonies of some slaves who managed to escape and reach some of these towns.

Resumen: La comarca de La Janda, en especial sus tres grandes núcleos de población Vejer de la Frontera, Medina Sidonia y Alcalá de los Gazules, asiste en el siglo XIII a un escenario de permanente conflicto entre cristianos y musulmanes. En él fue cotidiano el hecho de la entrada en cautiverio de cristianos en tierra de moros. Este trabajo, apoyándose en la obra de los Milagros romanzados de Santo Domingo de Silos del monje Pedro Marín, recoge los testimonios de algunos esclavos que lograron escapar y que en su huida llegaron a algunas de estas poblaciones.

The existence of the genre of mirror of princes in Byzantium remains an open question, while the classical traditions, western influences and modern misconceptions intermingle. Still, parainetic texts existed in Byzantium, even if they... more

The existence of the genre of mirror of princes in Byzantium remains an open question, while the classical traditions, western influences and modern misconceptions intermingle. Still, parainetic texts existed in Byzantium, even if they were so scarce and so different from one another that any additional classification would not help us to understand them. Moreover, Byzantine authors often combined different generic elements in one single work. The key for recognizing a parainetic text as such might be to 1) identify thenarrator who openly performs as a superior to his naratee while 2) not only counseling the Emperor how to behave, but setting a universal moral code for him.The interest in doing so lies in the possibility to deconstruct the idea of ideology as a monolithphenomenon shaped under the control of a single man. We argue that in the vivid period of the first half of the 13th century, in the states of Epirus and Nicaea, the position of the Emperor in the society and his role as a ruler were being constructed in the dynamic ‘negotiations’ between the Emperor himself and his surroundings.

Theodor I Doukas Angelos, being freshly crowned Roman Emperor in Thessaloniki, received two letters that contained parainetic elements. John Apokaukos approached the subject of imperial wrath, while Demetrius Chomatenos tried to calm the Emperor’s conscience after the execution of a pirate. But both of them, through different theories, insisted on the participation of the people in the Emperor’s sovereignty. An argument that served as legitimizing in external politics could become a warning for the sovereign in the internal one.

On the other side of Bosporus, Nikephoros Vlemmydes wrote the Imperial Statue for his ex-pupil and Emperor Theodore II Laskaris. We suggest on the basis of intertextuality that this piece was written latter than it is now considered, during the sole reign of Theodore II. The author used a parenetic form to criticize Emperor’s political actions and proclaim him unfit to rule. Theodore II replied banding the genres of a letter and an epitaph. In response to his teacher’s attacks, he developed an independent and original social theory and political ideology.

A common element between the proceedings of Epirus and Nicaea, more important than their shared imagery, is exactly this tendency to negotiate the Emperor’s position. We suspect that similar examples could be found even in more peacefulperiods of Empire’s history.

THE COMPARISON OF SOME ASPECTS OF THE ORIGIN OF CITIES CRACOW AND OLOMOUC The origin of institutional towns represents a result of a long-term development which culminated in the 13th century when the first towns were founded. The two... more

THE COMPARISON OF SOME ASPECTS OF THE ORIGIN OF CITIES CRACOW AND OLOMOUC

The origin of institutional towns represents a result of a long-term development which culminated in the 13th century when the first towns were founded. The two basic types of a new settlement appeared: towns that grew "on a greensward" and towns built on a place of a previous agglomeration. Cracow and Olomouc presents settlements which had a few century history settlement development behind them at the point of the institutional establishment of the city. Since early medieval times the varied agglomeration has originated around Olomouc and Cracow castle, what allowed the foundation and the formation of new legal cities that were established approximately in the middle of the 13th century. The similarity of the origins ofboth cities offers a comparative method for the development of both settlements and founding processes. Although every city is unique, it looks probable to trace certain parallels and at least at the basic level to describe an origin of a new town as a general process of many stages. It also shows that the existence of a pre-foundation settlement with churches in a wider settlement around the castle in Olomouc and Cracow became crucial. They were frequently connected with a trade as well as a market. The founding process itself represents a complicated, multi-layered, legal and physical activity, of which end it is possible to find a city.

When 19th-century American Presbyterian pastor James Waddel Alexander wrote the lyrics of the hymn “O Sacred Head Now Wounded,” he created what has become the most popular of numerous English translations of 17th-century German Lutheran... more

When 19th-century American Presbyterian pastor James Waddel Alexander wrote the lyrics of the hymn “O Sacred Head Now Wounded,” he created what has become the most popular of numerous English translations of 17th-century German Lutheran pastor Paul Gerhardt’s hymn “O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden.” That text was, in turn, a translation of part of an anonymous 13th-century cycle of passion poems, one dedicated to each of Christ’s wounds. From the medieval original through Gerhardt to Alexander, each subsequent translation has diminished its depictions of blood and rendered its narrator’s interaction with the crucified body of Christ less passionate, dictated by the theological needs and aesthetic sensibilities of the translator’s religious tradition. At the same time, both Gerhardt and Alexander included significant elements from the original that were anomalous in their own contexts. The inclusion of a medieval poem in the worship of 17th-century Lutherans and 19th-century Presbyterians may reveal an ecumenical bent on their part, albeit with clear limits. A comparison of the various versions of the hymn demonstrates the complex interrelationship between an original text and translations of it, some of which may properly be called versions of it and some of which may have become something altogether different.