January 12, 1945 – March 12, 2022

Mary Ann (Molitor Musto) Cornwell, 77, changed addresses on us Friday, March 12, 2022, in her home that borders the fifth hole of the Lakeview Golf & Country Club.

She was born Jan. 12, 1945, in Spokane, Washington to Ray and Virginia Molitor. The family moved to Ephrata in 1950. She had two older brothers, Pat and Steve, and two younger brothers, John and Skip.

Mary Ann graduated from Ephrata High School in 1963 and Seattle University in 1967. Later that year she went to work for IBM, based in Anchorage, Alaska. She worked in Fairbanks, Juneau, Sitka, Ketchikan, Nome and more. She loved Alaska and was happy that she preceded the pipeline and cruise ships as they adversely affected the natural beauty. She later worked in Olympia, Washington before she was transferred to Austin, Texas.

While in Austin she met her two wonderful husbands who also worked for IBM; Tom Musto from Nashville, Tennessee (deceased) and Derald Cornwell from Tulsa, Oklahoma (also deceased).

Mary Ann and Derald built their home near Lakeview Golf & Country Club. Because Mary Ann had secondary progressive multiple sclerosis she was unable to enjoy golf.

Mary Ann joked that her claim to fame was being the first female on the EHS golf team before there were ladies’ and men’s golf teams. Don Gordon was the team coach; Billy Rader and Tom Truax were her golfing buddies.

Mary Ann was a member of St. Rose of Lima Catholic Church. (It sounded like we were all in agreement that it would be appropriate to add Mary Nelson’s paragraph, which follows these parentheses.) Her dear friend from that parish, Mary Wickwire Nelson, said it best: “Mary Ann has left her imprint on those whose lives she touched. We are all better because of her. Think of her especially when things are hard and you want to complain. See her smile of acceptance as she lived out the meaning and purpose of her life.”

A small family gathering is scheduled in the near future.

In lieu of flowers, friends and acquaintances are encouraged to give to the charity of their choice or the Ephrata High School girls golf program.