HARRISBURG — Seated at their mahogany desks in the marble-green Senate chamber Tuesday were the six senators of Monroe County.

Sen. Robert Mellow, D-22; Sen. Ray Musto, D-14; Sen. Lisa Boscola, D-18; Sen. James Rhoades, R-29; Sen. Charles Lemmond, R-20 and Sen. Charles Dent, R-16, — they were all present to mark the symbolic start of the new legislative session and a new political reality for Monroe County.

The county is split among six Senate districts and four House districts as a result of the 2001 legislative reapportionment. While the boundary changes took effect last spring, Tuesday's ceremony marked the last step of the reapportionment process.

The senators may not think of themselves as a band of six, but one of the overriding questions at the start of the new session is whether this group of elected officials will actually work together as a cohesive group tobenefit Monroe County. If the six vote the same way, they will represent roughly 12 percent of the 50 names listed on the Senate rollcall.

Will they take a common approach to the hot-button issue of school property tax reform or vote along party lines? Will they work as one when it comes to getting money for a highway project or confirming a trustee at East Stroudsburg University? The senators share one thing in common, but that doesn't necessarily bring them closer together. None of them are residents of Monroe County and their political bases lie elsewhere.

One clue to the political forces dividing the six came with the swearing-in ceremony for senators re-elected to new terms.

The two Republicans — Lemmond and Dent — took the oath jointly with other GOP senators.

The three Democrats — Mellow, Boscola and Musto — took the oath jointly with others of their party.

Rhoades is in mid-term and didn't need to take a new oath. But Musto put his finger on the thing that will unite the senators: many of the problems facing Monroe County spill across district boundaries.

For example, Musto pointed out that traffic congestion caused by race fans going to Pocono Raceway in Long Pond is a problem for municipalities in his 14th District. But the genesis of the traffic problem — the raceway itself — is located in another Senate district.

"So you need to work together," concluded Musto.

Boscola says several factors will enable the delegation to pull together.

Monroe County commissioners have already taken the initiative to invite the senators to group meetings. Boscola expects Gov.-elect Ed Rendell to come up with proposals that will address the county's needs.

Rhoades and Boscola both see benefits for the county from having three votes in each party caucus.

"You're going to have both sides of the aisle," said Rhoades.

As chairman of the Senate Education Committee and a sponsor of a property tax reduction bill last session, Rhoades said he hopes to work with Rendell to achieve property tax reform.

— — — — — — — — — — Apon Services LLC Member BBB 24 hr emergency ser 877-254-9766