Kingpins McCord et al.jpg

In this bracket, Bob Mellow (l) faces LeAnna Washington (r); Rob McCord (center) goes against Ray Musto.

(PennLive.com file photos and graphic)

Note: You can scroll to the bottom and vote in our poll if you don't need a quick recap of our contenders' misdeeds.

In today's Kingpins of Corruption bracket challenges, our lead contest pits former state treasurer and admitted campaign contribution extorter Rob McCord against Ray Musto, a former state senator who died in April with federal corruption charges pending against him.

McCord pleaded guilty to federal corruption charges Tuesday. He has admitted telling two potential donors that he could use his position as state treasurer to harm their business if they didn't contribute to his campaign for governor.

Musto was under federal indictment on charges he took $25,000 from the contractor in the Luzerne County Kids for Cash judicial scandal. At age 85, Musto was found to be mentally incompetent to stand trial and sent to federal medical prison. Facing terminal cancer, he was released for health reasons and died shortly thereafter. Mitigating factor: After replacing the legendary Dan Flood in Congress in 1980, Musto was offered a bribe in the Abscam sting but flatly refused it.

In the undercard, notorious senatorial birthday-bash hostess LeAnna Washington goes against Bob Mellow, a fellow state senator who pleaded guilty to a federal charge arising from misuse of his state-paid staff for election campaign work. He got a prison sentence of 16 months, part of which was served in a halfway house.

Mellow (D-Lackawanna) was also charged in the recent Pennsylvania Turnpike pay-to-play scandal but a judge dismissed most of the charges and prosecutors dropped the remaining case against him.

Washington (D-Philadelphia) resigned the Senate late last year after pleading guilty to using her legislative staff to help stage her gigantic annual campaign fundraising birthday party bash. She was sentenced to home confinement and ordered to pay $200,000 restitution. Her plea deal allowed her to keep her state pension.

So who deserves to stay in the running for Pa.'s Kingpin of Corruption, and who should be turned aside as a minor-league wrongdoer? Vote in our two polls below.