From its humble beginning of a single showroom in the UAE in 1987, Joyalukkas has changed the landscape and widened the horizon of the jewelry retail industry. Today, the Joyalukkas Group has grown into a multibillion-dollar corporation with diversified interests, spanning retail, fashion, money exchange, realty and aviation industries. The Joyalukkas brand has become a household name and the group today enjoys the loyal patronage of over 10 million customers in the UAE, India, UK, Singapore, Malaysia, Qatar, Oman, Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the US.

Joyalukkas, dubbed the world’s favorite jeweler, has enjoyed much acclaim since inception. Some of the first and biggest accomplishments include the first retail chain to be awarded both ISO 9001 and ISO 14001 certification, seven years of “Superbrand” status in a row, the world’s largest showroom recognition from Limca Book of World records and more. Joyalukkas is renowned worldwide for quality, designs, best value offerings, convenience and setting new benchmarks in customer service.

“When I opened the doors of the first Joyalukkas showroom 30 years ago, I had a simple goal: to offer the very best. Every new showroom and location bring us closer to our goal of being where our customers are. Each achievement affirms our goal and motivates us to aim even higher,” said Joy Alukkas, chairman and managing director, Joyalukkas Group.

“But all of this would not have been possible without the loyalty and support of our dear patrons. They are the driving force behind our efforts and constant pursuit of excellence. They have made the past three decades highly rewarding for us and our gratitude knows no bounds. It is my pledge to tirelessly work toward delighting our customers every time they visit a Joyalukkas showroom,” he said.

Joyalukkas Group has been on an aggressive expansion drive since 2000, and currently has 130 showrooms across the globe. Work is now underway to open showrooms in new territories, such as Canada, Australia and Sri Lanka by the close of the second quarter of 2017 taking the brand’s reach to 14 countries. Many exciting initiatives, new product lines and innovative services are also in the works.