Educating Rita by Willy Russell

"Educating Rita", is a two-handed play which only has two characters

and one set. "Educating Rita" was written in 1985 by Willy Russell, it

looks at how the relationship between two people, Rita and Frank,

develops as the play goes on. "Educating Rita" is the story of Rita, a

hairdresser who decides to go to University in order to discover who

she really is. When she arrives at University she meets Frank, a lazy

alcoholic who doesn't really care about being a University lecturer.

At first, Frank refuses to teach Rita but he soon finds he has a soft

spot for Rita and decides to teach her everything he knows about

English Literature. I will be analysing the advantages and

disadvantages of "Educating Rita" being two-handed play. I will be

referring to the play version and also to the film version of

"Educating Rita" to analyse the different gains and losses of the

two-handed play.

First of all, I will be looking at the many advantages of "Educating

Rita" being a two-handed play. There are many benefits of having only

two characters and only one setting in a play, for example a close

relationship develops between the two main characters, as the depth

and intensity of the relationship is much more highlighted than it

would be if there were more than two characters in the play. This

shows the importance of the two characters. For example, in Act One,

scene five when Frank says "We really should talk about you and Denny,

my dear", this shows Frank and Rita's relationship takes a bigger step

because they both discuss each other's personal problems, for the

first time Frank isn't just Rita's teacher but ...

... middle of paper ...

... problems and to an extent Frank and Julia's personal problems. The

film also had the scene of Frank delivering a lecture whilst drunk,

which I think the play didn't really exploit and wasn't actually funny

when it was told in the play. Also, seeing Rita and Frank outside the

university with their personal lives wasn't really developed in the

play, for example when Rita was going to have dinner with Frank and

Julia, in the play it didn't really explain in detail why Rita didn't

want to go in and have dinner, but in the film it was easily

understandable why Rita didn't want to go in. So, in conclusion I

found the film version of "Educating Rita" much more effective than

the play version because the film was much easier to understand than

the play because I was very confused of what actually was happening in

the play.