Characters

The Adventures of Abney & Teal centres on two animated rag dolls named Abney and Teal who live on an island in a lake in a park in a city. Abney lives in a hut at the base of a tree. Teal sleeps in the branches of the tree, with her only possessions a blanket and an umbrella. Abney & Teal share their environment with several friends:

Neep, a small burrowing creature like a turnip.

Bop, an aquatic mammal somewhat resembling a furry male elephant seal who drinks 'tea' (actually water from the lake) and blows bubbles.

The Poc-Pocs, a set of 7 identical-shaped but different-sized comma-shaped wooden objects or hard tropical tree seeds, so named after the noise they make jumping about.

Toby Dog, a melodeon-playing dog who always sits upright on the same place on the lake's mainland shore. He normally plays the same tune, which the narrator describes as several sorts of music. There are rare occasions where Toby Dog will play a variation of his tune, notably the lullaby on the episode Bop's babies.

From time to time Neep's 'friends and relations' come to visit. They look much like Neep but are different colours and have varying other features. For example, Zeep has a long blond moustache and Meep wears glasses.

Production

The show is produced by Anne Wood who, as founder of Ragdoll Productions, had previously brought successful children's shows such as Teletubbies and In the Night Garden... BBC Television. Wood stated that she had been an admirer of Stewart's picture books and their "distinct brand of gentle, fantastical humour and exquisite drawing style", but stated that it was his work on the book Addis Berner Bear Forgets that prompted her to contact the author. As well as creator Stewart is also the series director, and spent three years working on the show before it aired. Stewart stated in 2011 that the characters were all original constructs, designed in his sketchbooks, and the inspiration for the setting came from a visit to Victoria Park in East London. The show is co-written by Steve Roberts and Matilda Tristram.

The show is narrated by British actor Adrian Scarborough who also provides the voice for Abney, while Teal is voiced by Shingai Shoniwa, who is best known as the lead singer of the Noisettes. None of the other characters have speaking roles, apart from Neep's ability to say his own name. Each episode is roughly eleven minutes long. The first series of 26 episodes started airing in the United Kingdom during September 2011. The show is aimed at 3-6 year-olds, but has been recognised for its adult friendly style, which harks back to earlier British children's programmes, drawing comparisons with the work of Oliver Postgate. BBC licensing manager, Julie Kekwith, acknowledged the show's retro-feel in 2011, stating "we're sure [it] will appeal to adults and parents as well as children." and that the show has a "unique nostalgic and literary feel". While Kate Monaghan in a 2011 review described the animation as having an "old-fashioned, puppet-esque feel", Fernando De Jesus of ITV Studios commented that the show has a "sort of chic brashness".

In January 2012 it was announced that the show would be further promoted by a range of soft toys and games, made by Rainbow Designs.

The first six episodes of Series 2 were broadcast in April 2012. The remaining episodes began airing on 28 October 2012. Series 2 also had 26 episodes.

Episodes

Each of the series's episodes are self-contained and do not follow a larger story narrative or chronology.

Series 1

1 The Porridge Party

2 The Star Stick

3 The Poc Pocs' Holiday

4 The Storm

5 Stuck

6 Firefly Lullaby

7 The Rainbow Whistle

8 The Radio

9 Sky High

10 The Poc Poc Hunt

11 The Train

12 The Mystery

13 Neep's Birthday

14 Abney Finds A Hole

15 Faraway Island

16 Bop's Best Bubble

17 The Slide

18 The Enormous Neep

19 The Buzzing Thing

20 The Moon

21 The Snow Neep

22 The Perfect Tree

23 The Artwork

24 Abney's Magic Show

25 The Woolly Tangle

26 The Leaf Sweep

Series 2