Born on 1 September 1981, Shingai Shoniwa is a Zimbabwean born musician, vocalist and lead-singer of UK indie rock band Noisettes. The music ensemble is perhaps best known for their hit single ‘Don't Upset The Rhythm’ (Go Baby Go). She grew up in South London where she lived with her mother following the death of her father when she was 11.

She attended Brit School, where she formed Noisettes with guitarist Dan Smith and drummer Jamie Morrison. She initially wanted to be pursue an acting career and she even joined a theatre company called Second Wave in Southeast London and got amazing acting training. She is also famous for her fashion icon status.

She has provided backing vocals for different indie rock, electronic, and punk rock artists including, Guillemots on their song ‘Made Up Love Song’ and ‘Over the Stairs’. She featured on Annie Lennox's 2007 album ‘Songs Of Mass Destruction’ on the single ‘Sing’. The track, about the fight against HIV and AIDS, included 22 other renowned female artists such as Madonna, Melissa Etheridge, Gladys Knight, and Celine Dion.

On 13 October 2007, she along with Patti Smith and Juliette Lewis helped celebrate Jack Daniel's birthday in Lynchburg, Tennessee. The three were joined by The New Silver Cornet Band for the show, which took place at the company's distillery. The event was part of the 157th birthday celebrations for Jack Daniel, who was born in September 1850. The Birthday JD Set opened to specially invited guests and competition winners only.

On 19 November 2009, she performed with rapper Dizzee Rascal at the Royal Albert Hall for an event to raise money for charity. Additional collaboration of Shingai with Rascal related to a version of the latter's song ‘Holiday’. She is credited for vocals of Dennis Ferrer's ‘Hey Hey’ dance/house track, released late November 2009.

On 31 December 2009, she was featured in the 'Annual Hootenanny 2010' show (aired by BBC), where she performed together with Jools Holland a version of ‘Don't Upset the Rhythm’ and contributed to the vocals of tail-song ‘Down By The Riverside’.

In 2013, Shoniwa appeared on the album ‘Chrome Black Gold’ by Chrome Hoof, singing lead on four tracks. She also made appearances live with the band.