SHINGAI Shoniwa, the fiery frontwoman of Brit It band Noisettes, wanted to join the circus, but instead she joined a band. Turns out, they were pretty much the same thing.

“The circus shares a rebellious spirit with rock ‘n’ roll, as well as the spirit of having to move on. It takes its attitude around the world to shock and inspire or put off different people,” she tells The Post.

The punk-soul-rock trio takes a slight detour from opening on the Bloc Party tour to perform at the Knitting Factory tomorrow. They’ll also perform at Siren Fest in Coney Island on July 21.

“I loved what the circus is about,” says Shoniwa, 24, whose parents are from Zimbabwe and whose grandmother is from Mozambique (her family settled in London in the ’80s).

“It’s a little buffet of acts that tell stories. It’s led by playfulness and the spectacle of what a human can do – make him look like an animal or throw him on the trapeze. It’s fascinating.”

Because she had a house full of people growing up and never had her own space, Shoniwa escaped into extracurricular activities – such as choir, theater and gymnastics, which are fit for a budding circus performer or rock star.

What she didn’t get in school, she got from her “big African family” full of uncles who were musicians, politicians and lawyers.

“We had lots of debates [during meals],” says Shoniwa, whose parents separated when she was an infant. “We spent a lot of time in Zimbabwe when I was a child. We didn’t have much money and were forced to use our imagination.”

Her feather-and-war-paint stage attire, as well, didn’t just come from the London punk scene, but from her African roots, where different tribes, including hers, express themselves in the ways they dress.

“You have all these different ceremonies, music and outfits – and big earrings,” she says. One thing that’s all hers, though, is her powerful vocals. Shoniwa shrieks one song and purrs the next – a little reminiscent of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs’ Karen O.

Guitarist Dan Smith and Shoniwa, who also plays bass, met in high school, where Smith persuaded her to join his dad’s blues band. Then they played noisy jazz in their own band, Sonarfly.

In 2004, Jamie Morrison, who spent his teens holed up in his attic playing drums 10 hours a day, joined them days before recording an EP, “The Three Moods of the Noisettes.”

The trio quickly shifted from playing at “squat parties and warehouses” to opening for druggy Pete Doherty’s Baby Shambles.

Making waves across the pond, Noisettes were flown to L.A., where they signed to Motown.

Their debut album “What’s the Time Mr. Wolf?,” named after a British version of tag, was released here in April.

The first single, “Scratch Your Name,” featured this week at nypost.com, was inspired by a close cousin’s death. “He had all these things he wanted to do, and he only just began,” she says.

And so have Noisettes.

marymhuhn@nypost.com