Its first-rate facilities, the population and its proximity to several big netball regions could see Auckland's Waitakere Trusts Stadium awarded the world championships over Christchurch.

Netball New Zealand offered to host the championships after the international body removed the tournament from Fiji following the military coup last year.

After discussions with the international body, Netball New Zealand determined that only Auckland and Christchurch had venues big enough to host the competition in November and would seek proposals from Waitakere's Trusts Stadium and Christchurch's Westpac Trust Stadium.

Those proposals were due yesterday.

Netball NZ and the president of world international netball Molly Rhone will announce the successful venue on Friday.

Trusts Stadium events and operations manager Brian Blake said the stadium had put forward what it thought was a pretty solid bid and was confident it could beat Christchurch Stadium.

"As far as the region goes, you can't get much better than this. It is a massive event and in New Zealand, aside from rugby, there is nothing bigger that we could do.

"It is great that Netball New Zealand have been able to get it, be it on the back of some unfortunate circumstances in Fiji. We are really excited with the bid. We have put forward the most solid and confident bid we can bring together and we think it is good enough to beat Christchurch."

In the past two years the stadium has been Netball New Zealand's venue of choice in Auckland, not only for tests and but also for this year's national regional championships.

The stadium has six netball courts and can seat 6000 spectators around a main court. Although Christchurch hosted the event successfully in 1999 and can seat about 900 more spectators than the Waitakere venue, Auckland's bigger population and, in particular its Pacific Island community, who will be represented by Samoa, Fiji, and the Cook Islands in the tournament, should help boost spectators, something Christchurch struggled with in the early part of the 1999 tournament.