Taiwan Taiwan

"Taiwan" in Traditional (top) and Simplified (bottom) Chinese characters

Traditional Chinese 臺灣 Simplified Chinese 台湾 Postal Taiwan

Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Táiwān Bopomofo ㄊㄞˊ ㄨㄢ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Tair'uan Wade–Giles Tʻai²-wan¹ Tongyong Pinyin Táiwan MPS2 Táiwān other Mandarin Dungan Тэван Wu Romanization The平-uae平

Xiang IPA dwɛ13 ua44 Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Thòi-vàn or

Thòi-vân Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Tòihwāan Jyutping Toi4waan1 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Tâi-oân Tâi-lô Tâi-uân Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC Dài-uăng

Abbreviation Traditional Chinese 臺 Simplified Chinese 台

Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Tái Bopomofo ㄊㄞˊ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Tair Wade–Giles Tʻai² Tongyong Pinyin Tái MPS2 Tái Wu Romanization The平

Xiang IPA dwɛ13 Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Thòi Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Tòih Jyutping Toi4 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Tâi Tâi-lô Tâi Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC Dài

Taiwan Province Traditional Chinese 臺灣省 or 台灣省 Simplified Chinese 台湾省

Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Táiwān Shěng Bopomofo ㄊㄞˊ ㄨㄢ ㄕㄥˇ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Tair'uan Sheeng Wade–Giles Tʻai²-wan¹ Shêng³ Tongyong Pinyin Táiwan Shěng MPS2 Táiwān Shěng Hakka Pha̍k-fa-sṳ Thòi-vàn-sén or

Thòi-vân-sén Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Tòihwāan Sáang Jyutping Toi4waan1 Saang2 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Tâi-oân-séng Tâi-lô Tâi-uân-síng Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC Dài-uăng sēng

Taiwan Province is a nominal province of the Republic of China without administrative function. Its administrative powers have been transferred to the central and county governments.

Taiwan Province covers approximately 69% of the actual-controlled territory of the Republic of China, with around 31% of the total population. The province initially included the island of Taiwan (Formosa), Penghu (the Pescadores), Orchid Island, Green Island, Xiaoliuqiu Island, and their surrounding islands. Between 1967 and 2014, six special municipalities (Kaohsiung, New Taipei, Taichung, Tainan, Taipei and Taoyuan) were split off from the province, all in the most populous regions.

The Taiwan Provincial Government was established in September 1945, after the Japanese rule. It was streamlined in December 1998, with administrative functions transferred to the National Development Council and other ministries of the Executive Yuan. In July 2018, the government was dissolved, with budget and personnel removed.

Geography

The province is made up of most of the island of Taiwan, and also the Penghu islands. Even though the special municipalities of Kaoshiung, Tainan, New Taipei, and Taipei are all on Taiwan island, they are not part of Taiwan Province.

Government

The province has a Provincial Council with 9 members, led by a Governor of Taiwan Province.

Divisions

Provincial cities

Chiayi City

Hsinchu City

Keelung City

Counties

Changhua County

Chiayi County

Hsinchu County

Hualien County

Miaoli County

Nantou County

Penghu County

Pingtung County

Taitung County

Taoyuan County

Yilan County

Yunlin County

Images for kids

The building of the Taiwan Provincial Government at Zhongxing New Village

Prior to January 1, 2007 all vehicles registered in Taiwan Province carried the label "Taiwan Province" (台灣省) on their license plates.

See also