After 16 years, Delhi Lieutenant Governor Vinai Kumar Saxena has approved an increase in the Adhoc Monthly Relief (AMR) to Kashmiri migrants in the national capital from Rs 10,000 to Rs 27,000 per month. This enhancement in eligibility will increase the number of beneficiaries being covered by about 70%. The Adhoc Monthly Relief (AMR) was last increased in 2007 when the amount was doubled from Rs 5,000 per family fixed in 1995.

According to Raj Niwas official, this enhancement comes after a long gap of 16 years, when the eligibility for AMR was doubled from Rs 5,000 per month to Rs 10,000 per month, in 2007.In 1995, the GNCTD had fixed the eligibility for AMR amount at Rs 5000 per month. At present, approximately 2,000 families in the national capital are being paid AMR at a rate of Rs 3,250 per person per month, subject to a maximum of four people per family. This amount is shared by the Delhi government, which pays Rs 1,000, and the Centre, which pays Rs 2,250. The monthly expenditure incurred on AMR is approximately Rs 2.5 crore.

AMR is provided to Kashmiri migrants under the “Security Related Expenditure (Relief & Rehabilitation)", introduced by the central government in 1989-90 to support those who had to migrate from the Kashmir Valley due to militancy. In Delhi, AMR is provided to migrant families registered by the Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi from 1990-93.

“The number of beneficiaries is, however, expected to increase by nearly 70% after factoring in increase in the number of “units” because of raising of the eligibility criteria and rise in the number of family members due to splitting and addition that will now be allowed,” Raj Niwas official said. “The LG also approved bifurcation / addition of names in the Kashmiri Migrant Cards issued by GNCTD to facilitate, grown up and married children of migrants, to get their own cards made and accordingly become entitled for AMR as separate units / families. The registered Kashmiri Migrant families will now be allowed to declare their family and allow splitting of the family due to increase in size. Birth to a couple in the migrant family would lead to addition in the family and death of a member would lead to deletion of that member.

Apart from this, a non-migrant girl marrying into a migrant family will be added as a member of the Kashmiri migrant family,” they said.

Delhi BJP President Virendra Sachdeva has welcomed the 170% increase announced in Adhoc Monthly Relief by the Lt. Governor of Delhi Shri Vinai Kumar Saxena for Kashmiri migrants. “This raise coming after 16 years is a proof of the Lt. Governor's sensitivity towards the basic needs of Kashmiri migrants many of whom are still financially struggling to meet both ends meet,” he said. The Leader of Opposition in Delhi Assembly Ramvir Singh Bidhuri also welcomed the LG’ s decision to this effect.