SUNNYVALE, California and ALEXANDRIA, Virginia, May 14, 2015 /PRNewswire/ --

Precision IP, a boutique Silicon Valley law firm, announced today that it uses CPA Global, the world's leading provider of intellectual property (IP) management services and software, for paralegal, docketing and patent/trademark renewal services.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130910/638525 )

Precision IP's founder, Varun A. Shah, had previously used CPA Global's services and technology when he was Global Head of Intellectual Property Development at Aruba Networks.

Shah comments: "Since my days at Aruba Networks, I have had complete trust in CPA Global. When I started Precision IP, I incorporated their services into my business model from the beginning. Their software and personnel track all my cases and remind me of any patent or trademark related deadlines. Also, CPA Global provides skilled paralegals and docketing professionals who are trained on FoundationIP , the company's software for managing IP portfolios. The CPA Global team is effectively an extension of my firm. They adjust their procedures to do projects under my supervision, meeting my standard and specifications. The results are consistently excellent and this frees up my lawyers to spend time on practicing law rather than being bogged down by administrative tasks."

Shah explains that because of CPA Global's services, he has no need to hire or train internal paralegal staff or rent additional office space to house them. This significantly reduces Precision IP's overhead costs and Shah passes the savings on to his clients. Precision IP does not bill clients for administrative or paralegal services; instead, the firm absorbs these costs and invoices clients only for substantive legal work. Thus, Precision IP clients save time because they don't need to review paralegal task invoices, and they save money by not paying for paralegal services. Providing these time and money savings to clients gives Precision IP an edge over competitors, and Shah notes that the firm is still profitable.

Marc Daleiden, Chief Operations Officer, Services for CPA Global, remarks: "CPA Global is proud to work with innovative boutique firms like Precision IP to help them deliver quality services with greater efficiency. Our teams seamlessly integrate with the client's internal resources and workflow procedures to deliver superior service, supported by state-of-the-art IP technology solutions. We believe that each client deserves a tailored suite of services that suits its individual needs rather than a 'one size fits all' approach."

About Precision IP

Based in Sunnyvale, California, Precision IP is a boutique Silicon Valley IP law firm founded by Varun A. Shah, a highly experienced intellectual property attorney. Shah has served clients ranging from start-ups to Fortune 100 tech companies including Apple, Dolby, Oracle, Cisco, Netflix, TiVo, Fanvana, Yahoo!, Intuit, Condusiv Technologies, Improvised Electronics, Schlumberger, and Sun Microsystems (prior to Oracle acquisition). For more information, visit http://www.precisionip.com.

About CPA Global

CPA Global is the world's leading intellectual property (IP) management software and services specialist, and an international provider of outsourced legal services. With offices across Europe, the United States and Asia Pacific, CPA Global supports many of the world's best known corporations and law firms with a range of IP and broader legal services, helping them to manage risk, cost and capacity, and realize greater value for their businesses and IP assets.

CPA Global helps corporates and law firms in managing valuable IP Rights, such as patents, designs and trademarks, ensuring that IP portfolios are protected, maintained and regularly reviewed in order to maximize value. Working closely with its clients, CPA Global ensures they have the best information on which to base IP decisions, and the best support in terms of helping implement those decisions.

Founded in Jersey, Channel Islands in 1969, CPA Global today employs some 2,000 people, serving clients' needs in 200 jurisdictions through its own offices and an extensive agent network. For further information, please visit: http://www.cpaglobal.com.

Media Contacts:

United States:

Julie Mandell +1-571-227-7025, [email protected]

Christy Burke +1-917-261-2845, [email protected]

United Kingdom:

Steve Clark +44(0)20-7549-5504, [email protected]

Jenny Julien +44(0)20-7549-4585, [email protected]

SOURCE CPA Global