Football action kicks off this weekend in Morocco. Reigning champions Raja Casablanca will seek to keep their place against local rivals Wydad Casablanca, OC Khouribga and FAR (Rabat) in this year's season.

Raja Casablanca star Soufiane Alloudi

Each of the challengers have won the championship once over the past four years and have spent a lot of money on new players and on training before the season started.

Raja Casablanca has a new coach, Brazilian Carlos Mozer, who played in the 1990 FIFA World Cup. New players include Moroccan international Soufiane Alloudi, on loan from Al Ain of the United Arab Emirates and defensive midfielder Abderrahmane Mssassi. Meanwhile, two players have moved on - former international forward Mohamed Armoumen has moved to Wydad and goalie Mohamed Amine Bourkadi is on loan to Wydad Fes.

Word is that Raja will be up against serious competition for the title, especially if their CAF Champions League commitments stretch their resources.

The biggest challenge to Raja this season may come from local rivals Wydad, whose big-name signings in the off season included those of Mohamed Armoumen from Raja and Abdelhaq Ait Laarif from the UAE club Ajman.

Wydad coach Badou Zaki has also brought in the Congolese player Lys Mouithys from French outfit FC Libourne, Malian Boubacar Coulibaly from Germany's SV Wehen and Ahmed Ajeddou from Alahly Tripoli. Determined to regain the crown they last won three years ago, Wydad have prepared thoroughly for the coming season by way of an international friendly tournament with Bayer Leverkusen, Galatasary and Egypt's Al Ahly.

FAR Rabat, for their part, have appointed established Belgian coach Walter Meeuws in their quest to add to their record 12 league titles. They have strengthened their squad with the purchase of Mohamed Jawad from CODM Meknes, Abderrahmane Ellaabi from AS Sale and Hassan Bouizgar from OC Khouribga, while Mustapha Allaoui, their top scorer last season, has left for Guingamp in France.

Meanwhile OC Khouribga, who won their one and only league title two years ago, have appointed Youssef Almarini as coach and signed a number of Moroccan players in their bid for further success.

Inspired by Professor Leila Maziane's new book, The Corsairs of Salé, Helen Ranger looks at the history of piracy in the small port of Salé that lies across the Bouregreg River from Rabat.

Unlike most Moroccan ports, Salé is turned towards the Atlantic, while others have a more Mediterranean focus. In the 17th century, this geographical factor greatly helped the city of Salé and other, smaller Moroccan ports to participate in the construction of an 'Atlantic World' through fishing, trade and piracy.

Both Morocco and Europe faced political and social crises at the time. In Morocco, the death of the Sultan Ahmad al Mansur in 1603 caused civil strife and the disintegration of the country. Several small republics came into being, including one in Sal é. In Europe, the Moors were finally expelled from Spain (1609-1614) and 13 000 of them settled in Salé, joining the existing 3000 Estremadurans. In addition, Salé also became home to some English pirates from neighbouring La Mamora, whose stronghold had just been taken by the Spaniards.

Morocco received also hundreds of renegades who were running away from the numerous conflicts Europe experienced in the 17th century. Salé was the natural gathering point for these men in search of fortune. They just had to convert to Islam. For example, Dutch sailor Morat Rais was captured by the Algerians in 1618. He converted to Islam and then became a 'Turk by trade' (ie a pirate), operating out of Salé. He undertook daring raids all over the Northern Atlantic - he is most famous for raiding Reykjavik in 1627. When he returned, he became the first governor of Salé and the admiral of the fleet.

corsairs prepare to raid a galleon

Salé played an important part in the economic development of Morocco. It provided the primary materials necessary for shipbuilding as well as food. The forest in particular proved crucial for the city’s development. Indeed, although the Salétins (residents of Salé) were famous for reusing captured European ships, they usually built their own vessels.

Besides, the region provided the crews for some sixty corsair ships. In the lists of captured corsairs we spot names typical of the mountains indicating that people came from as far as the Rif to become corsairs. In effect, the hinterland of Salé kept growing until it reached Algeria and even Tunisia. Salé was supported by other ports such as La Mamora (taked from the Spaniards in 1681) and Larache (captured in 1689) that provided men and shipyards. The network expanded along the European coasts, even as far as the Netherlands where pirates would buy materials and hire sailors. The Salétins and the Algerian community of Tetouan and other North African piracy hubs all supported each other; this lasted until the end of the age of piracy around 1800.

Salé was completely reliant on piracy. Little was produced in the city; normal trade existed but the bulk of commerce was in stolen goods that were distributed by a network of Jewish traders. It was a cosmpolitan place of about 20 000 people; the Moors still spoke Castellan, there were diplomats, merchants, black slaves belonging to the sultan and as many as 6000 captives. People came from all over Morocco to try and get a job as a corsair, as there were political and social problems as well as famines and epidemics. There was no ideological issue - they were fighting the Christians.

There was good money to be made. Spoils were democratically distributed, everyone invested in piracy, owning perhaps a small share in a ship.

But it couldn't last. Things ground to a halt in 1666 when the sultan Moulay al-Rashid conquered Salé and tried to control the piracy directly, instead of it being private enterprise. His plan simply didn't work - people lost interest, officials embezzled money and the ships gradually lost the quality that had made them the most feared vessels on the Atlantic.

a Barbary galley

Leila Maziane has a PhD from Caen University in France, and now teaches at the Hassan II University in Mohammedia.