Anslee Davidson is a singer-songwriter from Greensboro, Georgia who was singing before she could talk. As a baby she would “sing” without using any words. Once her vocabulary grew, so did her passion and love for music. In middle school, she began performing in school talent shows and musicals as well as leading worship at church and school. While on a family trip to Hawaii, when Anslee was 11 years old, she chose a ukulele as her souvenir. A mere three weeks after receiving the ukulele, she learned to play the instrument and performed with it in her school talent show. Soon after, she wanted to graduate to an acoustic guitar like “daddy’s.” Once that six string was in her hands, she immediately started writing her own songs. She and her dad, Dave began to collaborate and continue to write together to this day.

During the summer of 2020, Anslee decided to take her talents on the road and began playing shows all over her home state of Georgia. In no time at all, she began to garner a grassroots following with her distinctive voice, which has been described as soulful and timeless. Her engaging presence draws the audience in to her heartfelt storytelling. Listeners say her songs are a tasteful and smooth blend of Country, Folk, and Americana.

By the fall of 2020, Anslee found herself welcomed into the music industry with open arms by fellow artists. She has performed twice at Eddie Owen’s, Red Clay Music Foundry in Duluth, Georgia, opening for her friend and country music entertainer, Eric Dodd. Anslee was also given the amazing opportunity to audition for American Idol. The judges, Lionel, Luke and Katy gave Anslee 3 yes votes and the golden ticket to Hollywood Week. However, just 3 days before flying to Hollywood, Anslee tested positive for COVID-19 and her journey on the hit show was cut short. Not letting this unfortunate news deter her, she began exploring the world of songwriting deeper in Nashville through multiple co-writes in Music City. In the spring of 2021, Anslee decided to embark on the adventure of recording her songs for the world to hear. With the help of Nashville music producer Matt McVaney, Anslee recorded her debut single, “I’ll Wait for You” along with seven other originals which will make up her debut E.P. “hey love” slated for an early 2022 release. Since then, Anslee has had the opportunity to play at iconic venues such as the Bluebird Cafe in Nashville, and the well-known Eddie’s Attic in Decatur Georgia. Most recently, she had the opportunity to share the stage with Shawn Mullins and Rhett Akins at Reynolds Lake Oconee. We are witnessing an artist in bloom as Anslee’s catalog of original songs continues to grow. She loves nothing more than sharing her heart through music with audiences all over and looks forward to doing just that!

Show More