BEAU FULLER was born and raised in Mt. Vernon Missouri, a small rural town located in the Ozark hills of Southwest Missouri. Growing up, his passion in life was always centered around football, basketball and track. In addition to his love for sports, he began to realize a natural ability to play the guitar and piano by ear. After several years of college and working in his parents local appliance stores, Beau decided to make the move to Nashville in January of 1998 to pursue his passion for music. After spending more than a year and half in Nashville struggling to network and make ends meet, he found himself moving back to his hometown. Eventually though, he received a life-changing call from NSAI (Nashville Songwriter Association International) president Bart Herbison recommending that he make a weekend trip back to Nashville to meet with some publishers on Music Row. The very first meeting was with Roger Murrah, legendary songwriter and now Songwriter Hall of Fame member. Beau met Roger that Friday afternoon, and less than 48 hours later he was signed to his first major publishing deal. As a staff writer at Murrah Music, he had the opportunity to co-write with seasoned songwriters and learn the craft of writing a hit song.

In 2010 Beau was discovered by Bill Riddle, veteran publisher and manager (Joe Diffe & Clay Davidson) where he was signed to his 2nd major publishing deal where his songs graced the albums of over 50 up and coming artists. While at Riddle Music Group, Beau also launched his own Entertainment Company, NEXT BIG THING ENTERTAINMENT where he continues to work with talented artists and songwriters and helps others achieve their dreams in music. He also has songs he's co-written on the album of southern rock legend Jimmie Van Zant (Lynard Skynard & .38 Special) and well know American Idol Kristy Lee Cook.

To this day Beau has been referred by some of the top hit writers in Nashville as "One of the Best Melody writers in the business". His melodic sense allows him to bring a lyric, hook or idea to life. He also excels as a lyricist and is able to write on multiple instruments. In addition to writing, he has also worked with, writes with and produces some of the hottest up-and-coming artists including American Idol fan favorite Haeley Vaughn, Team Blake The Voice contestant from 2012 Casey Muessigmann, West Virginia country darling Morgan White, 5 time BCMA nominated and award winning Entertainer of the Year Pete Kennedy as well as many of the top Canadian and European country stars. He was nominated for Song Of The Year at the British Country Music Awards in London in 2013, has had several songs on BCMA award winning Album of the Years and has performed live at the British CMA's the past 4 years.

For 2 decades Beau has primarily stayed behind the scenes producing up and comers and getting songs cut on other artists albums, but 2017 is proving to be the breakout year for him as a solo artist. On September 15th 2017 Beau inked his 1st major record label contract with GoTimeRecords in Nashville. GTR is a Nashville based label headed by famed Grammy winning producer Kent Wells/Dolly Parton. Kent has produced artists from Jimmie Van Zant to George Jones to Dolly Parton and has been Dollys long time guitar player. Beau is currently in the studio to finish up his first project and has partnered with GTR to hit the radio waves coming to a town near you. It is only a matter of time until you sing his lyrics word for word, hum his songs to the radio and hear some of his greatest work to date!