SCARSDALE, N.Y. -- Joan Bennett, a blonde ingenue of the 1930s who became a sultry, husky-voiced brunette of the 1940s, died Friday in her suburban New York home. She was 80.

She played opposite such stars as Ronald Colman and John Barrymore.

Her fourth husband, David Wilde, a former publisher she married in 1978, said she died of cardiac arrest. Funeral services would be private. He said she was to be interred at a family plot with her actor- parents, Richard Bennett, a matinee idol, and Adrienne Morrison, in Old Lyme, Conn.

She was born Feb. 27, 1910, in Palisades, N.J. and two of her sisters, Constance and Barbara, also were actresses.

Bennett's first role was in the 1928 Broadway melodrama 'Jarnegan' with her father, who played a lecherous movie director.

She received good notices and despite her father's pleadings, according to Wilde, left for a Hollywood contract.

She was replaced by Bette Davis, Wilde said.

Bennett's first film success, opposite Ronald Colman in the 1929 'Bulldog Drummond,' was followed by dozens of films in a decade, including 'Moby Dick,' with Barrymore.

However, she lost out to Vivien Leigh for the role of Scarlet O'Hara.

She divorced her first husband, John Marion Fox at age 18, after a year's marriage.

Producer Walter Wanger, whom she married in 1940, had her change from an innocent blonde to an earthy brunette for the 1939 melodrama 'Trade Winds,' giving her a new career in film noir.

After the 1940 melodramas 'The House Across the Bay' and 'The Man I Married,' her hits in the noir genre directed by Fritz Lang were as a prostitute in the 1941 'Man Hunt,' a mysterious model in 1944's 'The Woman in the Window' and a blackmailer in 'Scarlet Street,' 1946.

In the 1950s Bennett became the warm mother in 'Father of the Bride' and 'Father's little Dividend.'

She is survived, in addition to Wilde, by four daughters, Diana Anderson of Los Angeles and Melinda Bena of Chappaqua, N.Y., from her second marriage to Gene Markey who she divorced in 1937, and Stephanie Guest and Shelley Wanger, both of Manhattan, from her marriage to Wanger, and 13 grandchildren.