Joan Bennett Carey, 87, of Atlantic Beach, FL, passed peacefully to heaven on April 21, 2018. Joan is survived by her beloved husband of nearly 64 years, Major General (USAF ret.) Gerald J. Carey, Jr.; her children G. John Carey, III, (Ann) of Jacksonville, FL, Cathleen Carey Corgan of Tampa, FL, J. Kevin Carey of Tampa, FL, and Daniel Carey (Kim) of Richmond, VA; her sisters Mary Lou Bennett Reese of Fort Lauderdale, FL, and Evelyn Bennett Vitale of San Antonio, FL. She is also survived by her 10 grandchildren, who were the light of her life. She was preceded in death by her parents John J. Bennett and Evelyn C. Bennett of Brooklyn, NY, and her brother John J. Bennett, Jr., also of Brooklyn.

Joan was born January 31, 1931 in Brooklyn. Her father was Attorney-General of New York for many years and later was Chief Justice of the New York Court of Appeals. Joan attended Catholic schools in the Brooklyn diocese, and graduated from The College of Notre Dame of Maryland, in Baltimore, MD in 1952. She was a dedicated teacher and Air Force spouse. She married Jerry in 1954, and they began their life together in Laredo, TX. Together they raised their four children, moving from place to place every 2 to 4 years, including to Japan. Joan was devoted to family so these separations from family back in New York were difficult. She showed grace and resilience in all that was asked of her and all that came her way. In an interview in early 1980s, she said, “Air Force families are close because of the moves and the hardships. You come out with a solid, loving, caring family as a result of it all. There is such little time together that what little time we do have we live to the fullest and make it count.”

Joan touched the lives of many through her teaching, through her support of family services in the Air Force, and through her friends and prayer groups. She had the ability to connect in a deep and authentic way with almost anyone in an instant. To all who knew her, her passing leaves a great void. Although a devout Catholic, one of her favorite quotes was from Martin Luther: “Pray like it all depends on God, then when you are done, go work like it all depends on you.” Her life of faith in action—demonstrated in her commitment to all people in need, to her students and friends, and to her family--demonstrated she understood this all too well.

The family’s heartfelt thanks go out to the staff at Fleet Landing’s Nancy House for their loving and professional care during the last 18 months of her life.

A visitation will be held on Thursday, April 26 from 5:30 to 7:30 PM, at Quinn-Shalz Family Funeral Home, 3600 3rd Street S, Jacksonville Beach, FL. A funeral mass will be held on Friday, April 27 at 11:00 AM at St. John the Baptist Catholic Church, 2400 Mayport Road, Atlantic Beach, FL. A reception will follow in the church hall.

Donations may be made in Joan’s honor to Covenant House, a Catholic charity focused on youth homelessness that Joan championed (https://www.covenanthouse.org) and to the Alzheimer’s Association (https://www.alz.org).