‘It functions as a reminder that trans people are not really who they say they are – that we’re fake and artificial’

Article bookmarked

Find your bookmarks in your Independent Premium section, under my profile

Don't show me this message again

✕

For free real time breaking news alerts sent straight to your inbox sign up to our breaking news emails

Sign up to our free breaking news emails

Please enter a valid email address

Please enter a valid email address

I would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy policy

Thanks for signing up to the

Breaking News email

{{ #verifyErrors }} {{ message }} {{ /verifyErrors }} {{ ^verifyErrors }} Something went wrong. Please try again later {{ /verifyErrors }}

Orange is the New Black actress Laverne Cox has spoken of her frustration of the narrative around transgender people, claiming that the media’s focus on surgery means trans people are objectified and not humanised.

Speaking to the Radio Times, Cox said she felt that since Christine Jorgensen became the first transgender woman to become widely recognised in the 1950s, “the narrative has been one of surgery, transitioning and bodies”.

“Part of the reason it continues to be the story is that this before-and-after narrative reinforces the idea that the barriers between male and female are so vast and so broad that trans folks must do all this surgery to cross over”.

Inspirational quotes about LGBT rights

Show all 29

She added that the focus on surgery reinforces an idea that trans people are “not who they say they are – that we’re fake and artificial”.

“It keeps us from humanising trans folks, objectifies us, reducing us to our bodies,” she told the magazine.

Cox was the first transgender actress to be nominated for an Emmy award and appeared on the front cover of Time magazine a year before Caitlyn Jenner’s appearance on Vanity Fair.

When Jenner was publicly praised for the bold reveal of her transition, Cox was one of the many who congratulated the athlete for her bravery.

But Cox, an activist for transgender rights, said in a blog post at the time that it is important to remember that not all trans people can afford gender reassignment surgery nor want to undertake it, that some are refused the option and that many trans people remain at risk in society.

She wrote: “Most trans folks don’t have the privileges Caitlyn and I now have. It is those trans folks we must continue to lift up, get them access to healthcare, jobs, housing, safe streets, safe schools and homes for our young people. We must life up the stories of those most at risk, statistically trans people of colour who are poor and working class.”

Subscribe to Independent Premium to bookmark this article

Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Premium subscription today.

Already subscribed? Log in