Hi! We’ve been hosts for four months and generally things have been fine. We’re in the East of England and all our guests have been nice. But this morning we got an enquiry for two nights end of March from “Ken” in China, no reviews, joined 1st February (i.e. this morning!), with a photo of a pretty blonde woman. Entire message, “Hello, is there a swimming pool?”. (If there was it would certainly be in the listing!!!).

We said simply “No, can’t help you”, declined and did a reverse search on the photo. It’s of a popular Australian actress. We reported the profile as fake.

It’s all a bit weird and has got us thinking. All our instant books have been fine, all our enquiries have been odd.

Is there anything else we can do about Kens and their kin?

Thanks!

Diana

Good for you, Artfulbadger, to do the reverse search.

A fake is a fake is a fake. And you don’t know who is coming in your home. The fact that you know nothing about them, and that they have no equity on Airbnb, should be enough to put you off. Once they get the key, it’s anybody’s guess.

I’ve had a last minute guest get an instant booking with a two word intro and an obstructed photo, plus no prior reviews (she’d been in one listing the night before, but the system hadn’t posted the host review yet).

Air cancelled.

She disregarded this and showed up anyway. The insults were loud and personal.

The case manager told me “Some hosts should not be on Airbnb”. I’m a SH, and it wasn’t a good day.

What a terrible situation for you, Mandi! We’re gentle souls and I’m not sure how we’d feel about continuing to host if we had to deal with loud insults. I don’t understand why Air thought the host was at fault when they were the ones who cancelled the booking.

We live at the edge of England in a place that people come to for fairly specific reasons, so we don’t get too many randoms, luckily. We don’t do last minute or long stays, and only take three to four guests a month.

Everyone in our future calendar has a good reason for visiting, but a couple don’t have photos. I think I’ll figure out a way to gently ask for one in future. We were all first time guests once, but until you have some reviews there are other ways to have bonafides.

Diana

This guest provided a 2 word into: “visit daughter”. She booked on less than 12 hours’ notice, probably while staying in her first ever Airbnb suite. The review from this stay did not show until after she was en route, which for some reason took another 12 hours, but she was still able to IB.

The Case Manager was an aggressive American who insisted that her 2 words were a sufficient introduction. He DID make several attempts to contact her, but for reasons of her own, she chose to ignore these and proceed to my home.

I found her and her daughter in my kitchen (I have self check in) about 9:30 pm when I came in from the gym. The guest immediately attacked me verbally, calling me ugly, old, stupid, and incompetent. She refused any offer of assistance, and continued to rant at me outside of my home.

The Case Manager formally apologized to me. He also surmised that “some hosts should not be on Airbnb”. Hmmm - I was, and still am, SH. But that, and $2, will get you a coffee, not credibility. He cancelled the reservation using 1 out of the 3 IB cancellation options we have per year.

As most of us have seen, much depends on the CSR or Case Manager we deal with. For my part, I now have an Everest of CYA descriptions, terms and rules, and proudly acknowledge same on my profile. I was, and am, very picky. And I have no problem turfing bad apples on the spot.

I also learned that “support” from Airbnb is sporadic. I am responsible for who gets in and out of my home, and in effect, am my own Host Guarantee.

From all accounts, this case was exceptional. In fairness, 95% of guests are pleasant, easy to deal with, and in many cases have been a pleasure to accommodate. Of late, there’s been less of them, but the quality of the people has been, at times, extraordinary. That’s why I keep doing what I’m doing.

Cheers!