Introducing a brand new written series: All My Keyboards, thought up by our friend, musician, composer and keyboardist of The Cure, Roger O'Donnell.

In this series we highlight the stories behind... well, you guessed it, a musician's keyboard collection! And who better to start us off than the creator of the series. As a member of The Cure since 1987, Roger has been instrumental in shaping the band's unique sound and style. He has previously been a member of a number of iconic bands, like The Psychedelic Furs, Thompson Twins and Berlin in addition to having an active solo career as a composer.

https://www.synthhistory.com/post/all-my-keyboards-roger-o-donnell

People are still falling for this stupidity. A warning from Simon on Facebook about yet another scam on Instagram. The fake account this time is official_simon_gallup.

Setlist: Alone, Pictures of You, High, A Night Like This, Lovesong, And Nothing Is Forever, Burn, Fascination Street, Kyoto Song, Push, In Between Days, Just Like Heaven, At Night, Play for Today, A Forest, Shake Dog Shake, From the Edge of the Deep Green Sea, Endsong

1st encore: It Can Never Be the Same, Charlotte Sometimes, Plainsong, Disintegration

2nd encore: Lullaby, The Walk, Friday I'm in Love, Close to Me, Why Can't I Be You?, Boys Don't Cry

NOAH x The Cure Reinvents Classic Tour Merch.

Expanding on the pairing’s first capsule from 2017.

Watch for the full NOAH x The Cure capsule, which lands online and at select retailers on Thursday, December 7 at 11 a.m. EST.

https://hypebeast.com/2023/12/noah-the-cure-fall-winter-2023-collab-release-info

Setlist: Alone, Pictures of You, High, A Night Like This, Lovesong, And Nothing Is Forever, Burn, Fascination Street, Push, In Between Days, Just Like Heaven, At Night, Play for Today, A Forest, Shake Dog Shake, From the Edge of the Deep Green Sea, Endsong

1st encore: It Can Never Be the Same, Want, Charlotte Sometimes, Plainsong, Disintegration

2nd encore: Lullaby, Hot Hot Hot, The Walk, Friday I'm in Love, Close to Me, Why Can't I Be You?, Boys Don't Cry

From Simon Price:

Sorry to announce that tonight's Curepedia event, The Art Of The Cure with Andy Vella Design at RoughTrade East in London is unfortunately postponed due to illness.

New date to be announced very soon.

(Please pass this on to anybody who was planning to attend.)

Setlist: Alone, Pictures of You, High, Lovesong, Last Day of Summer, Burn, Fascination Street, A Night Like This, Push, In Between Days, Just Like Heaven, At Night, Play for Today, A Forest, Primary, Shake Dog Shake, From the Edge of the Deep Green Sea, Endsong

1st encore: Cold, Charlotte Sometimes, Plainsong, Disintegration

2nd encore: Lullaby, The Walk, Friday I'm in Love, Close to Me, Why Can't I Be You?, Boys Don't Cry

From Todd Slater:

Just added the blue version of my Cure print to site. This was the version sold on band's website after show. I was kinda going for a violet Starry Night with this palette.

https://toddslater.net/products/the-cure-klimt-lovecats

From Adam Lopardo:

"am at @johnrobb77 talk about The Art of Darkness. Said he was at Rockfield Studios 2 weeks ago and asked staff about @thecure album. Apparently It’s finished but @RobertSmith keeps tinkering cos he’s a control freak. They said it sounds amazing. One day we’ll hear it!"

Have heard that from other people too. And that this isn't a new development. "Done", but Robert won't let it go. Reeves mentioned it too in a recent interview.

"With music, you seem to take it all in and it becomes immersive. Music has a power all its own"

The Cure's Reeves Gabrels picks the 10 records that changed his life

Setlist: Alone, Pictures of You, High, A Night Like This, Lovesong, And Nothing Is Forever, Burn, Fascination Street, Charlotte Sometimes, Push, In Between Days, Just Like Heaven, At Night, Play for Today, A Forest, Shake Dog Shake, From the Edge of the Deep Green Sea, Endsong

1st encore: It Can Never Be the Same, Want, Plainsong, Disintegration

2nd encore: Lullaby, The Walk, Friday I'm in Love, Close to Me, Why Can't I Be You?, Boys Don't Cry

Update: Well, that channel that streamed Friday without region blocking did not stream Saturday, and we'll have to wait and see if they broadcast today.

The official YouTube and Twitch channels listed in the graphic below are livestreaming parts of the festival, but it's region locked and many of you will need a VPN if you want to watch. But there's no guarantee of them showing The Cure's set as of now.

Will post more later as info becomes available.

Looks like they'll have an official livestream on YouTube and Twitch.

Oh no! Please get well soon,Roger! I'm sure Mike will do a good job, but y'all know how I feel about this, there's only one Cure keyboardist to me.

From The Cure:

FOR HEALTH REASONS ROGER WILL NOT BE WITH US ON THE LATAM LEG OF OUR SHOWS OF A LOST WORLD TOUR - WE ARE SURE YOU WILL JOIN WITH US IN WISHING HIM THE SPEEDIEST OF RECOVERIES - MIKE LORD WILL BE STEPPING IN TO PLAY KEYBOARDS

Schedule has been updated. The Cure get 15 extra minutes. They'll now have 2 hours and 30 minutes. 10:45pm - 1:15 am.