Free, copyright-friendly images for education.

Pics4Learning is a safe, free image library for schools. Teachers and students can use the copyright-friendly photos and images for classrooms, multimedia projects, web sites, videos, portfolios, or any other project in an educational setting.

Photographers from around the world donate images to this collection. While the photographers retain the rights to these photos, they have graciously allowed their use through this collection.

The thousands of donated photos are approved for use in the classroom, indexed, and sorted in order to maximize their effective use by students in a 21st century classroom.

With your active participation, this image collection will continue to grow into an even more valuable resource.

Image Use Policy

The Pics4Learning collection is intended to provide copyright friendly images for use by students and teachers in an educational setting. The original photographers of each image retain the copyright to these images and have graciously allowed their use in this collection. The images may not be sold as an image collection or partial image collection. Images in the Pics4Learning collection may be used by teachers and students in print, multimedia, and video productions. These could include, but are not limited to, school projects, contests, web pages, and fund raising activities for the express purpose of improving student educational opportunities.

Images cannot be used for commercial production without permission. This includes projects being sold on sites that market teacher produced products to other teachers.

The History of Pics4Learning

In 1995, the members of Educational Design Studio were looking for a few free use images for a project and were amazed to find so little available for teachers and students in the way of free photographic images. Knowing that they all had thousands of photos sitting in photo albums at home, they wondered if people would be willing to contribute their images for educational non-profit purposes and the PhotoShare Image Library was born.

Originally distributed on CD-ROM, PhotoShare was given an online home in 1996 through work done by Orange County Public Schools in Orlando, Florida. PhotoShare was nominated by Netscape for ComputerWorld Smithsonian Award and given the award in 1997.

In 1999, Orange County Public Schools partnered with Tech4Learning, Inc. to house, develop, and expand the PhotoShare concept. PhotoShare is renamed to Pics4Learning to highlight its new identity.

Since 1999, the image collection has grown from 7000 to over 30,000 images used by a million students and teachers every year for their classroom projects.