Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan have been married for 51 years now. The couple tied the knot on June 3, 1973, at an intimate wedding ceremony in Mumbai. It wasn't the age of the internet and social media, when people would share pictures or post inside stories for everyone to know. However, Big B's father and poet, Harivansh Rai Bachchan, had shared some intriguing insights from the wedding in his book, In an Afternoon of Time: An Autibiography by Harivansh Rai Bachchan.

To get more TV News and Entertainment News updates, follow BollywoodLife on WhatsApp.

Harivansh Rai Bachchan wrote that only a few guests were present for Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan's wedding ceremony. The couple got married on the top floor of Malabar Hills' Skylark building. The baraatis included five people, and two of them were Amitabh's father and political leader Sanjay Gandhi. In the book, Harivansh Rai mentioned that Jaya's family didn't seem interested in her wedding with his son.

As reported by Rediff, in his autobiography, Harivansh Rai Bachchan wrote that Jaya's parents wanted the wedding ceremony to take place as per Bengali traditions. The Bachchan family had no objection to it. The first stage involved var-puja, during which Jaya's father visited Amitabh's house with gifts and conducted a small ceremony. Big B's father did the same for Jaya and went to her house. However, Rai noticed that no one in her family except for Jaya showed any kind of excitement.

In the same book, Harivansh Rai Bachchan mentioned that even the haldi ceremony was a quiet affair. It was such a hushed ceremony that even the neighbours had no idea about Amitabh's wedding. The Bachchans lied to them, saying that the house was decorated for a Big B film shoot. Even the baraat was welcomed without fanfare. However, dressed as a bride, Jaya Bachchan (then Jaya Bhaduri) looked quite shy.

After the baraatis were fed and the wedding ceremony concluded, Amitabh Bachchan's father hugged Jaya's dad and congratulated him on his daughter's wedding and getting a son-in-law. However, Jaya's father gave him an unexpected response and said, "My family is utterly ruined."

Watch a video on Amitabh Bachchan below -

Both Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan haven't talked about this incident. The couple has two children, Shweta Bachchan and Abhishek Bachchan. Shweta has two kids, Agastya and Navya. Abhishek is married to Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, and they have a daughter named Aaradhya Bachchan.

Stay tuned to BollywoodLife for the latest scoops and updates from Bollywood, Hollywood, South, TV and Web-Series.