Actors Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan have been married for over 50 years. Jaya often talks about her husband, and discusses his habits with her granddaughter Navya Naveli Nanda on her podcast, 'What The Hell, Navya'. But, little did we know that the veteran actor used to affectionately address Amitabh as 'Lambuji'. She had to stop because of her daughter Shweta Bachchan.

advertisement

In a 2012 interview with Filmfare, Jaya shared, "I used to call him Lambu ji till Shweta started calling him by that name too. I realised it was time to stop." The 'Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani' actor, who turns 76 on Tuesday, April 9, also shared that Big B was a hands-on father with daughter Shweta. "After Shweta was born, we had a maid to help during the day but at night we’d do everything ourselves. In fact, on Sundays Amit would take over. He’d even bathe her."

However, by the time their son Abhishek Bachchan was born, Amitabh got busy with his work and couldn't spend as much time with his son.

Jaya, 76, also admitted to being "frightened" by Amitabh Bachchan when she met him for the first time on the set of Hrishikesh Mukherjee’s cult classic 'Guddi' (1971). "I got frightened because he was the only one who could dictate things to me and allowed him to do that. When I met him first, I saw danger," Jaya told Simi Garewal on her talk show, 'Rendezvous with Simi Garewal'. She added she wanted to "please" senior Bachchan which was not "natural" for her.

"It’s not like he would dictate things to me, it’s just that even if he said something to me mildly, I’d do them. I’d want to please him. That’s something that does not come to me easily and naturally, to want to please people," Jaya told Garewal.

Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Bachchan, who got married on June 3, 1973, haven’t shared the screen since their special appearance in R Balki’s 'Ki & Ka'. Earlier, they featured together in films like 'Sholay', 'Abhimaan', 'Zanjeer', 'Chupke Chupke', 'Mili', and 'Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham', among others.