MUMBAI: Bollywood actor Amitabh Bachchan got married to Jaya Bachchan on June 3, 1973. However, the 'Sholay' actor had a condition before he married her. After marriage, he didn't want his wife to work regular hours. Additionally, Amitabh and Jaya had to reschedule their October 1973 wedding since Amitabh's father, Harivansh Rai Bachchan, had not permitted them to take a holiday together before the wedding.

Also read: Allu Arjun reviews Kalki 2898 AD, 'outstanding visual spectacle'

In an episode of Navya Nanda's podcast, What The Hell Navya, Jaya recollected an Amitabh conversation with her about working after marriage. “We had decided we will marry in October because by then my work would have been reduced. But he had told me, ‘I definitely don’t want a wife who will be 9 to 5. Please work, but not every day. You choose your projects and work with the right people,’’ Jaya shared.

Amitabh and Jaya's wedding was an intimate affair. It took place at Jaya’s Godmother’s house in Mumbai. This year, the couple celebrated their 51st wedding anniversary.

After marriage, while Big B continued to act in films and became one of the biggest superstars of Hindi cinema, Jaya spent more time with her family. She took care of her children, Abhishek and Shweta Bachchan.

Speaking about the same, Big B said in 2014 to the popular news portal, “One thing I find very admirable about Jaya is that she chose to give preference to home and not films. There was no obstacle from me ever, it was her decision. In marriages, all decisions are taken by the wife.”

On Navya's podcast, Jaya Bachchan also talked about how they decided to get married in June rather than October so they could go on a vacation together.

She said, "We had to go on a trip after the success of the film we did together (Zanjeer). But one day, he called me and said, ‘There’s a problem. My parents won’t allow us to go on a holiday and if we want to go, we must get married.’ So, I said we were already planning to get married in October, let’s get it done in June. But you will have to speak to my parents. He called my father, who was not very happy, since he never wanted me to get married."

Jaya Bachchan made her cinematic comeback with Karan Johar's Rocky Aur Rani Kii Prem Kahaani.

Also read: Amitabh Bachchan's Triumphant Return in 'Kalki 2898 AD': The Legend, The Action Hero, The Powerhouse

For more news and updates from the world of television and Bollywood, stay tuned to TellyChakkar.

Credit- India Today