Multi-Tony and Academy Award-winning singer and actress Liza Minnelli married Saturday March 22, 2002 to Broadway show producer David Gest. It was the first marriage for Gest, who was 48 at the time, but it was already Liza's fourth. The ceremony took place in New York, surrounded by many celebrities, including several friends of Liza's mother, actress Judy Garland.

Among the guests, who were numerous, were only Diana Ross, Lauren Bacall, Luther Vandross, Carol Channing, Elizabeth Taylor, Michael Jackson, Robert Wagner, Michael Douglas, Kirk Douglas and actresses Mia Farrow, Janet Leigh, Gina Lollobrigida, the musical icon Elton John, composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and millionaire and former president of the United States, Donald Trump. It is noteworthy that no less than Lyz Taylor, legendary Hollywood star, and Michael Jackson, the “king of pop” were even the illustrious godparents of the bride and groom. This is just to give you an idea of the simplicity of the ceremony (it contains irony!). In fact, Michael Jackson was the one who introduced the two, when Gest was producing a television special about the 30 years of Michael's career.

The guests had to face the cold, in addition to a strong security scheme to be able to enter the church and witness the couple's union ceremony. The wedding was held at the Marble Collegiate Church on Fifth Avenue. The bridesmaids were actresses Elizabeth Taylor and Marisa Berenson. Lyz Taylor, by the way, was also known for her multi-wedding tradition. Michael Jackson and his brother Tito, childhood friends of Gest, were the godparents.

Liza Minelli was 56 years old, thinner, but she didn't seem to suffer the way she had gone through two years ago, when it was even speculated that she might not be able to resume her artistic career. She had undergone hip and back surgery, struggled with excess weight, viral encephalitis and an addiction to painkillers. The actress is said to have been on the brink of death, unable to speak and confined to a wheelchair. During her recovery, Liza lost more than 30 kilos, an event that she attributes to Gest.

Regarding the outfits, the silk dress chosen by the bride was signed by stylist Bob Mackie. Over the dress, Liza wore a white fur coat. Lyz Taylor wore a black veil over her face, which for us, looked pretty weird.

After the ceremony, approximately 500 guests were received at the Regent Hotel, located on Wall Street, which had an orchestra of 80 people and with the participation of Tony Bennett, Roberta Flack, Gloria Gaynor, Dionne Warwick, among others.

Another curiosity, which is not even an extravagance for such an eccentric ceremony, is that Liza and Gest's wedding appears on a list of the 20 most expensive in the world! The cake alone, according to published news, had twelve tiers and cost around $40,000; a trifle with the sweet taste of romance and extravagance! In addition to the menu, another “detail” that drew attention was the amount invested in the flowers for the ceremony. A modest expense of $700,000.

To close the little luxurious treats, on the list of gifts for the bride and groom, from the Tiffany & Co. there were some relics such as 4 silver soup bowls (US$ 4,000 each), 4 silver pitchers (US$ 2,700 each), 8 parmesan cheese knives (US$ 115 each), among other small “souvenirs”. Not bad, huh!?