Today was the kick-off for a multi-week festival of Yılmaz Güney‘s films hosted at two DC institutions (the Freer-Sackler and the Goethe Institut). Two films were screened at the Freer: Aç kurtlar (1969) and Zavallılar (1974). The first was intriguing, the second mediocre, but both were instructive.

Aç kurtlar translates literally to “hungry wolves” but is phonetically close to “hungry Kurds” (aç kürtler), and the similarity is probably intentional. The film takes place in an exclusively rural landscape of villages, streams, and mountains, all under a thick layer of snow. The dialogue and the dress reveal that we are deep in Turkish Kurdistan, somewhere in the region of Siirt.

The action revolves around conflicts between villagers and the bandits who prey on them. It opens with several sequences showing the brutality of the bandits; eventually a local grandee places a bounty on the heads of the most notorious. Our protagonist, Memed (played by Güney), emerges as a bounty hunter. He carries the bandits’ heads back to the village tea-shop and market, whose interior represents the film’s most fascinating environment. Covered with posters for political parties and state-sponsored instructions on hygiene (how to prevent the spread of cholera, how to exterminate vermin), it serves as a backdrop for the demonstration of the inefficacy of state power, as Memed arrives to present one head after another, each shrouded in a woven bag, its straps draped over the end of his rifle.

The plot is bare and effective: a series of showdowns between Memed and the bandits, with a culminating sequence shot in a blindingly white landscape of pure snow, through which Memed tunnels to outsmart the mightiest gang. Memed’s trademark is his cunning, and he is frequently compared to a fox, but more striking is the bandit who, in this sequence, declares himself a wolf. After Memed shoots him, his remains, picked cleaned by wolves, are discovered by his companions. This is an ambivalent pay-off. On the one hand it provides the literal appearance of the titular “hungry wolves.” On the other hand it continues to work on the level of kurt = kürt. The wolf has been devoured by wolves, just as the Kurds continue to devour each other, Kurdish bandits preying on Kurdish villagers, and thus fail to confront their true enemy, the state.

The state arrives in the film’s conclusion, in the form of the Jandarma. They have been hunting Memed on account of his own past banditry, and they get him by setting the tea house on fire. He dies in the flames, but in the film’s conclusion the camera is more interested in capturing the political posters as they turn to ash.

Aç kurtlar is a genre film, a take on the spaghetti western, but its political context makes it worth a second look. It is an attempt by a leftist director to make a leftist western by exploiting the genre’s traditional scorn for state authority in a film set in the present, not “once upon a time in the West.” The critique of the state remains unresolved insofar as it is never clear if the “true” enemy is the Turkish state ca. 1969 or the state as such. All of this is put across with more subtlety and humor than I can capture here. The audience at the Freer, mostly non-Turkish and probably unaware of the political subtexts, laughed at all the right parts and applauded at the end.

Nobody applauded at the end of Zavallılar (“The poor”), a mess of a film about a trio of released prisoners and their struggles to get by in Istanbul. One of the three is played by Güney, who was thrown into jail for political crimes well before shooting had finished. A colleague attempted to bring the resulting scraps up to feature length by turning the intended main narrative into a framing narrative and exploring the histories of the various characters in a series of flashbacks. The whole comes to a deeply unsatisfying conclusion when the framing narrative ends abruptly, mid-shot. It seems unlikely that the film would have been as intriguing as Aç kurtlar even if it had been completed. In place of the former’s playful alternation between genre convention and critique, it adopts a far less satisfying “realist” approach to the depiction of social ills.

The concluding shot, of Güney running away from the camera, is nevertheless poignant when one considers that he spent nearly all of the remaining decade in jail. The films that brought him to international attention (Sürü and Yol) were directed by proxy, making Güney one of the most intriguing of all auteurs, at least in terms of his methods of execution.