CHARLESTON–HUNTINGTON, W.Va., Oct. 3, 2017 — Sinclair Broadcast Group, Inc. (Nasdaq: SBGI) (“Sinclair”) announced that Shane Schwirian has been promoted to General Manager of WCHS (ABC) in Charleston–Huntington, West Virginia. Mr. Schwirian will also be responsible for the oversight of Sinclair’s provision of services to WVAH (FOX) under a time brokerage agreement. The announcement was made by Steve Marks, EVP & Chief Operating Officer of Sinclair’s television group.

In making the announcement, Mr. Marks said, “Shane has been with Sinclair for 11 years in a variety of sales roles, from Account Executive working his way up to Director of Sales. His sales and management experience will benefit the Charleston-Huntington stations and provide for a smooth continuity in leadership and operations.”

“I am honored to expand my role at WCHS and WVAH. I am excited to work alongside a dedicated and talented team in the tri-state area,” commented Mr. Schwirian. “Together we will provide the Charleston–Huntington communities with excellence in news, consult and service our local advertisers by utilizing both traditional and digital platforms, and continually connect our viewers with content everywhere.”

Mr. Schwirian most recently worked as Director of Sales at WCHS-TV (ABC8) and WVAH-TV (FOX11) in Charleston–Huntington, West Virginia since late 2016. Prior to that he served as Local Sales Manager at WPGH-TV (FOX) and WPNT-TV (MY) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania since 2015 and Local Sales Manager at WTOV-TV (NBC/FOX) in the Steubenville, OH / Wheeling, WV market in 2014. Mr. Schwirian joined Sinclair in 2006 as Sales Promotion / Producer and Account Executive in sales at WPGH-TV (FOX) and WPMY-TV (MY) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Mr. Schwirian holds a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration degree with a concentration in Marketing from Robert Morris University in Pennsylvania.

Sinclair is one of the largest and most diversified television broadcasting companies in the country. Pro forma for the Tribune acquisition (before any related divestitures), the Company will own, operate and/or provide services to 233 television stations in 108 markets. The Company has multiple emerging networks as well as stations affiliated with all the major networks. Sinclair is a leading local news provider in the country and a producer of live sports content. Sinclair’s content is delivered via multiple-platforms, including over-the-air, multi-channel video program distributors, and digital platforms. The Company regularly uses its website as a key source of Company information which can be accessed at www.sbgi.net.

View original content with multimedia:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/sinclair-promotes-shane-schwirian-to-general-manager-in-charleston-huntington-west-virginia-300529731.html

SOURCE Sinclair Broadcast Group, Inc.