Elkview, West Virginia

Elkview is a census-designated place (CDP) in Kanawha County, West Virginia, United States. The population was 1,222 at the 2010 census.

WVAH-TV

WVAH-TV is the Fox-affiliated television station for Charleston and Huntington, West Virginia which is the second-largest market in terms of area east of the Mississippi River.

Dunbar, West Virginia

Dunbar is a city in Kanawha County, West Virginia, along the Kanawha River. The population was 7,907 at the 2010 census estimate. Dunbar was incorporated on April 19, 1921, by an Act of the West Virginia Legislature. Dunbar is on land that was origi…

Poca, West Virginia

Poca is a town in Putnam County, West Virginia, United States. The population was 974 at the 2010 census. Poca is a part of the Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH, Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).

Winfield, West Virginia

Winfield is a town in Putnam County, West Virginia, USA, along the Kanawha River. The population was 2,301 at the 2010 census.

Teays Valley, West Virginia

Teays Valley (/ˈteɪz/ TAYZ) is a census-designated place (CDP) in Putnam County, West Virginia, United States. The place is divided into the two districts of Teays Valley and Scott Depot. The population was 13,175 at the 2010 census. Teays Valley is…

South Charleston High School

South Charleston High School is a public high school grades 9 through 12 located south of the Kanawha River, west of the city of Charleston, in the city of South Charleston's Spring Hill neighborhood. The School mascot is the Black Eagle and the enr…

BridgeValley Community and Technical College

BridgeValley Community and Technical College (BVCTC) is a multi-campus, comprehensive community and technical college that provides a broad spectrum of associate degrees, certificates, industry certifications, continuing education, community service…

Guthrie Air Force Station

Guthrie Air Force Station is a closed United States Air Force General Surveillance Radar station. It is located 5.3 miles (8.5 km) north-northeast of South Charleston, West Virginia.

Tornado, West Virginia

Tornado is a census-designated place (CDP) in Kanawha County, West Virginia, United States. Tornado is also known as Upper Falls, the U.S. Census Bureau's official name for the community. The United States Board on Geographic Names declared the comm…

Charleston, West Virginia (Amtrak station)

Charleston is an Amtrak station in Charleston, West Virginia, served by the Cardinal. The station was originally owned by the Chesapeake & Ohio Railway. In September 2010, the station was purchased by General Corporation, a commercial real estate co…

Alum Creek, West Virginia

Alum Creek is a census-designated place (CDP) in Kanawha and Lincoln counties in the U.S. state of West Virginia.

Chesapeake, West Virginia

Chesapeake is a town in Kanawha County, West Virginia, United States. The population was 1,554 at the 2010 census. The town is situated on the Kanawha River. Chesapeake was incorporated in 1949 and named for the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway, which ha…