LA MIRADA, CALIF. — Friday, Nov. 22 marks the fiftieth anniversary of C.S. Lewis’ death. This Friday, the author, theologian and professor, will be given a place in Westminster Abbey’s renowned Poet’s Corner and will be commemorated across the globe. According to one of the world’s leading C.S. Lewis scholars and Biola professor, Christopher Mitchell, Lewis’ reach is immeasurable and far surpasses his home in England or fame in the United States.

Biola is no different in its commitment to the influential author who has been called “the patron saint of evangelicals.” Commemorating Lewis’ writings and spiritual influence, Biola is hosting multiple events this month featuring prominent Lewis scholars and friends.

James Houston, emeritus professor of spiritual theology at Regent College, who actually knew C.S. Lewis during his time at Oxford from 1947-1971, will be speaking at two Biola University Center for Christian Thought events on Nov. 25.

Houston will participate in a discussion on the rise, decline and recovery of the human soul moderated by Bruce Hindmarsh, James M. Houston Professor of Spiritual Theology at Regent College, at Biola’s CCT Pastors’ luncheon. In the evening, the event “Past Watchful Dragons” will delve into what can be learned from Lewis regarding spiritual formation.

“Lewis demonstrated the way great truths require a diversity of genre to speak deeply to the mind, heart, and imagination,” said Hindmarsh. “Opposed to reductionism in all its forms, Lewis joined form to content to communicate the fullness of the gospel message in fantasy, science fiction, myth, poetry, essays, sermons, autobiography, and criticism.”

Both events are open to the public. Join the evening conversation in Calvary Chapel at Biola University from 7-9:30 p.m. and R.S.V.P. for the luncheon at http://cct.biola.edu/events/2013/Nov/25/rise-decline-and-recovery-human-soul-fall-2013-cct/.

Mitchell, who teaches in Biola’s Torrey Honors Institute and is the former director of the Marion E. Wade Center at Wheaton College, is speaking throughout the week on Lewis’ friend and fellow Inkling, J.R.R. Tolkein. The week following Thanksgiving, chapel sessions are devoted to the stories of Lewis, featuring professional actor with The Mirror Theatre Company, Anthony Lawton. Lawton will perform The Screwtape Letters on Dec. 4.