Today marks the 50th anniversary of C.S. Lewis’s passing, the same day that President John F. Kennedy and writer Aldous Huxley died. Although Lewis’s demise was overshadowed by Kennedy’s tragic death and Lewis himself believed that his works would soon be forgotten, Lewis’s influence continues even today, his works growing in popularity with each passing year.

The 50th anniversary of C.S. Lewis’s death has even more significance as Lewis will be honored with a memorial in Poets’ Corner at Westminster Abbey this evening. A two-day conference and a special service at Westminster Abbey (plus events in both Oxford and Cambridge) will also take place this weekend to commemorate this momentous occasion. Many interesting articles regarding the memorial at Westminster Abbey, as well as Lewis’s enduring legacy in general, can be found at publications such as The Christian Science Monitor, The Guardian, and The Daily Beast.

One of the reasons C.S. Lewis’s influence continues to rise was his ability to write successfully in a range of genres. Who else has been able to so successfully write and lecture about topics as seemingly divergent as science fiction, children’s fantasy fiction, scholarly nonfiction, and Christian nonfiction? If often amazes people that the writer of the Narnia series is the same person as the author of Mere Christianity and The Screwtape Letters, and the scholar who wrote Preface to Paradise Lost and The Discarded Image.

In “Living the Legacy” of C.S. Lewis, we at the Foundation don’t seek to idolize the man or merely to memorialize him, but rather we see Lewis as a model of someone who lived as a Christian in higher education and who used his imagination and intellect in the service of Christ.

Whether it’s the planned C.S. Lewis College, the programs of The Study Centre at The Kilns (Lewis’s beloved home), or our conferences/retreats, we at the C.S. Lewis Foundation seek to infuse faith, creativity, and scholarship into all of our programs. We invite you to explore the ways you can do the same in your own life.