On this day five years ago (September 7, 2011) at 12:02 UTS (16:02 MSK) near the Russian city of Yaroslavl crashed the passenger plane Yak-47 with the hockey team “Lokomotiv” Yaroslavl on board.

The aircraft ran off the runway before lifting off, struck a tower mast, caught fire, crashed 2 km from Tunoshna Airport at the Volga River bank and exploded.

Lokomotiv Yaroslavl, a member of the Kontinental Hockey League, was on its way to Belarus to start the 2011–12 season with a match against Dynamo Minsk. All players from the main roster and four from the youth team were on board the aircraft.

Of the 45 men, 43 died immediately at the crash site. One of the two rescued from the wreck, forward Alexander Galimov, died five days later in hospital. Only the avionics flight engineer, Alexander Sizov, survived.

Every year on this day we recall them all. We remember those, who will never come back and who will not come out again on the ice of “Arena 2000”.

Hockey players: Vitaly Anikeyenko (24, Russia, defense); Mikhail Balandin (31, Russia, defense); Gennady Churilov (24, Russia, forward); Pavol Demitra (36, Slovakia, forward); Robert Dietrich (25, Germany, defense); Alexander Galimov (26, Russia, forward); Marat Kalimulin (23, Russia, defense); Alexander Kalyanin (23, Russia, forward); Andrei Kiryukhin (24, Russia, forward); Nikita Klyukin (21, Russia, forward); Stefan Liv (30, Sweden, goaltender); Jan Marek (31, Czech Republic, forward); Sergei Ostapchuk (21, Belarus, forward); Karel Rachůnek (32, Czech Republic, defense); Ruslan Salei (36, Belarus, defense); Maxim Shuvalov (18, Russia, defense); Kārlis Skrastiņš (37, Latvia, defense); Pavel Snurnitsyn (19, Russia, forward); Daniil Sobchenko (20, Russia, forward); Ivan Tkachenko (31, Russia, forward); Pavel Trakhanov (33, Russia, defense); Yuri Urychev (20, Russia, defense); Josef Vašíček (30, Czech Republic, forward); Alexander Vasyunov (23, Russia, forward); Alexander Vyukhin (38, Ukraine, goaltender); Artem Yarchuk (21, Russia, forward).

Team staff: Yuri Bakhvalov (47, Physician/Massage Therapist); Aleksandr Belyaev (48, Equipment Manager/Massage Therapist); Alexander Karpovtsev (41, Assistant Coach); Igor Korolev (41, Assistant Coach); Nikolai Krivonosov (31, Fitness Coach); Yevgeni Kunnov (Massage Therapist); Vyacheslav Kuznetsov (Massage Therapist); Brad McCrimmon (52, Head Coach); Vladimir Piskunov (52, Administrator);

Yevgeni Sidorov (Coach-Analyst); Andrei Zimin (Team Doctor).

And we remember those, who lost their lives, performing their duties.

Flight crew: Nadezhda Maksumova (Flight attendant); Vladimir Matyushin (Flight engineer); Elena Sarmatova (Flight attendant); Elena Shavina (Flight attendant); Andrei Solomentsev (Captain); Igor Zhivelov (First Officer); Sergei Zhuravlev (First Officer).

We wish some days had never happened. We wish some days to be erased. Sometimes life is unfair and cruel. But we want to believe that all these souls are calm in heaven. They will never be forgotten.

We pay tribute to the team that should not has left so tragically.

They will always be with us on the ice.

Rest in peace.

Texas wins at Germany⬇1000 km Nürburgring 1966

Jim Hall wants a Chaparral to drive at Le Mans. The best car for it was the 2D. Driven by Jo Bonnier & Phil Hill. After a bad race at Daytona they came on 5th June to the Green Hell 1000km as preparation for Le Mans.

Denis Jenkinson: “Their chance of winning were not realistic, only one car. And Chaparral had no Nürburgring experience.” (But a license plate from Texas😀)

11 classes with 109 cars (only 77 started). GT-cars like Healey, Glas or Triumph were chicanes for the Prototypes. Favourites were Mike Parkes/ John Surtees in a Ferrari 330P3, Lorenzo Bandini/ Lodovico Scarfiotti it with same car and some Porsche Carreras, Ford GT40s and Ferrari 275LMs. ZDF (german TV) and Lufthansa had also cars. Chaparral man Hap Sharp about the 330 P3:“He could just as easily broken go as our.”

Parkes/ Surtees were starting from Pole. The Chaparral 2nd.

After the chaotic start, the 330 P3 runs away. But later he often need to stop because of rear suspension trouble( later he retired). And the 2D was still in the lead. Only when he stopped some Dino V6s or Porsche led for same minutes. The weapon of the 2D was a automatic gear.

Hill drove faster than his F1 lap record from 1961.

Then in lap 37. Hill just passed the boxes as a heavy rain shower begins. Chaparral had no wet tyres. They just carve grooves in the firestone tires. The stop need a bit longer, because the tires were to big for the wheel wells. Hill got nervous.

But after 44 laps suddenly they won. Surtees/Parkes were one of the first gratulants. The Chaparral mechanics and drivers celebrated like a big family.

2 weeks later at Le Mans the Chaparral retired after 10h of racing.

#whenracingwasracing #oldracing #historicracing #chaparral #jimhall #fordgt40 #ferrari #mikeparkes #jochenrindt #johnsurtees #philhill #jobonnier #hapsharp #nürburgring #grünehölle #nordschleife #lemans #firestone #denisjenkinson #ferrari330P3 #lorenzobandini #lodovicoscarfiotti #nring #ninovaccarella #texas #motorsport#rennlegenden #vintageracing #racing #enduranceracing

Inspiration by @automobilsport_magazine