Evgeny Grachev already had a hunger to win a spot with the St. Louis Blues as their 2011-12 NHL training camp opened.But he also skated Saturday in camp at St. Louis Mills Ice Zone with an unexpected sense of perspective, delivered in the harshest way off the ice earlier this month.

Grachev, a native of Khabarovsk, Russia, began his pro career in 2006 with Yarolslavl Lokamotiv, an elite team in Russia that later became part of the KHL. That same team met with tragedy on Sept. 7 when it's chartered jet crashed just outside Yaroslavl, shortly after taking off for the first game of the KHL season.

It killed 28 members of the team.

"I was asleep when a text message came in to me, saying 'Did you see the news?' '' said Grachev, 21. "Well I hadn't, and it was a shock. I can't tell you the emotions with it. I skated in the summer with those guys. I knew them. I had a lot of friends on that plane. I lost my best friend in hockey in that crash."

That was 20-year-old Artem Yarchuk, who Grachev had known and been friends with since age 13.

Grachev, who is one of four players projected to compete for what could be just two open forward roster spots on the Blues roster, was already in St. Louis, ready to go, when the crash happened.

He flew out of St. Louis and returned to Russia for four days after that.

"I just felt I needed to go there and say goodbye to the boys and support the families," Grachev said. "It was a difficult scene. The restaurants had no music playing. The city had no life to it. Everything seemed dead."

Are there concerns in the KHL about the air travel (and its safety)? "Well, there are worries about it," Grachev said. "A lot of the teams that came to the memorial chose to bus there instead. Something like this just can't happen ever again."

The Moscow Times this week cited source reports that the Yak-42 jet failed to gain enough speed for takeoff because pilots forgot to disengage its emergency brake. The paper also says Moscow government will pay $1 million rubles to the families of the 44 killed in the crash.

Grachev, meanwhile, says the four days he missed right before the start of camp left him below par with his skating as the Blues sessions opened this weekend.

"But I'll be alright, I'll get it back pretty fast," he said.

The highly-skilled Russian was the third-round pick of the Rangers in the 2008 NHL Entry Draft, and spent the last two seasons in the AHL with Hartford/Connecticut. He notched 16 goals with 22 assists and a +21 rating in 73 games there last season, and also earned his NHL debut, an 8-game stint with New York.

"I didn't get a lot of ice time in the NHL, but it was a chance," Grachev said. "It was fun to be part of, good to feel the atmosphere and see what that level was like. I feel like every year I get more excited to make it to the NHL."

The Blues acquired Grachev in late June, sending a third-round pick to New York.

"I don't know what their plan here is as far as how many forwards they intend to keep," Grachev said. "I'm just trying to do my best in this camp. If there's one spot open, that's enough for me.

"I've learned now that hockey is a game, and that life can change in a moment, and you have to take advantage of the time and the opportunities you get."

Dave Eminian covers the Peoria Rivermen for the Journal Star, and can be reached at (309) 686-3206 or deminian@pjstar.com. Check out his sports blog, Cleve's World, via pjstar.com.