1555336172

Use this image under Non-Commercial licence

This image was created and shared by: Isle of Axholme F.H.S.

You can embed or download low-resolution images free of charge for private and non-commercial use under the IWM Non-Commercial Licence.

By downloading or embedding any image, you agree to the terms and conditions of the IWM Non Commercial Licence, including your use of the attribution statement specified by IWM. For this item, that is:

© Isle of Axholme F.H.S. (WMR-92948)

Embed

HTML: BBCode:

Support IWM

Donate with

Any gift we receive makes a vital contribution to our ongoing work, from conserving our collection to supporting our public programme.

Current location

Back wall of the redunant church

St Mary's Church

Shore Road

Garthorpe

North Lincolnshire

Lincolnshire

SK831209

England

OS Grid Ref: SE 85088 19064

Denomination: Church of England

View location on Google Maps

Description

The Roll of Honour is a list of hand-written names on a printed paper form (SPCK). This is in a wooden frame under glass and is displayed on the back wall of Garthorpe Parish Church. The paper is deteriorating in condition and part of the backing board is missing.

Inscription

Your prayers are asked / for those who have gone / to serve our King & Country / by land, and sea and air / Our Roll of Honour / names

Inscription legible?

no

Names on memorial

Aaron, Arthur

Armitage, Alfred

Bailey, Thomas

Barrondale, William

Belton, George

Broderick, A[...]

Brown, John

Brown, Joseph

Butterick, George

C[...], James K

See details for all 49 names

Commemorations

First World War (1914-1918)

Total names on memorial: 27

Served and returned: 24

Died: 3

Exact count: no

Information shown: Undefined

Order of information: Undefined

Components

Roll of honour

Measurements: Undefined

Materials: paper, wood, glass

Listing information

This memorial is not currently listed. Find out how to nominate this memorial for inclusion on the National Heritage List for England

More about listing and the protection of historic places can be found on the Historic England website

Condition

If you know the condition of this memorial, please help by adding details

Trust fund/Scholarship

No

Purpose: Unknown or N/A

This record comprises all information held by IWM’s War Memorials Register for this memorial. Where we hold a names list for the memorial, this information will be displayed on the memorial record. Please check back as we are adding more names to the database.

This information is made available under a Creative Commons BY-NC licence.

This means you may reuse it for non-commercial purposes only and must attribute it to us using the following statement:

© WMR-92948

For queries, please contact [email protected].

Share this