The number of buildings listed as “at risk” is growing in Leicestershire and Rutland - due to crumbling disused churches.

There are currently 60 structures registered on the danger list by Historic England, the agency formerly called English Heritage.

Last year three sites were removed from the list thanks to restoration projects but a further five have been added in that time.

The places that have been removed from the list in the past year and are no longer at risk are Ashby’s former railway station, which is now an office building, and the parish churches in Tugby, near Billesdon, and Ashwell in Rutland. Both are 14th century churches that have been restored.

But the new additions to the list are St Peter’s Church in Belgrave, Leicester, and little-used village churches in Loddington, Owston, Garthorpe and Great Stretton.

The statistics have been released to mark the 20th anniversary of the Heritage at Risk Register.

Ben Robinson, Historic England’s heritage at risk principal in the East Midlands, said: “Over the past 20 years we have used the Heritage at Risk Register to highlight places in need of care and attention.

“We have dedicated time, expertise and money to bring cherished places back into use and we are proud to have played our part in saving them from neglect.

“Despite the successes, other places continue to fall into disrepair. They have been added to this year’s Register and we will focus our attention on them in the years ahead.

He said that achieving so much in 20 years has depended upon “sheer dogged determination” by local communities, charities, owners and partners.

Historic England’s technical advice, grant aid and “creative negotiation” had all been needed to deliver people’s vision for how these places could be used, he said.

In the East Midlands, Historic England has spent £1,166,944 in grants to help some of the region’s most important historic sites.

Successes over the years have included the City Rooms in Leicester, which was removed from the list in 2006 after the 1792 structure was renovated by a city businessman to become a popular venue for weddings and other events.

The station in Ashby, removed in the past year, closed in 1964 and was added to the list in 2012.

The Grade II* listed building, which dates back to 1849, was converted into the headquarters of the aerial mapping company Bluesky.

Mr Robinson said its re-use demonstrated that many historic buildings can be adapted and repurposed for the future.

He added that two sites still on the at-risk list – the Leicester Abbey ruins in Abbey Park and Taylor’s Bell Foundry in Loughborough were both making “good progress” and were on course to come off the list.

The abbey has been on the list ever since it began in 1998 but Historic England grants are being used to save its ancient walls.

The foundry has been awarded a Heritage Lottery Fund grant and repair grants from Historic England and is on its way to being removed from the list.

Other sites and structures that remain on the list include:

Ulverscroft Priory ruins

The Magazine Gateway in The Newarke, Leicester

The iron gates behind Skeffington House in The Newarke

The Newarke Wall in the Newarke

Turret Gateway in Castle View, Leicester

St Saviour's Church in St Saviour's Road, Leicester

St George’s Church in Rutland Street, Leicester

The former HSBC Bank in Granby Street, Leicester

Snibston Colliery in Ashby Road, Coalville

The Old Hall ruins in Exton Park

Oakham Castle walls

Also on the list are parish churches in Appleby Magna, Whitwick, Measham, Greetham and Ashwell.