Nora Buchanan has made a few appearances on GENERAL HOSPITAL, but fans of that ABC soap may not be aware that the character has quite a history from her decades on ONE LIFE TO LIVE! Actress Hillary B. Smith made her debut as Nora in 1992 and what was originally meant to be a guest character turned into a role she played until OLTL went off the air in 2013. The actress then brought the character to GH in 2017 for a guest appearance and has made a few more since.

Nora was first seen in 1992 defending Todd Manning and his frat brothers who were accused of raping Marty Saybrooke. The attorney grew close to Bo Buchanan after the death of his wife, Sarah, when the two joined forces to track down her killer. Nora began suffering from terrible headaches that turned out to be a brain tumor, and she feared she may have caused Sarah’s accident but Bo proved her innocent. After recovering from her brain tumor surgery, Nora Hanen became Mrs. Buchanan in 1995 in a beautiful church ceremony with special guest Little Richard.

After Bo’s son, Drew, was killed in the line of duty, Nora wanted to give Bo a child and in a desperate move, turned to her ex, Sam Rappaport. Bo was thrilled by Nora’s pregnancy, but they divorced when he learned that Sam was the father. However, after Sam’s jealous ex-wife, Lindsay, shot him dead, it was revealed that Bo was the real father of the boy they named Matthew.

Nora then began dating District Attorney Daniel Colson and accepted his proposal, but after they tied the knot, she suspected him of having an affair. However, not only was Daniel having an affair with Mark Solomon, he was also arrested for the murders of Paul Cramer and Jennifer Rappaport! Nora suffered a stroke and was in a coma for many months. When she finally woke up, she tried to put her life back together but then her house burned down. Former father-in-law Asa Buchanan invited her and Matthew to move into his mansion and left it to her in his will when he passed away. During their time in Texas for the will reading, Nora began a relationship with Clint Buchanan.

When Matthew was paralyzed in a car accident, his parents came together, sparking Clint’s jealousy. Nora and Bo were reluctant to let Dr. Greg Evans perform a risky operation to give Matthew back the use of his legs, so the teen hired Téa Delgado to sue his parents so he could make the decision himself. The night before Nora was to marry Clint, Matthew saw her kissing Bo and threatened to expose them if they didn’t approve the surgery, but they called his bluff and Matthew couldn’t bring himself to hurt his uncle Clint.

Although Nora still had feelings for Bo, she didn’t want to break Clint’s heart and went through with the wedding. But the drama with Matthew brought Bo and Nora together and they eventually rekindled their relationship. Clint was furious, divorcing Nora and disowning Bo. Nora and Bo were remarried, but she soon became jealous of his attractive new secretary. But Inez wound up dating Clint, who blackmailed her into seducing Bo as a way to take revenge on him and Nora. Clint also paid Inez’s evil ex, Eddie Ford, to kidnap Nora and hold her hostage. Eddie tried to rape Nora, but she was rescued and the villain was shot and killed.

Nora briefly left Bo believing he’d cheated on her, but took him back when Inez confessed to drugging Bo. Bo and Nora were stunned when Clint revealed that Matthew was the one who killed Eddie and agreed to keep it a secret to protect their son. Nora became a grandmother when Matthew and Destiny had a baby boy they named Drew. Nora also returned to her college passion of giving advice and began hosting a radio call-in show calling herself the Nightbird.

In 2017, Nora arrived in Port Charles to represent Valentin Cassadine in his custody battle with Lulu Spencer over their daughter, Charlotte. She then showed up again at the end of the year when she released a statement on behalf of her client, Olivia Jerome, to exonerate Julian Jerome of his crimes. In 2019, she once again appeared in town to act as Kevin Collins’ attorney to defend him against charges surrounding his involvement in the killing spree of his twin brother, Ryan Chamberlain.

Could Nora make even more appearances in Port Charles? Stay tuned to find out, because you never know what the future may hold!