Longtime federal prosecutor Ernest Gonzalez has been nominated to fill a vacancy on the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas.

Background

Ernesto Gonzalez, who goes by Ernest, received a B.A. from the University of Texas at San Antonio in 1987 and a J.D. from the Thurgood Marshall School of Law at Texas Southern University in 1993. Gonzalez subsequently became an Assistant District Attorney in Bexar County.

In 2000, Gonzalez became a federal prosecutor with the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Western District of Texas. In 2003, he shifted to become a federal prosecutor with the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Eastern District of Texas. He has held that position until 2023, when he became a senior advisor with the U.S. Department of Justice Criminal Division Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Section.

History of the Seat

Gonzalez has been nominated for a vacancy on the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas. This seat opened on December 1, 2022, when Judge Frank Montalvo took senior status.

Legal Experience

Gonzalez started his legal career in Bexar County (San Antonio) where he worked as a state level prosecutor. However, since 2000, Gonzalez has served as a federal prosecutor, starting in the Western District of Texas and then moving to the Eastern District of Texas and the U.S. Department of Justice.

During his time as a federal prosecutor, Gonzalez prosecuted a number of cases involving narcotics distribution. See, e.g., United States v. Loza-Gracia, 670 F.3d 639 (5th Cir. 2012). For example, he handled an appeal before the Fifth Circuit in a case involving the distribution of methamphetamine in Eastern Texas. See United States v. Garcia Mendoza, 587 F.3d 682 (5th Cir. 2009).

During the Covid-19 pandemic, Gonzalez also responded in opposition to motions for compassionate release for prisoners sentenced for narcotics distribution offenses. See, e.g., United States v. Dodd, 471 F. Supp. 3d 750 (E.D. Tex. 2020); United States v. Boutte, 568 F. Supp. 3d 706 (E.D. Tex. 2021).

Overall Assessment

As a lifelong prosecutor with extensive experience litigating on both the state and federal levels, Gonzalez brings a fairly conventional set of experiences to the bench, but this still should render him a fairly uncontroversial nominee. While Gonzalez may draw questions based on his lack of civil experience, given that he has the support of his home state senators, he should nonetheless be confirmed comfortably, while the White House can be happy with one of its political appointees moving to the bench.