Giant film crews rolled into the town centre over the weekend and descended on the hotel to make Nina's Heavenly Delights, a big budget movie about a Glaswegian Indian family.

The film has been written by Andrea Gibb from Greenock, who also penned award-winning films Dear Frankie and Afterlife.

The Star Hotel is acting as the main set for the film.

Crews will film on the roof, in two of the bedrooms, outside in the street and in the newly refurbished function area.

The owner of the hotel, Ruth Isaac, did the function area up earlier this year after it had lain unused for 18 years.

Now the film company have come in and painted over all her hard work, but she says she doesn't mind.

The film will star Art Malik, who has been seen in Bond film The Living Daylights, Arnold Schwarzenneger picture True Lies and A Passage to India.

He is joined by Scottish actress Laura Fraser, who has been seen on the silver screen in Hollywood movies like A Knight's Tale and Tom Cruise film Vanilla Sky, and Sanjeev Bhaksar from television series At Home with the Kumars, as well as leading actress Shelley Conn, who plays Nina.

Nina's Heavenly Delights is described by the film company, Fortissimo FIlms, as 'an exhilarating love story where Scottish humour meets Bollywood spectacle'.

The Light Trust charity shop across John Wood Street from the hotel has also been transformed into a florists.

Ruth (41) from Port Glasgow has owned the Star Hotel for just under two years. She said: `I am very excited. They contacted us about a month ago and said they were looking at a number of places. Then they called and said they want to use this.

`The customers are great. They are all excited and everybody wants to be an extra.

`It is nice to have something positive for Port Glasgow.

`I am sure it will be hectic for a wee while, but it is something different and it puts us on the map too.` Mark Hennan, manager of the hotel, said: `We have refurbished upstairs about six months ago and opened it in April and they have come in and painted over everything.

`It will be great for the hotel though. The fact it is being used for filming will give it more appeal.`