Directed by: Pratibha Parmar | Screenplay by: Andrea Gibb

Starring: Laura Fraser, Shelley Conn, Art Malik, Ronny Jhutti, Veena Sood

NINA’S HEAVENLY DELIGHTS is a surprising love story where Scottish humour meets Bollywood spectacle! It follows the mixed fortunes of a Glaswegian family, THE SHAHS and their award winning Indian restaurant, THE NEW TAJ.

The story is told through the eyes of NINA SHAH, a young Scottish Asian woman engaged in her own highly personal identity crisis. NINA had left home under a cloud after a row with her father but when he dies suddenly, Nina is forced to return. Her return reunites her with her childhood friend Bobbi, a wannabe Bollywood drag queen and brings her face to face with Lisa, a charismatic young woman who now owns half the restaurant.

Then Nina discovers her father’s secret – The New Taj has been selected for The Best of the West Curry Competition. In the turbulent days that follow, Nina (helped by Lisa) embarks on a personal mission to win the trophy for the third time. But Nina’s feelings are thrown into turmoil when she realises that she is falling in love. With Lisa.

Can her feelings ever be reciprocated? And, if they are, what will this mean for Nina and her family.

Awards

Winner of The Wolfe Award for Best Feature Film at Fresno Film Festival, US 2007

The Audience Award for Best Feature Film at 19th Cineffable Film Festival, Paris 2007

The Audience Award for Best International Film at Tampa LGBT Film Festival, U 2007

Nominated for GLAAD Media Award 2007 for Best Feature Film (Limited Release)

International Press Quotes

“Unapologetically upbeat” – The Guardian

“A crowd pleaser” – Sight & Sound, UK

“A truly lovely British rom-com…spot on soundtrack and strong performances from a terrific cast” – G3 Magazine, UK

“A sweet love story” – Empire, UK

“Parmar has created something quite adorable and, at times, visionary…. this little spicy samosa of hers is well worth a watch” – filmexposed.com

“Hugely appealing with great chemistry between the two gorgeous leads…they sizzle together like the dishes Nina prepares” – DIVA Magazine

“Parmar’s film scores with its central partnership, glowing like a strand of saffron at the heart of the mix…Ultimately, this is a spicy little number that won’t disappoint.” – EyeforFilm.co.uk

“A sparky, entertaining comedy well placed in the feel good territory” – Bite the Mango Film Festival, UK

“A delightful mix of Bollywood and “Chocolat”” – Windy City Times, Chicago

Related Links