Heading south from Glasgow along the Ayrshire coast, you'll find one of Scotland's - and the world's - most whimsical castles.

Kelburn Castle in Largs is surrounded by woodland but don't worry, you'll easily find it thanks to the psychedelic mural that covers much of its exterior.

The large country house, which dates back to the 12th century, was given its vibrant and fantastic makeover in 2007.

After it was discovered the castle's concrete facing would need to be replaced, the building's owner, Lord Glasgow, after being prompted by his children, invited four Brazilian graffiti artists to decorate it.

Makeover

Patrick Boyle, the 10th Earl of Glasgow, invited four of the world’s leading graffiti artists from Brazil to work alongside Scottish talent to add a colourful touch to the castle's walls.

Costing £20,000 is has been named as one of the world's best examples of urban art and is inspired by the colourful murals and street art that have sprung up in cities around Brazil.

Twin brothers Otavio and Gustavo Pandolfo, known as Os Gemos, together with Nina Pandolfo and Francesca Nunca used 1,500 cans of spray paint to create the design which features colourful cartoons.

Permitted by North Ayrshire Council and Historic Scotland on the understanding that it was temporary, it was agreed that the graffiti would remain for three years but removed when the castle was re-harled.

In 2011, the Earl pushed for it to be made permanent, it is yet to be announced whether a final decision has been made.

History

Part of the current building dates back to the 12th century but the current building as it looks now, designed after the French style, was created in the 18th and 19th centuries by the Earls of Glasgow who owned the house.

The category-A listed house and estate was opened to the public in the 70s.

One of the oldest castles in Scotland, it's become a popular tourist attraction in its own right, with the Boyle family, who still live at the house, adding a tea room, shop and visitor centre.

Tourism

Hugely popular with tourists, local residents and festival fans, the castle has a range of activities and events on offer throughout the year.

The castle has outdoor play areas including the Secret Forest, a fairy tale trail through the woodland, as well as an adventure course.

As well as being registered for weddings and civil ceremonies, it also offers glamping and camping options for those looking to stay on the estate.

Every year the family also host the Kelburn Garden Party, a hugely popular music and arts festival.