It’s not easy being a punk rocker. Sometimes that DIY ethic canwear a guy down.

“People don’t go out and buy our records,” said Mike Herrera,the singer, bass player and songwriter for MxPx. “We have to selleach and every record ourselves. We have to talk to each kidindividually, sell every ticket to every show. It’s insane.”

You’d think things would be easier now for the skate-punk trio,what with recent co-headlining a tour with Simple Plan. (Somenights MxPx topped the bill; other nights Simple Plan closed theshow.) No such luck.

Right off the bat, the bus broke down.

“We were on the side of the road outside of Denver on the way toKansas City,” Herrera, 27, said.

The band was there 21 hours until the rear axle could befixed.

At least Herrera, guitarist Tom Wisniewski and drummer YuriRuley are happy with their latest CD, “Before Everything andAfter,” their most mature and ambitious collection to date. “For aband with a punk background,” Herrera said on the phone fromMinneapolis, “it was like our ‘Sgt. Pepper.’ Some of our fans sayit’s overproduced, but most like it more than our last album.”

The cover of “Before Everything and After” (A&M), whichHerrera slouchingly posed for, may remind you of a certainclassic-rock cover. The label’s art director came up with theconcept. ” ‘We’ll have this guy wearing a belt buckle,’ ” Herrerasaid, recalling the pitch. ” ‘It’ll be full-on “Sticky Fingers” (bythe Rolling Stones) but MxPx style — the new generation.’ We werelike ‘Sounds rad. Let’s do it.’ “

The cover shot displays two forearms worth of Herrera’s abundanttattoos. “I started getting tattoos because my mom was gettingtattooed. She had her back done and all of one arm and almost allof the other,” he said. “It’s all weird designs — girlie stuff. Ithought, ‘I’m in a band now. I need to get a tattoo.’ “

Influenced by the Descendents, the trio, originally calledMagnified Plaid, formed in 1993 when they were high school juniorsin Bremerton, Wash. “It is and always has been a weird town,”Herrera said. “There’s a shipyard. That’s our main industry.There’s a couple of military bases. There aren’t a lot ofhigh-paying jobs. It’s a blue-collar town, all the way.”

From the beginning, MxPx has been a punk band with a difference,thanks to its Christian beliefs, traces of which crop up in thegroup’s music.

“Anything you believe will come out in your songs,” Herrerasaid. “I do it in a way I’m comfortable with. I’m not out there topreach to anybody. I’m just expressing myself.

“Bottom line is, I’m a spiritual person. Everybody is sointerested in being cool. If you’re honest and stop putting up afront, eventually you’ll come to something spiritual. I’m justtrying to figure out life. Maybe I’m wrong. Who cares what Ithink?”