“Another.”

So, Joseph Losey week safely over, we got this box set of “Fifty Film Noirs”, many of which are actually old TV shows and stuff, and many of which are VERY BAD QUALITY.

One of the stranger things included was a film I didn’t even know existed, THE LODGER.

No, not that one.

And not that one either.

This one! A ’30s remake of the Hitchcock original, again starring Ivor Novello, and directed by Maurice Elvey. Elvey could be the great lost mediocrity of British cinema, working over five decades and building up a truly negligible body of work, although there are islands of interest speckled among his ocean of dross. HINDLE WAKES, which he filmed twice, in 1918 and 1927, has a good reputation as a rare unpatronising look at working-class life and leisure. And anybody whose career runs from 1913 silent shorts to 1958 TV episodes is tied into our history in ways that are unimaginable now.

THE LODGER, unleashed stateside as THE PHANTOM FIEND, isn’t exactly one of Elvey’s highest points, but it has plenty of weird interest. Mostly sound-stage-bound, it occasionally throws in ciné-veritéstreet scenes showing news vendors hawking the latest accounts of “the Avenger” and his murderous exploits. It features a frighteninly nubile Jack Hawkins, playing “straight man” to Ivor Novello’s very queer gentleman.

‘ere I am, J.H.

It has a bizarre and lively leading lady, Elizabeth Allen (later to be seen slaughtering German fifth columnists in WENT THE DAY WELL?). And it has the strange, sometimes comical figure of Novello himself. And one simply superb cut: Hawkins describes how a murder victim’s throat was slashed from ear to ear, and Elvey jumps to Novello, in his room, drawing the bow across his violin with passionate intensity…

Brrr…illiant. Disgracefully, I can’t remember if this occurs in the Hitchcock. Very possibly it does. Elvey is also aided by his gifted screenwriters, actor/director Miles Mander, and director/producer/author Paul Rotha. So it’s hard for me to say where the idea came from. Perhaps a clue that I need to re-view the original. In fact, I have a dozen or so early Hitchcocks that need viewing…

Seemingly Novello’s Welsh accent was considered quite impossible in the early days of British sound film, so the script contrives a Serbian backstory for him, and his Celtic inflections are subsumed in cod-Balkan. Novello is a Shadowplay favourite because he is funny. Also, because of his peculiar dressing-room shenanigans. As with Ramon Novarro, there is absolutely no mistaking his homosexuality, which means that every film where he plays it hetero becomes a piece of Brechtian theatre, only more amusing.

Ivor is startled by a portrait on the wall!

But mainly the film was interesting because the crumbling soundtrack, bad splices and low-quality telecine made it all but inaudible. “It sounds like it was recorded on tissue paper,” Fiona said. When you can’t hear what people are really saying, it’s fun to just make stuff up and imagine a new story that would incorporate these lines:

“Insatiable nothingness.”

“Taking orders is an early morning cup of tea.”

“Why could I find something for to be strong in me?”

“What with the back-station, nobody wants a butler these days.”

“Just in time, pod bank.”

“Nine million people in London are immersive in Stanford Heath.”

(Casually) “Ah, that’s the murderer come in.”

“Ah, should… earth coat git.”

“You ought to know better than Sister Agatha’s common wife.”

Which leads to this reply: “You are lucky to have that at all.”

“Yes, I sorry he didn’t appear scraped away.”

“What’s wrong with him?” brings the response, “Ah, he’s slightly dark.”

Some of these are more suggestive of a screwy Russian sci-fi film than a fogbound London shocker. Which makes me want to try running this inaudible early talkie alongside this unsubtitled Soviet space opera. Who needs drugs?