NEWSONG

Newsong started out in 1981 as a 9 member church band for Morningside Baptist Church in Valdosta, GA. Throughout the years, and changes in the group, they have had 17 #1 singles, six Dove Award nominations, numerous songwriting awards, and five of the Top 100 Christian radio singles of the past decade. They are known for their songs, "Arise, My Love," "Miracles," "Jesus To The World (Roaring Lambs), and "The Christmas Shoes," which was also the title of their first Christmas Album.

With such success, it would have been easy to bask in the glow of the spotlight. "But it really wasn't about us," says Eddie Carswell. "It was pretty amazing to see how God orchestrated it all, and it took us completely by surprise.

Billy Goodman explains the group's faith attitude, "The commitment that we made was, 'God, we'll do this as long as Your hand is on it, as long as we see You working.'" He went on to say "God is faithful even when things look impossible."

Besides having a touring ministry they have also started their Jam event tours where many top name Christian Artists come together for evening concerts at a price that is affordable.

"I think what keeps us going is not necessarily the fun we have with the music, but it's that time at the end of the evening when we see people respond," Goodwin explains. "It's like a shot of adrenaline. It's amazing to see God use what little bit we're doing to reach people. That's really our motivation."

After releasing "All Around The World", Eddie Middleton left NewSong to pursue a solo career. Bobby Apon also left to spend more time with his family. In 1994, lead Truth vocalist Russ Lee, songwriter Leonard Ahlstrom, soloist Charles Billingsley, and musician Scotty Wilbanks joined Carswell and Goodwin. That year they released “People Get Ready”. This brought four #1 hits, and also featured a re-recorded version of the classic “Arise My Love”, originally recorded by the group in 1987 on "Say Yes". In 1996 Charles Billingsley left to again pursue a solo career. In 1997, they released “Love Revolution”. This featured again four #1 hits, including “Miracles”, which stayed at #1 on the CCM Adult Contemporary chart four consecutive weeks, tying the record set a few years earlier by Bob Carslie’s “Butterfly Kisses”. They also released that same year an enhanced album, “Joy To The Rhythm of the World”. In 1999, Bobby Apon died. He was recognized on their 1999 album “Arise, My Love, The Very Best of NewSong”. This featured all twelve #1 hits from “All Around The World”, “People Get Ready”, and “Love Revolution”. It also included the “Arise, My Love” recording from “People Get Ready”, as well as three new songs. “Can’t Keep A Good Man Down” and “Jesus To The World (Roaring Lambs), a song inspired by Christian speaker and author Bob Briner, became #1 hits. Bob Briner died later that year from cancer. The third song, “Like Minded, Like Hearted”, was a duet between NewSong and Out of Eden of Goatee Records.

Eddie Middleton and NewSong

Below is the release announcing the solo debut of Eddie:

EDDIE MIDDLETON, FORMERLY OF "NEWSONG" TO PRESENT SOLO DEBUT

JACKSON, March 15--Eddie Middleton, formerly of "NewSong" will perform his solo debut, Wednesday, March 27, at 8 p.m. in the University's G.M. Savage Memorial Chapel. The concert is free and open to the general public.

Middleton, one of the most unique, soulful voices in contemporary Christian music recently began his solo career. For 13 years, he was a member of the contemporary Christian group NewSong. Eddie and NewSong recorded seven albums, their latest All Around the World," produced four No. 1 and two top five singles. NewSong was nominated for the 1993 Dove Award Group of the Year."

Eddie's musical background is deeply rooted in R & B and Motown music. This influence can be heard in some of the NewSong classics - Arise, My Love," Forever King," Light Your World," Wholehearted," the 50's song, Say Yes," and Eddie's remake of Reach Out, I'll Be There," by the Four Tops.

He recorded with CBS/Epic Records; and, in 1978, he was voted #1 New Male Voice in Record World and #5 New Male Voice in Cashbox. Eddie appeared with groups like the Four Tops, Four Seasons, Three-Dog Night, Tina Turner, Drifters, Coasters, and many of the R & B artists of that day.

His solo concert will be highlighted by a medley of some great Motown hits gone Gold," rewritten with a clear, strong message of the love of Jesus Christ.

Eddie Middleton is now the Music Minister at a church in Acworth, Georgia. He appears in churches all over the country giving his testimony via song. His most popular is a medley of Mowtown hit songs with contemporary christian lyrics.

Organizers said, "One of the most unique, soulful voices in contemporary Christian music has gone solo. Eddie has just released his first solo album Spirit of Celebration, which is filled with songs of worship and celebration to encourage the church."

For 13 years, Eddie Middleton’s voice was heard in the contemporary Christian group, NewSong. Mr. Middleton and NewSong recorded seven albums, their last being “All Around the World” with the Benson Company. This album produced six number one adult contemporary hits, and one number two on the inspirational charts. NewSong was nominated for the 1993 Dove Award “Group of the Year”.

Mr. Middleton's musical roots go deep into R&B and Motown music. This influence can be heard in some of the NewSong classics: "Arise, My Love," "Forever King," "Light Your World," "Wholehearted," the 50’s song, "Say Yes," and Eddie’s remake of "Reach Out, I’ll Be There" by the Four Tops.

Before he was saved, he recorded with CBS/Epic Records. In 1978, he was voted #1 New Male Voice in Record World and #5 New Male Voice in Cashbox. Eddie appeared with groups like the Four Tops, Four Seasons, Three Dog Night, Tina Turner, Drifters, Coasters, and many of the R&B artists of that day.

Highlighting his concerts are songs from his new album, and a medley of some great Motown hits gone "Gold for God," which he has rewritten with a clear, strong message of the love of Jesus Christ.

Organizers said, "You’ll love joining with Eddie in making these old hits come alive. This will be a time of joy and celebration as Eddie also performs some NewSong hits from years gone by."

Mr. Middleton said, “I like to sing, but I love to preach God’s Word and see people come to know Jesus Christ. It doesn’t get any better than that. If you have close family, friends, and neighbors who are searching for purpose, direction and peace – bring them to this concert. Give them an opportunity to hear a life-changing story. Forever is a long time – everyone will spend it somewhere. My heart’s desire is to show people the joy and excitement Jesus brings to life."

Witness via song

Singer Eddie Middleton entertains inmates at Dixon Correctional Institute in Jackson, La., during an Operation Starting Line event in late September

Christian singer Eddie Middleton sang a medley of Motown favorites, with lyrics revamped to reflect the gospel: "Jesus, I need your lovin'. Got to have all your lovin'."

Eddie Middleton, fourth from left, coordinated the music for the Conference of Georgia Baptist Evangelists at their annual retreat in Conyers, January 2009.

Valdosta, GA 11-17-12

Eddie Middleton returns to Valdosta to do a free concert at Crossroads Baptist Church for a singles rally. Lot of Valdosta's "old timers" there to enjoy Eddie's still great voice, sense of humor and powerful testimony. There were frequent humorous references to the crowd, and himself, getting old. However Eddie is still quite a showman and managed to get the crowd on their feet clapping and singing just like in "the good OLD days". Everyone there had no doubt that Eddie loves the Lord and his family. He called upon America to have a great spiritual revival. The concert was sponsored by Ray Norton Tire & Auto.