Actress, model and singer, Amanda Seyfried has confirmed her talent through a series of (more or less) perfectly casted roles in film and television until she established herself as a household name on the Hollywood scene. After first being brought to our attention in the 2000s thanks to the comedies Mean Girls (2004) and Mamma Mia! (2008), both of which achieved worldwide success, the American continued her rise to success in the blockbusters Red Riding Hood (2010) and Time Out (2011), never relinquishing her romantic streak, which continues to be a theme in her filmography. In 2021, the Pennsylvania-born actress received an Oscar nomination for her role in David Fincher's biographical drama Mank. Last year, she surprised us with her role in the 2022 true-life series, The Dropout. To get a better idea of the extent of her range, Vogue takes a look back at the most beautiful roles played by 38-year-old Amanda Seyfried over the last twenty years.

Amanda Seyfried 7 best roles

Mean Girls(2004)

In the cult comedy Mean Girls directed by Mark Waters, Amanda Seyfried plays Karen Smith, one of Regina George's best friends. Accompanied by Rachel McAdams and Lindsay Lohan, she plays a sweet but not exactly intelligent teenager. She's a member of the Plastics, a group of popular girls with slanderous attitudes and typical 2000s dress codes including low-rise jeans, crop tops, rhinestones, and lip gloss. The film generated no less than 130 million dollars at the box office worldwide, and another remake is even expected for 2024.

Mamma Mia! (2008)

Mamma Mia was certainly one of the best films released in 2008. In this musical comedy from 1999, Amanda Seyfried plays Sophia, the daughter of Donna (Meryl Streep). The film's highlights include Sophia's wedding on a Greek island, her encounters with three of her mother's charming former lovers - one of whom could be Sophia's father (Pierce Brosnan, Stellan Skarsgård, and Colin Firth), and the iconic hits by Swedish band ABBA reinterpreted by Donna and the Dynamos. It's hard to choose what is best about this sunn-drenched comedy, apart from the sweet portrayal of love between a mother and daughter.

Dear John (2010)

Adapted from Nicholas Sparks' best-selling novel by Swedish filmmaker Lasse Hallström, the film Dear John offered Amanda Seyfried her first role - and a successful one, although reviews at the time were less than enthusiastic. Alongside Channing Tatum, the actress plays a love-struck woman. While he is away on an army mission and she is back at university, they promise to write to each other. Regardless of what anyone said, Dear John won over audiences past and present (it was the first film to beat Avatar at the box office), and is considered one of the best romance films of all time.

Time Out (2011)

In this dystopian drama where time is the new currency, Amanda Seyfried stars alongside Justin Timberlake, Olivia Wilde, and Cillian Murphy, to name but a few. Set in a society divided according to the amount of time each individual has left to live, Amanda Seyfried plays Sylvia, a woman from high society who decides to join forces with Will, a man who grew up in a working-class neighborhood, to overturn the established order.

The Clapper (2017)

The bittersweet romance The Clapper is well worth a watch. A world away from the big productions, the film directed by American filmmaker Dito Montiel that he adapted from his own novel, Eddie Krumble is the Clapper - depicts an entertainment professional who is paid to set the mood by clapping on demand. After appearing on a popular show, he becomes very famous. The only thing that brings him back down to earth is meeting Amanda Seyfried's intriguing character.

Mank (2020)

In David Fincher's black-and-white film, Amanda Seyfried takes us back to 1930s Hollywood to discover screenwriter Herman Jacob Mankiewicz, nicknamed Mank by his friends, who was commissioned to write the script for Orson Welles' 1941 film Citizen Ken. After a car accident (and a gambling and alcohol addiction), Mank faces writer's block. Of the eight Oscar nominations the film received, one went directly to Amanda Seyfried for her performance as California star Marion Davies.

The Dropout (2022)

In 2022, Amanda Seyfried slips into the shoes of an obsessive con artist for the Disney+ series The Dropout. She plays Elizabeth Holmes, a Stanford student who dreamed of being a billionaire after seeing her father lose his job at Enron (an American energy company whose bankruptcy had worldwide repercussions), and who ended up swindling the Silicon Valley world for years. Through Amanda Seyfried's convincing performance, we follow the entrepreneur as she changes her character and appearance to build a brand image that's sanitized and increasingly icy. This is a far cry from the roles to which Amanda Seyfried has so often led. Here, the American takes us through the rise and fall of her character, suffocated by ambition, greed, and megalomania.