A Hard Day's Night Official Trailer (2014) The Beatles, Musical HD

The Beatles film, A Hard Day’s Night, was a runaway success for the band, and even went on to receive award nominations. The film was released in 1964 and told the fictional story of the band struggling to organise their lives around an upcoming live TV performance. The band were also hit with such obstacles as hordes of adoring fans chasing them and Paul McCartney’s bumbling grandfather. Years later director of the movie, Lester, revealed what he thought of each of the band members and how it was filming with Paul.

The director told the BFI in 2012: “I think the problem with Paul he was so enthusiastic towards cinema, film, art, the zeitgeist - what was going on - that sometimes it got in the way.

“I think Paul tried harder than he should have.”

While Paul needed improvement, Lester went on to praise George Harrison and his surprisingly good acting skills.

He said: “George, I think, was the most effective actor all the way through.

READ MORE: The Beatles: John Lennon criticised A Hard Day’s Night director

WATCH THE RICHARD LESTER INTERVIEW BELOW

“He attempted less, but he always hit it right in the centre, and I always knew what I was going to get with George.”

The director also spoke candidly about working with John Lennon.

Although the Imagine singer performed well on set, Lester confessed he received some barbed words while filming.

He said: “John was not known to suffer fools, and I probably fell into the fool category.

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

“He was always willing to skewer the pomposity around him, and I think there can’t be any more pompous person on a set than the director.

“So, I have wounds. But I have a huge, huge admiration for John.”

Despite their crossed words, Lester added they maintained a strong relationship well after filming had finished.

He said: “I think I can take all his criticisms [as] they were meant in the best possible taste.

DON'T MISS...

The Beatles first bassist quit band 60 years ago and died a year later [NEWS]

Tom Jones John Lennon feud: What happened between them? [INFO]

John Lennon’s agonising sadness in touching tribute song Mother [INSIGHT]

The Beatles: Get Back documentary teased by Peter Jackson

“I hope I formed a relationship with all of them. I spent a lot of time with John, I was never less than impressed.

“He’s one of the three or four people in my life that shaped me.”

After A Hard Day’s Night was released, Lester worked with the Fab Four a second time to produce Help! in 1965.

Help! was the band’s first film in full colour.

A Hard Day’s Night was a huge success for The Beatles and Lester.

After its release the movie was nominated for two Academy Awards - one for Best Screenplay and another for Best Score.

By 1971 it had accumulated a staggering $11 million worldwide, which is approximately $70 million today.

In 1999, the BFI ranked it as the 88th greatest British film of the 20th century.