Is there anything left to say about the Beatles that hasn’t already been said? From encyclopedic books which detail their every recording session to clickbait articles about why they suck, people have been talking and thinking and writing about the group ever since they first came on the scene 60 freaking years ago. Now with another Beatles movie on deck – Peter Jackson’s 3-part The Beatles: Get Back, which premieres on Disney+ on November 24 – perhaps it’s time to go to the very beginning, 1964’s A Hard Day’s Night, which is currently available for streaming on HBO Max.

By the time the Beatles began filming A Hard Day’s Night in March 1964 they had already issued a slew of hit singles, two albums and made their historic U.S. appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show. The initial impetus was commercial in intent — a quick cash-in of a hot new band with soundtrack and album tie-ins – but as with everything in the Beatles milieu, this didn’t mean it was cheap or that the quality of the music was below their usual high standards. The film was shot for the low budget of about a half million dollars and was directed by Richard Lester, an American living in the United Kingdom who got his start in television and musical comedies and would go on to direct 1965’s Help!

From the opening guitar chord of “A Hard Day’s Night” – one of the most famous chords in pop music history – it’s instant mayhem. The Beatles are being chased down the street by a mob of young girls, a recurring peril throughout the film. The faceless screaming female horde are similar to the zombie herds of The Walking Dead, an omnipresent danger lurking around every corner. Along for the ride is Paul’s grandfather, played by veteran Irish actor Wilfrid Brambell, who serves as the film’s wild card, sowing conflict and wherever he goes.

The film’s plot is simple; the Beatles travel to London to perform on television before an adoring audience of teenage girls. What could go wrong? Everything, apparently. In between comedic segments which involve the lads running around in circles or sending up the pretensions of British society, the Beatles lip synch to songs off their new album and recent singles. The quality of the band’s material stands out, from the obvious hits to Ringo’s version of “I Want To Be Your Man,” a song Lennon and McCartney pawned off on the Rolling Stones, or George Harrison’s “Don’t Bother Me,” one of his lesser compositions but equal to many other group’s best number.

The band’s cheeky sense of humor is on full display. Alun Owen’s script, which earned him an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay, included the Beatles’ own words pulled from interviews or overheard while he palled around with the group. Even at this early stage of their career, the four working class Liverpudlians ranging in age from 20 to 24 had little time for the pomposity of the British establishment. They talk back to World War II veterans, clueless fashion designers, and television producers whose arrogance is easily turned on its head. It’s remarkable how much the four Beatles personalities were already set in the archetypes for which they would forever be known, the cheerful McCartney, the acerbic Lennon, the abstruse Harrison and Ringo, the comic sad sack.

A Hard Day’s Night finds a young band on the brink of turning the existing world upside down. The terrain we see them navigating, impossibly formal and stuffy, no longer exist. The Beatles destroyed it by turning pop music into art and embodying a new generation which would buck against the prevailing order of age, background and class. Lester’s direction is similarly revolutionary in its camera work and use of perspective. You are watching someone create the modern music video (and video album) in real time. At the film’s climax, when the Beatles perform in front of a theater filled to the brim with screaming ecstatic teenage girls, the camera travels from the front of the stage, into the crowd and then behind the band, so we see what they’re seeing. It’s hard to imagine any teenager watching the film didn’t immediately want to start a rock n’ roll band in that instant. In fact, many did.

“A Hard Day’s Night finds a young band on the brink of turning the existing world upside down. The terrain we see them navigating, impossibly formal and stuffy, no longer exist. The Beatles destroyed it by turning pop music into art and embodying a new generation which would buck against the prevailing order of age, background and class.”

The film ends with the band running into a helicopter for a midnight matinee in Wolverhampton. The last thing we see is the helicopter flying into the air. It’s always struck me how it’s the exact same way the Rolling Stones’ 1970 film Gimme Shelter ends. The two movies are solarized images of each other. One is an idealized fiction about the glamorous life of young pop stars. The other, a gritty documentary about a weathered rock band navigating the death of the 1960s. Stones lawyer Melvin Lawyer could almost be a stand-in for Paul’s grandfather. A Hard Day’s Night ends with the Beatles flying off into a world of possibility. Gimme Shelter ends with the Rolling Stones fleeing an actual crime scene. By that point, the world had already changed.

Benjamin H. Smith is a New York based writer, producer and musician. Follow him on Twitter: @BHSmithNYC.

Watch A Hard Day's Night on HBO Max