Chartered in 1560, Westminster School has a long and demonstrable history of tradition and excellence in education.

Westminster’s earliest origins can be traced back to pre-Norman Conquest, but it was only after King Henry VIII dissolved English monasteries that Queen Elizabeth I refounded the school to what it is today.

Boys and girls can both apply to Westminster School, but the age at which they can join differs: boys may be admitted to the Under School from age seven and to the senior school from thirteen, but girls may only be admitted to Sixth Form at age sixteen.

International applications are also welcome. This creates a unique dynamic for learning and development which is bolstered by its historic location at Westminster Abbey and directly next to the Houses of Parliament.

On account of its rich history, Westminster School has educated many notable figures, Old Westminsters, both contemporary and historical, including philosopher John Locke, historian Edward Gibbon, architect Christopher Wren, broadcaster Louis Theroux, actress Helena Bonham Carter, actor Alfred Enoch, and many more.

Moreover, multiple former pupils have been awarded the Victoria Cross.

With so much talent coming from this quality school, there is little doubt that Westminster School prepares youth for bright and successful future careers.

What Parents Should Know About Westminster School

Westminster School prides itself on its classical liberal education style that provides pupils with world-class learning outcomes in a broad range of subjects whilst also promoting a culture of rational, critical thinking that can prepare pupils for a dynamic and successful career and the ability to overcome real-world challenges in their daily lives.

The school is independent and is centrally located in London within the precincts of Westminster Abbey.

It offers boarding and day options as well as an Under School for younger children.

The term fees change depending on the option, but range from £6,834 per term for Under School pupils up to £13,869 per term for pupils in boarding.

It admits nearly 750 pupils every year within its different points of entry, which include the Under School (7+, 8+, 11+ Entry for boys) and the Great School (13+ Entry for boys, 16+ Entry for girls).

Scholarships are available which can help to reduce these fees, but they are limited in number.

Queen’s Scholarships are historically limited to 48 in total, with only 12 being awarded to eight boys and to four girls each year.

These scholarships reduce the fees to 50 per cent between boarding and day fees.

Music Scholarships are also available for applicants that can demonstrate exceptional musicianship. Twelve are available; eight for boys, four for girls. Bursaries are also available which can provide remission of fees for exceptional pupils whose financial assessments would make them otherwise unable to pursue schooling at Westminster School.

How to Get into Westminster School

Commensurate with the school’s prestige, Westminster is competitive and admits pupils on the basis of academic excellence and character.

The school encourages pupils to not only learn about themselves and the world through a commitment to classical liberal education, but it also encourages pupils to display loyal dissent and to be analytical and critical thinkers not afraid to question and to challenge their learning and the world around them.

Consequently, any parent wishing to have their child educated at this school must be prepared to not only provide an application that displays their child’s strong academic performance, but they must also duly submit all application documents correctly and on time.

All prospective applicants should apply early; Westminster School accepts applications two years before the desired entry date.

Applications to Westminster School should be completed online.

Application for 13+ Entry

Online tests take place in November or early December and must be sat either at the Under School or at the pupil’s current school. Only one attempt is permitted.

Following the online test, a select few children will be invited to the Under School to sit additional examinations in English and Mathematics in early January.

Selected pupils who perform well and provide a strong reference will then be invited for a formal interview.

Successful children will be sent offers of admission (or rejection, if the school decides not to admit your son) in late February as well as the opportunity to prepare for Westminster School by attending starter mornings throughout the preceding summer term.

For those boys that wish to be considered for a scholarship opportunity, an examination called The Challenge must be sat in April or May.

This examination tests pupils on the topics of Maths, English, French, Science, Latin, History, and Geography. Examples of previous years’ examinations (disaggregated by subject) can be found here.

All parents stand to benefit from attending the school’s 13+ Tours or Open Days whilst in Year 5.

Tours and Open Days during the spring and summer terms can help pupils and parents learn more about the school and see how their child feels about the school.

Note that boys should apply for 13+ entry before the end of Year 5 (the year of his 10th birthday). Applications must be submitted before 30 September.

Should Any Child Apply?

Any child may apply to Westminster School provided that they are of suitable age and gender for each point of entry.

Given the school’s prestige and competitiveness, however, many children can be expected to be competing for each place, resulting in many rejection letters every year.

Therefore, children that have an excellent capacity for learning and development, supported by strong grades and recommendations from educators, should apply to Westminster.

Parents that wish to apply to Westminster School for 16+ Entry should take advantage of the school’s Open Mornings, which take place in June or September, to meet current pupils and staff as well as to see for themselves if the school is a good fit for their child.

In summary, applications to Westminster School should be excellent in all regards.

Children that wish to apply should thus be well-prepared and provided with sufficient preparation and resources before and during the application process so that they can succeed at Westminster School.