Short Films and Tutorials about our Horseshoes and our Team

On our website, we have comprehensive information about the application of our horseshoes and accessories for you. However, if you prefer watching a film instead of reading text, you're in the right place.

We offer you behind-the-scenes glimpses of our production facility, animations explaining the hoof mechanism, step-by-step tutorials for horseshoe application, and introduce our team to you.

Attention: Important Data Privacy Notice! By clicking on the video, you agree with your usage data and communication data being transferred to YouTube in the USA. You can withdraw your agreement at any time, e.g. using the contact details on our legal information page. The revocation does not affect the lawfulness of the processing until the revocation. For further information, please take a look at our privacy policy.

What Makes our Composite Horseshoes so Special?

In the following videos, we will demonstrate our horseshoe and its function on the horse's hoof, including a glimpse behind the scenes of our production facility in the Bavarian Forest in Germany.

Nail-on, Glue-on and Cast Shoe - Application Guides

Our horseshoes provide you with the flexibility to cater to the horse's needs based on hoof shape and situation. They can be applied in the traditional nailed manner or used as nail-less hoof protection.

Accessories for Composite Horseshoes

For ideal hoof protection, sometimes not only the perfect shoeing is necessary but also the right accessories. In the following films, we would like to introduce some of our accessories to you.

Accessories for Steel Shoes

Since the world is never entirely black or white, and as developers of composite horseshoes, we understand the importance of traditional horseshoes. That's why we also offer appropriate accessories for traditional steel shoes in our product range.

Special Models, Testimonials, and Riding Disciplines - Hoof Protection in Action

At this point, we have some product videos and impressions from satisfied users for you.

Behind the Scenes - Our Team

At this point, we would like to give you a glimpse behind the scenes and introduce at least a part of our amazing team. We are proud of all our dedicated employees. Without the many hands in all areas - from tool manufacturing to welding, injection molding production, the warehouse, and various office departments - it would not be possible for us to ship our horseshoes to our customers all over the world.

Our Official National Representatives

It's always nice to put a face to the voice. In the following videos, we would like to introduce you to our official national representatives and our partners in the USA.