Burning Horseshoe Productions is an Edinburgh & Glasgow based Film and Video Production company, providing services throughout Scotland and across the UK. With two directors and an extensive network of professional contacts we can take on projects of any scale and deliver the highest quality.

Our individual experience covers all aspects of Film and TV production and has been recognised at prestigious international events such as the Cannes International Film Festival.

Currently we have three projects in development.

The first is called Road to Defiance (previously called In the Darkest Hour), in co-operation with Northern Ireland Screen and Silver Sombrero Pictures. The story is based on the memoirs of Stephen's father as a WW2 intelligence-officer. It is based on the true story of three Ballachulish soldiers behind the enemy lines, who got rid of their uniforms and made it back to Britain after fooling their Nazi interrogators by bluffing them with Scots Gaelic. It is meant to honour the Scottish heritage in a theatrical release.

The second film features Elsie Inglis and the work of the Scottish Women’s Hospitals (SWH) in WW1. Elsie and the other women did not conform to the stereotype of women in war. Elsie and the SWH were operating close to the fighting on both the Western Front and in the Balkans. Also, the SWH's were run entirely and predominantly staffed by women. This meant that there were not only women doctors, rare enough in the early twentieth century but like Elsie, women surgeons.

The third project is an animated docudrama based on the memoirs of Leonard H. Thomas, written by his daughter, Leona. The book was published under the name of Through Ice and Fire: A Russian Arctic Convoy Diary 1942.

The University of West of Scotland and Burning Horseshoe Productions have created a free smartphone app - Explore Edinburgh Rock 2 Rock - for locals and tourist to walk through Edinburgh’s Old Town, listen to stories about Edinburgh’s history, also answer some multiple choice questions to test their knowledge.

Engaging local artists, actors, professional game developers and sound designers, the Edinburgh guide app has been a successful co-operative project and the parties are looking to develop it to the next stage.

Explore Edinburgh Rock 2 Rock is available on GooglePlay and AppStore.

The next stage of the free smartphone app is an exciting type of gaming experience designed for both Android and iOS platforms. Whilst educating the user about historical Edinburgh it also offers unique entertainment based on augmented reality, sound effects and interaction. It will blur the boundaries between fiction and reality.

Follow us on Facebook and Twitter! Share your views and suggestions, we are happy to hear from you!