A list of 145 species of the family Tortricidae, recorded from the western part of Tuva, is presented. The material studied originates from a joint FinnishRussian expedition made in June 1995. Additional data have been taken from Ukrainian, Russian and German literature. Cochylimorpha arenosana n. sp. from sand dunes of Northern Mongolia is described. Three species, Falseuncaria lechriotoma Razowski, 1970, Acleris idonea Razowski, 1972 and Eucosma argentifera Razowski, 1972 - all described from Mongolia - are reported as new for Russia. From the total of 145 species 138 can be placed into three main zoogeographical complexes: Holarctic/Palaearctic about 83%, Mediterranean- Central-Asiatic about 10% and endemic for the mountains of CentralAsia about 7%. The Holarctic complex can be divided into four chorological groups: Holarctic (22 spp.), Transpalaearctic (65 spp.), Western Palaearctic (12 spp.) and Eastern Palaearctic (13 spp.). Subalpine meadows and grazed steppes of Mongun-Taiga...

The article presents the most interesting results of elaboration of the author’s and colleagues’ collections, and some collection materials stored in the museums and scientific institutions of Ukraine: I. I. Schmalhausen Institute of Zoology of National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Zoological Museum of Kyiv National University named after Taras Shevchenko, and Museum of Nature of Kharkiv National University named after V. N. Karazin. The author reveals for the first time 4 species of tortricid moths from Ukraine: Cnephasia tianshanica Filipjev, 1934; Cydia millenniana (Adamczewski, 1967); Grapholita difficilana (Walsingham, 1900); Dichrorampha senectana Guenée, 1845. New finds of 12 rare species of tortricid moths (Aethes tornella (Walsingham, 1898); Eucosma balatonana (Osthelder, 1937); E. rubescana (Constant, 1895); Thiodia sulphurana (Christoph, 1888); Corticivora piniana (Herrich-Schäffer, 1851); Cydia oxytropidis (Martini, 1912); C. ulicetana (Haworth, [1811]); C. intexta (Kuznetsov, 1962); Grapholita gemmiferana (Treitschke, 1835); G. lobarzewskii (Nowicki, 1860); Strophedra weirana (Douglas, 1850); Dichrorampha teichiana Šulcs et Kerppola, 1997), which distribution in Ukraine needs clarification and further study, are also presented. The obtained data will be used for preparation of catalogue of the Lepidoptera of Ukraine.

The Elachistidae fauna of the southern Ural area, Russia, is outlined. A total of 51 species are listed, four of which remain unidentified to species level. Six species are described as new: Elachista (Aphelosetia) olschwangi Kaila sp. n., E. (A.) arduella Kaila sp. n., E. (A.) gibbera Kaila sp. n., E. (A.) chamaea Kaila sp. n., E. (A.) acutella Kaila sp. n. and E. (Elachista) devexella Kaila sp. n. Four species are reported for the first time from Europe and illustrated: Perittia sibirica Sinev, Elachista (Hemiprosopa) altaica (Sinev), E. (E.) megagnathos Sruoga and E. (E.) baikalica Kaila. The previously unknown female of E. megagnathos is described. Fourteen species are reported as new to Russia. Further illustrations and notes on some poorly known species are given.

Faunistically interesting records of Lepidoptera from Chechen Republic (Russia) are presented. Two species of Crambidae are reported as new to European part of Russia, 2 species – as new to the Eastern Caucasus. Current occurrence in the republic is confirmed for 1 species of Noctuidae.

The first regional checklist of moths and butterflies of Arkhangelsk oblast of Russia includes 1,036 species (538 species of microlepidoptera and 498 species of macrolepidoptera), 496 of which have been found in the oblast for the first time. The most interesting records include Gnorimoschema robustella, Caryocolum leucomelanella, Dichrorampha sequana, D. uralensis, Neptis rivularis and Melitaea phoebe. We also discovered several populations of Parnassius mnemosyne in the southern part of the oblast. The fauna of Arkhangelsk oblast appears poorer than the fauna of Northern Ural Mts. but still includes some Siberian taiga species which do not reach Fennoscandia. Also, the distribution limits of several species extend further north in Arkhangelsk oblast than in the more western parts of Europe.We estimate that 500 to 800 species remain to be found in the study region.

Further interesting records of Lepidoptera from Chechen Republic (Russia) are presented. Eugnosta magnificana (Rebel, 1914) and Hypsopygia fulvocilialis (Duponchel, 1832) are reported as new to the Northern Caucasus; 13 species are reported as new to the North-Eastern Caucasus and 3 species as new to Chechen Republic.

Extensive sampling during 2000–2009 resulted in discovery of 65 species of Lepidoptera that have not been reported from the Kola Peninsula (i.e., Murmanskaya oblast of Russia) in our earlier publications. Critical revision of data published in several papers by the Russian scientists and in the comprehensive Catalogue of the Lepidoptera of Russia added further 59 species to the regional fauna (among which we controlled records of 15 species), while 60 species are excluded as erroneous or doubtful records. We also confirmed records of 12 species which were known from old publications only, and reported interesting findings of 71 rare species that expand their distribution range or demonstrate interesting ecological patterns. The fauna of moths and butterflies of the Murmansk region now totals 813 species.

Until very recently, Nenets Autonomous Okrug (NAO), located in the northeastern part of European Russia, was the least studied region of Russia in terms of itsmoth fauna. Intensive sampling in the surroundings of Naryan-Mar, combined with critical revision of earlier publications and evaluation of museum collections, resulted in the discovery of a relatively rich fauna of Lepidoptera. The first regional checklist of moths and butterflies of the continental part of NAO includes 324 species (169 species of microlepidoptera and 155 species of macrolepidoptera), 178 of which are reported fromNAOfor the first time.We estimate that 40 to 180 species remain to be found in the study region. The recorded speciesmostly belong to residents of northern boreal forests and bogs. The fauna of moths and butterflies of NAO clearly differs from the fauna of Fennoscandia, due to the relatively higher proportion ofEast Palaearctic andBeringian species.