Timeline of Philadelphia History

1646-1899

1600s

1646

First church built by the Swedes consecrated on Tinicum Island.

1677

Second Swedes church dedicated, in Southwark, below the present Christian Street.

1681

March 4. Charter of Pennsylvania granted by Charles II.

1682

October 24. Landing of William Penn at New Castle, Delaware.

November. Penn's Treaty with the Indians at Shackamaxon.

1684

August 12. William Penn left Philadelphia, and returned to England.

1690

First paper mill established by William Rittenhouse, on Wissahickon Creek.

1698

Quaker meeting House built, S. W. Corner Second and High (Market) Streets, which was pulled down in 1755, and another erected, which was demolished in 1808.

First school book published in America by Francis Pastorius.

1700s

1700

July 2. New Swedes Church consecrated on the on the ground formerly occupied by the Swedes Church, Southwark.

December 2. William Penn arrived at Philadelphia.

1701

October 25. Charter granted to the city of Philadelphia by William Penn.

November 1. William Penn left Philadelphia for England.

1704

First Presbyterian Church built, High Street and White Horse Alley (Market and Bank Streets).

1710

Christ Church, Protestant Episcopal, built on Second Street, above Market; replaced by the present church in 1727.

1715

A club was formed called the Bachelors' Club, situate on the Delaware shore above Gunners' Run. This was the first country club adjacent to the city. "Bachelors' Hall," as it was commonly called, was made notorious by its festivities.

1719

December 22. The American Weekly Mercury issued by Andrew Bradford. Price, ten shillings per annum. The first newspaper issued in Philadelphia.

1723

October. Benjamin Franklin arrived in Philadelphia and applied to Andrew Bradford, the printer, for employment. Employed as a printer until he and his friend James Ralph, a merchant's clerk, in 1724 sailed together to London to "seek their fortunes." Franklin returned to Philadelphia October 11, 1726. In the winter of 1726-27, he found the Junto.

1724

Founding the Carpenter's Company.

1729

March 1. St. David's Day. Welsh citizens organize the "Society of Ancient Britons" at the Queen's Head Tavern in King Street (now Water Street.) Attend service in Christ Church, sermon preached in the original Cymric.

1731

July 1. The Library Company of Philadelphia founded.

First Baptist Church built, Second Street below Arch.

1732

A fishing club was instituted under the title of "Colony of Schuylkill." This club, which is yet in existence on the Delaware, at Andalusia, is now known as the State in Schuylkill.

1733

St. Joseph's Catholic Church, in Willing's Alley, Built.

1734

September 22. Arrival of the English ship St. Andrew with the first contingent of emigrants, followers of Caspar Schwenkfeld, a repressed sect in Silesia and Germany. On the next day (September 23d) all male persons over the age of sixteen years proceeded to the State House, and there subscribed a pledge of allegiance to George 2, King of Great Britain, and his successors. They spent the 24th in thanksgiving to Almighty God for delivering them out of the hands of their persecutors, for raising up friends in the times of their greatest need, and for leading them into a land of freedom where they might worship Him unmolested by civil or ecclesiastical power. To this day the 24th of September is so observed by this sect. The emigrants settled in Montgomery, Berks and Lehigh Counties.

1742

First Moravian Church built at the S. E. Cor. Race and Bread streets. First type made by Christopher Sauer, Germantown.

1743

First German Church built in Race Street Below Fourth. St. Michael's German Lutheran Church, corner of Fifth and Appletree Alley, built.

1744

The Philadelphia Contributionship. The first fire insurance company in America.

1745

April 15. The first theatrical performance given in Philadelphia, in a storehouse, Water Street, near Vine.

1755

May 28. Cornerstone of the Pennsylvania Hospital laid.

1761

Lottery schemes proposed and ran riot. Lottery held for disposing of 46 acres of land on Petty's Land on Petty's Island, the property of Alexander Alexander. Other projects were for the paving of streets in Philadelphia, and for the benefit of various churches.

1762

May. District of Southwark created. Boundary, Delaware River, Cedar Street (South); thence west to the Passyunk Road, to the Moyamensing Road, by Keeler's Lane to the Greenwich Road to Delaware River

November. Organization of the first medical college in Pennsylvania, by Dr. William Shippen, Jr. Located on Fourth Street, below Arch.

1771

The Assembly this year resolved to provide the city a new jail, the one at southwest corner of Third and High (Market) Streets being confusedly and notoriously inefficient.

1773

September 5. Provincial Congress met at Carpenters' Hall.

1774

October 21. The building of Walnut Street prison authorized by act of Assembly.

1775

Continental Congress in session at Philadelphia elects Benjamin Franklin (Printer) first Postmaster General of the United Colonies. (A Pony Express was established. In summer the mail left New York for Philadelphia twice a week and vice versa. In winter if mail came within two weeks, was considered good. Franklin, with his keen appreciation of all the advance of science, doubtless would be lost in admiration of those winged couriers of the skies who daily traverse the aerial paths from the Hudson to the Golden Gate and who now span the Continent in less time than it took in his day to transmit a letter from Boston to the Potomac.)

1776

July 4. The Declaration of Independence adopted.

July 8. The Declaration of Independence read to the people from the Observatory, State House Yard, by John Nixon.

1777

September 26. The British entered Philadelphia.

October 4. Battle of Germantown.

October 22. Battle of Red Bank.

November 15. Fort Mifflin, an American defensive outpost at the confluence of the Delaware and Schuykill Rivers, on Mud Island, just south of Philadelphia, is captured by the British after a long siege.

1778

June 18. The British evacuated Philadelphia.

1781

May 26. Act of Congress passed, authorizing the establishment of the Bank of North America. The bank opened January, 1783.

1782

First Hebrew Synagogue built at Cherry Street and Third. Now known as Congregation Mikveh Israel, it is the oldest synagogue in Philadelphia, and the longest running in the United States.

1784

January 14. Definitive treaty of peace with England ratified by Congress. Triumphal arch erected at "the upper end of High Street," then between Sixth and Seventh Streets.

1786

July 20. First skiff steamboat navigated on the Delaware River, by John Fitch.

1787

August 22. Steamboat forty-five feet long navigated on the Delaware River by John Fitch.

1788

July. Steamboat navigated from Philadelphia to Burlington, New Jersey, by John Fitch.

1789

March 11. Act to incorporate the city of Philadelphia passed by the Legislature.

October 12. David Cronan, Francis Burns, John Burnett, John Logan and John Ferguson hung at Centre Square for the murder of John McFarland.

First election of President of the United States.

1790

April 17. (Saturday evening.) Death of Benjamin Franklin. Buried in Christ Church cemetery, southeast corner of Fifth and Arch St. In keeping with his wishes, the epitaph Franklin composed was not carved on his tombstone. The autograph "copy" of the epitaph in the Library of Congress is dated 1784 and reads:

The body

of

B. Franklin, printer

(Like the cover of an old Book

Its contents torn out

And stripped of its lettering and gilding)

Lies here, food for worms.

But the work shall not be lost,

For it will (as he believ'd) appear once more

In a new and More elegant Edition

Revised and corrected

By the Author.

December 6. Congress moves from New York to Philadelphia, meeting at Congress Hall. As the home of Congress, Philadelphia was the capital of the nation, and would remain so until 1800.

1791

The Bank of North America abandoned the old system of keeping its accounts in pounds, shillings and pence and adopted that of dollars and cents.

1792

April 2. Act passed establishing United States Mint in Philadelphia. Mint erected on the east side of Seventh Street, above Sugar Alley (afterward known as Farmer Street, now Filbert Street).

1793

First Universalist Church built in Lombard Street, above Fourth.

March 23. The Assembly passed an act to extend the market house on High Street (Market) from Third to Fourth Street, and to extend it as occasion required, from street to street westward.

Yellow Fever. Deaths in August-November: 4,002.

1794

April 18. District of Southwark incorporated.

Market house erected in the middle of Second Street to extend from Coates (Fairmount Avenue) to Popular Street.

1795

The Philadelphia and Lancaster Turnpike, the first in the United States, opened.

April. Ordinance passed compelling the owners and occupants of houses in the city in the city to provide and keep in repair any number of leathern buckets not exceeding six for each building, to be used in extinguishing fires.

1797

Yellow Fever. Deaths, August-November, 1,292.

1798

Yellow Fever. Deaths, August-November, 3,637.

March. An act was passed by the Legislature chartering "The Germantown and Reading Turnpike Road," said turnpike to commence at the intersection of Front Street with the Germantown Road, thence through Germantown to the top of Chestnut Hill and thence through Hickorytown, the Trappe, and Pottstown to Reading.

August 18. Arrival of General Thaddeus Kosciusko, the Polish Patriot. Received by a large gathering of citizens.

September 2. Bank of Pennsylvania entered at night and robbed of $162,821.61. Other banks becoming alarmed, transferred to Germantown. The streets at night being deserted due to the prevailing fever.

1799

May 2. Work upon the Schuylkill Water Works, at Chestnut Street wharf and Centre Square commenced. First water thrown into the city January 21, 1801.

December 26. National Funeral Procession for George Washington (who had died at Mount Vernon on December 14). Thousands of mourners process from Congress Hall to the New (Zion) Lutheran Church, where Maj. Gen. Henry Lee eulogizes the former president as "First in war, first in peace, first in the hearts of his countrymen."

1800s

1800

March 7. The town of Frankford incorporated as a borough.

Yellow Fever. Deaths, August-November, 1,015.

Schuylkill Arsenal, near Gray's Ferry, built.

1801

United States Navy Yard (foot of Federal Street, Delaware River) established.

February 12. Incorporation of the Germantown and Perkiomen Turnpike Company. The road to begin at the corner of Third and Vine Streets.

1802

Yellow Fever. Deaths, August-November, 835.

1803

District of Northern Liberties incorporated.

March 24. The Cheltenham and Willow Grove Turnpike Company incorporated. Their route was "from the Rising Sun Tavern through Shoemakertown (Ogontz) to the Red Lion Inn (Willow Grove), on the Old York Road."

On the same day another company was incorporated to build a turnpike "from Front Street through Frankford and Bustleton to the Morrisville Ferry, Bucks County."

1804

Manufacturing enterprises continued to be established. The largest of the year was the Seth Craige cotton mill (later the old Globe Mill), bordering on the Cohocksink Creek, Germantown Ave. Below Franklin Ave. (Girard Ave.). This formally was "the Governor's grist mill." This cotton mill became later on an extensive concern, manufacturing cotton and woolen fabrics.

1807

Arch Street prison built.

Spark's Shot Tower, Southwark, built.

Beck's Shot Tower, near the Schuylkill River, above Arch Street, built.

1808

Race course established in the Northern Liberties, on the Old York Road at the corner of Nicetown Lane. Afterwards known as Hunting Park. Later on Purchased by some public spirited citizens and presented to the city for a public park.

1809

Olympic Theatre built, N.E. corner Ninth and Walnut Streets.

1810

The first steam ferry boat used to convey passengers from Philadelphia to Camden. "Camden" Captain Zeiba Kellam. Course, lower side of Market Street to Cooper Street.

1812

March 24. District of Moyamensing incorporated.

1813

March 22. District of Spring Garden incorporated.

1814

Anthracite coal introduced in Philadelphia. In History of the Falls of Schuylkill, Chas. V. Hagner describes the introduction of anthracite coal as follows:

"White & Hazard were using in their rolling mill, bituminous coal. They knew of the large body of anthracite at the head of the Schuylkill, and early commenced making experiments with it. They had some brought down in wagons, at an expense of one dollar per bushel- twenty-eight dollars per ton-expended a considerable sum of money in experimenting but could not succeed in making it burn. The hands working in the mill got heartily sick and tired of it, and it was about being abandoned. But, on a certain occasion, after they had been trying for a long time to make it burn without success, they became exasperated, threw large quantity of the 'black stones' as they called them, into the furnace, shut the doors, and left the mill. It so happened that one of them had left his jacket in the mill, and in going there for it some time afterwards he discovered a tremendous fire in the furnace, doors red with heat. He immediately called all hands and they ran through the rolls three separate heats of iron with that one fire. Here was an important discovery, and it was the first practically successful use of our anthracite coal, now so common. The important discovery was the simple fact that all that was wanted to ignite it was time, and to be 'let alone'. All this may appear strange now, but the men employed in that mill — and everyone else who used the bituminous coal — were accustomed to see it blaze up the moment they threw it on the fire, and because the anthracite would not do so they could not understand it, and the more they scratched and poked at it — an operation necessary with the bituminous coal — the worse it was with the anthracite. Upon making this discovery, Josiah White immediately began to make experiments in contriving various kinds of grates to make the anthracite applicable for domestic use, in which he finally succeeded to admiration"

This coal was sent down from the Lehigh; it cost delivered in Philadelphia about fourteen dollars a ton.

1815

February 13. New received of the signing of a treaty of peace with England. Grand illumination in the evening. Grand Ball given at Vauxhall Garden, northeast, corner of Broad and Walnut Streets. A grand Te Deum, in honor of the event, sung at St. Augustine's Church on February 26th.

December 29. Launching of the new steamboat Baltimore at the shipyard of Vaughn & Bowers, Kensington.

1816

Gas as an illuminant introduced. The first private residence in the United States lighted by gas was that of William Henry, coppersmith, at No. 200 Lombard Street, near Seventh.

1818

In November, 1815, the county Commissioners proposed a plan of education to the City Councils, which led, in January, 1816, to the appointment of a committee to consult with the commissioners of Southwark and of the Northern Liberties. But it was not until 1818 that the details were sanctioned by the Legislature, when an act was passed providing for the education of poor children at the public expense in the city and county of Philadelphia, forming the "first School District of Pennsylvania." The School Controllers established two schools in Southwark, two in Moyamensing, two in Northern Liberties and two in Penn Township. A model school was erected on the side of Chester Street, above Race. The first Superintendent of schools was Joseph Lancaster.

The team boat Peacock ran from Market Street Ferry to the mineral Springs on the Rancocas. The team boat Phoenix ran between Greenwich Point and Gloucester, propelled by the action of eight horses.

The legislature passed an act dividing the Northern Liberties into seven wards. The boundaries were as follows: First Ward, Vine Street to Willow, from the Delaware River to Third Street; the second Ward, from Third Street to Sixth, and from Vine to Willow; Third Ward, from Third Street to Delaware, between Willow and Green streets, and Wells Alley, commonly called Whitehall Street; the Forth Ward, from Third Street to Sixth, between Willow and Green, Fifth Ward, from Third Street to the Delaware River, between Green Street and Poplar Lane, and that part of Cohocksink Creek called the Canal; Sixth Ward, from Third Street to Sixth, between Green street and Poplar Lane; Seventh Ward bounded by Cohocksink Creek on the North and east, Poplar Street to the South, and Sixth Street on the west. "There are now in the city and liberties thirty-four engines and fifteen thousand feet of hose, under the direction of forty-nine companies. These companies are all willing to receive new members."

In order to prevent danger as much as possible it was directed that the manner in which power should be transported from vessels in the Delaware River to the magazine on the Grays Ferry Road should be by landing at Conoroe & Co.'s Wharf, in the village of Richmond; thence up Ann Street west to Frankford Road; down that road to the Black Horse and Mud Lane (Montgomery Avenue); thence to Sixth Street; down the latter to Hickory Lane (Coates Street, now Fairmont Avenue); thence west crossing the Ridge Road, to Broad Street, and to the Callowhill turnpike road; thence west to Schuylkill Front Street (Twenty- Second); down the same, and by way of the Grays Ferry Road to the destination. The intention was that the powder should be carried at a distance from the built-up portions of the city.

1819

March 9. Masonic Hall, Chestnut Street between Seventh and Eighth Streets, burned.

April 19. Work commenced on Fairmount Water Works. Completed 1822.

In the United States Gazette appeared an advertisement, Orders for Leigh Coal will be received at 172 Arch Street "in quantities not less than one ton, at thirty cents per bushel of eighty pounds." The coal may be seen burning at the above place.

September 8. Vauxhall Garden, N.E. Cor. Broad and Walnut Streets, destroyed by a mob.

1820

March 6. District of Kensington incorporated.

April 2. Chestnut Street Theater burned.

Yellow Fever. Deaths, September, 67.

1821

Coal was being consumed. In this year the Lehigh Coal and Navigation Company delivered three hundred and sixty five tons of coal to Philadelphia.

March 20. The Legislature passed an act to provide a State penitentiary within the city and county of Philadelphia. The Cherry Hill farm property on the north side of Francis Lane (later on Coates Street, now Fairmount Avenue) west of the Ridge Road (Corinthian Ave. and Fairmount Ave.). Cornerstone laid on May 22d. Incorporation of Apprentices Library.

May 9. South Street Theater (below Fifth Street) burned.

1822

January 24. Orphan's Asylum, corner Eighteenth and Cherry Streets, burned. Twenty-three children perished.

1823

May 31. Turner Camac conveys to the bible Christian Society a lot of ground on the west side of Third Street above Girard Avenue, sixty feet front and two hundred feet deep to a twenty feet wide alley. On this plot was erected a church later on sold to Louis and William Burk. The bricks forming the sidewalk fronting this church were studded with nails.

1824

March 31. Legislature incorporated a company to construct a railroad from Philadelphia to Columbia, in Lancaster County; the company to be called "The President, Directors and Company of the Pennsylvania Railroad Company."

During the year Schuylkill water was introduced into 3,954 private houses, and 185 manufactories.

May 9. Fire in the Northern Liberties, Third Street near Brown. About thirty houses destroyed.

September 27. Arrival of Gen. Lafayette in Philadelphia stopping and sleeping at the Frankford Arsenal.

Grand procession on the 28th. Reception in Independence Hall.

A census taken in 1824 showed that the city contained fifty-five printing offices, one hundred and fifty printers.

1827

Penn Treaty monument erected upon the spot where William Penn made his treaty with the Indians.

1828

August. Stephen Heimer, a watchman, set upon and killed at corner of Third and George Streets. this precipitated a riot among the weavers residing in this neighborhood.

October 1. Arch Street Theatre opened, Arch Street above Sixth.

December 6. The Reading mail coach which left the city with nine passengers, held up by three men on the Ridge Road and Turner's Lane (Oxford Street). James Porter, George Wilson and John Poteet afterwards arrested and convicted. Poteet turned State's evidence. Porter executed at Bush Hill on July 2, 1830.

1829

July 4. Cornerstone laid of second United States Mint, S.W. Cor. Chestnut and Juniper Streets.

1831

December 26. Stephen Girard, a native of France but for many years an active merchant and citizen of Philadelphia, died in his house, Water Street above Market. He was buried on the 30th of December at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Trinity, Sixth and Spruce Streets. The remains were transferred in 1850 to the sarcophagus in Girard College, under the control of members of the Masonic order. At his death the value of his estate was appraised at $7,500,000.

1832

February 22. Cornerstone of the Merchants' Exchange laid.

April 2. Cornerstone of the Moyamensing Prison laid.

June 6. The Philadelphia and Norristown Railroad opened to Germantown.

July 5. Cholera commenced. Ended October 4. Deaths, 935.

August 10-12. Race riots between whites and blacks at and adjacent to a flying horse exhibition (carousel) South Street above Seventh. Three hundred special constables sworn in to quell the nightly riots.

September 13. West Chester Railroad opened to the intersection of Columbia Railroad.

1833

February 22. Cornerstone of Washington Monument laid, in Washington Square.

April 8. Cornerstone of St. Michael's R. C. Church laid at the southeast corner of Second and Jefferson Streets.

1834

March 4. William Penn steamboat burned below the Navy Yard.

September 28. St. Michael's R.C. Church consecrated.

October 14. Political riot in Moyamensing. Robb's Row, Christian Street above Ninth, burned.

1835

July 12. Riots. Houses inhabited by African-Americans, in the neighborhood of Shippen (Bainbridge) and Eighth Streets, sacked.

1836

February 8. Philadelphia Gas Works went into operation.

February 22. An ox roasted on the ice of the Delaware River, near Smith's Island (in the Delaware, opposite Chestnut Street).

1837

Banks suspended specie payments. The city of Philadelphia issued "shin plasters."

1838

March 15. The Commissioners passed an ordinance establishing the Northern Liberties Gas Works. Capital, $200,000.

April 1. Upper Ferry Bridge burned.

May 14. Pennsylvania Hall, corner Sixth and Haines (Cresson) Streets, attacked by a mob.

May 17. Pennsylvania Hall burned.

May 18. Shelter for Colored Orphans, Thirteenth Street, above Callowhill, burned by a mob.

October 4. Great fire on Chestnut Street Wharf, Delaware.

December 17. Schuylkill Bank failed.

1840

Riots in Kensington. The Philadelphia and Trenton Railroad torn up on Front Street, and Emery's tavern burned.

1841

January 15. The banks resumed specie payments.

February 4. Bank of the United States failed and other banks suspended specie payments.

1842

January 20. Celebration of the opening of; the Reading and Pottsville Railroad.

August 1. Abolition Riots. African Presbyterian Church, St. Mary's Street, and Smith's Hall, Lombard Street, burned.

August 26. Reading Railroad bridge and the old bridge at the Falls of Schuylkill destroyed by fire.

Ground purchased at the southeast corner of Fifth Street and Franklin Avenue (Girard Avenue) for the erection of a German Catholic Church. Purchase price $11,700.

1843

January 11. Weavers' Riots in Kensington, (Germantown Avenue and Master Street). Rioters assemble at "The Nanny Goat" Market, Washington (American) Street north of Master. Sheriff's posse assailed and beaten. Rioters later dispersed by General Cadwalader's brigade.

August 15. Cornerstone laid of Roman Catholic Church of St. Peter, Fifth Street and Franklin Avenue (Girard Avenue). Solemnly consecrated February 14, 1847. In 1853 the Christian Brothers took charge of the boys' school.

1844

May 6. Riots in Kensington. Several killed.

May 7. Riots renewed in Kensington. More people killed.

May 8. Riots continued. St. Michael's Church (Second and Jefferson Streets) with the Female Seminary adjourning, burned in the afternoon. St. Augustine's Church (Fourth and New Streets) burned in the evening. All of above buildings totally destroyed.

July 7. (Sunday). riots in Southwark; Church of St. Philip de Neri attacked. Fight at night between the military and the rioters; several persons killed.

July 24. This is considered as the foundation date of the establishing of Fairmount Park. On this date the city purchased from the assignees of the defunct Bank of the United States the estate known as Lemon Hill, formerly the estate of Henry Pratt, fifty-two acres for $75,000. Sedgely, north of Lemon Hill, was acquired in 1856. The Landsdown property, on the west side of the Schuylkill, was acquired in 1866.

1845

April 12. By act of Assembly, the city of Philadelphia and the incorporated districts of Spring Garden, Northern Liberties and Penn, and the township of Moyamensing are required to establish and maintain police forces of "not less than one able-bodied man for one hundred and fifty taxable inhabitants" for the prevention of riots and the preservation of the public peace.

July 4. Cornerstone of St. Anne's R.C. Church laid at Memphis Street and Leigh Avenue.

December 29. St. Peter's R.C. Church dedicated.

1846

May 11. Congress of the United States declared that war existed by the act of the republic of Mexico. Ten million dollars appropriated and the President authorized to call out fifty thousand volunteers.

May 13. The journeymen printers met at Keystone hall and resolved that they would take up their shooting sticks in their country's cause.

August 24. Cornerstone laid of new St. Michael's R.C. Church, to replace the one destroyed by fire in 1844.

September 17. Old Fellow' Hall, Sixth and Haines (Cresson) Streets, dedicated.

November 5. St. Anne's R. C. Church dedicated.

1847

February 7. Dedication of the new St. Michael's R.C. Church.

February 14. St. Peter's R.C. Church consecrated.

April 15. two elephants were drowned in the Delaware River in attempting to swim from Greenwich Point to Gloucester Point, New Jersey.

August 21. At the sugar refinery of George L. Broome & Co., Bread Street near Quarry, twenty-seven men struck down by falling walls. They were members of Fairmount engine and Perseverance Hose Companies. Andrew Butler and Charles H. Himes, members of the Perseverance Hose Company, killed. They were buried at the same time, the funeral was attended by fifty-one fire companies, numbering over three thousand members. The line of march estimated to be three miles long.

1848

February 27. Incorporation of the district of Richmond in the county of Philadelphia. Bounded on the east by the Delaware River, on the north by Westmoreland Street, along the same westward to the westward side of Emerald Street, along the same to the southerly side of Hart Lane, and along the latter to the northern boundary of Kensington district, and by the same to the Delaware River and place of beginning. March 25, 1848, the boundaries were extended to beginning at the river Delaware, on the west side of Westmoreland Street,, and extending along the river to the north side of Tioga Street; thence along Tioga to the east side of the Point Road; along the Point Road to Westmoreland Street, and along the same to the place of beginning.

1849

May 30. Cholera commenced. Ended September 8th. Deaths, 1012.

October 8. Riot at Sixth and St. Mary Streets: "California House" destroyed.

1850

July 9. Great fire which commenced on Vine Street Wharf and destroyed three hundred and sixty-seven houses.

October 18 and 19. Jenny Lind, "the Nightingale," managed by P.T. Barnum, sang both evenings at Musical Fund Hall, on Locust Street. The two concerts netted $19,000, a sum unprecedented for such entertainment.

1851

March 18. Assembly Building, S. W. Corner Tenth and Chestnut Streets, burned.

December 24. Public reception to Louis Kossuth, the Hungarian patriot.

December 26. Hart's Building and the Shakespeare Building at Sixth and Chestnut Streets burned.

December 30. Barnum's Museum, corner Seventh and Chestnut Streets, burned.

1852

May 22. The Diligent Engine played one hundred and eight nine perpendicular at Jayne's building, Chestnut Street, Below Third.

1854

February 2. Consolidation Act passed.

July 5. Chinese Museum at Ninth and Sansom Streets, and National Theatre, Chestnut Street, Below Ninth, burned.

1856

July 1. The long wharf of Merrick & sons, at the foot of Reed Street, Delaware River, Frequently used by the residents of the neighborhood as a recreation resort, caved in; ten persons drowned.

July 17. An excursion train on the North Pennsylvania Railroad leaving the Cohocksink depot, Germantown Avenue and Thompson Street, containing about six hundred children and young people of St. Michael's R. C. Church, on reaching Camp Hill, near Ambler, collided head-on with a train going southward. Fifty dead and one hundred injured.

September 21. Banks suspended.

October 12. The ship Cathedral drawing twenty-five feet four inches of water, being unable to get into New York, and cross the bar, came to Philadelphia up the Delaware without difficulty.

1857

January 18. Tremendous snowfall and gale. The thermometer touching zero. Numerous fire alarms to which the volunteer firemen gallantly responded. Fire destroyed Tabernacle Methodist Church, Eleventh below Oxford Street.

January 26. The Academy of Music opens for its first season with a grand gala. A month later it would host its first performance, Verdi's opera Il Trovatore. Today, it is the oldest grand opera theatre still used for its original purpose in the United States.

February 26. Opening of the Academy of Music, Broad and Locust Streets. Production of Il Trovatore, with Brignold and Gazzaniga in the principal characters.

September 25. Financial panic of 1857 precipitated. Bank of Pennsylvania closed its doors. Other banks suspended specie payments.

November 2. Dedication of the new hall and parade of the American United Mechanics, Northeast Corner of Fourth and George Streets.

1858

January 20. City passenger cars run for the first time in Philadelphia, over Fifth and Sixth Street Railway.

Introduction of steam fire engines.

September 1. Atlantic Telegraph celebration.

1859

January 4. Fire, factory, Lawrence Street above Brown. Loss, $35,000. Steam fire engines in efficient operation.

March 3. Great fire, Second Street below Dock. Seventeen families burned out.

March 14. Girard College Railroad goes into operation . (Ridge Avenue line).

March 24. Chestnut and Walnut Street Railway, act of legislature, approved by council and bill signed by mayor. Company agreed to pay $100,000 towards bridge over the Schuylkill.

March 27. Holy Trinity Church, Nineteenth and Walnut Streets, opened.

April 19. new Western Market, Sixteenth and Market Streets, opened.

May 30. Sunday cars run on Green and Coates Streets, (Fairmount Avenue) Railway.

June 23. Arch Street Railway to Fairmount commences operations.

July 17. (Sunday) Green and Coates Streets cars stopped by order of the Mayor.

July 21-23. Sunday car case argument on habeas corpus before Justice Thompson of Supreme Court.

July 23. Indignation meeting in Independence Square on Sunday cars.

August 15. Grand trial of steam fire engines at Fairmount on account of visit of City Council of Cincinnati.

August 20. Great fire. Stout's Planing Mill and Sewing Machine Factory, 18th Ward. Loss very heavy.

September 8. Great fire. Good Intent Mills, 24th Ward.

October 1. Fire. Hughes Hay Press, Jefferson Avenue and Marriott Street. No water to be had.

October 24. Chestnut and Walnut Streets cars commence running to Twenty-second Street.

November 21. market sheds in Market Street between Front and Eighth, demolition commenced.

December 25. Dedication of Siloam Methodist Episcopal Church, Wood and Brown Streets (E. Susqehanna Avenue and Moyer Street).

December 28. Washington Street Wharf fixed upon as the Delaware terminus of Pennsylvania Railroad.

1860

January 5. Bishop John Nepomucene Neumann falls dead at Thirteenth and Vine Streets.

January 9. Obsequies of Bishop Neumann at St. Johns Cathedral, Thirteenth Street above Chestnut. Buried at St. Peter's Church, Fifth Street and Girard Avenue.

February 13. Continental Hotel open for visitors, and open for quests February 16.

April 25. Public Building Commission holds its first meeting under act of legislature.

May 7. Fire, Tattersall's Stables, Filbert, below Thirteenth. 28 horses burned.

May 24. Fire, Richmond and Schuylkill River Railway (Girard Avenue line) Depot, Girard Avenue and Twenty-Sixth Street.

May 24. Cornerstone of Episcopal Hospital, Lehigh Avenue and Front Street, laid.

July 6. Public Buildings Commissioners decide on Penn Square as the site of the court houses.

July 13. Fire. Kimball & Gorton's car factory, Fifteenth Ward.

July 22. Fire. Yard, Gilmore & Co.'s store, 40-42 North Third Street. Loss, $50,000.

July 26. Tremendous tornado at Camden, NJ. Factory blown down. Three men killed.

September 6. Plans for Public Building adopted.

September 20. Contracts for Public Buildings awarded to John McArthur, Jr.

October 9-11. Visit of Prince of Wales.

October 19. Fire. Franklin Building, Sixth Street, below Arch.

November 12. Sensation from threats of secession at the South. Great depression of stocks.

November 22. Philadelphia banks suspend specie payments.

November 23. Destructive fire, Twelfth and Willow Streets.

1861

January 3. Meeting of citizens at Board of Trade rooms, to take action concerning the peril of the Union.

January 7. Destructive fire, Maule & Bros., lumber-yard, Twenty-third and South Streets.

February 10. Ship John Trucks cut through by ice and sunk at Arch Street Wharf, Delaware River.

April. War excitement.

April 23. Whale caught in the Delaware opposite the city.

May 8. First Regiment Pennsylvania Volunteers march South.

July 4. Grand parade of Gray Reserves and Home Guards.

September 4. Seizure of property belonging to rebels.

September 10. Ferry boat Curlew with 142 head of cattle aboard, sunk in the Delaware. Most of the cattle escaped.

September 14. Fire in Continental Theatre, Walnut Street above Eighth. Fourteen ballet girls burned, nine whom died.

October 19. Boiler explosion at I. P. Morris' machine works, Richmond. Two men killed.

October 30. Fire. Cotton and woolen mills, Twelfth Street and Washington Avenue. Loss $100,000.

November 5. Explosion at Bridesburg Arsenal. Two men killed.

1862

March 29. Explosion at cartridge factory of Prof. Jackson, Tenth Street near Moyamensing Avenue. Houses in vicinity shattered, seventeen persons died from injuries.

April 20. Cathedral of St. Peter and Paul, Logan Square, opened.

June 17. City Councils pass an ordinance appropriating $310,000 for purchase of League Island, to be presented to the United States as a naval station for construction of ironclads.

July 17. Gold eighteen and a half percent. Premium. Silver thirteen per cent. Great scarcity of specie and small change.

July 19. Postage stamps and car tickets put in circulation for small change.

September 5. Funeral of Col. John A. Koltes.

September 8. Independence Square made a recruiting camp.

September 12. Tremendous rains. Cohocksink Creek overflows. Several lives lost. Great damage in upper part of city.

October 16. Gold at thirty-seven per cent. Premium.

October 18. Destructive fire at Ninth and Market Streets.

1863

February 25. Gold reaches seventy-two per cent. Premium.

February 26. New post office building, Chestnut Street below Fifth (now eastern portion of Drexel Building) opened for business.

May 2. Fire. Car factory, Nineteenth and Market Streets. Loss, $100,000.

June 16. Mayor Henry issues a proclamation calling on the citizens to close their places of business and prepare to defend the State. State House bell tolled a 3 P.M. A large assembly convened in Independence Square.

June 29. A general mustering for defense of the advance of Lee. Earthworks constructed on roads leading to the city.

July 15. Draft commences in Fourth Congressional District.

August 24. Grand German festival at Washington Retreat. (Fairmount Park).

September 24. Grand review of colored troops at Chelten Hills. (Camp William Penn).

October 3. Grand parade of colored troops.

November 7. Dummy engines commence running from the depot of the Fifth and Sixth Street Railway, Fourth and Berks Streets to Frankford. They proved very satisfactory.

December 18. Destructive fore in a petroleum warehouse, Delaware Avenue below Almond Street.

December 22. Cooper's Shop Soldiers Home dedicated.

December 23. Grand military procession to receive 29th Regiment Pennsylvania Volunteers.

December 23. West end of Grays' Ferry bridge burned.

1864

March 1. Ringing of State House bell for ordinary fires forbidden by Mayor Henry.

March 5. Old Fish Market at foot of Market Street vacated.

March 27. Destructive fire at Ninth and Wallace Streets.

April 20. Grant's candle factory, Fifteenth Ward, burned. Loss, $75,000.

April 25. Boiler explosion, Cornelius & Baker's chandelier factory, Cherry Street above Eighth. Several killed and injured.

May 19. Coal Oil Refinery, Twenty-third and Arch Streets, burned.

May 24. Destructive fire, Twelfth and Willow Streets.

June 7. Opening of Great Central Fair, Logan Square. Receipts of Fair, over $1,000,000.

July 22. Simon's Wagon Works, Second and Huntingdon Streets, entirely destroyed by incendiary fire.

August 12. Grand reception Baxter's Fire Zouaves (72d Pennsylvania Volunteers).

September 24 Fall of iron rafters at the new depot, Philadelphia and Erie Railroad, Market and Sixteenth Streets; several persons killed, others injured.

Large unfinished building at northwest corner of Eighth and Vine Streets, falls down.

November 20. Cathedral of St. Peter and Paul, Logan Square, consecrated.

December 26. Serious riots among coal heavers, Port Richmond.

1865

January 28. Delaware River frozen over; people crossed over to New Jersey.

February 1. Passenger railway fares raised to 7 cents.

February 8. Disastrous conflagration at Ninth and Washington Streets. Fire originated in coal-oil establishment. Fifty dwelling

houses burned. Several persons perished. Streets filled with snow, and banked up the burning coal-oil, forming a sea of fire.

February 23. Draft commences in First an Second Wards.

February 24. Draft in Third, Fourth and Seventh Wards.

February 27. Draft in Sixth and Ninth Wards.

March 14. Mrs. Rachel Hancock dies from effects of a shot which the provost Guard was firing at a deserter in Fourth Street, near Buttonwood.

March 22. Draft in Twenty-Fifth Ward.

April 3. News of capture of Richmond, Va. Great rejoicing. State House bell rung. Blowing of steam whistles and ringing of hose carriage bells, and striking of gongs in front of Independence Hall. Parade of firemen. Mass meeting in front of Custom House. Illumination in evening.

April 9. News of surrender of Lee's Army. Illumination, blowing of steam whistles and ringing of fire bells. Firing of cannon.

April 15. News of assassination of President Lincoln at Ford's Theatre on the evening of Good Friday, April 14, General mourning throughout the city.

April 22. President Lincoln's body escorted to Independence Hall by a large military and civic precession.

May 14. New Union League House, Broad and Sansom Streets, opened.

May 17. Merrick's foundry partially destroyed by fire. Loss $75,000.

June 10. Review of returned Philadelphia troops, General Meade commanding.

June 24. Reception of General Grant at Union League House.

June 27. Fire. Joseph B. Biddle & Co.'s fire works store, 108-110 South Delaware Avenue. Loss, $100,000.

June 28. Fire. C.J. Fell & Co.'s spice establishment, 120 South Front Street. Loss, $70,000.

July 1. Spire of German Reformed Church, Green above Fifteenth Street, blown down; no one hurt.

July 3. Mary Ridey kills, by stabbing, two brothers, Joseph and Isaac Sides, at 1170 North Third Street, a house known as "The New Idea."

August 10. Large sale of Government vessels at the Navy Yard.

August 12. St. George's M. E. Church, fourth Street, Below New, partially destroyed by fire.

August 28. Union and Cooper Shop Volunteer Refreshment Saloons closed. Imposing ceremonies at the Academy of Music.

October 3. Great fire. French, Richards & Co.'s drug establishment, Tenth and Market Streets. Loss, near $300,000.

October 8. Fire, Coal-oil sheds, Dickinson Street Wharf. Loss, $100,000.

October 16, Grand parade of volunteer Firemen. In line 102 hose carriages, 57 steam fire engines, 11 hand engines, 12 hook and ladder trucks, 26 ambulances, including 30 companies from other cities.

November 29. Boiler explosion, Penn Treaty Iron Works, one man killed, three injured.

December 2. Landreth Public School partially destroyed by fire.

December 28. City Councils pass ordinance for the erection of a new court house on Sixth Street side of Independence Square.

1866

January 2. Great fire, 607 Chestnut Street. Loss $150,000.

January 7. Coldest night known; thermometer 18 degrees below zero. Delaware and Schuylkill frozen over.

Centenary services of the Methodist Episcopal Church, held at St. George's Church, Fourth below New Street.

January 20. Fenian mass meeting at Sansom Street Hall.

January 30. Fire, Delaware Avenue below Vine Street. Loss, $100,000.

February 22. Firemen's procession on the return of Hibernian steam fire engine after four years' service at Fortress Monroe.

February 26. Great fire extending from George H. Robert's' hardware store, 235-237 North Third Street, James, Kent and Santee, wholesale dry goods house, 237 and 239, Smith & Shoemakers', wholesale drug house, and others. Loss, $800,000. One man killed and nine injured by falling wall.

April 11. Christopher Deering and family murdered by Antoine Probst, on a farm in the southern section of the city. Probst hung on June 8th.

May 13. Chestnut and Walnut Street Railway commenced west of new Chestnut Street Bridge.

June 9. Great fire at Dearie's Mill, Twenty-Fifth and Callowhill Street. Loss $200,000.

June 23. Chestnut Street Bridge Formally opened by the Mayor.

July 4. Grand Parade. Representatives from over one hundred veteran regiments, and the orphan children of soldiers and sailors killed during the rebellion. State flags carried by the color-guards restored to the State. Ceremonies in Independence Square. Presentation made by the Mayor General George G. Meade and flags received by Governor Andrew G. Curtin.

July 5. Fire, Baker & McFadden's planing-mill, Hillsdale Street below Race (east of Fourth Street). Loss, $100,000.

July 7. Fire, Fitler, Weaver & Co.'s rope factory, Germantown Avenue and Tenth Street (fronting this factory was the toll-gate, Germantown Pike). Loss, &130,000.

July 12. Great fire, Tacony Print Works, Frankford, belonging to A. S. Lippincott. Loss, $1,000,000.

July 26. Boiler explosion. Yewdalls Mills, Hestonville. Three persons killed.

July 27. Fire, Biddle & Co.'s hardware store, 509 Commerce Street. Loss, $150,000.

August 4. Moyamensing Hall, Christian Street above 9th, set on fire and totally destroyed. The deed was committed by persons opposed to the use of the hall as a cholera hospital, cholera prevailing at this time.

November 3. City iceboat launched.

December 14. North Broad Street opened from Nicetown Lane to Fisher's Lane.

December 23. Fire. Gustav Bergner's malt-house, 31st and Thompson Streets; loss, $1000,000.

1867

June 4. Cornerstone of the new hall, Improved Order of Red Men, S. W. Cor Third and Brown Streets, laid.

June 6. Explosion at steam saw-mill of Geasy and Ward, Sansom Street, between 10th and 11th. Twenty-two persons killed (some being burned alive) and seven injured. A relief fund of $15,000 raised for the families of the sufferers.

June 19. American Theatre, Walnut between 8th and 9th, destroyed by fire. Ten persons killed by the falling of the front wall.

June 17. Grand parade of societies participating in Tenth General Saengerfest at Engel & Wolf's farm. (Fairmount Park, vicinity of Grant Monument.)

August 27. Cornerstone laid of new Siloam Methodist Church, Wood Street above Duke (E. Susquehanna Avenue above Thompson Street).

September 26. Grand reception of Gen. Philip H. Sheridan; great military and civic display.

November 28. Obsequies of David M. Lyle, Chief engineer of Fire Department, who was found dead in his office November 25th. Grand procession of military, firemen and citizens.

1868

January 8. Great Fenian demonstration and obsequies in honor of Allen, Larkin and O'Brien.

April 27. Boiler explosion, Penn treaty Iron Works, Beach above Marlborough street. Five persons killed.

July 17. Strike of firemen at Gas Works. City in total darkness. July 18th advance of wages granted, and work resumed.

July 30. Charles E. Becker, proprietor of a zoological garden, in the rear of his saloon, 441-443 North Ninth Street, bitten by a rattle-snake, and dies in twenty minutes.

Ice-house of Star Ice Company, on the Schuylkill above Girard Ave., falls, injuring 9 men and killing 3 horses.

August 4. Cotton and woolen mill of John Brown & Sons, Moyamensing Ave, and Moore Street, burned. Loss, $105,000.

August 11. Parade of Independent Order of Red Men, and dedication of the hall at S. W. Cor. Third and Brown Streets.

Conflagration at Front and New Streets. Loss, 70,000.

September 28. Brig Sunny South, loaded with coal-oil, explodes near Chester; Capt. James R,, Kelly, pilot, of Philadelphia, killed.

October 1. Mass Convention, "Boys in Blue," of the United States, being discharged soldiers of the U.S. Army.

October 2. Parade of "Boys in Blue."

October 17. George W. Childs, of Public Ledger, presents burial lot in Woodland Cemetery, valued at $8,000, to the Philadelphia Typographical Society.

October 22. Mrs. Mary E. Hill killed in her house, N.E. Cor. Tenth and Pine Streets. George S. Twitchell, Jr., and his wife, the daughter of Mrs. Hill, arrested on the charge of having committed the murder. Subsequently Twitchell was found guilty and sentenced to be hung. On

April 8th, the day he was to be executed, committed suicide. Mrs. Twitchell acquitted.

November 25. City Museum Theatre, Callowhill Street between Fourth and Fifth, destroyed by fire. Rebuilt and opened as Concordia Theatre. Later bottling establishment of John F. Betz & Son.

December 3. fire, 619-623 Market Street. Loss $150,000.

December 4. Ferry boat Brooklyn, belonging to Gloucester Ferry Company, destroyed by fire. Loss, $30,000.

December 23. John and Rebecca George present 83 acres of land, known as "George's Hill," to the city as an addition to Fairmount Park.

December 30. Depot of 2d and 3d Street Railroad destroyed by fire.

1869

January 7. The commission appointed to provide for the erection of new public building, meet and organize.

January 14. Jewelry establishment of J, E. Caldwell, Chestnut Street, above Ninth, destroyed by fire. Two clerks in Caldwell's store were burned to death.

February 21. Mrs. Lydia R. Bailey, a well- known printer, dies in her 91st year.

March 24. Joseph W. Smith, janitor of hall at Sixth Street and Girard Ave., found dead; Corner's jury rendered a verdict that his death was caused by violence.

April 4. The Beneficial Saving Society robbed of $1,000,000 in bonds by burglars; bonds subsequently returned.

April 6. The new building of the Fidelity Insurance, Trust and Safe Deposit Company opened.

April 26. Grand parade of Odd Fellows on occasion of the semi-centennial celebration.

April 28. Burning of the old depot of the Germantown and Norristown Railroad Co., Ninth and Green Streets.

April 29. Skating Rink, at 21st and Race Streets, burned.

May 3. The steam canal-barge Fulton sunk at the foot of Walnut Street. Two men drowned.

May 10. The cornerstone of Zion German Lutheran Church, Franklin Street below Vine, laid.

May 12. Parade of the Improved Order of Red Men. Imposing display.

May 17. John Dobson's blanket factory, Falls of Schuylkill, destroyed by fire. Pennypacker & Sildey's panel factory, Willow Street above 11th, burned down.

May 31. The will of Dr. James Rush, bequeathing over $1,000,000 to the Philadelphia Library Company, admitted to probate.

June 20. The carriage of the West Philadelphia Hose Co. is thrown into the Schuylkill by a party of rowdies.

June 21. The Independent Order of Druids celebrate their twenty-fifth anniversary at Washington Retreat.

June 23. Vista drive at Fairmount Park, opened by Park Commissioners.

June 25. Destructive fire at Sixth Street and Columbia Ave. Loss, $250,000.

June 26. Cornerstone of First Reformed Church, Seventh Street below Oxford, laid.

June 30. Raid made on the unlicensed distilleries in the Twenty-Fifth Ward. Revenue officers accompanied by a corps of marines.

July 4. German Lutheran Church, Fourth and Carpenter Streets, Consecrated.

July 5. Unveiling the statue of Washington Monument in front of Independence Hall. Dedicated by the school children.

July 13. The Third Reformed Church, Tenth and Filbert Streets, damaged by fire.

July 15. New building of the Mercantile Library, Tenth Street above Chestnut, inaugurated with appropriate ceremonies.

July 20. cornerstone of the German Synagogue, "Rodef Sholem," laid.

August 4. Great conflagration of Col. W. C. Patterson's bonded warehouse, Front and Lombard Streets. Thousands of barrels of whiskey burnt. Loss over $2,000,000.

August 15. Destruction of the Boston Fish Company's building, Fifth Street and Columbia Avenue. Loss over $50,000.

August 16. Scarcity of water in the Schuylkill. Steam fire engines used to pump water into Fairmount basin.

August 24. Large factory building, Ninth and Wallace Streets, destroyed by fire. Loss, $100,000.

August 26. Additional steam fire-engines used to pump water into Fairmount basin.

August 28. The Tax Receiver's office at Sixth and Chestnut Streets entered and robbed of $28,000.

August 31. The art store of James S. Earle & Sons, Chestnut Street below Ninth, destroyed by fire. Loss over $100,000.

September 12. Burning of spice mills, 137 North Front Street. Loss, $40,000.

September 13. The Humboldt Centennial celebrated by a parade and laying the cornerstone of a monument in Fairmount Park.

September 16. Barrel manufactory of W. B. Thomas, 12th and Buttonwood Streets destroyed by fire. Loss, $50,000.

October 3. The tide in the Delaware and Schuylkill rivers overflow the wharves and fill cellars.

October 19. The stockholders of the Philadelphia Library Company vote in favor of accepting the legacy of Dr. Rush.

November 24. Centennial celebration at St. George's M. E. Church.

1870

February 3. Horace Binney, Jr., a noted lawyer, dies.

February 17. The cotton mill of J. P. Bruner & Sons, Twenty-fourth and Hamilton Streets, destroyed by fire. Loss, $200,000.

February 22. Parade of firemen and dedication of monument to the late Chief Engineer David M. Lyle.

March 8. Tremendous hailstorm; hail fell for twenty minutes, some of the hailstones larger than hen eggs; great destruction of windows.

June 13. Gaul's brewery, New Market and Callowhill Streets, destroyed by fire.

June 29. Robert J. Hemphill, secretary to the Board of School Controllers from 1849-1862, dies.

July 10. Flour-mill of Rowland & Ervien, Broad Street below Vine, destroyed by fire; rioting among firemen, and carriage of Goodwill engine is thrown in the Schuylkill.

July 26. Sugar refinery of Newhall, Brewery destroyed by fire.

August 27. Coulson's planing mill, Twenty-fourth and brown Streets destroyed by fire.

September 6. Smith & Harper's saw-mill, beach and Coates (Fairmount Ave.) Streets, destroyed by fire; loss over $475,000.

The new synagogue "Rodef Sholem" dedicated.

September 11. The cornerstone of the Church of the Immaculate Conception, Front and Canal (Allen) Streets, laid.

Zion German Lutheran Church, Franklin Street below Vine, dedicated.

September 17. The planing mill of N. F. Wood, Spruce Street Wharf, Schuykill, destroyed by fire.

September 22. Race on the Schuylkill between the Nassau boat Club of New York, and a crew of Philadelphians, won by the New Yorkers.

October 11. Penn Square selected as the site for the Public Buildings by a vote of the people, the vote being 51,623 for Penn Square, and 32,825 for Washington Square.

October 20. The chair factory of George Fennen, 1730 North Fifth Street, destroyed by fire.

November 9. The schooner Harmonie capsized and sunk in the Delaware off South Street during a gale.

November 22. Steamboat City of Bridgeton burned while lying above Pier 7, North Wharves, on the Delaware. Loss about $70,000.

1871

January 3. The Board of Commissioners of the Paid Fire Department meet and organize.

January 10. Rudolph Stein, of the firm of Stein & Jones, a well known printing firm, corner Hudson alley and Chestnut Street, dies suddenly.

January 22. The cabinet works of P.P. Weiss & Co., 622 North Twenty-fourth Street, destroyed by fire.

February 2. The Kensington Bank, Beach Street, below Laurel, entered by pretended policemen, and its vault robbed of bonds and cash to the amount of $100,000.

March 3. Opening of the Northern Dispensary with appropriate ceremonies.

March 15. The Paid Fire Department of the city goes into operation.

March 24. Mass meeting of citizens at Academy of Music to advocate the abolishment of the Public Building Commission.

March 30. the soldiers and sailors (colored) hold a meeting and parade in honor of the anniversary of the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment.

May 15. German peace celebration; procession nine miles long; various trades and occupations in line.

May 16. The German peace celebration continued, Picnic at the new Philadelphia Schuetzen Park, Indian Queen Lane.

May 27. Keystone Marble Works, market Street near Twentieth, damaged by fire; loss $65,000.

Warehouse of Malone & Co., 1126-28 Washington Ave., destroyed by fire.

June 5. Saw-mill of Stanley & Neber, Marshall Street, below Girard Avenue, destroyed by fire. Also about forty other buildings. Loss, $150,000.

June 15. Cornerstone of new building of University of Pennsylvania, Thirty-fourth and Locust Streets, laid with impressive ceremonies.

June 15. Dedication of the New Methodist Episcopal Home for the Aged and Infirm, Lehigh Ave. and 13th St.

June 23. Gillingham & Garrison's saw-mill, Richmond and Norris Streets, destroyed by fire. Loss, $40,000

June 24. Monument to the memory of William B, Schneider, late Grand Tyler, Masonic fraternity, dedicated at Mt. Moriah Cemetery.

July 11. Pattern-shop of I.P. Morris & Co., Port Richmond, struck by lightning and destroyed by fire; loss, $55,000.

July 17. Three boys, Cornelius Ryan, Samuel Glass and William Galvin, drowned in a brick pond at Seventeenth and Reed Streets.

August 28. Celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Philadelphia Schuetzen-Verein (Rifle Club) at the park of the association, Indian Queen Lane.

Six hundred kegs of powder, found on board a canal-boat on the Delaware, seized.

September 22. Lincoln Monument at Fairmont Park unveiled and dedicated.

September 24. Cornerstone laid of the German Evangelical Lutheran Church of St. Michael, Trenton Ave. and Cumberland Street.

September 29, Jessup & Moore's paper warehouse, 524 North Street, destroyed by fire; loss, $200,000.

Jacob Schoenning's morocco factory, Randolph Street below Oxford, destroyed by fire; $90,000.

October 10. An election riot occurs in the fourth and Fifth Wards. Isaiah Chase and Octavius V. Catto, both colored, are shot and , and about seventeen men are wounded.

October 13. Mass meeting at National Hall to give expression to the feeling in regard to the murder of Major Octavius V. Catto, Principal of the Institute for Colored Youth.

October 15. Meeting held and collections taken up for the relief of the sufferers of the Chicago fire. Nearly $500,000 collected.

October 17. Old brick church building, Second Street above Poplar, used as an opera house by Samuel S. Sandford's Minstrels, destroyed by fire.

October 18. Parker & Macphilimy's planning-mill, Sixteenth and Fitzwater Streets, destroyed by fire.

October 20. Defalcation announced of City Treasurer, Joseph F. Marcer, in the sum of $478,000. This defalcation was caused by the failure of Chas. F. Yerkes, Jr., & Co., brokers, to whom the City Treasurer, contrary to law, had loaned the public money.

October 21. Planing-mill of William Barth, Trenton Ave. and Adams Street, destroyed by fire; loss, $11,000.

October 28. Charles F. Yerkes, Jr., broker for the City Treasurer, held in $50,000 bail to answer the charge of embezzlement, and $30,000 on the charge of larceny as bailee.

November 1. The grand jury presents bills of indictment against Joseph F. Marcer, City Treasurer, and William F. Yerkes, Jr.

November 4. Phosphate works of Watson & Clark, near the Point Breeze Gas works, destroyed by fire; loss, $150,000.

December 4. Reception of Grand Duke Alexis of Russia. Grand ball at the Academy of Music, in the evening.

December 5. Charles F. Yerkes, Jr., charged with embezzlement of funds belonging to the City of Philadelphia, sentenced to pay a fine of $500 and undergo an imprisonment of four years and nine months.

December 6. Joseph F. Marcer, City Treasurer, sentenced to an imprisonment of four years and nine months in the Eastern Penitentiary and to pay a fine of $300,000.00. Pardoned September 27, 1872.

December 19. Fourth National Bank, Arch Street below Fifth, stopped payment and failed.

December 25. Steam frigate Chattanooga sunk at League Island.

1872

January 1. Hon. William S. Stokley inaugurated as Mayor of the city.

January 21. The new Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception at Front and Canal Streets opened with appropriate ceremonies.

Water pumped for the first time into the new reservoir of the Delaware Water Works at Sixth Streets and Lehigh Avenue.

February 4. Central Presbyterian Church, corner of Franklin and Thompson Streets, dedicated.

February 17. The new Philadelphia Orthopedic Hospital, Seventeenth and Summer Streets, formally opened.

Steam-propelled Claymont sinks at Girard Wharf, about Market Street.

February 22. Meeting of the surviving soldiers of the War of 1812.

March 4. Centennial commission meets at Independence Hall.

New hall of the Philadelphia Rifle Club (Schuetzen Verein), North Third Street below Green, opened.

March 20. Simmons & Slocum's Opera House, 1005-07 Arch Street, burned.

March 25. The Pennsylvania Railroad Company commenced business at their new office, Fourth Street and Willings Alley.

April 2. Joseph Wittle, lion-tamer, mangled by a lion at "Porgey" O'Brian's menagerie, Frankford.

April 7. Trinity Reformed Church, Seventh Street below Oxford, dedicated.

April 17. The Public Buildings Commission annulled a former resolution directing that the buildings should be constructed upon the four Penn Squares, and ordering the erection of one building at he intersection of Broad and Market Streets.

May 5. Friend's Meeting House, northwest corner of Seventeenth Street and Girard Avenue, was opened for the first time for public worship.

May 27. Steam boiler explodes at the factory of Troth, Gordon & Co., Crease Street above Griard Avenue. Two persons killed and six injured.

June 1. The new Lincoln Market, corner of Broad and Coates (Fairmount Avenue) Streets, opened for business. (Later on site of the Hotel Lorraine).

June 13. National Amateur Regatta on the Schuylkill.

August 1. Spotted Tail, with eighteen other Indians and their wives, of the Upper Brule, Sioux tribe, arrived in this city, and the next day went upon an excursion to Cape May.

August 9. The Post Office Commission decided that the new post office should be placed on the lot northwest corner of Ninth and Chestnut Streets, containing 176 feet 9 inches on Chestnut Street and 378 feet 9 inches on Ninth Street.

The first stone of the foundation walls of the Public Buildings at Broad and Market Streets was laid at the southwest corner of the southwest square.

August 15. The iron steamship Pennsylvania, the first vessel of the American Steamship Company of Philadelphia, launched at Cramps' shipyard, Beach and Norris Streets. The ship was 355 feet over all in length, with a beam of 45 feet, a depth of 43 feet and a capacity of 3016 tons.

September 21. International Cricket Match between the English gentlemen 12 and 22 Philadelphia picked cricketers on the grounds of the Germantown Club, closed September 24th with the following score: Philadelphia, 22, first inning, 63; second inning, 74. English 12 first inning, 105; second inning, 34, with four wickets to go down.

September 23. Cornerstone of the Roman Catholic Church of St. Elizabeth laid at the southeast corner of Twenty-third and Berks Streets.

September 28. Fall regatta of the Schuylkill Navy. Prize for single sculls won by Max Schmitt, three miles in 22m, 30s. Prize for six-oared barges was by the Iona of the Crescent Club, time, 21m, 34s. Prize for Junior single sculls won by Frank Street of the Pennsylvania Club, time 23m,33s. Prize for four-oared gigs won by the Pennsylvania Club, time, 20m, 20s. Prize for double scull gigs won by the Ariel of the University Club, time, 24m.

September 30. Medicine Bear, Long Fox, Red Thunder and thirty-one others of the Teton and Grand River Sioux Indians arrived in the city in charge of the Indian agents.

October 5. The managers of the German Hospital took formal possession of their new hospital, corner of Girard Avenue and Corinthian Avenue. Removing from their old location at Twentieth and Norris Streets.

October 7. New depot of the Reading Railroad Company at Chelten Avenue, Germantown, opened.

October 9. Cornerstone laid of the Jewish Hospital, Olney Road, near the York Pike.

October 11. The new building of the University of Pennsylvania at Thirty-fourth and Locust Streets, was dedicated.

October 26. Big Mouth, Milky Way and forty-five other Indians of the Comanche, Kiowa, Arrapalio, Apache, Washita, Caddo, Delaware, Kihi and Tawa Earac tribes arrived from Washington and were taken to the Girard House (Hotel, N. E. corner Ninth and Chestnut Streets).

October 28. The "epizooty," or horse disease, made its appearance in Philadelphia. It continued its ravages for about a month; during that time almost every horse in the city was affected. Two of the passenger railway companies during this period suspended the running of cars for six days; others suspended on Sundays, and ran but few cars on weekdays. The transportation of goods and other articles almost ceased for some days, and wagons and carts were drawn through the streets by men.

October 30. Cornerstone laid of the building of the Academy of Natural Sciences, S. W. corner Nineteenth and Race Streets.

The Ohio, the second iron steamship of the American Steamship Company, was launched at Cramps' Shipyard, Port Richmond.

November 11. Funeral of Major General George G. Meade, with impressive public ceremonies.

November 18. Meeting of committee of three hundred citizens appointed to obtain subscriptions to the stock of the corporation which is to manage the great Centennial Exposition of Industry of 1876.

November 20. The tercentenary of Presbyterianism was celebrated at the Penn Square Church, Broad Street above Chestnut.

November 27. City Councils fix the tax rate at $2.05, with ten cents public buildings tax.

November 28. Race on Schuylkill between eight-oared English-built shells. Won by boat Longfellow of Crescent Club, over Leviathan of Undine Club. Course 2-1/2 miles; time, 11.15m.

December 6. Fire at Warrington & Co.'s pen factory, northwest corner of Twelfth and Buttonwood Streets; loss, $25,000.

December 12. Edwin Forrest, the tragedian, dies.

December 15. St. Bonifacius R. C. Church, corner Hancock and Diamond Streets, dedicated.

German Evangelical Lutheran Church of St. Peter, Forty-second and Myrtle Streets, West Philadelphia, dedicated.

Lehigh Avenue M. E. Church, Lehigh Avenue and Hancock Street, dedicated.

December 20. Fire at the stables of Forepaugh's circus and menagerie (winter quarters) Wister Street above Mill, Germantown: loss $100,000.

December 22. German Methodist Episcopal Church, York Street above Frankford Avenue, dedicated.

St. Elizabeth's R. C. Church, Twenty-third and Berks Streets, dedicated.

Grace Mission Presbyterian Church, Twenty-second and Federal Streets, dedicated.

December 30. Protestant Episcopal Church, St. James, Hestonville, consecrated.

December 31. Gottfried Kuehnle was killed at his residence and bakery, Frankford Road below Girard Avenue. Frederick Heidenblut, a journeyman under employ, tried for the crime, convicted and hung for the murder, January 20, 1875.

1873

January 22. The boiler of the locomotive Kedge Hill exploded at American and Norris Streets, North Pennsylvania Railroad; one man killed, and several wounded.

February 6. City Councils pass an ordinance appropriating $500,000 in aid of the Centennial Exposition.

William Siner, member of Common Council from the Sixteenth Ward, was impeached before Select Council upon the charge of keeping a gambling-house.

March 25, The Indiana, the third ship of the American Steamship Co.'s line, launched at the ship-yard of William Cramp & Sons.

March 27. The Legislature of Pennsylvania passed a bill granting $1,000,000 to the Centennial Exposition, the same to be principally collected by a tax on the receipts of passenger railways.

April 13. Norris Square United Presbyterian Church, corner Hancock Street and Susquehanna Avenue, dedicated.

April 18. Explosion of a still filled with oil at the adamantine candle works of C. H. Grant & Co., southwest corner of Twenty-third and Hamilton Streets. Alexander Wilson and Samuel Walker, employees, burned and lost their lives.

April 24. Cornerstone laid of the Cumberland M. E. Church, southwest corner

Coral and Cumberland Streets.

April 27. Park Avenue M. E. Church, corner Park Avenue and Norris Street, dedicated.

May 18. German Evangelical Reformed Church, Thirty-eighth and Baring Streets, dedicated.

June 7. The steamship Illinois, the fourth vessel of the American Steamship Company, launched from the ship-yard of William Cramp & Sons.

June 14. Regatta of the Schuylkill Navy. Prize for four-oared shells won by the Vesper, of the Vesper Club, in nineteen minutes and twenty-four seconds; course three miles. Prize for six-oar gunwale barges won by the Falcon, of the Pennsylvania Club; time, twenty-one minutes. Prize for four-oared gigs won by the Phantom, of the Pennsylvania Club, in twenty minutes and four and a half seconds.

June 22. Broad and Diamond Street Presbyterian Chapel, dedicated.

June 29. Cornerstone laid of the Lutheran Church at Roxborough.

June 30. Cornerstone laid of the Protestant Episcopal church, St. Peter's corner of Wayne Avenue and Harvey Street, Germantown.

July 4. The commissioners of Fairmount Park formally conveyed the U.S. Commissioners of the Centennial Exposition, and to the Centennial Board of Finance, at Lansdowne, in Fairmount Park, four hundred and fifty acres of land, for building and other purposes connected with the Centennial Exposition of 1876. Meeting of veterans of the war of 1812 at Independence Hall.

July 13. Services in commemoration of the hundredth anniversary of the meeting of the first Annual Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church in Philadelphia, held in the Methodist churches.

July 31. Cornerstone laid of the Harriet Holland Mission (Presbyterian), Broad and Federal Streets.

August 6. Justice Beuislay ascended from Smith's Island (in the center of the Delaware River, opposite Chestnut Street) on a trapeze attached to a balloon expanded with hot air, which fell into the river Delaware shortly afterward, being carried a considerable distance before Beuislay was rescued from the water.

August 12. Very heavy rain fell continuing until next day. The rainfall being seven ad thirty-two hundredths inches. Great damage and loss, especially in the district east of Fifth Street, between Poplar and Oxford Streets.

August 17. Cornerstone laid of the chapel of Eighteenth Street M. E. Church, corner of Wharton Street and Herman Avenue.

August 20. Cornerstone laid of M. E. Mariners' Bethel Church, northwest corner of Moyamensing and Washington Avenues.

September 7. Chapel of the North Star Mission (Baptist), Seventh Street and Susquehanna Avenue, dedicated. Cornerstone laid of the Church of the United Brethren at Mount Airy.

September 9. Cornerstone laid of Second Baptist Church, Seventh Street below Girard Avenue.

September 14. The Jewish Hospital, Nineteenth Street and Olney Road, was dedicated.

Church of the Brethren (Drunkards), Marshall Street below Girard Avenue, dedicated.

Cornerstone laid of the First Presbyterian Church of Mantua, Thirty-fifth and Baring Streets.

September 16. Celebration of the Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Aztec Club, formed in the city of Mexico during the Mexican War by officers of the U.S. Army, held at the residence of Gen. Robert Patterson. Generals Grant, Hooker and many other officers being present.

September 18. The banking firms of Jay Cooke & Co., and E. W. Clarke & Co. suspended payment, which announcement was followed by great excitement. A run was commenced upon the Fidelity Safe Deposit and Trust Company, which was sustained during the day.

September 19. The financial panic continued. Great run upon the Fidelity Trust Company and Union Banking Company; both sustained demands. During the day several prominent brokers failed.

Great excitement throughout the United States in consequence of the failure of Jay Cooke & Co. In New York and other Atlantic cities there was a panic. Banks, Trust companies and individuals failed, and a panic and business revulsion commenced throughout the country.

September 25. Commencement of the ceremonies of dedication of the new Masonic Temple, Broad and Filbert Streets. Grand tournoi of Knights Templar at Academy of Music and Horticultural Hall. Gethsemane Baptist Church, corner of Eighteenth Street and Columbia Avenue, dedicated.

September 26. Great parade of the Masonic Order for the dedication of the new hall. The Grand Lodge and on hundred and seventy subordinate lodges were in line, the brethren numbering over eleven thousand men.

September 28. Cornerstone laid of German Reformed Salem Church, Fairmount Avenue below Fourth Street.

The Roman Catholic Church of Our Mother of Sorrows, Lancaster Avenue near Cathedral Cemetery, dedicated.

Renaissance Hall, in the Masonic Temple, dedication to the uses of Royal Arch Masons.

September 30. Parade of twenty-six commanderies of Knight Templars.

October 6. Cornerstone laid of Grace Chapel M.E Church, corner Master and Carlisle Streets.

October 7-8. National amateur regatta on the Schuylkill.

October 9. The returns of the election canvassers showed that the number of citizens entitled to vote is 164,510.

Cornerstone laid of Bethany M.E. Church, southwest corner of Eleventh and Mifflin Streets.

October 23. A locomotive and eleven oil cars were thrown off the track of the Greenwich branch of the Pennsylvania Railroad, Point Breeze, by running over a horse. The engineer, John Frew, killed.

October 26. Chapel of Tasker Street M.E. Church, corner of Snyder Avenue and Fifth Street, dedicated.

November 5. City ice boat No. 3 launched at Kaighn's Point.

November 6. Baptist Home for Old Women, Seventeenth and Norris Streets, opened and dedicated.

November 10. The State Centennial Supervisors adopted the plan of Collins & Autenreeth for the memorial building of the Centennial Exposition.

November 17. First flag on the grand flagstaff at League Island hoisted by the Secretary of the Navy, Hon. Geo. M. Robeson.

November 27. Thanksgiving Day, grand review of the First Division National Guards of Pennsylvania, by Governor Hartranft.

1874

January 1. Fire at sugar refinery of McKean, Newhall & Borie, a Grange Place between Second and Third Streets; loss, $200.000.

January 29. New Olympic Theater, Market Street, south side below Thirteenth, destroy by fire; loss, $200.000. Two firemen were killed.

February 8. Miss Hage and Ms, Lee, two ballet dancers at Mortimer's Varieties (corner tenth and Callowhill Streets). burned by their dresses taking fire from a stove. Both subsequently died.

February 6. The Franklin Saving Fund Society adjudged bankrupt. Indignation meeting of depositors held same day at Assembly Building (S.W. corner Tenth and Chestnut Streets).

Fiftieth anniversary of the Franklin Institute celebrated at Musical Fund Hall.

February 13. The larger beer brewery of Henry Muller, Thirty-Second and Jefferson Streets, fell in from the weight of a great quantity of ice which was being stored in an apartment. There were twenty-eight persons in the brewery at the time; of this nine were killed, and eleven badly injured. Everything in the building was destroyed, the pecuniary loss estimated at $100.000.

February 18. Autopsy upon the bodies of the Siamese twins (Chang and Eng Bunker) finished at the College of Physicians and Surgeons.

February 27. First demonstration made against taverns and lager beer saloons in imitation of proceedings in Ohio and other Western States. About twenty women visited three or four saloons in the neighborhood of Susquehanna Avenue and Fifth Street, Sang hymns in front of these places and delivered prayers. None of the saloons closed.

March 5. Ropewalk of John P. Bailey & Co., Otsego and Morris Streets, burned; loss $20.000.

March 19. Fire at Insall & Dorey's spring factory, 1437 Hutchinson Street; loss $35.000.

March 24. Machine shops and other buildings at the Shipyard of William Cramp & Son, Beach and Norris Streets, burned; loss $175.000.

April 29. Steamship Mediator burned at Pier 19, Delaware Avenue below Callowhill Street; loss 250.000.

May 8. Boiler explosion at the Keystone Mills, Callowhill Street near Twenty-Fifth; two persons killed.

May 23. Sash-factory and planing-mills of Hazel & Co., north-east corner of eighth Street and Girard Avenue, burned; loss $25,000.

May 29. Fire al 11 North sixth Street, occupied by Edward Stern, printer; loss $20.000.

May 31. Eighteenth Street Chapel of M. E. Church, corner of Eighteen and Wharton Streets, dedicated.

June 3. Cornerstone laid of the addition to German Hospital, corner of Corinthian Street and Girard Avenue.

June 4. University Hospital Thirty-Fourth and Spruce Streets, dedicated by Governor Hartranft.

June 17. Edward Payson Weston, at the Chesnut Street Rink (Twenty-third and Chestnut Streets) commenced and effort to walk two hundred miles at the rate of fifty miles per day in ten hours per day. He accomplished it on the fourth day. Time, first day, 9h. 59m. 15s.; second day, 9h. 56m. 50s. Third day, 9h. 56m. 40s.; fourth day, 9h. 54m. 20s.

June 18-19. Regatta of the Schuylkill Navy. Course, from the Falls Bridge to Rockland, one and half mills. Prize for four-oared shells won by Argonaut Rowing Association of Bergen Point, NJ Prize for pair-oared shells won by Nassau Boat Club, NY Prize for single sculls won by J.R. Keaton of the Harlem Rowing Association of New York.

June 24. Fete champetre at Belmont, West Park, under auspices of Women's Centennial Committee.

June 27. Regatta of the Amateur Rowing Association on the Schuylkill. Course, from Rockland and return, two miles. First prize won by Nereid; second prize, Lucilla.

July 1. Charles Brewster Ross, a boy four years old, son of Christian K. Ross, of Germantown, together with an elder brother, was carried off and kidnapped by two men. The older boy was released at Richmond and Palmer Streets, and return to his home, but the younger one was not heard from. Very large rewards were offered for his recovery, and the case was one which attracted attention all over the United States.

Zoological Gardens at Fairmount Park formally opened to the public.

Public announcement made that the Centennial Board of Finance had accepted the bid of Richard J. Dobbins for the erection of the Centennial buildings. The contract price for Memorial Hall was $972,595, according to specified dimensions, or maximum cost of $1,249,273, if the cubic capacity of the building shall be increased thirty per cent. The contract cost of the main Exposition Building, covering eighteen acres, was $1,236,000, exclusive of about $80,000 for grading.

July 3. Henry Loth's sewing machine factory, southeast corner of Broad and Wallace Streets, burned; loss, $35.000.

July 4. Cornerstone of Public Building laid at Broad and Market Streets. The building had been commenced long before that time,

Girard Avenue Bridge formally opened. Total length, 1000 feet; total width, 100 feet. The widest bridge in the world. Cost, $1,404,445.

July 16, The Athletic and Boston Baseball Clubs sailed for Europe upon a professional tour on the steamship Ohio.

August 4. Fire at mill, northwest corner of Germantown and Columbia Avenues; loss, $22,000.

August 5. Cornerstone laid of Memorial Baptist Church, northeast corner Broad and Master Streets.

August 25. Signor Pedanto made a balloon ascension from Windmill Island. At the office of the Pennsylvania Railroad, Fourth Street and Willings Alley, the aerostat struck a flagpole on the top of the building, which tore a hole in the balloon, causing the gas to escape. The balloon descended rapidly, whereby the persons in the car were injured.

September 1. Fire at James Wright's carpet factory, Twenty-third and Simes Streets; loss, $25,000.

September 5. Centennial celebration of the meeting of the First Continental Congress at Carpenters' Hall.

September 9. Steamship Abbottsford arrived with the members of the Athletic and Boston Baseball clubs on board.

September 26. Annual regatta of the Schuylkill Navy. Course from Rockland, one mile up the river and return. Single scull prize won by J.B. McBeath, of Quaker City Club, time,16m. 10s; gigs,. Pennsylvaniaia Club, time 14m. 18s. Double sculls, Steele and Whitemar of Pennsylvania Club. Barges, Ione of Crescent Club, Ttime, 14m. 38 1/2s. Four-oared shells, Pennsylvania club, time, 9m. 15 3/4s.

October 1. Cornerstone laid of new building for the women's Medical College, corner of Twenty-First Street and North College Avenue.

October 11. Church of the German Reformed Salem congregation Fairmount Avenue below Fourth, dedicated.

October 18. Cornerstone laid of Roman Catholic Church of St. Agatha, northwest corner of thirthy-eigth and Bridge (Spring Garden) Streets.

October 27. F.H. G. Brotherton concluded, at 806 Green Street, the pedestrian feat of walking 1000 half-miles in 1000 half-hours, being 1000 half-hours of consecutive hours, which effort was commenced on October 6.

October 29. Falls of Schuylkill Brewery, belonging to Jacob Hohenadel, burned, loss $45,000.

November 2. Fire at glassworks of F.J. Cook, York and Thompson Streets; loss, $35,000.

November 12. Fast traveling on Pennsylvania Railroad from Jersey City to West Philadelphia depot, 1 hour 47 minutes, including two stoppages. From Philadelphia to Baltimore, 2 hours, 15 minutes. From Baltimore to Philadelphia, return, 2 hours, 13 minutes.

November 21. Manayunk and Roxborough inclined railway opened.

December 14. William Mosher and Joseph Clark, abductors of Charles Brewster Ross, shot and killed while attempting burglary at the residence of Judge Van Brunt, at Bay Ridge, Long Island.

1875

February 8. Steam tug Hudson, cut through the ice and sunk in the Delaware.

March 13. First number of Col. Alexander K. McClure's paper The Times, published.

May 9. Fiftieth anniversary of the pastorate of Rev. Dr. John Chambers celebrated at his church, services lasting for one week.

July 21. Preliminary surveys for the improvement of the Independence Square begun.

July 30. Peoples' passenger Railway (Callowhill) opened for travel.

February 9. Fire at Keen & Coates Foundry, 943 North Front Street; loss $46,000.

February 15. Fire at 113-115 North Third Street; loss, $50.000.

February 27. Fire at Washington Butchers' Sons, meat packing establishment, 146-148 North Front Street; loss, $100,000.

June 7. Fire at John Brown & Sons' cotton a woolen mills, Eight and Tasker Streets; loss $43,000.

August 15. Fire at Perot's malt house , 310 Vine Street; loss $31.393.

August 24. J.B. Johnson, a professional swimmer of England, swam from the Lazaretto to Gloucester, about ten miles, in a contest with Thomas Coyle of Chester, PA., who gave up before he had swam more than half the distance.

September 13-22. Cricket tournament at Germantown. The picked twelve of Philadelphia defeated Canada twelve by a score of 231 t0 144. The British officers defeated Canada twelve by 353 to 290. The Philadelphia twelve beat the British officers by eight wickets; score, 282 to 281.

September 26. A dummy on the Frankford (Fifth and Sixth Street) railway, smashed by an excursion train from New York at the Harrowgate crossing of the connecting railway; five persons killed, and twenty injured.

October 4. Fire at Burgin & Sons' glass factory, Girard Avenue and Palmer Streets; loss, $20,000.

October 14. Mattress and furniture factory on Randolph Street above Oxford Street, burned; loss, $20,000.

German Hospital formally dedicated.

October 31. Fire al Carlton Woolen Mills, Twenty-third and Hamilton Streets; loss, $500,000.

November 10. J.F. Betz's malt house, St. John (American) Street below Callowhill, burned; loss, $20,000.

November 20. Market Street bridge over the Schuylkill destroyed by fire. Permanent bridge first opened for travel January 1, 1805; rebuilt and widened, 1850-51.

November 21. Moody and Sankey, famous religious revivalists, began a series of meetings in the old Pennsylvania freight depot, southwest corner of Thirteenth and

Market Streets.

November 30. South Street bridge opened to pedestrians.

December 2. U.S. Navy Yard at foot of Federal Street sold to Pennsylvania Railroad Company for $1,000,000.

December 8. Fire at William B. Thomas' barrel factory, Willow Street above Twelfth; loss, $20,000.

December 22. Ridge Avenue Farmer's Market, Ridge Avenue below Girard Avenue, opened for business.

The Franklin Institute and Academy of Fine Arts in 1869 memorialized Congress in favor of holding an International Exhibition to commemorate the one hundredth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence. By act of Congress this was authorized March 3, 1871. Congress, on June 1, 1872, incorporated the Centennial Board of Finance with authority to receive subscriptions at ten dollars per share. The State of Pennsylvania gave $1,000,000 to the commission for the purpose of erecting a permanent building, since known as Memorial Hall, and the city of Philadelphia gave $1,500,000 with which were constructed Machinery Hall and Horticultural Hall. On July 4, 1873, the commissioners of Fairmount Park formally transferred to the Centennial Commission and the Centennial Board of Finance, for the use of the exhibition, two hundred and thirty-six acres of ground.

There were one hundred and ninety-four building erected. The main building were: Main Exhibition building, 1,876 feet long, 464 feet wide; cost, $1,600,000. Machinery Hall, 1,402 feet long, 360 feet wide; cost, $792,000. Horticultural Hall, 383 feet long, 193 feet wide; cost, $251,937.

Memorial Hall, intended to be an art gallery, permanent building, 365 feet long, 210 feet wide, the dome rising 150 feet above ground; cost, $1,500,000.

Agricultural Hall, a long nave, crossed by three transepts; nave, 820 feet long, and 100 feet wide; central transept 465 feet long and 100 feet wide; cost, $197,000.

The United States government building, built in the shape of a cross. Long nave, 400 feet long, 100 feet wide; cross transepts, 300 feet in depth, 100 feet wide; cost, $162,000.

Women's Pavilion formed by two intersecting naves, each 64x192 feet; cost, $40,000.

Foreign Government and buildings, etc.

The Centennial Exhibition opened on May 10, 1876, and closed on November 10, 1876. The total admissions were 9,910,966 persons. The exhibition was remarkably successful.

1876

January 1. Grand celebration of the opening of the Centennial year, at the State House, by hoisting the grand Union flag, together with illuminations, ringing of bells, blowing of steam whistles and firing of cannon and firearms, at midnight, between December 31 and January 1. Immense concourse of people present.

January 28. Moody and Sanky's meetings at the old Pennsylvania freight depot, southwest corner of Thirteenth and Market Streets, closed. During the time they were in the city they held 210 meetings, and it was estimated that they were attended by more than one million and fifty thousand persons.

February 27. Main auditorium of Siloam M. E. Church, Otis Street above Thompson, dedicated.

March 6. First train of cars from Philadelphia to New York, over the Delaware and Bound Brook Railroad (depot, American and Berks Street) passed through from city to city.

March 18. West End Mills, Sixty-seventh and Lombard Streets, burned; loss, $195,000.

March 26. East Montgomery Avenue M. E. Church dedicated.

March 28. New depot building of Twelfth and Sixteenth Streets Passenger Railway Co., Twelfth Street and Susquehanna Avenue, fell in, in consequence of heavy rains.

April 1. Municipal census taken by the police. Dwelling houses, 143,936; inhabitants, 817,448; males over twenty-one years, 226,070.

April 22. New building of Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, Broad and Cherry Streets, dedicated.

April 27. New York and Philadelphia Railroad between both cities opened by excursions.

May 1. Continental (horse) Railway opened.

May 3. New branch of the Reading Railroad to the Centennial grounds opened.

May 7. Roman Catholic Church of St. Charles Borromeo, Twentieth and Christian Streets, dedicated, the Empress of Brazil being present.

May 10. Opening of the Centennial International Exhibition of Industry, at the Centennial grounds, Fairmount Park, by the President of the United States, in presence of members of Congress, Supreme Court, Cabinet, and many other National, State and municipal officers, and over one hundred and fifty thousand people. The Emperor and Empress of Brazil were present, participating in the ceremonies which were grand and impressive.

May 26. John Hay's waste paper warehouse, northeast corner of Germantown Avenue and Master Street, collapsed from being overweighted with materials during alterations. Three persons were killed and four injured.

June 14. First passenger train run over Philadelphia and Newtown Railroad to Fox Chase.

July 3. Centennial service at Christ Church.

July 4. Centennial anniversary of Declaration of Independence.

Parade of volunteer troops from all parts of the Union; ;exercises in Independence Square, oration by William B. Evarts; poem by Bayard Taylor; Senator Ferry, President of U. S. Senate, presided. Emperor of Brazil and large number of distinguished visitors present; grand music by large chorus and orchestra. In the evening a grand display of fireworks was given in Fairmount Park.

Dedication of the Catholic T.A.B. Fountain in Fairmount Park.

Monument to Alexander von Humboldt, in Fairmount Park, unveiled.

Explosion of chemicals at drug store of Henry F Bucher, Passyunk Road and Moore Street. Four men killed.

Fire at Detwiler & Hartranft's Quaker City Flour Mill, Delaware Avenue above Laurel Street, Landell's soap works, lumber yard of Collins & Co., and B.F Taylor & Co., and Taxis' screwdock; loss, $90,000.

July 7 Fire, yarn mill of James Meadowcraft & Son, Emerald and Sergeant Streets: loss, $25,000.

Long centre span of the Penrose Ferry Bridge fell into the Schuylkill River.August 24 "New Jersey State Day" at the Centennial Exposition. Paid admissions, 56,325. Exhibitors, complimentary, etc., 8,709; total 65,034.

August 31. Prize fight at Pennsville, New Jersey, between Jimmy Weeden and Young Walker for $250.00 a side, won by Weeden. Walker died from the effects of his beating shortly after the fight was concluded. The captains of various boats and the Creedmoor Cutter, a barge, and others, the principal and accessories arrested and held by the Coroner of Philadelphia.

September 3. Fire at Mund & Albrecht's Farm (picnic grounds frequented principally by the Germans) Indian Queen Lane, Falls of Schuylkill. Property entirely destroyed; loss, $50,000.

September 6. Parade of Volunteer Firemen, embodying many of the old volunteer companies of Philadelphia, with companies from other parts of the Union.

September 14. "Massachusetts Day" at Centennial Exposition. Admission to main exhibition, 78,977; live stock show, 6,818; free admissions, etc., 12,075; total, 97,968.

September 22. A number of wooden buildings in Shantytown (in close proximity to the Centennial grounds) were town down by the police under the direction of Mayor Stokley.

September 25. "New York Day" at Centennial Exposition. Paying visitors at main exhibition, 118,719; at live stock show, 3,284; free admissions, 12,585; total, 134,588.

September 28. "Pennsylvania Day" at the Centennial Exposition. There were 274,919 persons in attendance.

October 1. Audience room of the Fifth Reformed Presbyterian Church (General Synod) York Street near Coral, dedicated.

October 2. Edwin Forrest Home, near Holmesburg, opened. "Instituted for the support and maintenance of actors and actresses decayed by age or disabled by infirmity."

October 3. Philadelphia, Newtown and New York Railroad sold at auction at the Merchants' Exchange for $10,000.

October 5. "Rhode Island Day" at Centennial Exposition. Total attendance, 100,946.

October 12. "New Hampshire Day" at Centennial Exposition. Total attendance, 115,422. Monument and statue to the memory of Christopher Columbus, procured by the Italians of Philadelphia, dedicated in Centennial grounds.

October 18. "Reading Day" at the Centennial Exposition. Total attendance, 138,874.

October 19. "Delaware and Maryland Day" at the Centennial Exposition. Total attendance, 176,407.

October 20. Monument statue in memory of John Witherspoon, signer of Declaration of Independence, dedicated in West Park.

October 21. Fire at George Griffith's shovel factory, Locust above Fifth Street; loss, $50,000.

October 22. Cornerstone laid of Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of Visitation, Leigh Avenue and B Street.

October 26. "Ohio Day" and "Merchants' Day" at the Centennial Exposition. Attendance, 135,661.

October 27. "Vermont Day" at Centennial Exposition. Attendance, 108,080.

October 30. Girls' Normal School at Seventeenth and Spring Garden Streets, dedicated.

November 2. "German Day" at the Centennial Exposition. Attendance, 128,002.

November 7. "Women's Day" at the Centennial Exposition. Attendance, 87,859.

November 9. "Philadelphia Day" at the Centennial Exposition. Attendance 193,078. In the evening, display of fireworks.

November 10. The centennial Exposition was formally closed with appropriate ceremonies. During the 159 days that it was open the paying visitors were 8,004,274; free, 1,906,692. Total, 9,910,966. The free admissions were mainly those of exhibitors, attendants and employees.

1877

January 1. The Supreme Court took possession of their new apartments, City Hall, Broad and Market Streets.

January 19. Fire at the flour mills of Detwiler & Co., 3042-44 Market Street; loss, $75,000.

January 20. Fire at Baeder & Adamson's glue factory, m Allegheny Avenue and Richmond Street; loss, $20,000.

Fire at sash and blind factory of Keller & Krouse, St. John (American) Street; loss, $30,000.

February 5. New fire station of Truck D, Union Street below Fourth, formally occupied by the company.

February 6. New police station at Girard Avenue and Vienna (E Berks) Street, 11th District, formally occupied.

February 22. Citizens of Philadelphia presented to John Welsh, president of the Centennial Exhibition Board of Finance, $50,000 in commemoration of his zealous and unselfish labors in promoting the success of the Centennial Exhibition. The money was transferred to the University of Pennsylvania for the perpetual support of "the John Welsh Professorship of History and English Literature.

February 23. Synagogue of the Hebrew Congregation Beth-el-Emeth, Franklin Street above Green, rededicated.

February 25. Fox's American Theatre, Chestnut Street above Tenth, with Rodger's carriage factory, and other buildings burned; loss, $300,000. One man killed.

February 26. Meeting of butchers at Institute Hall, Broad and Spring Garden Streets. Strong resolutions against the proposition that all the butchers shall have slaughtering done at the abattoirs.

March 10. Planning mill of Turner, Larrish & Co., Noble Street between Eleventh and Twelfth Streets, destroyed by fire; loss, $30,000.

March 21. Trial of steam passenger cars on the West Philadelphia (Market Street) P. R. W. Co. Seven dummy engines in use.

April 2. An exhibition of the powers of Elisha Gray's telephone at office of Western Union Telegraph Co., Tenth and Chestnut Streets. Music played at Philadelphia was heard in New York by an audience assembled at Steinway Hall.

April 4. Menagerie storage building and stables of Adam Forepaugh, Wister Street near Godfrey Avenue, burned; loss, $20,000.

May 1. Union Banking Co., Chestnut Street above Third, failed. Same day United States Banking Co., corner of Tenth and Chestnut Streets, failed.

May 10. Permanent Exhibition formally opened in Philadelphia by President Hayes and ex-President Grant. Admissions estimated at 100,000.

June 25. Cornerstone laid of new building of Central Presbyterian Church, on west side of Broad Street, north of Fairmount Avenue.

July 8. The new Philadelphia and Atlantic City Railway (narrow gauge) opened by an excursion of officers of the road and others.

July 16. Trial of the transmission of sound through Edison's vocal telephone at the Permanent Exhibition Building. Vocal music at the Central Station telegraph office, at Fifth and Chestnut Streets, was transmitted over the wires, and heard with great clearness at the Exhibition Building.

July 19. Fire at Swift & Courtney's match factory, 219 North Forth Street; loss, $45,000.

August 13. Swimming match on Delaware River between Thomas Coyle, of Chester and George H. Wade, of Brooklyn. Course from Red Bank to Gloucester, 4 miles. Race won by Wade. Time, 1 hour and 40 minutes.

September 17. Jefferson Medical College Hospital, Ransom Street between Tenth and Eleventh Streets, formally opened.

September 22. Great excitement among brokers and bankers in consequence of the discovery of an over-issue of stock of the Market Street Railway Co., which it was subsequently ascertained amounted to about 11,000 shares. John S Morton, President of the company, who with the Treasurer and Secretary had made the over-issue, resigned

the office of President, and also resigned his position as President of the Permanent Exhibition Company.

September 28. John S. Morton and others implicated, bound over to answer a charge of conspiracy to cheat and defraud.

The 101st Anniversary of the adoption of the old Constitution of Pennsylvania celebrated at the Hotel La Fayette (west side of Broad Street below Chestnut, now site of Land Title Building).

September 29. Fire at morocco factory of W. Schollenberger & Sons, S. W. Corner of Mascher and Putnam Streets; loss, $250,000.

September 30. New Roman Catholic Church of Sacred Heart, Third Street below Reed, dedicated.

Siloam Primitive Methodist Church, Otis (E. Susquehanna Avenue) and Moyer Streets, re-dedicated.

October 6. New Farmers' Market, N. .W corner of Broad Street and Columbia Avenue, opened for business.

October 19. First annual regatta of the Fairmount Rowing Association over the national course on the Schuylkill.

November 3. Fox's new American Theatre, Chestnut Street above Tenth (re-built after the fire) was opened for performances.

November 7. Fire at Randolph Mills, Randolph Street above Columbia Avenue, occupied by Weil & Sons, Harvey & Good, and others; loss, $50,000.

November 22. Fire at southwest corner of Ninth and Chestnut Street; loss, $100,000.

November 27. Farewell banquet to Hon. John Welsh, minister to England, at the Aldine Hotel., Public reception at the Academy of Fine Arts on the next day.

December 9. German Lutheran Church of Holy Trinity, Sixteenth and Tioga Streets, formally opened.

December 15. Fire at the building in which Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence, at the southwest corner of Seventh and Market Streets; loss, $15,000, suffered by Simon & Co., trunk manufacturers, and Longacre & Co., wood engravers.

December 25. The Alhambra Theatre on Broad Street re-opened by John S. Clarke, under the title of the Broad Street Theatre.

1878

January 1. William S. Stokley inaugurated for his third term as mayor of the city of Philadelphia.

January 11. Chatham Mills, Howard and Berks Streets, burned; loss, $50,000.

January 20. New iron bridge at Penrose Ferry, on the Schuylkill, opened for foot-passengers.

January 22. Excitement among dealers in morocco leather, caused by the failure of ten firms engaged in that trade.

January 23. John M. Armstrong, a music typographer, while on a visit to Camden, N. J., murdered. Coroner's jury at Camden found that Benjamin Hunter was guilty of the crime. Hunter, after a trial

at Camden, lasting twenty days, was convicted of murder in the first degree on July 3, 1878.

January 31. Fire at wholesale dry goods store of H. P. & W. P. Smith, 224-226 Chestnut Street; loss, $400,000.

February 2. Philadelphia, Newtown and New York Railroad formally opened for business.

February 10. Nine of the western arches of the South Street bridge feel. Loss estimated at $85,000.

February 14. Fire at the carriage factory of Jacob Rech, south-east corner of Eighth Street and Girard Avenue; loss, $12,000.

February 20. New building of the Kensington National Bank, Frankford and Girard Avenues, opened for public inspection. Business commenced Saturday the 23d.

March 11. The office of Prothonotary of the Supreme Court was removed from State House Row to the new Public Buildings.

March 16. Fire at the bedstead factory of Meyer, Tufts & Co., Richmond Street above Montgomery Avenue; loss, $15,000.

March 25. Fire at southeast corner of Fourth and Cherry Streets in the store of H. K. Wampole, extended nearly down to Arch Street; total loss, $750,000.

April 13. Steam dummy cars, after a trial of almost a year by the Market Street Railway Co., were withdrawn from service. Too expensive.

April 29. The gallery of Pompeiian views deposited with Fairmount Park Commission by John Welsh opened to the public in the Art Building, East Park.

May 6. Ridgway Library building and grounds, corner of Broad and Carpenter Streets, formally transferred to the Library Company of Philadelphia by Henry J. William, executor of the late Dr. James Rush.

May 10. Fire at phos