1. General Information :

Solna, in the Stockholm region, has a strategic location between central Stockholm and the Stockholm Arlanda International Airport. Solna is Sweden’s third smallest municipality in terms of area but a middle-sized Swedish city in terms of population.

Solna has 85 000 inhabitants and in 2032, the number is expected to be close to 100 000. 98 per cent of Solna residents live in flats, 52 per cent are single households and 34 per cent of the inhabitants were born abroad. 60 percent of the population in working ages, 20–64-year-olds, have post- secondary education.

Solna is an attractive business location with 12 000 companies and 106 000 workplaces. The city has an extensive and growing network of sustainable public transport. 94 000 people commute in to work in the city every day and 34 000 commute out. Solna has a larger day population than night population which is quite unique. Solna is also one of Sweden’s most business-friendly municipalities. Good business climate in combination with active employment measures lead to low unemployment and a high degree of self-supporting citizens.

A third of the area of Solna is made up of green open spaces with a third of the Royal National City Park – the world’s first National City Park – being located here.

Friends Arena, Sweden’s national arena for football and Scandinavia’s largest shopping centre, Mall of Scandinavia are located in the Arenastaden district. The Hagastaden district has been built on the boundary between Solna and Stockholm with the university hospital New Karolinska Solna and the Karolinska Institutet (KI), one of the world’s foremost medical universities located here. A centre for tertiary care and world-leading life sciences to improve public health is being developed in this district.

Population: 85 000

Location

Official Website

Prevention & Safety:

https://www.solna.se/om-solna-stad/trygghet-och-sakerhet

Safety contract: signed in 2008

Twinned with:

Gladsaxe (Denmark), Ski (Norway), Pirkkala (Finland) and Valmiera (Latvia). Solna has two cooperation cities Kalamaria (Greece) and Warszawa-Bemowo (Poland) as well as a sister city Burbank (California, USA).

2. The City in our network :

The City and Efus:

Member since : 2009

Participated in: