The name Richard Jefferson shouldn’t sound new to those who are avid followers of the National Basketball Association (NBA). But for those unfamiliar with the name, a brief introduction to the professional player with an NBA Championship trophy, currently playing for the Denver Nuggets will be in order.

Richard Jefferson is one of the most famous American professional basketball players to have won an NBA championship, following his excellent track record on the basketball court for about two decades.

Being an exceptionally skilled player, Jefferson was drafted in the first round of the 2001 NBA draft and was even named the NBA’s second all-rookie team in his first season with the New Jersey Nets, now renamed Brooklyn Nets.

Richard Jefferson: Bio

Born June 21, 1980, in Los Angeles, Angeles, Richard Allen Jefferson spent most of his early life in Phoenix, Arizona, where his parents worked as Christian missionaries. He began his education at Moon Valley High School in West Phoenix where he became heavily involved with the high school basketball team which went on to win the 4A State Championship in 1998.

When he moved to the University of Arizona, Richard was easily spotted by legendary coach Lute Olsen. He led the Wildcats to the 2001 NCAA National Championship Game where he averaged 11.2 points, 5.0 rebounds and 2.8 assists per game, helping the college team win the tournament three times of the NCAA.

Richard’s professional career as a basketball player started with the New Jersey Nets where he played with them for seven seasons with almost 489 games and the highest average of 22.6 points between 2007 and 2008. He then played 82 games with the Milwaukee Bucks for a year (2008-2009) before moving to San Antonio where he scored 104 times. Between 2011 and 2012, Richard appeared in 41 games with the Spurs (9.2 points) and on March 10, 2012, at the 2012 Pac-12 Conference Men’s Basketball Tournament, he was inductedin the Pac-12 basketball hall of honor and his journey began as one of the most brilliant players in the world of basketball. The same year, he played for the Golden State Warriors, then for the Utah Jazz in 2013 and the Dallas Mavericks before settling with the Cleveland Cavaliers on August 5, 2015.

There he started with Game 3 of the NBAFinale in place of the injured Kevin Love. Jefferson gave his team an impressive boost after scoring nine points with eight rebounds in 33 minutes and after many battles the Cavaliers won the series and became the first team in NBA history to win the championship after losing 3-1.

Salary and net worth

Effective October 19, 2017, Richard Jefferson signed a one-year contract worth $2.3 million with the Denver Nuggets. His net worth is estimated at $40 million with an annual salary of around $2.445 million. Jefferson is on his club’s top 10 list of paid players along with Jamal Murray, the Canadian professional basketball player for the Denp Nuggets.

Richard Jefferson wife, children, is he gay?

Following his relationships with several women, Jefferson will not be described as gay. The famous basketball player has had a series of girlfriend problems. First of all, it’s about a dancer with Kesha Nicholas, who he was dating and who planned to get married. Unfortunately, the planned wedding ceremony was canceled two hours prior.

Prior to his failed marriage to Kesha, Jefferson dated Jennie Finch, a former University of Arizona softball pitcher and first baseman. The two met in college, but their relationship didn’t last long as it was called off as soon as Jefferson entered the NBA.

Jefferson is currently settled with Teresa Lourenco, the beautiful model who was born in Trinidad in 1981 and raised in Germany. The pair reportedly got married even before Jefferson called off his marriage to Kesha. Lourenco has two children including a daughter – Zaria Lourenco Noel who was born in 2010. The children, however, do not belong to the skilled basketball player, Jefferson. It is also unclear why the couple broke up. Currently, Richard Jefferson is a single man.

Height and body measurements

The professional basketball player has an athletic body with a height of 6 ft 7 in or 201 cm and a body weight of 222lbs or 101 kg. His shirt number is 24, while his chest, waist, and biceps measure 47, 37, and 17 inches respectively. Jefferson has brown eyes and his hair is bald.

Quick Facts About Richard Jefferson