Philosophy, Literature, Mysticism: An Anthology of Essays on the Thought and Influence of Emanuel Swedenborg is the most comprehensive and broad-ranging volume of essays to date on Emanuel Swedenborg’s (1688–1772) place in the history of ideas.

The anthology contains twenty essays by internationally acclaimed academics and researchers, including Nobel Laureate Czeslaw Milosz and leading academics H. J. Jackson, Gary Lachman, Eugene Taylor, Michelle Gilmore-Grier, Anders Hallengren, Gregory R. Johnson, and many more. Highlighted themes include Swedenborg’s influence on William Blake, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Immanuel Kant, Honoré de Balzac, Charles Baudelaire, Arthur Schopenhauer, Carl G. Jung, and Fyodor Dostoevsky.

Philosophy, Literature, Mysticism is the definitive study guide for current research into the thought and influence of Swedish philosopher and mystic Emanuel Swedenborg. The volume contains the following twenty essays:

Part One―Philosophy

“Swedenborg and Kant on Spiritual Intuition” by Michelle Gilmore-Grier

“Swedenborg’s Positive Influence on the Development of Kant’s Mature Moral Philosophy” by Gregory R. Johnson

“C. S. Peirce and Swedenborg” by Eugene Taylor

“Schopenhauer as Reader of Swedenborg” by Gregory R. Johnson

“‘Swedenborg’s Meaning Is the Truth’: Coleridge, Tulk and Swedenborg” by H. J. Jackson

“Swedenborgian Simile in Emersonian Edification” by Anders Hallengren

“Swedenborg, Existentialism and the Active Life” by Gary Lachman

Part Two―Literature

“Blake and Swedenborg” by Czeslaw Milosz

“Balzac and Swedenborg” by Saori Osuga

“Spiritualized Science and the Celestial Artist: Nathaniel Hawthorne and Swedenborgian Aesthetics” by Devin P. Zuber

“The Spiritual Detective: How Baudelaire Invented Symbolism, by Way of Swedenborg, E. T. A. Hoffmann and Edgar Allan Poe” by Gary Lachman

“A Hermeneutic Key to the Title Leaves of Grass” by Anders Hallengren

“Swedenborg and Dostoevsky: An Interview” by Czeslaw Milosz

“Ideal Homes: James, Rossetti and Swedenborg’s House of Life” by Hazel Huchison

“‘Through Death to Love’: Swedenborgian Imagery in the Painting and Poetry of Dante Gabriel Rossetti” by Anna Maddison

Part Three―Mysticism/History

“Swedenborg the Mystic” by Czeslaw Milosz

“Jacob Boehme, Emanuel Swedenborg and Their Readers” by Ariel Hessayon

“‘The Swedishman at Brother Brockmer’s’: Moravians and Swedenborgians in Eighteenth-Century London” by Keri Davies

“Handel, Hogarth and Swedenborg: Manners and Morals in Eighteenth-Century London” by Richard Lines

“Jung and His Intellectual Context: The Swedenborgian Connection” by Eugene Taylor

Also included are a preface by Stephen McNeilly, a foreword by Inge Jonsson, a chronology of Swedenborg, and an index.

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

About the Author:

Edited by Stephen McNeilly, director of the Swedenborg Society, and introduced by professor of comparative literature at Stockholm University Inge Jonsson, this anthology includes work from the acclaimed Nobel Prize winner Czeslaw Milosz; the celebrated author, scholar, foreign affairs journalist, and Harvard alumni Anders Hallengren; writer on the history of consciousness Gary Lachman; professor of English and leading Coleridge scholar at the University of Toronto H. J. Jackson; author and professor of philosophy at the University of San Diego Michelle Gilmore-Grier; Swedenborgian scholar Richard Lines; Vice President of the Blake Society Keri Davies; lecturer in history at Goldsmiths, University of London, Ariel Hessayon; author and Kant scholar Gregory R. Johnson; author and former director of the Cambridge Institute of Psychology and Comparative Religions Eugene Taylor; professor of American studies, literature and Swedenborgian studies at the Pacific School of Religion, Berkeley, Devin P. Zuber; art historian and scholar Anna Maddison; Balzac scholar and assistant professor at the Faculty of Letters, Arts and Sciences, Waseda University, Japan, Saori Osuga; and lecturer in nineteenth and twentieth-century literature at the University of Aberdeen, Hazel Hutchison.

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.