Timișoara is the European Capital of Culture in 2023, after the Corona Pandemic made the originally planned year of 2021 an impossibility! With its various language and denominational groups, the city's cultural life has always been colorful and diverse. The organizers of the Capital of Culture program are building on this tradition and want the city to live up to the motto "Let the city shine through you! (Roman "Luminează orașul prin tine!" engl. "Shine your light! Light up your city!") - once again show up in its richness of facets.

Text

For several years, the Friedrich Pustet Publishing House in Regensburg has been publishing the series “Kleine Stadtgeschichten” (“Short urban stories”), which presents selected urban centers in Europe in a well-founded, but popular-scientific and handy format. The Banater capital of

Timișoara

deu. Temeswar, srp. Темишвар, srp. Temišvar, hun. Temesvár, deu. Temeschwar

Timișoara is a large city in western Romania, not far from the borders with Serbia and Hungary. It was a settlement center of the German-speaking Danube Swabians until World War II. Timișoara has just under 320,000 inhabitants.

(in Romanian: Timișoara) is the “Cultural Capital of Europe” in 2023, and the two historians Konrad Gündisch and Tobias Weger have prepared a corresponding publication. Just in time for the start of the Capital of Culture Year, "Timisoara/Timișoara. Small City History" at the beginning of 2023. The publication provides an overview of the medieval foundation of the city, the Ottoman rule, the Habsburg re-foundation in the 18th century after the conquest by Prince Eugene and its further development within the crown land of

Banat

ron. Banat, hun. Bánság, srp. Банат, hrv. Banat, deu. Banat, srp. Banat

The Banat is a historical landscape located in South-Eastern Europe, in the states of Serbia, Hungary and Romania. The region is situated between the rivers Danube, Marosh and Tisza, as well as a southern part of the Carpathian Mountains and the lowland plain of Hungary. The main city of the Banat is Timișoara in Romania.

, the

Kingdom of Hungary

hun. Magyar Királyság, deu. Königreich Ungarn

The Kingdom of Hungary (Magyar Királyság) existed in changing borders since the year 1000. Already in the early modern period it fell to the Habsburg Monarchy, in which it later became the most important of the so-called Lands of the Hungarian Crown (also Lands of the Holy Hungarian Crown of St. Stephen or, after 1867, also called the Hungarian half of the Empire). Unlike other Habsburg territories - such as the lands of the Bohemian Crown or the Archduchy of Austria itself - the Kingdom of Hungary never belonged to the Holy Roman Empire.

, the Dual Monarchy and finally in Romania. Special emphasis is placed on the language groups that have shaped the city's history – above all Hungarians, Germans, Romanians and Serbs – as well as religious communities, with a focus on Catholics, Orthodox Christians, Protestants and Jews. Accompanying events to the book publication took place in spring 2023 - book presentations in Munich (Haus des Deutschen Ostens), in Ulm (Kultur- und Dokumentationszentrum der Banater Schwaben) and in Stuttgart (Haus der Heimat des Landes Baden-Württemberg). But the book was also presented in Timisoara, Romania itself - both in the Adam Müller Guttenbrunn House and in the Centrul de proiecte.