Alright, students. I think it’s important to preface this post with a very clear statement of my love for all of you. I love that my job is centered around working with you as you aim to further your education. I love that so many of you similarly fall in love with my hometown of Auburn, AL – The Loveliest Village on the Plains. With all of that in mind, are we all on the same page about my feelings for all of you? Great! Because I also must admit that I kinda love summers in Auburn when there are just fewer of you in town. I always have. I always will… There’s less traffic, minimal wait times at restaurants, and a generally slower pace that makes for a nice reprieve from the energetic hustle-and-bustle of the academic year.

While I’ve never been the biggest fan of the heat and the humidity of Alabama summers, there’s something special about a season that comes with more sunlight to savor the experiences that accompany the consistent smell of freshly mowed grass and the sounds of cicadas and crickets chirping. This post won’t be an exhaustive list of all of the special things that take place during Auburn summers, but these are some of my favorites – coming from a food-loving, music-loving, and small-town charm-loving Auburn native.

Downtown Auburn

With the few blocks that compromise Downtown Auburn, there are several incredible restaurants. Several have outdoor seating, which make for my favorite dinner environment in the summer. Be sure to check out a former blog post by fellow admissions advisor, Jan. Jan prides herself on knowing the perfect restaurant – type of food, price point, and atmosphere for any meal, so you can trust her recommendations for the Best Food in Town! I would also encourage all of you to follow The Auburn Downtown Merchants Association’s Instagram: @downtownauburn. This is a great way to keep up with the comings and goings in downtown. They even have a highlight for events that are taking place during that current season. A couple of my favorites take place in the summer!

For example, SummerNight Downtown Art Walk will be taking place on June 11th this year. A couple of streets will be shut down to thru-traffic and downtown becomes even more walking friendly for folks to enjoy (and even purchase) the talents of many of our local artists.

Cheers on the Corner is another favorite event of mine that will be taking place on July 30th this year. This is a similar set up – streets are closed to thru-traffic and there will be over 20 stops in the downtown area where attendees can sample a small bite to eat from one of our many local restaurants.

Local Parks

We have several parks in town that are worth exploring during the summer. Be sure to check out a former blogpost from my colleague, Rebecca. She describes many of Auburn’s Most Loved Parks in greater detail along with several pictures!

But for a brief synopsis – If you want…

… to hike, mountain bike, or enjoy water in multiple forms (lake, waterfall, creek) – check out Chewacla State Park.

… to take a peaceful, meditative walk – check out Town Creek Park. This is also where one of our local farmers markets, City Market, takes place every Saturday from late-May to late-August.

… to walk/run, visit the dog park, or enjoy various festivals – check out Kiesel Park.

Surrounding Areas: Downtown Opelika; Waverly, AL; and more!

I also highly encourage you to explore our local surroundings like Downtown Opelika and the even smaller town of Waverly, Alabama. Clayton Ann, a fellow admissions advisor, recently wrote about several must-sees in Downtown Opelika. Opelika is a quick drive from Auburn University’s campus and is home to several blocks of restaurants, coffee shops, and music venues. It’s also worth following @downtownopelika on Instagram to keep up with events. One of my favorite bands, St. Paul and the Broken Bones, was featured at a local music festival that took place there just a few years ago. The Auburn/Opelika area is also home to several incredibly talented local musicians so you’re never going to be far away from musical entertainment. Another top music venue from local and visiting musicians alike is the Standard Deluxe in Waverly, AL. Just a short drive up Highway 280, this venue is home to a bi-annual “280 Boogie” as well as a favorite of musical acts throughout the summer as well.

Auburn is also centrally located in the southeast so you’re only a couple of hours away from bigger cities like Birmingham and Atlanta. And depending on the direction you drive, you’re only 3-4 hours away from the beaches of Alabama and the Florida panhandle or the southern portion of the Appalachian Mountains.