Lamellomphalus manusensis new genus, new species is described from a hydrothermal vent site of the Manus Back-Arc Basin. The familial assignment is based on morphologies of shell and external anatomy. The new taxon is superficially similar to some members of Peltospiridae McLean, 1989 in general shell shape, but differs from all peltospirids in having sex dimorphism and presence of a copulatory organ. Lamellomphalus manusensis is characterized by possessing haliotiform shell with some degree of coiling, which could be considered as an intermediate form in the family Neomphalidae McLean, 1981, between species with regularly coiled shells (Cyathermia Ware´n and Bouchet, 1989; Lacunoides Ware´n and Bouchet, 1989; Planorbidella Ware´n and Bouchet, 1993, and Solutigyra Ware´n and Bouchet, 1989) and limpet-like shells (Neomphalus McLean, 1981 and Symmetromphalus McLean, 1990). This feature thus distinguishes the new taxon from other neomphalids. A phylogenetic reconstruction based on cytochrome c oxidase I gene (COI) also supports its placement within Neomphalidae.

A new western Pacific species of the deep-sea limpet family Pectinodontidae is described from hydrothermal vents in Manus Back-Arc Basin, at depths of 1714–1853 m. Bathyacmea becki new species is most similar by shell morphology to its geographically closest congener Bathyacmaea jonassoni Beck, 1996. However, the new species is characterized by a radula with widened functional lateral teeth, which separates it from other congeners. Phylogenetic reconstructions based respectively on partial sequences of COI and 16S rRNA also support its placement within Bathyacmea.

This article presents a catalogue of 68 types of marine Gastropods deposited in the Marine Biological Museum, Chinese Academy of Sciences including color pictures, locality data, specimen sizes and references to original publications. In 1950, the Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences was founded. Outstanding scientists of China were engaged to work in this organization. The Marine Biological Museum was established as part of this institute. Specimens of marine species, previously scattered in different institutions of the country, were brought together and deposited here. Since that time, this institute is the center of marine mollusks research in China. In the past 65 years, over four thousand marine mollusk species have been recorded from China Seas. Huge quantities of specimens were collected. Most of the specimens were deposited in the Marine Biological Museum, Chinese Academy of Sciences. However, there is no comprehensive catalogue published till now. Therefore it is difficult for people outside the institute to use the material. This Museum also holds most of the type material of marine mollusk species described by Chinese scientists in the past decades. We will present a catalogue of these types with Latin name, specimen sizes, locality data, date of collecting and original publications. We first examined types of marine gastropods, hence 68 taxa will be listed in this article.

The genus Pyropelta McLean & Haszprunar, 1987 is exclusively restricted to deep-sea chemosynthesis-based environments, that range from the Western and Eastern Pacific to West Africa. In the present study, a new species, Pyropelta elongata sp. nov., collected from a methane seep area in South China Sea is described and illustrated. The generic assignation is mainly based on shell and radula characters. Pyropelta elongata sp. nov. is characterized by relatively large, elongate shell with a low profile and has a radula formula of (ca. 20)+5+1+5+(ca. 20). These features can distinguish the new species from other congeners.