Adeuomphalus Seguenza, 1876 is a little known genus among the skeneimorph vetigastropods, with very few specimens previously reported alive from the deep sea. We examined newly collected and museum-stored specimens from upper to lower bathyal depths in the Atlantic, Mediterranean, Pacific and Indian Oceans and recognize seven recent species in the genus: A. ammoniformis Seguenza, 1876, A. densicostatus (Jeffreys, 1884), A. trochanter Warén & Bouchet, 2001, A. sinuosus (Sykes, 1925) n. comb., A. guillei n. sp., A. elegans n. sp. and A. collinsi n. sp., along with a fossil species, A. bandeli (Schröder, 1995) from the Lower Cretaceous, Poland. These species are characterized by a minute and colourless shell with almost perfectly planispiral whorls, an orthocline aperture, distinct radial ribs and a deeply concave apex and base. At least three species are confirmed to be radula-less, while A. guillei n. sp. has a simplified (3-2-1-2-3) rhipidoglossate radula. Anatomical investigations of A. collinsi n. sp. and A. trochanter revealed the following traits: a monopectinate ctenidium, blunt and tapering cephalic tentacles with sensory papillae, a cylindrical snout, a simple right neck lobe, a large foot with the anterior corners drawn out into finger-like projections, a smooth ESO-tentacle and a single, micropapillate epipodial tentacle on each side of the foot; absence of pigmented eyes, eye lobes, cephalic lappets and subocular peduncles. Three species collected by submersibles in the vicinity of hydrothermal vents co-occurred with carnivorous sponges of the family Cladorhizidae; a parasitic mode of life is suggested based on the lack of the radula and the peculiar, tube-like shape of the snout. Separate and combined phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial (COI and 16S rRNA) and nuclear (histone H3 and 18S rRNA) gene sequences revealed six monophyletic groups in Seguenzioidea: Seguenziidae, Chilodontidae, Calliotropidae, Cataegidae, Spinicalliotropis and skeneimorph seguenzioids. Three included skeneimorphs (A. elegans n. sp., Xyloskenea sp. and Ventsia tricarinata) were ambiguously grouped together with long branches and low statistical supports, possibly suggesting a vast, undiscovered phylogenetic diversity of the group. Taxonomic composition, morphological characteristics and evolutionary history are discussed for the skeneimorphs and five other groups in the superfamily.

The helicoid microgastropod genera Leptogyra, Xyleptogyra and Leptogyropsis from deep, sunken wood off New Zealand, were originally classified among the poorly defined Skeneidae (Vetigastropoda, Trochoidea) based on shell characters, external morphology and fine-structure of radulae. We investigated the microanatomy and histology of several representatives by means of serial semi-thin sectioning followed by computer-aided 3D-reconstruction, studied the shell structure, and performed phylogenetic analyses of histone (H3) and COI-sequences in order to substantiate the neomphalidan nature of these genera. The anatomical data, in particular the lack of sensory papillae, the presence of a single left kidney, left-side innervated copulatory organs, glandular gonoducts, eggs without a vitelline layer, a single pair of radular cartilages, a rectum passing beneath the heart and statocysts with a single statolith clearly exclude Leptogyra, Xyleptogyra and Leptogyropsis from the Skeneidae and from the Vetigastropoda as a whole, but strongly suggest a systematic position among the Neomphalida, where the small, helicoid genus Melanodrymia shows most similarities. This conclusion is also supported by shell structure (in particular by the presence of shell pores similar to Neomphalus), and by the molecular trees. Similar to whale falls, the sunken wood habitat might have served as an ecological bridge between the ancestral regular deep benthos and the hydrothermal vent habitat otherwise typical for Neomphalida. We argue that Neomphalida is a separate basal clade of rhipidoglossate Gastropoda.

Until recently the systematics of the Skeneidae (type species Skenea serpuloides Montagu, 1808) has been solely based on shell characters, radula details and external morphology. However, methodological progress ( e.g. SEM) and preliminary anatomical data suggest that this vetigastropod group represents a polyphyletic, “skeneimorph” assemblage. Serial semithin sectioning combined with computer-aided 3D-reconstruction permits the detailed anatomical investigation of such small (1–3 mm), helicoid gastropods. The taxa for which micro-anatomical data are available include six skeneimorph species from six genera: (1) True Skeneidae, exemplifi ed by the type species, Skenea serpuloides (Montagu, 1808), doubtlessly belongs to Vetigastropoda and probably rests within the Trochoidea/Turbinoidea. Apomorphies of Skenea and related genera include a penis formed by the right propodium. (2) Bathyxylophila excelsa Marshall, 1988, Ventsia tricarinata Warén & Bouchet, 1993 and an undetermined “skeneimorph vetigastropod” have papillate cephalic and epipodial tentacles, a single monopectinate ctenidium with skeletal rods and bursicles, a papillary left and a right excretory organ, and statocysts with several statoconia. All these characters are indicative for a position of these species inside Vetigastropoda. Distinct appearance of epipodial tentacles and the lack of a combined epipodial sense organ argue against an inclusion into Trochoidea/Turbinoidea and thus Skeneidae s.s. (being defi ned by the characteristics of Skenea serpuloides). At present, these species cannot be classifi ed in any known vetigastropod subclade. (3) Leptogyra constricta Marshall, 1988 and Leptogyropsis kalinovoae Marshall, 1988 both are characterized by smooth cephalic and epipodial tentacles, a single, left excretory organ and statocysts with one statolith. These anatomical data strongly suggest a systematic position in the likewise rhipidoglossate Neomphalina, which might be considered as an independent rhipidoglossate clade outside the Vetigastropoda. Although we are still at the very beginning in our investigation of skeneimorph anatomies, it is clear that this polyphyletic assemblage needs to receive much more attention for a complete understanding of vetigastropod and neomphalinan phylogeny.

Identifying the unambiguous members of Vetigastropoda and understanding the relationships among its families has been challenging. This study investigates the internal relationships among putative members of Vetigastropoda sensu lato (Fissurelloidea, Haliotoidea, Lepetelloidea, Lepetodriloidea, Pleurotomarioidea, Scissurelloidea, Seguenzioidea, Trochoidea, Angarioidea, Phasianelloidea, Neomphaloidea and Cocculinoidea) in a molecular phylogeny utilizing nearly 6kb of molecular data from up to five nuclear and mitochondrial genes. Single-step parsimony-based and two-step maximum-likelihood analyses are employed as phylogenetic methods to analyse the data. Sequence data from all vetigastropod groups are included and in order to overcome shortfalls of previous vetigastropod analyses resulting from the under-sampling of outgroups, this study also includes broad outgroup representation. Fissurelloidea, Haliotoidea, Lepetodriloidea, Scissurelloidea, Seguenzioidea, Trochoidea, Angarioidea and Phasianelloidea formed a clade identified as Vetigastropoda sensu stricto united by morphological synapomorphies such as the presence of bursicles and epipodial sense organs. In contrast, Neomphalina, Cocculinoidea and Pleurotomarioidea fell outside Vetigastropoda s. s., indicating a need to reexamine the classification of these clades as vetigastropods.