~*~ Cast No Stones~*~ Prologue (Fox/Kay Others)

by WildFlower99

In my daughter's eyes I am a hero

I am strong and wise and I know no fear

But the truth is plain to see

She was sent to rescue me

I see who I wanna be

In my daughter's eyes

Song, Martina Mcbride, In My Daugther's Eyes

Kay Bennett stared in amazement at her daughter. She watched with the love only a parent could have as Maria pulled herself up and held on to the coffee table. Her eyes were wide as she thought about everything she had been through with her daughter. The nights she had prayed for her daughter to live and stay healthy. Now she had her child, and a new start at something good. She was going to show the town, show her baby that people could change, that hearts could soften. Kay was determined to be as strong as Maria, because her daughter had taught her what life was truly about.

“That’s my girl.” Kay giggled clapping her hands with excitement. The laugher in Kay’s voice caused Maria to turn around, loosing her balance as she hit the floor with a thud. Kay’s mouth fell open as she waited for her little girl to start crying; instead Maria stared up at her mother and began to giggle.

“She’s a tough one.” Sam’s voice boomed in the house. “Just like her mom.”

“Daddy.” Kay smiled picking up her daughter. “You’re home early.”

“Yeah, I thought I might take my girls out to eat.” Sam smiled taking Maria from Kay. His eyes became sad as he looked at his granddaughter, “Any word from Miguel?”

“Two months tomorrow.” She shrugged. “He’s called a few times, but I guess he made up his mind. Charity is his wife now, and she comes first.”

“Well I talked to Charity yesterday.” Sam frowned. “I guess you should know, she found her father.”

Kay rolled her eyes, “How did she manage that?”

Sam shrugged his shoulders, “She got a few memories back, and located him in New York. He’s some high profile lawyer, but she said he’s coming to Boston to stay with her and Miguel for awhile.”

Kay let out a sigh. Three months ago her world fell apart when Miguel and Charity got back together and decided to have a quick wedding. It wasn’t long after that Charity decided she wanted to go to school in Boston, and Miguel was more than happy to help his wife fulfill her dreams. Kay couldn’t believe Miguel left his daughter behind, but was even more surprised when his calls slowly stopped. Kay had taken that time to realize that the Miguel she once loved disappeared somewhere around the time that the real Kay vanished as well. It was then that she realized that moving back in with her father, and working on being a good mother was what she needed to do.

“Well I suppose I should be thrilled that someone is getting to see their father.” Kay muttered. “Too bad it’s not my daughter.”

“At least you have me.” Sam smiled, “And that Crane boy has been coming around a lot lately.” He winked.

Kay blushed slightly as she thought about Fox. The same night Miguel told her he was getting married, Fox had found Theresa in bed with Ethan. They ran into each other at the pier, and struck up an odd conversation about life. In the pass few months they had become good friends, and he had been wonderful with Maria. Though she didn’t think of him as anything more than a friend, it was nice to have someone treat her as a equal, and Fox did just that.

“Daddy, you know I’m just friends with Fox.” Kay laughed, “I’m just surprised you allow him in the house.”

Sam shrugged his shoulders, “I’m with his mother, and besides he makes you smile again. I like seeing that smile Kay, it’s been gone for so long.”

“She makes me smile.” Kay laughed tickling her daughter. She watched as Maria’s blue eyes sparkled as she giggled loudly. “Don’t you sweetie? You make mommy smile everyday.”

“Of course she does, a kid as cute as that, how can she not?” A voice spoke up.

Kay looked up to see Fox coming through the door, “So you just walk on in now?” She smirked.

“Your dad said I could.” He grinned.

“Yes I did.” Sam chuckled, “His mother lives here now, so he can come here anytime.”

“Dad inviting a Crane into his home, this is so odd.” Kay sighed.

“I don’t like the Cranes though, remember I’m the rebel.” Fox joked walking over to Maria whose arms were reaching for him. “Check out that pretty face, how’s my pretty girl doing?” He questioned taking her in his arms. Maria let out a tiny squeal as Fox tickled her stomach.

“She likes you Crane.” Sam spoke, “She’s getting attached too you.”

“Well I’m getting attached to her too.” Fox laughed.

Sam eyed his daughter and then Fox, “Well I think I’ll go upstairs and change, are we still on for dinner Kay?”

“Of course daddy, as long as Ivy’s not cooking.” She winked.

Fox watched as Sam went up the stairs, “So how’s work?” He asked sitting down with Maria.

“I hate it, but I need the job.” She shrugged. “So what brings you by today Crane? Kissing babies, making nice with my dad, are you running for mayor?” Kay teased.

Fox rolled his eyes, “You just don’t know me do you Kathleen? I came by to check on you, you seemed down last night when we talked.”

Kay smiled, for the first time in a long time someone was interested in how she felt. Fox didn’t start the conversation talking about himself, although he usually ended it with many little digs at how wonderful he was he always managed to show her that he cared. He was a good friend to her, and she hadn’t had one of those in a long time. He rarely judged her, and he listened when she needed to just talk. It was almost refreshing to have someone on her side.

”I guess I was just upset that Miguel isn’t showing any interest in his daughter. Seriously Fox, look at this little girl, how can you not want to know her.” Kay smiled. “She pulled up again today, she’s getting so big and doing so many new things and he’s missing it all.” She frowned. “She deserves better, she needs a daddy.”

“You’re right she does.” Fox spoke, “But she deserves better than the one she’s got.”

“You think you can find her one?” Kay joked.

Fox shrugged his shoulders, “Shouldn’t be that hard.”

“Yeah, sure thing Crane.” Kay laughed kissing Maria’s chubby cheek. “This little girl has me, and I love her plenty.”

__________________________________________________________

Charity Lopez-Fitzgerald looked up at the house that her and her husband was parked in front of. “How are you going to tell her?” She questioned looking over at her husband.

“I’ll just say it.” Miguel shrugged. “I’m doing what’s best for my daughter.”

“She’ll be furious at us.” Charity frowned. “But you’re right it’s the best thing for all of us.”

“Maria should be in a two parent home, and we’ll give her that. Your dad said there’s no way Kay can win in court. The way she chased me, and the things she’s done, we should have no problem getting full custody.”

“But she seems to be a good mother, won’t the courts look at that?” Charity asked with a sigh.

“You’ll be a even better mom Charity. You’ll be staying at home with Maria; Kay is only a part time mom. This is the right thing; it’s the best thing for our marriage. We’ll raise my daughter and Kay can have her future.” Miguel smiled. “It’s right for us all.”

“I’m sure your right Miguel, after all Kay has done to us this is the right thing. She won’t be a third wheel in our relationship anymore and we can raise Maria with the morals that she needs to have.” Charity nodded. “I’m so glad we found my father, we could have never afforded a lawyer as good as he is.”

“It’s all just a matter of time sweetheart, our lives will finally be complete.” Miguel smiled. “You’ll see.”