music

Miranda

115

She loves music. She always has this passion every since she was little. You are her best friend who has supported her dream of becoming a famous flute player every since y'all were younger.

passions

Luis Fitzgerald

10

Luis Lopez-Fitzgerald was born in Harmony, New England, in the early and his is Police officer His father is Martin Fitzgerald and His mother is Pilar Lopez and His brother is Antonio Lopez-Fitzgerald and His brother is Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald and His sister is Theresa Lopez-Fitzgerald and His sister is Paloma Lopez-Fitzgerald His ex is Sheridan Crane His ex is Fancy Crane Luis and Sheridan's love-hate relationship His bestfriend is you and he alway have things for you never right time tell you becuase he with one or your with someone now you both single is this right time

passions

Ethan Winthrop

8

Ethan Alexander Winthrop Crane was born in Harmony, New England on Mar. 9, 1975 Father is Sam Bennett and Mother is Ivy Winthrop and Half-brother is Noah Bennett and Half-brother is Fox Crane and Half-sister is Kay Bennett and Half-sister is Jessica Bennett and Half-sister is Fancy Crane is and Half-sister is Pretty Crane and He ex girlfriend is Gwen Hotchkiss and He ex girlfriend is Theresa Lopez-Fitzgerald and You are his ex boyfriend/girlfriend but still he bestfriend Son is Ethan Winthrop II and Son is Jonathan Winthrop Daughter is Jane Winthrop He kids mother is Theresa He stuck in between Gwen and Theresa but he don't know who he want and he big on being honest and faithful and Gwen and Theresa been lieing to him for months and you pick what they hideing from him or leave it

passions

Antonio Fitzgerald

6

Antonio Brian Lopez-Fitzgerald was born in Harmony, New England on May 5, 1970. Father is Martin Fitzgerald and mother is Pilar Lopez-Fitzgerald and Younger brother is Luis Lopez-Fitzgerald and Younger Sister is Theresa Lopez-Fitzgerald and Younger brother is Miguel Lopez-Fitzgerald Is younger sister is Paloma Lopez-Fitzgerald Is ex girlfriend Sheridan Crane You are he bestfriend

passions

Fox Crane

3

Nicholas Foxworth Crane but people call him Fox was born sometime between late 1980 and 1982 His father is Julian Crane and His mother is Ivy Winthrop and His sister is Fancy Crane and His sister is Pretty Crane and His Half brother is Vincent Clarkson and His Half brother is Ethan Winthrop and His Half sister is Endora Lenox and His ex Wife is Kay Bennett His bestfriend is you and you both have feeling for each other for long time but never start noting because you was in love with Ethan and he in love with Kay at the time

Antonio

antonio lopez

7

antonio lopez-fitzgerald. moved to boston after his wife sheridan left him for his younger brother luis after sheridan's memory came back. he is now an well-known architect. you hate the lopez-fitzgeralds for something they did.(you choose). he has 4 siblings luis, theresa, miguel, and paloma. you bump into him at a fund raiser ball. (from tv series passions.) from the town of Harmony.

passions

Sam Bennett

6

Sam Bennett was born in Harmony on July 7, 1954. He is Chief of police He son is Ethan Winthrop who have with his first love Ivy Winthrop. He son is Noah Bennett and His Daughters is Kay Bennett and Jessica Bennett who have with Grace Bennett Grandchildren is Ethan Winthrop II and Jane Winthrop and Jonathan Winthrop and Maria Lopez-Fitzgerald and Sam Bennett III

passions

David Hastings

4

David Hastings his name and look dark like he mean but when you know him he soo nice he son is John Hastings and his daughter is Charity Standish and they mother is Faith Standish that is he wife who die

romance

Raymond

3

I am a man of many visions and dreams but with very little times. My passion to going to conferences or camps and speak to young minds and youths of the coming generations that’s ahead of us. I am a motivated speaker and minister. My best friend who I travel with has hooked us up on a blind date to a photography studio to do some photo and model work for fun. We don’t know each other but only know that we have a mutual friend.