4 person holiday home in öRSJö Do you want to live close to the kingdom of glass, moose park and the sea? Then you should come to this nice cottage outside Örsjö. It's Cozy cottage in a secluded and scenic location. The house consists of a large windowed in patio for pleasant evenings, a living room with a sofa bed for two people, a larger bedroom with a double bed, a functional and practical kitchen with access to the garden at the back and a shower room with a shower and separate toilet. Please note that the fireplace and the iron stove may not be used. The ceiling height in the older part of the house is lower than standard. The property is hilly and on a height the owner has built a nice gazebo with a lovely view of the surroundings. Here you can sit and read a book or just relax listening to all the birds chirping in the summer. At the back of the house, the owner has built a pleasant grilling area that has both a charcoal and a gas grill. For a cost the owner can place a gas cylinder there if you want to use it before your arrival. There are also many swimming lakes such as Bällsjösjön (600 m) or Hultebräan - sandy beach (2 km) to choose from if you want a quieter swim. There is also Glasrikets Älgpark (moose park), 16 km away, where you can have a guided moose safari tour, eat moose sausages or moose hamburgers and fish for rainbow salmon. In Påryd (17 km) there is a restaurant, pizzeria and shop. Here is the popular Lantcafé with fantastically good food and coffee. Another popular restaurant to visit is La Famiglia, in Vassmolösa (34 km) where you can enjoy Italian food in a lovely Mediterranean-inspired garden. Kosta Glasrike (41 km) is usually a nice day trip. Here you will find everything from Kosta glassworks to glass shops and a large outlet with clothes, interior design, shoes as well as hunting and fishing. Kosta also has several year-round restaurants with everything from home cooking to fine dining at the Kosta Art hotel. At Kosta Art hotel there is also an excellent spa area with pools and a relaxation area. Not far from Kosta, you can visit the Safari park with everything from bison, fallow deer, mouflon sheep and red deer to wild boar. Here you take the car through the park and get to experience the animals in their natural environment up close. You have 54 km to Kalmar with a large shopping and restaurant selection. Sights such as Kalmar Castle and the County Museum are usually worth a visit. For children, Skälby Gård with its animals and playgrounds is usually popular. It is only 63 km to popular Öland with lots of exciting places and swimming spots to visit. Here you also have Öland's zoo with animals, amusement park and water park. It is not allowed to charge your electric car here! A perfect house in a perfect location. Welcome! At DanCenter you have a wide choice of holiday homes and Danland Parks. We have as many as 6,000 different holiday homes in Denmark, as well as a large selection in Sweden, Norway and Germany. Thanks to the extensive offer you will always find a holiday home that suits you. You can enjoy your stay in a holiday home in Scandinavia in any season. How about a holiday home with swimming pool in the spring? Or a holiday home by the sea in summer? That way you can cool down on sweaty days. But Scandinavia is also a fantastic destination in autumn or winter. There are plenty of houses with a fireplace or sauna. Moreover, some houses are also equipped with a billiard or table tennis table. You won't be bored for a moment! Even if you like staying at a holiday park, there are plenty of options. The Danland holiday parks all have good facilities, such as a swimming pool, playground or bicycle rental. A holiday park is always a good place to be. Discover from your holiday home the beautiful Danish beaches on the North Sea or Baltic Sea, or enjoy a holiday on one of the many Danish islands. Whether you go on holiday with your partner, family or group of friends, DanCenter provides the place to be. Plus, over 3,000 holiday homes allow you to bring your pet! Sounds like a wonderful holiday right? Layout: Kitchen(cooker(electric), hood, coffee machine, microwave, fridge-freezer, water from well), Living/bed room(double folding bed), bedroom(double bed), bathroom(washbasin, shower), conservatory, heating(electric), terrace, garden furniture, BBQ, parking