Vassmolosa Map — Satellite Images of Vassmolosa

original name: Vassmolösa

geographical location: Kalmar Kommun, Kalmar Lan, Sweden, Europe

geographical coordinates: 56° 36' 0" North, 16° 10' 0" East

detailed map of Vassmolosa and near places

Welcome to the Vassmolosa google satellite map! This place is situated in Kalmar Kommun, Kalmar Lan, Sweden, its geographical coordinates are 56° 36' 0" North, 16° 10' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Vassmolösa. See Vassmolosa photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Vassmolosa in Sweden. Vassmolosa hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Vassmolosa or add new placemark for Vassmolosa.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Vassmolosa hotel reservations

Book hotel in Vassmolosa online and save money

Vassmolosa hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Sweden »

Vassmolosa hotels – sortable list of all Vassmolosa hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Vassmolosa hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Vassmolosa, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Vassmolosa, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Vassmolosa hotels map

The location of each Vassmolosa hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Vassmolosa hotel map is available where all hotels in Vassmolosa are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Vassmolosa hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Vassmolosa hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Vassmolosa hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Vassmolosa hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Vassmolosa

Kolbodabaden Turist- & Konferensanläggning (in Kolboda, distanced approximately 7.6 km)

Törneby Herrgård (in Kalmar, distanced approximately 11 km)

Scandic Kalmar (in Kalmar, distanced approximately 12 km)

Rasta Kalmar *** (in Kalmar, distanced approximately 13 km)

Slottshotellet Budget Accommodation (in Kalmar, distanced approximately 13 km)

Slottshotellet **** (in Kalmar, distanced approximately 13 km)

Hotell Hilda (in Kalmar, distanced approximately 14 km)

more Vassmolosa hotels »

Vassmolosa car rental

Compare Vassmolosa car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Vassmolosa rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Vassmolosa car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Vassmolosa — we will do it for you!

Car hire Vassmolosa and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Vassmolosa the city centre. Compare Vassmolosa car rental offers by various suppliers.

Kalmar Airport car rental (distanced approximately 11 km)

Kalmar car rental (distanced approximately 13 km)

Borgholm (Oland Island) car rental (distanced approximately 30 km)

Karlskrona car rental (distanced approximately 55 km)

Ronneby - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 67 km)

more offers and Vassmolosa car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Vassmolosa

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Vassmolosa »

Overview of flights to and from Sweden »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Vassmolosa. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Vassmolosa and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Vassmolosa are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Kalmar Airport (distanced approximately 12 km) – airport hotels

Emmaboda Airport (distanced approximately 34 km) – airport hotels

Borglanda Airport (distanced approximately 43 km) – airport hotels

Kosta Airport (distanced approximately 52 km) – airport hotels

Ronneby Karlskrona Rail Svc. Airport (distanced approximately 67 km) – airport hotels

Vassmolosa 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Vassmolosa in Sweden

You can also dive right into Vassmolosa on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Vassmolosa 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Vassmolosa, Sweden in Google Earth »

Get more out of Vassmolosa map

Add placemark to Vassmolosa

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Vassmolosa map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Vassmolosa google map link options

link to us:

small Vassmolosa google map image link

medium Vassmolosa google map image link

large Vassmolosa google map image link