In 1936, the Empire of Japan stands at a crossroads. Though the country has evolved into a democratic system over the years, forces both inside and outside the government wish to see this status-quo crumble and a new order erected. There are three main paths in game.

In the first, Japanese democracy will survive the challenges faced in 1936 and society will continue to liberalize. Electoral Reform (Social Democrat, Market Liberal, Social Conservative, or Authoritarian Democrat governments)

In the second, radical, Restorationist forces in the army will launch a coup and transform Japan into a National Populist regime. Shōwa Restoration (National Populist government)

In the third and final path, Centralist elements in the army will foil a coup by Restorationist elements and then take control of the government, transforming Japan into a Paternal Autocrat regime. Military Centralism (Paternal Autocrat government)

January will see the end of the four-year term of the Imperial Diet (having been elected in 1932) and Prime Minister Inukai Tsuyoshi will dissolve the Diet and call a general election for a months time. His soc con Seiyūkai will win, but may not retain its absolute majority (player choice), falling just short to the opposition mar lib Minseitō.

May 15th Incident[]

The Diet will be thrown into turmoil when on the 15th of May, PM Inukai is shot and killed by radical Imperial Japanese Navy officers. Their motive will be to avenge the assassination of Katayama Sen, a syndicalist leader and founder of the opposition soc dem Shakai Taishūtō, months earlier. Suzuki Kisaburō, appointed by Emperor Hirohito to replace Inukai, will reintroduce the Peace and Preservation Act that had been repealed in 1926. Rebranded the National Security Act, it curtails a number of civil rights and is seen by the government as a counter to the rising tide of radicalism. It is supported by both the Seiyūkai and Minseitō, the Diet’s upper house (the House of Peers), and the Privy Council.

The government can pass the bill through the Diet, or withdraw it, bowing to public opinion.

If the NSA passes:[]

The trial of Inukai 's assassins will go ahead and the defendants will be found guilty and executed. In retaliation, a syndicalist will assassinate PM Suzuki, and former Home Secretary Mizuno Rentarō will be appointed in his place. The Emperor will be asked by the government to speak to the Diet, wanting his approval to shore up support.

If the Seiyūkai kept its majority in the last Diet election, he will come out in support of the government. The focus 'Protect Constitutional Government' will unlock. The focus tree branch is broken up into two parts, with only the right side available to the Seiyūkai. The next election will take place in 1940.

If the Seiyūkai lost its majority, the Emperor will refuse to back it when asked.

Agreeing with him will see a faction within the Imperial Army, the Kōdōha (or Imperial Way Faction), attempt a restorationist coup. With the Emperor coming out in opposition and the Imperial Navy mobilizing, the coup attempt will be defeated. Army Minister Hayashi Senjūrō of the pat aut Army Centrists will be appointed new PM. The focus 'Military Centralism' will unlock. Hayashi will pass away in office in 1943 and will be replaced by Nagata Tetsuzan.

If the government does not accept the decision of the Emperor, the coup will still occur but without the support of the Emperor or the Army Minister. It will be defeated and constitutional government will endure. Factions within the Seiyūkai and Minseitō will push for a National Unity Government, but the PM may also call a snap election. In either case the focus 'Protect Constitutional Government' will unlock. (The National Unity Government and the Snap Elections can be seen in the Subsequent Elections Section below).

If the auth dem National Unity Government was formed Adachi Kenzō will be appointed PM, with the next scheduled elections taking place in 1940. Having a Unity Government will allow for only four focus from both the left and right sides of the focus tree branch to be completed, so they must be wisely chosen. Time will take its toll on the 'unity' government, and it will unravel in early 1938. The Seiyūkai and Minseitō will split off leaving Adachi's Kokumin Dōmei as the government until the next election in 1940.

If new elections were called, Mizuno and the Seiyūkai can be returned, or see Minseitō win the election, with Hamaguchi Osachi becoming PM. With the Minseitō in power only the left side of the focus tree branch will become available, and conversely if the Seiyūkai stayed in power only the right side will be available to it. The next election will take place in 1940.

If the NSA is withdrawn:[]

With his allies deserting him and the House of Peers passing a censure motion against the cabinet, Suzuki will resign in disgrace. Former Home Secretary Mizuno Rentarō will be appointed in his place. Head of the Privy Council Hiranuma Kiichirō and factions within the Army (including the Kōdōha, or Imperial Way Faction, and its rival the Tōseiha, or Control Faction) will draw up plans for a coup to 'save the Empire.'

With Army Minister Hayashi Senjūrō's support, the coup will succeed and Hiranuma will be installed as the PM by the pat aut Army Centrists. The Kōdōha, feeling sidelined by Hiranuma and the Tōseiha, will carry out another coup. With the Emperor's approval the nat pop Army Restorationists will take over. The focus 'The Shōwa Restoration' will unlock. Once the focus completes the government will reorganized into the Taisei Yokusankai (Imperial Rule Assistance Association), 'assisting' the Emperor in rule since all power was returned to him. Konoe Fumimaro will be installed as the new PM.

Subsequent Elections[]

If democracy survived the next general election will take place in February 1940 and repeat four years later. The parties and leaders for each are shown below.

1940 Election

Seiyūkai led by Yoshizawa Kenkichi

Minseitō led by Ugaki Kazushige

Kokumin Dōmei led by Maeda Yonezō

Shakai Taishūtō led by Abe Isoo

1944 Election

Seiyūkai led by Hatoyama Ichirō

Minseitō led by Machida Chūji

Kokumin Dōmei led by Maeda Yonezō

Shakai Taishūtō led by Katayama Tetsu

Puppet Japan[]

Though not accessible to a player, KRv0.26.2 brought custom content for a puppet Japan. This includes an overlord event about the fate of the Emperor/Imperial Family (shown below) and custom focus trees. There are three types of political focus trees, and shared Army/Air Force and Navy trees.

Army/Air Force and Navy organize the new 'armed forces' of a puppet Japan, the first focus mobilizing Police divisions for defense.

Under the Left Kuomintang[]

The first is as a puppet of the Left Kuomintang, the People's Republic of Japan. Nosaka Sanzō, leader of the Japanese Nationalist Party (modelled on the KMT), will be installed as head of the provisional government. At the end of the political focus tree Japan will join the Republic of China as a 'sister Republic'.

Under a Socialist Country[]

If another Socialist country puppets Japan Arahata Kanson will be installed, with the ruling party depending on what the overlord's is: If Totalist, Arahata will rule through the totalist wing of the Nihon Rōdō Sōdōmei (Japanese Federation of Labour), if it was Syndicalist, he will rule through its syndie wing. Finally, if it was Radical Socialist, he will instead rule through the rad soc Nihon Kyōsan-tō (Japanese Communist Party).

This tree will fork about half way down, with each path, Communist Supremacy or a United Front, depending on the ruling party or what happened to the National Security Act years earlier.

Communist Supremacy can be taken by Totalists and Rad Socs, and if the Empire of Japan went Nat Pop (ruled by the Taisei Yokusankai).

The United Front can be taken by Syndicalists, or if the Empire of Japan was democratic.

Under a Democratic or Authoritarian Country[]

Democratic (Soc Dem, Soc Lib, Mar Lib, and Soc Con) and Authoritarian countries (Auth Dem, Pat Aut, and Nat Pop) will release the State of Japan under a powerless Emperor Hirohito, and PM Higashikuni Naruhiko, the Emperor's uncle-in-law.

If the overlord is Democratic: Post-war elections will be held with the following parties and leaders participating:

Minshutō (Democratic Party) led by Hatoyama Ichirō

Jiyūtō (Liberal Party) led by Yoshida Shigeru

Shakai Taishūtō (Social Masses Party) led by Katayama Tetsu

If the overlord is Authoritarian: Once the Peace Preservation Laws have been repealed, while the ruling party will stay the same, Hirohito will appoint Kishi Nobusuke as PM.

Fate the of Emperor/Imperial Family[]

Democratic and Socialist overlords will have to decide what to do with the Emperor and Imperial Family, respectively. Authoritarian overlords will keep Hirohito on the throne.