In the summer of 2021, Raye posted a series of tweets about her label preventing her from releasing a first album for seven long years. The tweets went viral, and she was ultimately released from her contract. She then had her first number 1 single as an independent artist with the TikTok-topping “Escapism.”. Now she’s released her long-awaited debut record, My 21st Century Blues. Here, Raye tells Vogue her painful story of creative suffocation in her own words.

Nina Simone was my breaking point. I’d just moved into my new house, and I was putting a poster of her up on the wall. Running along the bottom is her quote: “It is an artist’s duty to reflect the times.” I just thought... What the fuck am I doing? It had been seven years since I was first signed by Polydor on a four-album contract. A few days earlier I was told, again, that I’d have to hold off creating my debut album. There wasn’t any reason given.

I’d had my first album pretty much ready to go before I’d even joined the label. By the time I was 17, they had spent three years wooing me. I would do songwriting sessions from the age of 14, and label heads flattered me over fancy dinners. “We’ll put you in a room with this big star,” they’d say. “This one loves your music.” “Your life will change forever.” At that age, it meant a lot to speak to people who believed in me. But it didn’t take long for me to see that the dreams they lured me with were hot air.

As soon as I was signed, I was told the R&B I’d said I was excited to make wouldn’t sell in the UK. So to cater to the market – for now at least – I needed to write dance music, 120 BPM. The label would point to musicians like Rihanna: “She had so many big pop songs, and only then was able to artistically lead.” I was so young, so hungry, so grateful for the opportunity, I had to find a way to make this work. That became my motivation: work hard, then I’d earn the right to put together a body of work.

My first cheque for songwriting came that year from a dance track called “All Cried Out” by Blonde. It went to number 3 in the UK charts. It was a really big moment for me. But it got very dark when the head of the company, who had originally signed me, left a year and two months into my time with the label. I was pushed further into the box I’d never wanted to be in: write faster tempos, more hooks, more pop, more dance, singles only. No one was rooting for me and the new heads didn’t know me.

When I first signed, I had a list of things I said I would never compromise on:

Never release something you don’t love.

Never release something you don’t think is good.

Never prioritise other people’s opinions above your own.

By the end of my time at the label, I had compromised everything on that list.

There’s an awful pressure on signed artists to make a hit song. But I never wanted to be an artist who created music to sell – I wanted to create music that felt like art to me. I understand that a corporation needs to make money, but this was never business to me. My music was always so heartfelt and deeply personal. Whenever I was presented with hardships – trauma, pain, heartbreak, confusion – I, like so many creatives, turned to my art as medicine. “I’m going to pour this pain out into a song that makes this sound better than it feels in my head.” But that outlet was taken from me. My musical safe space was tainted.

I was losing my identity. As a Ghanaian-Swiss Brit, I grew up with so many different cultures. Gospel, soul, jazz, and R&B were what I felt connected to as an artist, and what that first album I’d always planned on sounded like. At the label, I was being cut off from my roots. But I’d talk to male peers and find out that they had more creative control. Meanwhile everything I wanted needed vetting. There were no women at the top making those big decisions — a study found that in the FTSE 250 companies there are more CEOs named John than there are female CEOs. I was trying my hardest to be what they wanted me to be, but they didn’t care about who I wanted to be at all.

In the moment that I sent those tweets about my treatment at the label, crying under my Nina Simone poster, I had nothing to lose. The power of social media on a good day gave me some leverage. Two weeks later, I was able to part ways with the label and become independent. I had to take time to find myself again. Who do I want to be? What do I want to say? What music do I want to share? I’m completely in control. It’s beautiful. I’ll never take creative freedom for granted again.

X content

This content can also be viewed on the site it originates from.

The moment I made music without numbers and stats in mind, I got my first ever UK number 1 with “Escapism.”. The beautiful irony. It’s just testament to the fact that only you truly know what you are capable of.

I wrote “Escapism.” after I left the label, but I’d had the concept – even the name – for ages. I took a road trip to Utah with Mike Sabath, my producer and Jenna, my engineer, for the album, and he had the perfect beat for this song. I went to the bathroom and prayed: “Dear God, please help me write something great.” It fell out really quick. I knew I wanted 070 Shake to be part of it. She’s been a good friend and there’s no compromise on her vision – she gave me a lot of amazing advice in my tough times.

About 60 per cent of the album is old songs: I was 18 when I wrote “Flip a Switch.”, 19 when I wrote “Oscar Winning Tears.”, 20 when I wrote “Worth It.”. The rest are stories that I always wanted to tell. It’s not the way I envisioned creating an album – I was creating a mosaic by taking broken glass fragments out of my paws, trying to make it all fit. It’s a testament to the connection that I have with those tracks that it was so important for me to share them, and not just let them slip away.

I put capital letters and a full stop on all the titles, because they do feel like complete stories to me. The first song I put out was venting, in “Hard Out Here.”, I was very loud about my label experience: all you CEOs, get your hands off my mouth. Some I’m nervous about sharing: “Body Dysmorphia.” and “Mary Jane.” are super gritty and personal.

And “Ice Cream Man.” is the hardest. God bless Michaela Coel, who encouraged me to self-direct an upcoming visual for that. I rewatched I May Destroy You before writing the treatment. I wanted to create an honest depiction of trauma and PTSD. It was the toughest experience I’ve ever had. On the day, I could only do three takes. No make-up, no hair – nothing to hide behind. But I’m proud. I haven’t thought about the repercussions, but it feels like the right thing to do. I want to just be honest.

A lot of this album was created with fragments of my past, still within a place of restriction. I’m so grateful that I’ve found my way out of a system that wasn’t for me. Now that I can create what I want, I feel so free. I have so many stories I want to tell.

As told to Amel Mukhtar

When asked for comment, a Polydor representative said: “Polydor and Raye made an amicable and mutual decision to part ways in 2021. Raye is an incredible artist and we very much enjoyed working with her over the years, achieving some great things together. We couldn’t be happier to see her having her well-deserved success and wish her all the very best for the future.”