Richard L. Rodgers, 90, Johnstown, went to be with The Lord on January 15, 2022 at home, surrounded by his family. Born December 31, 1931, in Johnstown, son of George W. and Nelle M. (McCreary) Rodgers. Preceded in death by parents; brothers: George, Thomas, Haval (in infancy); and sisters: Margaret Russo and Hope Friedline-Clark. Survived by wife, Nancy (Plows); daughters: Sandra (Henry Gardner), Sheree (Donald Speicher), Tammy (Wayne Faucher); and granddaughters: Annabeth Faucher (Christian Larrave) and Christiana Faucher; and many nieces, nephews, cousins and life-long friends. He was a lifetime member of Overbrook UM Church; and Cambria Lodge 278 F&AM;. Richard served on Southmont Borough Council for over 2 decades and as president. He was a board member and served as president of Professional Family Care Services. He coached Westmont Suburban Little League for many years in addition to coaching girls softball. He served as a mentor for the youth PA Outdoor Corps on various community projects. He was a loving father, grandfather, and devoted to his local community. Richard served the Ferndale Area School District (30+ years) as a teacher and administrator, serving as superintendent for over 2 decades. After retirement, he worked as a Realtor for the next 20 years. He was a US Army veteran of the Korean Conflict. The Rodgers family extends a heart-felt thank you to the staff at Windber Hospice for the loving care that they provided to Richard. Public viewing will be held 3-6PM Thursday at John Henderson Company Funeral Home, 215 Central Ave. As per the family's request, funeral service and interment will be private.

Published on January 18, 2022

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of RichardHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail