Sarah Vaughan, a singer who brought an operatic splendor to her performances of popular standards and jazz, died of lung cancer Tuesday night at her home in the Los Angeles suburb of Hidden Hills. She was 66. Where more idiosyncratic jazz artists like Billie Holiday excelled at interpretation, Vaughan was a singer's singer, a contralto who gloried in displaying the instrumental richness of a voice that had a comfortable three-octave range and was marked by a voluptuous, heavy vibrato.

"The most God-given voice just went away," said Tony Bennett upon hearing of her death.

Known for her dazzling vocal leaps and swoops, she was equally adept at be-bop improvisation and at singing theater songs with a symphony orchestra.

During a professional singing career that spanned nearly 50 years, Vaughan's voice remained remarkably unravaged by time.

Though her speaking voice noticeably deepened and darkened in later years, her singing retained a youthful suppleness and remarkably luscious timbre.

Throughout her career, Vaughan was affectionately known as either Sassy or the Divine Sarah.

The first nickname reflected her sense of humor and the mischievous sexiness that often inflected her singing and stage patter.

The second, appropriated from the legendary actress Sarah Bernhardt, acknowledged the phenomenon of a voice that _ had Vaughan had the training _ could easily have been adapted to the operatic stage.

Despite her fight with cancer, Vaughan had hoped to begin working on a new recording this week.

On Sept. 3, after Mayor Tom Bradley proclaimed "Sarah Vaughan Day in Los Angeles," she sang with the Los Angeles Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl, delighting 11,878.

"She just kept becoming greater and greater as the years went on," said Los Angeles Times jazz critic Leonard Feather, a long-time friend of Vaughan's who first announced her death. "In the last few years she was just astonishing. She was the idol and envy of virtually all singers."

Vaughan herself had scoffed at attempts to categorize her as a jazz singer.

"I just sing," she said. "I sing whatever I can."

She once told an interviewer that horns influenced her more than other singers, which was evident from her harmonic and rhythmic sense. A ceaseless innovator, she added that she never sang a song the same way twice.

In a rare tribute to a celebrity, Mayor Bradley ordered flags at all city buildings lowered to half-staff through Friday. That last happened when Lucille Ball died last April.

In New York City Wednesday night, a packed house for a regularly scheduled performance at the famed Apollo Theatre stood in respect to Vaughan and listened to a recording of her singing one of her hits, The Nearness of You. Then they cheered and applauded.

Sarah Lois Vaughan was born in Newark, N.J., on March 27, 1924. Her father was a carpenter and amateur guitarist and her mother a laundress and church vocalist.

She studied the piano from the age of 7 and later took up the organ. At the age of 12 she became the organist at Mount Zion Baptist Church in Newark, where she was also a choir soloist.

She also enjoyed performing popular tunes at parties, and when friends urged her to enter an amateur contest at the Apollo Theater in New York, she took the dare and won first prize in October 1942, singing Body and Soul.

The singer Billy Eckstine heard her perform, and six months after winning the contest she was hired at his recommendation as a second pianist and singer with Earl "Fatha" Hines' big band, in which Eckstine was a vocalist and Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker were instrumentalists.

The following year, when Eckstine formed his own band _ which featured Parker, Gillespie, Art Blakey and Miles Davis, among other jazz greats _ Vaughan went along, and remained with him for a year.

Later, she began a solo career. Her early solo recordings _ on which she performed songs such as Lover Man in full-blown be-bop style, accompanied by Parker and Gillespie _ helped establish her reputation as a jazz singer.

During an extended engagement at Cafe Society Downtown in New York City, Vaughan met trumpeter George Treadwell, who became her manager and the first of her four husbands. Under his guidance, she made the transition from jazz cult figure to popular singing star.

She had her first hit in late 1947 with Tenderly, for the small Musicraft label. The following year, her version of It's Magic, a song from the movie Romance on the High Seas, established her as a pop star.

In 1949, she signed a five-year contract with Columbia Records, where she remained until 1954, recording mostly popular songs backed by studio orchestras.

When Vaughan moved to the Mercury label in 1954, she was given the freedom to pursue a dual career as both a popular and jazz singer.

Two of her biggest hits were the title song of the Broadway show Mr. Wonderful (1956) and Broken-Hearted Melody (1959), a ballad with a light rock-and-roll beat.

After 1959, Vaughan would never have any commercially significant pop hits. But over the next 30 years, her reputation as consummate vocal artist soared steadily, thanks to her appearances in nightclubs, at jazz festivals and increasingly with symphony orchestras both in the United States and internationally.

It was for the jazz label Pablo that she recorded the most critically acclaimed album of her career, How Long Has This Been Going On? in which she sang with a group that included Oscar Peterson, Joe Pass, Louie Bellson and Ray Brown.

In 1982 she won a Grammy for best vocal jazz performance, for her Gershwin Live! recording on CBS.

During the 1980s, Vaughan appeared almost every year at the JVC Jazz Festival in New York. Two songs she would always perform were Misty and Send in the Clowns, which became her musical signature during the last decade of her life.

Living up to her Sassy sobriquet, the singer liked to perform Misty as a duet with herself, singing the first half in her regular voice, then dipping to the bottom of her contralto to do an amusing imitation of a seductive male lounge singer.

Send in the Clowns, the song that usually closed her shows, became her ultimate vocal showpiece, a three-octave tour de force of semi-improvisational pyrotechnics in which the jazz, pop and operatic sides of her musical personality came together and found complete expression.

The performances invariably won standing ovations.

In the Tampa Bay area, Vaughan's more recent appearances were at upscale performing arts centers. Her last performances were at Ruth Eckerd Hall in Clearwater and Van Wezel Hall in Sarasota in March 1988.

During an Eckerd Hall performance in the mid '80s, her dusky voice was in fine form as she masterfully bent and reshaped phrases throughout a repertoire of standards. Her singing had a liquid, hornlike quality.

Vaughan had a salty sense of humor as well. Greeting the Eckerd Hall audience she said, "Good evening. I'm Della Reese."

Vaughan's four marriages ended in divorce. Besides Treadwell, her husbands were former pro football player Clyde Atkins, Las Vegas restaurateur Marshall Fisher and musician Waymon Reed.

Survivors include her 87-year-old mother, Ada, and her adopted daughter, Paris Deborah.

_ Information from Times Pop Music Critic Eric Snider, AP, the Los Angeles Times and the San Francisco Chronicle was used in this report.