23 Sep – As the local cinemas are playing mostly movies from the comedy genre, Pierre Andre, Malaysia's young and talented actor, movie director, is back with another horror piece, "Al-Hijab".

Once again with horror movie that came from his idea and imagination which took him almost two years to complete, is said to be the best horror movie of 2011. And if the predictions are right, "Al-Hijab" will turn out to be as successful as the rest of Pierre's previous horror movies like "Jangan Pandang Belakang Congkak", "Jangan Tegur" and "Seru".

Realizing that his horror movies had left an impact to the local film scene compared to his other direction work of romance and comedy movies, son to actress Khatijah Tan, Pierre does not mind at all if everyone knows him as horror, supernatural, paranormal as well as mystic filmmaker, as it is not an easy task being a prolific director, even for the said genres. To him it is such a big honor if he is to be accepted as such.

"After "Jangan Pandang Belakang" movie, people look at me with fear. It's good because obviously the movie left an impact to many. That means the movie is a success. With the make of "Al-Hijab", I really don't mind if the 'jinx' stays. The 'jinx' that am talking about is how people will always remember me as director of horror, mystic movies," says the 26 years old director who was met recently at the premiere screening of "Al-Hijab" in Cathay e@Curve, Damansara.

Admitting being jealous of his two good friends' success, Syamsul Yusof and Farid Kamil, who have directed movies of various genres, Pierre thinks it does not matter if people are labeling him as the 'king of horror movies'.

"If it's my fate to continue working on horror movies then I accept it. Who knows? I could end up like my idol, Hideo Nakata, director of the famous Japanese horror film with great works like "Ring" and "Dark Water"," Pierre concluded.

"Al-Hijab" tells a story of a young man who wish to uncover his 'hijab', so that he is able to 'see' entities that are not visible to others. Other than acts by Pierre, this movie releasing on 6 October, also includes great act by Maimon Mutalib as well as Nur Fathia acting debut.