Shotaro Ishinomori was born on January 25, 1938 in Tome, Japan as Shotaro Onodera. As 1 of the most prolific comic artist in history, his works encompasses over 770 titles exceeding 128,000 pages. Being 1 of the early pioneers of Japanese manga, he was 1 of the few comic artists whose works has been syndicated overseas along w/ Osamu Tezuka (Astro Boy), Jiro Kuwata (8th Man), Rumiko Takahashi (Inuyasha) & Fujiko Fujio (Obake no Q-taro). He made his debut as a comic artist in 1954 w/ Nikyu Tenshi. His name could be read either as Ishimori or Ishinomori. Although he intended it to be read as Ishinomori, most people read it as Ishimori, which stuck for the next 30 years. In 1956, he moved to Tokyo to live in a now legendary apartment called Tokiwa-so, which housed many of the future comic artists of Japan. He was mentored like so many young comic artists living in there by the late Osamu Tezuka. The 1st episode of Astro Boy was actually penned by Ishinomori because Tezuka was sick at the time. He was writing adventure sci-fi action like many of his colleagues for pre-teen boys in the late 50s & early 60s such as Niichan Sensha, Mutant Sabu & Cyborg 009. He also drew a cartoon version of Toho's movie Matango during this period. In 1966, he won the Kodansha manga award for both works. In 1971, his comic Kamen Rider was syndicated as a TV series, which saw enormous success. The word henshin (the battle cry Kamen Rider shouts before making his transformation) became part of the staple language of youth at the time. He followed up on his success w/ Kamen Rider II, Kamen Rider V3, Kamen Rider Black, Inazuman & Kikaida, who all transformed their appearances before battle. In 1975, he co-created the Go Rangers, the 1st Super Sentai series. A later Super Sentai, Zyuranger, became popular in the U.S. in the 90s as Mighty Morphin Power Rangers. In 1986, he officially changed his pen name to Shotaro Ishinomori to celebrate his 30th year as a comic artist. It was also the name he intended for himself to begin w/. During his later years, he was penning many comics for adults that depicted society from his view as a comic artist. He passed away at 60 in 1998 from heart failure. He'll be remembered as 1 of the founding fathers of manga.