JOPLIN, Mo. — A local hospital and school system work together to lower the cost of private education. Mercy Hospital Joplin and Joplin Area Catholic Schools (JACS) are providing a tuition assistance program for Mercy employees who want to send their kids through the Catholic school system.

Local support group celebrates World Breastfeeding Week with informative event

Walmart kicks off Wellness Day to help families prepare for school year

Sales tax free weekend underway in Missouri for back-to-school shoppers

Family fun and education at Joplin’s Emancipation Day Celebration

Pepper Fest 2024 heats up Joplin Empire Market

Bishop Edward Rice is one of ten brothers from the same family that all went to Catholic schools. He says the 20% discount can make a big difference in the cost.

“Unfortunately sometimes the finances can be an obstacle and so this partnership with Mercy can help alleviate some of the tuition burden that might be there for any Mercy partner who would come into our school system,” said The Most Reverend Edward Rice, Bishop, Springfield-Cape Girardeau Diocese.

Riverton (KS) Avoids Elimination With Big Win Over South Sioux City (NE), 6-5

Noah Lyles pulls out Olympic 100 in photo finish

Seneca man arrested on child sex crime charges in abuse case

What are ‘fairy rings,’ and are those mushrooms dangerous? Expert explains

Another disturbance appears in the Atlantic as Florida prepares for Tropical Storm Debby

“Any Mercy co-worker who is in good standing with the hospital here in Joplin, Carthage, Galena, and Columbus, Kansas, they qualify for the tuition assistance program,” said Jess Sickman, Director, Joplin Area Catholic Schools.

Jess Sickman says the enrollment period for St. Mary’s Elementary, St. Peter’s Middle School, and McAuley High School is currently open.

The school year starts Thursday, August 15th.

Copyright 2024 Nexstar Media, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.