A TRIBUTE TO ALL THE BRITPOP BANDS

Total Britpop Live Band embodies the essence of 90s Britpop, Madchester, and indie music while also incorporating classics from related genres and decades. Their dynamic performances cater to diverse audiences at parties, corporate events and much more, ensuring enjoyment across all age groups. With something for every generation, they ignite the dance floor, encouraging everyone to sing along and participate.

Dressed in authentic attire of the era and wielding the same guitars, Total Britpop Live Band recreates the genuine sound and vibe of the 90s, transporting audiences back in time with their nostalgic melodies and energetic presence.

Music Genre

60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, 00s, Britpop, Madchester, Indie, Rock, Ska, Mod

Current Playlist

Oasis: Don’t Look Back In Anger, Wonderwall, Roll With It

Blur: Parklife, Song 2

Pulp: Common People, Disco 2000

The Stone Roses: She Bangs The Drums, Fool’s Gold, I Am The Resurrection

Ocean Colour Scene: The Day We Caught the Train, The Riverboat Song

The Verve: Sonnet, Bitter Sweet Symphony

Supergrass: Alright, Pumping On Your Stereo, Moving

Getting Better: Shed Seven

James: Sit Down, Laid

Reef: Place Your Hands

Happy Mondays: Step On

The La’s: There She Goes

The Charlatans: The Only One I Know

Primal Scream: Rocks

The Wannadies: You & Me

Good Enough: Dodgy

Hush: Kula Shaker

Total Britpop can also swap out some of the lesser known, melancholy tracks for the likes of:

The Killers: Mr Brightside

Arctic Monkeys: Mardy Bum

Stereophonics: Dakota

Kings of Leon: Sex On Fire

Kaiser Chiefs: I Predict A Riot

The Jam: Town Called Malice

The Specials: Gangsters

The Fratellis: Chelsea Dagger

The Beatles: I Saw Her Standing There

The Rolling Stones: (I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction

Franz Ferdinand: Take Me Out

The Smiths: This Charming Man

The Who: My Generation

R.E.M.: Losing My Religion

The Wonder Stuff: The Size of A Cow

Coldplay: Yellow

Dandy Warhols: Bohemian Like You

The Coral: Dreaming Of You

The Strokes: Last Nite

Previous Clients

Grosvenor Casinos

The Teenage Cancer Trust

Stonebridge Golf Club

Her Majesty’s Armed Forces: The Royal Engineers

Hotels

Live Music Venues

Festivals

Scooter / Mod Rallies throughout the U.K.

Testimonials

I wanted to do something a bit special for my 50th birthday during the summer of 2021 and so a party with live music and a load of friends was the big idea. It’s a bit nerve wracking choosing a live band, but I’ve always loved Britpop and a load of the music that has sprung up from those times – so when I found Adam and his band everything was looking good. Well it was better than good, the guys turned a good party into a great party and I can’t thank them enough for that. Professional in every way pre, during and after the gig – I would 100% recommend them. – Nick Canney – European Managing Director of Innocent Smoothies, 50th Birthday Party, Gerrard’s Cross

We booked Total Britpop for our wedding having seen them at a number of different gigs. These chaps are superb, can whip up a crowd, and are versatile enough to mix it up. The evening of our wedding was turned into a party by Adam and the guys- exactly what we wanted. Absolutely brilliant quality and range- made our evening. Well done and Thank You guys – Merry Christmas! – Lee Marsh, Wedding in Penkridge, Staffordshire

Thank you for a fantastic performance. The Warrant Officers’ & Sergeants’ Mess, Christmas Function 2019 appreciated the efforts from the band. The music was professionally delivered, sounded quality and enhanced the atmosphere. The performance enhanced the ‘Peaky Blinders’ themed event with tunes that everyone could dance, sing and relate to. All that attended have mentioned that you were brilliant and have walked away with lasting memories of the event. – Staff Sergeant Arron Hastings, Royal Engineers Christmas Party, Chetwynd Barracks, Nottinghamshire