Editor's note: This is the second in a series of travel stories on Ohio presidents, which we are publishing in the months leading up to the Republican National Convention in Cleveland in July.

NILES, Ohio - Twenty-fifth president William McKinley was a true son of Northeast Ohio: Born in Niles, schooled in Poland, settled in Canton.

And yet, none of McKinley's primary residences remain, save for his wife's family house in Canton, where the couple lived on and off in the late 1800s. Today, it is home to the First Ladies National Historic Site, definitely worth a visit to learn more about the women behind the men in the White House.

But to learn more about McKinley himself, you'll need a bit more travel time.

I started my journey in Niles, just south of Warren, home to the McKinley Birthplace Museum and the McKinley Birthplace Home, a re-created residence on the property where McKinley was born in 1843.

And I ended it in Canton, home to the McKinley Presidential Library and Museum and the McKinley Memorial, the magnificent tomb where McKinley is buried.

McKinley's story starts in Niles

The small frame home where McKinley was born, relocated twice after the president's death in 1901, burned down in the 1930s. Seventy years later, a replica of the house was erected, a gathering place for community events and a good starting point for an introduction to William McKinley, Civil War veteran, lawyer, congressman, governor, president.

He was born here in 1843, the seventh of nine children to Nancy and William McKinley, a blast furnace operator. With just four small rooms on two floors, these were close quarters indeed.

When McKinley was 8, his family moved from tiny Niles, with a population of 300 and a one-room schoolhouse that ended after grade eight, to nearby Poland. In Poland, McKinley attended high school and worked as a teacher and postmaster.

After the Civil War, he joined his sister in Canton, where he married, practiced law and ran for office.

In 1907, six years after McKinley's assassination, the stately domed McKinley National Memorial in Canton was dedicated, an elaborate final resting place for the president, his wife and two daughters.

"But we had nothing here in Niles," said Patricia Scarmuzzi, curator of collections at the McKinley Birthplace Museum.

So Joseph G. Butler, a Niles native and a long-time friend of McKinley's, got to work. The Northeast Ohio industrialist (who would later become best known for the founding of Youngstown's Butler Institute of American Art) had friends in high places, with names including Carnegie, Frick and Westinghouse.

He hit them up for money and offered in exchange a bronze bust at the to-be-created McKinley Birthplace Memorial.

A design contest was held, won by prominent architecture firm McKim, Mead and White, who envisioned a memorial modeled after a Roman temple, with two wings on either side of a central court. Inside the court: a magnificent statue of McKinley created by John Massey Rhind, surrounded by many of those bronze busts.

An estimated 10,000 onlookers showed up to hear former President William Howard Taft dedicate the building in 1917. Businesses and schools were closed, according to Scarmuzzi. Bands and parades filled the streets.

Nearly 100 years later, "we have not changed all that much," said Scarmuzzi.

The inside of the memorial museum is far more modest than its exterior. Half of it houses the city's public library; the other half is home to the Birthplace Museum, which features several exhibits chronicling the life of McKinley.

If you go: A McKinley tour

McKinley Birthplace Museum: 40 N. Main St., Niles; open for guided tours Monday through Thursday, closed Friday through Sunday. Free. Information: 330-652-4273

McKinley Birthplace Home: 40 S. Main St., Niles; open for guided tours by appointment. Call 330-652-1704.

McKinley Presidential Library and Museum: 800 McKinley Monument Drive NW, Canton; open 9 a.m.-4 p.m. Monday through Saturday, noon-4 p.m. Sunday. Admission is $9, $7 ages 3-18. Information: 330-455-7043

McKinley Memorial: 800 McKinley Monument Drive NW, Canton; open April 1-Nov. 1 during museum hours. Free.

Some items of note:

* Campaign memorabilia from McKinley's presidential elections in 1896 and 1900, including ribbons, buttons and an oddity called a soap baby - a baby-shaped bar of soap with words inscribed, "My papa will vote for McKinley."

* War-related materials, including Civil War swords and a cannon from the Spanish-American War, fought in 1898 under commander-in-chief McKinley.

* Furniture, including McKinley's mother's piano, a chair he used in Washington and a sleigh (though perhaps he preferred the automobile; he was the first president to ride in a car, in 1900).

* Several fascinating photos, including an April 1901 image of McKinley with his cabinet; and a photo of him walking to the Temple of Music in Buffalo on Sept. 6, 1901, the last photo taken of him alive.

The birthplace home, too, contains several interesting artifacts, including a mug shot of Leon Czolgosz, McKinley's assassin, a former Clevelander; political cartoons that poked fun at McKinley's pro-business stances; and a massive campaign poster from 1896 produced by Cleveland's Morgan Lithographic Co. (and still in business today).

Next stop, Canton

In 1867, McKinley moved to Canton and joined his sister, who was working as a teacher. (Interesting fact: Canton's McKinley High School was named for Anna McKinley, as well as her younger brother.)

It was here he first worked as a lawyer, met his wife, ran for office.

The house from which he launched his famous front-porch campaign in 1896, however, is long gone. It was demolished in the 1930s after it fell into disrepair and its owner didn't have the money to fix it.

One former McKinley residence does still stand: the childhood home of his wife, Ida Saxton McKinley, the daughter of a wealthy banker. The two lived in the house, on and off, for decades, while they commuted between Canton and Columbus and Canton and Washington.

In the 1980s, that house was saved from the wrecking ball; it became part of the National First Ladies Historic Site in 1998. Take a tour of the property to learn more about Ida, who was being groomed to take over her father's bank when she met her future husband.

The house is filled with family heirlooms, including furniture, artwork, a treasured music box and some of the several thousand pairs of slippers Ida crocheted as gifts during her later years.

The third floor features a gallery of photos of all 45 first ladies, though museum officials hope to convert the space back to its late 19th century use: The McKinleys used it as an apartment when they were in town.

For a closer look at McKinley's Canton years, head north from downtown Canton to the McKinley Presidential Library and Museum. The museum houses the largest collection of McKinley artifacts in the world, including the only portrait of the couple's daughter, Katie, who died of typhoid at age 3 1/2; and the piano the couple used at the White House.

Also:

* Ida McKinley's diamond tiara, featured on reality TV show "Pawn Stars," and purchased by the museum in 2014. The tiara, with 200 diamonds, is valued at about $75,000.

* The nightshirt McKinley wore after he was shot in Buffalo, and a gun identical to the .32-caliber Iver Johnson revolver used to kill him (the actual gun is displayed at the Buffalo History Center in New York).

* Dozens of campaign buttons, featuring McKinley and running mate Garret Hobart. The 1896 election was the first to make use of the recently patented celluloid-covered political button.

The centerpiece of the exhibit is an animatronic version of William and Ida, who, at the press of a button, converse about a variety of topics of the day: from McKinley's Civil War days; to his presidential opponent, William Jennings Bryan ("too young and inexperienced," says Mrs. McKinley); to the day they first met ("I was at the church picnic when I saw you looking radiant in your white dress," William says.)

A robotic Mrs. McKinley also expresses concern about her husband's upcoming trip to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo.

As it turns out, she had a right to be worried.

Canton, and the world, were devastated by McKinley's death in September 1901. Plans began immediately for a national memorial to honor his legacy. A location in Canton was chosen, a hilltop north of downtown, a place often visited by McKinley.

Construction began in 1905 and was finished two years later; President Theodore Roosevelt attended the dedication in September 1907.

The memorial has been a Canton landmark ever since.

Designed by Harold Van Buren Magonigle, the granite dome is 50 feet across, 77 feet high, with a double sarcophagi at its center, the final resting place for Ida and William McKinley, with their two daughters buried behind. At the dome's top: a gorgeous stained glass skylight, part of Magonigle's original plan but not added until 1976.

A line from McKinley's final speech, given in Buffalo, circles the dome's interior: "Let us ever remember that our interest is in concord, not conflict; and that our real eminence rests in the victories of peace, not those in war."

A timeless message, to be sure, and a perfect way to conclude any McKinley tour.