More about this celebrity name : Garrick

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: David Garrick

David Garrick (born 19 February 1717 in Hereford – 20 January 1779) was an English actor, playwright, theatre manager and producer who influenced nearly all aspects of theatrical practice throughout the 18th century and was a pupil and friend of Dr Samuel Johnson.

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: Garrick Utley

Garrick Utley (born November 19, 1939, Chicago, Illinois) is an American TV journalist. He established his career reporting about the Vietnam War and has the distinction of being the first full-time television correspondent covering the war there.

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: Garrick Hagon

Garrick Hagon (born September 27, 194?) is a British film and theatre actor and voice actor, who was raised in Toronto, Canada.

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: Garrick Ohlsson

Garrick Ohlsson (born April 3, 1948 in New York) is a US-American classical pianist. He was the first American to win first prize in the International Frederick Chopin Piano Competition in 1970. He also won First Prizes at the Busoni Competition in Italy and Montreal Piano Competition. Ohlsson was awarded the Avery Fisher Prize in 1994 and received the 1998 University Musical Society Distinguished Artist Award in Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: Barbara Garrick

Barbara Garrick (born December 3, 1965) is an American actress perhaps best known for her role as DeDe Halcyon Day in the three television miniseries based on Armistead Maupin's Tales of the City novels. She was nominated for a Gemini Award in 1999 for Further Tales of the City.

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: Michael Garrick

Michael Garrick (b. 30 May 1933) is an English jazz pianist and composer, and a pioneer of poetry and jazz concerts.

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: Neville Garrick

Neville Garrick is a Jamaican born Los Angeles based graphic artist, photographer, filmmaker, and writer.He is best known for creating the art work for many Bob Marley album covers

Personality/ Celebrity / Famous Name: Richard Garrick

Richard Garrick (December 27, 1878 – August 21, 1962) was a director and actor.

Leon Vivian Garrick Origin/Culture/Country: Jamaican

Leon Vivian Garrick: is a Jamaican cricketer. He played only one Test and three One Day Internationals for West Indies in 2001.Prior to playing test cricket he played for Jamaica senior and youth teams, most notably in the domestic competition in 1997 he made successive centu

Thomas S. Garrick Origin/Culture/Country: American

Thomas S. Garrick: is an American former professional basketball player who was selected by the Los Angeles Clippers in the 2nd round (45th overall pick) of the 1988 NBA Draft. He played guard in four NBA seasons, mainly for the Clippers. Garrick's best year as a Clipper was during the 1989-90 NBA season when he averaged 7.0 ppg in 73 games. He played collegiately at the University of Rhode Island.

Michael Garrick Origin/Culture/Country: British

Michael Garrick: is an English jazz pianist and composer, and a pioneer of poetry and jazz concerts.Garrick was born in Enfield, Middlesex, and educated at University College, London (U.C.L.), from which he graduated in 1959 with a B.A. in English literature. As a student

Horace James Garrick Origin/Culture/Country: Australian

Horace James Garrick: was an Australian politician. Born in Melbourne, he attended state schools and then Swinburne Technical College before becoming a mechanical engineer. Having sat on Collingwood City Council, he was Mayor from 1960 to 1961 and from 1968 to 1969. In 1969, h

Sir James Francis Garrick Origin/Culture/Country: Australian

Sir James Francis Garrick: was a politician and agent-general from Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. In his later years, he lived in London. Garrick was elected to the Queensland Legislative Assembly (lower house) for the 1867–68 period, representing the East Moreton electorate. In