I've been in the scene for over half my life, but it's evolved so much I need help. Please share your opinions on this; what differentiates screamo and post-hardcore? First off, I don't consider screamo to be a genre anymore. It was heavy emo, practiced by Orchid, Saetia, City of Caterpillar, etc. IMO hardly any bands are making screamo. Post-hardcore and metalcore are the heavyweights as far as heavy music in our scene is concerned. Allmusic considers post-hardcore to be bands finding creative ways of blowing off steam as opposed to strict punk and metal foundations. I agree, but please respond b/c the answer is elusive. Is screamo even a relevant term, and are post-hardcore and music labelled "screamo" virtually the same genre?

Lastly, I've noticed a trend of ppl not recognizing post-hardcore because they don't like a band. Purists can dislike PTV, Sleeping w/ Sirens and We Came as Romans all they want, but they still fit the rules of post-hardcore. Especially "Feel" from SWS.

They were liking my Instagram posts, only way I found them! They are fire(pun intended).

Screamo has become skramz

Listen to stars hallow great new screamo/skramz band. @cwhit can recommend way more than I can

no but bad post-hardcore is bad

like i mean if you look at bands like slint and fugazi and early refused and modern bands like big ups rather than this sing/scream generation of warped tour bands, there's such a seismic difference in sound that it's hard to keep them related

Which variation of Underoath? Are you talking about when Spencer joined? But then do you mean when he only used high vocals or when he went to a lower register?

Also, I'd argue that Alexisonfire did this better and were around before Underoath were at their most popular.

Yep I mean during their 2002-2004 era. I didn't think of Alexisonfire but you're right. Idk if they were already popular over the states at the time though. I can't think of another band that did that sound earlier. Poison The Well maybe, but they were much heavier and didn't use clean vocals that much in the first place. Same case for Hopesfall.

Yea I forgot about this band. There were so many goddamn bands that followed this format, even Hawthorne Heights did this.

I agree though, Spencer's screaming was possibly the best in the genre during the They're Only Chasing Safety period.

His performance on that one and Define The Great Line is unbelievable. He changed his style unfortunately afterwards. The band catched up to him on Disambiguation so it didn't bother me anymore once Aaron left the band

I agree that he got away from the traditional "screamo" sounding vocals, but I miss the higher pitched stuff. Aaron was always just really one note, every vocal of his sounded similar and he never got "better" with any aspect of his singing.