Since I’ve been stuck on old 90s Noise Rock and Post Hardcore lately and listened to my favorite albums, the question came up what the scene currently has to offer. After short research I stumbled upon a band from the Czech Republic, whose artwork appealed to me first. But also the music knew how to keep me hooked quickly, because it was in no way inferior to the exciting cover and demonstrates how tasty or versatile this genre can still be. Considering that Sinks and their self-titled debut album is a release that came out just a few days ago, I then went into it more intensely and liked it so much that I decided to review it immediately. Fans of Slint, Failure or even the first Swans albums should definitely listen to it and will probably also be able to lose themselves in that sound, just like myself.

Already after a few bars, Sinks cast a spell with their gloomy-melancholic Noise Rock and quickly create a pleasantly cool atmosphere, which is seasoned with several strange sounds and sound effects. The song structures vary between melodic passages with a slight Post-Hardcore touch, while others are more reminiscent of Jazzy improvisations. Even though the tracks are really multi-layered and contain a lot of different elements, the music here never sounds too chaotic, but finds a remarkable balance, which keeps the listener on the edge of his seat during the further course of the album building up the tension and letting him come across various surprises. In addition to a very distinctive bass and distorted guitars, especially the vocals quickly stand out positively, which use a kind of lethargic chanting and light Post-Punk borrowings.

Along with this, as is so common in Noise Rock, there is mechanical-sounding riffing as well as various noises. The resulting smoky mood is only loosened and expanded by a few smaller dreamy sections. Some parts in the songs also turn out to be quite groovy, which forms a strong contrast in combination with the monotonous robot voice and keeps the individual tracks thoroughly variable, providing for a spooky ambience. Similar to the Swiss YC-CY, Sinks also make use of melodies that sound like carnival for this. Not the happy kind of carnival, though, but rather the disturbed, creepy variety. Musically, most of the titles on the long-player are different and diversified, so the only common thread you will find that remains consistent is the fearsome but charming atmosphere that comes up.

Official release date for the album has been May 14. Besides the digital record there are also physical versions available via Korobushka Records. Here you can choose between several different, extremely limited vinyl versions or a tape with an alternative cover. I’m going to get it and buy one of the records as soon as possible, just because of the catchy artwork, which in retrospect fits very well to the presented music.

Sinks and their eponymous debut album sound about like the fair with the famous Ferris wheel in Pripyat might sound after all the loneliness. Somewhere between melancholy, gloom and curiosity for wacky sounds, the Czechs move, but stand on firm feet and know exactly what they are doing. Another remarkable fact is that although the trio has only been active for about 2 years, an insanely well thought out and polished record is delivered, which knows how to tell its own, spooky story and can not only inspire over the entire length but also in the long run!

Favourite Tracks:

“White Whales”

“Seeing Things”

[bandcamp width=99% height=120 album=43611260 size=large bgcol=333333 linkcol=ffffff tracklist=false artwork=small]