Sanaya Irani’s Biography

Anaya Irani is a television actress who started out as a model. She spent seven years in an Ooty boarding school before making her acting debut in the 2006 film Fanaa alongside Aamir Khan and Kajol. She quickly transitioned to television and her debut show was Left Right Left. Sanaya became best known for her famous show Miley Jab Hum Tum which aired from 2008 to 2010.

Her other shows include Radhaa Ki Betiyaan Kuch Kar Dikhayengi Rangrasiya and Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon and she is 33 years old. She has also appeared in a number of reality series. She finished first in Season 8 of Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa. She was the winner of the Indian Television Academy.

Book a Personalised message from your favourite celebrity. Click here to know more.

Sanaya Irani’s Age

Sanaya Irani is aged 39 years old as of 2022. Irani was born in Mumbai on September 17 1983 to an Irani (Zoroastrian) family. Her zodiac sign is Virgo.

Sanaya Irani's Education

Irani studied an Ooty boarding school for seven years. Before becoming a model she graduated from Sydenham College of Commerce and Economics in Mumbai and was pursuing an MBA.

Sanaya Irani's Family

Sanaya Irani is from a Parsi family in Mumbai India. Her family is a traditional Zoroastrian family from Iran. Kashmira Irani is Sanaya's younger sister. She is quite close to her family yet she does not post details about her personal family life on social media.

Sanaya Irani's Husband

Irani revealed her relationship with Miley Jab Hum Tum co-star Mohit Sehgal on November 19 2010 the last day of filming. Irani proposed to Mohit Sehgal in December 2015. They married on January 25 2016 in Goa. The duo met on the sets of their show 'Miley Jab Hum Tum ' in which they played opposite each other as the love protagonists.

They fell in love but kept their relationship status a secret until the show was over when they announced it to the public. Their fans refer to them as 'Monaya'. After dating for over 7 years the couple married in a spectacular wedding ceremony at the Planet Hollywood Hotel in Goa India on January 25 2016.

Sanaya Irani's Career

Photographer-turned-actor Boman Irani established Irani's first modelling portfolio. Irani made her acting debut as Mehbooba in the Yash Raj film Fanaa (2006). Irani made her acting debut as Mehbooba in the Yash Raj film Fanaa (2006). Before entering television the actress spent a year doing TV commercials alongside Bollywood stars like Shahrukh Khan Kareena Kapoor and others. She debuted with Jagjit Singh's Tumko Dekha. Irani was not fluent in Hindi at the start of her career and has spoken about her difficulties with the language on various occasions.

Sanaya Irani's Movies

Fanaa

Fanna is a 2006 Hindi-language romantic thriller film directed by Kunal Kohli and produced by Aditya Chopra and Yash Chopra through their production company Yash Raj Films. Rishi Kapoor Kirron Kher Tabu and Sharat Saxena play supporting roles alongside Aamir Khan and Kajol.

Fanaa was released on May 26 2006 and grossed over $1.03 billion at the box office despite a $300 million production and marketing expenditure making it the sixth-best-grossing Hindi film of 2006.

Despite being prohibited in the state of Gujarat due to demonstrations to Khan's comments criticizing the Gujarat administration the film was a huge commercial success. It earned great reviews from critics who praised its direction soundtrack cinematography costumes styling and cast performances particularly Kajol's; nevertheless its story screenplay and pacing received some criticism.

Ghost

Ghost is a 2019 Indian horror thriller film directed by Vikram Bhatt and written and produced by Vashu Bhagnani Production. Sanaya Irani and Shivam Bhaargava star in the key roles in the film which is produced by Loneranger Productions. The film's plot revolves around Karan Khanna (Bhaargava) an Indian-origin politician in the United Kingdom who is accused of murdering his wife.

He tells his lawyer that the murder was done by a ghost and that he should be convicted In November 2018 principal photography began in London. On October 18 2019 it was released. The film is based on a newspaper article in which a British Court allowed a spirit-related case to be tried. The film's primary photography began on November 17 2018 in London

Ved and Arya

Ritesh Menon's short film begins with Ved (Nakuul) putting his six-month-old daughter to sleep. In the absence of his wife Arya (Sanaya) arrives at his pad moments later. Before you think they're in a sexual connection remember that they're siblings and Arya has something special to tell her brother. On a Friday night Arya shows up uninvited at Ved's house. Ved realizes it's not a normal surprise and that Arya is thinking about something else. Will everything happen as planned?

Sanaya Irani's TV Shows

Left Right Left

SAB TV aired the Indian television serial Left Right Left. Anshuman Kishore Singh directed the show which was produced by Tony Singh and Deeya Singh under the umbrella of DJ's a Creative Unit. The second season of the show concluded on September 26 2008.

After many trials and tribulations Naina successfully exposes Lala's sins to the public. Lala is arrested but manages to escape from jail as revealed in season two. Naveen Singh Ahluwalia receives justice and has his name cleared. Naina and the other cadets graduate from KMA and head off to their posts.

Miley Jab Hum Tum

It is a STAR One teen drama television series that ran from September 22 2008 to November 19 2010. The show is about falling in love in college and building relationships that last a lifetime. Mohit Sehgal Sanaya Irani Rati Pandey and Arjun Bijlani appear in the show. The series is available digitally on Disney+ Hotstar.

Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon?

It is a Hindi-language Indian romantic drama television series that aired on Star Plus from June 6 2011 to November 30 2012. It was directed by Gul Khan and starred Barun Sobti and Sanaya Irani. The first episode of the Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon? series.

On November 24 2015 Hotstar debuted an eight-episode web series titled Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon? To extend the Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon Ek Jashan? storyline. Barun Sobti and Sanaya Irani reprised their roles as Arnav and Khushi respectively. The plot centers around Arnav Singh Raizada (ASR) a Delhi-based billionaire and Khushi Kumari Gupta a middle-class girl from Lucknow.

Rangrasiya

It is a Colors TV television drama series that ran from December 30 2013 to September 19 2014. Major Rudra Pratap Ranawat and Parvati were played by Ashish Sharma and Sanaya Irani respectively. On Raj TV it was dubbed into Malayalam as Pranayavarnangal Tamil as Azhagiya Laila (transl. My Lovely Fiancee) Arabic as Habibi Daiman English as My Love Forever and Turkish as Sensiz Olmaz.

Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 8

Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 8 is the eighth season of the dance reality show Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa also known as Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa Reloaded. It debuted on Colors on July 11 2015. Manish Paul hosts the show once more. The eighth season was judged by Malaika Arora (in place of Karan Johar) Shahid Kapoor Ganesh Hegde and Lauren Gottlieb. The finale was held on October 10 2015 when Faisal Khan and Vaishnavi were declared the winners with renowned actress Sanaya Irani and Jai as the first runners-up.

Sanaya Irani's Career Timeline

Year Sanya Irani Movies Sanaya Irani Character Name 2020 Ved and Arya Arya 2019 Ghost Simran Singh 2018 Pihu Pihu 2018 Dum Dum Dumroo Dr. Sneha 2006 Fanaa Mehbooba

Television

Year Sanya Irani TV Show Sanaya Irani Role/Character 2017 Nach Baliye 8 Contestant 2016 Box Cricket League 2 Contestant 2015 Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 8 Contestant 2013–2014 Rangrasiya Parvati Chauhan Ranawat/ Myrah Mehra 2013 Chhanchhan Chhanchhan Sarabhai Borisagar 2013 Welcome – Baazi Mehmaan Nawazi Ki Contestant 2011–2012 Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon? Khushi Kumari Gupta Raizada 2010 Zara Nachke Dikha 2 Host 2010 Nachle Ve with Saroj Khan Contestant 2010 Meethi Choori No 1 Contestant 2008–2010 Miley Jab Hum Tum Gunjan Bhushan 2008 Radhaa Ki Betiyaan Kuch Kar Dikhayengi Sanaya 2008 Kaho Na Yaar Hai Contestant 2007 Left Right Left Cadet Sameera Shroff 2007 Kasamh Se Geet

Sanaya Irani's Controversies

Farhan Khan Controversy

When Farhan Khan was replaced from the show Chanchhan in 2013 he stated that it was due to actress Sanaya Irani. Barun Sobti the actor who replaced him was then asked what he thought of him.

For those who are unaware Barun Sobti and Sanaya co-starred in the highly successful show 'Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon'. Their on-screen chemistry had a huge fan base back then. Farhan Khan was replaced in Chhanchhan and stated that his abrupt departure was due to his co-star Sanaya Irani.

Irani referred to Khan as a liar during an interview with TellyChakkar. The publication ran a story containing remarks from the actor which irritated the production company. There has been a lot of animosity between the unit and both actors since then.

Sanaya Irani's Networth

According to taddlr.com Sanaya Irani's net worth is believed to be approximately $2 million USD. When converted to rupees the actor's net worth is approximately Rs 14 73 35 000 (Rs 14.73 crores). According to a report in Daily Hunt actor Sanaya Irani owns a luxurious residence in Mumbai worth over Rs 12 crores.

According to the YouTube channel Little Monster the star also owns a white Skoda car that she has been driving for the past eight years. According to the channel Sanaya Irani is the only Indian television actress who has been named one of People Magazine's (India) Forty Most Beautiful Women and is one of the highest-paid actors in the Indian television industry. Mohit Sehgal an actor is her husband.

Sanaya Irani's Awards

In 2008 Sanaya won IITA Gr8! Performer Of The Year - Female for Miley Jab Hum Tum

In 2008 Sanaya won Gold Awards for Best Onscreen Jodi for Miley Jab Hum Tum

In 2008 Sanaya won Star Parivar Awards Favorite Jodi for Miley Jab Hum Tum

In 2012 Sanaya won People’s Choice Awards India Favorite Onscreen Couple for Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Du?

In 2012 Sanaya won ITA Best Onscreen Couple for Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Du?

In 2014 Sanaya won Asian Viewers Television Awards for Female Actor Of The Year for Rangrasiya

10 Interesting facts about Sanaya Irani