Ok, here is the deal: I am collecting an uncertain number of windsurfers and dinghy sailors for a symbolic and historic trip to the opening ceremony of a new wind power plant on the most eastern and isolated outpost in Sweden – Svenska Högarna. Of course we will have an awesome beach party out there as well:-) But first we have to convince politicians, voters, banks, venture capitalists, sponsors and quite a few friends to chip in. Chip in money, advice, open attitudes, efforts and understanding in order to finance the building and installation of a new plant on the island. A plant to serve the one and only family living there, the unique light house from 1874 (still going strong) and the whatever other energy consuming sea rescue- and military equipment necessary to have intstalled on such an outpost.

More info on Facebook: “Fixa Vindkraft På Svenska Högarna / Call for wind lovers”.

I strongly believe that there are enough intelligent people around who understands the symbolic value of having a sustainable energy production out there instead of a diesel plant. It might take some years to get the financing and management done but hey, how hard can it be? This is 2010 and wind power is not exactly rocket science anymore. Right?

This is what I discovered when I surfed out there in July 2010:

From left: The characteristic red light house from 1874, the old and huge diesel tank, the old and loud diesel power plant, the old and broken wind power plant.

This is where Svenska Högarna is situated:

For now this is the plan for the opening ceremony trip: You drop down in Stockholm. Everybody gets transported to, and meet up on the Möja island. Möja will be our base camp. We surf/sail out to Svenska Högarna. We will arrange transportation to 2-3 different starting points depending on how far you wanna surf/sail on your own. It will most likely be one overnight stop on the way out. We will arrange tenderboats carrying luggage, tents etc. Check the map for position, distances e.t.c on Google Maps here.

Safety first and room for everyone

No matter how this idea/project develops in times to come, the arrangement will be wisely designed with “safety first” on top of the list of priorities. We still have a long way to go with the wind power plant itself, and this gives us plenty of time to plan and find resources enough to also make the trip and event right. For instance: It wouldn’t surprise me at all if the Swedish Sea Rescue Society and the Swedish Coast Guard would love to chip in and support us out there with their presence. Who would want to miss that kind of happening and what else is going on out there that day?

This is the windsurfingtrip out there that started the whole thing

In July 2010 the summer was nice to us in Sweden. I found my 30 year old Tornado 39 and packed some stuff and left for a week in the archipelago. My goal was to reach Svenska Högarna. I got there and loved it. However, I didn’t love to see the old old windmill just stand there, broken since more than ten years, or the the sound of an even older diesel power plant…or it’s gigantic ugly tank…pumping out carbon dioxide every day every year. What a symbolic disaster for our sustainable energy ambitions – let’s do something about it.

This is what has to be done:

1. We will continue with the work on the wind power plant campaign in order to get the financing in place and put pressure on politicians and decision makers, on representatives for the Swedish wind power business and on local and national governmental- and environmental institutions. Anybody and everybody needed. Watch out guys, we are nice people but we will not take a no for an answer…

2. We also need contacts, minds and hands in order to create the surf/sailing event, the opening ceremony and the beach party. A management team as well as a squad full of energetic doers. If you feel that I am talking to you, sign in on our Facebook Group or drop an email to me: “bjorn (at) bertoft.com”

3. We spread the buzz all over the world and challenge windsurfers and dinghy sailors to actually come to Stockholm and join us on the long distance sailing trip out there. Long distance windsurfing and/or dinghy sailing in an archipelago such as this is not exactly something you can do everywhere on earth so I bet enough people will be challenged. My theory (and hope:-) is that if there are enough intelligent people around to fix the wind power plant, it will be enough crazy people around to join in on this historic trip and awesome beach party.

4. We sign-up the campaign to be part of whatever global manifestations suitable in order to get additional media attention and by that additional support (for instance: it is easy to see this project as a part of the 350-movement and aim for 350 windsurfers/sailors on the water…but not on the 10th of October however – this is a July-thing).

5. We collect and share great ideas and create a historic wind power party footprint. Signed by us who love the wind as a source for speed, adventure and fun as well as a source for sustainable energy production.

6. We inspire and encourage each other and others to get up and get things done in other parts of the world… instead of sitting on our buts complaining about that too little is being done everywhere.

7. We show the photos from the trip and party to our grand children and they say to us – Cool stuff grandma/grandpa… thanks!

– – –

Ok, what can you do if you wanna join?

– Drop an email about what you think/wanna do to: bjorn (at) bertoft.com

– Sign up on Facebook

– Read the full story on how this started (PDF in Swedish)

Thank you so much for reading all this!

Nobody said that you have to do it, nobody can guarantee that we will make it, I only ask if you dare to try. And I truly hope to see you on Svenska Högarna on that day of the opening. It will be a day you will never forget.

Best regards/Bjorn Bertoft