Funeral services for Thomas Albert Peek, 83, of Caldwell are set for 10:00 a.m., Wednesday, May 1, 2019 at Burleson County Cowboy Church in Caldwell, with Bro. Harvey Abke and Bro. Geary Oren McManus officiating. Interment will follow at Liberty Cemetery. Visitation will be from 6:00 to 8:00 p.m., Tuesday, April 30, 2019 at Strickland Funeral Home in Caldwell. Mr. Peek passed from this world April 28, 2019 at his home in Caldwell surrounded by his loved ones.

Albert was born February 8, 1936 to Elmer Peek and Minnie Ruth (Brand) Peek in Katy, Texas.

In his early life he enjoyed hunting and catching alligators for fun. He also enjoyed crossword and sudoku puzzles, watching Tom and Jerry, and sports. He was a member of the Burleson County Cowboy Church and the Round Pen Bible Study Class. He and Darlene were instrumental in the construction of the New Education and Office Building. Some of Albert’s favorite ministers were, Bro. Hagee, Bro. Charles Stanley and Bro. Harvey Abke. An interesting fact about Albert is that he has survived crashes in both auto and plane.

Albert was preceded in death by his parents; daughter, Laura Peek; sisters, Ada Bell Sweeney and Ruth Dennison; brother, Warren Peek; nephew, Gary Peek; and niece, Charlotte Ruth Rodgers.

He is survived by his wife of 28 years, Darlene McManus Peek of Caldwell, Texas; sons, Thomas Peek of Hollywood, Florida, Christopher Peek of Caldwell, Texas; step-son, Norris McManus & wife Nadine of Caldwell, Texas; sisters-in-law, Francis Peek of Comfort, Texas, Myra & Jimmy Lamb of Jacinto City, Texas; step-grandchildren, Brady & Melissa McManus, Sarah & David Jenkins; step-great grandchildren, Grant McManus, Reese McManus, Emilee Jenkins, Jack Jenkins; and many other nieces, nephews and other family and friends.

Pallbearers will be Keith Dennison, Joe Smith, Ronnie Smith, Vance McManus, Craig Sweeney, and J.L. Rose. Honorary pallbearers are Junior Baron, Francisco Flores, James Peoples, Lee Ussery, and Bill Jenia.

Visitation

STRICKLAND FUNERAL HOME - CALDWELL

Tuesday, April 30, 2019

6:00 PM - 8:00 PM

Email Details

530 HWY 36 SOUTH

CALDWELL, Texas 77836