In the days when Tom Burlison, who has died aged 71, was northern regional secretary of the General and Municipal Workers' Union (GMWU), the northern region was special. Even at the height of unionisation of the workforce nationally, in most regions we were only the country's third largest union. But in the northern region we were easily the dominant force.

There was an impressive and self-confident cadre of officials from the northern region. Tom was distinguished from the rest by his red hair, quiet demeanour - and unusual background as a professional footballer. He inherited a tradition of powerful regional barons, but he also led the way in modernising services. Politically, he and the union played a key role in the selection of many northern MPs - including Tony Blair and Peter Mandelson. He went on to become deputy general secretary of what was by then the GMB, treasurer of the Labour party and the first professional footballer to sit in the House of Lords.

Tom was born in Edmondsley, near Durham, the son of a miner. He did his national service in the RAF and, intermittently from 1951 to 1957 worked as a panel beater, overlapping that activity from 1953 until 1965 with playing as a midfielder for Lincoln City, Hartlepool United and Darlington. He played nearly 200 games for Hartlepool and 30 for Darlington, and to my knowledge was still engaging in kickabouts into his 50s.

He became a full-time union officer in Newcastle upon Tyne in 1965, moving up in 1978 to northern regional secretary. His membership was almost entirely non-craft manual workers. They faced low pay and status from employers and disparagement from craft and white-collar unions. The strength of the regional organisation under Tom's leadership helped offset that, and gave a confidence and identity to his members.

This was also a period of massive closures of traditional factories and the rundown of the shipyards - plus the impact of Margaret Thatcher's anti-union legislation. The GMWU lost a lot of its key concentrations of members in the north-east. Yet they fought back. In Tom's time, in probably the region most hard hit by Thatcherite economics, the union kept a relatively high level of membership.

Tom could be tough, but was more of a conciliator. He set high standards, and allowed his officers to get on with the job. He also encouraged his people to go on to higher things. Among his staff who owe their careers to Tom are the former cabinet minister Nick Brown, Alan Donnelly, former MEP and leader of the European parliamentary Labour party, and the former Europe minister Doug Henderson.

He served on several development and regeneration bodies, and was northern region TUC chairman for nine years. Under his influence, the GMWU northern region was famously influential within the Labour party. Hostile commentators have seen this solely in terms of fixing selections; but, as Tom recognised, it was also a way of ensuring, through union delegates, that there was an engagement with and recognition of the voice of relatively low-paid workers - Labour's most loyal voters - in the party machinery, an engagement that is dangerously lacking today

Tom was involved in the difficult negotiations that brought the shipyard-based craft union, the Boilermakers, and the GMWU together in 1982 to form the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trade Union (GMBATU), and three years later he unsuccessfully stood for the general secretaryship of the new union. Afterwards, he remained profoundly loyal to John Edmonds, and in 1991 became deputy general secretary of what was now (with the merger with Apex in 1989) the GMB. He held the post until 1996.

I first met Tom in the mid-1970s, when I worked at union headquarters in London. In 1992, he became treasurer of the Labour party and we were together again. In his quiet, supportive way, he helped rebuild the party finances after the 1992 general election defeat, negotiating with banks and unions, and consolidating the business plan that delivered thousands of small donations from party supporters to accrue a substantial surplus - without recourse to millionaire donations.

A year after he retired from both union and party posts in 1996, Tom became a life peer, and a government whip (1999-2001). When news of his death reached us, a colleague said he was one of the few members of the Lords for whom no member had a bad word. That is some compliment.

He is survived by his wife Valerie, whom he married in 1981, their children Robert and Lyndsey, and his son Kevin by a former marriage.