Titles like this were part of the reason I scooped up these Mill Creek 50-movie collection initially. I had hoped it would turn out to be some kind of crazed scientist jam. But alas. It's a propaganda flick that attempts to show the positives of artificial insemination. This one was bad. Really bad. It walks a couple through their relationship from beginning to the doctors office, and uses half the runtime in interactions with the doctor as he explains the birds and the bees, how insemination works step by step, and has him conducting his 'examinations'. It manages to include an extra long scene of two women rolling around on the floor in a hysterical cat fight, which was undoubtedly…

Test Tube Babies tells the story of George and Cathy Bennett, a couple who only excel in their banality, inexplicably drawn together in post-WWII America but who eventually run into a problem of multiplication. Unable to have children the old fashioned way, and unwilling to entertain adoption even as a concept, perhaps their lethargic union can be saved...through the power of science!

At 70 minutes, this is a fascinating watch. After three minutes of text walls, the next forty minutes will set up our couple's home life, basically devolving into what passed for titillation in 1948. The direction, by W. Merle Connell, feels very proto-Ed Wood except without Wood's focus. It sneaks as much risqué imagery as the heart could…

I wasn't really sure what to expect from W. Merle Connell's Test Tube Babies when Kino Lorber originally announced it as part of their Forbidden Fruit collection. I didn't know anything about it other than the title, which is certainly attention-grabbing to say the least.

It turns out that the film is essentially an informative feature about artificial insemination with some light exploitation elements, and it's exactly as interesting as it sounds (which is to say, not very interesting at all). The story is boring, the acting is wooden, and I never even began to give a single fuck about any of the characters (in fact, I actually hated most of them). The second half is especially tedious, which is…

George (William Thomason) and Cathy (Dorothy Duke) are living the greatest life. It's the simple boy meets girl, they fall in love and get married story but the problem happens a couple years in when they find out they can't have a child. They go to a doctor (Timothy Farrell) who discovers that George is sterile.

TEST TUBE BABIES is one of those exploitation films that belongs in the same league as SEX MADNESS, REEFER MADNESS and whatever else kind of madness cheap producers were trying to sell. For years this film has been available in a variety of public domain versions but thankfully Kino has released it to Blu-ray and has it looking better than it has any right…

This was a wild ride. Unfortunately, the horrible cuts and editing leaves us with many questions and a lack of narrative connection. The title cards tell us that there's a thing out there called artificial insemination that can help save fruitless marriages (was that even a thing in the 40s??). Soon enough we meet our young couple who feel incomplete after a year of wedded bliss. And the only way to make them complete is by making babies (you know, in the duty sex boring way).

Then the tone shifts dramatically. Besides hinting at an extramarital dalliance, they have a party. A lurid, tawdry affair, which includes drunken kisses, stripping, and it all culminates in a half-naked catfight. This entire…

Oh man what a terrible film! But it can be funny as all get outs! This is the type of film they passed as education on adult topics like this one about being sterile and artificial insemination. I found the part with the doctor being blunt with the man really funny... especially after he was being blunt then told the man (husband) "let me be blunt... dead" -- I fell out laughing!! He was already about as blunt as he could get by actually saying the word "sperm" and then suddenly wanted to be blunt about the sperm being "dead". That was too funny!! If you haven't seen this film, then you'd have to see it to understand why it…

Test Tube Babies is a train wreck of two very different films. One is a woodenly acted informational film about artificial insemination and the other is a woodenly acted drama about a less-than-perfectly-happy young married couple whose friends are all drunks and swingers.

That young couple are George and Cathy Bennett (William Thomason and Dorothy Duke), and the lack of children in their marriage after the eternity of 12 months is causing them great unhappiness. George isn’t happy that Cathy spends time with the sleazy gigolo Frank Grover (John Michael), and she isn’t happy with all of the wild parties they keep having. But without children, what’s there to do but host swinging make-out parties?

These wild parties consist of…