Two weeks before its 50th birthday, Nato today notches up day 17 of its bombing campaign against Yugoslavia. The alliance's first resort to war started on:

March 24

preceded by the withdrawal from Kosovo of 1,400 monitors from the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe, 100 cruise missiles start raining down on Yugoslavia, fired from the Adriatic task force, while United States fighters fly their first missions and four German Tornados attack air defence systems in the Luftwaffe's first combat mission since 1945. The Nato spokesmen announced the first sorties at 7pm.

March 25

US Stealth bombers join the campaign and Nato announces 50 military targets hit in 400 sorties, including the main military airport outside Belgrade. Yugoslavia cuts diplomatic relations with the US, Britain, Germany and France and orders the media from Nato countries out of Yugoslavia.

March 26

Some 20,000 Kosovans flee into neighbouring Albania, the vanguard of the huge tide of refugees, bearing tales of Serb atrocities, scorched earth and ethnic cleansing policies as Nato launches its first daylight attacks and shoots down two Yugoslav MiG-29s in Bosnian air space. The Nato campaign 'Determined Force' is renamed 'Allied Force'.

March 27

The alliance suffers its first casualty when a Stealth fighter is shot down near Belgrade by a Sam missile, although the pilot is rescued six hours later. Nato decides to intensify the campaign, targeting Yugoslav formations on the ground. Belgrade and the Kosovo capital, Pristina, are hit.

March 28

While sorties target Serb paramilitary police facilities in Kosovo, Western leaders up the ante in the war of words by accusing Slobodan Milosevic of 'genocide' in Kosovo.

March 29

At least 40 Nato bombers hit Yugoslav military facilities in the Belgrade area, including an aircraft factory at Pancevo north of the capital and Western leaders say the alliance is in a race against time to stop Milosevic 'cleansing' Kosovo of its indigenous population.

March 30

Nato announces round-the-clock sorties while the Russian prime minister, Yevgeny Primakov, embarks on a failed mediation mission to Belgrade. Milosevic's truce offer is dismissed by the West's leaders after Primakov briefs Chancellor Gerhard Schroder on the talks. Sealed trains roll from Pristina carrying thousands into Macedonia in a grim echo of the Nazi deportations of European Jews.

March 31

Nato confronted with a dilemma as Belgrade seizes three US soldiers snatched after a firefight on the Yugoslav-Macedonian border. The US maintains the trio were on the Macedonian side of the border; Belgrade says they intruded into Yugoslavia. The speed of the exodus into Macedonia, Albania and Montenegro picks up with the United Nations refugee agency reporting 125,000 expellees from Kosovo.

April 1

The impact of the war hits the US for the first time with the three US captives paraded, bruised and glum, on Serbian television. Milosevic scores another propaganda coup when the Kosovo Albanian leader, Ibrahim Rugova, is also shown alongside him on Serbian television allegedly calling for a 'political solution' of the crisis. The US deploys the B1 bomber for the first time while Serb television shows the destroyed bridge over the Danube at Novi Sad, the main city of the north Serbian province of Vojvodina.

April 2

The Easter weekend gets under way with Good Friday attacks and Nato leaders dismissing calls for an Easter truce while the refugee crisis mushrooms. Macedonia and Albania say they cannot cope with the influx as Nato puts number of displaced inside and outside Kosovo at almost 800,000. Belgrade requests military help from Moscow and Minsk as the Russian reconnaissance vessel Liman heads for the Mediterranean.

April 3

Both the Yugoslav and the Serbian police headquarters in Belgrade are devastated by cruise missile strikes as Nato escalates its campaign, targeting another two Danube bridges. Nato troops in Bosnia blow up the railway line connecting Serbia and Montenegro to hamper Yugoslav troops movements.

April 4

As the refugee crisis threatens to spiral out of control amid strong criticism of the West and the aid agencies for failing to anticipate the scale and the speed of the expulsions, Macedonia agrees that Nato can build and run a camp for 100,000 deportees, while European Union countries quarrel over whether to take in refugees and how many. Talk of a limited land invasion of Kosovo by Nato is encouraged by US announcement it is sending 24 Apache helicopter gunships to Albania.

Easter Sunday sees Belgrade hit by cruise missiles for the third consecutive day, with the Yugoslav air force headquarters a target. Western military transport aircraft start on the 'air bridge' operation, ferrying food, medicine, and tents to Albania and Macedonia.

April 5

Heaviest air strikes of the campaign to date, with nine Serbian cities targeted, and Nato officials saying the better weather was the reason for the escalation. In Albania, the number of refugees rises to 230,000 while Macedonia gets embroiled in deepening row with the West over the 140,000 Albanians who have fled there. Strong evidence that the Serbs are emptying Pristina, a city of a quarter million, of all Albanians.

April 6

The Milosevic regime announces a unilateral ceasefire with immediate effect and also pledges that the victims of ethnic cleansing can return to their torched towns and villages under the auspices of the UNHCR and the International Red Cross. Nato rejects the truce offer and lists conditions Milosevic must meet for the bombing to end. The main terms are a full withdrawal of all Yugoslav forces from Kosovo, with Nato forces moving in to police a truce and shepherd refugees to their homes.

April 7

Outrage over the fate of the refugees as Yugoslavia closes its borders with Albania and Macedonia and forces columns of Albanians back into Kosovo. The crisis is compounded by Macedonia refusing to take any more, bussing thousands from its border to Albania in the middle of the night and leaving aid officials guessing as to the whereabouts of some 10,000 more refugees. The US names nine Serb military officers as suspected war criminals.