Directed by: Richard Curtis

Starring: Colin Firth, Hugh Grant, Keira Knightley, Laura Linney, Liam Neeson, Alan Rickman, Emma Thompson

Rated: R (for adult language, nudity and sexual situations)

Running Time: 128 minutes

Best Suited For: Eternal optimists and hopeless romantics (or even hopeful realists), holiday couples in love

Least Suited For: The recently scorned, the humbugs

"Love Actually" is almost (but not quite) a brilliantly conceived and sophisticated romantic comedy; almost (but not quite) a visual primer for love; almost (but not quite) a seamless and poignant marriage of several related, interwoven tales—and could have been (but isn’t quite) a holiday classic. In spite of such a dubious "almost" quotient, the film remains a largely endearing, romantic charmer.

Playing off such quirky British hits as "Bridget Jones’ Diary," "Four Weddings and a Funeral," and "About a Boy," the utterly British "Love Actually" is a pre-holiday medley that portrays multiple situations concerning love—those seeking it, fleeing it and trapped within its clutches. Its bittersweet approach strays here and there (is it a dramatic comedy or a comedic drama?), although the film’s strength lies in its lighthearted approach to the conquest of love.

The ensemble cast includes some heavy hitters—Hugh Grant, Emma Thompson, Liam Neeson, Laura Linney, Colin Firth and Alan Rickman among them—vying for screen time in a hectic, pre-Christmas-rush of a pace. "Love Actually" is also very English—in its humor and sexual innuendo (both crude and earnest) and in its tongue-in-cheek elbow jabs at American politicians and easy Midwestern bar girls (if only).

Through the necessity of its brisk, interweaving plot, the film sometimes too quickly scurries through a cast of sympathetic characters. Despite its 128-minute length, one has the impression that much was left on the cutting room floor. (Too bad, because many of film’s characters are almost—but not quite—drawn with complexity and depth.)

Some of the abbreviated sketches might have proven worthy on their own feature-length merit—a recently widowed stepfather (Liam Neeson) whose preteen son announces that he’s in serious love, or the newly elected, unmarried prime minister (Hugh Grant) enamored with his tongue-tied working-class aide. Or Colin Firth as a recently wronged husband who falls for, but cannot communicate with, his lovely Portuguese housekeeper. But the film hurries by without pausing to delve, more intent on providing an alternately cautionary and amusing morality tale. Clever, yes, but a tad too rushed to fully deliver a message.

A final complaint: What is it about celluloid men who can’t even utter, "Excuse me, but I think I like you" when the women of their dreams turn to exit their lives forever. Are we really that dense? (An informal, not-so-random survey remains—um, inconclusive.) Then again, if we accept the notion that a man can express unabashed commitment to a woman, it would devastate 90 percent of the romantic comedy scripts ever written. Best we leave well enough alone.

In a nutshell: "Love Actually" mostly hits but sometimes misses its mark in various, loosely connected sketches of love won, lost or simply yearned for. Teetering between genuinely touching and predictably sentimental, the film meanders in an uneven path—but for the most part is buoyant and cheerfully optimistic. Despite the film’s failure to tie together loose ends that could have made this a serious contender as a holiday "must have" flick, it remains an enjoyable date and couples film and worthy holiday treat. If love is a Christmas gift, "Love Actually" proves that it comes in a variety of packages.