St Michael and All Angels parish church

Most of the fabric of the parish church of St Michael and All Angels originates from the 15th century, including the rood-screen. The north aisle screen is of a different style and design and possibly comes from another church, whilst the screen at the base of the tower was put together from the remains of the 1625 Jacobean gallery, demolished in 1875. Saint Apollonia was depicted on one of the panels but this has been badly disfigured. The 12th century Norman font according to Arthur Mee (1965) is "believed by many to be the finest in Devon". It is sculpted from local Beer stone, and a fibreglass replica cast is currently (January 2016) in storage at Exeter's Royal Albert Memorial Museum.

In 1749, a peal of eight bells was hung in the church, having been cast by Bilbie of Cullompton. It was then the largest peal in the county. These eight bells were re-cast from the original five hung prior to 1550. The current incumbent is the Rev. Stephen Bessent.

Other buildings

Cartwheels is a typical 15th century Devon cob and timber farmhouse near the church, overlooking the Rectory. Mile End Cottage, on the main road through the village, is the house that Charles Dickens rented for his parents in 1839. Gidley's and Gidley's Cottage in Ide Lane are reputed to be the oldest dwelling in the village. There are numerous other thatched cottages including Pixies cottage (close to the church), and Laurel cottage (in Ide Lane), dating from the 17th century onwards as well as a Victorian prison building, recently renovated.

In the past, Alphington had a halt on the old Teign Valley railway-line, but this was closed on 9 June 1958. It is still possible to see the abutments of the bridge that used to carry the railway-line over Church Road, and also smaller scale masonry remains at the previous overbridge in Ide Lane.

Historic estates

Matford

Education

The modern Alphington Primary School is the main educational establishment in the village, with around 350 pupils aged between 5 and 11. Secondary Education is provided by West Exe Technology College, on the border between Alphington and St Thomas, and Exeter College. The old Victorian school building has been reused, housing the Pre-School and is used by other groups for meetings and activities. .

Sport

The village is represented in the South West Peninsula League Division One East (formerly the Devon County League) by the Alphas (Alphington AFC) football team who play at The Chronicles (on Alphington Playing Field). The playing field is also home to the Alphington cricket team.

Notable people from Alphington

Charles Babbage (1791–1871), "father of computing" educated in Alphington

Charles Dickens's parents (1839) moved to Alphington

Charles Grene Ellicombe, British Army General

Philip Bailey

Sir William Montagu Manning, Australian politician

Robert Stone (1516–1613), composer and member of the Chapel Royal

Namesake

Alphington, the suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia was named after the village.