OKLAHOMA CITY -- The Oklahoma City Thunder re-signed guard Derek Fisher on Wednesday.

The 38-year-old Fisher has spent parts of the last two seasons with the Thunder, averaging 4.5 points in 44 regular-season games. He has averaged 7.1 points in 31 playoff games for them.

The five-time NBA champion with the Los Angeles Lakers has appeared in 240 postseason games.

Thunder general manager Sam Presti says in a statement that "Fisher has proven to be a valuable member of our team and we are excited to have him back."

Presti adds: "He has such a positive impact on his teammates and the organization."

Terms of the contract with Fisher, the president of the NBA players' association, weren't disclosed.

Knicks: 10-year limit for MSG approved

NEW YORK -- The New York City Council voted Wednesday to limit Madison Square Garden's permit at its current spot above Penn Station to 10 years -- a decision cheered by civic organizations campaigning to move the home of the Knicks and Rangers so the busy station can be renovated.

NBA

The owners of the Garden had wanted to operate at the site in perpetuity, while the city planning commission recommended a 15-year extension.

Organizations hoping Madison Square Garden will move to another location applauded the 47-1 City Council vote limiting the arena's permit.

The Alliance for a New Penn Station said the council "has made clear that now is time to get to work and build the Penn Station that New York City and the region desperately need in order to improve transit access and spur economic growth in the city and throughout the region."

Kim Kerns, a spokeswoman for the Madison Square Garden Co., noted that the arena is in the midst of a three-year renovation costing nearly $1 billion.

"Madison Square Garden has operated at its current site for generations and has been proud to bring New Yorkers some of the greatest and most iconic moments in sports and entertainment," Kerns said (see full story).

USA: Durant, Love in for 2014 World Cup

LAS VEGAS -- Kevin Durant shied away from swarming media after Wednesday's Team USA practice in UNLV's Mendenhall Center.

There is one thing he won't be able to escape.

"Kevin Durant is the face of USA basketball going forward," said Jerry Colangelo, managing director for the national team. "He loves to compete, he has a passion for the game, he's won a lot of gold medals, he's just going to win more -- we hope."

Oklahoma City forward Durant and Minnesota Timberwolves center Kevin Love announced Wednesday they've committed to Team USA for next summer's 2014 World Cup in Spain. Durant said he made the commitment to Krzyzewski late Tuesday night, while Love officially made his announcement during the news conference.

"It's an opportunity to represent my country ... and I'm looking forward to the opportunity to playing against the best in the world and playing with the best in the world," said Durant, who set a record for most points scored in an Olympic basketball tournament with 156 at London.