Who is Patti LaBelle?

Patti LaBelle is a singer, actress and author who is best known for songs such as ‘Lady Marmalade’ and ‘On My Own’.

Patti started her musical career as part of the singing group the Bluebelles. Patti’s solo career became more established in 1983 upon release of her album I’m in Love Again - it was also the year Patti received her first Grammy nomination. In total, Patti has won two Grammys out of the 13 that she has been nominated for.

She has also had several collaborations with established artists - this includes ‘Your Song’ with Elton John and ‘Superwoman’ with Gladys Knight and Dionne Warwick.

Read more: 'Where Are My Background Singers?' Patti LaBelle's Awkward Performance At The White House

What TV shows has Patti LaBelle been part of?

Patti LaBelle appeared in a number of popular shows in the 1990s she made appearances on shows such as A Different World and Out All Night.

In 2014, Patti appeared on Ryan Murphy’s popular horror series American Horror Story. She appeared in several episodes during the show’s fourth season as the character Dora Brown. Patti also appeared in drama series Greenleaf as Maxine Patterson and most recently appeared as a contestant on The Masked Singer USA in 2019.

How old is Patti LaBelle?

Patti LaBelle was born on May 24, 1944 and turned 77-years-old earlier this year. Patti was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and her birth name was Patricia Louise Holte.

Read more: This video of Dolly Parton and Patti LaBelle playing music with their nails is spellbinding

Did Patti LaBelle ever get married?

In the 1960s, Patti LaBelle became engaged to Otis Williams from The Temptations after attending one of their concerts. The couple were together for some time but when Otis suggested that Patti stop singing and move to Detroit, she ended their engagement.

"I said very nicely, ‘the engagement is off. I have to sing for the rest of my life. If they weren't paying me, I have to sing. That's how it is with me,'" Patti said during an interview with OWN.

"I still really care for him very much... But I'm glad I didn't marry you, boo boo."

Patti LaBelle got married to her manager, Armstead Edwards in 1969. The couple were together for around 30 years and had three children together. Patti and Armstead called it quits in 2000 and decided to separate and later got divorced.

How many children does Patti LaBelle have?

Patti LaBelle had three children with her ex-husband Armstead Edwards. Patti has one biological child who was born in 1973. Her son is named Zuri Edwards. During their time together, Patti and Armstead adopted two more children named Stanley Stocker-Edwards and Dodd Stocker-Edwards.