Quiz Answer Key and Fun Facts

1. My name is Augie. I am from a Ohio. I love hockey, roller blading, being a bully and pulling pranks. Can you name the actor who played Augie in the movie "Airborne"?

Answer: Jack Black

"Airborne" is one of Jack Black's earliest films. He then moved on to star in "Shallow Hal", "Orange County" and "School of Rock". Jack also is the lead singer of Tenacious D.

2. Most people find me disgusting. My name alone can often times make people gag. I am all about women, beer, pot and pranks. Can you name the actor who played Booger in the 1984 film "Revenge of the Nerds"?

Answer: Curtis Armstrong

Curtis got his first break starring alongside Tom Cruise in "Risky Business". Since his role as "Booger", Curtis has evolved as an actor picking up roles in many TV shows such as "American Dad!" and "Boston Legal".

3. Caitlin just got engaged to an Asian design major, but she still loves her old boyfriend Dante. Dante has a new girlfriend named Veronica, so Caitlin has someone new to challenge for Dante's love. Can you name the actress who plays Caitlin Bree in the movie "Clerks"?

Answer: Lisa Spoonhauer

Lisa was married to Jeff Anderson, Randall in "Clerks", for 10 years. Lisa also did the voice of Caitlin in "Clerks: The Animated Series".

4. I play the title character in the movie "Donnie Brasco". In this film I am an undercover FBI agent who infiltrates the Bonanno family. Can you name who I am?

Answer: Johnny Depp

Depp has acted in many roles over the years including "Edward Scissorhands" and "21 Jump Street". Depp also wrote and directed the 1997 film "The Brave".

5. Eddie Deezen plays a nerdy character in the movie "Grease". He dances like a nerd, walks and talks like a nerd. Can you give me the name of the character?

Answer: Eugene Felsnic

After his live action role in "Grease", Eddie has moved on to doing mostly voice work for cartoons including the voice of Pop for Rice Krispies commercials.

6. I love getting drunk and hanging out with my good friend Billy. I also love to light poop on fire. Can you tell me who plays the role of Frank in the movie "Billy Madison"?

Answer: Norm MacDonald

Norm MacDonald frequently makes appearances in Adam Sandler films. He was also a regular on "Saturday Night Live" in the 1990's including being the anchor in the segment entitled "Weekend Update".

7. In this movie, four men battle the Stay Puft Marshmallow Man, meet a ghost named Slimer and a ghost named Zuul. This 1984 film takes place in New York City and they drive a converted hearse called Ecto-1. Can you name this film?

Answer: Ghostbusters

"Ghostbusters" had an all-star cast starring Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Harold Ramis, Rick Moranis, Sigourney Weaver, Annie Potts and Ernie Hudson. It was ranked "Greatest Comedy Ever" by IGN in 2005.

8. Speaking of Harold Ramis. What movie did he direct in 1993 that had Bill Murray, as weatherman Phil Connors, reliving the same day over and over in Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania?

Answer: Groundhog Day

Harold made his directorial debut in the 1980 film "Caddyshack". This movie also stars Andie MacDowell, Chris Elliott, Stephen Tobolowsky and Brian Doyle-Murray.

9. I star in the 1942 movie "Casablanca" in the role of Ilsa Lund. I am torn between the two loves of my life, Rick my ex-lover and Victor my new husband. Who am I?"

Answer: Ingrid Bergman

"Casablanca" won three Oscars and was nominated for five more. During her career, Ingrid Bergman won three Academy Awards, two Emmy Awards and one Tony Award. The American Film Institute also ranked Ingrid as the fourth greatest female star of all time.

10. My name is Scarlett Johansson and in the movie "The Island" I play a woman who is a clone. I star in this movie along side with Ewan McGregor. Can you name my character from the movie?

Answer: Jordan Two Delta

Scarlett got her first major role when she starred in the 1998 film "The Horse Whisperer". In the March 2006 issue of "FHM" magazine, Scarlett was deemed the "Sexiest Woman Alive".

Source: Author joemc37

This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor skunkee before going online.

Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system.