Lisa Spoonauer, a Rahway native known for playing Caitlin Bree in Kevin Smith's iconic 1994 New Jersey movie "Clerks," has died.

Spoonauer, who ended her acting career not long after starring in the black-and-white film that gave Smith his start in Hollywood, was 44 when she died on Saturday. Her family did not announce the cause of death.

The former actress, who became a restaurant manager and event planner, grew up in Freehold and lived in Jackson at the time of her death, according to her obituary.

Smith, 46, posted a long remembrance of Spoonauer on Instagram Tuesday afternoon, recalling how he first met her in 1992 when visiting an acting class at Brookdale Community College.

"Lisa was easily the most natural and authentic voice in the room," Smith wrote, below several photos of Spoonauer with the "Clerks" cast. "She didn't sound like she was acting at all; she delivered scripted dialogue as if she was inventing her conversation in the moment, like people do in real life."

Smith offered her a role in his movie set around a local convenience store and video rental shop, the same one that would launch his Jersey-set "View Askewniverse" films into motion. Her classic reply to his offer: "Not if it's porn." Later realizing it wasn't porn -- "Well it's not porn, but everybody talks like it is," she told Smith, after reading the script -- Spoonauer joined the production.

Smith, who wrote and directed the film, called her "one of the chief architects" of the movie.

"You changed my life, Lisa," he wrote.

The "Clerks" maestro, who grew up in Highlands, also mentioned how Spoonauer fell for Jeff Anderson, who plays Randal Graves, one of the lead characters in the movie. They married in 1998 -- on Twitter, a friend who called her "Spoony" remembered Spoonauer with a photo of their wedding -- and divorced in 1999.

Spoonauer is survived by her husband, Tom Caron, her daughter, Mia, and her stepson, Tyler.

In the movie, Spoonauer's Caitlin gets back together with her high school boyfriend, "Clerks" lead Dante Hicks, played by Brian O'Halloran.

"She always had a wicked sense of humor and smile," O'Halloran, 47, wrote on Instagram, saying he was "truly gutted" by news of her death. "I was blessed to have been part of an incredible life changing adventure with her. To this day it is a part of my life. Not a day goes by that she (wasn't) mentioned or remembered in some fashion. She will live on in my heart and in the hearts of millions. Always in my heart. Rest in Peace Lisa."

Another "Clerks" co-star, Marilyn Ghigliotti, who played Veronica in the film, also posted a remembrance on Instagram along with a vintage photo with Spoonauer and O'Halloran.

"Words can not even begin to express how heartbroken I am to hear that Lisa Spoonauer passed away on Saturday," she said. "My sincerest and deepest condolences to her husband Tom, her dearest daughter Mia and the rest of the family. I was blessed to have gotten to share an experience with her and the rest of the Clerks family that cannot be measured and will always be remembered. Prayers to you always. You will be forever in our hearts Lisa."

Spoonauer's twin brothers, Michael and Mark Spoonauer, set up a page on JustGiving.com where they explain that if Lisa's condition had improved, "she was going to devote the rest of her life to fighting for those with chronic illness who didn't have the strength or the resources to get the right answers and ultimately obtain the correct course of treatment for themselves."

They are collecting donations in Lisa's name for the Patient Advocate Foundation, a nonprofit that provides case management services and financial assistance to patients.