Quick facts for kids

Braceface

Series title card featuring protagonist Sharon Spitz

Genre Comedy

Drama

Teen sitcom Created by Melissa Clark Directed by Micheal Stuart Bass Voices of

Alicia Silverstone (season 1–2)

Stacey DePass (season 3)

Dan Petronijevic

Michael Cera

Tamara Bernier Evans

Marnie McPhail

Peter Oldring

Vince Corazza

Katie Griffin

Daniel DeSanto

Emily Hampshire

Elisa Moolecherry

Theme music composer Grayson Matthews Inc. Composer(s) Pure West Country of origin Canada

United States

Hong Kong Original language(s) English No. of seasons 3 No. of episodes 78 (list of episodes) Production Executive producer(s)

Alicia Silverstone

Michael Hirsh

Patrick Loubert

Clive A. Smith

Wallace Wong

Melissa Clark

Producer(s) Marilyn McAuley Running time 22 minutes Production company(s) Release Original network Canada

Teletoon

United States

Fox Family/ABC Family

Toon Disney

China

CCTV Original release June 2, 2001 ( ) – September 1, 2004 (2004-09-01)

Braceface is a Canadian-American-Chinese animated television series that aired on Teletoon in Canada and the Fox Family Channel in the United States. The series was produced by Nelvana and Jade Animation, with actress Alicia Silverstone of Clueless fame (who also voiced the titular character for the first two seasons) serving as executive producer.

Summary

The series, set in Elkford, British Columbia, recounts the travails of Sharon Spitz (a Portmanteau of Sharing and Spits), who is a junior high school student with braces that get in the way of leading a normal teenage life. Her braces are somehow electrically charged at all times, giving her strange abilities such as remotely operating machinery, tapping into wireless communication channels, and even discharging electricity directly into what's in front of her, though much of these abilities are often outside her control. In the first season, she is enrolled at Mary Pickford Junior High but later the show progresses into Sharon going into high school.

Cast

Alicia Silverstone (seasons 1–2) and Stacey DePass (season 3) as Sharon Spitz

Dan Petronijevic as Adam Spitz

Michael Cera as Josh Spitz

Tamara Bernier Evans as Helen Spitz

Marnie McPhail as Maria Wong

Peter Oldring as Conner Mackenzie

Vince Corazza as Alden Jones

Katie Griffin as Nina Harper

Daniel DeSanto as Brock Leighton

Emily Hampshire as Alyson Malitski

Elisa Moolecherry as Hannah Corbett

Episodes

Main article: List of Braceface episodes

List of Braceface episodes

Production

The show was produced by Nelvana in Canada and Jade Animation (Shenzhen) in China, with additional work done by Studio B Productions.

Broadcast

In the United States, the series originally aired on Fox Family Channel starting on June 2, 2001, with reruns on its successor ABC Family and future corporate sibling Disney Channel and Toon Disney. In Canada, it ran on Teletoon from June 30, 2001 to September 1, 2004.

Internationally, the series aired on Fox Kids UK and Pop Girl in the United Kingdom. It also aired on Nickelodeon in Germany. In India the series aired on Star One. It aired in the Republic of Ireland on RTÉ Two from 3 September 2001 to 2005.

Home releases

Some of these DVDs were released by FUNimation.

2001

Volume 1: Brace Yourself

2004

Volume 2: Getting Real

Volume 3: Twist of Fate

2005

Turning 13

Volume 4: Miss Popular

2006

Miss Popular, Brace Yourself, Getting Real, Twist of Fate (4 pack DVDs)

See also