Dayton Michael Simpson, “Mike” of Missouri City, Texas passed away at the age of 74, ending his long battle with multiple health issues on September 25, 2023.

He was born on November 3, 1948 in Lubbock, Texas to Dayton Edward Simpson and Dorothy Nell (Moser) Simpson. During his early childhood, his family moved to Houston, TX where he grew up. Mike graduated from Stephen F. Austin High School. He then attended the University of Houston where he earned a Bachelor’s Degree in Industrial Engineering and a Master’s Degree in Civil Engineering.

During his senior year of high school Mike met and started dating his one and only love, Sharon Andrews. Mike and Sharon were married on August 25, 1967. While Mike was completing his Master’s degree, he began his engineering career with Brown & Root Engineering and Construction Company. Mike’s work as an engineer continued for 44 years, until he retired from Kellogg Brown & Root in 2016. During his long career, Mike was a world traveler, as his projects ranged from Natural Gas Plants in Syria, to Off Shore platforms in the North Sea. He also had the opportunity to move his young family to England from 1978- 1980. Upon returning to the states, Mike and Sharon, and their two young girls, Shannon and Laura moved to Quail Valley in Missouri City, TX. Shortly after this, their son, Michael, was born completing their family.

Mike and Sharon were always very active members of their church families- in their early years- MacGregor Park Church of Christ and Friendswood Church of Christ. After returning from England - Quail Valley Church, Grace Church, and for the past 20 years Sugar Creek Baptist Church. Mike loved bible study and teaching. He was highly supportive of local and international missionaries. He always promoted opportunities that encouraged the family, and had a special heart for single moms.

Above all, Mike’s greatest passion was his family. He was devoted to his wife, children, grandchildren, and was most recently thrilled to become a great granddad. Mike loved spending time with his younger brother John, and his wife Donna. He enjoyed their many conversations about sports, politics, and spiritual matters. Mike provided a steady foundation, and set the greatest example of how to follow Christ for his loved ones.

Mike is survived by his wife of 56 years, Sharon (Andrews) Simpson, their children Shannon McMath and husband Mark, Laura Kalokowski and husband Henry, and Michael Simpson and wife Laura. 8 grandchildren- Katie Coto and husband Carlos, Mark McMath Jr., Emma Kalokowski, David Kalokowski, Sarah Kalokowski, Rebekah Simpson, Tyler Simpson, and Savannah Simpson. Great granddaughter, Layla Joy Coto. Brother John Simpson and wife Donna.

He is preceded in death by his parents Dayton Simpson and Dorothy Robinson.

In lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made to the Missions Ministry of Sugar Creek Baptist Church www.sugarcreek.net, The Women’s Pregnancy Center www.wpchouston.com, or Samaritan’s Purse www.samaritanspurse.org.

A Celebration of Life Service will take place on Saturday, September 30, 2023 in the Chapel of Sugar Creek Baptist Church at 10:00am.

Thank you for visiting this memorial web page. Please sign the online guest book to let the family know you were here thinking of them.