You’d never guess that the Marcus family aren’t Shocker alumni by degree.

Rose and Howard raised their children on Wichita State basketball and football. They attended musical theatre and symphonic performances by the College of Fine Arts. Their name even sits above the “front door” to the university, the Marcus Welcome Center near Braeburn Square. So, when Dr. David Marcus was approached with a giving opportunity for the new Shocker Success Center, he knew it would not only serve future generations of students, but continue his family’s philanthropic legacy by honoring his sister, Bonnie.

“It was just the perfect fit,” David said.

Bonnie Marcus was the oldest of her three siblings, with younger brothers David and Billy. She loved writing poetry and was fiercely passionate about animal conservation, joining Greenpeace after moving to Los Angeles in her twenties.

“My sister was just a sweet, sweet person. She was good-natured, bright and personable,” David said. “And she was always giggling, just a little bit.”

Bonnie, who had bipolar disorder, autism and a learning disability, passed away in 2007. She was 41.

Growing up in the 1970s, Bonnie was among the first generation to benefit from Section 504, a federal law published in 1973 to protect students with disabilities from discrimination. In time, universities across America established accommodation centers to assist students with a range of learning disabilities.

David, who has practiced psychiatry for 23 years, specializing in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) treatment, sees the benefits of these accommodations in his day-to-day life.

“Through my training, I’ve seen children and adolescents with psychiatric problems using testing accommodations – extra time, a quiet room – which was very beneficial,” David said.

Beginning in the fall of 2024, the Bonnie Marcus Office of Student Accommodations & Testing in the Shocker Success Center will provide these resources for students across campus, empowering students of all learning capabilities to reach their full potential.

“People with disabilities can do amazing things,” David said. “The support we’re providing at Wichita State will help them to achieve their goals.”