_The Dwarf_ by Pär Lagerkvist

A Review

The first Nobel Prize for literature was awarded in 1901. Since

there have been seven years (mostly during wartime) when no prize

was awarded, that makes a total of 94 awards, one or two of them

shared [1]. Of these 90-plus writers, I have so far read only 21,

plus 6 questionable ones that I’m not sure of reading. Perhaps one

reason I have not read more of them, is that I estimate that about

64 of them wrote in a language other than English … and I tend to

avoid translations, and am not well-versed enough in any other

language to read it fluently. In this respect, I am unfortunately

like many other Americans, who, knowing that they can easily get by

with English alone, just stay with their own language. And, even

though the Nobel Laurates include some dubious choices (John

Steinbeck, Toni Morrison) that may be governed more by their liberal

views than their literary merit, I am sure that I have been turning

my back on many worthwhile works of literature.

These musings are prompted by my just having read _The Dwarf_, a

novel published in 1944 and written by the Swedish writer Pär

Lagerkvist (1891-1974), who won the Literature Nobel in 1951. (PL

was a poet and dramatist, as well as a novelist.) The strong

translation (by Alexandra Dick) should encourage me to be less

prejudiced about reading translations in the future! This book was

lent to me by my friend Peter, who may be surprised to see it

returned to him, after a lapse of a number of years. It came very

highly praised … perhaps a dangerous situation, since it can lead

one to expect so much. As you will see, my enthusiasm is perhaps a

bit more qualified than Peter’s; nevertheless, my reactions are on

the whole very positive.

The edition I read was a paperback published by Hill and Wang.

Unlike Forster’s _A Room with a View_, which I read recently and

which was sewn in signatures, my copy of _The Dwarf_ was, like most

paperbacks, made with a “perfect” binding, i.e. having the pages

glued in separately. Unfortunately the glue had apparently become

brittle, so the binding cracked and one page is totally loose.

Well, at least this is a small-format book that can be slid into a

pants pocket if necessary … a good attribute for reading while

commuting on the subway!

Sweden … I think of the filmmaker Ingmar Bergman. And regarding

Scandinavia more generally, the Finnish composer Jean Sibelius comes

to mind. Both these creators convey, I would say, a dark brooding

quality. (I am embarrassedly not yet much acquainted with the

Scandinavians Strindberg or Ibsen, so can’t comment on them.)

Lagerkvist definitely fits in to this somber mood, at least with the

present book. It may also be relevant that _The Dwarf_ was

evidently written during wartime, a period (as is our present time)

when a massive struggle was being waged against forces widely felt

to be of great evil.

I can often tell a lot about how I will react to a novel, just by

reading the opening paragraph or two. _The Dwarf_ is no exception.

Here is the first paragraph:

I am twenty-six inches tall, shapely and well

proportioned, my head perhaps a trifle too large. My

hair is not black like the others’, but reddish, very

stiff and thick, drawn back from the temples and the

broad but not especially lofty brow. My face is

beardless, but otherwise just like that of other men.

My eyebrows meet. My bodily strength is considerable,

particularly if I am annoyed. When the wrestling match

was arranged between Jehoshaphat and myself I forced him

onto his back after twenty minutes and strangled him.

Since then I have been the only dwarf at this court.

If you are like me, you were probably rather shocked by the

culmination of this little excerpt! I would also guess, that like

myself, you might want to read more …

In the course of reading this book, I became curious enough about

dwarfs (for the plural, “dwarfs” is apparently preferred to

“dwarves”, which surprised me) to seek out more information [2],

which I am paraphrasing in this and the following two paragraphs.

In physiological terms, a “dwarf” is distinguished from a “midget”

by the fact that dwarfs have disproportionate bodies — e.g. a

too-large head — whereas midgets are normally proportioned.

(However, the politically correct term to be used for both of these

groups nowadays, is — ready for this? — “little people”.) Dwarfs

often have normal intelligence and sexual function. In a condition

called “progeria”, an individual will remain the size of a normal

5-year-old, but will look like a 60-year-old adult by the time he or

she is 10!

The dwarf in folklore: perhaps not surprisingly, this comes mainly

from the Scandinavian countries. Dwarfs live inside mountains and

the lower levels of mines. They are often pictured as grave old

men, and are generally kindly beings (just think of the seven

examples in Disney’s _Snow White_).

The dwarf in history: Back to the early Egyptian Pharaohs, dwarfs

served as favorites, jesters, and entertainers. The practice of

having dwarfs at the royal court was widespread in the Renaissance,

and even persisted into 19th-century Russia. Perhaps the most

familiar depictions of these court dwarfs are those by Velazquez,

showing the dwarfs kept by Philip IV of Spain (ruled 1621-65) [3].

The Dwarf in PL’s book (let us use a capital “D” for the character)

partakes of some of the above characteristics. His face, like the

progeria victim’s, has from childhood been full of wrinkles, which

makes him look very old despite his younger years, and leads him to

think he may be “descended from a race older than that which now

populates the world”. He is in the service of a “great and powerful

prince”.

But in other ways, the Dwarf differs sharply from the physiology,

legend, or history cited above. He has no body hair, and is

sterile! He cannot smile, and finds laughter “unlovely and

disfiguring”. Although he can “see in the dark like a mole” (which

fits the folklore), he cannot see the stars, which is strange until

you think about the symbolic implications of this.

Despite the Dwarf’s social position (which necessitates subservient

status), his nature prohibits him from being anything like a jester

or a buffoon, And he is definitely *not* kindly, as you have

doubtlessly surmised already from the novel’s opening, quoted above.

Like Mr. Spock, of _Star Trek_ fame, he cannot fathom human emotion,

and the resulting complexities of human nature (his view of the love

affair of two of the younger characters is particularly memorable in

its total incomprehension of what is going on). But, unfortunately,

he is not quite the force for ultimate good that Mr. Spock is! In

fact, he longs for war …

There is a monolithic aspect to the Dwarf’s nature. Unfortunately

from a novelistic point of view, this means lack of character

development, and a general want of variety as the book progresses.

(Poe’s characters could be unabashedly bent on evil purposes, but of

course he wrote short stories, where monotony is not a real

concern.) PL does however, I think, introduce enough interest of

other kinds, so that this relentlessness of character, and the

resulting uniformity of events, is not a major issue. Here are some

ways he keeps the reader from being bored:

== The book is not long! … just 228 pages.

== The novel is told in the first person, and in “diary” form, as if

it were being narrated by the Dwarf as it is happening. This allows

wide swings in mood, compared to, say, if he had been shown as

looking back after everything had occurred, and writing his

reminiscences.

== Despite the Dwarf’s general alienation from humanity with its

wide spectrum of emotion, there is one character — the Princess —

for whom his feelings are more complex. He carries notes, for her,

to her lovers, and he vows that he would never betray her, even were

he to be tortured … though he does not know why.

== As the story progresses, we get more and more of a sense of time

and place. Some figures seem to be identifiable, at least to some

extent, with actual personages in history … though I won’t spoil

your fun by giving them away here!

== One never (I believe) learns the Dwarf’s name. This, along with

the extreme nature of his feelings, suggests that (like Heathcliff

in _Wuthering Heights_) he could perhaps be regarded as a force — a

part of human nature — along with being seen as the individual that

he ostensibly is.

== There is some humor, which provides much needed relief from the

woeful proceedings. Perhaps there could even have been more.

Speaking of the Prince, the Dwarf says: “I will not deny that he is

a great man; but nobody is great to his dwarf.” This of course

recalls the familiar saying: “No man is a hero to his valet”.

Later on, when the Dwarf is to be tortured in order to extract a

confession about something, they try and put him on the rack but …

it will not accommodate a body of the Dwarf’s diminutive size!

(Unfortunately for the Dwarf, they do find a workaround, however.)

In summary: Though perhaps not totally satisfying as a novel, _The

Dwarf_ is a powerful study of evil, conceived in one time of war and

maybe especially meaningful for our time as well. And at least I

have made one small step toward rectifying my shameful ignorance of

important literature in languages other than English!

NOTES

[1]

http://www.nobel.se/literature/laureates/index.html

[2]

http://search.eb.com/ This is the online Encyclopedia

Britannica, which unfortunately is no longer free. Fortunately,

NYU has a subscription!

[3]

http://www.kfki.hu/~arthp/search.html

This is the Web Gallery of Art. Search for painter “Velazquez” and

the word “dwarf”. See especially the portrait of the dwarf

Sebastian de Morra for an image that resonates with PL’s book.

Search for the word “meninas” to see V’s painting “Las Meninas”,

which depicts two dwarfs.

For an discussion of “Las Meninas”, see:

http://www.artchive.com/meninas.htm

— Tom Frenkel