Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are used in a variety of operations in civilian and military domains including search and rescue, surveillance, monitoring, cadastral surveys, and package transportation. Although technological achievements in UAVs made them more intelligent than they were in the past, there is still human factor affecting their operations. Particularly in path planning, operators can improve effectiveness and efficiency of the mission by controlling static and dynamic criteria before the flight and during the flight. However, existence of multiple criteria has made the path planning a difficult task that operators can hardly achieve an optimal path for an UAV. In this paper, we propose a simulation model which can help UAV operators and planners achieve optimal paths. Our model considers environmental factors, performance limitations, basic aviation rules and UAV user requirements.

Title of Thesis: Mission and Scenario Planning for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (Path planning and Collision Avoidance systems) Niloofar Shadab, Master of Science, 2016 Thesis directed by: Professor Huan Xu Institute for Systems Research As unmanned autonomous vehicles (UAVs) are being widely utilized in military and civil applications, concerns are growing about mission safety and how to integrate different phases of mission design. One important barrier to a costeffective and timely safety certification process for UAVs is the lack of a systematic approach for bridging the gap between understanding high-level commander/pilot intent and implementation of intent through low-level UAV behaviors. In this thesis we demonstrate an entire systems design process for a representative UAV mission, beginning from an operational concept and requirements and ending with a simulation framework for segments of the mission design, such as path planning and decision making in collision avoidance. In t...

UAVs have been contributing substantially to multi-disciplinary research and around 70% of the articles have been published in just about the last five years, with an exponential increase. Primarily, while exploring the literature from the scientific databases for various aspects within the autonomous UAV path planning, such as type and configuration of UAVs, the complexity of their environments or workspaces, choices of path generating algorithms, nature of solutions and efficacy of the generated paths, necessitates an increased number of search keywords as a prerequisite. However, the addition of more and more keywords might as well curtail some conducive and worthwhile search results in the same pursuit. This article presents a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) for 20 useful parameters, organized into six distinct categories that researchers and industry practitioners usually consider. In this work, Web of Science (WOS) was selected to search the primary studies based on three k...