Overview

The application of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) with different levels of autonomy is widening in sectors like agriculture, construction or defence. The development of autonomous UAS requires the collaboration of several technology domains, connecting system engineers and algorithm designers with multi-disciplinary skillsets (including communications, controls, perception or motion planning, among others) in the same working environment. New programs where collaboration is the key can benefit from early proof-of-concept simulations to reduce risk, cost, and rework before flight testing.

Highlights

In this one-hour session, learn how you can use MATLAB® and Simulink® in integrated development workflows for autonomous UAS applications that span from early system design and simulation to deployment and test, including:

Developing system level and design level models in a common working environment

Proofing concepts early with simulation and rapid prototyping

Evaluating autonomous algorithms for self-awareness and situational awareness with simulations

About the Presenters

Christian Merkl is an application engineer at MathWorks in Munich. His background is in aerospace engineering with more than ten years of professional experience in industry and research. At MathWorks he focuses on Model-Based Design and workflows for safety critical applications.

He started his carrier in industry, working on flight mechanics studies and the development of an electrical UAV. Parallel he was a researcher at Technische University Munich and specialized on system identification algorithms for flight control design. Christian received his PhD in aeronautical engineering from the TU Munich in 2019.

Juan Valverde is the Aerospace and Defence Industry Manager for the EMEA region at MathWorks. His technical background is on the design of dependable embedded computing solutions for aerospace.

Prior to MathWorks, Juan was a Principal Investigator for Embedded Computing at the Advanced Technology Centre for Collins Aerospace - Raytheon Technologies in Ireland. Juan has a PhD in Microelectronics and Computing Architectures by the Technical University of Madrid (Spain).