TAG Aviation Holding S.A. and Sentient Flight Group, LLC, one of the nation's premier full-service private aviation companies, today announced an agreement in principle for Sentient to purchase the aircraft management business of TAG Aviation USA. The deal is expected to close prior to the end of the year. Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.

"We are delighted to reach an agreement with the Sentient Flight Group to join forces and provide the continuity of outstanding service and safety that our owners have come to expect from TAG," said Jake Cartwright, president and chief executive officer of TAG Aviation USA. "Sentient is an organization that shares our passion and dedication to both service and safety. By working together and leveraging the unique resources of the Sentient Flight Group, I am confident we will continue to provide and even improve our existing aircraft management capabilities."

"TAG USA has set the standard for aircraft management. This deal will strengthen our position as a leader in private aviation and allow us to create even stronger programs and services for all of our aircraft owners," said Steven Hankin, chief executive officer, Sentient Flight Group. "Our team will work on behalf of all TAG aircraft owners to effectively and seamlessly integrate the TAG Aircraft Management business and its experienced personnel into our organization."

The deal will provide TAG USA with a favorable solution to an operational control matter regarding operating authority of its affiliated certificate holder, AMI Jet Charter-which is largely related to TAG USA's foreign ownership by Swiss-based TAG Aviation Holding.

The aircraft management teams - including the customer service and owner relationship teams - from TAG USA will remain with the Company and will work with the teams from Sentient Flight Group to maintain continuity of service and operating capability for all owners. The teams will work with each of the TAG aircraft owners and the charter ally partner aircraft from AMI Jet Charter to develop plans that allow planes to be transferred as soon as possible.

Hankin concluded, "Jake and I are confident that the combined resources of our two companies offer the best solution for owners to move forward quickly. Together, we will truly deliver the best aircraft management program in the industry for both current and future owners."

In a short period of time, the Sentient Flight Group has emerged as a leader in the private aviation industry and is known for its unwavering commitment to safety and its relentless focus on customer service. Through its subsidiary operators, Sentient is already one of the largest aircraft management companies and is focused on delivering the benefits of scale combined with a personalized service experience for each and every owner. In addition to the largest aircraft management business, the Sentient Flight Group also includes Sentient Jet Membership, the leading private jet membership program with over 3,000 active Members, and JetCorp Technical Services, a leading aviation maintenance operation.

About TAG Aviation Holding and TAG Aviation USA

TAG Aviation is a network of companies providing worldwide personal air travel solutions. TAG Aviation USA offers aircraft management, acquisition and sales, charter sales services and aviation consulting. It sells US charter flights on aircraft operated by FAA-approved and DOT-authorized air carriers. TAG Aviation USA, TAG Aviation Europe S.A., TAG Farnborough Airport (UK) and TAG Aviation Asia are subsidiaries of TAG Aviation Holding S.A., a privately held company based in Geneva, Switzerland. More information is available atwww.tagaviation.com.

About Sentient Flight Group

Sentient Flight Group ("Sentient") is a leading national provider of private aviation services serving clients across the country. Based in Weymouth, Mass., the Company operates Sentient Jet Membership, JetDirect Charter, JetDirect Aircraft Management, JetDirect Aircraft Services and JetCorp Technical Services. Investors include CD Ventures, Argosy Capital, ABS Capital Partners, Brantley Partners, HSBC and AIG. All flights are operated under FAR Part 135 regulations. Sentient's subsidiary operators (Atlantic Aviation Flight Services, Inc., JetDirect Aviation, LLC, Presidential Jets, LLC, Spirit Aviation, Inc., Summit Jet, LLC, and Sunset Aviation, Inc.) providing service for Sentient Flight Group must meet both FAA safety requirements and additional standards established by Sentient. More information is available atwww.sentientflight.com.