The creator of Motorstorm and Evolution Studios founder Martin Kenwright has announced his new studio, Starship, comprising a range of industry veterans.

Led by senior veterans from Evolution and Sony Liverpool, the team at Starship have credits on a range of big franchises, including Motorstorm, Wipeout, Formula 1 and World Rally Championship.

Starship is reportedly set to focus on creating original content in the realms of games, entertainment, lifestyle and e-health, and has already started work on several next-gen titles.

"I’m trying to use games to disrupt other marketplaces. What we’re proposing is some of the first and best in the world and to try and break out of traditional sectors," Kenwright explained to IGN. "Historically we’d always make software for formats that didn’t exist yet. What I’m trying to do is start up a new venture now, with a five or ten year roadmap. There’s no point competing in the current marketplace; it’s already established. It’s important to set your stall out for the next generation of tech.

"I’m trying to use games to disrupt other marketplaces. What we’re proposing is some of the first and best in the world and to try and break out of traditional sectors

"It’s the optimum time to start a new IP, a new franchise at the start of new technology life cycles. You need to pragmatic about it, so that’s what I’ve been doing. Formulating memorable IPs with genuine use and need. The idea was to take some of the best gaming talent in the world and then move it slightly outside games."

With the pedigree of talent he has on board, you'd be forgiven for assuming that a racing title is an inevitability. Kenwright refuses to say one way or the other, however, explaining, "I don’t want to do another Digital Image Design and do flight sims, I don’t want to do another Evolution and do driving. I thought with all these people and resources we know, maybe, just maybe, there could be amazing new things to explore.

"All I’d say is we are going to be doing announcements in the next year or so, but for me to get back into automotive, I wouldn’t want to do more of the same. I’ve got the time, energy and resource now to do all these amazing thing and if I was going to go back into this sector, and who says I’m not, but while everyone else is working on better propellers, I’m thinking jet engines. We’ve had meetings in the automotive sector with companies and they say that some of the visions we have blow their minds. We’re really out to change the game."

Though we're yet to get an idea of what the team is working on, Starship's first endeavour is set to be unveiled at this year's E3, which kicks off on June 10. As soon as we know more, we'll let you know.