MotorStorm

Racing 06 March 2007

MotorStorm is a production prepared by Evolution Studios (a bastion of World Rally Championship series creators), which deals with off-road races. This is the first production of this team dedicated to PlayStation 3. However, this title breaks with traditional rallying in favour of a fierce and competitive fight between different types of vehicles.

ModNation Racers

Racing 21 May 2010

ModNation Racers is a lively racing game, created by Canadian development studio United Front Games. Players guide the activities of fun looking characters who take part in kart racing. The gameplay has a strictly arcade character, and the tightly twisted routes allow you to perform breakneck evolutions. The creators also took care of an easy to use editor, allowing you to create your own tracks and vehicles.

Initial D: Extreme Stage

Racing 03 July 2008

Initial D: Extreme Stage is the next installment of car races based on manga by Shuichi Shigeno. Before the title was released on the PS3 console, it had previously appeared on coin-op machines.

Ridge Racer 7

Racing 17 November 2006

Ridge Racer 7 is another of the best-selling car racing series that is almost inextricably linked to the PlayStation console family. This item was created exclusively for PlayStation 3 under the watchful eye of Namco Bandai holding specialists.

Gran Turismo 5

Racing 24 November 2010

The fifth installment in the PlayStation racing game series by Polyphony Digital. Gran Turismo 5 has all the crucial features of its predecessors plus a realistic but a very user-friendly driving system and cutting-edge graphics, worthy of the newest generation of Sony consoles.

Toy Home

Racing 20 December 2007

Toy Home is a race from Game Republic studio, referring in its climate to the cult title from before years - Micro Mashines. Here, too, we sit at the helm of small cars that race against each other on routes constructed in rooms: bedroom, kitchen or children's room. This title is available through the Sony network platform, PlayStation Network.

Absolute Supercars

Racing 06 November 2012

Developed by racing game specialists, this production allows you to get behind the wheel of super-fast cars and take part in competitions on real and imaginary tracks. In multiplayer mode, up to sixteen players can race on both real and invented tracks.

Motorstorm Apocalypse

Racing 16 March 2011

The third installment of a series of spectacular racing games in which the player takes control of several types of vehicles. The action takes place in a powerful metropolis destroyed by a catastrophic earthquake. The authors took care of the possibility of a wide modification of the appearance of the vehicles (among which there are both cars and motorcycles) - from decorative patterns, additional visible parts, to a complete change of shape.

MotorStorm: Pacific Rift

Racing 28 October 2008

Continuation of the popular racing game. The competition takes place in difficult terrain, and drivers use, among others, motorcycles, quads, off-road vehicles or trucks. The game is distinguished by detailed graphics.

Gran Turismo HD Concept

Racing 24 December 2006

A free spin-off to the popular Gran Turismo series, which was intended to serve as an introduction for the planned – but eventually cancelled – Gran Turismo HD. The title also acts a kind of bridge between the new and old generation of Sony consoles, as it is based on Gran Turismo 4 released on PlayStation 2, but was created with tools designed for another major installment of the series, intended for PlayStation 3.

WipEout HD

Racing 01 December 2007

Refreshed version of the extremely popular futuristic racing game. We sit at the helm of interestingly designed flying hovercraft, racing on demanding routes.

SuperCar Challenge

Racing 04 September 2009

Car races designed for both keen fans of the genre and beginners. The title offers dozens of real cars and tracks, as well as several addictive gameplay modes.

Gran Turismo 6

Racing 06 December 2013

Another installment in the popular Gran Turismo racing series. It is an extensive racing simulator developed by Kazunori Yamauchi and Polyphony Digital. The creators aimed to increase the level of realism in this installment, diversifying the experience through the addition of new game modes as well. The game features over 1200 faithfully recreated car models representing different classes.

Smash `N` Survive

Racing 22 February 2012

Smash `N` Survive is an arcade racing game in which the task of players beyond reaching the finish line is to eliminate opponents as effectively as possible, using various weapons. In the game you will find 10 routes and 40 car models, from small cars to trucks.

LittleBigPlanet Karting

Racing 06 November 2012

LittleBigPlanet Karting is an arcade racing game, which is a spin-off version of a popular series of platformers by Media Molecule studio. Players have the opportunity to guide Sackboy and his friends in the exciting struggles on the karting track. The advantage of the game is the ability to build your own tracks and compete with other players.

MotorStorm RC

Racing 22 February 2012

Continuation of the well-known series of racing games. Unlike the previous titles in the cycle, the main heroes of the game are remote-controlled car models, which will be racing on one of the 16 available tracks.

Formula One Championship Edition

Racing 23 March 2007

Formula One 06 is a new version of the popular series of car races, which has been served for several years by the European branch of Sony Computer Entertainment to PlayStation family console owners. This time the program was designed for the third generation of these devices.

Championship Sprint

Racing 31 May 2007

Re-edition of one of the most popular racing games of the eighties. We sit at the helm of ultra-fast cars racing on eight different routes. There was also a multiplayer for two people.

PixelJunk Racers

Racing 13 September 2007

A dynamic racing game in which we take control of one of the small cars. We are racing on interestingly designed routes. The action is shown from a bird's eye view.

Gran Turismo 5 Prologue

Racing 26 March 2008

Another racing game by Polyphony Digital and a foretaste of Gran Turismo 5, developed for the next generation of game consoles. Gran Turismo 5 Prologue features selected elements of the fifth installment of the series, focusing primarily on the multiplayer mode. In this game, you can drive about 40 different cars, which will also be available in the final version, although some of them can only be used by the AI opponents.