HISTORY is lost on most people, and even most of those who take an interest tend to view it in a linear way, as sequences of events that line up like dominos until they fall together between book covers. But the present, as we know -- history's raw material -- is cluttered with murky choices and influences that seldom make it seem that what happens next is inevitable.

The world knows that Adolf Hitler was the great monster of the 20th century, and the story of his rise and fall can now be efficiently packed into books and documentaries of almost any length. The great imaginative leap made in the new movie ''Max,'' opening on Friday in New York and Los Angeles, is to give us a picture of Hitler that comes not from the last, well-thumbed third of his life, but from an earlier moment, just after the First World War, when a 30-year-old Hitler was an altogether marginal person whose future was totally up for grabs.

Sight unseen, ''Max'' has been condemned by the Jewish Defense League and others. ''The film is in bad taste,'' says a statement posted on the J.D.L. Web site. There is nothing human, it says, ''about the most vicious, vile murderer in world history.''

Yet no one who sees this film is very likely to risk feeling twinges of sympathy for Hitler. Indeed, in making Hitler more human, ''Max'' accomplishes the considerable feat of making him more culpable as well.

''I was reading this book by Albert Speer,'' says Menno Meyjes, the Dutch writer and director of ''Max.'' ''He said to understand Hitler, you have to understand that he always thought of himself as an artist first. And then in 'Explaining Hitler,' Ron Rosenbaum writes about Hitler as a bohemian, living in Vienna, with long lank hair.

''And it hit me: Hitler, who I'd always thought of as a demented monster who wasn't human at all, was really just like us. He wasn't born a monster, or spawned a monster. He actually decided to become a monster, because he tried becoming an artist, and found that becoming a monster was easier. Once I had that realization, the film seemed right in front of me. I thought: 'Well, you finally have a good idea. Do you have the nerve to make it?' ''

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.