Because Menno Meyjes's film ''Max'' presents a humanized portrait of the young Adolf Hitler as a desperately ambitious young painter, it has been prejudged in some quarters as an inappropriately sympathetic apologia for one of history's monsters. But as the film observes the edgy relationship of Hitler (Noah Taylor) and Max Rothman (John Cusack), the warmly solicitous (and fictional) German-Jewish art dealer who advises him, it presents a fascinating and psychologically credible interpretation of events that may have been crucial to that monster's formation.

The movie has the temerity to imply that had Hitler found a patron, his life might have taken an entirely different turn.

Make no mistake: the 30-year-old Hitler imagined by the film is a thoroughly disagreeable creep. As he skulks through the movie, radiating a clenched, clammy phosphorescence, he could be described (in therapeutic terms) as a humorless, obsessive-compulsive rageaholic with zero tolerance for frustration. He is the sort of killjoy who, when attending a social gathering, would be deemed intriguing for the first 20 minutes but quickly would wear out his welcome with his haranguing intensity, rigid certitude and lack of social grace.

Hitler had charisma, to be sure. But the movie imagines that at this point in his life it manifested itself only on a podium. The scary later scenes, which portray Hitler as a ranting backroom orator, suggest how in a public forum his toxic mixture of high-pitched fury and egomania could strike a spark and ignite mob violence.

When we first meet Hitler, he is an impoverished, shiftless war veteran listlessly hanging around with his fellow soldiers and grumbling about Germany's loss of World War I and the country's humiliation by the Treaty of Versailles. Hitler's anti-Semitism has already coalesced into a bogus theory of racial purity. He professes a grudging admiration for Jewish clannishness, which he believes has given Jews superior intelligence. But that respect is outweighed by an icy strain of paranoid loathing for what he perceives as the contaminating Jewish influence on other cultures.

A fellow soldier, Mayr (Ulrich Thomsen), an army propaganda officer, recognizes Hitler's potential as a forceful public speaker and encourages him to speak out in beer halls. The film subtly portrays the influences of Mayr and Rothman as a tug of war for Hitler's soul.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.