Erschienen in:

Open Access 01.12.2019 | Research

An AARS variant as the likely cause of Swedish type hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids

verfasst von: Christina Sundal, Susana Carmona, Maria Yhr, Odd Almström, Maria Ljungberg, John Hardy, Carola Hedberg-Oldfors, Åsa Fred, José Brás, Anders Oldfors, Oluf Andersen, Rita Guerreiro

Erschienen in: Acta Neuropathologica Communications | Ausgabe 1/2019

download

DOWNLOAD

print

DRUCKEN

0 / 0

0

Vorherige

Nächste

insite

SUCHEN

Abstract

Swedish type Hereditary Diffuse Leukoencephalopathy with Spheroids (HDLS-S) is a severe adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with the histopathological hallmark of neuraxonal degeneration with spheroids, described in a large family with a dominant inheritance pattern. The initial stage of the disease is dominated by frontal lobe symptoms that develop into a rapidly advancing encephalopathy with pyramidal, deep sensory, extrapyramidal and optic tract symptoms. Median survival is less than 10 years. Recently, pathogenic mutations in CSF1R were reported in a clinically and histologically similar leukoencephalopathy segregating in several families. Still, the cause of HDLS-S remained elusive since its initial description in 1984, with no CSF1R mutations identified in the family. Here we update the original findings associated with HDLS-S after a systematic and recent assessment of several family members. We also report the results from exome sequencing analyses indicating the p.Cys152Phe variant in the alanyl tRNA synthetase (AARS) gene as the probable cause of this disease. The variant affects an amino acid located in the aminoacylation domain of the protein and does not cause differences in splicing or expression in the brain. Brain pathology in one case after 10 years of disease duration showed the end stage of the disease to be characterized by widespread liquefaction of the white matter leaving only some macrophages and glial cells behind the centrifugally progressing front. These results point to AARS as a candidate gene for rapidly progressing adult-onset CSF1R-negative leukoencephalopathies.

Hinweise

Oluf Andersen and Rita Guerreiro contributed equally to this work.

Supplementary information

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s40478-019-0843-y.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.