Kevin McNally is married to Downton Abbey actress Phyllis Logan, who denied knowing about the arrest a day after the news was first released. Logan was at their shared home in Chiswick, West London while McNally ventured to the United States to appear in a Doctor Who fan convention, meaning the arrest and subsequent charges alleged against the actor likely have nothing to do with his wife. This means that, if the comments from the Los Angeles police are true, McNally’s alleged infraction must have been against a cohabitant of the place where he stayed during his time in the country.

Unfortunately, organizers for the Gallifrey One Doctor Who convention announced over the weekend that Kevin McNally would not be in attendance, though they specified that the absence was personal in nature, and did not explicitly mention the arrest. McNally has appeared in multiple iterations of Doctor Who over the years, including a four-episode stint as Hugo Lang in 1984, and a three-episode stint as Professor Jericho in 2021. McNally also lent his voice to the podcast series Doctor Who: The Tenth Doctor Adventures as the character Merrick Kingdom.

Kevin McNally has also shared the screen with his wife in several episodes of Downton Abbey, though his best-known role is that of first mate Joshamee Gibbs in all five of the Pirates of the Caribbean films. Gibbs is a loyal follower of Johnny Depp’s Captain Jack Sparrow and often aids the eccentric seafarer in launching convoluted schemes throughout the run of the blockbuster film franchise. Since the news of his arrest first broke, fans have called back to McNally’s vocal support of Pirates co-star Johnny Depp when he faced similar charges in 2021.

Kevin McNally continued to champion Johnny Depp’s good character and demand a return to the Disney-owned franchise for the series star after Depp was accused of physically abusing his now-ex-wife Amber Heard. The Depp vs. Heard trial famously dragged on for years as the pair both suffered several professional and financial losses, eventually leading to Depp parting ways with the Disney-owned franchise entirely.

While it’s too soon to say what fallout, if any, will be incurred by McNally’s arrest, Disney has announced an upcoming sixth installment in the Pirates of the Caribbean franchise, with no word on the film’s casting at this time.

More details are sure to come as this story develops. For now, Kevin McNally is out on bail and expected to return for a court appearance next month.