Independent producer David Thwaites has joined Miramax in the newly-created position of VP of film, the company announced Monday.

Reporting to Zanne Devine, executive VP of film and TV, Thwaites will head Miramax’s burgeoning film production and development activities as the studio continues its push into new content areas, including film, television, acquisitions and co-productions.

“I’m thrilled to be joining the fantastic team at Miramax,” said Thwaites (pictured above at the premiere of “What to Expect When You’re Expecting”). “I can’t wait to begin working on Miramax’s rich and diverse development slate, and I look forward to bringing in new projects for all of us to dive into.”

Also Read: Remake of Freddie Prinze Jr. and Paul Walker Movie 'She's All That' in the Works at Weinstein Co., Miramax

“We are very excited to boost our growing production and development activities with an industry executive of David’s caliber. David has great network reach, creative intuition and production savvy,” added Devine.

Thwaites most recently produced “Crouching Tiger II: The Green Destiny.” He also served as co-president of production at Phoenix Pictures, where he led the development of many projects and nurtured relationships with writers, directors and actors. During his tenure at Phoenix he produced and executive produced films such as Darren Aronofsky‘s Oscar-nominated “Black Swan,” the Cameron Diaz comedy “What to Expect When You’re Expecting,” “Shanghai,” “License to Wed,” “Miss Potter” and “All the King’s Men.”

Up next for Miramax is Bill Condon‘s “Mr. Holmes,” which stars Ian McKellen as Sherlock alongside Laura Linney. Miramax will release that film domestically with Roadside Attractions on July 17. The company also has “The 9th Life of Louis Drax with Jamie Dornan, Aaron Paul and Sarah Gadon in the release pipeline.

The post Miramax Hires ‘Black Swan’ EP David Thwaites as VP of Film appeared first on TheWrap.

Related stories from TheWrap:

Abbie Cornish, Dermot Mulroney to Star in Psychological Thriller 'Lavender'

'It Follows' Star Keir Gilchrist, James Caan, Logan Miller Set for 'The Waiting'

7 Things Scene and Heard at NBC's Upfront Event

CBS Cancels 'Stalker' After One Season