The definitive cyberpunk novel, William Gibson's Neuromancer is a science-fiction masterpiece that ranks as one of the twentieth century's most potent visions of the future. First published as a paperback original in 1984, several years before the Internet was commonplace, William Gibson showed us the Matrix — a world within the world, the representation of every byte of data in cyberspace. Neuromancer is the story of Henry Dorsett Case, once the sharpest data-thief in the Matrix, until an ex-employer crippled his nervous system. Now a new employer has recruited him for a last chance run against an unthinkably powerful artificial intelligence.

Neuromancer was the first fully-realized glimpse of humankind’s digital future — a shocking vision that has challenged our assumptions about technology and ourselves, reinvented the way we speak and think, and forever altered the landscape of our imaginations.

The novel is the first in history to win the Nebula, the Hugo, and the Philip K. Dick Award for paperback original, and the Mail & Guardian described this achievement as "the sci-fi writer's version of winning the Goncourt, Booker, and Pulitzer in the same year." By 2007, it had sold more than 6.7 million copies, and it remains one of the most honored works of science-fiction in recent history. Time magazine included it on their list of 100 Best English-Language Novels Written Since 1923, remarking, "There is no way to overstate how radical Neuromancer was when it first appeared."

Neuromancer ushers us into a dystopian world, exposing the dark side of a culture inextricably linked to computer technology with a keen prophecy that endures.

The signed limited edition of Neuromancer by William Gibson is presented in two states: Lettered and Numbered editions.

NUMBERED EDITION

6” x 9” trim size.

272 Pages.

Limited to 250 copies.

Quarter Japanese cloth binding with premium foil stamped paper boards.

Introduction by William Gibson from the trade edition.

Six full color illustrations by Billy Norrby.

Signed by William Gibson and Billy Norrby.

Printed offset on Cougar Natural.

Endsheets are Hahnemühle Bugra.

Housed in a capped slipcase enclosure.

Bookmark with all pre-orders.