1. Neuromancer By: William Gibson

2. William Ford Gibson (born March 17, 1948) is an American-Canadian writer who has been called the "noir prophet" of the cyberpunk subgenre of science fiction. Gibson coined the term "cyberspace" in his short story "Burning Chrome" and later popularized the concept in his debut novel, Neuromancer (1984). In visualizing cyberspace, Gibson created an iconography for the information age before the ubiquity of the Internet in the 1990s. He is also credited with predicting the rise of reality television and with establishing the conceptual foundations for the rapid growth of virtual environments such as videogames and the Web.

3. Gibson's early works are bleak, noir near-future stories about the effect of cybernetics and computer networks on humans – "lowlife meets high tech". The short stories were published in leading science fiction magazines and eventually revived science fiction, which at the time was widely considered insignificant. The themes, settings and characters developed in these stories culminated in his first novel, Neuromancer, which garnered critical and commercial success, virtually launching the cyberpunk literary movement. Although much of Gibson's reputation has remained rooted in Neuromancer, his work has continued to evolve in style and concept. After expanding on Neuromancer with two more novels to complete the dystopic Sprawl trilogy, Gibson became a central figure to an entirely different science fiction sub-genre—steampunk—with the 1990 alternate history novel The Difference Engine, written with Bruce Sterling. In the 1990s he composed the Bridge trilogy of novels, which focused on sociological observations of near-future urban environments and late capitalism. His most recent novels—Pattern Recognition(2003) and Spook Country (2007)—are set in a contemporary world and have put his work onto mainstream bestseller lists for the first time.

4. The Beginning It was Gibson's first novel and the beginning of the Sprawl trilogy. The novel tells the story of a washed-up computer hacker hired by a mysterious employer to work on the ultimate hack. Gibson explores artificial intelligence, virtual reality, genetic engineering, and multinational corporations overpowering the traditional nation-state long before these ideas entered popular culture. The concept of cyberspace makes its first appearance, with Gibson inventing the word to describe "a consensual hallucination experienced daily by billions." The novel appeared on Time magazine's list of 100 best English-language novels written since 1923.

5. Neuromanceris sometimes believed to be the first work to refer to cyberspace as "the matrix" (not capitalized), possibly inspiring the title of the film The Matrix. However, the Doctor Who story The Deadly Assassin introduced its own Matrix in 1976, with substantial similarities. Indie rock band Straylight Run derived their name from this book. The roleplaying game Shadowrun is also heavily influenced by Neuromancer. "Street samurai", "razorguy", and "deck" include some of the borrowed vocabulary, and the characters live in a similar near-future world (with the corrupt multinationals, etc.). It also mixes fantasy with cyberpunk, adding elves, dwarves, dragons and magical powers. Its makers were accused of using Gibson's materials without permission, who expressed his dislike regarding the combination of the cyberpunk and fantasy genres. The videogame Deus Ex includes a similar plot element involving two AI fusing together. Its hero also uses an ICE Breaker for hacking, like Case. In the roleplaying game Vampire: The Masquerade - Bloodlines there is a book found in an internet cafe entitled : "The Cowboys Guide to Cyberspace" by Case; a reference to Neuromancer. Reading the book increases the players hacking skill.