Hardcover. Condition: New. Limited Edition. VERY FINE. Sealed and mint without any flaws. Personally SIGNED by William Gibson. Easton Press, "Neuromancer" William Gibson. Signed Limited Edition. Leather Bound with COA. Hardcover with decorative designs and 22kt gold accents. Science Fiction favorite among fans. The definitive cyberpunk novel, William Gibson's Neuromancer is a science-fiction masterpiece that ranks as one of the twentieth century's most potent visions of the future. First published as a paperback original in 1984, several years before the Internet was commonplace, William Gibson showed us the Matrix a world within the world, the representation of every byte of data in cyberspace. Neuromancer is the story of Henry Dorsett Case, once the sharpest data-thief in the Matrix, until an ex-employer crippled his nervous system. Now a new employer has recruited him for a last chance run against an unthinkably powerful artificial intelligence. Neuromancer was the first fully-realized glimpse of humankind's digital future a shocking vision that has challenged our assumptions about technology and ourselves, reinvented the way we speak and think, and forever altered the landscape of our imaginations. The novel is the first in history to win the Nebula, the Hugo, and the Philip K. Dick Award for paperback original, and the Mail & Guardian described this achievement as "the sci-fi writer's version of winning the Goncourt, Booker, and Pulitzer in the same year." By 2007, it had sold more than 6.7 million copies, and it remains one of the most honored works of science-fiction in recent history. Time magazine included it on their list of 100 Best English-Language Novels Written Since 1923, remarking, "There is no way to overstate how radical Neuromancer was when it first appeared." Neuromancer ushers us into a dystopian world, exposing the dark side of a culture inextricably linked to computer technology with a keen prophecy that endures. Features Includes all the classic Easton Press qualities: * Premium Leather * Silk Moire Endleaves * Distinctive Cover Design * Hubbed Spine, Accented in Real 22KT Gold * Satin Ribbon Page Marker * Gilded Page Edges * Long-lasting, High Quality Acid-neutral Paper * Smyth-sewn Pages for Strength and Durability * Beautiful Illustrations. Signed by Author(s).

First Printing. Octavo (21.75cm); black and purple paper-covered boards, with titles stamped in gilt on spine; dustjacket; [viii],[2],3-278,[2]pp. Signed by the author on the title page. Subtle yellowing and some scattered foxing to text edges, else Near Fine. Dustjacket is unclipped (priced $21.95), with some sunning to the red design at spine ends; Near Fine. "In a highly urbanized future dominated by cybernetics and bioengineering, anti-hero Case is rescued from wretchedness and given back the ability to send his persona into the cyberspace of the world's computer networks, where he must carry out a hazardous mission for an enigmatic employer. An adventure story much enlivened by elaborate technical jargon and sleazy, streetwise characters the pioneering "cyberpunk" novel and arguably the most influential SF novel of the 1980s" (Barron, Anatomy of Wonder II-439). This edition with a new afterword by the author. An important debut, winner of the Hugo, Nebula, and Philip K. Dick awards. First Ace Hardcover Edition (and Tenth Anniversary Edition).

Condition: Near Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Near Fine. First thus. The 10th year anniversary edition of Gibson's breakout science fiction novel, signed by the author on the title page. A Near Fine copy in like dust jacket. Book with some foxing to the outer edge of the closed text block, otherwise appearing unread. Jacket with a sticker indicating that the book was autographed for University Book Store in Seattle/Bellvue. William Gibson's sci-fi classic. Not only would Neuromancer be the first book to win all three of the Nebula, Hugo, and Philip K. Dick awards, but the book is also responsible for helping to popularize the cyberpunk genre. Indeed, when Gibson saw Blade Runnerâ"in the middle of the novel's compositionâ"he thought Neuromancer would receive lukewarm reviews and be viewed as a kind of rip-off, instead of the revelation it was. Much of the dialogue and cant that the work is famous for was adapted by Gibson from the street slang of the Toronto underworld, which Gibson became familiar with when he moved to Canada in the late 1960s. Neuromancer is on Time magazine's list of the 100 best English language novels since 1923, and has sold more than 7 million copies worldwide to date. A contemporary review hailed GIbson's first novel as "[A]n amazing, virtuoso performance. Kaleidoscopic, picaresque, flashy and decadent" (Washington Post). Near Fine in Near Fine dust jacket.

First US hardback edition, first printing, inscribed by the author on the title page alongside his large ink sketch of a neuron, "Wm Gibson, Atlanta '92". This Phantasia edition carries the atmospheric jacket illustration by Barclay Shaw, a frequent nominee for the Hugo Award for Best Professional Artist and recurring figure in the top ten rankings of the annual Local Poll Award for Best Artist. A landmark of modern science fiction, Neuromancer immediately defined the then-fledgling cyberpunk genre. It was first published as an Ace paperback in 1984, followed later that year by the first hardback edition, issued in London. Such is the attractiveness of the Phantasia edition that, in another inscribed copy we have handled, Gibson called it the "Deluxe" Neuromancer. This copy is one of 1,200 from the trade issue, published simultaneously with the signed limited issue of 375 copies. Peter Harrington, sold item number 150893. Octavo. Original white cloth, spine lettered in bronze, author's initials blind-stamped on front cover, buff endpapers. With dust jacket by Barclay Shaw. Light foxing to edges of cloth and leaves, contents clean; bright, unclipped jacket with gentle vertical creases on rear panel: a near-fine copy in like jacket.

First US hardback edition, first printing, signed limited issue, this copy additionally inscribed on the title page, "To Brent, very best, Wm Gibson". It is number 299 of 375 copies signed by the author on the limitation page, bound with gold endpapers, and housed in a slipcase. The trade issue of 1,200 unsigned copies had buff endpapers and did not include a slipcase. The atmospheric jacket illustration is by Barclay Shaw, a five-time nominee for the Hugo Award for Best Professional Artist and a recurring figure in the top ten rankings of the annual Local Poll Award for Best Artist. The most famous and enduring cyberpunk novel, Neuromancer immediately defined the then-fledgling cyberpunk genre. It was originally published as an Ace paperback in 1984, followed later that year by the first hardback edition, issued in London. Such is the attractiveness of this Phantasia edition that Gibson called it the "Deluxe Neuromancer" in an inscribed copy of the trade issue we have handled. Peter Harrington, sold item number 150893. Octavo. Original white cloth, spine and front cover lettered in bronze on recessed ground, gold endpapers. With dust jacket by Barclay Shaw. Housed in publisher's white cloth slipcase. Touch of mottling to upper board edges, jacket unclipped, slipcase slightly mottled: a fine copy in fine jacket.