A public meeting has been scheduled by the Auburn Hills Planning Commission/Recreation Commission for Wednesday, March 4th, 2020 at 7:00 PM in the City of Auburn Hills – City Council Chambers which is located at 1827 N. Squirrel Road, Auburn Hills, MI 48326 regarding the City’s consideration of a Michigan Natural Resources Trust Fund (MNRTF) grant application (https://www.michigan.gov/dnr) to assist with the funding of a potential new park along the Clinton River.

The site where the proposed Kayak Point Park (name under consideration) is planned is the former Country Kitchen restaurant property, which is located at the northeast corner of Opdyke Road and Auburn Road.

The City obtained the property from Oakland County as the result of tax foreclosure in July 2017. The entire site is situated within a federally designated floodway and flood hazard zone, which makes converting the land into a park a natural transition. In accordance with the goals of the City Council, the project will also help beautify and improve that section of the Opdyke Road corridor. A city park in this location with river access is consistent with the goals set forth in the 2009 City of Auburn Hills Riverwalk Master Plan as well as the 2019-2023 Parks and Recreation Master Plan.

The grant application includes many features that will take advantage of the site’s placement along the Clinton River, which are the following:

New access point to the Clinton River for recreational use

Kayak and canoe launch

Riverfront/access for fishing

Wildlife/river viewing areas

Pathways and nature trails

Entrance drive for vehicles from Auburn Rd.

Picnic shelter with seating

River wayfinding and safety signage

LED and solar site lighting

Landscaping with native plants/grasses, rock

This project has the full support of 11 organizations including: DNR Fisheries, SEMCOG, Oakland County Department of Economic Development and Planning, Clinton River Watershed Council, City of Rochester Hills, local businesses and nearby property owners.

Those wishing to learn more about the proposal are welcome to attend the meeting and provide comments. The proposed grant application may be examined in advance of the meeting during regular business hours at the Auburn Hills Community Center.

Persons wishing to express their views may do so in person at the meeting, in writing addressed to the Recreation Commission c/o Sage Hegdal, Recreation Director at 1827 N. Squirrel Road, Auburn Hills, MI 48326. For additional information or to provide comments by phone persons may contact Sage Hegdal, Recreation Director at 248-370-9353.

Sage Hegdal, Recreation Director, Parks and Recreation