The 52-3 District Court: North Oakland Jurisdiction

The 52-3 District Court covers a densely populated geographic area in northeastern Oakland County, Michigan, with jurisdiction over the following communities:

Addison Township

Auburn Hills

Lake Angelus

Lakeville

Leonard

Oakland Township

Orion Township

Oxford Township

Rochester

Rochester Hills

Village of Lake Orion

Village of Oxford

52-3 District Court & Geographic Area Covered by this Court System

The 52-3 District Court current contact information is as follows:

Address: 700 Barclay Circle, Rochester Hills, MI 48307

Phone: 248-853-5553

Convenient 52-3 District Court Links:

Online Case Search

Online Payments

Weddings

The 52-3 District Court covers an expansive and diverse area of Oakland County that includes prized residential communities, along with the following establishments and attractions:

Oakland University located in Rochester Hills has an enrollment of approximately 20,000 undergraduate and graduate students.

Chrysler World Headquarters and Technology Center in Auburn Hills which has over 5 million square feet of space and employs several thousand people.

Meadowbrook Hall, completed in 1929 for a cost of $4 million and was once home to the Dodge Family.

Downtown Rochester, a historical district with over 300 shops and restaurants, and services.

The Big Bright Christmas Light Show in downtown Rochester, is one of the most spectacular holiday light shows in the United States and it attracts hundreds of thousands of spectators every year.

Charming lakefront communities located in Lakeville, Orion Township, and Oxford.

Paint Creek Arts and Apples Festival, a 3-day event held each year at the Rochester Municipal Park that hosts over 200 fine art exhibits, an assortment of food vendors, and entertainment.

Criminal & Drunk Driving Caseload of the 52-3 District Court

The 52-3 District Court handles misdemeanors, felony cases through the preliminary examination, traffic tickets, civil matters not exceeding $25,000.00, evictions, and criminal/civil infraction ordinance violations.

Arraignment: Once a criminal case is in the Court system, an arraignment will be scheduled to bring the accused party before the magistrate or judge for the following legal business:

Advise the accused party of rights (link to Advice of Rights)

Advise the accused party of the criminal charges.

Determine if a cash bond will be required.

Set other bond conditions (travel restrictions, alcohol/drug testing, no-contact orders).

Schedule future court date(s) (a misdemeanor will be scheduled for a pretrial conference and a felony will be scheduled for a probable cause conference).

You have a right to have a lawyer present at your arraignment. Contact an attorney as soon as you are charged with a crime or if you have a warrant for your arrest.

Drunk Driving Cases: In 2021, over 3,000 individuals were tested in Oakland County for alcohol and/or drugs with most of these cases resulting in criminal charges for driving under the influence. Drunk driving cases are some of the most prevalent criminal cases processed in the 52-3 District Court. If you are facing an OWI in the 52-3 District Court, you can expect to be put on drug and/or alcohol testing even if you are only charged with a first time OWI with a low blood alcohol content (BAC). If you get convicted of a second drunk driving within 7 years of a prior offense for driving under the influence, your license will be revoked for 1 year unless you get accepted in a Sobriety Court program. A person convicted of an OWI with a High BAC of .17 or greater will not be able to operate a vehicle unless it has a breath alcohol ignition interlock device (BAIID) installed. The complete license sanction for OWI with a High BAC is as follows: no driving for the first 45 days followed by a restricted license for 320 days with a BAIID. Contact a criminal defense lawyer that specializes in drunk driving to find out about getting your charge reduced, avoiding jail, and keeping your driver’s license.

Criminal Cases: Hire an attorney to get you out of the system if you are charged with a criminal matter. Some of the most prevalent criminal matters that we have handled in the 52-3 District Court are as follows:

Disorderly Conduct

Domestic Violence

Retail Fraud (shoplifting)

Assault with a Dangerous Weapon

Drug Crimes

Embezzlement

Uttering and Publishing

Carrying a Concealed Weapon

Driving While License Suspended or Revoked

Leaving the Scene of an Accident (hit and run)

Traffic Tickets: Thousands of traffic tickets are handed out in Michigan every year. Yet less than 5% of all tickets are contested. Even a 2 point speeding ticket will get in rated as a higher risk with your insurance company that will result in a bump in your premiums. Consider hiring a lawyer to fight every traffic ticket to avoid getting hit with points and higher insurance premiums.

Contact Abdo Law for a free consultation if you need an attorney in the counties of Macomb, Oakland, or Wayne. We have represented over 10,000 clients and we know how to get you out of the court system with the best results possible.