Sydney Pollack was born on July 1, 1934, in Lafayette, Indiana, to Russian-Jewish immigrants. His mother, Rebecca Miller, was a homemaker and alcoholic who died at 36, when Sydney was 16. His father, David Pollack, was a professional boxer who became a pharmacist. They divorced when Sydney was young.

Despite earlier plans to attend college and then medical school, Sydney moved to New York City at age 17, after he graduated from high school. He drove a lumber truck until he saved up enough money to attend acting school. From 1952-1954, he studied acting with Sanford Meisner at the Neighborhood Playhouse School. After two years in the army, Sydney returned to the Playhouse, where he worked for Meisner as an acting teacher. In 1958, Pollack married his former student Claire Griswold. They had three children, one of whom died in a 1993 airplane crash.

In 1960, Pollack’s friend John Frankenheimer asked him to come to Los Angeles to work as a dialogue coach for the child actors on Frankenheimer's first big picture THE YOUNG SAVAGES. On that pic, Sydney became friends with star Burt Lancaster, who encouraged him to try directing.

Pollack, who began his acting career on stage, made his name as a television director in the early 1960s (on series including Ben Casey, The Fugitive, The Alfred Hitchcock Hour and The Defenders). His big-screen acting debut was in the Korean War drama WAR HUNT (1962), where he met and formed a lifelong friendship with fellow thesp Robert Redford. Their first collaboration was on THIS PROPERTY IS CONDEMNED, which co-starred a radiant Natalie Wood. Pollack’s film directing debut was on the 1965 suicide drama THE SLENDER THREAD, starring Sidney Poitier and Anne Bancroft.

In 2000, The Directors Guild honored Pollack with its John Huston Award as a “defender of artists' rights.” Sydney Pollack died from cancer on May 26, 2008, at his home in Pacific Palisades CA. He was a major talent who directed, produced and/or performed in many outstanding, thoughtful movies.

FIVE SYDNEY POLLACK QUOTES:

“Although it has a story, you usually make a film about an idea. The idea in TOOTSIE is that a man becomes a better man for having been a woman. How do you dramatize that idea? First you have to show that he's kind of a bad man. So we see him hitting on three different women with the same lying dialogue. Then he begins to see the woman's point of view when his best friend, Jessica Lange, gets mistreated by Dabney Coleman in the same way he used to treat women. Knowing what the idea that you're dramatizing is helps you structure it with some sort of aesthetic shape that illustrates the idea. Life doesn't always do that.”

“Film is the 20th century’s real art form. Look at the influence it has, look at the economics it commands, look at the preoccupation with it in all cultures of the world, look at its power to spread ideas, look at it as a political tool and look at it as entertainment. It would be hard to find something (other than the Internet) that's changed and affected the world as strongly. Film is the one art form that combines all the others, including writing, painting, photography, dance and architecture.”

“I have never made a movie in Hollywood, because I don't want to get up in my own bed, go to the movie set and then come home at night to my real life. I can't handle that dichotomy. I prefer to go where the only thing I'm there for is the movie, leaving my regular life behind.”

“It’s hard to make a film that’s releasable, that’s not embarrassing.”

“My favorite part of directing is editing, because you’re alone. You don’t have to manage a 200-person crew. I always have a result in my head, but I have to go through people in so many different disciplines that it creates a high-anxiety effect, because you never know what you’re going to get. In directing, you’re mining a lot of clay. Then in editing you sit at a keyboard, with all this great clay and you sculpt.”

© Alan Waldman and Sharon Waldman (July 6, 2008)

****************