Sydney Pollack, who died on May 26 aged 73, was an eclectic director of Hollywood movies, who lacked a recognisable stylistic signature but made films that were often extremely successful at the box office; his 1985 production Out of Africa, based on the life of Isak Dinesen, was named best film in the annual Oscars and earned him a personal award as best director.

He had planned to become an actor and still appeared periodically in films made by himself and others He was best remembered as Dustin Hoffman's agent in his own film Tootsie (1982) - a part he undertook at the actor’s request.

But he also registered impressively in Woody Allen’s Husbands and Wives (1993) and was perhaps a small island of sanity in Stanley Kubrick's last film, Eyes Wide Shut (1999).

He was born on July 1 1934 at Lafayette, Indiana, into a family of first-generation Russian immigrants, but grew up at South Bend, better known for its industrial and athletic achievements than for any cultural leanings.

As a boy he divided his time between high school plays and football, freely admitting that in that field: "I was lousy because I wore glasses and couldn’t see."

He graduated from high school in 1952 and made straight for New York, where he joined the Neighbourhood Playhouse School of Theatre. There he met Sanford Meisner, who ran the acting department and whom he subsequently acknowledged as his greatest mentor.

After two years' army service in 1957-58, he returned to the Playhouse at Meisner’s invitation to become his assistant. During this time, he juggled teaching with acting assignments and secured a big role in John Frankenheimer's television production of For Whom The Bells Tolls.

This was to be influential because when Frankenheimer gravitated to Hollywood, he asked Pollack to join him as a dialogue coach on his 1961 feature The Young Savages. Also in the cast was Burt Lancaster, with whom Pollack struck up an instant friendship. Lancaster thought he had the potential to become a director and passed on his name to Universal Television.

On the strength of this, Pollack moved to Hollywood and cut his teeth on a half-hour western series called Shotgun Slade. It was the forerunner over the next five years of some 80 episodes for such TV shows as The Defenders, Ben Casey and Dr Kildare.

Lancaster kept in touch and in 1963, asked him to supervise the dubbing for the American market of the foreign actors in Visconti's The Leopard, in which Burt had played the lead.

Pollack's movie debut was The Slender Thread in 1965 - a Samaritans-type drama in which Sidney Poitier had to keep the suicidal Anne Bancroft talking on the telephone until a rescue party could reach her.

Shot in monochrome on location in Seattle, it felt more like a TV drama than a movie, with few hints of the cinematic instinct Pollack would later develop.

Pollack himself was under no illusions about what he could and could not do. "I suppose,” he said, "I am a traditionalist. I think that my films are conventional in form, but not necessarily in point of view.

Tootsie, too, where Dustin Hoffman's "resting" actor cross-dresses because all the best parts are going to women, achieves a remarkable balance between farce and the often bleak prospects for journeyman actors.

Beyond these two triumphs, however, Pollack's work was sometimes disappointing. His 1995 remake of Billy Wilder’s Sabrina lacked a star to match the young Audrey Hepburn in the original while Greg Kinnear and Harrison Ford were no substitutes for William Holden and Humphrey Bogart. And in Random Hearts (1999), there was no chemistry between the even older Harrison Ford and Kristin Scott Thomas.

These four films were the high and low points of Pollack's career. In between came a long line of modest successes. They included This Property Is Condemned, based on a one-act play by Tennessee Wiliams, which starred Natalie Wood and Robert Redford.

It was the beginning of a close professional association with Redford, which extended to the western Jeremiah Johnson (1972), the CIA thriller Three Days of the Condor (1975), The Electric Horseman (1979), Out of Africa (1985) and Havana (1990).

Less successful were the films Pollack made with Robert Mitchum, Paul Newman and Al Pacino. The Yakuza (1974), with Mitchum, was a misconceived Japanese Mafia yarn from a script by Paul Schrader that strove vainly to mimic the New York low-life he had understood so well in Taxi Driver, written for Martin Scorsese.

Bobby Deerfield (1977) was a maudlin romance from a story by Erich Maria Remarque in which Al Pacino’s Formula 1 racing driver falls for a girl who is dying of an incurable disease. And Absence of Malice (1981) was a run of the mill vehicle for Newman and Sally Field focusing on investigative journalism.

Pollack's Oscar-laden Out of Africa typified the best of his work. As an actor himself, he could conjure superlative performances from gifted players such as Meryl Streep and Klaus Maria Brandauer, both of whom are outstanding in the film.

Other actors over the years also benefited from Pollack’s guiding hand. He steered two to Academy Awards in the supporting category - Gig Young as the cynical master of ceremonies in They Shoot Horses, don’t They? and Jessica Lange in Tootsie.

In The Firm (1993), Holly Hunter's supporting performance was so feisty that she was beaten in the Oscar stakes only by herself. Nominated twice in the same year, she took the best actress award for Jane Campion’s The Piano.

She gave an Oscar-nominated performance in They Shoot Horses, Don’t They? that was passed over in favour of Maggie Smith in The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie. But it set a pattern that eventually earned her two Oscars in Klute (1970) and Coming Home (1978), both made for other directors.

After the unsuccessful Random Hearts in 1999, it seemed as if Pollack had abandoned film-making. But in 2006, he re-emerged with a documentary, Sketches of Frank Ghery, about the architect who was a personal friend and whose most controversial building is the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao.

In the course of the film, Ghery reveals that he works essentially by instinct and chose Pollack out of several possible candidates to film him because he knew nothing about architecture.

For his part, in a number of informal interviews, Pollack reveals that he too picked up his own job as he went along rather than through formal training and began without a clue about film-making. A meeting, evidently, of minds. Last year he took a part in George Clooney's Michael Clayton, which he co-produced.