Pannonian Croatia ( _hr. Panonska Hrvatska) or Savia, Southern Pannonia, Lower Pannonia, Principality of Southern Pannonia, Transsavian Croatia or just Pannonia was a medieval Croatian duchy from the 7th to the 10th century located in the Pannonian Plain approximately between the rivers Drava and Sava, but at times also considerably to the south of the Sava. Its capital was Sisak.

Prelude

As early as in under the Roman emperor Diocletian (284-305), Pannonia was divided into 4 provinces, one of which was Pannonia Savia (or simply Savia). Its capital was Siscia (Sisak). Its northern border was constituted by the River Drava.

History

Slavs came to the territory of Savia in the late 6th century, as evidenced by many archeological finds. According to De administrando imperio, at the time of the rule of Emperor Herakleios (610-640), Croats arrived in Dalmatia, founded a duchy there and, shortly afterwards, a part of them went to the north to Savia and founded another duchy there (Pannonian Croatia).

In the late 7th century or in the 8th century, Savia became vassalaged to/part of the Avar Empire, as archaeological finds suggest. After the defeat of the Avar Empire by Frankish troops, a certain Croat Vojnomir was assigned Savia as a vassal of the Frankish margrave of Friuli. Savia failed to end Frankish domination during a rebellion under local Croatian Duke Ljudevit Posavski in the early 9th century.

In 827, the Bulgarians invaded and conquered Savia and parts of territories to the north of Savia. In 829 they imposed a local Duke Ratimir as the new ruler of Pannonian Croatia in their name, the Franks however claimed the territory, which in their view belonged (since 827) to the March of Carantania and thus under the rule of Count Ratbod, who had been head of the Avar March and March of Carantania since 828.

In 838, Ratbod deposed Ratimir and subordinated Savia to the Frankish March of Carantania. Another known ruler of Savia was Braslav, who ruled there in 880-898/900, still vassalaged to the Kingdom of East Francia.

In the 10th century, under Prince/King Tomislav, Pannonian Croatia was united with Littoral Croatia to form the Kingdom of Croatia.

ee also

*Medieval Croatian state

*List of rulers of Croatia

External links