Darlington Borough Council has set a Council Tax for 2024/25 of £2,147.26 as the equivalent Band D amount in the urban area.

This is made up of the tax for the:

Borough Council’s services £1,866.02

Office of the Durham Police Crime and Victims’ Commissioner £255.24

County Durham and Darlington Fire and Rescue Authority £118.12

The increase in Council Tax for each authority from 2023/24 is:

Darlington Borough Council 4.99%

Office of the Durham Police Crime and Victims’ Commissioner 5.09%

County Durham and Darlington Fire and Rescue Authority 2.99%

The remainder is converted to an additional Council Tax for parish households.

The figures appropriate to each parish and band are shown in the table below.

You can challenge your Council Tax band if you think the band is wrong.

Challenge your Council Tax band [external link].

Adult Social Care Precept

The Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government has made an offer to adult social care authorities.

Adult social care authorities are local authorities which have functions under Part 1 of the Care Act 2014, namely county councils in England, district councils for an area in England for which there is no county council, London borough councils, the Common Council of the City of London and the Council of the Isles of Scilly.

The offer is the option of an adult social care authority being able to charge an additional “precept” on its council tax for the financial year 2024/25 without holding a referendum, to assist the authority in meeting expenditure on adult social care.

Subject to the annual approval of the House of Commons, the Secretary of State intends to offer the option of charging this “precept” at an appropriate level in the financial year 2024/25.

The Secretary of State has determined (and the House of Commons has approved) a referendum principle of 5% (comprising 2% for expenditure on adult social care and 3% for other expenditure), for adult social care authorities.

The referendum principles allow an authority to set Council Tax up to 5% in 2024 without holding a referendum.

Darlington Borough Council has approved an additional adult social care “precept” of 2% in 2024/25.

Valuation bands

Each dwelling is placed in a valuation band to enable the council to calculate the bill for each property. The value is based on what the property might have sold for on the open market at 1/4/1991- not the current value which is now likely to be considerably more.

Even the values of properties built since 1991 are estimates of what they might have been worth at 1/4/1991 had they been completed.

The current range of property values within each valuation band is as follows:

The proportion of each band to band D means, for example, that a dwelling in band H will pay 3 times as much Council Tax as a dwelling in band A and twice as much as a dwelling in band D. A dwelling in band A will pay two thirds of the amount paid by dwelling in band D.

Even if you make improvements to your property that significantly increase its value, the valuation banding cannot be increased until either there is a change of ownership or there is revaluation of all dwellings.

Dwellings are valued for Council Tax by the Valuation Office Agency (part of HM Revenue & Customs) and not by the council. Details of all properties are available on the Valuation Office Agency's website [external link].

If you think the valuation band placed on your property is too high, you can only appeal to the Valuation Office Agency in specific circumstances, including the following:

Less than six months have elapsed since a change of ownership in the property

The property has been wholly or partly demolished

The surroundings of the property have changed

Improvements have been made to the property and it has been sold

Council Tax will always be payable on the existing valuation until any appeal is successful in reducing the valuation.

Penalties

You should always tell us of any changes that may affect your Council Tax or respond to our written request for information.

The law allows us to charge a penalty of £70 if you fail to tell us about:

A single person discount that should have ended

An exemption on a dwelling that should have ended

Any other discount that should have ended

A change of address

Any change to the household that affects who should be the liable person

Information that was requested to establish liability

Penalties will normally be added to your Council Tax account and a new bill will be sent to you.

Additional penalties

If you've had the first £70 penalty added to your Council Tax bill and we need to make further requests for the same information, we can add further penalties of £280 every time you fail to supply this information.

If you disagree with the penalty

If you disagree with a penalty, you should discuss it with us first so that you can explain why you disagree. Please contact us and we can advise you how to proceed.

Payments during the appeal process

If you do appeal the decision of the penalty being applied, unlike appealing any other part of your Council Tax, you do not have to pay your penalty until your appeal has been decided. You should continue to pay your Council Tax until a decision is made.

Empty Property Premium

As part of the government’s measures to tackle the country’s housing shortage, The Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023, contained a provision to amend the definition of long-term empty homes. This means that from 1st April 2024 onwards, unfurnished properties that have been empty for one year or more, are now liable to the Empty Property Premium.

If you own a property which has been empty and unfurnished for 1 year or more, you will have to pay an additional charge on your Council Tax.

This is known as an Empty Property Premium and will show as a separate entry on your Council Tax bill.

If you own a property which has been empty and unfurnished for 1 year or more you will have to pay an additional premium of 100% on top of your normal Council Tax charge

If you own a property which has been empty and unfurnished for 5 years or more you will have to pay an additional premium of 200% on top of your normal Council Tax charge

If you own a property which has been empty and unfurnished for 10 years or more you will have to pay an additional premium of 300% on top of your normal Council Tax charge

In some cases, an exemption to this charge can be applied. Visit our exemptions page for more information and how to apply.

Second Home Premium

From 1 April 2025 a 100% Council Tax Premium is applied and is payable in addition to the standard Council Tax liability in respect of "Second Home" dwellings.

The introduction of a new Council Tax Premium for Dwellings Occupied Periodically ("Second Homes") was approved at a meeting of full Council on 7th November 2023, coming into effect from 1 April 2025.

This follows changes to legislation for Council Tax included in the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act 2023, which amends the Local Government Finance Act 1992.

The change means that a 100% Council Tax Premium will be applied and is payable in addition to the standard Council Tax liability, in respect of "Second Home" dwellings that meet the following conditions:

there is no resident of the dwelling (sole or main residence), and

the dwelling is substantially furnished.

Exceptions to the 100% Council Tax Premium can be considered if:

Dwellings are being marketed for sale - this exception is time-limited

Dwellings are being marketed for let - this exception is time-limited.

Visit our exceptions page for more information and how to apply.