Feethams

Darlington

County Durham

DL1 5QT

Website: Darlington Borough Council

Email: customerservices@darlington.gov.uk

Telephone: 01325 405000

Visit Darlington Borough Council for State Primary School admission information for pupils starting at either:

A Primary or First school at the beginning of the reception year

A Junior school at the beginning of Year 3

Or Secondary State School admissions for pupils starting at either:

a Secondary school at the beginning of Year 7

an Upper school at the beginning of Year 9

State school admissions in England are regulated by the Schools Admissions Code, and schools must play fair, ensuring their admissions policy is not only fair but also transparent. Parents must play fair too: schools and local authorities are wising up on parental attempts to circumvent the code, and hundreds of school places are withdrawn every year, sometimes after the child has started school. read more

The Good Schools Guide Education Consultants now offers a specific service for parents who want advice on state school places: visit State School Service.

Schools in Darlington Borough Council

Primary State Schools

Abbey Infants' School, Cleveland Terrace, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 8JA. A state school for boys and girls aged from 4 to 7.

Abbey Junior School, Abbey Road, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 8NN. A state school for boys and girls aged from 7 to 11.

Bishopton Redmarshall CofE Primary School, Cobby Castle Lane, Bishopton, TS21 1HD. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

Borough Road Nursery School, Borough Road, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 1SG. A state school for boys and girls aged from 2 to 5.

Corporation Road Community Primary School, Corporation Road, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 6AR. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

Firthmoor Primary School, Ingleby Moor Crescent, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 4RW. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

George Dent Nursery School, Elms Road, Elms Road, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 7PY. A state school for boys and girls aged from 2 to 5.

Gurney Pease Academy, Dodsworth Street, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 2NG. A state school for boys and girls aged from 2 to 11.

Harrowgate Hill Primary School, Thompson Street West, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 0HZ. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

Heathfield Primary School, The Broadway, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 1EJ. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

Heighington Church of England Primary School, Hopelands, Heighington, Newton Aycliffe, County Durham, DL5 6PH. A state school for boys and girls aged from 4 to 11.

High Coniscliffe CofE Primary School, Ulnaby Lane, High Coniscliffe, Darlington, County Durham, DL2 2LL. A state school for boys and girls aged from 4 to 11.

Holy Family Catholic Primary School, Prior Street, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 9EN. A state school for boys and girls aged from 4 to 11.

Hurworth Primary School, Westfield Drive, Hurworth, Darlington, County Durham, DL2 2ET. A state school for boys and girls aged from 5 to 11.

Marchbank Free School, Mowden Hall, Barnes Road, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 9BL. A state school for boys and girls aged from 5 to 11.

Mount Pleasant Primary School, Newton Lane, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 9HE. A state school for boys and girls aged from 2 to 11.

Mowden Infant School, Bushel Hill Drive, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 9QG. A state school for boys and girls aged from 5 to 7.

Mowden Junior School, Conyers Avenue, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 9DE. A state school for boys and girls aged from 7 to 11.

Northwood Primary School, Pendleton Road South, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 2HF. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

Red Hall Primary School, Headingley Crescent, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 2ST. A state school for boys and girls aged from 2 to 11.

Reid Street Primary School, Reid Street, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 6EX. A state school for boys and girls aged from 4 to 11.

Skerne Park Academy, Coleridge Gardens, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 5AJ. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

Springfield Academy, Salters Lane South, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 2AN. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

St Augustine's Catholic Primary School, Beechwood Avenue, St Augustine's RC Primary School, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 7HP. A state school for boys and girls aged from 4 to 11.

St Bede's Catholic Primary School, Kingsway, Thompson Street East, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 3ES. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

St John's Church of England Academy, Fenby Avenue, Lascelles Park, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 4UB. A state school for boys and girls aged from 2 to 11.

St Mary's Cockerton Church of England Primary School, Newton Lane, Cockerton, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 9EX. A state school for boys and girls aged from 5 to 11.

St Teresa's Catholic Primary School, Harris Street, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 4NL. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

St. George's Church of England Academy, Neasham Road, Middleton St George, Darlington, County Durham, DL2 1LD. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

The Rydal Academy, Rydal Road, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 4BH. A state school for boys and girls aged from 2 to 11.

West Park Academy, Alderman Leach Drive, Darlington, County Durham, DL2 2GF. A state school for boys and girls aged from 3 to 11.

Whinfield Primary School, Augusta Close, Whinfield Primary School, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 3HT. A state school for boys and girls aged from 5 to 11.

Secondary State Schools

Carmel College, The Headlands, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 8RW. A state school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 18.

Darlington College, Central Park, Haughton Road, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 1DR. A state school for boys and girls aged from 16 to 99.

Haughton Academy, Salters Lane South, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 2AN. A state school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 16.

Hummersknott Academy, Edinburgh Drive, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 8AR. A state school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 16.

Hurworth School, Croft Road, Hurworth-on-Tees, Darlington, County Durham, DL2 2JG. A state school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 16.

Longfield Academy, Longfield Road, Darlington, DL3 0HT. A state school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 16.

Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College, Vane Terrace, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 7AU. A state school for boys and girls aged from 16 to 99.

St Aidan's Church of England Academy, Hundens Lane, Darlington, County Durham, DL1 1LL. A state school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 16.

Wyvern Academy, Eggleston View, Darlington, County Durham, DL3 9SH. A state school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 16.

Independent Special Schools

Embleton View, Westgate House, Coniscliffe Road, Darlington, DL2 3DL. A special independent school for boys and girls aged from 11 to 18.

Hurworth House School Aspris Children's services, Westfield Drive, Hurworth-on-Tees, Darlington, County Durham, DL2 2AD. A special independent school for boys and girls aged from 5 to 19. Type of SEN provision: ASD - Autistic Spectrum Disorder; SEMH - Social, Emotional and Mental Health.

Oakwood Learning Centre, Exact address withheld at the school's request, Darlington, County Durham. A special independent school for boys and girls aged from 8 to 18. Type of SEN provision: ASD - Autistic Spectrum Disorder; MLD - Moderate Learning Difficulty; OTH - Other Difficulty/Disability; SEMH - Social, Emotional and Mental Health.