Amersham

Collection of articles, letters, research notes etc extracted from various sources and passed to the Beaconsfield and District Historical Society relating to Amersham

G-A

Amersham's new museum

1 page article detailing the Amersham museum in the Old Town created by the Amersham Society under the guidance of the late Ernest Bridstock Choat, antiquarian and archaelologist. Housed in Whielden Street in the British Legion building. It displayed Amersham’s rich history in photographs and objects.

P-HC/A/219

An article entitled 'Wilton Park 1291 - 1939'

An article about the history of Wilton Park, including its ownership by Edmund Waller and the Du Pre family, with 4 photographs of the property and 2 of its owners

B-WP/A/008

An extract from a book/document on the historical geography

An extract from a book/document on the historical geography. It is 4 double sided pages with information on the historical geography of Britain on one side and a map of Britain on the other. Pages 144-149.

P-HC/A/003

An extract from a book/document with a map on one side and general information on the other.

An extract from a book/document with a map of Great Britain one side and general geological, geographical and social information. Page 10

P-HC/A/004

Article about churches in Buckinghamshire

Article reviews local church buildings and changes over time. Little Missenden, High Wycombe and Penn churches are included. All had square towers. Flint and rubble would have been covered with plaster or lime-washed in the past but now exposed. Local churches eg at Wycombe have been rebuilt in this case in the 13th century. Little ...

P-HC/A/239

Article entitled "A History of Wilton Park" including three photographs

Article including descriptions of the owners and usage of Wilton Park, including: reference to the Burnham Hundreds, ownership passage to Richard Earl of Cornwall and King of Romans, brother of King Henry III. Then passage of ownership passing to Missenden Abbey until the dissolution of the monasteries in the sixteenth century, when it was given ...

B-WP/A/001

Article entitled "The Excavation of a Mesolithic site at Gerrards Cross, Bucks".

The article refers to areas of archaeological interest investigated in Misbourne valley at Gerrards Cross. Also included are a series of maps of the area.

P-PB/A/024

Article titled 'Upton Church and the Bulstrode Brasses'

Magazine article about brass plates found in Upton church near Slough. The brasses were believed to have been in the manor and represent Bulstrode family members. Pictures of brasses are with in the article

B-Bu/A/007

Articles about a stone on the Butlers Court stone including correspondence between specialists and Sotheby's

The upright sepulchral Stele limestone stone was part of a collection by Lord Grenfell in 1904. He called the extension to the house Butlers Court inherited from his brother ‘ his museum’. Most items went with him when he sold to Francis Reckitt in 1912. However this stone with Egyptian writing was ...

P-PB/N/123