17 July 2019

McCarthy and Stone, the developer behind the Chiltern Place Retirement Living Plus development which is currently under construction on The Broadway in Amersham, - has donated £500 to Amersham Museum's 'Age Friendly Project'.

Since its opening in 1991, Amersham Museum has flourished as a local independent museum. It runs a wide-ranging creative programme for adults, families and schools, and welcomed 10,000 visitors to the museum in 2018. In 2017, its 'Age Friendly Project' was launched, with the aim of supporting older people in Buckinghamshire.

McCarthy and Stone's Sales Consultant for Chiltern Place, Johnathan Stirland, presented Jane Barnes, Age Friendly Co-ordinator at Amersham Museum with a cheque for £500. The funds will be used to extend the Age Friendly programme to provide activities for isolated older people who cannot visit the museum - in their own homes and care settings

Jane Barnes, Age Friendly Co-ordinator at Amersham Museum said: 'Buckinghamshire has a higher than average population of over 65s, and isolation and loneliness are greatly exacerbated by age and ill health. We aim to increase the number of older people engaging in hobbies and activities, so receiving this donation from McCarthy and Stone gives us a real boost and helps us to continue to make a difference to the lives of older people in and around Amersham.'

McCarthy and Stone's Sales Consultant for Chiltern Place, Johnathan Stirland, said: 'As a company, we appreciate our responsibilities go further than building quality retirement apartments, and we also seek to create a positive legacy in the towns and cities in which we build.

'We were delighted to present this donation to Amersham Museum's Age Friendly Project. We understand how vital it is to support older members of the community. The project will help tackle social isolation and loneliness experienced by older people, providing a very important service for those living in the local area, and the team at McCarthy and Stone's Chiltern Place development wishes everyone at The Amersham Museum every success in their future work.'

Currently under construction, McCarthy and Stone's Chiltern Place Retirement Living Plus development will offer Amersham retirees the opportunity to maintain an independent lifestyle while having access to tailored domestic and personal assistance packages to help them manage their day-to-day lives - and with an on-site restaurant providing freshly cooked meals.

Facilities at Chiltern Place will include a Club Lounge, ideal for socialising with new-found friends; a guest suite for when homeowners have visitors to stay; and beautifully maintained gardens. An Estates Manager will take care of the day-to-day running of the development, while secure entry systems and 24-hour emergency call points will provide added peace-of-mind.

Located in the market town of Old Amersham, opposite the River Misbourne, Chiltern Place will offer easy access to the hustle of the Capital, whilst tucked away in the Chilterns Area of Natural Beauty. Known for its beautiful green hills, streams and rivers, future homeowners will be able to enjoy the picturesque scenery, while being within close proximity of the village's supermarkets, local restaurants and boutiques.

More than 90% of customers would recommend McCarthy and Stone to a friend, ensuring it has received the maximum Five Star award for customer satisfaction from the Home Builders' Federation for 14 years running. It is the only UK housebuilder of any size or type to achieve a Five Star award during every year of the HBF's awards. To find out more about Retirement Living Plus in Amersham, please contact McCarthy and Stone on 0800 201 4811 or visit www.mccarthyandstone.co.uk.