Jan 21, 2016; Cincinnati, OH, USA; Cincinnati Bearcat former player Kenyon Lee Martin acknowledges the fans at Fifth Third Arena. Mandatory Credit: Aaron Doster-USA TODAY Sports

The Denver Nuggets are a historical team that has been led by many great players, and with this article, we will divulge into power forwards in team history.

The Denver Nuggets are a franchise that has always been able to accumulate talent. The one problem has been being able to retain that talent, but that is beside the point.

Everyone knows about the talented small forwards, shooting guards, and point guards the Nuggets have had through the years. However, the one position that has been overshadowed is the power forward spot.

While not as glamorous as the Nuggets legendary small forwards, they have had some great power forwards as well.

Jan 21, 2016; Cincinnati, OH, USA; Former professional basketball player and former Cincinnati Bearcat Kenyon Lee Martin acknowledges the fans at Fifth Third Arena. Mandatory Credit: Aaron Doster-USA TODAY Sports

Kenyon Martin

While he was not the New Jersey Nets Kenyon Martin, he provided Denver with a physicality they needed desperately.

Martin stepped in his first year and averaged 15.5 points per game and 7.3 rebounds per game for the Denver Nuggets. This was his fifth year in the league after being drafted out of the University of Cincinnati.

Kenyon Martin spent the majority of his years in Denver, and he would continue to bring the physicality nightly.

Martin was not someone who would stuff the stat sheet night in and night out, but he was an enforcer. Any opponent who got in Martin’s face was running a dangerous risk. He was a reliable defensive presence with Denver even averaging 2 blocks per game in the postseason one year.

It is key to note that Martin made the playoffs every season that he was with the Denver Nuggets.

Nene

Nene never quite materialized like a lot of fans hoped he would. However, much of that had to do with injuries. The guy is an inspiration to Nugget faithful for battling and winning against testicular cancer and still coming back to play.

While it wasn’t a pretty trade getting JaVale McGee in return, Nene has developed into one of the strongest rim protectors. It was a trade that benefited the Wizards for a couple of years. Nene was a great defender for the Nuggets and was an efficient scorer. He had one season where he shot an outstanding 60% from the field and it was rare for him to shoot under 40%.

Nene’s best days were in a Nuggets jersey. During the 08-09 season, Nene’s true shooting percentage was 64.5%. He was a dominate big man. While not being a great shooter- honestly anywhere other than right by the rim- Nene used his energy and athleticism to spark the Nuggets team. Nene in his prime was much like Joakim Noah a few seasons ago.

Nene was a great second tier player for Denver.

Bobby Jones

Jones was a defensive mastermind for the Denver Nuggets. He helped lead the Nuggets to an ABA Finals appearance in 1976, so it would be foolish to leave him off this list.

Jones has left his imprint on the Nuggets’ history books leaving behind 625 blocks during his tenure with Denver. Jones, being 6th in team history for steals, would probably intimidate some of the power forwards in today’s game.

There isn’t too much more about Jones. He was a very underrated NBA player. He also ended up being a top defender for the Nuggets.

Kiki Vandeweghe

Of course, any Nuggets fan would know Kiki should be on this list.

Vandeweghe is one of the true pioneers of Denver basketball along with his former teammate Alex English. Despite only playing four seasons with Denver before being traded, Kiki put up significant numbers at 23.3 points per game and 5.3 boards per game.

In one season that he was with the Denver Nuggets, he actually got up to a whopping 29.4 points per game!

Vandeweghe provided a spark with Alex English one time scoring 51 in a game while his counterpart poured in 47. Kiki Vandeweghe was one of the first true stretch 4’s in Nuggets history.

Feb 10, 2016; Auburn Hills, MI, USA; Retired professional basketball player Antonio McDyess (middle) shares a laugh with former teammates Rasheed Wallace (left) and Richard Hamilton (right) during halftime in the game between the Detroit Pistons and the Denver Nuggets at The Palace of Auburn Hills. Nuggets win 103-92. Mandatory Credit: Raj Mehta-USA TODAY Sports

Antonio McDyess

Okay before you crucify me, let me just state my reasoning.

McDyess may not have had the scoring ability like Kiki, but a young McDyess was relatively athletic and more rounded in other areas of the game. McDyess was great in the post averaging around 20 points per game in 2 different seasons with Denver.

Antonio McDyess didn’t have a year where he did not average double figures in points until the 2003-2004 season. He was a solid rebounder throughout his entire career as well.

It is a big chart, but I bet you didn’t know that he averaged 20.8 points per game along with 12.1 rebounds. Can I hear Tim Duncan?

McDyess was a second overall draft pick for a reason. McDyess’ great tenure in Denver earns him the title of greatest power forward in Nuggets’ history.

We definitely acknowledge that you may not agree with our list, but we certainly hope you tell us your thoughts and drop of a comment or just comment/reply on Twitter and Facebook!

More from Nugg Love

This article originally appeared on