Annie Greiner, at four years old the eldest of Nicholas Greiner's three great-grandchildren, captured the family mood on the death of their patriarch. It was very sad that old Pop's heart had stopped, she said, but the day was not completely sad because she was off to the movies to see Shrek 2.

The Greiners, then, were saddened by the death, but consoled by the fact he had led a full and rich life. He was 96, after all. He had planned another holiday in Europe, making his own travel arrangements for Switzerland, Austria and Hungary. He had dressed for his weekly game of tennis before rain made the court slippery, so he mounted his exercise bike. He died suddenly soon after.

People used to ask Nick Greiner snr if he was the father of Nick Greiner, the then premier of NSW. "He's my son," Greiner the elder would say, with a hint of toughness and the proper order of things. The parents came first, even if the son became the premier.

Nicholas Greiner was born in Budapest, into a family that had established a timber-producing company in 1822. The family grew wealthy on wood but Nicholas estimated that they lost 90 per cent of their riches with the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire and the devaluation of the currency at the end of World War I.

The Greiners fled to Vienna in 1919, after the newly arrived communists arrested Nicholas's uncle, Sandor. But Hugo Greiner took his wife, Ilona, and son back home the next year. They started over again and, a few years later, bought a sawmill in Transylvania called White River Timber Industries.

The family enjoyed a busy social life. Artists, singers, painters and actors visited the Greiner home. So, too, did the composer-conductor Gustav Mahler.

Young Nicholas was something of a mischief-maker at school, and an athlete. His father wanted him to go to university but Nicholas wanted to join the family business. He took it over in 1933, when his father's health deteriorated.

The company provided timber for the Axis powers in World War II, with Hungary on Germany's side. Greiner was called up in 1944, and went to the Russian front with an engineering division that finally surrendered to the Russians. Back in Budapest, the Greiner home had been flattened in the fighting.

Greiner courted Clare Redlinger, dining out on mushroom goulash, all they could afford in the postwar hyperflation. A Slovak, she had been married before. Clare Greiner, who died in 1992, didn't like talking about her first marriage but told the Herald in 1991 that her first husband was a Jew, she was half-Jewish and they had suffered. The Nazis had killed her husband, and taken her away to a concentration camp.

A clue to their suffering came in the NSW Parliament some years ago when the Labor Party accused her son of being soft on Liberal Party right-wingers, whom some critics called neo-Nazis. Nick Greiner's voice, for once, shook with emotion: "My mother suffered directly and personally at the hands of the Nazis ... This is real life for me. This is suffering and ignominy for my family ..."

Nicholas and Clare married in 1946. Nick jnr was born in Budapest in 1947.

Fascism had had its say on the Greiner family. Communism was to have another say. The communists took over the company in 1948. The secret police took away the parents, leaving young Nick with a nurse.

Clare was released next day but her husband was held for six weeks, accused of not paying taxes. Clare and her son escaped to Austria using her Czechoslovak passport. Greiner paid to be smuggled across the border but was stopped by police, who shot dead another would-be escaper. He spent two months in jail but secured false documents and made it to Vienna at the second attempt. The two Nicks had been apart for about a year. The boy did not recognise his father, crying at the stranger.

The Greiners arrived in Australia on March 10, 1951, the day after the High Court of Australia ruled Prime Minister Robert Menzies' Communist Party Dissolution Act invalid.

Nicholas Greiner made inquiries about the local timber industry in his first week in Australia, secured a load of timber from Kempsey in his second week, sold it to the railways in his third and received a cheque for £20 the following week. The Greiner timber company, which was to become White River Corporation, was on its way again. Five years later the Greiners bought their first Australian house, at Killara.

Greiner joined the now defunct Democratic Labor Party after the Labor split of the 1950s, partly because of the DLP's strong anti-communist stance. He once joked that he could stand for the DLP, Nick for the Liberals and Chris, his other son, for Labor in the one seat. A Greiner would certainly be elected.

The Australian timber industry had been dominated by a loose cartel of companies, including George Hudson, and Vanderfield and Reid. Greiner and a few other migrants undercut the established companies, bringing a new era of competition to the industry. Greiner was innovative, pushing new products such as prefabricated frames. White River supplied several generations of home-builders - AV Jennings, Lend Lease, Meriton, Mirvac.

"He was known in the industry as 'the Old Man' and was a bit of a gruff personality," son Nick said.

"If he thought people were good he was very loyal but, if he thought them no good, he would abuse the daylights out of them."

Nick jnr worked - "not always harmoniously" - with his father before entering State Parliament. "We had people who worked with us for 20 years and people who lasted 20 minutes," he said.

Nick Greiner left the company on becoming Opposition leader in 1983, when his father doubted whether the MBA from Harvard would be tough enough for politics. "He admitted years later that judgement might have been wrong," Nick said. "He made some mistakes but rarely admitted them. He was tough, but with a wicked sense of humour."

The White River group was investigated by the Corporate Affairs Commission over a series of inter-company transactions in the 1970s. The commission found six instances of apparent breaches of duty by the directors, but the then NSW Labor government announced in March 1986 that it would not prosecute under the Companies Act.

Greiner sold the company in that year, but continued to dabble in the industry. He went to Siberia and worked hard to bring Soviet timber to Australia.

He was still driving a car until his last days, securing a licence with annual tests. His children recall him driving the first family car in the 1950s, and his relish for Australian expressions, shouting at other drivers, "Sunday driver" and "Lights, you mug".

One of his proudest moments was when Nick became a junior member of the Sydney Cricket Ground in 1957. Greiner snr thought this the ultimate Australian thing to do.

His grandson, Justin Greiner, asked him 10 years ago to leave a message for future generations. It included: " ... for achievements in life you have to work hard. If you are on the losing end, do not despair, get quickly over it and restart the fight which is called life."

His Requiem Mass was held at St Mary's, North Sydney. He is survived by Nick and Kathryn, Chris and Virginia, grandchildren Justin, Marnie, Kara, Simon, Victoria and Alexandra, great-grandchildren Annie, Lillie and Sophie, and Eve Endrey, his companion of later years, who was to have travelled to Europe with him.

Tony Stephens