The Tappan Zee Bridge is the longest bridge in New York State, spanning the Hudson River at its widest point and connecting South Nyack in Rockland County to Tarrytown in Westchester County. Crossing the bridge is a familiar route for New Yorkers fleeing the city on sizzling summer weekends for cooler destinations upstate. The bridge, unfortunately, also is known as a favorite jumping off point for suicide victims, thus those many signs along the span declaring: “Life is worth living,” and giving numbers for suicide help lines.

Opened to traffic on December 15, 1955, the bridge has withstood decades of traffic, an average of 138,000 vehicles a day. That wear and tear has taken a toll. One report called the Tappan Zee “one of the most deceprit and dangerous bridges in the U.S.” Something had to be done and so in 2013, construction began on a replacement bridge which is expected to open in 2018.

Those who are familiar with the original bridge, however, have memories. None expressed more eloquently than those in this poem by Susan Moorhead.

From the window of the Tarrytown library at night, you

can see the green lights of the bridge, bright over dark water.

When I was little, I thought they were strands of emeralds looped

across the water, as my father drove us home from visiting

relatives on the Jersey side. The new Tappan Zee will shine

with LED lights states the local news alongside comments

including “the old bridge sucks” from some opinionated

Matthew. It’s something, watching it rise from the Hudson,

this new bridge. My parents grew up in New Jersey. We

moved from NJ to NY then NJ to NY, and then they returned

to NJ, and I grew up and went NY CT NY, surprising myself

by ending up a local girl back by the Westchester town I grew

up in. It’s officially the Governor Malcolm Wilson Tappan

Zee Bridge. Zee means sea. Years ago, just after dawn,

I dozed off in the line at a toll booth and tapped some guy’s

bumper. I still remember the look of fury on his face until

he saw I was just some kid, still in my wedding guest

fanciest and he settled for shaking a finger at me as I

mouthed sorry through the window. It’s a cantilever

bridge: a beam anchored on one end only is a cantilever.

I can drive from the Tarrytown, New York side to

Ridgewood, New Jersey with closed eyes if I had to,

all 16,013 feet of bridge. I drove home after we settled

my mother in the hospital, raced back at three a.m. after

the phone call about her emergency surgery. It’s the largest

bridge in New York State. Feels that when you drive over it

begging God not to take her tonight. When you drive over it

practicing your eulogy for your father who surprises everyone

by going first. They are buried in a graveyard beyond the coiling

highways in New Jersey. I see them in mind every day in the kitchen

overlooking the long yard where he putters, she is calling across

the bridge, over the long stretch of shimmering water for someone

to put on the water for tea.

Top photo from Bigstock Images.