In the lead-up to the announcement of the 2023 Nobel Prize for Literature (October 5th), Jeff Rich in his occasional series about writers on his (usually much more political) Burning Archive podcast, last week devoted an episode to the work of the Australian novelist, playwright, and author of short stories Patrick White (1912-1990) who was awarded the prize fifty years ago in 1973.

Wikipedia tells us that:

in 1973, White did accept the Nobel Prize “for an epic and psychological narrative art, which has introduced a new continent into literature”. His cause was said to have been championed by a Scandinavian diplomat resident in Australia. White enlisted [Sidney] Nolan to travel to Stockholm to accept the prize on his behalf.

And (having declined to enter his books for any more awards because he was independently wealthy and had won the Miles Franklin twice), PW invested the money to set up the Patrick White Award, awarded annually to a writer who has been highly creative over a long period but has not necessarily received adequate recognition. You can see a list of them on my Patrick White page. and read reviews of works of authors who’ve won this award here. Ironically, because PW seemed not to care about public recognition and asserted (here, at 26:00) that his books were his crowning achievements of his career and not the Nobel, it is an award in his name which ensures that we in the OzLit community remember him every year.

If you consult the Author pages at the top menu here, you will find that Patrick White is one of only five authors (so far) to have his own page here at ANZLitLovers. There you will find all my reviews, plus my review of David Marr’s magnificent 1991 biography. (It won the Douglas Stewart Prize for Non-Fiction in the New South Wales Premier’s Literary Awards for 1992; the Nettie Palmer Prize for Non-Fiction in the Victorian Premier’s Literary Award for 1992; and The Age Book of the Year in 1991.)

Happy Valley (1939), see my review

The Living and the Dead (1941), on the TBR

The Aunt’s Story (1948), see my review

The Tree of Man (1955), see my review

Voss (1957), see my review

Riders in the Chariot (1961), see my review

The Solid Mandala (1966), see my review

The Vivisector (1970), read in 2006 before I started this blog. A review constructed from the copious notes in my reading journal is a work in progress.

The Eye of the Storm (1973), see my review and my very brief response to the 2011 film

A Fringe of Leaves (1976), see my review

The Twyborn Affair (1979), see my review

Memoirs of Many in One (1986), on my TBR

The Hanging Garden (2012, unfinished, posthumous), on my TBR

The Burnt Ones (1964), see my review

The Cockatoos (1974), on my TBR

Three Uneasy Pieces (1987), I am yet to track down a copy of this.

Jeff Rich’s podcast begins with the tired old stuff about the perceived lack of pride in Patrick White’s achievements, but there are amusing audio clips of PW dealing with the media after his Nobel win and it’s always nice to hear from other readers of White. I won’t repeat it here, you can listen for yourself.

I disagree with Jeff Rich about many things, and I don’t agree (in the intro) that PW is not a very ‘Australian’ writer (huh? The Tree of Man??) but I’m pleased that his podcast reminded me about this important anniversary. (He’s a bit premature in noting the absence of what we might call anniversary attention… My draft of this post was begun in September but was waiting until closer to the announcement of this year’s Nobel winner.)

FWIW this year’s betting for the Nobel is on the best-selling Haruki Murakami and the avant-garde fiction writer Can Xue. Gerald Murnane is apparently at 7/1.

Image credit: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Patrick_White_writer.jpg

Update: I found this interesting video when I was checking the date for the announcement: