Julia Roberts (born October 28, 1967, Smyrna, Georgia, U.S.) is an American actress whose deft performances in varied roles helped make her one of the highest-paid and most-influential actresses in the 1990s and early 2000s.

Although Roberts’s parents briefly ran an actors’ workshop when she was a child, she had no acting experience or formal training when she moved to New York City after high school to pursue a career in show business. She signed with a modeling agency upon her arrival but failed to land any jobs. Her first film role turned up after she was recommended by her older brother, actor Eric Roberts, for a bit part as his on-screen sister in Blood Red (1989), a drama set in the late 1800s; although the film was completed in 1986, its release was delayed for several years. She next made several television appearances before securing her first leading part, in Mystic Pizza (1988).

Britannica Quiz

Oscar-Worthy Movie Trivia

Roberts’s career took off after she was cast in Steel Magnolias (1989), which featured such veteran actresses as Shirley MacLaine, Olympia Dukakis, and Sally Field. Roberts received an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actress for her heartrending portrayal of Field’s diabetic daughter. In 1990 she starred in Pretty Woman, an upbeat comedy about a romance between a prostitute and a business tycoon, played by Richard Gere. A huge hit, it made Roberts a household name and earned her a second Academy Award nomination.

Roberts continued to work steadily throughout the 1990s, starring in Flatliners (1990), Sleeping with the Enemy (1991), The Pelican Brief (1993), Something to Talk About (1995), Mary Reilly (1996), My Best Friend’s Wedding (1997), and Stepmom (1998), for which she also served as executive producer. Her personal life at times overshadowed her professional career, however, as when her highly publicized marriage to singer Lyle Lovett abruptly ended in 1995. In 1999 Roberts starred in two popular romantic comedies, Notting Hill and Runaway Bride, the latter of which again paired her with Gere.

In 2000 Roberts launched her own production company, Shoelace Productions, and that same year she commanded $20 million for her starring role in Erin Brockovich. The film portrayed the real-life story of a law-office clerk who helped the citizens of a California town win a multimillion-dollar settlement against a utility company for health problems caused by the company’s pollution of their drinking water. For her performance, Roberts won an Academy Award for best actress. She later starred opposite Brad Pitt, George Clooney, and Matt Damon in the blockbuster comedy Ocean’s Eleven (2001) and its sequel Ocean’s Twelve (2004). She also appeared in the relationship drama Closer (2004).

In 2006 Roberts supplied the voice for the spider Charlotte in the animated film adaptation of E.B. White’s beloved children’s book Charlotte’s Web. That year she made her Broadway debut in Three Days of Rain, co-starring Paul Rudd and Bradley Cooper, earning mixed reviews. Roberts next appeared with Tom Hanks in Charlie Wilson’s War (2007), a film based on true events surrounding the U.S. government’s involvement in the Afghan resistance to the Soviets in the 1980s. Her subsequent movies included the family drama Fireflies in the Garden (2008); Duplicity (2009), in which she played a corporate spy; and the romantic comedy Valentine’s Day (2010).

After starring in Eat Pray Love (2010), which was adapted from Elizabeth Gilbert’s best-selling memoir of the same name, Roberts, playing a community-college professor, reteamed with Hanks in Larry Crowne (2011). In Mirror Mirror (2012), a comedic version of the Snow White tale, she inhabited the role of the evil queen. She then crossed swords with Meryl Streep—who played her savagely critical mother—in the family drama August: Osage County (2013), based on the play by Tracy Letts; the role earned Roberts an Oscar nomination for best supporting actress. She later assumed the role of a doctor assisting gay men during the early years of the AIDS crisis in New York City in The Normal Heart (2014), a television adaptation of Larry Kramer’s play.

In the feature film Secret in Their Eyes (2015), Roberts portrayed an FBI agent whose daughter is raped and murdered. She then joined the cast of the ensemble comedy Mother’s Day (2016) as a hard-driving businesswoman. In Jodie Foster’s Wall Street thriller Money Monster (2016), Roberts’s character is the producer of a financial advice show who is taken hostage along with the host (Clooney) and their crew. In 2017 Roberts lent her voice to the animated film Smurfs: The Lost Village and played the mother of a child with a rare facial condition in Wonder. The following year she starred as a therapist working at a facility to help veterans adjust to civilian life in Homecoming, her first television series, and as a mother whose son skips his rehabilitation program to return home for Christmas in Ben Is Back.

Roberts then appeared in the TV miniseries Gaslit (2022), a drama centring on Martha Mitchell, the outspoken wife of U.S. Attorney General John Mitchell, and the attempts to discredit her as she sought to reveal the truth about the Watergate scandal. Also in 2022 Roberts reunited with Clooney for Ticket to Paradise, a rom-com in which a divorced couple try to stop their daughter’s wedding.