Julia Roberts is a leading actress in the Hollywood industry with a megawatt smile; she's a phenomenal role player in different movie genres, an A-lister, and one of the wealthiest actresses.

She is famous for starring in the blockbuster hit romantic comedy Pretty Woman which earned her an Oscar and Golden Globe nomination.

This article highlights Julia Roberts' net worth and the most significant achievements that led to her wealthy superstar status.

Plus, find out how to build a million dollar brand in about a year with our FREE training.

What is Julia Roberts' net worth?

Julia Roberts has an estimated net worth of $250 million.

Who is Julia Roberts?

Julia Roberts was born on October 28, 1967, in Smyrna, Georgia, a suburb of Atlanta, to Betty Lou Bredemus and Walter Grady Roberts. She’s one of four siblings: Lisa, Eric, and Nancy (deceased).

She is of English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, German, and Swedish descent.

As a child, she loved animals, so she originally wanted to be a veterinarian but later studied journalism. She attended Fitzhugh Lee Elementary School, Griffin Middle School, and Campbell High School. She also attended Georgia State University but did not graduate.

However, she headed to New York City to pursue a career in acting. Once there, she signed up with the Click Modeling Agency and enrolled in acting classes.

Julia Roberts’ Career

Her first break came in 1988 when she appeared in two youth-oriented movies Mystic Pizza (1988) and Satisfaction (1988). The film introduced her to a new audience who instantly fell in love with this pretty woman.

Roberts had a role in the fourth-season finale of Miami Vice and acted in the independent romantic comedy Mystic Pizza. She played a Portuguese-American teenage girl working as a waitress at a pizza parlor.

Maximizing her 1989 Academy Award nomination, Roberts gained further notice from worldwide audiences when she starred with Richard Gere in the Cinderella–Pygmalionesque story Pretty Woman in 1990, playing an assertive freelance hooker with a heart of gold.

Her next film release was Joel Schumacher's supernatural thriller Flatliners (also 1990), in which Roberts starred as one of five students conducting clandestine experiments that produce near-death experiences.

She played a role in the thriller Sleeping with the Enemy, and in late 1991, she took a brief break from the screen.

Her return proved extraordinary when she starred with Denzel Washington in The Pelican Brief (1993). This film grossed $195.2 million worldwide.

In the late 1990s, she probed her competence in the romantic comedy genre. She starred in My Best Friend's Wedding (1997). This film was considered to be one of the best romantic comedies of all time.

More Roles

In that period, she acted in Notting Hill, Runaway Bride, and Empire.

She became the first actress to be paid $20 million for a film when she took a role in Erin Brockovich (2000). This film made $256.3 million worldwide and earned Roberts the Academy Award for Best Actress.

Julia acted in The Mexican (2001), America's Sweethearts, Mona Lisa Smile, and Closer. She also got featured in the music video for the single “Dreamgirl."

She starred in Mike Nichols’ biographical drama Charlie Wilson's War. In the 2010s, she played stellar performances on Valentine's Day, Eat Pray Love, The Normal Heart, and Mother's Day.

She also teamed up with George Clooney for the Money Monster movie.

In the past five years, she has acted in Wonderz Smurfs: The Lost Village, Ben Is Back, Homecoming, and several other movies.

Brands And Other Endorsements

In 2006, Roberts signed an endorsement deal with fashion label Gianfranco Ferre, valued at $6 million.

Mario Testino photographed her in Los Angeles for the brand's advertising campaign, distributed in Europe, Asia, and Australia.

Since 2009, Roberts has acted as Lancôme's global ambassador, a role in which she has been involved in developing and promoting the brand's range of cosmetics and beauty products. She signed a $20 million contract for a year.

Roberts starred in multiple primary ads and advertised the La Vie Est Belle fragrance.

Julia Roberts’ Philanthropy

Julia Roberts has contributed immensely to impacting the lives of people globally. She has supported the following charities:

American Foundation for AIDS Research

Boys & Girls Clubs of America charity:water

Children's Hospice & Palliative Care Coalition

CHIME FOR CHANGE

Global Fund

GLSEN

Hole in the Wall Gang

Kids Wish Network

Lupus LA (RED)

Red Cross

Shane's Inspiration

Stand Up To Cancer

UNICEF

FAQ

How did Julia Roberts become one of Hollywood's wealthiest actresses?

She became one of Hollywood's wealthiest actresses because of her capacity as an actress. Julia has become a key person of influence, and she attracts hefty paychecks because of her value.

She was one of the highest-paid actresses in the 1990s and early 2000s. She was the first actress to breach the $20 million salary mark.

Julia earned a notable salary of $300,000 for Pretty Woman and a whopping $25 million for Mona Lisa Smile.

What is Julia Roberts' net worth?

Julia Roberts’ net worth is estimated to be $250 million.

What were some of Julia Roberts' early acting roles?

Roberts got her first acting job in 1987. She appeared in one episode of the television series Crime Story. Her talent for acting caught everyone's attention.

The following year, in 1988, Roberts landed a role in the movie Satisfaction along with well-known actors Liam Neeson and Justine Bateman.

What acting school did Julia Roberts attend?

She attended Click Modelling Agency for acting classes.

What was Julia Roberts' breakout role?

Julia had many breakout roles, but one stood out and made her famous beyond her imagination.

Her big break came when she headlined the romantic comedy Pretty Woman (1990), which grossed about $464 million worldwide.

What properties does Julia Roberts own?

She owns real estate properties. She once sold a Malibu home for $9.5 million and a Victorian-style mansion in New Orleans for $8.3 million.

What awards has Julia Roberts won for her acting?

Oscar [Winner] (2001)—Best Actress in a Leading Role: Erin Brockovich (2000)

BAFTA Film Award [Winner] (2001)—Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role: Erin Brockovich (2000)

Blockbuster Entertainment Award [Winner] (1998)—Favorite Actress - Comedy:My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)

Blockbuster Entertainment Award [Winner] (1999) Favorite Actress —Drama: Stepmom (1998)

Golden Globe awards ([Winner] (1990) Best supporting actress—Steel Magnolias

Takeaway

Julia Roberts' stellar performances in the movie industry have earned her a successful career, and her fame has opened doors with high-profile moguls in the media industry.

If Julia's story inspired you to become an award-winning actor, we hope you’ll go for your dream. We probably can’t help you get there, but we’ll cheer you on.

But if you want to follow in Julia’s entrepreneurial footsteps and start a brand that makes the world a better place - and that can create generational wealth that sets your family up for life? Well, that’s us!

In fact, we’re on a mission to make one million millionaires by 2028. We’d love for you to be one of them.