John Carney’s next musical comedy “Power Ballad,” starring Paul Rudd and Nick Jonas, has sold to Lionsgate.

The film, described as an “uplifting and music-driven story,” follows a has-been wedding singer (Rudd) and younger rock star (Jonas) — and the song that comes between them. Jack Reynor, who appeared in Carney’s prior movies “Sing Street” and “Flora and Son,” is also in “Power Ballad.”

More from Variety

Nick Jonas, Adrienne Warren Starring on Broadway in 'The Last Five Years'

Cher and Two Jonas Brothers Rock Out at Dazzling 30th amfAR Cannes Gala

Paul Rudd and Nick Jonas to Star in Musical Comedy 'Power Ballad' From 'Sing Street' Director John Carney

Lionsgate will handle the theatrical release in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and Ireland.

“I’ve always been a huge fan of John’s movies, and I’ve had my eye on this particular film for some time,” said Lionsgate’s Motion Picture Group chair Adam Fogelson. “It combines the best of John’s immense creative talents with a marketable concept and an incredible cast. I couldn’t be happier that he and the rest of the team have entrusted us with it.”

In addition to directing, Carney wrote the film with Peter McDonald. It was fully financed by 30 West, which launched domestic sales with WME Independent and UTA Independent Film Group. WME Independent, which has international rights, introduced the project to buyers in Cannes.

Anthony Bregman and Peter Cron were producers on behalf of Likely Story with Robert Walpole Rebecca O’Flanagan for Treasure Entertainment and Carney. They all produced Carney’s most recent film “Flora and Son,” which sold to Apple TV+ for a staggering $20 million following its premiere at Sundance.

“I am so delighted this film, which has been in my heart for so long, has found its home,” said Carney. “Musically themed films are meant to be watched together, and what better studio than Lionsgate to bring this movie to the world in the way it was intended: with a crowd, in the dark, next to strangers who, for a few hours, become friends.”

Best of Variety

New Movies Out Now in Theaters: What to See This Week

Awards Season Calendar (2024-2025): Key Dates and Timeline for Oscars, Emmys, Golden Globes, Grammys, SAG and More

Here’s Where To Buy Retro Arcade1Up Cabinets To Re-Live Your Childhood Online