Alejandro Jodorowsky, guru, sage, mystic, and acclaimed author (his epic autobiographical novel Where the Bird Sings Bestis forthcoming from Restless) is perhaps best known for his cult-classic psychedelic freak-out films: Holy Mountain, El Topo, and now, thanks to a documentary by Frank Pavich, his incomplete Dune, which has been called "the greatest film never made." Jodorowsky's iconic vision is still being emulated by artists today: Erykah Badu, Kanye West, Marilyn Manson, and MGMT have all referenced the director in music videos; countless artists, including Marina Abramovic and Yoko Ono, have paid tribute to his influence on their work.

What makes Jodorowsky so compelling? His enormous talent aside, Mr. Jodorowsky is an artist's artist. Refusing to commit to one identity or even to one medium (he is also a playwright, actor, musician, comic book artist, spiritual guru, and Tarot master), Jodorowsky's curiosity about the world around him is infinite, his drive to reinvent himself inexhaustible, and his flouting of convention utterly fearless. Like these artists, we stand in awe before him.

Kanye West

Kanye has cited Jodorowsky as one of his primary influences in conceiving his album Yeezus, noting that Jodorowsky is one of those “amazing creative inventors who weren’t recognized in their time.” When Jodorowsky and West finally met, the director tweeted in Spanish: “Me sorprendiò la pureza de West y su profundo deseo de crear una obra que desarrolle la conciencia de los jóvenes.” Or, “I was surprised at the purity of West and his deep desire to create a work that develops the consciousness of young people.”

Nicolas Winding Refn

Jodorowsky's influence on Refn shows in the gorgeous and violent excess of the Danish director's remarkable films (the original Pusher trilogy, Bronson, Drive, and, most recently, Only God Forgives, to name a few). Now, Refn is reportedly working on a film adaptation of Jodorowsky and Moebius' six book comic series The Incal, a gorgeous dystopian 1980s graphic novel series said to have influenced Hayao Miyazaki, Katsuhiro Otomo’s Akira, Blade Runner, The Matrix, and even depictions of Coruscant in the Star Wars prequel films.

Jodorowsky has also acted as a kind of mentor to Refn, who says “I called Jodorowsky in Paris and he says to me, ‘What is this shit in Hollywood, why?’” And I thought I was being yelled at! He said ‘You must not let your vision be destroyed!’ And I was like, 'I know, I know, I was wrong.' He said ‘You have to stay true, or else I’ll not like you anymore!’ He’s like ninety, but he has the mind of a comet."

Alma Jodorowsky

Jodorowsky's granddaughter Alma, a French model, actress, and singer, is just as multi-faceted as her grandfather. She's a lead vocalist and songwriter for the band Burning Peacocks, a muse to Karl Lagerfeld, and the 2011 face of Opening Ceremony. She's already appeared in numerous French and American films, including Eyes Find Eyes, Sea, No Sex, and Sun, and Blue is the Warmest Color. In her next film, Kids in Love, set to be released in 2014, she plays alongside Will Poulter and fellow model Cara Delevingne. Follow her on Twitter.

Dan O'Bannon

Before writing Total Recall and Alien, Dan O'Bannon was director of special effects for Jodorowsky's never-completed Dune. Based on Frank Herbert's pioneering sci-fi novel, Dune brought together an all-star team of artists: O'Bannon, Swiss set designer H.R. Giger, French artist Moebius, and British painter Chris Foss, all of whom went on to work on Alien and countless other science fiction films now regarded as classics of the genre.

The cast was to include Orson Welles, Mick Jagger, Pink Floyd, and Salvador Dalí. Although the movie was never completed, the artwork produced on the set of Dune went on to be extremely influential for post-1970s sci-fi imagery.

Check out Frank Pavich's incredible documentary Jodorowsky's Dune for the detailed story behind the unmade masterpiece.

Moebius (Jean Giraud)

A French artist, writer, and graphic novelist, Moebius was admired by Stan Lee, Federico Fellini, Hayao Miyazaki, and, of course, his friend and collaborator Jodorowsky. Moebius contributed storyboards and designs to numerous science fiction films, including Alien, Tron, The Abyss, and The Fifth Element (he and Jodorowsky actually sued Luc Besson for using their graphic novel series The Incal as inspiration for the latter movie without credit).

Moebius is widely regarded as one of France's greatest visual artists. He bridged the gap between fine and popular art forms while consistently creating beautiful, iconic imagery. Federico Fellini even wrote him a gushing fan letter, imploring him to "continue to draw fabulously, for the joy of us all."

Marina Ambramović

The Serbian-born artist and "grandmother of performance art" recently spoke at a screening of The Dance of Reality, hosted by MoMA in New York City and featuring a rare appearance of Jodorowsky himself. Introducing the legendary artist, Ambramovic stated, "I divide the world into two categories: the originals, and the ones who follow. The originals are the people looking differently, who take the simple elements of everyday life and make miracles. And for me, Alejandro, you are the one original."