Lyman Frank Baum’s novel “The Wizard of Oz” was written at the turn of the century in 1899 as a novel for children. The author describes the adventures of a young girl finding her way back home to Kansas, after she was picked up by a cyclone and swirled into the magical land of Oz. It took me a couple of chapters into the novel to find my rhythm of reading, and to begin to understand why Baum employed certain figures of speech to achieve a certain intention. My background knowledge about the author is limited to what the novel gives away on its cover, and therefore does not have a significant impact on my reaction to the novel. My attempt is to structure my reaction to the novel in terms of style, targeted audience, and the moral in which in my opinion the author had in mind.

Of course, I started reading the novel with my own preconceptions, which were based on the movie adaptation to the novel with Judy Garland. I was a child when I watched it, but I remember vividly the bright colors, catchy tunes and fairytale like characters. Based on this image, my first impression was different from what I expected: a thick book with small print “Lord of the Rings”-style. Instead, what I encountered was a 200 page book with big font, and margins. Secondly, I anticipated a wordier, more fluent, pleasing, and elaborate writing style. This might sound contradictive, but the author does writes very descriptive, and imaginatively, yet he gets immediately to the point without any elaborate details. Moreover, Baum’s writing style is somewhat direct to an almost factual degree: “There were four walls, a floor and a roof, which made one room” (p. 1). To get his plot started and catch the reader’s interest, the author offers an answer to the question which every child has asked itself at some point: Where does a cyclone take you when you get caught in it? To the wonderful land of Oz. The author is scarce in usage of literary figures. For the most part I identified simile as patterns of tropes: “…as easily as you could carry a feather” (p. 4), “…she felt as if she were being rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle” (p. 4). The lack of metaphors and other tropes keeps the narrative style of the novel to a level which leaves not much room for misinterpretation, yet plenty of room for imagination. However, Baum uses a lot of binary opposites in his novel to add to the transparency of the plot. Red-yellow, blue-green. (the lands where the different witches reside are in distinct colors, and the Wizard of Oz lives in the Emerald City where everything is green). Other binary opposites are North-South, East-West (the clear cut borders the Land of Oz is divided into), courage-cowardice, love-hate, and beautiful witches-ugly witches. Furthermore, there is good and evil, princes and princesses, female witches and male wizard. I found interesting that the witches rule their country but the most powerful wizard is male (Oz) which illustrates the patriarchy which at the time the novel was written (1899), was still predominant in society. In addition, Baum employs an effective stylistic feature at the beginning of chapter 14 (p. 127) when he speaks directly to the reader by writing: “You will remember there was no road…”. With this stylistic device Baum defines a new relation with the reader; he puts himself side by side with his audience, as he is actually telling the story face to face like a mom or grandfather would do. Finally, there is one passage where Baum plays with words. To give the Scarecrow its promised brain, Oz puts “a measure of bran” (p. 152) in his head which he later refers to as “bran-new brains” (p. 152). In conclusion, the author keeps his figures of speech to a minimum in order to reach a broad audience, and not lose any readers (children) to the sophisticated figures of speech.

Next, I want to address the target audience of the novel. Baum wrote “The Wizard of Oz” for children. Midway through the book the different styles the author used culminated to the point that they were intended to get the reader’s (children) attention. The lack of sophisticated literary figures of speech was meant to keep the story simple so every naïve soul would be able to relate to it. Furthermore, Baum did not excessively describe characters, situations, or settings because he wanted to leave room for each individual reader to fill in the gaps with their own imagination. As a result, there are plenty of gaps in the plot which catalyze the reader’s imagination. This means is probably the biggest contributor to the success of the book over the span of more than a century. Baum understood how children’s mind work; simple structured without complexity. Everyone dealing with children knows that the wordier something gets explained, the likelier one loses the child’s attention and interest. Children think in bright colors with sharp contrasts. Moreover, the world of children is laid out in binary opposites: good-evil, love-hate, humans-animals, and life-death. Baum put all the ingredients in his novel which catch a child’s interest: a little, vulnerable girl with a “simple soul” (p. 115) (Dorothy), a cute, brave, little, fearless dog (Toto), characters children fear (wolves, black bees, crows), the Tin Woodman stands for a toy every child could relate to in 1899 since a lot of toys were made of tin, a Lion, as the king of the animals, Witches and Wizards, China Figurines (girls like to play tea party with mom’s Hummel figurines but are told not to break them), and Munchkins for the cute-factor. Even a witch as wicked as the Wicked Witch of the West was afraid of water and darkness which most children can relate to. In conclusion, Baum shows in depth insight in children’s mind by catering to their wishes, fears, and ability of imagination. In doing so, he reaches out to young readers regardless of their background.

Finally, I had to think about the intention of the novel. What message did Baum want to transport to his young readers? As simple as the novel is structured, as simple and bold is the moral of the novel: be good and pure and you will be rewarded. As for the Scarecrow: you do not have to have brains to be smart. As for the Tin Woodman: it is not the heart which makes you kind or it takes more than a heart to be kind. As for the Lion: you do not need courage to be brave. As the great Oz says: “I never grant favors without some return” (p.98); meaning that nothing is for free, you have to earn it. As for Dorothy, even the wicked witch of the West ”never thought a little girl like you would ever be able to melt me and my wicked deeds.” Little scared Dorothy, thrown into an unknown land rose to become a witch-killer, and a hero. Is that not what every child imagines to be? Finally, above all is the message that “… the Power of Good, is greater than the Power of Evil.” (p. 114). In conclusion, if you believe in yourself, be determined, confident in your actions, and moreover work together as a team, intelligence, courage, and kindness will follow, and will lead eventually to success. In addition, if you work as a team, you can achieve anything. Does that not sound so 21st century workforce like?

In conclusion, in his novel “The Wizard of Oz”, the author, Lyman Frank Baum draws on what gets children’s interest in a story: make believe. This recipe is the very same which made Mr. Roger’s “Neighborhood” so ever popular, and withstands time. Even though the novel is written for children, I thoroughly enjoyed reading it. Once my mind caught on to Baum’s means of reaching out to his target audience: the scarce use of tropes and other figures of speech, the bold use of binary opposites, the simplicity of narration, and the moral message, I was able to appreciate and enjoy the imaginative world of the book.