Le Roy Ladurie set out to recreate “a factual history of ordinary people”[1] from a very unusual source: drawing on one half of an inquisitorial register under Bishop Jacques Fournier in his campaign to root out heresy in the south of France. While Montaillou achieves a empathetic, detailed insight into the lives, outlook and psychologies of villagers, it is an incomplete picture in other regards: there are significant issues with the methodology of Le Roy Ladurie, his treatment of women as human agents is somewhat problematic, and the circumstances of the village itself suggest that such a penetrative, intimate approach can scarcely be reproduced elsewhere. Nonetheless, the anthropologically-influenced, ethnographic approach capture social relations and mentalités in a way that readings of many other top-down sources cannot achieve. Without reproducing wholesale the stories and arguments that Le Roy Ladurie writes, I seek to replicate, in some small part, the insights into peasant life he achieves.

Much like the Catharist beliefs underpinning this book, Montaillou paints village life as a dualist experience: “the physical warmth of the ostal, together with the ever-recurring promise of a peasant heaven”[2]. The second half of the book, ‘An archaeology of Montaillou’, is more focused on this experience, with chapters dedicated to attitudes towards sex and love, marriage and childhood, social relations, morality, religion and magic, to name a few. The influence of anthropology and ethnographic studies is clear, with Le Roy Ladurie aware that the symbols, rituals and practices tying the material world to the cultural realm is often rich, fluid and uncertain. Few details escape him, from greetings of politeness that hint at an unspoken social hierarchy- egalitarian in some ways, sexist in others, to the implications of how Cathar parfaits washed and cleaned themselves on their beliefs of spiritual purity: “It was not so much the outside as the inside of the body which had to be kept clean”[3]. Even as the particularity of such beliefs are highlighted, he hints at the universality of other practices: disdain towards dissenting religious beliefs are demonstrated through “a flick of the wrist such as we still make today”[4].

Nonetheless, other episodes challenge assumptions that may be held about social relations: contraception was not “something which liberated the opposite sex”, but a means of binding women to a man[5], seen through Pierre Clergue’s possession of a rennet, whose magical and symbolic properties (making ‘a man’s semen curdle’ too) could be jealously safeguarded to limit the autonomy of his lover, Beatrice. We see from this episode how Le Roy Ladurie is not above judging his subjects: Pierre depicted to be caddish in his exploitation of her fear of pregnancy, and Beatrice is “a real country girl despite her noble extraction”[6]. Love in Montaillou is multifaceted: its carnal, romantic, social, and religious qualities all intermingling in the minds of its inhabitants when they made decisions to marry, or take on a lover. On the marriage between Raymonde d’Argelliers to Arnaud Belot, he accepts that decisions within can be impenetrable but rational in their own right. “He had no trade, she did not love him passionately, she did not even know whether he was a Cathar. So why on earth did she marry him? She still could not say”. However, amidst the ethnographic sympathy he holds towards this puzzling decision, the most obvious (to me) escapes Le Roy Ladurie: any religious dimension to this union could easily be misconstrued during an inquisition.

Montaillou is also able to illuminate the cosmology and cultural attitudes of its inhabitants, exposing how any monolithic understanding of Western Christianity does not account for the intense localization and diversity of belief systems. La Roy Ladurie exposes the contrast between the ordered, bureaucratic form of dating used in inquisitorial records, and the vagueness of “rural time”[7], which often approximated ages and dates. Surprisingly little in the villagers’ conception of time is dedicated even to Christian myths, with emphasis on the Cathar myth of the fall, but less of the Old Testament and prominent myths within of the Flood. This lack of a sense of history, heritage and continuity indicate to La Roy Ladurie an absence of “logical connections with past and future”; a different conception grounded in physical sensation and perception is also used to understand space. Domus (house) and corpus (body) were thus measures of the word, and this smaller sense of scale is also explained by the geographical and spatial world of villagers, where intense regional and subregional differentiation with other villages meant that journeys outside of Montaillou were journeys into a very different world.

Implicit to La Roy Ladurie’s emphasis on the phenomenological and cultural world of Montaillou, a more isolated but not hermetically sealed village, is the suggestion Catharism and ‘heretical’ beliefs would have manifested and been understood quite differently by these villagers. The religious and ideological tenets spread by itinerant preachers from abroad, and parfaits within, intersected with preexisting beliefs and cultural systems that explain the unique, almost idiosyncratic beliefs of some villagers: Raymond de Laburat scorned the entirety of the clergy, and would be “delighted to see the churches razed to the ground”, while passionately believing Mass could then be celebrated out in open fields by peasants “seeing the body of their divine Master in the open air”[8]

The difference “between theory and practice” is also apparent in how instructions given by distant ecclesiastical councils were sometimes not heeded by local Catholic priests . They preached “in the vulgar tongue”, or stated that “Christ ate and drank like everyone else, but that when he ate, he did not swallow”[9], practices charmingly provincial and backwards in the eyes of clergymen at Sabarthes. However, it was the general immorality of priests’ conduct, rather than rarer deviations from orthodox doctrine, which were prevalent in Montaillou. Examples of improper conduct are abound in Montaillou: sleeping with married women, Pierre Clergue’s confession he cared only for the income of his office, for instance. What impression we have of local religious attitudes and beliefs in Montaillou certainly illuminates how in the face of constant reforms and ecclesiastical decrees by the papacy, hegemony over religious dogma and the lay clergy were theoretical at best.

The very fact Montaillou problematizes any notion one may have of generalizing religious belief in France, or even ‘Frenchness’ itself (after all, even local differences within Occitan itself are highlighted) make it unsuitable as a general study for the whole period. To be fair, La Roy Ladurie consciously set out to expound on a “breath of life” offered by partial, incomplete inquisitorial records, embracing the limitations of his microcosmic approach. Yet, readers remain confined within an ‘ethnographic present’: the records’ timeframe of 1294-1324, along with the villagers’ aforementioned conception of time, mean that causation is difficult to establish. Understanding why the social structure of Montaillou, or villagers’ conception of salvation, or precepts for marriage, came to be was beyond the remit of Fournier, outside the villagers’ concerns, and therefore troubling for La Roy Ladurie to unearth.

Even with regards to the spread of Catharism, presumably one area of interest for Fournier, we remain unsure why even within the Pyrenees Montaillou seems anomalous in the number of ‘heretics’ it contained. Neither can the relationship between elite social relations and religious dogma, exemplified in local opposition to the Clergues’ Cathar beliefs, be satisfyingly explained: how did familial rivalries adapt to the institutional persecution of one faction, for example? Here, even the records are patchy: La Roy Ladurie notes the fate of some accused heretics are unrecorded[10], and the unknown identities of some village patrons and allies of the Clergue make it difficult for him to expound on his argument that within Occitania rural elites partially succeeding in leveraging on networks of friendship and patronage to counter the Church and its agents. Nonetheless, these weaknesses in Montaillou are inherent given the sources’ limited scope and survival.

More problematic are the liberties with which La Roy Ladurie transforms, too uncritically at points, the testimonies of villagers to the stories and profiles that form the book. The inquisitorial records were written in three stages: a scribe, Guillaume Barthe noting down the hearing and interrogation, then compiling these minutes into a ledger that the accused could submit alterations to, then finally several scribes copied out these texts onto parchment. Yet, for all the cognitive, psychological and religious details La Roy Ladurie can provide us concerning Fournier and the villagers, there is nothing about the potential biases and quirks of these scribes, through whom the documents are mediated. Given the heavy influence of these individuals, and the notable involvement of the accused themselves in creating the documents, what La Roy Ladurie refers to in writing Montaillou are not simple, recorded facts and biographic information, but the product of an actively interpretative process engaging individuals whose very lives (both mortal and spiritual) depended on their innocence. The relative lack of discussion by La Roy Ladurie on the veracity of such details necessitates a more critical look on some of the narratives and episodes thus presented within Montaillou.

Finally, despite being a history of a village, Montaillou falls into the same trap many others in the Annales school have been accused of doing[11]: La Roy Ladurie does not go beyond the sources to uncover female agency and the role they had within the domus, despite the tantalising starting points that many villagers’ accounts offer. Hence, men continue to be defined and portrayed as integral to the domus, and women continued to be a means of exchange within these households. This is apparent in his generalizations on social relations of “concubinage”, a term recurring in Montaillou without sufficiently differentiating what it meant for men and women to commit adultery.

Sexual relations seem to be a solely male choice: Pierre Clergue’s “some dozen authenticated mistresses”[12] are attributed both to his “irresistible personal charm” and “position as priest, invested with power and prestige”: to say nothing of what great risk it entailed for women to consciously engage in extramarital sexual relations with a priest. Despite other accounts that do in fact hint at how women could have a higher status, particularly widows and mothers-in-law, La Roy Ladurie’s later observation that female influence declined in the domus is not adequately explained. Rather, he generalizes that “the domination by adult males did not provoke rebellion either among the women or among the young people”, asserting the “real sources of division were the various village clans”[13] without a sympathetic understanding of the differing experiences and unequal relations between women and man. Hence, Le Roy Ladurie does not fully explore the potential of his evidence in discussing and revising the role of women even amongst this highly unusual village society.

Montaillou is an impressive work illuminating the dual currents of village life: one spiritual and concerned with salvation, the other concerned with mortal, economic issues. Yet distinct as these concepts were in theory and practice, attention must be paid to the unique ways that they came to interact in this Occitan village: “one within the other, the one supporting the other”[14]. In the face of this evidence it would be foolish to continue generalizing the experiences of the clergy, as well as peasants- not homogenous in themselves, but composed of individuals with a myriad of different experiences based on gender, family, occupation, relations, and standing. Yet, there are limitations to his microhistorical approach: it can only purport to understanding a small space within a small span of time, and there are doubts as to the veracity of testimony and the accuracy of reconstruction. On one hand he claims, as a reason not to explore issues of gender or homosexuality, the inaccessibility of certain experiences: “The evidence of the Register does not deal with the unconscious”[15], La Roy Ladurie writes. On the other hand, it is the unconscious and internalized norms of culture, behaviour and belief which he uncovers to explore the rich world of Montaillou. Still, La Roy Ladurie achieves what few authors can claim to do: to restore the experiences and stories of people through a register formed with the intention to repress them is no easy feat, and one wonders what could have been done with more complete archives and testimonies.

Bibliography

Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. Montaillou: Cathars and Catholics in a French Village, 1294-1324. Penguin, 1980.

Stuard, Susan Mosher. “The Annales School and Feminist History: Opening Dialogue with the American Stepchild.” Signs, vol. 7, no. 1, 1981, pp. 135–43.

Zaretsky, Eli. “Peasants and Shepherds in Montaillou.” Radical History Review, vol. 1979–80, no. 22, Jan. 1980, pp. 181–87. read.dukeupress.edu, doi:10.1215/01636545-1979-80-22-181.

[1] Montaillou, 356

[2] ibid

[3] M. 142

[4] M, 144

[5] M, 173

[6] M, 172

[7] M. 280

[8] M. 304

[9] M. 317

[10] M. 218

[11] Stuard 1981

[12] M. 155

[13] M. 255

[14] M. 356