How does the adjective defunct contrast with its synonyms?

Some common synonyms of defunct are dead, deceased, departed, and late. While all these words mean "devoid of life," defunct stresses cessation of active existence or operation.

a defunct television series

When is dead a more appropriate choice than defunct?

The meanings of dead and defunct largely overlap; however, dead applies literally to what is deprived of vital force but is used figuratively of anything that has lost any attribute (such as energy, activity, radiance) suggesting life.

a dead, listless performance

How does the word deceased relate to other synonyms for defunct?

Deceased, departed, and late apply to persons who have died recently. Deceased is the preferred term in legal use.

the estate of the deceased

When might departed be a better fit than defunct?

The words departed and defunct are synonyms, but do differ in nuance. Specifically, departed is used usually as a euphemism.

our departed sister

When would late be a good substitute for defunct?

While in some cases nearly identical to defunct, late is used especially with reference to a person in a specific relation or status.

the company's late president

Recent Examples on the Web But that streaming platform is now defunct; every other show that debuted on the platform has ended; and Warner Bros. merged with Discovery. —Rafael Motamayor, IndieWire, 19 July 2024 Concrete pads from a defunct meteorological tower sit just off the dock behind the field station, marking the current edge of the surrounding marsh system. —Tribune News Service, New York Daily News, 12 July 2024 The Cannon Trust background and fight The defunct Cannon Mills company, based in Kannapolis, was once the world’s largest producer of towels and sheets. —Catherine Muccigrosso, Charlotte Observer, 28 June 2024 Its future is up in the air as Correa and his wife, Aurora, struggle to pay down the defunct theater’s property taxes — about $37,000 total — ahead of the city’s final June 17 deadline. —Megan Ulu-Lani Boyanton, The Denver Post, 12 June 2024 See all Example Sentences for defunct

These examples are programmatically compiled from various online sources to illustrate current usage of the word 'defunct.' Any opinions expressed in the examples do not represent those of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback about these examples.