The following is a list of television stations licensed to and/or serving the U.S. state of Michigan, listed in order from lowest to highest on the current TV band (RF channels 2-36) and by market from largest to smallest. Only active stations are listed, in other words, only those stations currently active on-air will be shown. Also, only primary network affiliations (unless one or more major networks are active on other subchannels) are listed at this time. Stations marked with the letters NO are owned and/or operated stations of their respective networks. It MUST be noted that, reception, coverage, carriage and/or availability of any given station may vary by television provider, subscription, geographical location and/or atmospheric conditions. Known metropolitan and sub-metropolitan centers will be listed in bold text.

In-State Markets[]

Southeast Michigan (Detroit)[]

Counties: Lapeer, Livingston, Macomb, Monroe, Oakland, Sanilac, St. Clair, Washtenaw and Wayne

Cities: Allen Park, Ann Arbor, Bloomfield Hills, Brighton, Canton, Capac, Chelsea, Clawson, Dearborn, Dearborn Heights, Detroit, Dexter, Dundee, Eastpointe, Farmington Hills, Ferndale, Flat Rock, Fowlerville, Garden City, Grosse Ile, Grosse Pointe Woods, Hamtramck, Harper Woods, Highland Park, Howell, Imlay City, Lincoln Park, Livonia, Luna Pier, Madison Heights, Manchester, Milan, Milford, Monroe, Mount Clemens, Northville, Novi, Oak Park, Plymouth, Pontiac, Port Huron, Port Sanilac, Riverview, Rochester Hills, Roseville, St. Clair Shores, Southfield, Southgate, Sterling Heights, Taylor, Trenton, Troy, Utica, Warren, Waterford, Westland, Wixom, Woodhaven, Wyandotte and Ypsilanti

West Michigan (Grand Rapids-Battle Creek-Kalamazoo)[]

Counties: Allegan, Barry, Branch, Calhoun, Ionia, Kalamazoo, Kent, Montcalm, Muskegon, Newaygo, Oceana, Ottawa, St. Joseph and Van Buren

Cities: Albion, Allegan, Battle Creek, Coldwater, Comstock Park, Grand Haven, Grand Rapids, Holland, Kalamazoo, Muskegon, Norton Shores, Paw Paw, Portage, Sturgis, Walker and Wyoming

Mid-Michigan and the Thumb (Flint-Saginaw-Bay City-Midland)[]

Counties: Arenac, Bay, Genessee, Gladwin, Gratiot, Huron, Iosco, Isabella, Midland, Ogemaw, Saginaw, Shiawassee and Tuscola

Cities: Alma, Bad Axe, Bay City, Caro, Cass City, Clio, Fenton, Flint, Frankenmuth, Gladwin, Grand Blanc, Harbor Beach, Midland, Mount Pleasant, Owosso, Pinconning, Port Austin, Port Hope, Saginaw, Standish, Swartz Creek and Vassar

1 Both WEYI-TV and WBSF are operated by Sinclair Broadcast Group (through WSMH) under a Shared Services Agreement. FCC regulations and policies prohibit direct and outright common ownership of these stations, particularly WEYI and WSMH, as they are "Big Four" network affiliates. Triopolies (common ownership of three full-power stations at once by the same company) are also legally prohibited at this time. The lattermost rule does NOT apply to low-power stations.

South Central Michigan (Lansing-Jackson)[]

Counties: Clinton, Eaton, Hillsdale, Ingham and Jackson

Cities: Brooklyn, Charlotte, Dewitt, Eaton Rapids, Grand Ledge, Hillsdale, Jackson, Lansing, Michigan Center, Onondaga, Webberville, Westphalia, White Oak and Williamston

1 WLAJ is operated by Nexstar Media Group (through WLNS-TV) under Joint Sales and Shared Services Agreements. FCC regulations and policies prohibit direct and outright common ownership of these stations, as they are "Big Four" network affiliates, and also due to the very limited number of television stations within the market.

Northern Michigan (Traverse City-Cadillac-Sault Ste. Marie)[]

Counties: Antrim, Benzie, Charlevoix, Cheboygan, Chippewa, Clare, Crawford, Emmet, Grand Traverse, Kalkaska, Lake, Leelanau, Luce, Mackinac, Manistee, Mason, Mecosta, Missaukee, Montmorency, Osceola, Oscoda, Otsego, Presque Isle, Roscommon, Oscoda and Wexford

Cities: Baldwin, Big Rapids, Cadillac, Charlevoix, Gaylord, Houghton Lake, Kalkaska, Ludington, Manistee, Petoskey, Rogers City, Sault Ste. Marie, Traverse City and Wolf Lake

1 Both WGTU and WGTQ are operated by Sinclair Broadcast Group (through WPBN-TV and WTOM-TV respectively) under a Local Marketing Agreement. FCC regulations and policies prohibit direct and outright common ownership of these stations, as they are "Big Four" network affiliates, and also due to the very limited number of standalone, non-satellite television stations within the market.

2 Both WFQX-TV and WFUP are operated by Heritage Broadcasting Group (through WWTV and WWUP-TV respectively) under a Shared Services Agreement. FCC regulations and policies prohibit direct and outright common ownership of these stations, as they are "Big Four" network affiliates, and also due to the very limited number of standalone, non-satellite television stations within the market.

3 WXII-LP still broadcasts with an analog signal, and should also, NOT be confused with WXII-TV, the NBC affiliate in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, owned and operated by Hearst Television.

4 Both WCMV and WCMW are satellite stations of WCMU-TV in Mount Pleasant, which is within the Flint-Saginaw-Bay City television market.

Western Upper Michigan (Marquette)[]

Counties:

Michigan: Alger, Baraga, Delta, Dickinson, Houghton, Iron, Keweenaw, Marquette, Ontonagon and Schoolcraft

Wisconsin: Florence

Cities:

Michigan: Copper Harbor, Crystal Falls, Escanaba, Gladstone, Iron Mountain, Iron River, Ishpeming, Maplewood, Marquette, Negaunee and White Pine

Wisconsin: Aurora, Florence, Ridgetop, Tipler and Tyran

1 WJMN-TV is a semi-satellite station of MyNetworkTV affiliate WFRV-TV in Green Bay, Wisconsin, also owned and operated by Nexstar Media Group.

Alpena[]

Counties: Alcona and Alpena

Cities: Alcona, Alpena, Curran and Long Rapids

1 WCML is a satellite station of WCMU-TV in Mount Pleasant, which is within the Flint-Saginaw-Bay City television market.

Out of State Markets[]

U.S. Markets[]

Chicago, IL[]

Counties in Michigan: None

Cities in Michigan: None

Cleveland-Akron-Canton, OH[]

Counties in Michigan: None

Cities in Michigan: None

1 WLFM-LD is owned by Murray Hill Broadcasting, LLC and operated by Venture Technologies Group under a Local Marketing Agreement.

2 W18ES-D in Mansfield is a fringe translator of WOSU-TV, which is within the Columbus market.

3 WEAO is a full-time satellite station of WNEO, which is within the Youngstown market.

Milwaukee, WI[]

Counties in Michigan: None

Cities in Michigan: None

1 Although WMVS and WMVT are sister stations, each station has its own standalone program schedule.

2 WVTV carries both The CW on channel 18 and MyNetworkTV on channel 24. WVTV-DT2, the secondary subchannel for WVTV, once operated as a separate, fully-licensed station as WCGV-TV, until signing off the air for the final time on January 8, 2018. The shutdown of WCGV was the result of Sinclair Broadcast Group selling that station's spectrum for roughly $84.3 million (USD), as part of the FCC's spectrum incentive auction at the time, on April 24, 2017. Once WCGV was off the air, its intellectual unit, license properties and its MyNetworkTV affiliation went to WVTV, but still operates as if it's still a separate station, hence the different virtual channels now shared by WVTV.

3 Although licensed within the Green Bay television market, WIWN primarily serves the Milwaukee market.

Fox Cities (Green Bay-Appleton), WI[]

Counties in Michigan: Menominee

Cities in Michigan: Eagles Nest, Nadeau, Powers and Wallace

1 W30BU continues to broadcast with an analog signal.

2 WPNE-TV is an affiliate station of PBS Wisconsin, a network of PBS stations serving all of Wisconsin except Milwaukee, which is served by WMVS and WMVT respectively.

3 Although licensed to the city of Fond du Lac, which is geographically and technically within the Green Bay television market, WIWN primarily serves the Milwaukee market.

Toledo, OH[]

Counties in Michigan: Lenawee

Cities in Michigan: Adrian, Blissfield, Morenci and Tecumseh

1 WUPW is operated by Tegna (through WTOL) under a Shared Services Agreement. FCC regulations and policies prohibit direct and outright common ownership of these stations, as they are "Big Four" network affiliates, and also due to the very limited number of television stations within the market.

Michiana (South Bend-Elkhart), IN[]

Counties in Michigan: Berrien and Cass

Cities in Michigan: Benton Harbor, Berrien Springs, Dowagiac, New Buffalo and Vandalia

1 Under normal circumstances, FCC rules and regulations would legally prohibit such common ownership of three or more stations. However, such does NOT apply to WCWW-LD, WBND-LD and WMYS-LD, as they are low-power stations.

2 WMYS-LD2 gets its programming relayed from WYTU-LD in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

Fort Wayne[]

Counties in Michigan: None

Cities in Michigan: None

Northland and the Arrowhead (Duluth-Superior), MN/WI[]

Counties in Michigan: Gogebic

Cities in Michigan: Anvil, Fuller, Ironwood Marenisco and Wakefield

1 K18MB-D in International Falls, is a translator station in of KAWE in Bemidji, which is in the Twin Cities (Minneapolis-St. Paul) television market.

Canadian Markets[]

DISCLAIMER: Market regions and cities may NOT be exact or accurate at this time.

Southwestern Ontario (Windsor-Chatham-Kent-Sarnia-London-Kitchener)[]

1 TVOntario is regional public television network a-la-PBS, servicing the province of Ontario. All transmissions and rebroadcasts originate from CICA-DT in Toronto.

2 CIII-DT-22 in Stevenson and CIII-DT-29 in Sarnia and Oil Springs are repeaters of network flagship CIII-DT in Toronto.

3 CITS-DT-2 in London is a repeater of CITS-DT in the Toronto area.

4 CHCH-DT-2 in London is a repeater of independent station CHCH-DT in Hamilton, within the Toronto market.

5 CFMT-DT-1 and CJMT-DT-1, both in London, are repeaters of Toronto stations CFMT-DT and CJMT-DT respectively. CFMT airs programming in several European (such as French, Italian and Portuguese), Caribbean and Latin American (such as Spanish) languages, while CJMT airs programming in several South Asian (such as Hindi), Middle Eastern (such as Somali) and Far East Asian (such as Chinese, Japanese and Korean) languages.

Northeast Ontario (North Bay-Sudbury-Timmins)[]

1 All of these stations expect CKNY-DT continue to broadcast analog signals. Only CKNY is completely digital.

2 CKVR-DT-1 is a repeater of CKVR-DT, in Barrie, which is within the Toronto market.

3 All three stations, which are repeat transmitters of Toronto-based CHCH-DT, continue to broadcast analog signals.

Central Ontario (Thunder Bay and Sault Ste. Marie)[]