Northumbria University Overview

With around 26,000 students from over 140 countries, Northumbria University is one of the UK’s largest and most successful universities. Northumbria has a rich history going back through its constituent colleges to the late nineteenth century. It was founded as Newcastle Polytechnic in 1969 and inaugurated as a university in 1992.

Offering degrees in most major subject areas, Northumbria University courses in Engineering, Computing, Sciences, Business, Law, Design, Built and Natural Environment, Arts, Social Sciences, Psychology, Sport, and Health are some of the best in the UK. Lecturers are experts in their field and passionate about teaching. Many courses carry professional accreditation, and, as well as Northumbria masters courses which require a subject-specific first degree, the University offer a range of 'conversion' masters for those who are considering a change of direction. Northumbria is the only Business School in Europe with double recognition for Accounting and Business from AACSB.

Northumbria’s consistently excellent performance in UK quality audits places it at the very top among modern universities. With over 95% of graduates in work or continuing education, Northumbria is among the most successful universities for graduate employment.

The Northumbria University acceptance rate is 65% and a key Northumbria University ranking is placing in the Top 25 in the UK for graduates in highly skilled employment.

- Northumbria University, London Campus

At Northumbria’s London Campus, academic experts and professional support staff are committed to giving you an educational experience that will set you up for life. Cutting-edge courses such as MSc Business with International Management, MSc Business with Financial Management, Business with Marketing Management, BA (Hons) Business Administration, International Foundation Programme and Pre-sessional English are all offered.

Based in the centre of London’s business and finance district, the London campus is home to both international and UK students. A strong reputation among employers thanks to the track record of its alumni, Northumbria University is on the ‘must-see’ list of many employers.