Northumbria University is the ‘parent’ of a number of wholly or majority-owned subsidiary companies. The companies which the University have incorporated under UK company law, are for specific activities which the University operates which it wishes to be distinct from its legal structure as a Higher Education Corporation (HEC) and an exempt charity under charity law in England and Wales.

Setting up a separate company means that the University can operate a range of non-charitable and commercial activities, ring fenced from the University’s charitable status, without compromising the charitable ‘objects’ of the University, the principal one of which is the ‘advancement of education’. However, this does not mean that the activities of each subsidiary company is wholly commercial. Each company supports an aspect of the educational experience, either directly or indirectly. In circumstances where one of the University’s companies generates surplus income, unless a separate agreement is in place, the distributable profits are donated back to the University to invest in its core educational activities.

Each of the University’s subsidiary companies (with the exception of its Netherlands-based entity) is a company limited by shares under UK company law, which means that they have a separate legal ‘personality’ and structure from Northumbria University, but they report into the University as a parent undertaking, and constitute our ‘Group’ structure. We undertake external audits of all of the University’s companies, produce annual accounts and file all returns to Companies House. The Directors of all companies are appointed by and are drawn from senior management or the Governors/Trustees of the University (with the exception of Northumbria London Campus Limited and Northumbria University Amsterdam).

The University has the following subsidiary companies:

The University’s Subsidiary Companies Policy and Procedure and a diagram showing the ‘Group’ structure is provided here.

The registered address of each of the University’s subsidiary companies (with the exception of the Northumbria University Amsterdam) is:

Sutherland Building

College Street

Newcastle Upon Tyne

NE1 8ST