About Northumbria University

At Northumbria, we embrace tomorrow. We pursue new thinking, forge new partnerships, create and exchange new knowledge, and find new solutions. Our inspirational academics, partners and students work together to tackle tomorrow’s challenges head on. We are ready for the future whatever it may hold.

Recently named University of the Year (Times Higher Education Awards 2022), Northumbria University is a research-rich, business-focused, professional university with a global reputation for academic excellence. By putting students at the heart of an outstanding experience, and with world-leading research and award-winning partnerships, Northumbria is a new kind of excellent university.

Postgraduate courses from Northumbria University will take you to the next level. Taught by experienced and inspirational academics, we will equip you with everything you need to fulfil your potential, professionally and personally. Whether you want to get the real-world experience you need to progress in your career, the research skills you need to drive the direction of your discipline, or you simply want to build your confidence and pursue your passion, a Masters at Northumbria will take you there.

For a student perspective on everything Northumbria has to offer why not read more from our student bloggers?

Postgraduate courses available

We have over 150 postgraduate courses available in the following subject areas:

Applied Sciences

Architecture and Built Environment

Arts

Business

Computing and Information Sciences

Design

Geography and Environmental Sciences

Humanities

Law

Maths, Physics and Electrical Engineering

Mechanical and Construction Engineering

Nursing, Midwifery and Health

Psychology

Social Sciences

Social Work, Education and Community Wellbeing

Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation

Relevant and recognised

At Northumbria University, we create industry-recognised courses, with more than 560 employers and 60 professional bodies sponsoring or accrediting our courses, such as the British Psychological Society and the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Northumbria’s Business School was also the first in Europe to gain AACSB double accreditation in accounting and business (Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business).

Ranked in the UK top 40 (Guardian University League Tables 2024), Northumbria is leading the debate and responding to today’s global challenges through ground-breaking research, which is brought into the classroom. Northumbria has the biggest rise in research power ranking of any UK university and is ranked Top 25 for Research Power in the UK (REF 2021).

Facilities

The city of Newcastle is home to our main campuses; one in the heart of the city and one just a few miles away at Coach Lane.

Over the last decade, Northumbria has invested more than £250m in making sure our students here have a world-class learning experience. With its award-winning architecture, modern teaching buildings and impressive sports facilities, the city campus creates an environment that encourages learning and self-development. Coach Lane Campus is home to students from the Faculty of Health and Life Sciences and has excellent computing and library services; its own modern Students’ Union, and new sports facilities.

It’s not just physical facilities that we invest in. We put your learning at the heart of everything we do, and we use the latest digital technology to ensure that whether you are a full-time, part-time or distance learner you will have the same excellent learning experience.

Fees and Funding

We recognise that by studying for a postgraduate qualification you are making an investment in your future, so we offer a range of support packages to ease the burden and allow you to concentrate on your studies.

You’ll find all our course fees on our website, and we can tell you with confidence that they’re very competitive for both home and international students. We also offer financial incentives throughout the year – keep checking the fees and funding pages on our website or register for updates online to be the first to find out the details.

Living in Newcastle-upon-Tyne

Northumbria University is based in central Newcastle, a city which is regularly voted one of the UK’s best cities for students. Newcastle is an amazing city for student life and is also a very affordable one. One in every six people in Newcastle is a student and the city has a vibrant, exciting and cosmopolitan feel. Featuring in the worldwide top ten of the TripAdvisor Travellers’ Choice Awards, Newcastle boasts a combination of friendly culture, rich history and sporting passion that can rival any city in the world.

Newcastle’s art and cultural scene has become one of its defining characteristics, with iconic venues like The Sage Gateshead and The BALTIC Centre for Contemporary Art leading the North East’s cultural revolution.

The city is also surrounded by national parks, ancient monuments, castles, and miles of stunning coastline, and boasts excellent travel links to the rest of the UK and Europe via its international airport.

Accommodation

Our accommodation is close to campus and we offer a range of accommodation options for postgraduate students from en-suite top-of-the-range residences to traditional student housing.

Our accommodation application system lets you select the exact residence, flat and room you’ll live in, so you can choose to share with other postgraduate students. We also offer tenancies that suit postgraduate course patterns – such as single semesters – to give you greater flexibility.

Admissions and selection

You can apply for most postgraduate courses direct to Northumbria via our website. For some courses there are specific deadlines by which we must receive your application. Please refer to our website for further information.

For detailed information on entry requirements, the selection process and how to apply please see the individual course pages on our website.

English language support

A university recognised English language test such as IELTS, Pearson or equivalent is an entry requirement to postgraduate courses for non-native speakers. English language requirements range from IELTS 6.0-7.5 depending on the course.

Don’t worry if you don’t yet meet the requirements, we offer a range of pre-sessional English and Study Skills programmes throughout the year and we also run a large Summer School.