Northumbria University

Northumbria University, Newcastle, is a research-rich, business-focused, professional university with a global reputation for academic excellence. Today, Northumbria is internationally renowned for its distinct combination of academic excellence, outstanding experience, and responsiveness. Based in the UK’s two best cities for students, Newcastle and London, Northumbria is one of the largest universities in the UK with more than 34,000 students from 131 countries.

The University works with hundreds of employers and professional bodies to help give its students and stakeholders a competitive edge in today’s global marketplace. Northumbria is among the top 10 universities in the UK for the number of graduates entering professional employment, with 94% in work or further study six months after graduation, and is No.1 in the UK for graduate start-ups. The University puts students at the heart of an outstanding experience, with world-leading research and award-winning partnerships driving and informing academic excellence, to make Northumbria a new kind of excellent university.

Company contact details

Tel: 0191 277 4717

Web: www.northumbria.ac.uk

Latest News

New North East cultural partnerships announced

Northumbria University has announced partnerships with two of the North East’s largest cultural organisations in a move that will cement the region’s reputation for excellence in the cultural and creative industries. Northumbria has joined... Read More

Northumbria achieves highest ever world ranking for sustainability

Northumbria University has been ranked among the top 50 institutions in the world for sustainability in the Times Higher Education Impact Rankings 2024. The Times Higher Education Impact Rankings, which are published today (Wednesday 12... Read More

A new era of digital consultancy: BIM Academy announces its transformation into Okana

BIM Academy, a leading built environment consultancy, has announced its transformation into Okana. This marks a pivotal moment in the company’s evolution as it brings together its global expertise from different specialisms, sectors and... Read More

Registrations now open for IVCO 2024 in Newcastle

Delegates can now register for the prestigious annual International Volunteer Cooperation Organisations (IVCO) conference, which is being hosted for the first time in Newcastle upon Tyne by Northumbria University and Comhlámh, the Irish Association of... Read More

Northumbria University recognised as an Academic Centre of Excellence in Cyber Security Research

Northumbria University has maintained its status as an Academic Centre of Excellence in Cyber Security Research (ACE-CSR) in recognition of its internationally leading research in this field. Following a recent assessment by the National... Read More

£11m funding to expand access to renewable energy research in North East

World-leading research from three North East universities to advance renewable energy technologies has received a welcome boost, with the announcement of almost £11.5 million to expand their work and include people from under-represented groups... Read More

Northumbria University spin-out raises £1.4m for lung test to aid early diagnosis of asthma

PulmoBioMed, a Northumbria University spin-out which has developed a new lung test that could lead to earlier diagnosis of asthma and other conditions, has raised £1.4m to help commercialise its technology. The investment round was... Read More

Northumbria welcomes Shadow Secretary of State for Education

The Shadow Secretary of State for Education, Bridget Phillipson, visited Northumbria University, Newcastle to hear about world leading research that is having an impact regionally, nationally and globally and the way in which it... Read More

First university hosting of international volunteering conference highlights value of collaboration

Northumbria University has been confirmed as the first academic institution to host the prestigious International Volunteer Cooperation Organisations (IVCO) conference organised annually by the International Forum for Volunteering in Development, known as Forum, in... Read More

Northumbria University announces £50m space skills, research and development centre set to transform the UK space industry

Investments from Lockheed Martin, the UK Space Agency and Northumbria University forge pathway for NESST’s global prominence Northumbria University, Newcastle has secured a total of £50 million in funding to create a world-leading... Read More

Newcastle hosts international conference to explore cutting edge digital technologies for operations and supply chain excellence

Academics and practitioners from across the world visited Newcastle this week to attend the Ninth International Conference on Lean Six Sigma and Operational Excellence. The conference, hosted by Northumbria University, was chaired by Prof... Read More

Record funding boost enhances Northumbria’s global reputation for AI research and teaching

Northumbria University has been named as one of 12 Centres for Doctoral Training in Artificial Intelligence as part of a major £118m funding announcement by UK Research and Innovation (UKRI). The centres, based at... Read More