Just two months after Kennedy Place was renamed Urso Hall in his honor, the dorm’s namesake passed away this week.

Dr. Frank P. Urso, an Ybor City native, died May 4 at his Naples home. He was 73. The 1957 UT alumnus turned author gave more than $3 million to the University of Tampa.

THE DEDICATION

Following other UT residence halls that have been renamed for the University’s benefactors, Kennedy Place was officially renamed Frank P. Urso, M.D. Hall in February.

Urso, however, was too sick to attend the ceremony, but received kind words from UT brass.

“Dr. Urso felt strongly about what UT had done for him in terms of his education,” said Tom Giddens, the Director of Major and Planned Giving. “He was very influenced by a couple of faculty members who assisted him to go on to medical school.”

HIS STORY

After graduating from UT, Urso went to medical school at the University of Miami and graduated with honors.

He then served as the director of pathology and clinical laboratories at three major hospitals. He worked as a professor of pathology at Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine, and there was honored twice as “Lecturer of the Year.”

In his retirement, Urso published a memoir: “A Stranger in the Barrio: Memoir of a Tampa Sicilian.” As part of the residence hall dedication, each student in the hall will be given a copy of his book.

UT president Ronald Vaughn was excited about the donation, but was even more enthusiastic about its source and Urso’s story.

“[Urso is] a tremendous success story you want everyone to know about,” Vaughn said. “He went from being poor to having a lot of success, and he attributes a lot of that to UT. It’s a great transformative story. We’re thrilled to name the hall after him.”

Urso has lived the American dream, said his son, Lt. Commander Phil Urso.

“He only got into med school from the support of UT,” he said. “It’s been a large motivation for me. It’s hard to find the right words because there’s so much to say.” He added that Dr. Urso was very happy to contribute to the school that got him started.

GROWING UP IN “THE BARRIO”

Urso grew up in Ybor City, where his family worked in cigar factories.

“His parents were immigrants from Sicily,” his daughter, Dr. Lillian Palmon, said.

She explained that Urso actually learned Spanish growing up in Ybor before he learned English in grammar school.

“He planned just to make it through high school, but one of his friends suggested he try UT. The professors told him he had talent and not to waste it,” she said.

It was this encouragement that spurred Urso to work towards his biology degree and enter the field of medicine where he enjoyed great success.

FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS

Urso is survived by his children, Lillian Urso Palmon, M.D., of Fort Myers, Fla., Katherina Russell of San Francisco, Calif.,and Lt. Cmdr. Philip Urso of Virginia Beach, Va.

A graveside service took place at 1 p.m. Saturday, May 10, at L’ Unione Italiana Cemetery. Donations, in lieu of flowers, may be made to the L’ Unione Italiana Cemetery in care of The Italian Club of Tampa, P.O. Box 5054, Tampa, FL 33675.