Good news, Dick Wolf fans: Your favorite dramas are returning to NBC.

On March 21, it was announced that Law & Order, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, Chicago Med, Chicago Fire, and Chicago P.D. will all be returning for NBC's 2024-2024 season. However, the renewal status of Law & Order: Organized Crime is still in discussion.

For the One Chicagos this will mark Season 10 of Chicago Med, Season 13 of Chicago Fire, and Season 12 of Chicago P.D. For the Law & Order franchise it'll be Law & Order's 24th season and SVU's 26th. Here's everything you need to know about the upcoming premieres, below.

RELATED: Mariska Hargitay & Peter Hermann Share Rare Pic with Dick Wolf From "Family Lunch"

What to expect for Law & Order Season 24

Stay tuned for more details for Season 24, which will mark Tony Goldwyn's first full season as D.A. Nicholas Baxter. Season 23 of Law & Order airs Thursdays at 8/7c on NBC. Episodes are available for streaming the next day on Peacock.

What to expect for Law & Order: SVU Season 26

Led by Mariska Hargitay, stay tuned for more details for Season 26. Season 25 of Law & Order airs Thursdays at 9/8c on NBC. Episodes are available for streaming the next day on Peacock.

What to expect for Chicago Med Season 10

Stay tuned for more details for Season 10. Season 9 of Chicago Med introduced Gaffney's newest doctor, Mitch Ripley, and airs Wednesdays at 8/7c on NBC.

RELATED: This is Why Your Favorite Characters and Stars are Leaving One Chicago

Episodes are available for streaming the next day on Peacock.

What to expect for Chicago Fire Season 13

Stay tuned for more details for Season 13. Season 12 of Chicago Fire airs Wednesdays at 9/8c on NBC, and we've had to say goodbye to both Kara Killmer (Brett) and Alberto Rosende (Gallo). Episodes are available for streaming the next day on Peacock.

What to expect for Chicago P.D. Season 12

Stay tuned for more details for Season 12. Season 11 of Chicago P.D. airs Wednesdays at 10/9 on NBC, and marks the final season for Tracy Spiridakos. Episodes are available for streaming the next day on Peacock.

Dick Wolf on Law & Order: SVU getting picked up for its milestone season

In 2023, when it was announced that SVU was being renewed for a landmark 25th Season, executive producer Dick Wolf made a proud statement.

“I’m pleased to continue my four-decade relationship with Universal Television and NBC. All six shows being picked up again is the ultimate accolade to our incredible casts, producers, and writers. I'd also like to thank our loyal fans who have kept our NBC shows on the air for what will be a cumulative 84 seasons,” he said.

RELATED: Law & Order Creator Dick Wolf's Movies and TV Shows

Lisa Katz, the president of scripted programming at NBCUniversal and Streaming, also said in a statement about the landmark 25th Season: “We understand the emotional connection our audience has with these characters and we can’t wait to bring more of their stories to the forefront next season. A huge thank you to Dick and his amazing team who are the masters of producing incredibly compelling television week after week.”