Law & Order is the longest running crime drama on television police procedural and films on location in our favorite city, New York. The series follows the lives of several police officers and prosecutors who represent the public interest in the criminal justice system. Its wild success inspired the Law & Order franchise; three other television dramas under the same brand: Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, Law & Order: Criminal Intent, and Law & Order: Trial by Jury.

Often episodes were inspired by actual cases, especially in the first few seasons. This “ripped from the headlines” style entranced audiences who quickly elevated the show into a ratings bonanza. New York City Mayors Rudy Giuliani and Michael Bloomberg, attorney William Kunstler and Bronx Congressman Jose Serrano have all made cameo appearances as themselves throughout the seasons.

Ever wonder the locations where Law & Order is filmed?

Stay up to date with what’s filming in New York on our Blog for a chance see your favorite shows and TV stars in action in New York.

The Law & Order series—with the exception of the reality series, Crime and Punishment—have been filmed almost entirely in the New York City area. This is unusual, as many television dramas are taped in the Los Angeles area, even if the program is “set” in New York City. This means every arrest, each conviction, and all the jaw dropping moments you remember happened right here in the Big Apple. So if you can’t get your Law & Order fix from a TV marathon, its time to visit NYC and see where the live action takes place. Locations featured on the series include:

Foley Square

Think about Law and Order and what comes to mind? Most certainly the infamous Courthouse scenes! See where the Law and order court scenes filmed and Marvel at the New York Supreme Court, also known as the NY Courthouse. The Supreme Court is New York’s trial court, located in lower Manhattan’s beautiful Foley Square. Jack McCoy and the other attorneys trek up and down these stairs in every episode. The square is often featured in Law & Order as well because of its long association with the NY County, NY State, and judicial building. The history and notoriety of this landmark cannot be missed on a trip to New York!

Chelsea

Located on the west side of Manhattan is the neighborhood of Chelsea, a historic and diverse neighborhood that is also home to the General Theological Seminary now The Highline Hotel on West 20th Street. This building has been featured in both Law & Order and Law & Order: SVU.

One Police Plaza

This is epicenter of the real NYPD and countless television versions. Also known as “Puzzle Palace” it is the largest NYPD headquarter in New York City and featured many of the squads in Law & Order including Major Case Squad, Special Victims Unit, Emergency Services Unit, Crime Scene Unit. Within these walls police work tirelessly both on television and in reality to piece together evidence and build cases.

It would be impossible to see all the memorable Law and Order sites in one day, let alone one tour, so check out these other famous hotspots from the show.

Chelsea Piers

Take a walk or bike ride along the Hudson River and see the 200,000 square feet that make up Chelsea Piers, Manhattan’s largest center for film and television production. Inside are the sets of Law & Order and Law & Order:SVU where all the harrowing courtroom drama and police interrogations took place. It’s not a bad time to check the USS Intrepid, but watch your head because helic

Union Square

Attorneys, detectives, and police officers are often seen strolling through Union Square Park. Just to the east visitors can check out Pete’s Tavern. This bar and restaurant often appears on Law & Order has the hotspot to hang after a long day.

If you take the NYC TV & Movie Tour or the When Harry Met Seinfeld bus tours you may recognize some locations from this long running series. The tours don’t feature any specific locations from the series but drive through every neighborhood in New York City where the shows have filmed.