Appointments are required to appear in court. Bail is not required. For more information on appearances, including when virtual appearances are allowed, check the Traffic/Minor Offense Hearings page.

For payment relief options, see the Payment Options and Financial Hardship Information page.

East County Division

Infractions:

ALL COURTROOM APPEARANCES are by appointment only and must be scheduled in advance, including the appearance date on your ticket. Schedule a courtroom appearance online or call 619-456-4100 between the hours of 8:30 - 11:30 a.m., Monday through Friday. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT accepted. When appearing for a scheduled courtroom appearance, you must check in 30 minutes before your scheduled time.

No reservations are available for Criminal matters at this time. Please refer to the Court Appearance Information Sheet (MO-042 EC) for additional court appearance information.

Misdemeanors:

All MISDEMEANOR COURTROOM APPEARANCES are by appointment only and must be scheduled in advance. You may schedule a courtroom appearance by visiting the Traffic Business Office at the East County Courthouse on Mondays-Fridays between 8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT allowed.

Central Division (Kearny Mesa)

Infractions:

ALL COURTROOM APPEARANCES are by appointment only and must be scheduled in advance. Schedule a courtroom appearance online or call (858) 634-1800 between the hours of 8:30 - 11:30 a.m., Monday through Friday. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT accepted. When appearing for a scheduled courtroom appearance in Dept. B, you must arrive 30 minutes before your scheduled time and report directly to the courtroom.

Cases with a warrant or that have been referred to the collection agency require a visit to the courthouse during business office hours to schedule a courtroom appearance. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT allowed.

Refer to the Court Appearance Information Sheet (MO-042 C) English/Spanish for additional court appearance information.

North County Division

Infractions:

ALL COURTROOM APPEARANCES are by appointment only and must be scheduled in advance, including the appearance date on your ticket. To schedule a courtroom appearance online or call 760-201-8500 between the hours of 8:30 - 11:30 a.m., Monday through Friday. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT accepted. When appearing for a scheduled courtroom appearance, you must check in 15 minutes before your scheduled time.

No reservations are available for Criminal matters at this time. Please refer to the Court Appearance Information Sheet (MO-042 NC) for additional court appearance information.

Misdemeanors:

All MISDEMEANOR COURTROOM APPEARANCES are by appointment only and must be scheduled in advance. You may schedule a courtroom appearance by visiting the Traffic Business Office at the North County Courthouse on Mondays-Fridays between 8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT allowed.

South County Division

Infractions:

ALL COURTROOM APPEARANCES are by appointment only and must be scheduled in advance. To schedule a courtroom appearance online or call 619-746-6200 between the hours of 8:30 - 11:30 a.m., Monday through Friday. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT accepted. You must arrive 15 minutes before your scheduled time and report directly to the courtroom.

No reservations are available for Criminal matters at this time. Please refer to the Court Appearance Information Sheet (MO-042 SC) for additional court appearance information.

Misdemeanors:

All misdemeanor courtroom appearances are by appointment only and must be scheduled in advance. You may schedule an appointment for a courtroom appearance by visiting the Traffic Business Office at the South County Courthouse on Mondays-Fridays between 8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Unscheduled courtroom appearances are NOT allowed.

For more information regarding how to appear in court, please refer to the Traffic/Minor Offense Hearings page.

An extension is a postponement of the original appearance date on a citation.

The court may grant a one-time 30-day extension to the appearance date on eligible citations. No further extensions at the end of the 30-day period will be given.

The following options are available to request a one-time 30-day extension on or before your appearance date: