This paper is mainly focused on “racial hygiene” and eugenic questions in the context of the ideology of the interwar Yugoslav extreme right and during occupation of Serbia in the World War II. The main historical sources used in this research were racial narratives and journal articles from 1920s and 1930s, together with unpublished archival records originating from the period of occupation. Analysis of sources and literature have shown that racial and eugenic themes were present in Serbian and Yugoslav political thought from the very first days of the new South Slavs state. The term “race” had several different meanings in this country, particularly regarding the “Yugoslav race”, that referred both to the cultural individuality of so-called “Yugoslav civilization”, and to the biological attributes of the Dinaric race. The ideology of (integral) Yugoslav nationalism, strongly promoted during the dictatorship of King Alexander I, encouraged racial and eugenic stances. Affirmative writings on the qualities of Dinaric race from the world-wide famous eugenic authors like Houston Stewart Chamberlain also spurred interests in racial and eugenic discussions in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Since the mid-1930s a number of Serbian eugenicists became close to the extreme political right, placing themselves in the first rows of ongoing ideological struggle between fascism, communism and liberal democracy. Many of them, like Dr. Svetislav Stefanović, Branimir Maleš, Dr. Stevan Z. Ivanić and others, were fascinated with the rise of Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, and were later on involved in the collaboration with the Germans during the occupation of Serbia 1941–1944.

Апстракт Суштина рада огледа се у разматрању термина еугенике и расветљавању овог појма кроз историјске периоде. Иако готово заборављена ова доктрина је у историјској перспективи имала значајан утицај и на концепт образовања. Рад представља покушај њеног разоткривања, ради указивања на странпутице времена када није било доступно основно право на живот, развој и образовање свима. Образовање је према неким идејама и визијама била категорија намењена само одабранима, док се ове идеје појављују касније и код трансхуманиста. Кључне речи: еугеника, образовање, Спарта, трансхуманизам. Abstract This paper discusses the term eugenics and sheds light on this concept through different historical periods. Although almost forgotten, historically, this doctrine has had a significant influence on the concept of education. The paper is an attempt to clarify the doctrine so as to show the misguided nature of the times when the basic right to life, development, and education was not available to ever...

Abstract: In the paper, we are dealing with social and national problems within First Yugoslavia (1918–1941). We choose to closely examine problems of nationalities and ethnic tension which caused political and social instability during the entire period of the state’s existence. The King and governments tried to overcome huge differences among Yugoslav people imposed a centralized system which was replaced with a dictatorship (1929–1935). From the beginning, First Yugoslavia dealt with numerous interior and exterior enemies. Over the years along with national tension they weaken the country, undermining its foundation from inside and outside until finally succeeded to abolish it in the Second World War.

Nation-building is often proposed as a device for integration in ethnically divided societies. The determinants of national sentiment, however, remain imperfectly understood. This paper analyses the role of interethnic contact in the process of nation formation within multiethnic Yugoslavia, just before its disintegration in 1991. Using a variety of data sources and empirical strategies, I find that interethnic contact stimulated the formation of the Yugoslav nation. I argue that ethnic intermarriage is the key mechanism through which ethnic diversity influenced the adoption of a shared Yugoslav identity. These results illustrate the powerful effect that interethnic contact can have in reducing ethnic division even in a tense ethnic environment on the verge of conflict, like that of Yugoslavia.