From Brothers to Neighbours and Back. Yugoslavism as National Idea and State-Building Project Course description The course will explore the evolution of Yugoslav nation-building from its 19th century roots until the Yugoslav dissolution in the 1990s. It will be conceptualized as exercise in source analysis, combining scrutiny of historical sources relevant to the course topic and the introduction to basic secondary literature. Following the methodological introduction into work with historical sources, as well as the introductory theorization of national identity building in modern Europe, in each session a particular phase or vision of Yugoslavism will be explored on the basis of political manifestos, official state proclamations, polemical, artistic and scientific reflections on the character and future of Yugoslav national and state project. The course would diachronically follow the history of Yugoslav idea: romanticist ideas influenced by pan-Slavism; the interwar balancing between " tribal " and integral Yugoslavism; socialist concept of " brotherhood and unity " , including its variations; the demise of common supra-national identity in face of ethnically motivated particularisms. As its conclusion, the course will look into the contemporary phenomena of " Yugonostalgia " and EU-induced discourse on " regional stability " as surrogate for the former " brotherhood ". Along original sources, for each session additional secondary reading will be assigned, in order to provide necessary historical background and broader context to the issues to be discussed in class. Aims The learning outcomes of the exercise will enable students upon completion to:  engage critically with different types of historical sources  understand the process of nation-building and different approaches to identity formation  gain basic knowledge on the history of Yugoslavia and its broader context  become familiar with main guidelines of academic writing in English Requirements Students are expected to be present and actively participate in the classes. The maximum of two unexcused absences during the semester will be allowed. Required primary and secondary readings will be assigned for each class, but students are encouraged to propose alternative sources for the final paper and discussion in the class. The course will be held in English, and students will be provided with guidelines of academic writing. However, upon agreement, term paper and oral presentation can be made in German, and part of the reading assignments will be in German. In case of sufficient knowledge of Serbo-Croatian, using the documents in its original language will be strongly encouraged.

The economic and social provisions of the Vidovdan constitution represent its most advanced part. Its introduction was a step forward towards the creation of a socially responsible state. However, their basic goal, increasing the cultural and economic well-being of the people, was not achieved and the economic crisis deepened. In the post-war state, burdened with cultural, religious, and national differences, the democratic constitution did not last long. The author tries to explain the factors that influenced the adoption of these provisions and their (non) implementation. Whether the failure of economic and social provisions was determined by the fate of the constitution or by objective facts is difficult to say. The author seeks to prove that the collapse of the constitution and its economic and social provisions was influenced by a number of unfavorable circumstances, such as the economic underdevelopment of the state, the remnants of feudal relations, political disunity, resist...

Introduction: Austro-Hungarian monarchy had great impact on healthcare system in Bosnia and Herzegovina (B&H), and consequences of that exist today. Aim: To launch of the section Â„The Most Influential Physicians in the Development of Health Care in Bosnia and HerzegovinaÂ“, in which, within next issues of the Medical Archives will be presented the prominent physicians, dentists and pharmacists who gave contribution to development of healthcare system in B&H. Results: This paper provides a full overview from the literature about health care circumstances during 150 years in Bosnia and Herzegovina and important of the role health care institutions and of all the doctors working in B&H during the Austro-Hungarian administration. To some of them is devoted more attention in the texts about their life and work and their contribution to the development of the health service in B&H, but also to the description of the others, except for the medical activities they have contributed to our homeland, such as Dr. Jozef Kecet, Dr. Julije Makanec, Dr. Teodora Krajewska, Dr. Josef von Preindlsberger, Dr. Hamdija Karamehmedovic and others, but there are many more that we should know about and mention them. Conclusion: The fact is Austro-Hungarian model of healthcare system in that time was functional for that period and great improvement in comparison to past and the fact is that that system represents a basis even for modern medicine in territory of B&H.

The article examines the general assessment that socialist legislative assemblies are but rubber-stamp parliaments, and finds exemptions from this assessment through the case study of the Yugoslav system. The author designs a theoretical model and applies it in studying post-war Yugoslavia's socialist parliamentarism, which she defines as being real-socialist, during the period 1946–1991. Her research uses a wide pool of primary sources, including shorthand notes from socialist legislative assembly discussions, legal acts, documents of the Federal Assembly, federal ministries and other political bodies, statistical data, etc., examined against personal written notes by the most prominent politicians of the day and against the contemporary historical, legal and political science studies of the field. Due to Yugoslavia having had a federal government system, the author studies the political system on the federal level, taking into account government at the level of the republic and the local level where relevant. The author outlines the key characteristics of the self-governing socialist legislative assembly system and opens up new fields of research. The numerous constitutional amendments adopted in the 45-year period had gradually brought the system closer to democracy and parliamentarism and thus away from totalitarian regimes.