The Historic and Progressive Town of Plaridel in Bulacan

Bulacan is a province known for the numerous historical sites scattered throughout its towns. Plaridel is one of the towns with a prominent part in Philippine history in the midwest part of the province. It’s where the Battle of Quingua happened--an engagement where Filipinos fought for freedom against the American army in 1899.

Like many other towns in Bulacan, Plaridel has also blossomed into a place where one can live conveniently and comfortably. At present, the municipality boasts of a healthy mix of residential, commercial, and industrial establishments. Locals also enjoy easy access to their necessities, the neighboring Bulacan cities, and of course, Metro Manila.

Similarly, there are several properties for sale in Plaridel. These properties attract urbanites who want to live or start a business outside the metro, many of whom consider buying a lot for sale in Plaridel, Bulacan.

Nearby Establishments

When looking at lots for sale in Plaridel, one would easily notice how close these properties are to the basics and more. From schools to shopping centers to leisure destinations, below are the landmarks close to any lot for sale in Plaridel, Bulacan:

Educational facilities:

Plaridel Central School

St. Francis De Assisi Montessori School

Delta Air International Aviation Academy

Shopping centers:

Puregold Plaridel

Walter Mart Plaridel

Plaridel Terminal Mall

Novo Department Store

Leisure destinations:

Grass Garden Resort and Villas

Eugenio’s Garden Resort

Villa Emmanuela Wavepool & Resort

Other prominent landmarks:

Plaridel Airport

Battle of Quingua Memorial

Don Jose J. Mariano Park

How Much is a Lot For Sale in Plaridel, Bulacan?

The total contract price varies in terms of the lot type. Residential lots, for instance, are generally more affordable than commercial lots. In fact, you can find residential land for sale in Plaridel for as low as P500,000. Foreclosed residential lots are also available in the area; prices start at P1.4 million for a land size of over 200 sqm.

You’ll also find agricultural and commercial land for sale in Plaridel, with prices ranging from P16 million to P40 million. Agricultural lots are ideal for farming businesses or real estate projects, while large commercial lots can be converted into supermarkets, financial institutions, or health and personal care stores.

Why Invest in a Lot For Sale in Plaridel, Bulacan

Investing in land for sale in Plaridel means investing smartly. Whether you choose to use it for residential or commercial purposes, the property can offer an excellent locational advantage. Turn it into a home, and you’ll be conveniently near the necessities; develop it into a commercial establishment, and you can expect high profits because of its accessibility.

Another way to get solid returns from a lot for sale in Plaridel is to buy and sell it. Acquiring and selling properties can be a lucrative business, especially if they’re in a strategic location. You may also want to consider turning a vacant lot into a housing unit that you can sell for a higher price.

FAQs

What’s the typical size of residential lots for sale in Plaridel?

120 sqm to 200 sqm is the usual size of residential lots in Plaridel.

How much is agricultural land for sale in Plaridel?

The starting price for agricultural land measuring more than 2,500 sqm is around P12 million.

Where can I find vacant lots for sale in Plaridel that are located inside subdivisions?