Reviewed By reds50 - Brisbane Australia

We went to this resturant last year and found both the food and service to be excellent. A real pleasure to dine at and a great selection of quality food and reasonable prices for Sweden

Staff and management really helpful and effecient and well worth the trip from Karlskrona by train.

Also a great Pub close by with a great host. we really look forward to returning when back.

Reviewed By Josep80_11 - Granada, Spain

If you visit Ronneby you should try this place located in the old Kockums' store. Try the lunch menu which is varied and delicious. They cook different dishes everyday that range between swedish traditional cookery and international food. They offer special thematic food days. Totally recommended.

Reviewed By Serafina_90

Wanted to take my parents to a nice Saturday lunch. Took 1 hour before we got our food and once we got it, it wasn't worth waiting for. Truth be told, if we hadn't already paid once ordering, we would have left after 30 min. We paid 450 Swedish kr for one today's special, one meat dish and one fish. The fish had a lot of bones even if the menu stayed filet. The mashed potatoes were burnt and my pepper sauce tasted of no pepper. My meat was so over cooked I couldn't cut it properly. Thanks for ruining my parents visit in my new hometown.

Reviewed By mrdom

This place is run by friendly Kazakhs who speak very little English (Swedish, Russian or Kazakh should be fine) so I guessed at the kebab special and ended up with a huge pile of meat, mushrooms, onion, cabbage, tomatos and chips all smothered in a great garlicky spicy sauce - due to communication difficulties, I don't even know what sauce it was. Not too expensive given the amount of food.

Reviewed By PaulHell

What could you say but being pleasantly surprised to find this super great Indian restaurant in the small place called Ronneby. We had a late lunch, menu is large, prices are ok, service friendly and food is great!! So nothing to complain! Go there and get stuffed!!