SPOOKS star Raza Jaffrey reckons it's a godsend that he and his wife Miranda Raison work together on the hit BBC1 drama - because it stops them killing each other.

The 32-year-old, who plays MI5 agent Zaf Younis in the slick series, says he couldn't cope with being in the kind of marriage where actors come home at night and practice their lines in the living room.

Raza, who married his Spooks costar last month in Suffolk, admits the pair talk about their work at dinner - but they stop short of learning scripts together. He says: "That really never happens. We would start killing each other if we did that.

"We help each other loads - but not like that."

The pair got hitched after a whirlwind romance that kicked off when they met on the set of the award-winning spy thriller.

Eyebrows were raised as both were allegedly in relationships at the time, but soon it became an open secret among the cast and crew.

Raza says: "We've never had a problem working together on the show. We haven't really had a great deal of time together in Spooks to be honest so it's never really been that much of a consideration for us."

Miranda is the former face and voice of a Daily Record advertising campaign in 2001 and plays Jo Portman. Mid-chat with Raza she breaks in to deliver her line in a perfect west of Scotland accent.

The pair roll about laughing.

Raza says: "You can see we're still in the honeymoon period."

Are they still basking in the glow of a lazy month in the Bahamas?

Actually, no. Raza says: "We stayed in Suffolk for our honeymoon and had some friends over.

"We were in the unusual position of having shared our honeymoon with friends." Laughing, he adds: "I'm not sure if that's maybe a sign of the way things will be...

"There was a bit of temptation to get away to the Maldives or somewhere but the weather was so nice down here in September that we decided just to stay at home."

Staying at home is something that Spooks fans - and there are six million of them at the last count - will be doing now that the series has returned for a sixth run.

Rupert Penry-Jones, Hermione Norris and Peter Firth return as officers Adam, Ros and Harry of Section D, MI5.

The format of the series - whose tagline is 'MI5 not 9 to 5' - has changed, with one major incident having ramifications for the rest of the 10 episodes.

It's a decision which producer Katie Swinden hopes will pay off.

She says: "For the first time ever, we've chosen to explore one theme throughout the series and one which is an ongoing concern in today's international agenda.

"The relationship between Britain, Iran and the US is such a delicate and topical issue that it opens up a wealth of new storyline possibilities to us."

As the series kicks off this week, viewers will see Raza at the centre of the London-based MI5 team's intricate undercover plans.

Iran's covert scheme to become a nuclear power leads to growing mistrust between the British, American and Iranian governments, who all nurse their own agendas to help or hinder the Middle Eastern state in its efforts.

The volatile climate culminates in a series of high risk operations both at home and abroad.

And the opening episode sees Zaf, undercover in Tehran, placing a bomb on a civilian train to flush out a key Iranian spy.

But in the fall out of the explosion it becomes clear flawed intelligence has led to Britain inadvertently unleashing a bio-weapon in Iran - which has dangerous ramifications not only for Zaf but for the whole team and international politics. Meanwhile, the atmosphere between Adam and Ros comes to a head, but things are complicated further by Adam's dangerous ongoing affair with a key asset inside the Iranian embassy. Raza's delighted to be so centrally involved in a key story.

He says: "Basically I commit a terrorist act on behalf of the British government which has quite far reaching repercussions.

"You'll have to watch to see what happens - but there's a bomb in Iran and I plant it."

It's this topicality, at a time when Iran's intentions remain dubious, that Spooks has a knack of tapping into. Raza says: "Spooks has always done that, it's always been very good at getting on the pulse and I always think the best scenes are those corridor of power ones where you get Harry (Peter Firth) wandering around talking to politicians about what's going on. It's always incredibly accurate, it has its finger on the pulse - although it is very obviously fiction.

"But we always laugh at the fact there are scenes of four of us sitting around our desks talking, when in MI5 there are like hundreds of them working there. By episode 10, the cast are quite damaged in this series, more than they ever have been before, psychologically and physically.

"They all go on bigger journeys than they have in any other series, which really is saying something."

With reports suggesting Raza's days with Spooks are numbered, could this mean an explosive end to his time with the MI5?

Raza's careful. "I don't know what's being said about that, to be honest, other than to say that I've started filming another series," he says, laughing nervously. "I'm doing a series called Mistresses with Sarah Parish Orla Brady for the BBC.

"I play a man whose wife has an affair with someone else so there's a lot of gnashing of teeth."

Meantime, he's preparing himself for another round of conversations with his public, prone to forgetting he's an actor.

"I find myself talking to people at dinners and things who have a connection with security services in some way, and having to try to make that connection with them when they talk to me about Spooks," he says. Some people get involved in the online interactive website that goes with the series, and a lot of people approach me about it.

"In fact, one day I was walking along the south bank in London, and walked past Thames House, the head of MI5.

"As I went past, these three young guys about my age came out of the building. They clearly work for MI5 and they did a real double take when they saw me - a guy who 'acts' what they actually 'do'.

"It was one of those 'they know that I know' situations. Bizarre." Being spied on by spies?

Spooky or what?

Spooks, BBC1, Tuesday, 9pm

'Basically I commit a terrorist act on behalf of the government - there's a bomb - which has far reaching repercussions'