'Spooks dating agency' couple

spied leading separate lives

Spooks star Miranda Raison has separated from her husband Raza Jaffrey four years after they met on the set of the hit BBC spy drama.

Ms Raison, who plays agent Jo Portman in the show, has told friends their two-year marriage is over.

The couple fell for each other as their on-screen characters also developed a relationship – but their marriage is said to have suffered because they spent too little time together after Mr Jaffrey left the show.

A source said: ‘Miranda and Raza have split up. It’s very sad but they have just drifted apart and are focusing on other things in their lives. They have told friends that they have separated and are filing for divorce.

‘Miranda is composed, level-headed and focused on moving forward and Raza is the same. They’ve had some awful rows but that’s in the past now.’

The actress joined Spooks in 2005, when her character, a journalist, was kidnapped, then rescued and recruited by MI5.

Ms Raison, 29, and Mr Jaffrey, who played undercover operative Zafar Younis, quickly formed a bond, leading to jokes about a ‘Spooks dating agency’.

Their relationship followed the romance between Matthew Macfadyen and Keeley Hawes, who also married after meeting on set.

Mr Jaffrey joked in a recent interview that there must have been ‘something in the canteen tea’.

The 34-year-old said the pair discussed work over dinner but stopped short of learning lines together.

‘That really never happens,’ he said, shortly after their marriage. ‘We would start killing each other if we did that.

‘We’ve never had a problem working together on the show. We haven’t really had a great deal of time together in Spooks to be honest, so it’s never really been that much of a consideration for us.’

Ms Raison added: ‘Once we got together we never had any proper scenes together, which was probably a good thing. When you see somebody you know really well loading a gun in earnest, you just think, “Oh, for goodness sake.”’

The couple married in September 2007, just as Mr Jaffrey left the show. Ms Raison then took a more central role alongside Rupert Penry-Jones, who played station chief Adam Carter, until his character was killed off.

The wedding took place in Aldeburgh, Suffolk, near where Ms Raison grew up. Her mother Caroline is a former local television newsreader and her father Nick is a pianist, while her brother Ed plays bass guitar for American country singer Stonewall Jackson.

Cracks began to appear in the marriage soon after their wedding. The source said: ‘When they spent all day and night together on the set of Spooks their relationship was fine but after Raza left the show it all started to go terribly wrong.

‘Their careers have both taken off and they have been focused on that. It’s hard to juggle a personal life and work in the industry when you are constantly apart and busy.’

Mr Jaffrey, whose father is a retired ship’s captain from Agra in India and whose mother is from Liverpool, went on to play cuckolded husband Hari in the BBC drama Mistresses.

He said in an interview for the series: ‘Fidelity is absolutely important, especially in the acting industry, which is littered with broken relationships because people are away filming for months. But I think you have to work at these things.’

He is now working on the big-budget sequel to the Sex And The City movie, and stars in the new movie Harry Brown alongside Michael Caine.

Meanwhile Ms Raison has just finished filming the ITV1 comedy-drama Married, Single, Other, which follows the turbulent lives of three couples.

The couple, who share a flat near Battersea Park, South London, are now working out how to divide their assets.