Raza Jaffrey is an English actor and singer who played Neal Hudson on the CBS TV medical drama Code Black.

What is Raza Jaffrey’s net worth? Salary, Earnings

Raza Jaffrey’s projected net worth as of 2022 is $1.2 million . He earns a lot of money thanks to his work in film and television.

Where was Raza Jaffrey born? Ethnicity, nationality, family and education

His parents were Indian and Liverpool, and he was born on May 28, 1975, in Liverpool, Merseyside, England. Her mother is from Liverpool and her father is from the Indian seaport of Agra.

Hyder Jaffrey and Joan Bradshaw are his parents. From 1986 to 1991, Raza and fellow Spooks actor Rupert Penry-Jones attended Dulwich College. Born and raised in London, Raza spent his childhood there.

After graduating from Dulwich College, he attended Bristol Old Vic Theater School for acting training and the University of Manchester for drama.

He then planned to enlist in the Royal Air Force and train to become a pilot. Through his appearances in multiple productions at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, he boosted his time at university.

Brian Friel’s London Vertigo was performed during the Pendley Open Air Shakespeare Festival. Gregory Doran, senior associate director of the Royal Shakespeare Company, met him during his last semester in Manchester and made him a job offer.

As a result, he was able to apply to Bristol Old Vic Theater School and later pursued a career in acting.

Fast facts

Real name Jaffrey Breed Nickname race famous as Actor Age 46 years Birthday May 28, 1975 place of birth Liverpool, Merseyside, England Zodiac sign Gemini Ethnicity White Nationality British Religion Christendom Height 6 feet Weight 75 kilos Body measurements N/A bicep size N/A eye color Dark brown Hair color Black Shoe size N/A Girlfriend/Dating Spouse Lara Pulver Heritage 1.2 million dollars Brands N/A Hobbies Act, travel

Is Raza Jaffrey married? Relationship

In September 2007, Raza Jaffrey married Miranda Raison, his Spooks co-star. Still, in November 2009, this couple filed for divorce.

Later, in 2011, he began dating actress Lara Pulver, whom he married on December 27, 2014. Their son, Ozias Jaffrey, was born in February 2017.

How tall is Raza Jaffrey? Weight, hair color

Raza Jaffrey, 45 years old, has a height of 6 feet and a width of 6 feet. She weighs seventy-five kg. Raza has stunning black hair and beautiful brown eyes. He has an athletic build and is Asian.

How did Raza Jaffrey start his professional career?

Driven by a deep ambition to pursue an acting profession, Razza Jaffrey became actively involved in the theater sector while attending the University of Manchester.

Raza made his stage debut at the Pendley Open Air Shakespeare Festival after debuting at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival.

Additionally, he has worked under the tutelage of notable individuals, including Gregory Doran, Senior Associate Conductor of the Royal Shakespeare Company. As a result, her interest in the Bristol Old Vic Theater School grew.

In the television musical drama “Smach”, he also played the character of “Dev Sundaram”. “Elementary” was another drama series that Raza starred in.

This drama was inspired by the Sherlock Holmes books written by Arthur Conan Doyle. After that, he appeared in the 2014 spy thriller television series “Homeland” as “Ansar Khan.”

Social media

Raza is one of the most prominent influencers on social media, with an estimated 12.7k followers on Instagram and 16.4k followers