Welcome Skyview Members & Steel City Members & North Hills Members

To the first Joint Zoom Meeting between our clubs. This week meeting is another special tour this time it is the Shortwave Radio Station WTWW located in Lebanon, Tennessee. This shortwave radio station is run my Ham Radio operators and they several radio related programs that they broadcast like: QSO Radio Show & Ham Nation Live, and Amateur Radio Newsline. They transmit on 5,085 Mhz & 9,475 Mhz.

See Their Website: http://wtww.us/

When: May 13th at 8:00 PM

Where: Online Zoom Meeting

Meeting Links: SCARC & Skyview emails will be sent via your email reflectors.

Other clubs look for the email from your leaders

Programing: WTWW Tour

Not a member of these clubs: Send a email to N3LRG (AT) W3KWH (DIT) COM

Other WPA clubs wanting to participate let N3LRG know your club reflector.

Hello are you missing all your friends up at the club house? Well This Wednesday night at 8:00 PM sharp we will try out our first virtual social meeting. Like our normal social meeting there is no set format for the meeting just friends getting together to jabber the night away.

This past weekend the technical committee tried out the software and what was suppose to be just a short test but it work so well we used the software for two hours. Doug W3HH show us his shack and how his person SDR radio worked. Karl WA3VXJ show us some of his old antique radios. The the stories flowed the whole night. I was able to show off RemoteHams software to the whole group while they were all able to ask questions about how to use it.

This is what the invite will look like – Just click on the link in the message

So you now wondering how to join in on the fun. First of all there is nothing to install on your computer. All you will have to do is to check your email for the Zoom Meeting Invite which I will be sending out around 7:45 PM Wednesday. Once you open the email you will just have to click on the link inside the email. This will install a very small program in your browser once that little program is install the Zoom Window will open up and ask for your name. I would recommend using your First Name and Call Sign. Now the meeting will open up and you should be able to see what is going on. You will most like need to click on the MICROPHONE icon at the bottom of the screen to turn your microphone on. The first part of the meeting I will be going over how to use the software.

So what equipment do you need to make this work. You will need either a Desktop Computer, Laptop, I-Phone, Android Phone, Window or Mac are ok. The second thing you will need is some sort of microphone plug into your computer. If you have a headset for the remotes that would be perfect for the Zoom Meeting. Now your computer should have a Webcam {While its not required it is nice to see your face other wise the screen will just show your name} If you have a desktop computer make sure the webcam is plug in. {Dont bother looking to buy one the $40 ones are going for $100 and they are still out of stock.} Now most laptops have webcams built into them along with a microphone. The webcam is a small hole above the computer screen. And all I-Phones and Android phone have camera now a day.

Now if you what you show us your shack pictures, an interesting webpage, or your favorite FT-8 program make sure you have those open before you start the Zoom Window. That way you can click on SHARE THE SCREEN icon at the bottom of your window to select which ever Windows screen you want to share out to the group. This program has been very interesting in how it lets many people join in on the fun.

MEMBERS: Please make sure your on the [W3KWH Group] email reflector. The invite will be sent out only via the email reflector from my N3LRG gmail account.

366220cookie-checkWTWW Tour This Wednesday Zoom Meetingyes