A remarkable movie about a remarkable woman, "The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl" is a must-see for film buffs, history buffs and anyone else who enjoys a good, solid documentary that is also highly entertaining.

In fact, I have only one complaint about this film — it's too long. At more than three hours, it begs for some judicious editing and does tend to drag in spots. But for the most part, it's a riveting experience and well worth a look.

At 90, Riefenstahl is vital, intelligent and well-spoken and could easily be mistaken for a woman in her 50s or 60s. Currently living in Florida, her most recent passion is scuba-diving, and she has filmed amazing underwater footage that has never been shown publicly before.

But Riefenstahl is still best-remembered as Hitler's filmmaker, her two signal achievements being a pair of documentaries that are still hailed as being among the best ever made. First there was the startling and disturbing propaganda film "Triumph of the Will," about Adolf Hitler's 1934 Nazi Party Congress in Nuremberg. Then came "Olympia," an exhaustive chronicle of the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin, with frequent references to Hitler and the Nazi Party.

For her part, Riefenstahl denies ever being Hitler's mistress, says she never joined the Nazi Party or even so much as uttered an anti-Semitic remark and insists that she had no personal or social contact with Hitler or Joseph Goebbels, despite evidence to the contrary — including Goebbels' own diaries.

And when confronted at one point with an effusive telegram she sent to Hitler after his 1940 march on Paris, she at first denies that she sent it and then claims she was expressing relief that the war might be over as a result of his action. (She also claims to have known nothing of the Holocaust until much later.)

Juxtaposing current interviews with footage from her films, photographs and other archival material, and using an occasional voice-over narration, filmmaker Ray Muller has taken a unique point of view in that he also includes behind-the-scenes outtakes that reveal how controlling Riefenstahl is, telling Muller how he should be shooting his film and becoming quite upset at some of his more pointed queries.

Muller has chosen to focus on her career at the expense of her personal life. We learn nothing about her roots or her family, as the film immediately jumps into her professional life — first as a dancer, then as an actress in German "mountain films," then a filmmaker in her own right before coming in league with Hitler.

The movie explores her reputation as someone a bit too fascinated with perfection in the human form and offers as evidence the poses of those who appeared in "Olympia" all those years ago, and her more recent, unfinished films that seem to take a similar stance toward the Nuba tribes in the southern Sudan.

And while Muller does attempt to probe Riefenstahl for explanations of her contradictory behavior — and some of the contradictory statements she makes within the context of this film — in general he lets her say what she will, make what excuses she must and offers an obvious, but important position: Whatever her motivations may have been when she made movies for Hitler, should she be condemned for making them so artistically successful?

However misdirected, Riefenstahl's talent is here in full bloom. And audience members may leave with their own contradictory feelings about her life and what it means.

"The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl" is not rated but would probably be in PG-13 territory for a fair amount of nudity, including models posing at the 1936 Olympics and footage of the Nuba tribes.