Officials from NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), the Japanese Space Agency (JAXA), the United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Portuguese, Italian, British and German universities and other international organizations were invited by Critical Software for a seminar in Coimbra, on the 20th and 21st of February.

At the seminar, participants will discuss the challenges and market trends for high integrity systems in different industries, with particular emphasis on the results of recent research carried out by researchers.

The purpose of Critical Software (www.criticalsoftware.com) is to promote in our country a broad debate, on an international scale, on the Reliability and Certification of critical and complex systems.

The Seminar on Reliability and Certification, a joint initiative of Critical Software and the Critical Step, a project that results from a Portuguese-Italian partnership, in which Critical Software is also a part, integrated in the FP7 program of the European Commission and in the IAPP (Collaborations of Research between Academia and Industry – Marie-Curie), is an emblematic event, taking place for the second time in our country, and which will bring together the most reputable academic and industrial experts, contributing to consolidate the important role played by Portuguese technology in High integrity critical systems.

Among the various topics to be addressed in this seminar, we highlight, among others, Verification and Validation, Analysis of Integrity and Certification of Systems, Safety and Fault Injection, and Cooperation Projects between academia and business .

About Critical Software

Critical Software is a global company that provides reliable software technology for critical information systems for the Business and/or Mission of leading companies and organizations in their markets.

Critical's software solutions help companies control their costs and improve their performance by providing the real-time feedback needed to quickly identify and resolve issues that inhibit process, product and service improvements.

Founded in Portugal in 1998, Critical Software is headquartered in Coimbra, with offices in Lisbon and Porto and is present, through subsidiaries, in Southampton and Somerset (UK), Chicago (USA), São Paulo (Brazil), Maputo (Mozambique ), Luanda (Angola) and Singapore.

The company has a quality management system with CMMI® Level5, ISO 9001:2008 Tick-IT, EN 9100, AQAP 2110 and 2210 (NATO) certifications, and also implements ISO 12207 and ISO 15504 (SPICE) standards.

About the Critical Step project

The Critical Software Technology project towards an Evolutionary Partnership (Critical Step) belongs to the European Marie-Curie program that promotes Partnerships and Strategies between Academy and Industry (IAPP), integrating the FP7-PEOPLE-2008-IAPP invitation. This project lays the foundation for a long-term strategic research collaboration between partners who are dedicated to the growing challenge of software development and certification for critical and complex systems (SCSs).

These systems are generally based on the use of commercial components (software) of general use (OTS) for the control of complex distributed infrastructures, such as Air Traffic Control Management (ATM) systems, large industrial complexes, integrated systems, etc. .