TUMO Coimbra opened its doors on 28th September in the 'Correios, Telégrafos e Telefones de Coimbra' building, located in the city centre. With 2000 m2 available, the building has been renovated and transformed into a unique space, equipped with state-of-the-art technology to welcome the first young people from 2nd October onwards.

Filipa Cunha, TUMO Coimbra Director, emphasises the importance of this moment: ‘TUMO is finally a reality and is now a vehicle for opportunities for young people in Coimbra. Our ambition is to make education an ally for life, offering something stimulating and directly linked to each person's interests and the needs of the market'.

TUMO is an Educational Programme that Combines Technology with Creativity

The programme is for young people aged 12 to 18, with two-hour face-to-face sessions twice a week. Each student can choose the areas they like best and complete the programme at their own pace. There are eight areas on offer at TUMO Coimbra: Photography, Animation, Games Development, Programming, Music, Graphic Design, Cinema, and Robotics.

All workshops are led by coaches across TUMO’s eight learning areas that combine creativity and technology, developing STEAM skills (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, Maths), which are currently considered the most relevant for the future in a world that is constantly changing. Linked to innovation, they allow young people to stimulate numerous social competences, such as their creative and innovative capacity, their entrepreneurial and collaborative spirit, as well as their aptitude for learning.

All coaches hold paramount importance when mentoring and teaching these young people, as they promote valuable skills and knowledge. Their guidance and mentorship contribute to a more inclusive society where an increasing number of individuals have access to powerful educational tools.

Gonçalo Quadros, Critical Software’s Chairman, says that ‘This is a project capable of transforming and boosting the self-confidence of the youngest, making them discover and develop passions for different creative fields'.

TUMO Coimbra Partners