1. © 2013 Critical Software S.A. Dependable Technologies for Critical Systems Adoption of Agile/Scrum in a Portuguese CMMI L5 enterprise: Improvement Approach and Experiences Délio Almeida, Quality Manager 21st June 2013, Agile & Scrum Portugal 2013

2. DEPENDABLE TECHNOLOGIES FOR CRITICAL SYSTEMS © 2013 Critical Software S.A. Critical Software | About us 3 • Spin-off of the University of Coimbra in 1998 • Global Software Engineering company • Engineering Centres: ~250 engineers - Portuguese Offices in: Coimbra, Lisbon, Oporto • Strong investment in R&D and Quality - 10% of turnover invested every year in R&D - More than 20 people allocated to R&D • Strategic Pillars - Global Vision, People & Community, Quality - Innovation and R&D, Reinvestment & Growth • Investment in Quality Certifications - SEI CMMI-DEV Level 5, AS9100C, ISO9001, NATO AQAP 2210, 2110, NP4457 Coimbra University: 1290 Vision To become an international software technology and engineering business, recognized for excelling in the provision of pioneering and innovative solutions in multiple markets, while ensuring the highest quality and dependability Mission To support mission and business critical solutions

3. © 2013 Critical Software S.A. DEPENDABLE TECHNOLOGIES FOR CRITICAL SYSTEMS The motivation for change…. 4 Aeronautics Space Defence Transports Mission-Safety Critical Solutions CSW has always worked with: • Conservative markets from SW eng. point of view • Highly mature and regulated • Safety-Critical Software which cannot simply fail .... • Mature SW Development Processes based on ESA-ECSS software standards, ISO 15504 (SPiCE), NASA SEL, BSSC Guides • Characterized by detailed RFP, SoW, highly specialized customers and specialists, very good domain knowledge, formal approaches to project and quality management

4. © 2013 Critical Software S.A. DEPENDABLE TECHNOLOGIES FOR CRITICAL SYSTEMS The motivation for change…. 5 BUT, CSW has – also always worked - with: • Non-conservative markets from a SW engineering point of view... • Highly dynamic and flexible markets Highly mature and regulated • Non-safety critical, but more mission critical, who can live with some faults Safety-Critical Software which cannot simply fail .... • Who want good quality SW working and in production Adopted Mature SW Development Processes based on ESA-ECSS software standards, ISO 15504 (SPiCE), NASA SEL, BSSC Guides • Characterized by more vague RFP, SoW, not engineers, more flexible and informal, high scope volatility, change in features... Telecom Government Finance Health Energy & Mobility Enterprise Critical Solutions Search for more suitable SW development method + Business/Customer demand for Agile + New Product Development Unit , Spin-Offs paradigm and internal developments

5. © 2013 Critical Software S.A. SW Process Improvement Approach • Launched CMMI Level 5 Organizational Performance Management Initiative : “Agile @ CSW” 6  SW Process Improvement Phases: [1st Phase : Sub-Phase 1 – Define and Improve] Define Agile Methodology, Work, Processes and Report Establish baseline, estimate ROI [2nd Phase: Sub-Phase 1 – Piloting ] Conduct Pilots (Update artefacts, Select/Execute pilots, Evaluate Pilots and Improve) [2nd Phase: Sub-Phase 2 - Deploy] Define and Execute Deployment Plan [2nd Phase: Sub-Phase 3 – Monitor Deployment] Monitor Deployed Improvements [2nd Phase: Sub-Phase 4 – Evaluate Effects] Evaluate and record the effect 1st Phase 2nd Phase (Conduct Pilots, Deploy, Monitor, Evaluate) 235h 324h • Impacts: Impact Level IMS Processes Major 18 Minor 13 None 38 • More Impacts: • Changes in PMO, SPA, ENG, training plans, skills, tools, ... • Around 70-80 active projects

6. © 2013 Critical Software S.A. DEPENDABLE TECHNOLOGIES FOR CRITICAL SYSTEMS SW Process Improvement Approach – The references Inspirational Sources: • “The Scrum Guide, The Definite Guide to Scrum: The Rules of the Game”, Jeff Sutherland & Ken Schwaber, Oct. 2011 www.scrum.org • “Agile Contracts – Money for Nothing and Your Change for Free”, Jeff Sutherland, SCRUM Training Institute, July 12, 2010 http://jeffsutherland.com/ (05-06-2013) • “Mature Agile with a twist of CMMI”, by Carsten Ruseng Jakobsen (Systematic Software Engineering ) and Kent Aaron Johnson (Agile Digm, Incorporated), Proceeding AGILE '08 Proceedings of the Agile 2008 • Certified Agile Tester Manual, Version 2.1, iSQI GmbH, 2010, http://www.agile- tester.org/ (05-06-2013) • Lessons & in-house Experience from several projects ... • Others... 7

7. © 2013 Critical Software S.A. Agile Challenges & Problems Problems  Description How we approached it? P1 – Agile reference sources to use? So many available Agile/Scrum sources, sites (Scrum Alliance, scrum.org, mitchlacey.com), institutes, Training programs (CAT), and authors ...  Going back to the original author(s) Looking for other CMMI companies who have done it! Tailoring it to our Org. reality and experience P2 – Scrum roles & responsibilities We have a projectized organization, strong matrix structure, with multiple Departments/Units, with already defined roles, no one wants to loose strenght and importance ... Tried to stick to roles definition! Did accept some team specialization (e.g. Testers & developers) Tried to find internally the people with the best skills to assume the new Scrum roles Still not happy with the result ... P3 - Agile contracts, how to sell? Trying to use Agile/Scrum in a fixed price contract is hard ... Customers typically demand all constraints fixed: cost, schedule, scope and quality... Following Agile Contracts approach from Jeff Sutherland Using our own selling experience and know how... P4 – Agile mindset Transformation Internally, many think that we don’t need Agile, we just need a robust and institutionalized evolutionary or iterative waterfall life cycle ... Involve all stakeholders from the start... The pros and the ones against... Communicate a lot, use other successful examples to show its its possible! Have practioners writing the new process ... P5 – How to measure the Agile/Scrum Benefit ? How do we know we are doing better ... Or we just got worse ??? Being a CMMI L5 company, and by following a structured quantitative process improvement initiative this is guaranteed ... We baseline, we set goals/ROI, we measure the pilots, we compare with the post-result

8. © 2013 Critical Software S.A. DEPENDABLE TECHNOLOGIES FOR CRITICAL SYSTEMS Contacts 9 Portugal Coimbra, Lisbon,Oporto www.criticalsoftware.com USA Chicago www.criticalsoftware.com UK Southampton,Somerset www.critical-software.co.uk Brazil São Paulo www.criticalsoftware.com.br Angola Luanda www.criticalsoftware.com Mozambique Maputo www.criticalsoftware.co.mz Singapore Singapore www.criticalsoftware.sg