Who is Joaquim Rafael Branco? Biography, gossip, facts?

Joaquim Rafael Branco (born 1953) is a São Toméan politician. He is the President of the Movement for the Liberation of São Tomé and Príncipe/Social Democratic Party (MLSTP/PSD) and the former Prime Minister of the country. Branco served as Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2000 to 2001. He was Minister of Public Works in July 2003 when he was detained by the military during a briefly successful coup d'etat led by Major Fernando Pereira.

Is Joaquim Rafael Branco still alive? Are there any death rumors?

Yes, as far as we know, Joaquim Rafael Branco is still alive. We don't have any current information about Joaquim Rafael Branco's health. However, being younger than 50, we hope that everything is ok.

When did Joaquim Rafael Branco retire? When did Joaquim Rafael Branco end the active career?

Joaquim Rafael Branco retired on the 14th of August 2010, which is more than 13 years ago. The date of Joaquim Rafael Branco's retirement fell on a Saturday.

Is Joaquim Rafael Branco gay or straight?

Many people enjoy sharing rumors about the sexuality and sexual orientation of celebrities. We don't know for a fact whether Joaquim Rafael Branco is gay, bisexual or straight. However, feel free to tell us what you think! Vote by clicking below.

0% of all voters think that Joaquim Rafael Branco is gay (homosexual), 0% voted for straight (heterosexual), and 0% like to think that Joaquim Rafael Branco is actually bisexual.

Advertisement

When did Joaquim Rafael Branco's career start? How long ago was that?

Joaquim Rafael Branco's career started on the 22nd of June 2008, which is more than 16 years ago. The first day of Joaquim Rafael Branco's career was a Sunday.

What is Joaquim Rafael Branco doing now?

Supposedly, 2024 has been a busy year for Joaquim Rafael Branco. However, we do not have any detailed information on what Joaquim Rafael Branco is doing these days. Maybe you know more. Feel free to add the latest news, gossip, official contact information such as mangement phone number, cell phone number or email address, and your questions below.

Is Joaquim Rafael Branco hot or not?

Well, that is up to you to decide! Click the "HOT"-Button if you think that Joaquim Rafael Branco is hot, or click "NOT" if you don't think so. 0% of all voters think that Joaquim Rafael Branco is hot, 0% voted for "Not Hot".

Does Joaquim Rafael Branco do drugs? Does Joaquim Rafael Branco smoke cigarettes or weed?

It is no secret that many celebrities have been caught with illegal drugs in the past. Some even openly admit their drug usuage. Do you think that Joaquim Rafael Branco does smoke cigarettes, weed or marijuhana? Or does Joaquim Rafael Branco do steroids, coke or even stronger drugs such as heroin? Tell us your opinion below. 0% of the voters think that Joaquim Rafael Branco does do drugs regularly, 0% assume that Joaquim Rafael Branco does take drugs recreationally and 0% are convinced that Joaquim Rafael Branco has never tried drugs before.

Are there any photos of Joaquim Rafael Branco's hairstyle or shirtless?

There might be. But unfortunately we currently cannot access them from our system. We are working hard to fill that gap though, check back in tomorrow!