Around the year 700 travelling Radhanites (later known as Jewish merchants) from Khazaria had founded Kiev (Turkish for “beach settlement”) at the Dnieper River. The place was during the 700s and 800s an outpost for the Khazar Kha- ganate. As Kiev became an important station on the trade route for the Gotlandic mer- chants on their way from the Baltic Sea to Miklagarðr (Istanbul), the Varangians took Kiev from the Khazarians in 882 and appointed one of their own, Oleg, as ruler. Archaeological excavations show that a line of strong-holds was esta- blished in the Kiev area along the Dnjepr in the last two decades of the 800s. Tax collection was probably a motivation for establishing these strongholds. From Arabic sources we know that one of the al-Rus’ trade routes ended in Miklagarðr where they sold furs and swords. Garðaríki (Kievan Rus’) was after that ruled by a resident Varangian nobility, that became the nucleus of the Kievan Rus’ polity, whose ‘Golden Age’ was from late 800s to mid 1200s, when it disintegrated after the Mongol invasion. (1237– 1240). They are referred to as Kievan Rus’ and Garðaríki.

The article deals with the issue of the ethnic origin of the Varangians. According to an ancient legend preserved by the Russian sources of the second half of the 17th century, they had lived on the banks of the Dnieper before Kiev was founded. Taking into account archeological and linguistic data, the author provides justification for their East Germanic origin and approximate location on the map of the late antique ecumene. As a separate issue, the author considers the relation between the exodus of Kyi and his brothers from the north to the Varangian territories in the Dnieper region and the exodus of the bearers of the Kiev archaeological cultural antiquities to the Gothic lands of the Northern Black Sea region. The author substantiates the opinion about the existence of an East Slavic heroic song in the past, in which the ancient Goths of the realm of Ermanaric were mentioned as inhabitants of the lower reaches of the Dnieper long before the exodus of the Slavs. The article confirms some of the original evidence of a little-studied late chronicle topos (17th century) about Kyi the robber who founded the city of Kiev. The author puts forward the idea that not only did the Novgorod chronicler want to belittle Kiev, but he also tried to rework a certain folklore plot. According to the author, the lost heroic song referred to the Goths, whom the chronicler called the Varangians for a number of reasons. In the song, the Varangians inhabited the territory of the Lower Dnieper. This locus was the center of the Greuthungian realm of Ermanaric (ca. 350 – ca. 376), where its capital was located (it is identified with the settlement of Bashmachka). When analyzing the original excerpt from the legend about Kyi the robber, the author used the present-day data from archeology, linguistics, and physical anthropology, which lends undoubted novelty to this study. For citation: Тарасов И.М. Об упоминании «днепровских варягов» в контексте предания о начале Киева // Historia provinciae – журнал региональной истории. 2023. Т. 7, № 1. С. 22–71. / Tarasov, I.M. “On the Mention of the Dnieper Varangians in the Context of the Legend of the Beginning of Kiev.” Historia Provinciae – the Journal of Regional History, vol. 7, no. 1 (2023): 22–71. https://doi.org/10.23859/2587-8344-2023-7-1-1

The Russians and the Ukrainians, and indeed the Belarusians too, share an origin myth which reaches back to the legendary Rurik’s founding of the kingdom of the Kyivan Rus However, rather than reaching fruition in the early 20th century, as was the case in much of Central Europe, the origin story was subsumed into the Soviet experiment, and only remerged after 1991. It is still very much a work in progress. Here we will look at how the founding myth of the Rus has been used in the Ukrainian nation building project, which will unavoidably lead to comparisons with Russia and, to a lesser extent, other neighbouring countries such as Poland, Belarus and Lithuania. From the Normanist debate of the mid-18th century to the rise of nationalism in the 19th century and the use of the Rus in the the Soviet Union, we turn to the present with its all its historical complexity and political ramifications regarding the relationship between Ukraine and Russia.

Considered to be among the best sources we have on early Russian history are the three or four Russo-Byzantine Treaties inserted in the Povest’ vremennykh let s.a. 907, 911, 944 and 971. Undoubtedly the now lost originals were written in Greek and only later translated into Old Russian, possibly in connection with the compilation of the Povest’ vremennykh let. The question then arises to which extent the Old Russian translation offers an exact rendition of the Greek originals or whether the text was somehow modified to suit 11th-century circumstances. Such a modification was certainly the appearance of the Slavic thunder god Perun on whom pagan Rus’ envoys with pure Norse names are said to have taken their oaths rather than Perun’s Norse colleague, Thor. In the paper, it is argued that another anachronistic modification can be seen in the recurrent prioritized sequence in which citizens of the Rus’ towns Kiev, Chernigov, Pereiaslavl’(-Russkii), were remunerated by Byzantine officials in the three earliest treaty texts. Rather than 10th-century realities, this sequence seems to reflect the seniority system of succession to the Kievan throne as instituted after the death of Jaroslav Vladimirovich in 1054. This view is supported by a discussion of the Tale of the Foundation of Pereiaslavl’, included in the Povest vremennykh let s.a. 992, suggesting that Pereiaslavl’, as seen by the compilator of Povest’ vremennykh let, only came into existence towards the end of the 10th century.

This paper represents a commentary of the previous one on Kyiv Rus culture, evaluating its considerable western influences and its imperial nature. Although Kyiv at this time is generally considered a vast empire this paper will seek to re-evaluate that position as well as the notion of a single dynasty, the Rurik, showing that it is likely that there were at least three different Scandinavian incursions, the last of which created Muscovy. Kyivan Rus, towards Volodymyr Monomakh, and Novgorod Volodymyr I, much loved of Putin and who some say he imagines to be a reincarnation, was positioned as the church's representative in the lands to the east. Like many figures of that period hagiography preceded historical truth, and scepticism over his achievements is perhaps necessary. Viewed as a great figure, he was the ruler who converted to Christianity, thereby representing not just the Christian faith but the church which created all subsequent and previous narratives. Kyiv Rus as the supreme Slav city was constructed by the Greek Orthodox Church.