There’s a new action hero in Hollywood and her name is June Squibb! At 94 years young, the Oscar-nominated actress (“Nebraska”) stars in “Thelma,” an action comedy about Thelma Post, a 93-year-old woman who gets duped by a phone scammer pretending to be her grandson. Fueled with rage, Thelma sets out on a treacherous quest across the city to reclaim what was taken from her. Watch the first teaser trailer below.

More from GoldDerby

Box office preview: 'Kung Fu Panda 4' will try to take down 'Dune: Part Two'

An Oscar bookend for 'Maestro' writer Josh Singer?

Oscars 2024: In Memoriam will honor past winners Alan Arkin, Glenda Jackson, William Friedkin and many more

“Thelma” premiered at the 2024 Sundance Film Festival on January 18, 2024 and was quickly scooped up by Magnolia Pictures. Squibb’s co-stars include Fred Hechinger, Richard Roundtree, Parker Posey, Clark Gregg and Malcolm McDowell. The feature directorial debut of Josh Margolin, “Thelma” is a poignant action-comedy that gives Squibb her first leading role and features Roundtree’s final performance.

SEE Celebrity Deaths 2024: In Memoriam Gallery

Inspired by a real-life experience of Margolin’s own grandmother, “Thelma” puts a clever spin on movies like “Mission: Impossible,” shining the spotlight on an elderly grandmother as an unlikely action hero. With infectious humor, Margolin employs the familiar tropes of the action genre in hilarious, age-appropriate ways to tackle aging with agency. In the first leading film role of her 70-year career, Squibb portrays the strong-willed Thelma with grit and determination, demonstrating that she is more than capable of taking care of business – despite what her daughter Gail (Posey), son-in-law Alan (Gregg), or grandson Danny might believe.

The film won over critics at Sundance and holds a 98% freshness rating on Rotten Tomatoes. The critics consensus reads, “A stellar showcase for the talented June Squibb, ‘Thelma’ avoids cheap laughs as it finds the lighter side of some serious issues.” “Thelma” will be released nationwide on June 21, 2024.

PREDICT the 2024 Oscar winners through March 10

Make your predictions at Gold Derby now. Download our free and easy app for Apple/iPhone devices or Android (Google Play) to compete against legions of other fans plus our experts and editors for best prediction accuracy scores. See our latest prediction champs. Can you top our esteemed leaderboards next? Always remember to keep your predictions updated because they impact our latest racetrack odds, which terrify Hollywood chiefs and stars. Don’t miss the fun. Speak up and share your huffy opinions in our famous forums where 5,000 showbiz leaders lurk every day to track latest awards buzz. Everybody wants to know: What do you think? Who do you predict and why?

SIGN UP for Gold Derby’s free newsletter with latest predictions

Best of GoldDerby

When are the 2024 Oscars? Date, time, and everything to know

Oscars flashback 50 years ago to 1974: Streaker shows 'his shortcomings' during memorable ceremony [WATCH]

Oscars flashback 20 years ago to 2004: 'The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King' ties all-time record

Sign up for Gold Derby's Newsletter. For the latest news, follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.