I was looking forward to “Hancock,” a superhero spoof starring Will Smith that sounds a bit like “The Return of Captain Invincible” (1984), an Australian production starring Alan Arkin that received scant distribution in the U.S. via the long-gone Jensen-Farley Pictures. But an alarm went off when Sony decided to show “Hancock” to most New York critics Thursday night at the Lincoln Square, in an all-media screening likely overflowing with civilians who have received their tickets from a radio station. Sony, like their enlightened colleagues at Warner Bros. and Fox, generally offers reviewers the courtesy of showing their movies in screening rooms during regular working hours and doesn’t force us to brave the crowds at night, as Paramount, Disney (see below) and Universal so often do. The early reviews for “Hancock” seem to explain Sony’s strategy here. “An intriguing high concept is undermined by low-grade dramaturgy,” writesTodd McCarthy in his withering pan in Variety. “This misguided attempt to wring a novel twist on the superhero genre has a certain whiff of ‘The Last Action Hero’ about it, with Will Smith playing an indestructible crime-buster in a pointedly real-world context. Although it will inevitably open very large, this odd and perplexing aspiring tentpole will provide a real test of Smith’s box office invincibility.” Ouch. Over at the Hollywood Reporter, Stephen Farber is damning “Hanock” with faint praise: “Will Smith’s powers are even more extraordinary than those of a caped crusader who can leap way beyond the tallest buildings in a single bound. Smith has salvaged many vehicles more threadbare than ‘Hancock,’ and though his latest venture is decidedly uneven, he seems poised to score yet another supervictory at the boxoffice. The movie is a good showcase for him — and for co-stars Charlize Theron and Jason Bateman. Imagine the heights they all could have scaled if the picture had been really good.” Over at Fantasy Moguls, ace prognosticator Steve Mason cites early tracking to predict “Hancock,” which opens next Wednesday, will take sell $140-150 million worth of tickets in the U.S. by the end of the July 4 weekend on Sunday. Mase point out this would be Smith’s eighth consecutive $100 million-plus blockbuster, something never accomplished by either Tom Cruise or Tom Hanks, both of whom Smith has far outpaced as an international superstar.