One of the greatest guitarists of all time is dead at age 81.

Deadline reports Jerry Miller, who co-founded the famed psychedelic rock band Moby Grape, died Saturday in his hometown of Tacoma, Washington. A cause of death has not been announced.

“Sadly... Jerry Miller passed away last night,” a post on the Moby Grape Facebook fan page said. “Jo and the family are asking for everyone to please give them some privacy and respect, and Jo asked that people cease phone calls for the time being. Thank you.”

According to Ultimate Classic Rock, Miller was one of the most influential musicians of the San Francisco scene in the 1960s. He formed Moby Grape with Don Stevenson in 1966 and co-wrote three of the band’s best known songs, “Hey Grandma,” “8.05″ and “Murder In My Heart for The Judge.”

Moby Grape built a reputation with their unique sound, blending elements of psychedelic rock, progressive, country and pop with three guitarists and five members all contributing songwriting and vocals. Their self-titled debut was named one of the 500 greatest albums of all time by Rolling Stone.

The group broke up in 1970 but members continued to occasionally perform and record music together. Miller later performed as a solo artist, as the leader of the Jerry Miller Band, and in The Rhythm Dukes.

Miller also played guitar on an early version of “I Fought the Law” by The Bobby Fuller Four and later toured with Bobby Fuller. The iconic song was named one of the 500 “Songs that Shaped Rock” by the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and became a punk rock classic when it was covered by The Clash in the ‘70s.

Miller was named one of the 100 greatest guitarists of all time by Rolling Stone magazine. He was a friend of Jimi Hendrix in the ‘60s, performed with fellow greats like Eric Clapton, B.B. King and The Doors, and inspired other artists like Led Zeppelin.

Legendary rock band cancels tour after founding member suffers stroke

‘80s rock singer diagnosed with Lewy body dementia, retires from touring