Synopsis

"Tell Me Lies" season 2 release date on Hulu is nearing and we have details pertaining to cast and plot.

Hulu original series "Tell Me Lies" season 2 release date is almost here. The second season will premier on Hulu on Wednesday, September 4.

On the first day of release, two episodes of "Tell Me Lies" season 2 will drop. There will be a total of six episodes. These six episodes of "Tell Me Lies" season 2 will be released on weekly basis thereafter.

"Tell Me Lies" season 2 will feature Grace Van Patten and Jackson White in pivotal roles. The second season will also feature Cat Missal, Spencer House, Sonia Mena, Branden Cook and Alicia Crowder in key roles.

"Tell Me Lies" is based on a book by Carola Lovering. The series delves into complicate relationships among a group of college mates.

Meanwhile, Kerry Washington’s comedy “UnPrisoned” returns for a second season Wednesday on Hulu. She plays Paige, a single mom raising a teenage son who is thrown a curveball when her dad (played by Delroy Lindo) moves in after he’s released from prison. Paige works as a therapist but has personal issues of her own to work through, including fears of abandonment. The series was created by writer Terry McMillan, who tapped into her own experience growing up in the foster care system because her own father was incarcerated.

FAQs:

Q1. Is 'Tell Me Lies' season 2 happening?

A1. Yes, 'Tell Me Lies' season 2 is happening.

Q2. Where and when can we watch 'Tell Me Lies' season 2?

A2. 'Tell Me Lies' season 2 can be watched on Hulu on September 4.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by a 3rd party. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

Indian car buyers are holding their horses on EVs and buying this instead

Not TCS. Not HDFC. 3 stocks that beat all benchmarks and peers in the last 20 years.

Will your texts be delivered on September 1?

Mpox virus is back. Is vaccine maker Serum Institute ready?

Why India must remain vigilant of the risks when permitting Chinese FDI

When earnings growth falls to 14-quarter low, you can't predict but can prepare

1

2

3