Duffy Bishop is a force of nature, an unforgettable performer, and for those who know Duffy and what new fans will discover, her new album, I’m Gonna Do What I Want, speaks volumes about who she is: a genre breaking, take no prisoners, passionate performer who defies any one label.

Duffy is a living treasure on the West Coast and is in the Halls of Fame for The Washington Blues Society, The Cascade Blues Association and the Oregon Music Hall of Fame.

Duffy is influenced by the entirety of American Music. From the time she was a little girl, Duffy would soak up everything - from Memphis Minnie to Judy Garland, Ella to Janis, Dylan to Bowie. She loved the performers who could walk out on stage, hold your heart in their hand and transport you to another world. Like the artists who inspired her, Duffy’s charisma, authentic voice, and ferocious presence sends chills down the spine and puts a smile on the face.

With a long and enduring career, Duffy Bishop is truly a gift that keeps on giving, whether at a Festival or an intimate House Concert, her live shows are legendary music experiences.

Duffy has enjoyed learning from the many greats she has been fortunate to open for. Etta James, Ruth Brown, Lou Rawls, Bo Diddley (who called her “dangerous”), The Neville Brothers, to name just a few.

With long-time collaborator, guitarist, singer/songwriter, husband Chris Carlson, they have travelled and made music across the USA, Canada, Norway, Hong Kong, Japan, and Austria.

To find out more about Duffy. She was the subject of a 2010 documentary “Who Is Duffy Bishop and Why Is She Not World Famous?”, an exploration of her career and life. https://youtu.be/yqKLAbguCg0

Duffy’s mission statement is clear, “There is always more music to create, in hopes of helping make people happier and more positive about the world “.

Duffy Bishop’s new album, I'm Gonna Do What I Want, was produced by Duffy, guitarist/husband Chris Carlson and engineer, Jim DeVito at Retrophonics Studios in Crescent Beach, FL.

"Bishop is a revelation, belting dynamic blues ...

with the blistering guitar of her husband Chris Carlson."