Duffy’s Beer and Much More is one of the most unique beer distributors in all of Pittsburgh. Our 26,000 square foot home is packed with every type of beer you could think of, from the nostalgia inducing blasts-from-the-pasts, to new modern favorites, to beers you have yet to try.

We like to think of Duffy’s as a playground for adults, which is why we have a six-tap sample station where you can taste the beers we have on sale each month. After you find something that pleases your palate, you can walk through our five isles to find a sample you liked, or find something else new to try. If you don’t see what you’re looking for, even if it is rare limited, if it is available to us, we can get it for you. All you have to do is ask!

The same thing applies for kegs. We have plenty of 1/6, 1/4 and 1/2 kegs on hand, but if you want something we don’t have for your upcoming party, ask us and we can order or reserve it for you.

Even if beer is not your style, we have something for everyone. Our snack and candy isles rival that of huge grocery stores. We also have bottled water and pop at the most competitive prices anywhere, along with the cups, plates, napkins and plasticware to complete your party shopping.

More of a do-it-yourselfer? We have all the ingredients you need to get started or keep going as a home brewer or a seasoned pro looking to brew large quantities. Whether it is for beer, wine, hard cider or ginger beer, we have the supplies necessary to get the job done at any scale.

Regardless of what your taste is, Duffy’s number one goal is always YOU, the customer. That is why we have iPad stands throughout the store with access to our website and social media channels. That is why we were one of the first beer distributors in the Pittsburgh area to have a growler/crowler filling station and have hard slushies to go. It is why we invested in brand new coolers for singles, six and 12 packs. We want to provide the best shopping experience for our customers, and we will strive relentlessly to be on the forefront of both innovation and customer experience.