IN Brookfield, Mass., 15 miles southwest of Worcester, they have their own ways of keeping down the cost of living, and a night on the town there doesn't eat up all the housekeeping money. When Brookfield opened the observance of its 300th anniversary a few weeks ago with a costume ball and buffet supper in the Town Hall for 500 people, the price was only $3.50 a head. It is true that the community is spending $5,000 in town money to finance the various anniversary celebrations, ‘nit don't imagine that the $5,000 is simply going to disappear. The anniversary committee, which has been planning the whole operation at bimonthly meetings in the firehouse, feels fairly confident that it will be able to recoil) most of the, money by selling decorated beer mugs, towels and other anniversary souvenirs and through the proceeds of flea markets and auctions. The souvenirs will be on sale at the events that have been scheduled for the next few months. Visitors are welcome to attend of them.

Among the people who will be joining in the celebrations will be former Brookfield residents who, while they may now live far away, still feel affection for the little town of 2,200 or so people with its white clapboard houses and two churches clustered around the Common, its Quaboag Pond and Quaboag River. The anniversary committee has mailed details of the year's program to former Brookfield people and the interested response, according to George Clancy, committee chairman, has been excellent. Former residents who haven't been to Brookfield for a while will find that few things havi changed, but they may be surprised by the number of beards around town. Quite a few Brookfield men are growing beards for a competition that will be held when the celebrations wind up in the fall. The redbearded Mr. Clancy is among the contestants.

Before the beard‐judging rolls around, however, there will be a whole string of events celebrating Brookfield's settlement in 1673. The first comes on May 19, when there will be a rock music dance on the Common (1 to 5 P.M.) and an auction of lunch baskets prepared by local wives. June 18 is Firemen's Day; there will be a parade by the Brookfield Fire Department and firemen from other towns (10:30 A.M.). The parade will be followed by a firemen's muster and a chicken barbecue. Brookfield, incidentally, does not have professional firemen—or policemen either for that mater. It relies, and very nicely too, on part‐timers known as call men who down tools or drop whatever else they are doing and turn out when an emergency arises. On June 17 there will be another barbecue (12:30 P.M.), more firemen's activities, tours of the firehouse and an eavening band concert.

Other events are — July 21: coin auction, don carriage and bicycle parades, supper at the elementary school (5 P.M.) and band concert on the Common; July 22: ecumenical service on the Common (10 A.M.) followed by a pancake breakfast, display of exhibits and a conducted tour of the public library and elementary school; Aug. 11 and 12: arts and crafts Festival in the Town Hall (from 2 P.M.); Sept, 15: canoe races and log‐rolling contest on the Quaboag River (from 10 AM), turkey shoot and archery contest at Rod and Gun Club (2 P.M.) and chicken barbecue at the club (8 P.M.) The grand finale weekend will be Oct 13–14 and will Include a special Town Meeting at the Town Hall on Saturday (3 P.M.), square dancing and horsedrawn hayrides, and on Sunday a parade at 1 P.M.

Visitors can combine a look at Brookfield with a glimpse of Podunk. The word Podunk is used in New England to describe an unimportant, Isolated town, but there is a place that actually goes by the name. Podunk is a section of East Brookfield, about three miles from Brookfield proper, and a highway under construction that touches the area and runs between U.S. 20 and State Route 9 has already been nicknamed the Podunk Pike,

A CHANGE OF CUSTOM

The Bureau of Customs has amended its regulations to permit Customs officers to make up to $50 in change for traveler's checks offered by tourists who owe duty on purchases they bring into the country. Previously, traveler's checks that exceeded the amount due Customs by more than $20 were not accepted. In other words, if a traveler was being charged $10, he could not present a check for $50 and receive change. A Customs official said that the old $20 limit created hardship for many travelers, especially those arriving at international airports, and that the new $50 ceiling would speed travelers’ pasage through Customs. Travelers can, of course, pay any duty they owe in American currency or with a personal check as well as a traveler's check.

SMOKE‐FREE ROOMS

Rooms have been set aside for non‐smokers at Quality Inns in Los Angeles and Indianapolis, and a spokesman for the chain says that if the response is good, nonsmokers’ rooms will be provided at other Quality Inns. The chain operates more than 350 of them in the United States and Canada.

In Los Angeles at the Quality Inn Airport Motel an entire floor has been reserved for nonsmokers, and the housekeeping dutiea are being handled by maids and linen boys who do not smoke. Ashtrays have been removed and fabrics cleaned and walls scrubbed, an official said, adding: “Smokers do not object to the program and nonsmokers are delighted.” In Indianapolis, the Quality Inn North has carried out a housecleaning program In a block of 12 rooms set aside for nonsmokers. “We even changed the filters in the air‐conditioners to insure that the air WAS pure,” the manager said.

BRITRAIL PASS RATES

Rates for the Britrail Pass, which enables foreign visitors to use the railroads of England, Scotland and Wales foi unlimited travel for varying periods, are being held at their pre‐devaluation level, according to an announcement from the United States representatives for Britrail Travel International. The rates range from $40 for eight days in economy class to $115 for a month in first class. Fifteen‐day and 21‐day passes are also available, as are youth passes.

FOLKLIFE FESTIVAL

The seventh annual Festival of American Folklife, which begins its nine‐day run in Washington, D.C., on June 30, has a new sponsor and a new site this year. Joining the Smithsonian Institution, which founded the festival and has been its sole official support for the past six years, will be the National Park Service. And the new site Will be the banks of the Reflecting Pool between the Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument, a move dictated by construction of the city's subway system on the old homegrounds near the Smithsonian buildings on the Mall.

Themes for the festival this year will be Regional America, Working Americans, Native Americans and Old Ways in the New World. The Old Ways section, a new offering, will show America as a nation of immigrants. In the Native Americans section, 10 tribes of Northern Plains Indians will demonstrate traditional crafts and discuss Indian culture and the problems of modern life. The honored state in the festival will be Kentucky, and there will be exhibits on its tobacco whiskey, waterways and horses and also Park Service displays on Mammoth Cave, the Cumberland Gap and Lincoln's birthplace.

SPORTS TOURS

More and more tours are being organized for sports buffs. Les Fcrd, editor of The Harness Horse, a weekly newsmagazine on standardbrea horses, is arranging a trip that features visits to top races at the Sovalla trotting track in Stockholm and at the Dagfliug race course in Munich. Tour members will also attend trotting races at the Charlottelund race track in Copenhagen and the Mariendorf course in Berlin, and visits are planned to breeding farms in Sweden, Denmark and West Germany. The 15‐day trip begins May 24. The cost has not been set, but other information can be obtained from Les Ford's Trot Tours, 5705 Linglestown Road, Harrisburg, Pa.

Voyageplan Inc., 608 Fifth Avenue, New York City, is arranging tours for tennis enthusiasts that will include tickets to Wimbledon and the semifinals and finals of the French Open tournament. The French Open tour offers one week in Monte Carlo, three days in the chateau country of France and four days in Paris. The Wimbledon program includes eight days on the Riviera and six days in London. With land arrangements and airfare, the tours range in price from $995 to $1,267.

AIRLINE TERMINAL TROUBLES

These are troubled times for airline terminals. At the East Side Terminal in New York, where baggage check‐in facilities were suspended recently (Travel Notes, March 25); there are rumblings that the entire terminal may soon be shut down. In London, British European Airways has announced plans to close its West London terminal by the end of the year. The reason for the BEA move is economy. The number of London passengers using the BEA terminal has dropped in recent years from 53 per cent of the airline's volume to 20 per cent. Officials said that the end of services at the terminal would save the airline about $2.5‐million a year. They added that buses woud continue to leave from the terminal for Heathrow Airport, but that passengers would not be guaranteed making their flights.