Joseph C. Borelli is the Minority Leader of the New York City Council and represents the 51st Council District, which encompasses Staten Island’s South Shore.

A passionate advocate for conservative ideology and common-sense governance, Borelli is dedicated to improving the quality of life for residents of his home borough and the city as a whole. He was instrumental in the successful fight to eradicate polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) from public school buildings; coordinated the development of several Park and Rides to improve commutes for his constituents; secured $50 million for new building for special needs students at PS37/Great Kills High School; spearheaded the transformation of the former Brookfield Landfill to a clean 287-acre park; has worked with the Parks Department to complete the construction and major renovations of several parks on Staten Island; and most recently authored and passed legislation that will lower the financial burden for homeowners to replace trees.

Throughout his career in state and city government, Borelli has also been a leader in the movement for property tax reform, and lower tolls, taxes and fees, and an unwavering supporter of law enforcement officers.

First elected to represent the 51st Council District in a special election in November 2015, Borelli was re-elected to his first full term in November 2017 and to a second full term in November 2021. He is the current Chairperson for the New York City Council Committee on Fire and Emergency Management at the New York City Council and is also a member of the Committee on Education, Committee on Parks and Recreation, and the Committee on Cultural Affairs, Libraries and International Intergroup Relations.

Borelli previously represented Staten Island’s South Shore in the New York State Assembly, where he was the ranking minority member of the Assembly Cities Committee, and served on committees for Health, Housing, Transportation, Mental Health, Banking, Education, and Energy.

Prior to his election to office, Borelli was Chief of Staff to former City Councilman and Minority Leader Vincent Ignizio since 2007, and formerly served in the same role for Ignizio in the state Assembly since 2005.

A lifelong Staten Islander, Borelli attended Public School 4, Our Lady Star of the Sea Grammar School, and graduated from St. Joseph by-the-Sea High School. He earned B.A. in Political Science from Marist College, and an M.A. from the College of Staten Island, where he also taught as an Adjunct Professor.

Active in his community, Joe has been involved in the Staten Island Growth Management Task Force, the West Shore Light Rail Task Force, the Brookfield Landfill Citizens Advisory Committee, and helped spearhead the formation of the South Shore Business Improvement District, the largest geographical BID in New York City.

As a volunteer, Joe serves on the Development Board of St. Joseph by the Sea High School, as well as the Friends of the College of Staten Island, which raise money for scholarships. He has assisted dozens of non-profit, veterans and community organizations in accessing governmental grants. He has helped raise private money for equipment to help handicapped children at Mount Loretto, and has worked with the Verdino Foundation to bring the new state-of-the-art little league facility to the South Shore.

Borelli lives in the Annadale section of Staten Island with his wife, Rachel, their two sons Joseph and John, and his English Bulldog, Luna.