This article's content is marked as Mature

The page contains mature content that may include coarse language, sexual references, and/or graphic violent images which may be disturbing to some. Mature pages are recommended for those who are 18 years of age and older.

If you are 18 years or older or are comfortable with graphic material, you are free to view this page. Otherwise, you should close this page and view another page.

“ Your mother sucks c--ks in hell, Karras, you faithless slime! „ ~ Pazuzu baiting Karras during the exorcism.

“ You again... You interrupted me... Have you come to save God's servant? Well, I must save mine, my son: The Gemini. He has work to do, much more... But come in, Father Morning... Enter, knight... This time you're going to lose. „ ~ Pazuzu possesses Damien Karras after sensing Father Morning's presence.

Pazuzu is the main antagonist of The Exorcist franchise. It is a powerful demon who was based loosely on a mythological figure native to the Mesopotamian culture where he was considered the king of wind demons and son of the Babylonian god Hanbi.

In the original book and film, Pazuzu was the demon that possessed Regan. This was its most famous outing, but it had also appeared in all five Exorcist films as well as Fox's 2016-2017 TV series.

Pazuzu's face was portrayed by Eileen Dietz.

Voice Portrayals[]

Mercedes McCambridge (March 16, 1916 – March 2, 2004) - The Exorcist

Karen Knapp - Exorcist: The Heretic

Colleen Dewhurst (June 3, 1924 – August 22, 1991) - Exorcist: Legion

Rupert Degas - Exorcist: The Beginning

Mary Beth Hurt - Dominion: Prequel to the Exorcist

David Hewlett - The Exorcist: TV series

Biography[]

Exorcist: The Beginning[]

In this prequel to The Exorcist, Pazuzu lorded over a pagan temple, systematically murdering anyone that came to the temple. The sole survivor that would remain is often a priest. Towards the end of the film, the only survivors of Pazuzu's massacre were Father Merrin and a young boy.

Dominion: Prequel to the Exorcist[]

Pazuzu possessed a young and handicapped boy named Cheche at Derati. Father Merrin exorcized the young kid and Pazuzu possessed a hyena. The hyena left Derati.

The Exorcist[]

In the novel and film adaption, Pazuzu managed to possess Regan after she played with an Ouija board (appearing to her in form of the now-infamous demon called "Captain Howdy"), turning her into a hideous vessel for it to mercilessly taunt and abuse those around itself while also displaying major supernatural powers that increased as the story progressed. It presumably grew in strength as the demon took more and more control over Regan's hapless form - which twisted her into a demonic parody of her former self which included behaviors like vigorous masturbation with a crucifix, demanding people to have sex with her, and yelling sexual insults at people.

Regan's mother became desperate and sought two priests to exorcise the demon from her daughter after several failed attempts to solve the problem by more scientific methods (with Regan violently attacking doctors and therapists). That proved trickier than expected as even the priests were reluctant to perform an exorcism due to the belief that such things were confined to the Dark Ages.

However, Father Karras and Father Merrin eventually arrived to perform the exorcism regardless. The battle with Pazuzu was a terrifying rollercoaster for the two priests, who struggled to contain the vast powers of the creature. Sadly, the battle proved too much for Father Merrin, who died of a heart attack during the exorcism. Father Karras became enraged when Pazuzu mockingly laughs at his futile attempts to revive Father Merrin while demanding him to give it up and was possessed by the demon after forcing it out of Regan through physical force upon which the priest leaped out of the window to his death. Presumably, without a human host, Pazuzu was dispersed when the two priests died, but it returned in the future sequels of the novel and film.

Exorcist: The Heretic[]

Exorcist: Legion[]

Pazuzu plays a crucial role and was also instrumental in revenge against Father Damien Karras for being exorcised from Regan's soul. Pazuzu discovers the soul of an executed serial killer known as the The Gemini Killer, and he transfers it into Karras' broken body thus contributing to the Gemini Killer's chaotic killing spree.

The novel makes no mention of Pazuzu soon after he succeeded in transferring the Gemini's consciousness within Karras but plays an active role in the film adaptation of Legion titled The Exorcist III, where he again possesses Damien Karras after the Gemini lost control in possessing the old woman dressed as a nurse, and failed to murder Kinderman and his family by the arrival of Father Morning in an attempt to perform an exorcism on the patient.

Pazuzu severely wounded and mutilated Morning in response to interrupting the Gemini's killing spree, and Kinderman arrives in time to euthanize Karras after finding the body of the priest, only to be hurled into the wall and later in the ceiling by the possessed Karras. Pazuzu along with the Gemini was dispersed once more after Morning manages to bring Karras back to his senses and briefly regains control of his free will to receive mercy kill from Kinderman to free him from the demons.

The Exorcist (TV series)[]

Pazuzu returns in the television series being revealed to have taken on the persona of the Salesman. In the series, it takes possession of Regan's daughter Casey Rance, giving her horrific nightmares. It also murders Katherine's girlfriend by placing her in a car accident among other misdeeds. When it repossesses Regan, Regan receives some willpower to physically beat Pazuzu to a bloody pulp before leaving it to presumably die.

It is also revealed that it had raped Regan when she was 12.

The Exorcist: Believer[]

Pazuzu did not appear in this direct sequel to the original, but its influence is still felt throughout the film and has been indirectly referred to by Chris MacNeill when talking about the events of the first film to Victor Fielding.

Quotes[]

“ You know what she did? Your c**ting daughter? „ ~ Pazuzu to Regan's mother.

“ I am Pazuzu! „ ~ Pazuzu possessing Kokumo.

“ What an excellent day for an exorcism. „ ~ Pazuzu's most famous quote.

Gallery[]

Images[]

Videos[]

Trivia[]

In the first film and Exorcist: The Beginning, Pazuzu sometimes speaks in a strong blasphemous and profane language (e.g. Calling Lankester Merrin a "motherf***ing worthless c**ks**ker"). This was toned down or omitted in Exorcist II: The Heretic, The Exorcist III and Dominion: Prequel to the Exorcist.

It was listed as the 2nd greatest villain of all time by Wizard Magazine.

Hugh Kane from Scary Movie 2 is a parody of Pazuzu from the film The Exorcist.

In the Codename: Kids Next Door episode "Operation: H.O.T.S.T.U.F.F.", Numbuh 3 (although not a villain) served as the main antagonist of the episode and most likely parodied Pazuzu and its actions when it possessed Regan MacNeil, only with pyrokinetic powers similar to that of Father's and Grandfather's. It was also noted that the latter was as strong as it was and even more powerful than the said K.N.D. villains.

Pazuzu also appeared in Scary Movie 2 and Repossessed - both of these appearances had Pazuzu's personality changed into that of a comedic villain compared to its hideously perverted true nature in the films and novels.

In the comic book "Bart Simpson's Treehouse of Horror 2"", in the story "The Exorsister!", Madonna's Spirit is a parody of Pazuzu from the film The Exorcist which the comic story is based on.

In Celebrity Deathmatch, Captain Doody serves as a minor antagonist when he parodied Pazuzu, Doody possesses Nick Jr. by using him as a host while parodying Pazuzu who possessed Regan McNeil. The Undertaker manages to exorcise Captain Doody from Nick Jr's body by using his signature taunt the Tombstone Piledriver and Captain Doody does possess a helpless popcorn guy named Phil.

Pazuzu made an appearance in a 2017 episode of The Simpsons, "Treehouse of Horror XXVIII", possessing Homer (briefly) Maggie (until the end) and Bart Simpson (at the end) in a spoof of The Exorcist.

Other than brief glimpses of a humanoid face, Pazuzu's appearance as portrayed by its statues and mythology point to it being an indescribable being of darkness.

Regan's possessed face was infamously used as a screamer, where she will pop up on the screen. Unlike K-fee commercials and other screamers, she was only used in the viral flash game created in October 2004 made by game developer Jeremy Winterrowd, The Maze (More commonly known as Scary Maze Game).

In The Exorcist: Believer, it marked the first and so far only Exorcist film that Pazuzu did not make an appearance in, but it's influence is still felt throughout. Instead, the demon in this film is Lamashtu, another Mesopotamian based demon.

[]

Pazuzu at Wikipedia

Pazuzu on the Pure Evil Wiki

Pazuzu on the The Exorcist Wiki

Navigation[]