Sometimes there's a house for sale in Wales that is so distinctive it easily stands out and stops you scrolling through the list of properties, effortlessly intriguing people to take a closer look - even if the home is not in their price bracket or matching the style they are looking for.

This is true for Shangri La, a detached Art Deco-style abode nestled within the valleys in Pontllanfraith that is definitely nowhere near the typical and traditional property people associate with the area.

The house was Grade II listed by Cadw in 1999 for its 'special architectural interest as a rare example of an Art-deco suburban house in the South Wales Valleys. Historical association with the Withers family of cinema proprietors'. For more property stories sent to your inbox twice a week sign up to the property newsletter here.

READ MORE: Inside the pretty Welsh cottage that is the most viewed home on Rightmove in the UK

It seems very appropriate then that the current owners have created a home cinema with a large movie screen seeing as the property's past links to the movies is so strong it is even mentioned in the Cadw listing.

The house dates back to the late 1930s and was constructed in a 'Streamline Art-Deco style, a more pared down version of the fancier design of the 1920s. After the Great Depression a streamlining of the more ornate style focused on smooth walls, curves and circular shapes and removed any layers of detailing to reflect the more austere economic climate.

But Shangri La stood out from the crowd as one of the only Arts and Crafts homes in the valleys region, built for Francis Cam, a cinema manager and his wife Maisie, who were the daughter and son-in-law of Alfred Withers, who with his brother Albert Jackson-Withers had relocated from London to South Wales to manage a chain of cinemas.

The Cadw listing states that the Withers brothers’ business began with cinemas in Merthyr Tydfil and Bargoed in 1908 and by its peak in the 1950s the family owned around fifty cinemas across south Wales and south east England.

Francis Cam was an electrician at the New Hall cinema in Bargoed and played a prominent role in managing the Withers’ cinema empire after marrying into the family. By the 1960s the Withers brothers had become business partners of Julian Hodge, who sold the cinema chain to the Rank Organisation following their deaths.

By 2015 though the three-bed house had become rundown and went to auction where it was bought by the current owners who have spent years updating it, including adding a pool, a one-bed annexe, a huge garage, a gym and a monochrome internal décor that creates a blank black and white canvas for a new owner to effortlessly add their personal style.