J.J Thomson was born in Cheetham Hill, a suburban area in Manchester, England on December 18, 1856. Thomson was a Nobel Prize winning physicist with his research that helped discover the electrons of an atom. J.J Thomson full name was Joseph John Thomson, He was an English physicist and mathematician. Joseph Thomson was considered to be a prodigy at his time, becoming the first to be 14 and attending college. Joseph Thomson’s father was a book seller who intended Thomson to become an engineer. Thomson got an apprenticeship at an engineer firm but after 2 years, his father died. His family was unable to pay for the apprenticeship for engineering so Thomson had to leave. Thomson was sent to Owens College, which had a great science faculty, at …show more content…

Thomson’s work on gas discharges led to the Astons mass spectrometer where he then discovered about isotopes. Thomson was later received a Nobel Prize in 1906 for his theoretical and experimental research on the discharge of electricity though gas. The discovery of electron helped many/connected the discovery of many other new researches. There were many experiments before the discovery of electrons but first we need to understand how his experiment works. First Gas is a poor conductor under normal condition but if the gas is in a glass container as a reduced pressure, then the voltage is then applied across two electrodes inside the container, a discharge will then occur allowing the gas to become conductive. One of the most important experiment in the discovery of electrons was the Cathode Rays tube. The above experiment reveals bright lines are observed to come from the cathode, negative electrode also known as Cathode Rays. Before there were many controversy over the nature of cathode rays. Many German physicists thought that cathode rays was some form of radiation while most of British physicists believed that the Cathode Ray was a stream of negative charged …show more content…

His Father Joseph James Thomson owned a specialist bookshop that has been owned from the past 3 generations. His mother on the other hand owned a cotton company. His personal life was also very interesting, in 1890 J.J Thomson was married to Rose Paget, one of his students in his class. Thomson had 2 children’s, a daughter and a son. His daughter name was Joan and his son was George Paget Thomson, who later became a physicist also win a Nobel Prize as well. George Paget Thomson was an English physicist and Nobel Prize winner for his discovery of the wave properties of the electron by