Gilan is one of the northern provinces of Iran with Rasht as the capital. This province is connected to the Caspian Sea from the north, has a water border with the coastal countries of the Caspian Sea, and has a land border with the Republic of Azerbaijan through Astara. It can be said that the dominant ethnic group in Gilan is Gilak. Talesh, Turk, Kurd and Lor constitute the largest population in Gilan province respectively.

Geography

Gilan has borders with Ardabil province in the west, Zanjan and Qazvin provinces in the south and Mazandaran province in the east. Gilan has an area of 14,044 square kilometers, and its population is 2,350,686 people according to the 2016 census. Gilan is divided into 16 cities called Astara, Astane Ashrafieh, Amlash, Bandar Anzali, Talesh, Siahkal, Shaft, Rasht, Rudbar, Rudsar, Rezvanshahr, Soomehsara, Fooman, Lahijan, Langrud, and Masal.

Customs

The customs and traditions of Gilan depict an interesting complex interrelation between pre-Islamic and Islamic ones; for instance, the combination of trees, bulls and eggs in holy places such as shrines, and the importance of natural elements in the performance of religious ceremonies have attracted much attention. The importance of trees among the Gilani is quite palpable, sometimes these same trees are considered as the survivors of the Imams, so they are called noble or elderly. The juice of these trees is considered as a sign the Imams’ blood due to their red color. Pilgrims beg, make vows, and ask God to heal the sick people under these trees. With the child's first teeth, the traditional ceremony of Dandan fashoon is held in which they spread a tablecloth with mirror, scissors, Quran, gold coins, books, pens, and needles; the first thing the child grabs indicates his fate. If he takes Qur'an, he will become a clergy, and if scissors, he will become a hairdresser. Weddings also have a special hierarchy. Even the ceremony of rice planting and harvesting is so important that it is still held during certain times of the year.

Handicrafts

Handicrafts produced in Gilan province embrace a wide range including wood carving, joinery, mosaic work, mat weaving, bamboo weaving, pearl weaving, pottery, ceramics, pumpkin painting, felt weaving, silk weaving, Jajim weaving, kilim weaving, chamush embroidery, crochet, Chadrshab weaving, carpet weaving. Tea, rice, Rudbar olives, fresh fish, smoked and salted fish, peanuts, citrus fruits, Fooman cookies, dried noodles and honey are some of the souvenirs of this province. Gilan has a long list of special foods due to its fish, olives and a variety of local vegetables. Among the most important local dishes of Gilan, we can mention Mirza Ghasemi, Baqlaqatagh, Torshtereh, Anarij, Kal Kabab, Fesenjan chicken or Lako chicken, Vavishka, Torshshami, Sheshandaz, Sirabij, Sirqliyeh and Borani eggplant.

Tourist Attractions

The nature of Gilan province, with temperate climate, has dense forests and beautiful landscapes such as sea, waterfalls, forested mountains, flowing rivers, and lush gardens. Anzali Wetland, Rudkhan Castle, Visadar Waterfall, Saqalaksar Lake, Rural Heritage Museum, Mirza Kuchak Khan Tomb, Municipality Building, Sheikh Zahed Tomb, Latoon Waterfall, Divrash Forest, Sheytan Kuh, Tea Museum, Masouleh Village, Darband Cave, Subatan summer resort, Matash, Gisum forest and beach, etc. are among the tourist attractions of this province.