Introduction

1Numbers are rare in Chinese history, which forces China historians to rely on empiricism and rule of thumb. It may seem that legal history is less hampered by the shortage of quantitative data than economic or social history, since there are plenty of codes and casebooks to explore. Yet evaluating the efficiency of the legal system in general, or the implementation of death penalty and its deterring effect on the Chinese populace, the lack of reliable figures becomes a serious obstacle.

Why focus on lingchi executions ?

4This paper focuses on executions by dismemberment, lingchi chusi in Chinese, which are more commonly known by the expression “death by a thousand cuts”. In reality the practice involved no more than eight to ten cuts. Why focus on lingchi, that constituted the most extreme form of deterrence in the Qing penal system ? As the harshest form of death penalty, it was assured the highest degree of visibility as well as certainty, due to its exclusion from the judicial revision process. Like other crimes, lingchi sentences were systematically conveyed through memorials drawn up by the provincial judge (ancha shi) on behalf of the provincial governor under whose authority cases were investigated, processed and submitted to the Board of Punishments in Beijing. Crimes committed in the Beijing metropolitan area were adjudicated directly by the Board of Punishment in a procedure called “immediate adjudication” (xianshen). Once examined by the specialized services of the Board, the cases were assigned to the “Three Legal Courts” (Sanfasi) composed by the directorates of the Board of Punishments, the Censorate (Duchayuan), and the Court of Revision (Dalisi). Lingchi sentences were then transmitted to the emperor for confirmation by the emperor, like all capital sentences.

5This judicial process was somewhat perfunctory, however, since lingchi was not an ordinary death penalty, it did not appear among the “Five Punishments”, the list of legal penalties in Article One of the Chinese penal codes, which had been in force since the Tang. The Fifth and most serious penalty was subdivided into “death by strangulation”, supposedly a milder form of execution because it left the body in its integrity, and “decapitation”, more severe since “head and body were separated” (shenshou yichu). While the Chinese legal system was based on the principle that the nature of crimes and punishments must be clearly and publicly defined and announced, so that people would be deterred from committing crime, the absence of the harshest punishment of all in the list of the legal penalties is intriguing. It makes dismemberment a terse and duplicitous device of deterrence.

6Lingchi was peculiar in another respect which was hidden in the depth of the code. In various sections, death penalty was allowed in order to fit itemized crimes, each time specifying whether the sentence required “immediate execution” (lijue), or whether, as in most cases, extenuating circumstances justified preventive “detainment in jail” (jianhou), meaning that the death sentence was suspended until its reexamination by the Autumn Assises. This procedure effectively reduced executions to a small number of “confirmed sentences”, while most death sentence were finally commuted to banishment or pardon. These broadly dispensed mitigations were welcome in a harsh legal system, but lingchi completely derogated from them. The few articles of the code that mention this penalty – the detail of which will be examined below – always implied “immediate execution”. Accordingly, lingchi sentences were excluded from the revision procedure of the Autumn Assizes. Introduced in the code by the conquering Mongols who established the Yuan dynasty, lingchi was originally intended as a sheer instrument of terror, and it remained so both under the Chinese Ming dynasty and the Manchu Qing dynasty. Its application therefore had to remain outside the boundaries of mercy and pardon, although the latter was quite generously dispensed in the penal system as a whole.

8This plethora of derogations deprived the accused of the due process which was normally guaranteed by the revision system. This is undoubtedly the evil face of the imperial legal system, reserving in many respects a sphere for extra-legal measures and draconian justice where legal procedures were systematically distorted or ignored. Although a curse for the population, the lingchi penalty and its procedures are a blessing for the statistician, who can assume that all identified lingchi sentences were executed with very few exceptions. For this particular punishment sentence meant execution, with only a negligible margin of discrepancy.

9Another advantage of lingchi for historical enquiry comes from the formal nature of the memorials sent by the provincial authorities to the central boards. These reports mostly consisted of the lists of convicted persons, categorized according to the sentences they received. Only those who were ‘short listed’ were named, while the others were left unnamed under the character “deng”, meaning etc., et alii. For instance : “Condemned to immediate decapitation are Wang X, Zhang Y, and 18 others”. Lingchi condemnations were judged serious enough to be presented separately in a single memorial, where each individual was identified by name with the crime he or she had committed. Whenever lingchi sentences were mentioned in a routine memorial including several different types of penalties, lingchi sentences were placed at the top of the list. In group executions of rebels or bandits, the ringleader was usually condemned to lingchi and his full name was used to identify the case, while his subordinates who were condemned to decapitation were mentioned only cursorily by the et alii stock designation.

10This conspicuousness has allowed the identification of a significant sample of over 1100 lingchi sentences executed between the Qing conquest in 1644 and the abolition of lingchi and other ‘cruel penalties’ in 1905. This set of cases is briefly described below and more details are provided in the appendix.

Common assumptions about lingchi and the issues they raise

10 Meadows (1856, pp. 655-656). Quoted in Bodde, Morris (1973).

As soon as the thirty-three were decapitated, the same executioner proceeded, with a single-edged dagger or knife, to cut up the man on the cross, whose sole clothing consisted of his wide trousers, rolled down to his hips and up to his buttocks. He was a strongly-made man, above the middle-size, and apparently about forty years of age. (…) As the man was at the distance of twenty-five yards, with his side towards us, though we observed the two cuts across the forehead, the cutting off of the left breast, and slicing of the flesh from the front of the thighs, we could not see all the horrible operation. From the first stroke of the knife till the moment the body was cut down from the cross and decapitated, about four or five minutes elapsed. We should not have been prohibited from going close up, but as may be easily imagined, even a powerful curiosity was an insufficient inducement, to jump over a number of dead bodies and literally wade through pools of blood, to place ourselves in the hearing of the groans indicated by the heaving chest and quivering limbs of the poor man. Where we stood, we heard not a single cry ; and I may add that of the thirty-three men decapitated, no one struggled or uttered any exclamation as the executioner approached him.

12The impact of this breathtaking rendition is put into context by Bodde and Morris who stressed the exceptionality of the event :

11 Bodde, Morris (1973, p. 111) – (my italics).

The fact that these accounts from north, central and south China have to do with events occurring respectively in 1860, 1857, and 1851 is important because all three dates fall within the period of the Taiping rebellion (1850-1864). This conflict, probably the most destructive civil war of all time, devastated much of the richest land of China, killed twenty or more millions people, and very nearly overthrew the Manchu government. These then were years of crisis, very different indeed from the period only thirty or forty years earlier to which the bulk of the cases translated in this book belong. Hence it may be not wholly fair to project what is said about penal institutions during the one age back to the earlier age of political stability.

14Hence the question that underlies this article : to what extent is Meadows’s account of a bandit’s execution by dismemberment and beheading representative of Chinese law under the Qing ? Was lingchi a tool of deterrence used in periods of exceptional turmoil, which significantly receded in peaceful times ? An implicit assumption by Bodde and Morris is that lingchi was mainly employed against rebellions and gangs of violent bandits. In another part of their book the authors provide a complete list of the crimes that were punished by lingchi. Nevertheless it is clear that in their view this punishment was primarily a technique of mass terror intended for reestablishing State authority and public law and order disrupted by revolts and armed banditry. Other crimes punishable by dismemberment, such as murders of elder relatives, bloody feuds between families or lineages, are deemed marginal and anecdotal compared with the major disruptions of the public order. Must we regard this kind of executions primarily as a tool of political terror used by the State against society ?

15Our data gives insight on the following five issues :

Frequency : how many lingchi executions took place during the 261 years between the Qing conquest in 1644 and the abolition of the ‘cruel penalties’ in 1905 ?

Trend : do we discern an upwards or downwards trend in the use of lingchi during the Qing period ?

Periodization : were there periods which saw an abrupt increase or decrease in lingchi executions ? Were some Qing Emperors more prone than others to authorizing ‘slicing’ executions ?

Localization : were lingchi executions spread evenly throughout the empire, or did some provinces or regions witness the executions more frequently than others ?

Dissuasion target : Among the few major crimes for which the code provided for a lingchi sentence, which crimes were most frequently subject to linchi execution ? Were there significant changes across provinces and time ? Were certain types of crimes more targeted or repressed in particular provinces, or during particular periods ?

Problems and potential of the collected data

16We have gathered a sample of 1,140 persons killed by the lingchi process across 1,017 executions. The discrepancy between the two figures results from the fact that several dismemberments could take place in the same execution, as the dramatic case of the Monk Snowfield and his followers will show. Let us start by presenting our source (for further details see appendix 1).

17Our two major sources are the “Archives of the Grand Secrétariat” (neige daku dang’an) and the judicial chronicles in the Shenbao which reproduced the “Beijing gazette” (jingbao). The archives preserve the record of 357 persons dismembered in 338 executions between 1644 and 1854 ; the Shenbao supplies us with the record of 453 persons dismembered in 453 executions. This makes up the first sample of 810 lingchi, a good basis for our enquiry, but it presents two vexing flaws. First, the periods covered by each source are grossly unequal in length : 210 years for the archival source versus 33 years for the newspaper source. Moreover, the eighteen years from the last year of the archival source, 1854, to the first year of the journal source, 1872, are entirely devoid of data. As a matter of fact, the gap is wider, since the Grand secretariat archives show a sharp drop of executions from the early 1840s down to almost none in 1854. Given that these are the years of the high tide of lingchi and many other forms of violence caused by the Taiping, Nian, and Muslims rebellions, it is clear that these small numbers, or none at all, most likely reflect the disruption of the Qing administration rather than a real decrease in executions. During these thirty years, the rebels as well as the officials acted outside the law and off the record. Even though the lingchi sentences imposed on the Taiping leaders as well as on the chiefs of other rebellions were recorded, most punishments occurred through summary “executions on the spot” (jiudi zhengfa) which were rarely reported. The magnitude and lawlessness of violence for these two decades renders all judicial statistics unreliable.

18Similar problems might negatively affect the data of previous periods. For instance, the Grand Secretariat records only 34 executions for the 60 years of reign of the Kangxi emperor, i.e. around 1.4 lingchi per year. The average is much lower if we consider that a single collective execution held in 1667, that is, during Oboi Regency, counts for 27 lingchi, or 80% of the total number of the individuals executed. If we consider the number of the executions, rather than the individuals, the number falls to eight, which is barely more than one every ten years. Either Kangxi’s was the Grand lenient reign that admirers of imperial ‘légendes dorées’ like to venerate, or the data are flawed. Our inclination for the second view prompted us to compensate the gap in time and flaws of data by referring to three complementary sources. These are collections of administrative and judicial documents issued by State agents, either officially or unofficially (see appendix 1). Such sources allow raising the rate of executions under Kangxi to a more credible 3.9 per year. However, there are still spans of over ten years entirely “blank” of all executions under Kangxi or Yongzheng reigns, which lead us to suspect deficiencies in judicial registration.

19Resorting to complementary sources could not compensate for the sharp discrepancy between the last thirty years, corresponding exactly to the reign of Guangxu, and the rest of the Qing period. It simply allowed reducing the Guangxu share of the lingchi executions toll from 55% to 40%, but still a remarkably high proportion ; this question will be discussed later. The imbalance might result from the difference of coverage between the sources kept or issued by the central Qing administration, and the Shenbao, a modern newspaper that daily extracted information from the Beijing gazette as well as from other local reports thanks to an efficient network of correspondents. Hence a possible underestimation of the numbers prior to Guangxu, which only a systematic survey of the judicial archives in Beijing would be able to rectify.

21The complementary sources are less reliable. They contain the name of the condemned, the authorities that confirmed the sentence, the “name of the crime”, and the date of sentencing. In around one hundred cases, however, the locality is not indicated, or even the province, where the case originated. We laid down as basic requirement for our samples that the case include the name of the condemned, a clear statement of the sentence to lingchi, and the nature of the crime. On the whole, this set of samples is sound enough to attempt a “comprehensive weighing” of lingchi executions under the Qing and to find answers to the five questions raised above.

Frequency of linchi sentences and trends throughout the Qing period

23The diagram shows a regular trend upward from the last years of Kangxi (after 1700) to the reign of Jiaqing (1810). If, as we suspected, the trend downward that started during this era can be explained by the judicial breakdown, we can compensate for the lack of data by conjecturing a continuation of the trend upward from the peak of the Jiaqing reign in 1806 to the peak of the early Guangxu reign. Since the gap in the diagram corresponds to the bloodiest years of the civil conflict, when lingchi executions of the kind that Meadows witnessed took place in great numbers. It is reasonable to imagine even higher peaks under Xianfeng and Tongzhi – between 1850 and 1875 – than under Daoguang : thus the line would reach a peak around 1860, over twenty executions per year, which then would slightly decrease and remain at around fifteen per year under Guangxu.

24Even if we refrain from such bold statistical speculation, the general trend upward seems undeniable with the available data. At the present stage, it might be interpreted as a confirmation of Bodde and Morris’ assumption of a growing recourse to lingchi as a reaction to the unprecedented civil conflicts of the mid-19th century. The most suitable interpretation would be as follows : once the critical years of settlement under Shunzhi and the regencies of the early Kangxi reign passed, lingchi was seldom employed during most of the Kangxi and Yongzheng reigns, marking the acme of the dynasty. It was more frequently employed under Qianlong, whose reign was plagued by millenarian revolts and banditry during its last years. Then followed a troubled period during the early 19th century, mostly concealed by the absence of archival data. Finally, once the State administration was restored and a better recording of judicial activities by the new media became available, the change appears dramatic : lingchi had become the unmistakable device of mass deterrence in a Chinese empire in general turmoil.

25This interpretation seems coherent, but it relies on the idea that lingchi was mostly a tool for repressing rebellions and restoring ‘public order’. Conceptually, it places the dynamics of the evolution not so much in the law but rather in society which was marred by ethnic, social, and political conflict. In such a perspective, lingchi is just a tool of repression in the hand of the State. The momentum is external to law, which reflects events passively : more rebellions to repress implies more lingchi sentences and executions. This paper will contend that, contrary to these interpretations, law is dynamic and creative : by determining what is criminal, it shapes the social reality in which the crimes take place. Far from a mere tool, lingchi was a conception of society and power cast in a dogmatic mold and grounded in the most sacred Classics. The trend of sentences therefore had its own dynamics, relatively independent from the socio-political events, no matter how tremendous the impact of such events.

Targets of deterrence : crimes liable of lingchi and their share in effective lingchi sentences

26Crimes subject to lingchi in the Qing code fall in the following categories :

15 Law against Robbery or banditry (“Qiangdao”, art.261 in the Qing code) did not provide for lingchi (...)

Rebellions, high treason, conspiracies (real or attempted) against the dynasty, and armed banditry. In analyzing the statistical and diagrammatical data, all the forms of collective actions that subverted or disrupted public order have been grouped under the same category of “Revolt”, marked by R in the diagrams of the appendix (see diagram c. and d. in appendix 2)

16 Art.287 : “Killing three persons in a same family” (Sha yijia sanren). The term “familicide” is cur (...)

Killing three persons or more in another family. This was clearly a measure against family extermination, or “familicide”, that marked particularly vicious forms of blood feuds between lineages. These are the F crimes in the diagrams.

17 Art.284 : “Plot to kill grand-parents or parents” (Mousha zu fumu fumu) ; art.286 : “Plot to kill t (...)

Murder, attempted murder, or similar action, by a younger person on the elder person, or an inferior on the superior in the same family or clan. This is the general category of “parricides”, marked by P. This category can be split into 5 sub-categories, according to whether the victim of the crime was the father (Pf), the mother (Pm), other close relatives (aunt, uncle, elder brother or sister all regrouped under the collective noun of zunzhang, that can be translated as “senior elder”, hence Pse in the diagrams) ; the killing of the household head (Phh) by a slave or hired domestic ; and the killing of the husband by his wife, which I propose to call viricide, as a Latin symmetric of uxoricide – marked Pv in the diagrams.

18 Art.287, last paragraph ; and art.288 : “Picking up parts of the body of a living person” (Zhaishen (...)

Inhuman crimes such as maiming and desecrating of the body of an enemy killed in a feud, or taking a body part of a living person for cannibalism or witchcraft (or both), have been ranged in the category of “atrocities” (A).

27These categories of crimes affect different realms, which can be regarded as concentric circles. The first circle concerns the public order of the empire, and the crimes in question have the potential for disrupting large areas or even the whole territory, as was the case of the massive rebellions of the mid-19th century. For crimes within this category, lingchi fulfills its ‘classical’ function of protecting the State and the dynasty. Crimes of the second category delineate a more restricted circle : a village or a district, the order of which could be disrupted by blood feuds between rivaling families engaged in ‘private wars’ or vendetta that affected local communities in many parts of the empire. In this field, lingchi does not defend the State itself but local peace and order.

28The third circle is the family, in its twofold legal definition : Firstly, as a household including the head of the family, all relatives living with him, slaves and hired servants. Secondly, as including all relatives linked by duties of ritual mourning, even those living separately. These two kinds of kinship – the existential one and the ritual one – were taken into account in the legal framing of a “parricide” sentence, thus condemning to lingchi a domestic servant suspected of having plotted the death of the family head as well as a younger brother accused of having killed his elder brother even if living in separate dwellings. Moreover, a junior member of the family who killed a distant senior relative, for instance an aunt visiting his parents, was also liable of lingchi. Here, dismemberment was intended to maintain a strict subordination of the ‘younger junior’ (beiyou : those who were of a younger generation, or junior in age) vis-à-vis their senior or elder relatives (zunzhang : those relatives of an older generation, or elders of the same generation). This subordinate status was for life : one remained the lifelong ‘younger junior’ of one’s elder brother or sister, which changed only by the arrival of new members in the family who became one’s ‘younger junior’.

29The fourth circle is the most intriguing, since it delineates the individual body : death by dismemberment for desecrating the human body, either in the course of a vengeful feud or with the intent to use parts of the bodies for witchcraft or wicked sectarian cults. Here, lingchi serves to defend a certain idea of human dignity, at least its bodily integrity. Despite the original significance and intentions behind making this a crime of lingchi, such cases became rare under the Qing, with most of them occurring at the height of blood feuds (see diagram c in appendix 2).

31The four categories of crimes had their specific realms, so that their respective proportions are indicative of the main trend in the repression of the most heinous crimes. The code merely provides us with a theoretical definition of the most heinous crimes. To identify which of these crimes were most effectively repressed in practice, we need to turn toward the lingchi sentences pronounced by the judicial courts. The data allow for calculation of the share of each of the four categories of lingchi sentences, and for representing the figures in pie charts covering the reign of eight Qing emperors (see c. “Four categories of lingchi sentences for eight Qing emperors reigns” in the appendix).

32Some structural characteristics become immediately apparent. Thus, the relative proportion of each category of crime during the reign of Shunzhi is strikingly similar to that of the reign of Guangxu, and to the intermediary reign of Daoguang. Condemnation for parricides represents around two thirds of the crimes, while the last third is shared between revolts and familicides : there are more revolts (30%) than familicides (7%) under Shunzhi (30% vs 7%) and also under Daoguang (22% vs 8%), but under Guangxu there are slightly more familicides than revolts (14 vs 16%). During the long 18th century, under Yongzheng, Qianlong and Jiaqing rules, the occurrence of parricides remain under or around 50%, and revolts somewhere between 33 and 45%. The share of revolts tends to increase throughout the time, until the early 19th century. Finally, there are the anomalies of the Kangxi and Tongzhi periods, during which revolts accounted for 94% of all crimes under Kangxi and 100% of parricides under Tongzhi. This aberration, however, simply indicates that the data are flawed. Apart from parricides and revolts, familicides would require a special study : they remain stable between 7 and 9% for most of the period, and jump to 16% under Guangxu. Judicial archives as well as novels by popular authors, confirm that familicides and their punishment with lingchi formed a basso continuo of local life throughout the empire. They occasionally came with “atrocities” (maiming of bodies, dead or alive), which slowly declined from 4% to 2% of the sentences between the Qianlong and the Daoguang reigns, and disappear thereafter.

34In such cases, the legal penalty strikingly mirrored the circumstances of the crime, the State committing a familicide in a bout of retributive justice. This was the only category of crimes for which lingchi sentences met broad popular consensus. The legitimacy of the State was enhanced when it redressed the abuses of the local gentry, and repressed feuds by turning their own methods against them. For this type of crime, public opinion and popular culture undoubtedly supported the State’s effort to use terror as deterrence.

35There is enough evidence to establish that the use of lingchi could not be ascribed solely to the repression of revolts, even though this component was always present and could become overwhelming depending on time and location. Even taking into account the potential flaws of our data, it seems reasonable to argue that the majority of lingchi sentences were not pronounced against rebels or armed bandits, but against parricides. Throughout the period under examination, revolts account for hardly one third, while parricides account for more than half of the lingchi sentences, and familicides for ten percent combined with 1.5% of “atrocities”. However, revolts and bandits are dominant for a longer period, when we combine the reigns of Kangxi, Qianlong, Jiaqing and Tongzhi, i.e. 155 years out of 261, while parricides are dominant only at the beginning (under Shunzhi) and, more preeminently, at the end (under Guangxu), whose thirty years’ reign saw more than 40% of all lingchi sentences. Therefore, the predominance of parricides over revolts is established in the very last decades of the empire. In other words, it seems safe to infer a shift from a revolt-focused lingchi toward a parricide-focused lingchi during the 19th century. This shift occurred in the 1820s, if we take seriously the striking similarity between Daoguang’s and Guangxu’s pie-charts. To explain this shift, let us first consider of the case of revolts, to turn to parricides next.

Lingchi as restoration of public order

36The idea that lingchi was devised mainly for repressing rebellions and bandits is firmly grounded in famous historical events, such as the dreadful fate of famous Taiping leaders. Our data include eloquent examples of that kind, most notably the repression of a revolt led by Buddhist Bonzes, whose chief was called Snow Field (Xueye). It took place on the sixth year of Kangxi (1667), when the reign was still under the regency of Oboi, two years before he was tried and imprisoned by the young Emperor. This was a period of violent conflict among the ruling elite. Oboi had the entire clan of one of his co-regents executed, a fate that came to haunt him and his kin some years later. This background might account for the merciless treatment of Snow Field partisans, of whom nothing is known otherwise. The memorial to the Board of Punishments reads :

The Governor General of Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces and other places, concurrently in charge of military affairs and logistics, vice-president at the Ministry of War, and Censor Lü Chongling respectfully reports in re : the rebelled monk has surrendered.

23 For the wives and children of the condemned ‘being confiscated’ meant to be deported and reduced to (...)

24 Neige daku, Archives of the Grand Secretariat, ‘Basic material’ (jiben ziliao) 065912-001.

Your Servant has under his control the chief rebel, the monk Snow Field, who connived with Li Faming et al. for printing fake seals and spread libels full of absurd ideas and foolhardy bravadoes. Your servant has proceeded to interrogations and established that Snow Field was the vicious head of a “Complot of Sedition”, punished by dismemberment according to the Law. Those who plotted with him for faking seals and spreading libels, that are [the monk] Illuminating Light and ten others who followed the rebellion and received the libels, as well as Zhou Shaofeng and thirteen others, each being found guilty of participating to a plot of rebellion, all of them (i.e. 27 persons), without distinction between leaders and followers, are according to the Law, condemned to death by dismemberment. There has been no contestation of the sentence. As for those who were aware of the situation, who concealed the prohibited items, or deliberately let escape [prisoners ?], namely Wang Sanye and four others, as well as the members of the family of the chief rebel such like Qi Fengxi and twelve others, they are all condemned to decapitation. (Here follows a list of accessories, sentenced to various non-capital punishments) The wives and the children of the criminals are all, according to the law, confiscated (ruguan) , as well as their wealth and lands, with specifications detailed in the appended folios.

37This harsh sentence reveals some salient characteristics of lingchi execution against rebels, which can be sketched out as follows :

Collective incrimination conforming to legal key-terms in the statute and sub-statute : “all of them, without distinction between leaders and followers” (jie, bu fen shoucong). Here, the abnormally high number of leaders condemned to dismemberment suggests that the rebellion was considered a serious threat for the dynasty, although the Bonze Snow Field and his unfortunate companions left no other trace in the records.

combination of lingchi for the main culprits and decapitation for accessories, with exposure of the head for both categories ;

‘chain indictment’ (lianzuo) of relatives and neighbors who were supposedly aware of the plot but did not denounce the plotters to the authorities ;

Derived penalty for wives and children – slavery, castration for males, or even death, deportation and ‘confiscation’ (ruguan) for females, meaning that they became State slaves.

39Therefore, it seems reasonable to infer that the “lingchi against great rebellion” with its apparatus of mass terror, collective incriminations and serial executions, made its last round in the suppression of the Taiping, the Nian and Muslims rebels in the 1860s, and then almost disappeared over the last thirty years of the Qing. The dramatic increase of the lingchi sentences during this period is entirely due to the increase of the parricides, accounting for more than 70% of the total, as the pie chart clearly shows.

40As shown in table d., the category of “revolts”, banditry included, represents little less than one third of the lingchi sentences for the entire period, a proportion that had fallen to 15% in the last decades of the Qing. By contrast, parricides represent more than half of lingchi cases for the entire period, with more than two thirds occurring during the last decades. For every rebel dismembered for challenging public order, two or three rebellious children or wives were dismembered for breaching the family hierarchy in the household.

Lingchi used for restoring hierarchical order within the family

42Greek tragedy, Roman Law, and Freudian psychology taught us to construe ‘parricide’ primarily as the murder of a father by his son, or secondarily of a mother by one of her children. In Qing China however, parricide was a much broader category, involving distant relatives, which includes murder or attempted murder by slaves and servants against the household head. The killing of a parent comes only in third and fourth places, after offences against ‘seniors-elders’ (zunzhang). The category covering conflicts between domestic slaves and their master has the lowest number throughout the period, nearly disappearing under the Guangxu reign (just 4 cases recorded, or less than 1%). Yet this was very different by the beginning of the Qing, as we will see below. Most striking is the prevalence of spousal killing, where “offences against husband” comes in the first place with 25% of lingchi. The “parricide”, in Qing China, was primarily a wife killing her husband, or “viricide”.

43The statistics reveal significant changes throughout the Qing period. Under Shunzhi, in the mid-17th century, the killing of a master by one or more domestic slaves was still the most important category of lingchied parricides, accounting for 47% of all such executions, ahead of the viricides, which already surpassed 40%. Master killings recede gradually along the Qianlong and Jiaqing eras (with 7% and 4%, respectively), and drop to less than 1% over the last thirty years of the Qing under Guangxu. During the same years, viricides reach their peak, with almost one third of the “parricides” (31%), and almost one quarter (22.5%) of all the lingchi sentences. Inasmuch as lingchi sentences reflect the inner conflicts in the household, there is a clear shift from slave-against-master killings toward a wife-against-husband killings, while other parricides do not show any striking change.

Spreading deterrence : the spatial repartition of lingchi in the Qing empire

46Thus far, lingchi as a means of mass deterrence has been evoked in its theoretical, qualitative, and quantitative aspects. The crucial issue remains how deterrence was conveyed in practice from the centers of State power toward the provinces and local communities. Capital executions, notably those applying the harshest forms of violence, involve a particular relationship between the center and the provinces or the non-Han marches of the empire (Mongolia, Tibet, Xinjiang). They suggest regional peculiarities which our data leads us to capture.

47This is the most challenging issue, however. First, the flaws in the data that obscured changes over time pose even more serious obstacles when we turn to the distribution between regions. Major differences set apart the eighteen provinces of China proper from the immense crescent of Manchurian, Mongolian, Turkestan and Tibetan steppes and mountains that were incorporated through the Manchu conquest of China. Apart from the well-known and persistent differences in climatic conditions, population density, ethnic composition, etc., they constituted two different worlds in terms of institutions and rules. Chinese provinces were ruled for centuries by the imperial administration, and submitted to codified law and centralized judiciary. The outer margins were left to their own aristocratic elites, under the initially loose, but gradually tighter and more intrusive supervision by a special administration, the Court for Ruling the Frontier-Marches (Lifanyuan). Although the majority of its personnel consisted of non-Han, mainly Mongolian, origin, this Court tended to promote the Chinese way of regulation, codified law, and harsh punishments. But this general statement does not explain why Tibet had almost no lingchi sentences, while Mongolia and Manchuria have the highest rate of lingchi executions per capita, although all three were under the jurisdiction of the Lifanyuan. One of the aims of this research project is to gain a clearer understanding on how the legal and judicial components of the imperial state functioned as a coherent system.

49We start with a rather fragmentary framework for the first two decades 1644-1663, due to the lack of data for many provinces. At the dawn of the dynasty, when its grip on the Chinese territory was still uncertain, lingchi sentences were concentrated in the centers of power : Zhili province, the metropolitan area centered on Beijing ; and Manchuria, that is in fact Shengjing – Moukden under its Manchu name – which was the original capital of the Qing and kept after the conquest of China as part of its institutional and jurisdictional functions to the exclusive usage of the Manchus. The high rate of Gansu deals either with Muslim resilience that was to influence the province in the following centuries, or more likely with the gradual involvement of the dynasty in Mongolian rule in the northern border. The latter cannot be confirmed, since we have no figures for Mongolia proper. At this first stage, the high rates of lingchi sentences are seen in the Northern region that was directly under the rule of the conquerors, while central China reveals lower rates ; for the South and West there are no data. As will be shown further on the nature of the crimes punished with lingchi, there is no indication of rebellious attitudes of these Northern regions, since “parricide”, not “revolt”, was the most targeted crime.

50The map for the two decades, 1728-1747 shows a very contrasted picture, with high rates of lingchi sentences in the South-Western regions (Yunnan, Sichuan, Guizhou) singularized by their many ‘ethnic minorities’ and a strong Muslim component in the population. As the “nature of the crime” will show below, these are rebellious regions already at this time – the years of the end of Yongzheng and the start of Qianlong rules – and this is confirmed in our second time-unit : the map for 1770-1789 shows high rates of lingchi sentences in Yunnan-Guangxi-Sichuan, and also the adjacent Hubei and Hunan, all regions where the White Lotus rebellion originated, which drained armies and finances of the late Qianlong and early Jiaqing reigns. On the South-Eastern coast, Fujian province and its dependence of Taiwan, reveal high rates, mostly explained by feuds and banditry. But the most striking are the high incidents in the ‘non-Han’ Northern and Western vast crescent comprising Manchuria, Mongolia, and Xinjiang. The grim honor of being the areas that saw the most incidents of lingchi goes to these three areas under Daoguang (1821-1851), and Guangxu, up to lingchi’s abolition in 1905. The blind spot in the middle of the century prevented us from verifying whether the Taiping, Nian and other rebellions augmented the rates of lingchi sentences in the regions which were most affected. One notes, however, that regions where the Taiping originated, like Guangxi, and the regions where they spread, like Jiangsu, Anhui Zhejiang, and the regions where the rebels fled and tried to entrench, like Sichuan and Guizhou, saw higher incidents of lingchi. The high rates in Guizhou are partly explained by the recurrent revolts of the Miao. The clearest case of all is Xinjiang’s, the Chinese Turkestan with its original populace of Uyghurs, prone to rebellion and separatism such as the independent khanate with Russian support. Here, as we will see, lingchi sentences have been a tool for repressing and deterring separatism.

51The impact of rebellions on the occurrences of lingchi sentences would need further research. However, the category of “revolts” makes for less than one third of the total number for the whole period, and much less still during the last decades that followed the great rebellions. If insurgent spirit and deeds were targeted in places like Xinjiang, Guizhou or Yunnan, this is but one aspect of a more complex picture, as shown in our last category of documents : maps indicating the nature of crimes that were predominant in the lingchi sentence pronounced in each province (see maps f, g, h).

Localizing crimes targeted by lingchi sentences

52The last three maps all show a sharp contrast between two categories : 1. Provinces where “parricides” are overwhelmingly prevalent, with at least 40% of the sentences ; 2. Province where “revolts” are the most targeted crimes, with at least 40% of the sentences. For the whole period (map f), category 1 is dominant in all the Northeastern region from Manchuria, Mongolia, and Zhili, the metropolitan province, to the lower Yangzi provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, throughout the central provinces, like Anhui, Hubei, down to the Hunan and West to Sichuan. The second category, where “revolts” is the main course of lingchi sentences forms a peripheral arc from the Southeastern coastal provinces of Fujian and Guangdong, up to the North-western Xinjiang, including the ethnically instable Yunnan, Guizhou, and Xizang, that is Tibet. Close to Xinjiang, Gansu has an even greater proportion of “revolts” than expected for a province where an important Muslim minority periodically revolted well before initiating the great Hui rebellion of the 1860s. The adjacent Shaanxi presents a similar picture.

53Thus a contrast appears between a Southern and Western ‘outer’ China on the one hand, where lingchi was mainly a tool for repressing or deterring rebellions and banditry, and a Northern, Eastern and Central China on the other hand, where “parricides” were the main target. These two Chinas are highly unequal in population and density given that the Chinese population is concentrated in the Eastern Coastal provinces and in some central provinces like Hubei or Sichuan, while the peripheral areas are sparsely populated. The prevalence of “parricides” over “revolts” in our data reflects this difference in demographic weight, which should not lead us to overlook the importance of the spatial dimension. If “revolts” amounted to less than one third of the lingchi sentences for the whole empire, they mostly occurred in the vast border areas with mixed and unruly populations, which form buffer marches of great geo-strategic importance for the Empire. In such regions, lingchi was undoubtedly the emblematic manifestation of imperial supremacy, or the tool for its restoration, in other words the State terror device that the term conveys in the Western literature.

54For most of the provinces of ‘inner China’, however, lingchi was imposed not to affirm imperial supremacy or restore public order, but to restore local and familial order. As for familicides, their general progression, as mentioned above, increased from around 7% to nearly doubling in the last decades of the Qing, as well as their permanence in local life. Geographically, lingchi sentences for familicides are in greater proportion in Northern and Central China : around 45% in Manchuria, 50% in Anhui, 30% in Shanxi, over 20% in Zhili. In the unruly Yunnan province, lingchi sentences are equally shared between parricides, revolts, and familicides. There are stunning bursts of “atrocities”, in Zhejiang or Fujian, meaning that local conflicts lead to inhumane conducts, such as the maiming of corpses or dismembering alive, with statistically significant frequency. Given that parricides were already a major cause of lingchi from the beginning of the dynasty, the progression of familicides appears as a major change, which seems to complement the decline in revolts and banditry. Under the Qing, and particularly in the last decades, lingchi was increasingly employed to deter dominant lineages or local bullies from vanquishing their opponents by exterminating them with their kin, and thus maintain at least the simulacra of peace and order at the local level.

55The data do not allow us to go further in the geographical analysis. As limited as our survey is at the present stage, it hints at a penal typology of provinces, which would help restitute its spatial dimension to the legal system.

Some tentative comparisons with Europe

56How should we assess the dismemberment of 1140 people over 250 years, with a frequency of around five incidents per year ? Do these numbers confirm that China lavishly resorted to ‘cruel punishments’, as Westerners would assert increasingly vociferously from the mid-19th century ? How does the Chinese practice of execution compare with the equivalents of the Western countries in the same period ?

57The comparison is not easy. The first difficulty is that reliable and regular data are hard to find prior to the mid-19th century except on a very small scale : covering one city or town, or at best a whole province. Since the judicial systems of Europe were not centralized to the same degree as the Chinese, historians have to piece together scattered information to reach general estimation on the execution rate in England or France. The second difficulty deals with the quality, rather than the quantity, of the data : the type of execution and the categories of targeted crimes in the West do not coincide with the Chinese ones. For instance, it has been calculated that around 35,000 death sentences were pronounced in England and Wales between 1751 and 1800, of which about 7,000 were actually executed. These figures cannot be compared directly with our 1,140 lingchi cases, since the latter number refers only to the particular form of penalties, which occurred much less frequently than ‘ordinary’ capital punishments. A sound comparison could be made only with a general account of all the capital sentences and executions in China, a figure that would be considerably higher than our present data. Producing such statistics is perfectly feasible through a systematic survey of the judicial archives kept in Beijing and Taipei, but it would require much more time and manpower than we have been able to summon until now.

Conclusion

61Even at this initial stage, our investigation in penal geography promises an important outcome in charting out for the spatial dimension of law. The Qing had a well-developed legal system, highly systematic in labeling crimes and apportioning punishments ; but the system could live and grow only by its interrelation with local realities through a complex institutional network that is most aptly seized when restored in its spatial dimension. The Qing code provides us with only a list of crimes liable to lingchi, but in order to know what kind of crimes were effectively targeted by lingchi, we have to delve into the archival cases, and into their spatial repartition and evolution through time. Beyond the sheer figures about harsh punishments, and the comparisons of the level of cruelty between China and Europe that these data seem to reveal, a key interest of such an enquiry is to map the penal agenda of the State throughout its territory. The present data and the maps we drew from them as well as the associated analyses are intended as an invitation to further and more ambitious research into the central archives in Beijing and Taipei, as well as in local archives that become more accessible each year.