For the tour of the same name, see Troublemaker Tour.

"Troublemaker" Single by Weezer Album Weezer (The Red Album) Released June 3, 2008 (album)

July 26, 2008 (single) Recorded March 2008 Length 2:44 Label Geffen Writer(s) Rivers Cuomo Producer(s) Jacknife Lee Status Officially released Live debut August 18, 2008 in Los Angeles, CA Stream Error creating thumbnail: Unable to save thumbnail to destination Spotify Error creating thumbnail: Unable to save thumbnail to destination Apple Music Weezer singles chronology

"Pork and Beans"

(2008) "Troublemaker"

(2008) "The Greatest Man That Ever Lived (Variations on a Shaker Hymn)"

(2008)

Weezer (The Red Album) track listing

"Troublemaker"

(1) "The Greatest Man That Ever Lived (Variations on a Shaker Hymn)"

(2)

Alternate Cover

Troublemaker (Japan iTunes Single)

This song is part of the "Troublemaker" lineage of songs

"Diamond Rings" (2001)

"Special"/"Rock Star" (2006—2007)

"Troublemaker" (2008)

"Troublemaker" is the second single and first track off of The Red Album.

Appearances

Weezer (The Red Album) (2008)

"Troublemaker" (Japanese iTunes Single) (2008)

Troublemaker Remixes (2008)

Various official live bootlegs

iTunes Originals (2010)

Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years (2020)

Overview

"Troublemaker" was originally written by Rivers Cuomo in 2006. Cuomo recorded several acoustic guitar demos in 2006 featuring different guitar riffs and vocal melodies. The song's verse lyrics also appeared in a similar demo titled "Rock Star" (previously titled "Special") based on the guitar riff from the 2001 demo "Diamond Rings." It is unknown if "Troublemaker" is derived from "Rock Star"/"Special" or vice-versa. These demos were released to fans in 2020 as part of the demo compilation Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years.

When the label suggested to Weezer to include more commercial material to speed up the album, the band revisited "Troublemaker." The line "Keep it on the up" was inspired by Cuomo's friend and former bandmate Kevin Ridel (of Avant Garde and AM Radio). Ridel has stated "Rivers sure has made my catch phrase popular!"[citation needed] "Troublemaker" is notably repetitive, with a guitar riff and drum beat that play unchanged throughout almost the entire song.

The song was released as a digital single. A promotional single was also sent to radio. A physical retail single was scheduled to be released in the UK in late September 2008 but never surfaced.[citation needed] "Troublemaker" debuted the week of July 26, 2008, at No. 39 on the Billboard Hot Modern Rock Tracks charts and peaked at No. 2.

Liner notes

Music video

The music video for "Troublemaker" was directed by the Malloy Brothers and was released on October 6, 2008. The video features Weezer and a selected group of fans attempting to break various world records. It was filmed in front of the Great Western Forum in the Los Angeles suburb of Inglewood, California. The video includes footage of Weezer fans playing dodgeball, riding on an oversized skateboard, playing air guitar, and filling a large Weezer logo with nachos, cheese, and jalapenos. Rivers Cuomo is also shown pulling a stationwagon full of Weezer fans with his teeth. The video alternates between scenes of the hootenanny as well as a live performance by the band.

Troublemaker Remixes

See Troublemaker Remixes

Personnel

Rivers Cuomo – lead guitar, lead vocals

Patrick Wilson – percussion

Brian Bell – rhythm guitar, backing vocals

Scott Shriner - bass guitar, backing vocals

Jacknife Lee - producer

Lyrics

Put me in a special school 'cuz I am such a fool

And I don’t need a single book to teach me how to read

Who needs stupid books? They are for petty crooks

And I will learn by studying the lessons in my dreams

So turn off the TV 'cuz that’s what others see

And movies are as bad as eating chocolate ice cream

They only sicken me. Don’t let me play football

I’ll sack the quarterback and jack the brother of the ball

I’m a troublemaker, never been a faker

Doin’ things my own way and never giving up

I’m a troublemaker, not a double-taker

I don’t have the patience to keep it on the up

I picked up a guitar. What does this signify?

I’m gonna play some heavy metal riffs and you will die.

You wanted arts and crafts. How’s this for arts and crafts?

Wuh-nuh- nuh- nuh- nuh- nuh- nuh- nuh- nuh—that’s right!

I’m growing out my hair. I’m moving out to Cherokee.

I’m gonna be a rock star and you are gonna bear with me

'Cuz I can’t work a job like any other slob

Punchin’ in and punchin’ out and suckin’ up to Bob

Marryin’ a beeyotch, havin’ seven keeyods

Givin’ up and growin’ old and hopin’ there’s a God.

I’m a troublemaker, never been a faker

Doin’ things my own way and never giving up

I’m a troublemaker, not a double-taker

I don’t have the patience to keep it on the up

I’m gonna be a star and people will crane necks

To get a glimpse of me and see if I am having sex

And studying my moves, they try to understand

Why I am so unlike the singers in the other bands.

I’m such a mystery as anyone can see

There isn’t anybody else exactly quite like me

And when it’s party time, like 1999

I’ll party by myself because I’m such a special guy

I’m a troublemaker, never been a faker

Doin’ things my own way and never giving up

I’m a troublemaker, not a double-taker

I don’t have the patience to keep it on the up

Keep it on the up

I’m a troublemaker

Keep it on the up

I’m a troublemaker

Keep it on the up

I’m a troublemaker

Keep it on the up

I’m a troublemaker

Never giving up

Known recordings

Performer(s) Title Filename Date of recording Recording location Length Appeared on Notes For earlier demos, see "Diamond Rings" and "Special" Rivers Cuomo Troublemaker troublemaker feel and low bridge.mp3 2006 3:03 Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years Rivers Cuomo Troublemaker troublemaker melody crammed.mp3 2006 2:02 Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years Rivers Cuomo Troublemaker troublemaker melody shifted.mp3 2006 3:07 Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years Rivers Cuomo Troublemaker troublemaker chunky GFeF.mp3 2006 1:23 Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years Rivers Cuomo Troublemaker troublemaker orig feel.mp3 2006 3:18 Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years Rivers Cuomo Troublemaker troublemaker strummy.mp3 2006 2:18 Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years Rivers Cuomo Troublemaker Troublemaker.mp3 2006/2007 2:48 Alone X: The Red-Raditude-Hurley Years "Last Ditch Efforts for Album 6" Weezer Troublemaker 2007

Shangri La Studios, Malibu, CA

Malibu Performing Arts Center, Malibu, CA

Threshold Studios, Santa Monica, CA

2:44 Weezer (The Red Album) Weezer Troublemaker 2010 2:45 iTunes Originals about this table

See also