Loading...

The Collected Short Fiction of C.J. Cherryh

by C. J. Cherryh

Other authors: See the other authors section.

MembersReviewsPopularityAverage ratingMentions417661,772 (3.93)53

All of C.J. Cherryh's award-winning short fiction, collected in one volume for the first time... "It's rare that I'm not working on a novel. Short stories often happen between novels. Consequently my output is fairly small. But I love the tale-telling concept, the notion that I can spin a yarn, rather than construct something architectural and precise." So writes triple Hugo Award-winning author C.J. Cherryh in the introduction to this book, the first comprehensive collection of her independent short fiction. For though Cherryh is primarily known for her novels, it's clear both from the more than two dozen brilliant and varied stories collected here, as well as her commentaries about them, that she loves the short forms and truly enjoys her forays into them. We welcome you to join the realms of C. J. Cherryh's imagination, where you'll visit: "Cassandra"--the Hugo Award-winning tale of a woman cursed with a unique, prophetic madness. "Threads of Time"--an unforgettable reminder that when you play tricks in time, Time itself may play the greatest trick on you. Sunfall--in which six mighty Earth cities laden with the grandeur of history confront their fates in the far future light of our own dying sun. And many other magical, alien, and future worlds, in a volume that incorporates all C. J. Cherryh's previous, long-unavailable collections, individual short stories that have never been compiled before, and a never-before-published novella written specifically for this book. Board this spaceship where your tour guide is one of the most gifted and brilliant science fiction and fantasy writers, and embark on a journey fueled by the imagination of the incomparable C. J. Cherryh.… (more)

▾Tags

▾LibraryThing Recommendations

▾Lists

None

▾Will you like it?

Loading...

Sign up for LibraryThing to find out whether you'll like this book.

▾Conversations (About links)

No current Talk conversations about this book.

» See also 53 mentions

▾Other authors

» Add other authors

Author nameRoleType of authorWork?StatusC. J. Cherryh—primary authorall editionscalculatedWhealan, MichaelCover artistsecondary authorsome editionsconfirmed

▾Awards and Honors

▾Common Knowledge

You must log in to edit Common Knowledge data.

For more help see the Common Knowledge help page.

Canonical title Original title Alternative titles Original publication date People/Characters Important places Important events Related movies Epigraph Dedication First words Quotations Last words Publisher's editors Blurbers Original language Canonical DDC/MDS Canonical LCC

▾References

References to this work on external resources.

Wikipedia in English (5)

Cassandra (short story)

File:CherryhCollectedShortCover.jpg

The Brothers (novella)

The Collected Short Fiction of C. J. Cherryh

The Scapegoat (C. J. Cherryh novel)

▾Book descriptions

All of C.J. Cherryh's award-winning short fiction, collected in one volume for the first time... "It's rare that I'm not working on a novel. Short stories often happen between novels. Consequently my output is fairly small. But I love the tale-telling concept, the notion that I can spin a yarn, rather than construct something architectural and precise." So writes triple Hugo Award-winning author C.J. Cherryh in the introduction to this book, the first comprehensive collection of her independent short fiction. For though Cherryh is primarily known for her novels, it's clear both from the more than two dozen brilliant and varied stories collected here, as well as her commentaries about them, that she loves the short forms and truly enjoys her forays into them. We welcome you to join the realms of C. J. Cherryh's imagination, where you'll visit: "Cassandra"--the Hugo Award-winning tale of a woman cursed with a unique, prophetic madness. "Threads of Time"--an unforgettable reminder that when you play tricks in time, Time itself may play the greatest trick on you. Sunfall--in which six mighty Earth cities laden with the grandeur of history confront their fates in the far future light of our own dying sun. And many other magical, alien, and future worlds, in a volume that incorporates all C. J. Cherryh's previous, long-unavailable collections, individual short stories that have never been compiled before, and a never-before-published novella written specifically for this book. Board this spaceship where your tour guide is one of the most gifted and brilliant science fiction and fantasy writers, and embark on a journey fueled by the imagination of the incomparable C. J. Cherryh.

▾Library descriptions

No library descriptions found.

▾LibraryThing members' description

Haiku summary

Current Discussions

None

Popular covers

Quick Links

Rating

Average: (3.93)

0.511.5 12 32.5 23 113.5 24 214.5 25 18

Is this you?

Become a LibraryThing Author.