The following reassessment of present-day NT textual criticism requires, by its very nature, a brief statement of the circumstances that occasioned it. Seven years ago, in the W. H. P. Hatch Memorial Lecture at the 1973 annual meeting of the Society of Biblical Literature, I attempted in fifty minutes an adventuresome—if not audacious— assessment of the entire scope of NT textual criticism during the past century. Though this was an instructive exercise for me and one that others report as instructive also for them, it was inevitable that so bold an undertaking would elicit sharp criticism. The first hint of this came from Münster in 1976, but more clearly within the past year or so in an invitation to subscribe to a Festschrift for Matthew Black containing an article by Kurt Aland of Münster with an announced title—appearing as it did in English—that had a highly familiar ring: “The Twentieth-Century Interlude in New Testament Textual Criticism,” obviously the title of the Hatch Lecture, which, following its presentation, had been published in the 1974 volume of JBL When the Festschrift itself appeared, it seemed obvious from Professor Aland's article that some reassessment of the course and significance of twentieth-century NT textual criticism was in order. Late in September 1979, Aland's article was reprinted in the annual report of his Münster foundation for NT textual research, now under the title of “Die Rolle des 20. Jahrhunderts in der Geschichte der neutestamentlichen Textkritik.”

12 The Hatch Lecture mentioned two other areas in which progress was not evident: (1) major critical editions/apparatuses of the Greek NT (in addition to popular critical editions), but these can be treated together since the major editions/apparatuses that have been announced have not appeared as yet; and (2) the return to the textus receptus as the best NT text by a few, but this requires no additional comment, though there are continuing attempts to provide a scholarly basis for that viewpoint. Treatment of the evaluation of readings has been incorporated into point 2, below, but see also “The Eclectic Method in New Testament Textual Criticism: Solution or Symptom?” HTR 69 (1976) 211–57.CrossRefGoogle ScholarPubMed

51 Ibid. This (with some omissions) is the last paragraph of the essay. Aland gives in English the words “in the original Greek,” quoting from the title of Westcott-Hort's edition. He does qualify his statement to the extent of acknowledging that it is not made with the “self-certainty of Westcott-Hort,” for the “standard text” has an extensive apparatus that will alert scholars to numerous “thoughtful considerations” (whereas Westcott-Hort presented no apparatus to suggest that other options were viable—although vol. 1 has a ten-page list of rejected readings and vol. 2 has an “Appendix” containing 140 pages of “Notes on Select Readings”).