Carnarvon caravan, camping and visitor information.

Carnarvon is located approximately 900 kilometres north of Perth on the North West Coastal Highway. It is in the Carnarvon Region of the Coral Coast area of Western Australia. Situated on the Indian Ocean coast and surrounded by pristine natural environments, it sits on the edge of the mighty Gascoyne River delta.

About the Carnarvon Area

Carnarvon’s traditional owners are the Inggarda, Baiyunga, Thalanji, Malgana and Thudgarri people. They named this area long ago, Kuwinywardu (Kow-win-wordo), meaning ‘neck of water’.

In 1839 the British explorer, Lieutenant Grey was the first European person to land at the area now known as Carnarvon. Grey noted that the area around the mouth of the Gascoyne River was good for agricultural development. The Browns and the Brockmans settled in the area in 1876. They brought 4000 sheep with them from York and eventually established Boolathana and Brickhouse stations.

Often referred to as the ‘food bowl’ of Western Australia, the region produces 80% of the state’s total fruit and vegetable crops. It also provides much of states seafood, with a thriving prawn, scallop, crab and fishing industry.

Things to See and Do

Discover the region’s Aboriginal history, art, heritage and culture by visiting Gwoonwardu Mia, the Gascoyne Aboriginal Heritage and Cultural Centre. The Centre celebrates the five Aboriginal language groups of the Gascoyne Region with a permanent collection, exhibitions, Artist-in-Residence program as well as an ethnobotanical garden.

Follow the Gascoyne Food Trail along the scenic North and South River Roads. Aptly known as “The Fruit Loop”, travel past working plantations, some of which operate roadside stalls. Pick up a wide range of preserves, dried fruits and ice-creams made fresh from seasonal fruit and vegetables while you’re there.

The beautifully rugged surroundings of the coastline offer the dramatic spectacle of the natural Blowholes and king waves. Another activity to enjoy the surfing at Gnaraloo. Additionally, you can snorkel at ‘the aquarium’ at Quobba or go wind or kite surfing at Red Bluff. You will also find Eco-camps at these locations.

The Hinterland is also home to an equally beautiful freshwater swimming spot called Rocky Pool. Only 50 kilometres from town, a visit here with picnic in tow makes for a wonderful day trip!

With so much to see and do in Carnarvon, make sure you add a visit here to your must do list!

(source: www.carnarvon.org.au and www.australiascoralcoast.com)