Actress Sharon Catherine Brown is currently playing the role of Mrs. Nolan and others in the new Broadway musical, Days of Wine and Roses, now playing at Studio 54 through Sunday, March 31.

Brown, a native New Yorker, shares her favorite diversions and spots around town below.

Where do you live in the city?

I’m born and raised here so I’ll answer like the native New Yorker I am. I live somewhere in the city.

What are you writing, a book?!

What is your favorite neighborhood in New York and why?

The West Village, especially around Bleecker Street. I’m weak in the knees for tree lined streets . So romantic!

Can you share some of your favorite spots in the Theater District and what makes them so great?

I’m a vegan and I really love pizza, but in my opinion most vegan pizzas are slimy and gross! Angelo’s

Pizza where the Stephen Colbert show is taped makes the absolute best vegan pizza in the city! Also,

Broad Nosh Bagels on west 58th street between 8th & 9th Ave! Obsessed with these bagels! And they have tofu cream cheese! The best! Period!

Where is the best place for a pre-or post-theater meal and why? What are go-to dishes at each?

P.S. Kitchen on West 48th! It’s a well-known vegan restaurant that meat eaters actually love. The food is so good and the ambiance is perfect for before or after the theatre or a date night! Their chicken pot pie is excellent and very popular as is their P. S. Burger! Yummy yum!

What is the best Theater District watering hole and the drink to get?

I don’t drink. My go to drink is Cold Brew coffee and I usually make it at home, but when I’m out and about Frisson Espresso on West 47th street is my favorite little coffee place. Excellent coffee! I love the vibe and you can get oat milk there. They also make baked goods that will get you into some serious trouble!”

Please share your insider tips for enjoying a Broadway show. Anything to make the experience better as an audience member?

Always come to the theatre prepared to go on a magical journey. Live theatre is magical! Come expecting to have a wonderful time and you probably will! Finish eating your wrapped candy before the show starts. PLEASE!

What’s the New York City theater you love to go to and why?

The Winter Garden Theatre . My Uncle Warren Williams was the doorman there for many years before he passed. I spent a lot of time there growing up. My uncle had so many great stage door stories. He would talk to a very young Barbra Streisand after performances of Funny Girl. He loved Angela Lansbury as Mame and always referred to her by her married name, Mrs. Shaw.

I was The Narrator onBroadway in Joseph And The Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat at what is now The Jacobs theatre. Our show was short, and I would run from our theatre to the Winter Garden so I could see Betty Buckley sing Memory in Cats. I did that several times a week! My uncle would look out for me and let me in. He’d tap on the glass door with his keys so I’d know which one was open. That theatre has my heart.

What other Broadway shows are on your radar right now?

An Enemy Of The People, Water For Elephants , Hell’s Kitchen. I mean, really there are so many shows you miss because you’re on the same schedule. I was fortunate to see The Notebook because they had a Monday night preview. It was stunning! I cried the ugly cry!

Share your insider New York gems.

Let’s face it, all my favorite New York gems come from Tiffany. And I don’t share them.