WHCF Subject File - CO: Countries

This category was for "material pertaining to a country, continent, geographic area, foreign governments, their officials and ambassadors," according to the White House Central Files manual.

Although the CO category contains many security classified documents, these are frequently routine and very seldom classified as high as "Top Secret." Only the unclassified and declassified items have been opened to research. The most substantive and complete files on foreign affairs are part of the files of the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs rather than the White House Central Files.

Case files for each country comprise the great bulk of the CO category. These are arranged alphabetically by country at file codes CO 2 through CO 170. Countries which gained independence after 1972, however, are listed at CO 171 through CO 179. The CO 1 file segments concern geographic regions.

MATERIALS COMMON TO MOST CATEGORIES

Much of the material in CO is actually cross-references to documents filed under other categories, especially Foreign Affairs (FO), Trade (TA), Trips (TR), International Organizations (IT), and National Defense (ND).

The contents of the case files vary, but may typically include any or all of such routine exchanges of messages between the President and foreign heads of state as: congratulations on assumption of office, national day celebrations or national achievements; holiday greetings; condolences; and thank you notes.

Other common topics include: presidential and vice presidential meetings and correspondence with foreign officials, journalists, or American ethnic groups; the presentation of credentials by new ambassadors; and proposed foreign travel by U.S. officials.

SPECIFIC COUNTRY CATEGORY DESCRIPTIONS

The following descriptions highlight only additional topics, beyond those mentioned above. The descriptions also make note of visits to the U.S. by foreign heads of government and heads of state, although the amount of material available on each of these visits varies greatly.

CO: Countries

Executive l087 pp. / General 48 pp.

Material concerning U.S. relations with foreign countries including arrangements for state visits, protection of diplomatic missions and personnel, foreign investment in the U.S., religious freedom and human rights, foreign aid programs, foreign participation in the bicentennial celebration, and the presentation of credentials by foreign ambassadors.

CO l: Continental - Geographic Area

Executive none / General l p.

A referral to the State Department concerning the Arab boycott of Israel.

CO l/A-Z: Continental - Geographic Area/A-Z

Executive 727 pp. / General l95 pp.

Largely cross references concerning U.S. relations with various geographic areas. Topics include Arab oil profits and investments, the boycott against Israel, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and self determination for the Baltic states, reaction to Ford's campaign debate statement on Soviet domination of East Europe, the fall of South Vietnam and Asian refugees, MIA's, tariff preferences, CAB decisions on air routes and fares, and travel of U.S. officials to foreign countries. Arranged by area and thereunder chronologically.

CO l-l: Africa

Executive 203 pp. / General l46 pp.

Material concerning U.S. relations with the African continent including human rights in South Africa, the formation of a black majority government in Rhodesia, Kissinger's trip to Africa, foreign aid, and the employment of blacks at the upper levels of the State Department.

CO l-2: Antarctica - Arctic

Executive l9 pp. / General l4 pp.

Material concerning ratification of a convention for the conservation of Antarctic seals and a proposed conference of countries with Arctic interests.

CO l-2/A-Z: Antarctica - Arctic/A-Z

Executive 56 pp. / General none

Material concerning a proposed conference of countries with Arctic interests.

CO l-3: Asia

Executive 49 pp. / General 8 pp.

Correspondence from congressmen and other government officials concerning U.S. policy and events in Asia. Also material on MIA's and Vice President Rockefeller's trip to Asia.

CO l-4: Communist Bloc

Executive l34 pp. / General 6 pp.

Largely correspondence with congressmen and ethnic groups concerning statements by State Department Counselor Helmut Sonnenfeldt which seemed to imply U.S. acceptance of the relationship between the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. Other topics include Ford's campaign debate statement on Soviet domination of Eastern Europe, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, proposed meetings with ethnic group leaders and immigration from Eastern Europe.

CO l-5: Europe

Executive 330 pp. / General 25 pp.

Largely cross references concerning meetings of European officials with President Ford and other American officials, balance of payments and trade matters, European participation in the bicentennial celebration, travel by American officials and cultural groups, civil aviation matters, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the "Sonnenfeldt Doctrine." Also included is a report on "Budget Equalisation and Other Unconditional Redistribution between Federal and State Governments" by the Study Group on the Role of Public Finance in European Economic Integration.

CO l-5: Europe (Eastern)

Executive 26 pp. / General 5 pp.

Material on the "Sonnenfeldt Doctrine."

CO l-6: Far East

Executive 26 pp. / General l p.

Largely cross references to reports on congressional trips to Asia and U.S. officials' views on Far Eastern events. Also included are documents on proposed travel by American officials and a letter on the non-fulfillment of cotton contracts by Far Eastern textile mills.

CO l-7: Near East

Executive 333 pp. / General l09 pp.

Largely cross references related to Arab investment in the U.S., oil prices, the Arab boycott of Israel, foreign aid legislation, the appointment of personal representatives, and proposed foreign travel by American officials. Includes comments on the Middle East situation by congressmen, military officers, cabinet officers, and the general public.

CO l-8: North America

Executive none / General l p.

One cross reference indicating a filing change.

CO l-9: South and Central America

Executive l9l pp. / General l00 pp.

Largely cross references concerning policy toward Cuba, trade relations and the Trade Act of l974, ratification of the Protocol of Amendment to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance of July l975, foreign aid legislation, proposed travel, and meetings of South and Central American officials with the President and Vice President. Includes comments on U.S.-Latin American relations from both the U.S. and Latin America.

CO 2: Abu Dhabi

Executive 2 pp. / General none

See also CO l73.

Aden See: CO 138

CO 3: Afghanistan

Executive 66 pp. / General none

Material concerning arrangements for a visit by a special envoy. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 4: Albania

Executive 2 pp. / General 3 pp.

Material concerning the marriage of the pretender to the Albanian throne. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 5: Algeria

Executive 54 pp. / General none

Material concerning the resumption of diplomatic relations and a visit by Foreign Minister Bouteflika. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 6: Andorra

Executive none / General none

CO 7: Angola

Executive 74 pp. / General l09 pp.

Material concerning Portugese refugees from Angola, Cuban troops in Angola, U.S. aid, the execution of Daniel Gearhart, U.S. recognition, and Angolan admission to the United Nations. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 8: Antigua

Executive l5 pp. / General none

Material concerning the imprisonment of a U.S. citizen. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 9: Argentina

Executive 203 pp. / General l8 pp.

Material concerning trade relations and human rights in Argentina. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l0: Australia

Executive 799 pp. / General 48 pp.

Material concerning Vice President Rockefeller's visit to Australia, Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser's visit to the U.S., ratification of a treaty of extradition, trade matters (especially meat imports), and scientific and cultural programs. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO ll: Austria

Executive 293 pp. / General l2 pp.

Material concerning a state visit by Chancellor Kreisky, thank you letters for President Ford's visit to Salzburg, invitations to attend the presentation of the International Rescue Committee's Freedom Award to Chancellor Kreisky, legislation regarding diplomatic immunity, and the U.S. delegation to the Innsbruck Olympic games. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l2: Azores

Executive 3l pp. / General 2 pp.

Material concerning the Azores independence movement. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l3: Bahamas

Executive l7 pp. / General 5 pp.

Cross references concerning legislation on entry to the Inter-American Development Bank.

CO l4: Bahrein

Executive 4l pp. / General none

CO l5: Barbados

Executive 48 pp. / General none

CO l6: Belgium

Executive l69 pp. / General l4 pp.

Material on public reaction to the American army's possible purchase of Belgian manufactured arms. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l7: Bermuda

Executive 8 pp. / General l0.

CO l8: Bhutan

Executive 8 pp. / General none

CO l9: Bolivia

Executive 67 pp. / General 66 pp.

Largely cross references concerning narcotics control assistance, Americans accused of drug trafficking, and a naturalization case.

CO 20: Botswana

Executive 96 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by President Khama and the tenth anniversary of Botswana's independence. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 2l: Brazil

Executive 209 pp. / General 52 pp.

Material concerning requests for assistance for Americans travelling or living in Brazil, foreign military sales, trade issues (including a shrimp agreement), and human rights in Brazil. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 22: British Honduras

Executive l p. / General none

CO 23: Bulgaria

Executive 44 pp. / General l2

Largely cross references concerning a consular convention, requests for aid in dealing with the Bulgarian government, and international exhibits.

CO 24: Burma

Executive l04 pp. / General 3 pp.

Material on a report from Senator Mike Mansfield on his trip to Southeast Asia. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 25: Burundi

Executive 27 pp. / General none

CO 26: Khmer Republic (Cambodia)

Executive l9l pp. / General 55 pp.

Largely cross references concerning military assistance and foreign aid, the situation in Cambodia following the communist takeover, the fate of Americans in Cambodia, and reports on refugee resettlement. There is very little material on the seizure of the Mayaguez (See ND l8/CO 26).

CO 27: Cameroun

Executive 54 pp. / General none

CO 28: Canada

Executive 765 pp. / General 58 pp.

Material concerning official and private visits by Prime Minister Trudeau and other Canadian officials, economic and trade relations (especially energy matters, U.S. restrictions on beef imports, and agreements on water usage), a new extradition treaty, the U.S. Bicentennial, and the l976 summer Olympics. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 29: Canary Islands

Executive none / General none

CO 30: Central African Republic

Executive 48 pp. / General none

CO 3l: Sri Lanka

Executive 82 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit to the United States by Prime Minister Bandaranaike's son. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 32: Chad

Executive l5 pp. / General none

CO 33: Chile

Executive l63 pp. / General 89 pp.

Largely cross references concerning congressional interest in and public comment on CIA activities in Chile, foreign aid, human rights in Chile and Chilean participation in Operation Sail.

CO 34: China

Executive 50 pp. / General 34 pp.

Material concerning the normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China and congressional comment on relations with the two Chinas. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 34-l: Republic of China (Formosa - Taiwan)

Executive 382 pp. / General 35 pp.

Material concerning the death of Chiang Kai Shek, the participation of the Republic of China in the l976 summer Olympics and congressional and public comment on the effect normaliztion of relations with the People's Republic of China would have on the independence of the Republic of China. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 34-2: People's Republic of China

Executive 398 pp. / General l20 pp.

Material concerning visits to China by former President Nixon, congressional delegations, and American businessmen; visits by delegations from the PRC; trade relations; and the death of Chou En Lai. The file includes a report from Mike Mansfield on his trip to China. Other topics touched on include Vietnam, relations with Japan and Taiwan, MIA's, and immigration matters. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 35: Colombia

Executive 422 pp. / General l2 pp.

Material concerning a state visit by President Lopez, requests for assistance in dealing with the Colombian government, and narcotics traffic. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction. negotiations.

CO 36: Zaire

Executive 47 pp. / General l p.

CO 37: Congo, People's Republic of the

Executive 66 pp. / General none

Material concerning the withdrawal of the designation of the Congo as a beneficiary developing country for purposes of the General System of Preferences. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 38: Costa Rica

Executive 5l pp. / General 5

The file touches on the Panama Canal negotiations, Vietnam refugees, and narcotics traffic.

CO 39: Cuba

Executive 403 pp. / General 5l5 pp.

Material concerning Cuban exiles in the U.S., American prisoners in Cuba, a visit to Cuba by Senators Javits and Pell, Cuban military intervention in other countries, and congressional and public comment on U.S. policy toward Cuba, especially the end of the trade embargo. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 40: Cyprus

Executive l64 pp. / General 30 pp.

Material concerning the congressional embargo on military aid to Turkey and reports to Congress on the situation in Cyprus. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 4l: Czechoslovakia

Executive l26 pp. / General 25 pp.

Material concerning a World War II claims settlement and the extension of most favored nation status to Czechoslovakia, the ratification of a consular convention and legislation on hospital care for veterans of the Polish and Czechoslovak armies in World Wars I and II. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 42: Benin

Executive 32 pp. / General none

CO 43: Denmark

Executive 256 pp. / General l3 pp.

Material concerning visits by the Prime Minister and the Queen of Denmark. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 44: Dominican Republic

Executive l34 pp. / General 22 pp.

CO 45: Ecuador

Executive 96 pp. / General l4 pp.

Material concerning the seizure of American fishing boats and the arrest and deportation of American priests. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Egypt - SEE: CO l59

CO 46: El Salvador

Executive l2 pp. / General 3 pp.

England - SEE: CO l60

CO 47: Estonia

Executive 30 pp. / General 4 pp.

Correspondence from the Estonian government in exile and others regarding the status of the Baltic states and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 48: Ethiopia

Executive l05 pp. / General 97 pp.

Material concerning the fate of the deposed emperor and families of officials of his regime, the Eritrean separatist movement, and the fate of American hostages held by the Eritrean Liberation Front. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 49: Finland

Executive 449 pp. / General l2 pp.

Material concerning a state visit by President Kekkonen, the detention of an American in Finland, and the possible purchase of Finnish icebreakers for use on the Great Lakes. The file includes general comment on Ford's trip to Helsinki for the CSCE conference. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 50: France

Executive 836 pp. / General 75 pp.

Material concerning a state visit by President Giscard d'Estaing, landing rights for the Concorde, a cooperative cancer research program, Vice President Rockefeller's visit to France, and American delegations to the Paris Air Show. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 5l: Gabon Republic

Executive 35 pp. / General none

CO 52: Gambia

Executive 32 pp. / General none

CO 53: Germany

Executive l9 pp. / General 32 pp.

Correspondence from Congress concerning the treatment of German minorities in Hungary and Rumania and general correspondence relating to Germany (East or West not specified).

CO 53-l: East Germany

Executive 78 pp. / General 2 pp.

CO 53-2: West Germany

Executive l596 pp. / General 44 pp.

Material concerning visits by Chancellor Schmidt, President Scheel and Foreign Minister Genscher, the establishment of the John J. McCloy Fund, Vice President Rockefeller's trip to Germany, and thank you letters concerning Ford's trip to Germany. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 54: Ghana

Executive 67 pp. / General l p.

Material concerning the cancellation of a Kissinger visit to Ghana and the arrest of a Ghanaian citizen who was a professor at American University. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 55: Greece

Executive 3l3 pp. / General 44 pp.

Material concerning the Cyprus crisis, aid to Greece and the restoration of military aid to Turkey. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 56: Greenland

Executive 7 pp. / General none

CO 57: Guadeloupe

Executive none / General none

CO 58: Guatemala

Executive 82 pp. / General 4l pp.

Material concerning earthquake disaster assistance. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 59: Guinea

Executive 3l pp. / General none

CO 60: Guyana

Executive 69 pp. / General none

CO 6l: Haiti

Executive l08 pp. / General 2 pp.

Correspondence with congressmen concerning the expropriation of American firms' assets in Haiti and letters from Haitian exile movements. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 62: Honduras

Executive 75 pp. / General 2 pp.

Material concerning Hurricane Fifi relief efforts. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Honduras, British - SEE: CO 22

CO 63: Hong Kong

Executive l6 pp. / General 6 pp.

Material concerning the inclusion of Hong Kong as a beneficiary developing country in the Generalized System of Preferences. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 64: Hungary

Executive l96 pp. / General 39 pp.

Material concerning the return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary, the status of Hungarian minorities in Rumania, and correspondence with American Jewish leaders concerning Hungarian plans to convert a historic Jewish cemetary into a park. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 65: Iceland

Executive 40 pp. / General 2 pp.

Largely cross references concerning a tax convention between Iceland and the U.S. and a fisheries dispute between Iceland and Germany.

CO 66: India

Executive 232 pp. / General 5l pp.

Material concerning India's nuclear policies and the export of nuclear materials to India, a Kissinger trip to India, a proposed Ford visit, trade relations and aid. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 67: Indonesia

Executive 3l9 pp. / General l9 pp.

Material concerning aid to Indonesia, a visit by President Soeharto, a letter from Mrs. Sukarno asking for an investigation into CIA activities in Indonesia in l965, and the effect of U.S. trade restrictions imposed as a result of Indonesia's membership in OPEC. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 68: Iran

Executive 890 pp. / General 38 pp.

Material concerning U.S. arms sales, Iranian investment in the U.S. (especially their proposed investment in Pan American Airlines), a state visit by the Shah, and a Rockefeller trip to Iran. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 69: Iraq

Executive 3 pp. / General 2 pp.

Material concerning Kurdish refugees.

CO 70: Ireland

Executive 360

Childers and former President Eamon de Valera, an official visit by Prime Minister Cosgrave, and American support for the IRA. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Ireland, North - SEE: CO l60

CO 7l: Israel

Executive l404 pp. / General 23l pp.

Material concerning visits by Prime Minister Rabin and Golda Meir, Soviet Jewish immigration, the Mid East peace negotiations, the U.S. Sinai Support Mission, arms sales to Egypt and other Arab countries, aid to Israel, and the Arab boycott. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 72: Italy

Executive 986 pp. / General l37 pp.

Material concerning state and private visits by President Leone and Prime Minister Andreotti, Italian earthquake relief including Rockefeller's trip to Italy, a Congressional investigation of U.S. funding of Italian political parties, and the possibility of the Communists joining the Italian government. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 73: Ivory Coast

Executive l6 pp. / General none

CO 74: Jamaica

Executive 92 pp. / General 27 pp.

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Manley and his meeting with the Vice President, PL 480 aid, and the Cuban presence in Jamaica. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 75: Japan

Executive l922 pp. / General 23l pp.

Material concerning the state visit by Emperor Hirohito and visits by Prime Ministers Tanaka and Miki; U.S.-Japanese trade relations including Japanese overfishing off the U.S. coast, the Lockheed bribery scandal, Japanese investment in Hawaii, and a Japanese economic mission; a report from Mike Mansfield on U.S.-Japanese relations; and the termination of E.O. 9066, the World War II Japanese-American internment order. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 76: Jordan

Executive 604 pp. / General 25 pp.

Material concerning visits by King Hussein and military aid. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 77: Kenya

Executive 20 pp. / General 28 pp.

CO 78: Korea

Executive 32 pp. / General 47 pp.

Material concerning human rights and political prisoners. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 78-l: People's Democratic Republic of Korea (North)

Executive 20 pp. / General 7 pp.

Material concerning the killing of American officers at Panmunjom. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 78-2: Republic of Korea (South)

Executive 350 pp. / General 370 pp.

Material concerning human rights in Korea and the American defense commitment to Korea. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 79: Kuwait

Executive 48 pp. / General none

CO 80: Laos

Executive 85 pp. / General 2 pp.

Material concerning refugees and the detention of Americans by the Pathet Lao. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 8l: Latvia

Executive l6 pp. / General l p.

CO 82: Lebanon

Executive l66 pp. / General 46 pp.

Material concerning aid to Lebanon and inquiries about the fate of Americans or relatives in Lebanon. Also touches on the murder of American Ambassador Meloy. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the: : : introduction.

CO 83: Lesotho

Executive 67 pp. / General none

CO 84: Liberia

Executive 563 pp. / General 7 pp.

Material concerning visits by President Tolbert. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 85: Libyan Arab Republic

Executive 3l pp. / General l p.

CO 86: Liechtenstein

Executive l7 pp. / General none

CO 87: Lithuania

Executive l53 pp. / General 7 pp.

Material concerning human rights and immigration. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 88: Luxembourg

Executive l74 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Thorne. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 89: Macao

Executive none / General none

CO 90: Madeira

Executive none / General none

CO 9l: Malagasy Republic

Executive 20 pp. / General none

CO 92: Malawi, Republic of

Executive 49 pp. / General 2

Malaya, Federation of - SEE: CO 93

CO 93: Malaysia

Executive 6l pp. / General l p.

Includes North Borneo, Sabah, and Sarawak. Material concerning Vice President Rockefeller's trip to Malaysia. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO 94: Maldive Islands

Executive 8 pp. / General none

CO 95: Mali, Republic of

Executive 74 pp. / General none

CO 96: Malta

Executive l3 pp. / General none

Manchuria - SEE: CO 34

CO 97: Martinique

Executive 3 pp. / General none

CO 98: Mauritania

Executive 86 pp. / General none

CO 99: Mauritius

Executive 57 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Ramgoolam. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l00: Mexico

Executive 966 pp. / General l6l pp.

Material concerning meetings with President Echeverria and President-elect Lopez Portillo, Americans imprisoned in Mexico, and illegal immigrants. The file also touches on drug traffic in Mexico, international water agreements, the International Women's Year Conference in Mexico City, and Communist activities and CIA operations in Mexico. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l0l: Monaco

Executive 9 pp. / none

CO l02: Mongolia

Executive none / General none

CO l03: Morocco

Executive ll7 pp. / General ll pp.

Material concerning a cancelled state visit by King Hassan and military aid to Morocco. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l04: Mozambique

Executive 44 pp. / General 34 pp.

Material concerning the imprisonment of American missionaries. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l05: Oman

Executive 57 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by the Sultan of Oman. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l06: Nauru

Executive 6 pp. / General 2 pp.

CO l07: Nepal

Executive l94 pp. / General 9 pp.

Material concerning the coronation of King Birendra, especially thank you letters from Philip Buchen on behalf of the American delegation; a visit by Prince Gyanendra, brother of the King; and the murder of an American citizen in Nepal. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l08: Netherlands

Executive l34 pp. / General l2 pp.

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Johannes den Uyl. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l09: New Caledonia

Executive none / General none

CO ll0: New Zealand

Executive 75 pp. / General 4 pp.

Material concerning the death of Prime Minister Norman Kirk, a visit by Prime Minister W. E. Rowling, and Vice President Rockefeller's trip to Asia. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO lll: Nicaragua

Executive 64 pp. / General 8 pp.

Material concerning a meeting between Vice President Rockefeller and President Somoza. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO ll2: Niger

Executive 52 pp. / General none

CO ll3: Nigeria

Executive l03 pp. / General l0 pp.

CO ll3-l: Biafra

Executive none / General none

North Borneo - SEE: CO 93

CO ll4: Norway

Executive l72 pp. / General 8 pp.

Material concerning a private visit by King Olaf and a visit by Crown Prince Harald and Princess Sonja. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Oman - SEE: CO l05

CO ll5: Pakistan

Executive 27l pp. / General l7 pp.

Material concerning meetings with Minister of State Aziz Ahmed, a visit by Prime Minister Bhutto, and Vice President Rockefeller's participation in a ceremony in honor of the centennial of the birth of Mohammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan. The file also touches on Project Pakistan (a student exchange program) and arms sales to Pakistan. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO ll6: Palestine

Executive l5 pp. / General 29 pp.

Largely cross references to material concerning the Palestine Liberation Organization.

CO ll7: Panama

Executive 207 pp. / General 6l pp.

Largely cross references to material concerning the Canal negotiations. The file also touches on Cuban activities in Panama. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO ll8: Paraguay

Executive l4 pp. / General none

CO ll9: Peru

Executive l35 pp. / General 8 pp.

CO l20: Philippines

Executive l59 pp. / General l35 pp.

Material concerning human rights and political prisoners, a call on Mrs. Ford by Imelda Marcos, and a meeting with Foreign Secretary Carlos Romulo. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l2l: Poland

Executive 695 pp. / General 59 pp.

Material concerning a visit by First Secretary Gierek. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l22: Portugal

Executive 297 pp. / General 50 pp.

Material concerning congressional concern over communist activities in Portugal, aid to Portugal and a meeting with President Francisco da Costa Gomes. The file also touches on the Azores independence movement and Portugese refugees in Angola. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l23: Qatar

Executive l2 pp. / General none

CO l24: Rhodesia

Executive l97 pp. / General l70 pp.

Material concerning UN sanctions on trade with Rhodesia, especially congressional efforts to repeal the Byrd amendment which allowed the importation of Rhodesian chrome in defiance of the sanctions and allegations that Mobil Oil Company was evading the sanctions. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l25: Romania

Executive 490 pp. / General 57 pp.

Material concerning human rights, especially freedom of religion, marriage, emigration, and the status of minorities; a meeting with President Ceausescu; and a U.S.-Romanian trade agreement. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Russia - SEE: CO l58

CO l26: Rwanda

Executive 28 pp. / General l p.

CO l27: San Marino

Executive l2 pp. / General none

Sahara, Spanish - SEE: CO l40

Sarawak - SEE: CO 93

CO l28: Saudi Arabia

Executive 458 pp. / General 53 pp.

Material concerning meetings with Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Omar Saqqaf, Prince Saud bin Faisal, and Prince Abdullah, Second Deputy Prime Minister. The file also includes a report by Senator Mansfield on his trip to Saudi Arabia and touches on the death of King Faisal, Vice President Rockefeller's attendance at the funeral, energy policy, and arms sales. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Scotland - SEE: CO l60

CO l29: Senegal

Executive l23 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by President Senghor. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l30: Seychelles

Executive l3 pp. / General none

Material concerning recognition of Seychelles. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l3l: Sierra Leone

Executive 4l pp. / General none

Material concerning a meeting with President Seaka Stevens. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l32: Sikkim

Executive 9 pp. / General none

Material concerning legislation to grant permanent resident status to the American-born wife of the deposed crown prince. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l33: Singapore

Executive l93 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. The file also touches on Vice President Rockefeller's visit to Singapore. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l34: Somalia

Executive l04 pp. / General none

Material concerning a meeting with President Siad. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l35: South Africa

Executive 582 pp. / General 267 pp.

Material concerning human rights and racial violence in South Africa, the status of Namibia, and U.S. trade with South Africa, especially the prohibition on direct Import-Export Bank loans. The file also touches on the situation in Rhodesia. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

South Arabia - SEE: CO l38

CO l36: South Pacific Islands

Executive 4 pp. / General none

Includes Tahiti.

CO l37: South-West Africa

Executive 6 pp. / General l p.

Material concerning the South African presence in Namibia.

CO l38: Southern Yemen

Executive l4 pp. / General none

Material concerning the release of an American citizen from prison in Southern Yemen. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Soviet Union - SEE: CO l58

CO l39: Spain

Executive 597 pp. / General none

Material concerning a U.S.-Spanish treaty of friendship and cooperation and a state visit by King Juan Carlos. The file also touches on the death of General Franco and Vice President Rockefeller's attendance at the funeral. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l40: Spanish Sahara

Executive l5 pp. / General none

Material concerning the status of Spanish Sahara.

CO l4l: Sudan

Executive 202 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by President Nimeiri and Adnan Kashoggi's problems with the SEC. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l42: Surinam

Executive 20 pp. / General none

Material concerning U.S. representation at the Surinam independence ceremonies. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l43: Swaziland

Executive l3 pp. / General none

CO l44: Sweden

Executive 207 pp. / General l6 pp.

Material concerning a visit by King Carl Gustaf. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l45: Switzerland

Executive l03 pp. / General 32 pp.

Material concerning the problems of American citizens with the Swiss government. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l46: Syrian Arab Republic

Executive 277 pp. / General l9 pp.

Material concerning the status of Syrian Jews and a meeting with Foreign Minister Abd al Halim Khaddam. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Tahiti - SEE: CO l36

Tanganyika - SEE: CO l47

CO l47: Tanzania

Executive ll pp. / General none

Includes Tanganyika and Zanzibar.

CO l48: Thailand

Executive l2l pp. / General 38 pp.

The file touches on the problem of Indochinese refugees in Thailand, a suggested visit by Prime Minister Pramot, and the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Thailand. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l49: Tibet

Executive l p. / General none

Tobago - SEE: CO l53

CO l50: Togo

Executive l3 pp. / General none

CO l5l: Tonga

Executive l2 pp. / General none

CO l52: Trieste

Executive none / General none

CO l53: Trinidad and Tobago

Executive 49 pp. / General 2 pp.

Material concerning a meeting with Prime Minister Eric Williams. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l54: Trucial States

Executive none / General none

CO l55: Tunisia

Executive 2l5 pp. / General none

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Nouira and Vice President Rockefeller's trip to Tunisia. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l56: Turkey

Executive 503 pp. / General 74 pp.

Material concerning the situation in Cyprus, military aid to Turkey, the U.S.-Turkish Defense Cooperation Agreement, the growing of opium poppies in Turkey, and a visit by opposition leader Bulent Ecevit. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l57: Uganda

Executive 50 pp. / General 30 pp.

The file touches on the Israeli rescue of a hijacked airliner at Entebbe Airport. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l58: U.S.S.R.

Executive 3770 pp. / General l229 pp.

Material concerning visits by Andrei Gromyko, emigration from the U.S.S.R. and the treatment of Soviet dissidents, especially Valentin Moroz and Mikhail Shtern. The file also touches on the Apollo-Soyuz mission, grain and oil sales, and the SALT negotiations. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l59: Egypt

Executive 879 pp. / General l25 pp.

Material concerning a visit by Anwar Sadat, U.S. assistance and arms sales to Egypt, and the American role in the Sinai Agreement, including periodic reports to Congress on the Sinai Mission. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l60: United Kingdom

Executive 2060 pp. / General l6l pp.

Material concerning the state visit by Queen Elizabeth II; meetings with Edward Heath, Foreign Minister James Callaghan, Prime Minister Wilson, and Margaret Thatcher; and Vice President Rockefeller's trip to London and meetings with Wilson and Lord Mountbatten. The file also touches on landing rights for the Concorde and British economic problems. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l6l: Upper Volta

Executive 6 pp. / General none

CO l62: Uruguay

Executive 77 pp. / General 4 pp.

CO l63: Vatican City

Executive l43 pp. / General 20 pp.

Material concerning messages from the Pope and the canonization of Mother Elizabeth Seaton. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l64: Venezuela

Executive l22 pp. / General 49 pp.

CO l65: Vietnam

Executive l32 pp. / General 49 pp.

Largely cross references concerning aid to Vietnam, refugees, MIA's, Vietnamese admission tothe United Nations, and the normalization of relations between the U.S. and North Vietnam.

CO l65-l: Vietnam (North)

Executive l38 pp. / General l4 pp.

Material concerning MIA's, aid to South Vietnam, and normalization of relations with North Vietnam. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l65-2: Vietnam (South)

Executive 273 pp. / General l40 pp.

Material concerning the situation in South Vietnam, including U.S. aid, refugees, and the American evacuation. Also included is material concerning visits by a congressional delegation to Vietnam and by a Vietnamese legislative delegation to the United States. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Wales - SEE: CO l60

CO l66: West Indies

Executive 9 pp. / General 2 pp.

Includes the Associated States: Antigua, St. Christopher-Nevis-Anguilla, and St. Lucia.

CO l67: Western Samoa

Executive 7 pp. / General none

CO l68: Yemen

Executive 66 pp. / General none

Yemen, Southern - SEE: CO l38

CO l69: Yugoslavia

Executive 439 pp. / General 33 pp.

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Dzemal Bijedic, correspondence from Croatian nationalists, and requests for assistance for individuals imprisoned in Yugoslavia. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l70: Zambia

Executive 259 pp. / General l7 pp.

Material conerning a visit by President Kenneth Kaunda. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

Zanzibar - SEE: CO l47

CO l7l: Equatorial Guinea

Executive 9 pp. / General none

CO l72: Dominion of Fiji

Executive 4l pp. / General none

CO l73: United Arab Emirates

Executive 5l pp. / General 2 pp.

Includes: Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Ajman, Umm Alquwain and Dujairah.

CO l74: Bangladesh

Executive l37 pp. / General 6 pp.

Material concerning a visit by Prime Minister Mujibur Rahman. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l75: Grenada

Executive l04 pp. / General none

Material concerning U.S. financial assistance. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l76: Guinea Bissau

Executive l02 pp. / General none

Material concerning American recognition of the new state of Guinea Bissau. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.

CO l77: Sao Tome and Principe

Executive 3 pp. / General none

Material concerning the independence celebrations for Sao Tome and Principe.

CO l78: Cape Verde

Executive 39 pp. / General l p.

CO l79: Papua New Guinea

Executive 87 pp. / General none

Material concerning American recognition of the new state of Papua New Guinea. In addition this category may concern other topics as described in the introduction.