Lais Ribeiro is a Brazilian Model. She was born in born in Teresina, Piauí, Brazil. In 2009, she started modelling locally and shortly after walked the major international catwalks for such designers as Chanel, Louis Vuitton, Gucci, Dolce & Gabbana, Versace, and Marc Jacobs.

Quote:

“I feel that girls of my biotype still find some resistance in some markets. There’s prejudice against blacks in the fashion world and everywhere . Unfortunately their still plenty of backward heads out there. ”

She’s 5’11 tall.

Brazil’s population includes the largest number of people of African descent in the entire Western Hemisphere.

Brazil has the world’s second biggest black population after Nigeria, the largest number of people of Japanese ancestry outside Japan, and more people of Lebanese or Syrian extraction than the combined populations of Lebanon and Syria.

Brazil officially the Federative Republic of Brazil is the largest country in both South America and the Latin American region. It is the largest Portuguese-speaking country in the world, and the only one in the Americas.

Brazil census shows African-Brazilians in the majority for the …

https://youtu.be/dp13gxkct3E

http://youtu.be/zkBot3-aagA?t=1m16s

dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3163874/How-Victoria-s-Secret-Angel-Lais-Ribeiro

Fans of her beauty, tattoo her image on their arms.

Did you know…? – Embassy of Brazil in London

Afro-Brazilian refers to a Brazilian with African ancestry. The term does not have widespread usage in Brazil, where people with noticeable African ancestry are generally referred to as negro or simply “preto (“black“)”, but the term is not considered very politically correct. Another group, multiracial Brazilians, or Pardos also have a significant degree of African ancestry.These two categories are among five color categories used by the Brazilian Census, along with branco (“white”), amarelo(“yellow”, East Asian) and indígena (Amerindian).

In 2010, 7.6% of the Brazilian population, some 15 million people, self-identified themselves as “preto” while 43% (86 million) identified as “pardo”. Pretos tend to be predominantly Sub-Saharan African in ancestry, while Pardos tend to have African ancestry to a lesser degree than pretos. On average pardos are predominantly European, although all three ancestries (European, African and Native American) are often present.

Brazil has an indigenous Indian population of around 450,000, comprising more than 200 peoples who speak more than 180 different languages. According to the National Foundation for the Indian (FUNAI) the indigenous population has been growing at a rate of more than 3.5% per year and is now four times greater than in 1950.

FUNAI also estimates that in the Brazilian Amazon there are more than 60 ‘uncontacted’ Indian groups living in complete isolation from the outside world. Government policy is to avoid contact with such groups unless they are in extreme danger.

With Fashion Designer Jean Paul Gaultier below

LAIS Ribeiro | Women Management

cidadeverde.com/noticias/179930/fas-tatuam-rosto-da-piauiense-lais-ribeiro-no-corpo

With her 6’10 ft tall boyfriend (below) Jared William Homan who is an American professional basketball player who currently plays for Eskişehir Basket of the Turkish Basketball League.

His natural position is power forward, but he is also an accomplished center.

https://youtu.be/xKRn7q-TX0k

A photo of her mother below