The Chairman of the Board of KazMunayGas (KMG) A. Khasenov during a working trip on June 21, 2024 visited the production facilities of Urikhtau Operating, Kazakhoil Aktobe LLP and Kazakhturkmunay in the Aktobe region.

This was reported by the press service of the company.

Currently, KMG is preparing the concept of full-scale development of the central and East Urikhtau deposits.

Urikhtau project

Suggests a 2-stage development of the field:

Phase 1 – includes the development of the oil and gas field of East Urikhtau. In December 2023, the company introduced a field into industrial operation, which made it possible to obtain additional volumes of commodity and liquefied gas for the Aktobe region. In 2024, in East Urikhtau, production is expected in the amount of: 89 thousand tons of oil and about 46 million m3 of gas.

Phase 2 – involves the full-scale development of the Urikhtau deposit, including areas of the Eastern and Central Urikhtau: Central Urikhtau is a gas condensate field (GCF), which contains significant reserves of natural gas. In this section of the subsoil, extraction is planned. Currently, according to GCF, Central Urikhtau KMG is developing a feasibility study (feasibility study) of various options for the outbreak of industrial development.

The objects of the Central and East Urikhtau are technologically interconnected, and after the launch of the Central Urikhtau, the subsoil plots will have common infrastructure objects. Project operator – Urikhtau Operation, 100% subsidiary of KMG.

Following the meeting, A. Khasenov instructed the leadership of Urikhtau Operations: to pay special attention to industrial safety, labor protection and environmental issues, as well as ensure measures to achieve planned production at the East Urikhtau field in 2024.

Geological exploration work on Karazhara

According to the company, during a visit to the objects of Kazakhoil Aktobe and Kazakhturkmunay (KTM), the issues of execution of the production program in 2024, compliance with safety safety, labor discipline, labor protection and environment within groups and contracting organizations were considered.

On June 4, 2024, the KMG received a contract for reconnaissance and prey for a promising section of the subsoil Karazhar, the geological resources (P50) of which are 32 million tons.

On June 19, 2024, the KMG transferred the rights of subsoil use by the subsoil section of Karazhar in favor of KTM for the purpose of conducting exploration for the development of the resource base of hydrocarbons.

To date, development is underway:

exploration project;

exploration liquidation project;

technical project for the construction of a search well.

A. Khasenov instructed to start the drilling of a search well with a depth of 3 thousand m until the end of 2024. KMG reports that the KTM for a free basis provides gas with the residents of the village. Zharkamy of the Bayganinsky district of the Aktobe region.

The volume of deliveries is about 4 million m3/year.

The total volume of such supplies from 2007 to 2023 amounted to about 30 million m3 of gaz.

In addition, since 2015, the company transfers excess electricity that is generated at its own power plant for two peasant peasants households of the district.