Public hearings on the “Environmental Impact Assessment” (EIA) to the technical design for construction of exploration wells at the Urikhtau field (Mugalzhar region of the Aktobe oblast) has been held in Aktobe.

Drilling and completion of 5 exploration wells will be carried out at the field during the exploration period.

Representatives of the local executive and representative, JSC NC “KazMunayGas”, Aktobe Oblast Natural Resources and Environmental Control Administration, non-governmental organizations, veterans and others participated in the hearings.

In compliance with the instruction of the RoK Prime Minister Karim Massimov, the Urikhtau field hydrocarbons exploration and production contract was signed between the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan (today – the Ministry of Oil and Gas of the Republic of Kazakhstan) and JSC NC “KazMunayGas” on 5 December 2008.

The environmental impact assessment project has been developed by the Consulting Center “NEDRA” LLP. In the submitted EIA project the technology aspects of drilling exploration wells at the Urikhtau field and solutions for minimizing their environmental impact are explored.

The Urikhtau Operating LLP (a wholly-owned subsidiary of JSC NC “KazMunayGas”) will perform all works in strict adherence to the environmental legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan and with minimum negative impact on the environment and the social sphere.

The Urikhtau Operating LLP, guided by the JSC “NWF “Samruk-Kazyna” Rules for Purchasing Goods, Works and Services, is intent on maximizing the engagement of the local suppliers of goods, works and services.

Development of the Urikhtau gas and condensates field is a social project, intended to provide the southern regions of the Republic of Kazakhstan with gas and is a part of the implementation of the “Beineu-Bozoi-Akbulak” main gas pipeline project.

Implementation of this project will make it possible to increase the hydrocarbon uplift for saturation of the domestic market of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

The Urikhtau oil and gas field was discovered in 1983. The hydrocarbon reserves of the oil-and-gas-condensate field were included in the State balance sheet for the first time in 1988. The initial free gas, condensate, oil and dissolved gas in place in the amount of 39,815 Mcm, 11,623 thousand tons, 6,493 thousand tons, and 2,389 Mcm were approved in the State Reserves Committee of the USSR.

Все новости за сегодня (51)