Heath Ledger and Michelle Williams became first-time parents Friday, after welcoming a daughter into the world, according to Us Weekly and Extra. Matilda Rose Ledger reportedly made her big debut in Brooklyn, where the couple is currently residing.

None of the baby's vital statistics was released.

The Dawson's Creek alum, 25, and her Aussie beau, 26, began dating last June, after meeting on the Canadian set of the upcoming Ang Lee gay-themed western, Brokeback Mountain, in which they play husband and wife.

The publicity-shy couple has been trying to keep their relationship on the down low. Though they have not confirmed it, several published reports indicate Ledger and Williams are engaged, but no date has been set.

The actors were equally hush-hush about their pregnancy, leaving the tabloids to speculate by virtue of "belly watch" alone. Even after the birth was widely reporter, her publicist was mum. "At this point we are not commenting," Mara Bauxbaum said Tuesday.

While several Australian newspapers report that native son Ledger will be bringing his New York-reared companion and their new baby Down Under once promotional duties for Mountain ends, he won't say for sure.

"I am actually thinking of going to live in Italy," the actor said earlier this year while promoting another upcoming film, the romantic comedy Casanova with Sienna Miller. "We have a few places up our sleeves. I would much rather work in Europe than in America."

Ledger first earned his status as heartthrob material in the teen romantic comedy 10 Things I Hate About You. He flirted with the A-list with a high-profile role alongside fellow Aussie Mel Gibson in The Patriot and then as the lead in A Knight's Tale.

He has previously been romantically linked--and unlinked--with older women Naomi Watts, Heather Graham and Roar costar Lisa Zane.

For her part, Williams gained popularity as Capeside's vixen-next-door Jen Lindley in the WB hit Dawson's Creek, where she starred for six years alongside another soon-to-be maternity ward visitor, Katie Holmes. Of late, Williams has focused on art-house projects, including The Station Agent, Me Without You and The United States of Leland.

Prior to coupling with Ledger, she was linked with Bright Eyes' singer Conor Oberst and Royal Tenenbaum's bit player Donal Lardner Ward.

In addition to plenty of diaper duty, the new parents have a lot on their respective plates.

Mama is set to shoot the drama The Hawk is Dying, opposite Paul Giamatti and former Dawson's love interest Michael Pitt, next year.

Papa, meanwhile, wraps up promotional duties on Brokeback Mountain and Casanova, out Nov. 30, before starring in an untitled surfing drama.

The highly-anticipated Brokeback Mountain, costarring Jake Gyllenhaal, hits theaters Dec. 9. (Yahoo.com)

taurus_07 said:

i don't know...she seems like a nice enough person but i don't really like Heath (even though he's Aussie like me!) He was at a cafe in Sydney a while back, where my friend worked across the road...She went there to buy lunch during her break, and I don't know why but he saw her looking at him or somerhing so he flipped her the bird and started yelling at her!! So needless to say, we don't like him anymore!

OMG, how incredibly rude. Somehow I bet they won't stay together.