American actress Michelle Williams, the ex wife of the late Australian actor Heath Ledger, is engaged and expecting a child with Hamilton director Thomas Kail.

According to PEOPLE Magazine, the 39-year-old Greatest Showman star and Kail, 42, were spotted together in London where Williams is currently filming Venom 2.

She appeared to be wearing an engagement ring in images obtained by the publication.

Know the news with the 7NEWS app: Download today

There was little sign of a baby bump as the star wore an over-sized coat.

The same source also suggested Williams’ 14-year-old daughter Matilda, who she shared with Ledger, played matchmaker between the two.

Williams was seen shopping for baby clothes at Seraphine’s maternity boutique in Kensington, according to the report.

"The two are also expecting their first child together," a source told PEOPLE.

A representative for Williams has not commented on the matter.

The couple worked together when Kail directed Williams in 2019 TV mini-series Fosse/Verdon - a role in which scored her an Emmy Award for lead actress.

News of the engagement comes eight months after her marriage to Mount Eerie musician Phil Elverum came to an end.

In the past, the actress has opened up about her romantic life after Ledger’s death in 2008.

“I never gave up on love,” she told Vanity Fair in 2018.

“I always say to Matilda, ‘Your dad loved me before anybody thought I was talented, or pretty, or had nice clothes'.”

For more on 7NEWS.com.au

Blaze claims dad-to-be: Volunteer, 28, killed in 'fire tornado' was expecting baby with wife

Sexually abused 13-year-old died giving birth to her father's child, police say

Mum's fury after 'disrespectful' cafe worker leaves nasty message on receipt

Williams is normally reserved about her personal life.

But she told the American publication she wanted to help other widows who had faced hardship.

“I don’t really want to talk about any of it. But what if this helps somebody?” she said.

"'I don’t really want to talk about any of it. But what if this helps somebody?'"

“What if somebody who has always journeyed in this way, who has struggled as much as I struggled, and looked as much as I looked, finds something that helps them?

“Don’t settle. Don’t settle for something that feels like a prison or is hard, or hurts you.

"If it doesn’t feel like love, it’s not love.”