The late Heath Ledger's family have opened up about Michelle Williams' surprising marriage announcement.

Loading

Speaking exclusively to The Goss this week, Kim Ledger, who has remained close with Williams following the death of the Oscar-winning actor in 2008 for the sake of their daughter, Matilda, 12, had nothing but good wishes for the newlyweds.

"We are terribly happy, it is great," he said.

Kim did not attend the intimate nuptials in July in the rural Adirondacks region of upstate New York and has yet to meet Williams' new husband, American indie musician Phil Elverum of Mount Eerie fame. But he said he would do so "soon".

"She's very private and I don't really like to make too many comments about her, but we are very happy [for her]," Kim said.

Speaking to Vanity Fair, Williams described her relationship with Elverum, whose first wife died of pancreatic cancer, as "very sacred, very special".

He has one daughter, Agathe, 3, from that marriage.

Williams and Ledger were together for three years after meeting on the set of Brokeback Mountain in 2005. They split in 2008 a few months before his death at the age of 28 of an accidental prescription drugs overdose.

Karl Lagerfeld's muse Adut Akech Bior back for David Jones

Adut Akech Bior is no stranger to David Jones having walked in three previous shows and starring as the face of the department store's last beauty campaign.

But their SS18 show on August 8 at Fox Studios will be the 18-year-old's first as a fully fledged muse of Karl Lagerfeld, Chanel's creative director, and the biggest designer in the world. No big deal.

Three weeks ago, the model - who was born in South Sudan, raised in a Kenyan refugee camp until the of age six then moved to Adelaide - became only the second black model ever to close the Chanel Couture Autumn 2018 show in Paris.

The prime position, dubbed the "Chanel Bride", is one of the most lusted after contracts in the modelling industry and follows in the footsteps of Claudia Schiffer, Linda Evangelista and Kendall Jenner.

"Since then, there has been more attention on me than ever before," Adut told The Goss following a photoshoot in Italy.

"It's definitely opening a lot of doors."

Adut said "it's amazing" being one of Lagerfeld's muses and claims "he's really down to earth".

She said: "He was so nice to me when he first met me. He said, 'You remind me of my little cat, you are so beautiful.'"

Since then, he has invited her into his exclusive club of his favourite models called the “Choupettes” (which also happens to be the name of his Insta-famous cat) alongside the likes of Johnny Depp's daughter Lily-Rose and Cindy Crawford's daughter Kaia Gerber.

Despite walking for an eye-watering list of names such as Saint Laurent, Alexander McQueen, Givenchy, Prada and Burberry, she said David Jones was always her "dream" as a child.

"They are the top of the top," she said.

"I am super excited. I haven't walked for any shows in Australia in over two years, so it will feel good to be back home."

When she's not in her day job, Adut works with the United Nations on becoming an ambassador for the refugee camp she grew up on in Kenya.

"I plan to visit in December and it will be by my first time back in almost 13 years. It's going to be really emotional," she said.

Sam Dastyari wants Australians to "stop disgracing themselves"

He's set to host a Ten show on the "week's major scandals", but it hasn't all been plain-sailing for the former Labor senator Sam Dastyari.

"Every time we want to shoot, another bunch of scandals happen," he told The Goss.

"I'm going to respectfully ask Australians to stop disgracing themselves so we can focus on the show."

(Is he forgetting that Chinese donations scandal?)

Dastyari wouldn't be drawn on who his co-host will be after Roxy Jacenko ruled herself out, telling this publication: "I am very happy to leave scandals behind."

While it's Kendall's first child, it's Johns' third. He has two sons, Sam, 18, and Louis, 9, from two previous marriages, the first to model Renae Chapman and the second to Sydney publicist Cathrine Mahoney. He is also known for his relationship with Hollywood producer Satsuki Mitchell, the former girlfriend of James Bond star Daniel Craig.

Johns, who has opened up in the past about drug use and suffering from depression and bipolar disorder, has credited Kendall in helping him.