Michelle Williams is a newly married woman. And her ex’s family is so, so happy for her. As you may or may not know, Williams was once involved with the late Heath Ledger, with whom she has a daughter named Matilda. Since Ledger’s death in 2008, Williams and her daughter have remained close with his family. And they’re beyond excited for Williams’ new marriage. Actually, Heath Ledger’s dad’s reaction to Michelle Williams’ surprise marriage is really heartwarming.

In a brief interview with the Sydney Morning Herald’s The Goss, Ledger’s father, Kim Ledger, expressed complete delight over Williams’ marriage.

“We are terribly happy, it is great," Ledger said of Williams’ recent walk down the aisle.

Although Ledger has not met Williams’ new husband, Phil Elverum, he assured The Goss that he would “soon.” Ledger also added, "She's very private and I don't really like to make too many comments about her, but we are very happy for her.”

Williams married Elverum in early July in a private ceremony that included only a few guests. She and Elverum met earlier in 2018 through a mutual friend and really hit it off.

Williams is a notoriously private person and she has only opened up about her personal life a few times. But in a recent cover story for Vanity Fair, due out in September 2018, Williams talked a little bit about her past, including her relationship with Ledger. She insists that she “never gave up on love”:

I never gave up on love … I always say to Matilda, ‘Your dad loved me before anybody thought I was talented, or pretty, or had nice clothes.’

Clearly, Williams still carries Ledger’s memory close to her heart, which is really sweet.

In her interview, Williams also spoke of how she found love with Elverum and how his love for her has completely changed her life:

Obviously I’ve never once in my life talked about a relationship, but Phil isn’t anyone else. And that’s worth something. Ultimately the way he loves me is the way I want to live my life on the whole. I work to be free inside of the moment. I parent to let Matilda feel free to be herself, and I am finally loved by someone who makes me feel free.

Although Williams is super private about her personal life, she felt that opening up about finding love would be helpful to other people:

I don’t really want to talk about any of it. But there’s that tease, that lure, that’s like, What if this helps somebody? What if somebody who has always journeyed in this way, who has struggled as much as I struggled, and looked as much as I looked, finds something that helps them? … Don’t settle. Don’t settle for something that feels like a prison, or is hard, or hurts you. If it doesn’t feel like love, it’s not love.

What a sweet person she seems to be. No wonder the Ledgers are so happy for her!