July 1, 1862

Malvern Hill, southeast of Richmond VA

“Faugh a Ballagh!” (Clear the Way!) the Irishmen of the 69th Regiment cried as they charged downhill into the teeth of the enemy assault.

The previous days had seen a lot of fighting across the Virginia Peninsula, as the Union Army attempted to reach Richmond and force an early end to the war. Alas, General Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia held their own, pushing them back to the banks of the James River. Malvern Hill - a small rise southeast of the Confederate capital, became their last stronghold during the campaign; should they lose it, the entire army would be at risk of folding entirely.

Throughout the day, the Union had held their own against numerous Confederate attacks. But as the sun started to set over the horizon, the rebels still refused to quit the field and began weakening the Union lines. A pivotal moment was upon them all: should their lines break at any point, it could spell ruin for the Union.

---------------

The 69th NY Regiment was formed as a volunteer militia during the 1850’s in Manhattan by young Irish immigrants who had just arrived in the United States. Some fled the famine, some came in search of opportunity, while others were freedom fighters on the run from the United Kingdom, but they all had one thing in common: their heritage.

When the Civil War kicked off in 1861, the 69th NY Regiment was called upon, and the Irishmen answered: they mustered into service and marched out of New York City for Washington DC to join the Union’s newly formed Army of the Potomac.

Their first action came at the First Battle of Bull Run (Virginia). While the battle was a decisive loss for the Union - one of many in the early years of the Civil War - the 69th was one of the few regiments which held their composure during the fight, even stepping up to cover the rear of the Union army as they retreated in defeat. The 69th did not emerge unscathed, however, suffering over 150 casualties, including their commanding officer - Colonel Michael Corcoran - who was wounded on the field of battle and subsequently captured by the Confederates.

Thus, following Bull Run, command of the 69th fell to Thomas Francis Meagher.

------------

Meagher (pronounced “Mar”) had already become somewhat of a celebrity among the Irish in America, having been a leader of the Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848; an effort to win Ireland’s independence from the United Kingdom. When that effort failed, he was arrested by the British, and found guilty of treason.

It’s no secret that the past 3 years have been a challenge for our industry: uncertainty, shortages, increases in costs across the board, etc. We know you’ve seen a lot of the same in your daily lives. While Able Ebenezer has not been immune to these challenges, I am proud to say we are holding our own and staying in the fight.

With that, I wanted to give everyone a quick recap of this past year, and lay out our strategy for 2023, with a “call to action” covering how you - our loyal customers - can support the effort.

2022: HOLDING THE LINE

A year ago, it became clear that the cost increases we endured over the previous 2 years were not going to be temporary, and we needed to take steps to remain sustainable. At that time, the cost of everything from grain, hops, cans, case boxes, CO2, natural gas, electricity and more - along with the cost to ship them all to Merrimack - had gone up over double-digits in terms of percentage, and it was not looking like that trend would ease in 2022.

Thus, we executed our first price increase in the history of Able (going on 8 years at the time), adding a dollar to the cost of pints at the bar, from $5 to $6 (we still eat the tax), and increased our wholesale case pricing ~10%. This helped keep our margins relatively healthy, as we embarked on a year with the focus of “holding what we’ve got:” maintain our current Distro territory and Taproom traffic, and be prepared to adjust should uncertainty appear once again.

Uncertainty did reappear: CO2 prices increased twice, with deliveries becoming sporadic as the supply began to run short (it’s still short; shout out to Matheson for keeping us going though). Fuel for our Distro vehicles - which we run daily - obviously increased, and energy costs for the brewery spiked once again at the end of summer.

Getting on my soapbox for a minute: To top it off (or add insult to injury), the regulatory environment in NH shifted over the summer, with new legislation officially forcing our home delivery service - Distro Direct, later BringtheBeers.com - to cease operations. This one likely hurt the most as home delivery, something we created out of the shutdowns in March 2020 to stay in the game, kept our team together and Able going during that volatile time.

But, as we learned in the military, you focus on what you can control and channel all of your effort towards staying in the fight, regardless of the challenges. After all, we didn’t cry and tap out when the shutdowns came, and we weren’t going to do so when we received that call from the state.

Take the L, pick yourself back up, and drive on.

And that’s what we did: we finished 2022 having held *most* of what we had at the start of the year. Uncertainty still lingers, but we held together.

The question going into the end of the 2022 became what the focus in 2023 would be, given everything that had happened during the year. Would we stay the course and hold what we had? Should we dial back in an attempt to reduce costs, or increase prices again to make our margins healthy again and hope the market will bear it?

We’re not pursuing any of the above; instead, we’re expanding our operations in 2023.

2023: LFG

“Given the same amount of intelligence, timidity will do a thousand times more damage than audacity.”

-General Carl Von Clausewitz

Right before the New Year, we received a call from Hannaford; they wanted us to expand our distribution to their stores…by a lot.

Some background: We started with Hannaford at the end of 2018, serving just 6 stores in the towns around Merrimack. A year later, our sales performance encouraged them to expand our presence to 10 stores (big shout out to y’all!). We’ve served those 10 stores consistently since then, throughout the recent years of uncertainty. In 2023, however, they wanted us to take on 17 new stores (!!) across the state, with the goal of pushing into the remaining 9 at some point in the next year.

Boom. Go Time.

Note: I really want to take a moment to thank both Hannaford and Whole Foods (who we’ve been doing business with since 2015) for being the only grocery chains willing to work with small, local, self-distributing breweries like Able. It really means the world to us, especially since we’re only maintaining 2 out of hundreds of SKUs on their shelves, and they could easily simplify by just having the large distributors fill those slots.

Our Distro Team adjusted their rhythm to enable us to get hands on all of these stores, while also continuing to service our current partners in the market, and started making the first deliveries this past week. In the coming weeks, as shelf plans are finalized, our core brands “Burn the Ships” and “Victory nor Defeat” will have a locked-in presence at 27 of the 36 Hannaford stores in NH, spanning from West Lebanon to Portsmouth, Nashua to Meredith.

This expansion is what triggered our shift from “holding what we’ve got” in 2022 to “let’s f*cking go” in 2023.

As stated up front, the challenges of recent years have impacted all brewers, and the hospitality industry in general. Many reacted similarly as well, by increasing their prices. They are also adjusting in a manner we didn’t anticipate: reducing the number of SKUs they send out to the market and placing focus back on core brands instead of maintaining a wide variety. This is a solid way to simplify an operation on many fronts, as well as streamline & reduce overall costs, since maintaining a variety of new and rotating products typically comes with higher costs. What this shift has caused in the market is less SKUs available to fill shelves and draft lines, both of which have expanded significantly over the past decade to keep up with the boom of craft beer. Now, with less products available to stock, those shelves and lines are at risk of being underserved, hence the call from Hannaford to expand.

Able has been unique in that we’ve never really leaned on a wide variety of brands to keep y’all interested. Instead, while we always have fun occasionally developing new beers and rotating through our old favorites, our operation has always been focused on our core brands: “Burn the Ships” and “Victory nor Defeat;” the most solid, consistent, proven and loved of our beers.

This presents an opportunity for Able: we can expand the presence of our core brands by simply occupying vacant space across the state, without the need to dial back the rhythm of our rotating & experimental brands. This in turn increases “Burn The Ships” and “Victory Nor Defeat” production, simplifying and streamlining our overall raw materials, which in turn reduces costs.

So, we decided we don’t need to increase our prices again at this time; by simply increasing the raw material purchases, production and sell-through rate of our core brands, we should be able to keep our margins healthy enough for Able to be both sustainable and grow.

Thus, our 2023 strategy is centered around the following mission:

Increase the presence of “Burn The Ships” & “Victory Nor Defeat” across our expanded Area of Operations in order to secure Able’s place as a solid, reliable and true state-wide brand.

I remember taking this photo just before midnight; I had gotten up to piss and walking back to my seat - as we’ve all done so many times over the years - I was hit with emotion at the sight of our bar, completely empty. I felt alone, lost, helpless. But it’s in those moments we need to face our fears head on, and go on the attack. What I wrote that night was meant to keep me in the fight as much as it was for anyone else.

I remember not knowing what to do, and running the numbers on how long we might be able to keep going before having to make sacrifices. I also remember throwing the numbers aside, and deciding that failure - at any level - was not an option.

I’ve done a lot of reflecting this week - looking back at all the challenges our team faced to make it here - and being reminded of this post made me want to share some of it with you, since you all are a big part of it all. Re-reading what I wrote to you all back in May, this statement still accurately sums up my feelings today:

“I couldn’t be more proud to be a part of a team of people who rally, rather than run, in the face of a crisis.”

We had every reason to fold a year ago; to give up, go home, and wait for help to come. But this team didn’t; everyone showed up the next day, ready to help build whatever was needed to keep Able going.

It was tough because, in reality, we had no idea what to do. In figuring out how to survive, we realized we had to find a way to repurpose everyone’s job functions & skill sets:

For a company with only 8 employees (at the time), we have a very diverse operation here at Able: brewers, packaging, bar staff, sales and distribution; we do it all in-house. We lost the functionality of our bar and most of our sales/distro network overnight as restaurants & bars were forced to close. In theory, from a business perspective, the first move to make would be cutting the staff of both to reduce costs and hope to survive the next “three weeks” until things go back to “normal.”

The problem with that approach is it’s not a solution; it’s a bandage. Eventually, we would have to reduce brewing staff because we wouldn’t be brewing as much without an active sales effort. After enough time, we would cease to be a brewery.

So, instead, we went on the offensive. We accepted, up front, that there would be no “going back to normal.” To think otherwise was just fooling ourselves.

"Given the same amount of intelligence, timidity will do a thousand times more damage than audacity."

-General Carl von Clausewitz

As I mentioned above, we have a very diverse operation with a lot of moving parts. While this can complicate how to find and implement a solution, it also grants our operation independence: we have our own canning line, delivery vehicles, drivers & salespeople; we maintain our own inventory on-site, have complete control over our production rhythm, and have systems & processes in place to manage & sync everything. We had 6 years of experience building this independence, and this independence would be what would keep us together.

As most of you know, we decided the best way to pivot the company would be bringing beers directly to customer’s doors; a service we named Able Direct. In retrospect, it was the obvious strategy: we were already delivering beer in bulk to restaurants & retailers daily; all we had to do was adjust our order punching & invoicing system, add ecommerce to the website, then reconfigure loadouts in the vehicles for the smaller quantities. Putting it together was a big team effort, and looking back, we had fun doing it. I remember the last thing I did before launching the site, within days of being shut down, was add the Bruins/Patriots “fog horn” sound file to our new Dispatch desk computer so it would play every time a new order came in.

Then, suddenly, it took off.

I’m not exaggerating: within days we delivered over 100 orders to people’s doors. Within a month, we were well over 1000. The “fog horn” started to become a bit much, but we embraced it (it still plays in the Distro office, btw). By the end of March, we were struggling to keep up with the demand. Our drivers were here 7-days/week from morning until the last window closed at 6pm. Our Bar Staff became dispatchers, supporting the workload of our drivers by organizing routes, packing cases & maintaining the website. Note: looking back, having dispatchers was critical; delivering 4-packs to homes eats into our overall margin, and they ensured the efficiency of our work.

It’s crazy to say, but April & May 2020 are the two best sales months in Able’s history, no joke. None of our employees were laid off, no one took a pay cut, and we didn’t (and still don’t) qualify for any of the grant money issued by the govt. At the end of May, our team donated $2500 to the restaurant industry’s employee relief fund. What a stellar fucking team effort.

So yes, I’m stupid proud of this team. Nicole, Dan, Chris, Brendan, Mandy, Jim & Mike are absolute rockstars.

And this team is still going: We’re still delivering beer to your doors every day. We’ve created 2 new jobs, upgraded our ordering website (to bringthebeers.com!), invested in software to automate routing & ETA notifications (which allowed our bar staff to retire from Dispatch & reopen the bar), expanded our delivery radius, and - most importantly - we’re still having fun.

But my favorite aspect to think back on from this year has been our community; all of you. You made Able Direct a source of positivity in a very negative time, and it was contagious. You not only believed in us, tried Direct for the first time, and helped spread the word - you went out of your way to add to the positive vibes:

Corey & Trinley volunteered to be the first to test out our online ordering (and thank goodness, cause it needed help). Chef Paul brought us lunch, just about daily, from his commercial kitchen. Jordan hooked us up with free radio ads for 3 weeks to help promote Direct. Dalton & Derek kept making us fried chicken sandwiches in the loading dock at the end of long days. Eric bought cases of beer out of the tap room, then drove around giving out beer & bbq to small businesses in town. Alli ordered beer to her friends houses via Direct, and - when we ran out of friends to send beer to - ordered a case delivered to her local police department (not gonna say which, but yes they accepted it). A local business had ordered cases for a “goodbye party” on the day they had to lay everyone off, then ordered again weeks later to celebrate their ability to bring everyone back (cried a happy tear when that one came in).

There’s honestly too many of these stories to tell; I wish I could fit them all here. Just know that everything you all have contributed to the cause has not gone unnoticed, and is appreciated more than words can convey.

A year ago, we - once again - burned our ships & ventured forward into the unknown, knowing we possessed the determination to make it to the other side with a ‘W’.

Thank you for joining us on the journey; we would not have made it without you, and couldn’t ask for better teammates. Cheers to you, and to the year ahead.

“The common man is not concerned about the passage of time, the man of talent is driven by it.” - Arthur Schopenhauer

Time is an interesting thing; we always feel as though we don’t have enough of it. Sometimes, our days seem to drag on; and yet, at the end of the year, we look back and say how quickly they have all gone by. This past year, 2020, in particular, seemed to have been the longest year ever, yet somehow, it also went by in an instant.

Time is a crucial factor in brewing. To craft any beer, it takes time and patience; however, depending on the variety of the beer you're crafting, you need to allot yourself more or less time. For example, lagers, in comparison to ales, need several weeks to be conditioned before they are ready for consumption. It takes time and patience to boil the wort and then to ferment the beer until it’s done. When developing new recipes, you often spend time brewing small batches and waiting weeks for them to be done just to try the final sample and say, “not good enough.”

In life, we often find the same thing happening. It is commonplace to view time simply as an abundant resource that you can grind through to achieve an end goal. We might dedicate a substantial amount of time working on something only to get to the end and not feel satisfied; as though that time was wasted. However, if the time spent on a particular task was fulfilling in the moment, how could that be considered a waste? Realizing that our time is precious serves as motivation to make sure we spend it on things that we value. For me, I find the work I do to be gratifying and I find fulfillment in spending time with the people working alongside me.

Outside of work, I find that the best way to spend my time is to simply be in the company of close friends and family. Nothing beats an afternoon with old friends- laughing, conversating, and obviously enjoying a few beers together. That’s what I love about beer; it's communal. I mean, no one ever asks if you want to go grab a glass of water after work, right? Beer is meant to be shared. That’s why I enjoy making it so much; because I get to see the final product poured into a glass and shared amongst friends, which makes all the time spent making it worth it.

This beer has been a labor of love for me. I started over a year ago and would brew a sample batch in between other new recipes we were working on whenever I had a free day. I’ve enjoyed many of the recipes along the way; but, it wasn’t until this final batch that I truly felt proud of it. I’m excited to share it with my friends and family and to see it enjoyed amongst others. So think about the time you have every day and, no matter how trivial, spend it doing what makes you happy. Cheers!

- Jim

What a ride it’s been: Today marks 6 years since our grand opening. This weekend usually hosts our biggest party of the year, but 2020’s anniversary is quiet here at the brewery.

It’s important to acknowledge milestones, but I believe it’s equally important not to let them define you. Yes, it’s been 6 years - and I’m proud of that fact, we all are - but recent weeks have felt more like starting over. Right now, we’re focused on what’s ahead, not what is past.

“One's victories in battle cannot be repeated--they take their form in response to inexhaustibly changing circumstances.” -Sun Tzu

With that, rather than reflect on the past, I wanted to take this opportunity to update you on what’s happening at Able, and what you can expect to see from us in the near-term:

TAP ROOM: Renovations to the tap room are nearing completion, with everything on pace to be done by early July. Bigger space, better flow, more seating, air conditioning, new flooring, expanded outdoor seating, and thensome...all built around the original 27’ White Pine bar (which now has charging outlets). We were also able to work in a new glass washer for the Bar Team (you are so welcome, Nicole). You’re going to love the new space; if you happen to drop in for beer to-go, we’ll gladly show you around. We’ll announce a date for grand re-opening in the coming weeks

DISTRO: The Distro Team is still embracing the hustle, and is still on the road everyday (including rn). We’re beyond stoked to have our partnered restaurants beginning to reopen; we def missed them (be sure to get out there and give them your support). We started producing limited quantities of kegs just for them.

Direct (our new home delivery service @ ableebenezer.com/order) is here to stay. In fact, we’re working now on expanding & improving the service. A big shout out to all of you Direct customers who took the time last week to complete Nicole’s survey; your feedback has been a huge help.

Soon, you will see same-day orders stretch into the evenings, delivery windows narrow from hours to minutes, and the delivery radius begin to expand. You will soon be able to choose when you want beer delivered, and receive up-to-the-minute text notifications on your driver’s route status & estimated arrival time, no joke.

-Accident on the DW Highway has traffic backed up? No worries, you’ll see a text with adjusted ETA.

-Chris driving like a mad lad up the Everett TP? No prob, you’ll get a heads up that he’s ahead of schedule.

-You’re the next stop & Dan is 15 minutes out? You’ll see a notification letting you know it’s time to pull out your ID & put pants on (optional).

We didn’t know what this service would become at the onset...honestly, the first iteration of it was intended to be a life raft, nothing more. 3 months later, we’ve delivered nearly 1800 individual orders across southern NH (for perspective: our Distro Team ran just over 2500 total orders to retailers & restaurants in 2019). We’ve already created new jobs with Direct, specifically the Dispatch role (the “managers of the chaos” that proper route planning & execution is, currently being filled by our Bar Team), and anticipate the Distro Team will continue to expand as we move forward.

The Brewhouse team is beginning to get caught up, and is now able to invest more time into R&D. Ingenuity #7 is finally done and in the tanks now; release date to be announced soon. Going forward, we’re committing to actively pursuing fun ideas & expanding our variety of offerings (again, per your feedback), while also maintaining the core brands we all have come to love & expect: Burn the Ships & Victory nor Defeat (never forget where you came from).

Finally - and we’re wicked excited about this project - we’re committing to a new collaboration series with fellow local producers (first up: Ancient Fire collab. Stay tuned, more to follow...).

Beyond all that, the Able team is staying strong, safe & motivated. It’s a slow Sunday today; Brendan’s here covering Dispatch, Mike’s covering down on the road to give Dan & Chris a day off, and I’m knocking out maintenance ahead of tomorrow’s canning run. At day’s end, we’ll crack open a Burn the Ships and give a quick cheers to 6 years.

Thank you all for an incredible 6 years; it has been the time of my life, and - as much as I like to believe there’s nothing I can’t do on my own - we could not have done any of it without you.

Now get out there & enjoy this beautiful Sunday! Cheers.

-Carl

Although the state is allowing portions of our local hospitality industry to resume on-premise ops beginning Monday, May 18th, we at Able Ebenezer are opting to keep our bar closed. Don’t fret tho: We’ll still be offering beer to-go @ the brewery, as well as Direct beer delivery via our Distro Team (ableebenezer.com/order).

Instead, we’re taking this time to renovate the bar; a project we had slated for earlier this Spring, but had to delay amidst the shutdown. We’ll monitor the state’s phases as we progress, and announce a reopening date once we’re ready. In the meantime, we’ll continue driving on with our current rhythm: brewing, canning & bringing the beers.

——————————

A little personal reflection: I want you to know our team here is forever grateful for your continued support - whether it began at our Grand Opening several years ago, or with your first Direct order mere weeks ago. It’s no secret this has been a challenging time for our entire industry, and you have kept us in the fight throughout.

Upon first hearing of the shutdown the afternoon of March 16th, I had no idea where we would be by the end of that month, let alone in May. The bar here was packed that night, filled with regulars wondering if it would be the last time. Several were in tears (which I, admittedly, don’t handle the best).

After sharing a beer and thanking everyone for their support, I drove home to pack a bag, then right back to the brewery. I lived here for the next 4 days.

Mentally, it’s tough not to focus on the imminent dangers ahead; when your mind keeps running the math on how long you might be able to keep paying yourself, your teammates, your bills, or your own rent. You imagine the tough conversations you’re likely going to have to endure, and all the things you’ll have to give up, and the very real possibility that you may have to sell off your dream - one piece at a time - to pay back your debtors. Furthermore, I knew my teammates were processing similar concerns in their own minds. It’s then you begin to triage everything, picking what can be dropped in the moment to delay facing those dangers. Note: Mike & I cancelled two things up front: 1) the production schedule, and 2) our paychecks.

But to survive, you have to shut those things out; refuse to accept them as possible, and force yourself to focus only on what you can control to influence the outcomes.

When challenges come at us, we have two choices; but my time in the Army taught me to really only see one. Thus, I refused to entertain defeat as an outcome. I didn’t have all the answers - not even close - but I would not quit until I did; there was no limit to what I was willing to endure to keep Able going. “Keep your heads up; we'll make it through to the other side, regardless of who or what gets in the way” I wrote to our team that evening.

Another note: I still don’t have all the answers - not even close - so we’re still getting after it everyday. Complacency & comfort are enemies in this ongoing fight.

In 48 hours, we had the beginnings of our Direct delivery service in place. Within just a couple weeks, we had processed hundreds of orders, created new jobs for our bar staff (as Distro Dispatchers; a role they’re maintaining today and likely beyond), and are back in full production. Some have called us “lucky",” but luck had nothing to do with it: this is the product of teamwork & effort.

I couldn’t be more proud to be a part of a team of people who rally, rather than run, in the face of a crisis. In short: we were built for this, and fully intend on making it to the other side; we’ll see you there, beer in hand.

Stark put a great deal of thought into the timing of his march, ensuring the operation coincided with both low illumination (complete darkness from a waning moon phase) and low tide. Because of this, when Stark’s men reach the shore of Chelsea near the convergence of Belle Isle Creek & Chelsea Creek, they are able to easily evade British boat patrols around the islands and wade across the water to Hog Island. They begin quietly ferrying livestock across the creek to the mainland, then over to Noddle’s Island to do the same.

The operation takes hours, going until late morning, but it’s a complete success: the Patriots now possess hundreds of new horses, cattle & sheep for their young army. With the sun now high in the sky, they know it’s time to begin moving the regiment back to Winter Hill. But Stark, not wanting to leave any supplies behind for the British to obtain, orders his men to begin setting fire to the remaining hay stacks and barns. When the rising smoke becomes visible in Boston, Vice Admiral Samuel Graves - General Gage’s naval commander in the waters around the city - orders his navy to surround the islands & land hundreds of marines on Noddle’s to combat the rebels.

By midday, the New Hampshiremen are decisively engaged with the British on Noddle’s Island, while also enduring cannonfire from the ships around the islands. This is the Granite Stater’s first taste of real combat against British Regulars, and a tough one at that. But Stark’s men - although scattered in small teams about the islands - are able to hold off the 400+ redcoats, most using the low marshland beside the creek separating Noddle’s & Hog Island as cover, forcing the British ranks back to the inland of the island.

With the sun now setting, the British commanders on the ground opt to cut their losses, considering the damage done and the day lost.

“Before we got from Noddle’s Island to Hog Island we was fired upon by a Schooner. But we crossed the river and about fifteen of us squatted down in a ditch on the marsh and stood our ground. And there came a company of Regulars on the marsh on the other side of the river and the Schooner, and we had a hot fire until the Regulars retreated. But notwithstanding the bullets flew very thick yet there was not a man of us killed. Surely God has a favor towards us. Thanks be unto him that so little hurt was done when the balls sung like bees round our heads.”

-Private Amos Farnsworth, from his Diary

The Schooner Amos refers to is the HMS Diana - a 120 ton, 18-gun warship commanded by Lieutenant Thomas Graves - Admiral Graves’ nephew.

The Diana isn’t the largest or most formidable ship in the Boston fleet, but she is one of the fastest and most capable for her size. In fact, she was built at the Boston shipyards in 1774, then acquired by the British shortly after and fitted for combat; Admiral Graves personally selecting her for his fleet:

“I have taken it upon me to purchase the Diana schooner of 120 tons, about eight months old, so exceedingly well built that she is allowed to be the best vessel of the kind that has yet been in the King’s Service.”

-Vice Admiral Samuel Graves, in a letter dated January 8th, 1775

Because of her speed and maneuverability, combined with her firepower, the Diana is instructed to cut off the Patriot’s escape route back across to Chelsea by navigating north of Noddle’s Island and into Chelsea Creek with the high tide. Here, they become engaged with the rebels, such as Amos Farnsworth.

But as the battle wears on and British Marines are forced back on land, the wind and tide also turns in favor of the Patriots: the crew of Diana finds themselves without the conditions needed to navigate back east towards the Mystic River and out into Boston Harbor. She signals for assistance from the main fleet, who dispatch two ships & a dozen barges up the Mystic to help tow the Diana out of Chelsea Creek before low tide.

--------------------

This is where the story should have likely ended: the Battle of Chelsea Creek is only the 2nd major engagement of the war (Lexington & Concord serving as the first), and the Patriots had won the day decisively. They’d succeeded in their mission, making it back to the mainland with a bounty of supplies, while also holding off a combined force of British Regulars, all with minimal casualties. It’s now been over 18 hours since they first stepped off towards Chelsea, and the only task that remains is an easy march back to Winter Hill.

But the story doesn’t end there.

--------------------

The New Hampshiremen see an opportunity to chalk up yet another win for the day. They assume fighting positions along the shoreline and engage the struggling Diana and her would-be rescuers. As night sets in, Colonel Stark sends a rider back to Cambridge requesting reinforcements & additional ammunition to keep up the fight.

At their Headquarters in Cambridge, the Patriot commanders are elated at Stark’s report: not only had the mission been carried out successfully, but the regiment had been decisively engaged with the enemy and came out the victors. Without hesitation, reinforcements led by General Israel Putnam rushes out of Cambridge into the night towards Chelsea Creek.

Side note: Dr. Joseph Warren - Chairman of the MA Committee of Safety, famous Son of Liberty from Boston’s North End, and soon-to-be hero of Bunker Hill fame - was present at the Cambridge Headquarters when the rider arrived. Upon hearing Stark’s report, he volunteered to join Putnam’s men on their march: Dr. Warren did not want to miss the chance to witness what he believed to be history in the making, but was unable to join the fight. What he witnessed that evening at Chelsea Creek motivated him to take the field again - this time as a Private within the ranks - at Bunker Hill a month later, where he would be killed in action while fighting honorably.

It’s now late in the evening, and Putnam’s reinforcements join Stark’s men along the north shore of Chelsea Creek, exchanging fire through the darkness with the British on the water. After hours of attempting to tow the Diana back to deeper waters while under constant fire from the Patriots, the tide finally recedes beyond her waterline: her keel runs aground, settling into the sands just off the shore of Chelsea. Lieutenant Graves orders abandon ship.

The British have a difficult go at it, but are able to use the darkness to transfer her crew over to the HMS Britannia - one of the vessels dispatched to help the Diana. Once aboard, the British tow themselves back to safety in the deeper waters of Boston Harbor, leaving the Schooner Diana behind.

It’s now the early morning hours on the 28th. The musket & cannon fire finally silences, replaced with a loud cheer as the Patriots swarm abroad the abandoned vessel, now listing heavily on one side as the tide continues to recede. They go to work stripping her of any valuables: her 18 guns, powder, shot & supplies and thensome, then load bales of hay to set the Diana ablaze #burntheships.

But before sparking the flame, they have one more trophy to take from the Diana: Her 76’ tall, New England grown, White Pine mast. Yes, these mad lads - now over 24 hours on mission - took the time to cut off HMS Diana’s mast and carry it with them all the way back to Winter Hill.

Not sure there’s any better way to give a nod to the fighters of NH’s Pine Tree Riot.

Months later, her mast would be carried up Prospect Hill - the highest point around Boston, and thus, the most visible to the British held up in the city. There, by order of General Washington himself, the mast was planted to fly the first American Flag. Today, the spot atop Prospect Hill is marked by the "Prospect Hill Monument;” a 4-story structure of stone from which a flag still flies. The City of Somerville continues to raise a new flag every year at their annual Flag Raising Ceremony; 2020’s being the 244th year.

“Orders given from the General for scouting parties to fire at all times whenever they have the opportunity. The same day raised the mast that came out of the schooner that was burnt at Chelsea, for to hoist our new flag upon, in the fort upon Prospect Hill, seventy-six feet high.”

-Lieutenant Paul Lunt, from his Diary

August 1, 1775

By December, 1776, the war for independence was not going well for the Patriots.

The year had started with a win, as the New England militias under command of General George Washington forced the British to evacuate Boston in March. Yet, the remainder of the year would host a series of defeats for Washington & his army: they would suffer a great defeat at the Battle of Brooklyn Heights, and subsequently forced to abandon New York City on lower Manhattan Island soon after. From there, they would lose decisively at Pells Point, White Plains, then Fort Washington - the last Patriot position in New York. What remained of their army would flee across the Hudson River to Fort Lee in New Jersey, which would also fall soon after. Finally, Washington receives word that his 2nd in command - General Charles Lee - is captured by the British.

Thus, as December sets in, the Patriots are retreating across New Jersey, then over the Delaware River into Pennsylvania, with General Lord Cornwallis’ army in pursuit. The Continental Congress, fearful for their lives, abandons Philadelphia.

Thankfully, harsh winter weather soon sets in, putting a halt to both Patriot & British operations. But while British begin to establish their winter encampments, General Washington & his officers know they must attempt something as their situation is bleak: The army is weak, underfed, and under supplied. Many of their men have deserted, believing the cause to be lost. Further, most of those who remain are due to have their enlistments expire on January 1st. If they settle in for winter, their army would likely fade away before the Spring thaw, and with it, the cause for independence itself.

“I think the game is pretty near up.”

-General George Washington, in a letter to his brother John

December 18, 1776

On December 22nd, Washington calls a meeting with his generals to determine what action - if any - they can muster to save the cause. One officer called to attend the meeting - even though he does not hold a brigade command like Washington’s fellow generals - is Colonel John Stark of the 1st New Hampshire Regiment. He offers only one contribution to the discussion:

“Your men have too long been accustomed to place their dependence for safety on shovels and pickaxes. If you ever mean to establish the independence of these united states, you must teach them to place their dependence upon their arms and their courage.”

-Colonel John Stark

Stark’s words resonate with Washington and his staff, who then began work on a bold counter-offensive. Two days later, Washington calls upon Stark once again:

“We have agreed upon the plan: we are to march tomorrow on Trenton, and you are to command the advance guard.”

General Washington to Colonel Stark

December 24, 1776

Thus, at nightfall on Christmas Day, 1776, in the midst of pounding wind, sleet & snow, the Patriots load themselves into boats along the Delaware River and are ferried across to New Jersey at McKonkey’s Ferry; some 9 miles north of Trenton. Their plan is to surround the town before daybreak and deliver a surprise attack.

———————————

Meanwhile, in Trenton, a combined force of Hessian soldiers and British Cavalry commanded by Colonel Johann Rall are well-established in their warm, dry winter quarters. Rall - an experienced officer and combatant - is so far unimpressed by the colonial rebels, having faced & defeated them handily in the previous months. While he’s received a few vague reports from loyalist spies that the rebels might be planning an attack, Rall scoffs at the notion, whether true or not: “Then let them come,” he tells his messengers. “We will go at them with the bayonet.”

And he has good reason to be cocky: Rall and his Hessians were at Brooklyn, White Plains and Fort Washington, often leading the British attack. Before being called to the colonies, they were veterans of wars in Bavaria, Austria, Russia, Scotland, and in the 7 Years War against France. The Hessians had successfully quelled rebellions and conquered nations many times over. Thus, they are some of the most seasoned, professional soldiers the world can muster…and they know it.

And in their minds, this war is at its end.

——————————

Several miles to the north, Washington’s army is fighting through the blizzard to begin their march. The weather is so bad that 3000 of Washington’s men - who are supposed to cross the Delaware River south of Trenton & secure the rear of the town - are unable to make it across. The 2400 who do cross the Delaware suffer tremendously in the cold, two of whom succumb to the elements and perish during the march. One New England soldier wrote of that harsh night in his journal:

“During the whole night it alternately hailed, rained, snowed, and blew tremendously. I recollect very well that at one time, when we halted on the road, I sat down on the stump of a tree and was so benumbed with cold that I wanted to go to sleep; had I been passed unnoticed I should have frozen to death without knowing it. We then began to march again, just in the old slow way, until the dawn of day, about half-past seven in the morning.”

-Private John Greenwood

The operation is now hours behind schedule, and thus Washington considers abandoning the attack several times throughout the night. But he finds resolve in his men, all who continue onward - albeit slowly - toward Trenton; John Stark & his New Hampshiremen at the front.

The sun has already risen by the time the Patriots arrive on the outskirts of the town. They’ve lost the element of surprise, have less than half the men they intended, and those who survived the brutal river crossing & march are soaked & chilled to the bone, many finding their rifles & powder too wet to fire.

It is in this moment that John Stark orders fixed bayonets, and leads his charging men down 2nd Street into the town of Trenton.

“John Stark had a reputation as a fighter. He was devoted to the revolutionary cause and wrote often to his wife that he was determined to “live free or die,” a phrase his state later made its motto. Stark had trained his New Hampshiremen to use the bayonet, and he led them through the fields along the River Road. The Hessians were astonished to see the despised American rebels running toward them through the storm with fixed bayonets.”

-David Hackett Fischer, “Washington’s Crossing”

Major James Wilkenson of the 1st Pennsylvania Rifles - who were formed with the brigade directly behind Stark’s New Hampshire Regiment during the assault - wrote about this moment in his memoir of the battle:

“We soon marched, Colonel Stark in command of the advance guard, with orders to clear their muskets as best they could as they moved. It was now broad day, and the storm beat violently in our faces. The attack on the left was immediately answered by Colonel Stark in our front, who forced the enemy’s picket and pressed it into town, our column close at his men’s heels. The enemy made a momentary show of resistance by a wild and undirected fire from the windows of their quarters, which they abandoned as he advanced...While I render justice to the services of [other fellow officers], I must not withhold due praise to the dauntless Stark, who dealt death wherever he found resistance, and broke down all opposition before him.”

-Major James Wilkinson, 1st PA Rifles

The fight was over in an hour: By mid-morning, the Hessians were forced out of the streets and into the orchard field just east of the town. It was here they would find themselves surrounded, surrendering to General John Sullivan (of Somersworth NH), who assumed the rear of the town upon hearing 3000 of their men were unable to cross. Washington’s army would find a bounty of arms & supplies, as well as take over 800 prisoners, all with only a handful of casualties. In one daring assault, the Patriots had defeated some of the most renowned soldiers seen at that point in history.

The Battle of Trenton became an instant turning point in the war, saving the cause itself. Having previously been an army constantly on the defensive, or on the run, this served as their first successful offensive operation. The Patriots had finally proven they could hold their own against some of the best, most fierce soldiers in the world. Days later, as enlistments were expiring, many opted to remain with the army, reinvigorated by their victory over the Hessians. Furthermore, as news of the victory spread across the colonies, new enlistments rose dramatically. John Stark personally appealed to his men, convincing all to stay with him in the fight rather than return home to the Granite State. On January 3rd, 1777, they would go on the offensive yet again at Princeton, winning gloriously once more in the cold ice & snow.

Thus, without the daring & courage of Colonel John Stark & his New Hampshiremen, the victory at Trenton may never have been, and the cause for independence would have certainly been lost.

Note: We want to give a big shout-out once again to the team at the NH Historical Society for all of their help & expertise in this effort to share the stories of the NH Regiments. If you’re interested in NH’s history, they’re worth a visit. Please consider supporting their work here: https://www.nhhistory.org/Join/Donate/Ways-To-Give. Cheers!

Andrew McClary was already plowing his field when first light hit on the morning of April 20th, 1775, as the alarm horn was sounded from Epsom town center. Without a second thought, he dropped his work, grabbed what belongings he could from his home, then rounded up fellow men from town and hit the road.

“Like the Roman Cincinnatus, he left the plow in the furrow, hastily armed himself, and dashed off to Deerfield accompanied by a few daring spirits.”

-Elliot Cogswell, History of Nottingham, Deerfield & Northwood NH

By 1 o’clock that afternoon, McClary stood at the front of just over 80 men gathered from the neighboring towns of Northwood & Deerfield, leading them south for Massachusetts with great haste. By nightfall, they arrived in Andover where they stopped for supper. Instead of staying in town until morning, they continued onward and marched all night.

By sunrise on the 21st - less than 48 hours after the British marched on Lexington & Concord - McClary reported to the Patriot headquarters in Cambridge, having led his men 70 miles in under 24 hours. No joke.

--------------------

Andrew McClary was a badass.

In 1730, he became the first of his family to be born in the New World, the son of immigrants from Ulster, Ireland. They settled in Epsom, NH, where Andrew would be raised, spending much of his youth climbing Fort Mountain & exploring the surrounding NH countryside. He became an avid outdoorsman, tracker & hunter, then, as a teenager, joined the local militia to serve as a scout. He was also the local champion in boxing & wrestling; he would go undefeated in both.

And one can see why: The man stood over 6 and a half feet tall, and was built like an ox. One local described him as “straight as an arrow, finely proportioned, symmetrical of form, every muscle well formed, rough and ready, jovial, generous, with a stentorial voice, blue eyes, florid complexion. Such a man would be picked out of a thousand as born to command.”

Andrew also excelled as a soldier in the militia. So much in fact that he was selected to join the famous “Roger’s Rangers,” fighting alongside the likes of John Stark & John Goffe throughout the French & Indian War (1754-1763), rising to the rank of Captain.

He was a favorite officer, nearly six and one-half feet in height, with a Herculean form, a voice like Stentor and strength of Ajax, never equaled in athletic exercises and unsubdued in single combat. Whole bodies of men had been overcome by him, and he seemed totally unconscious that he was not equally unconquerable at the cannon’s mouth.

-Warren Tripp, “The McClary’s of Epsom”

Following the war’s end in 1763, Andrew returned to Epsom, where he took charge of the family farm & tavern he had built with his father in his youth. Over the next several years, he would become a successful entrepreneur & leader within the community. His ventures grew to the point where he volunteered his tavern to become the town meeting place (since it was the largest building in town), and the adjacent land the local militia’s muster field (which he maintained himself).

Of he and his neighbors, it was said, “they were a people who would praise good whiskey and drink it; and damn bad whiskey, yet drink it with equal relish.” One tale from his past tells of a bar fight at a Portsmouth tavern, where Andrew overwhelmed six uniformed British officers who attempted to tackle him after a spirited debate over several drinks, throwing each -one after the other - through a window and out onto Court Street.

In December of 1774, he was again in Portsmouth - this time alongside future war heroes John Langdon & John Sullivan - leading the raid on Fort William & Mary to seize all of its arms & supplies (which would be used to combat the British at Boston a few months later).

Now, at the close of April 1775, he is gathered among more than a thousand spontaneously mustered NH citizens along the southern slope of Winter Hill, overlooking the besieged city of Boston. Their first order of business is to organize into something resembling a military regiment, and thus hold a vote to elect their officers. John Stark of Manchester - the well-known, outspoken hero of Roger’s Rangers fame - is chosen as their commander.

Second in command goes to Andrew McClary.

--------------------

June 17th, 1775 brings the Battle of Bunker Hill, and McClary’s finest - and final - action.

Less than a couple months into the Siege of Boston, the Patriots are looking to tighten their lines around the city by building fortifications at Bunker & Breed’s Hills just outside Charlestown during the night of June 16th. On the morning of June 17th, the British wake up to the sight of rebels digging these defensive positions directly across the river from Boston’s North End; too close for comfort. General Howe wastes no time, launching a full attack by land & sea to remove the Patriots from the Charlestown peninsula. The New Englander’s respond in kind, ordering reinforcements to Charlestown to support the badly outnumbered Patriots.

The New Hampshire Regiments are some of the first to arrive at the Charlestown Neck - a narrow land bridge connecting Charlestown peninsula to the mainland - but they aren’t the first: Massachusetts Regiments under Colonel Samuel Gerrish are halted in the road leading to Charlestown. Why? Because upon first seeing the thousands of British troops landing on the shores & several warships bombarding the Patriots from the Charles River, Gerrish & his officers are refusing to take the field. In response, Andrew McClary pushes his way to the front, demanding they move out of the way if they do not intend to fight.

“The fire of the gunboats and warships had turned the Neck into a terrifying war zone...it was hardly a surprise that a crowd of fearful soldiers was now blocking the approach to the Neck. In his deep and booming voice, Major McClary demanded that the officers and their men immediately step aside so Colonel Stark & his regiment could march to Bunker Hill.”

-Nathaniel Philbrick, “Bunker Hill: A City, A Siege, A Revolution”

Note: Colonel Gerrish was court-martialed by General Washington following the battle, charged with cowardice. He was found guilty & discharged from the Continental Army.

Once through the neck, they followed Colonel Stark & Major McClary through the cannonade to the base of Bunker Hill, assuming the critical flank position along the rail fence to the Mystic River on the Patriot’s left. It was here the British would endure their greatest losses during the first two assaults, with McClary proving himself a superior combat leader once again:

“During this tremendous fire of musketry and roar of cannon, McClary's gigantic voice was distinctly heard, animating and encouraging the men as though he would inspire every ball that sped with his own fire and energy.”

-Samuel Swett, “History of Bunker Hill Battle”

When British reinforcements arrived later in the afternoon, General Clinton redirected them away from the Patriot flanks & towards the defenses atop Breed’s Hill for their third, and only successful, assault. While the regiments from NH held the field to cover the retreat of their fellow New Englander’s from Connecticut & Massachusetts, it was McClary who was the last man to leave the field, covering the NH men’s retreat back to the Neck.

One of his childhood friends and fellow officers wrote of this moment, when they reached the Charlestown Neck immediately following the battle. Note: I include his full account because it’s told far better than I could ever reiterate:

“A heavy cannonade was kept up upon our line and redoubt, from the commencement to the close of the action, and during the retreat; but with very little effect, except that of killing the brave Major Andrew McClary of Col. Stark's regiment soon after we retired from Bunker Hill. He was among the first officers of the army - Possessing a sound judgment, of undaunted bravery, enterprising, ardent and zealous, both as a patriot and soldier. His loss was severely felt by his compatriots in arms, while his country was deprived of the services of one of her most promising and distinguished champions of liberty.

After leaving the field of battle I met him and drank some spirit and water with him. He was animated and sanguine in the result of the conflict for independence, from the glorious display of valor which had distinguished his countrymen on that memorable day.

He soon observed that the British troops on Bunker Hill appeared in motion, and said he would go and reconnoitre them, to see whether they were coming out over the neck...After he had satisfied himself that the enemy did not intend to leave their strong posts on the heights, he was returning towards me, and when within twelve or fifteen rods of where I stood, with my company, a random cannon shot, from one of the frigates lying near where the centre of Craigie's bridge now is, passed directly through his body and put to flight one of the most heroic souls that ever animated man.

I had him carried to Medford, where he was interred, with all the respect and honors we could exhibit to the manes of a great and good man. He was my bosom friend; we had grown up together on terms of the greatest intimacy, and I loved him as a brother.”

-Captain Henry Dearborn of Epping

He was buried somewhere in the Medford/Somerville area, alongside dozens of fellow men from NH who fell during the battle. While his burial site has been lost to history & no monuments have been erected to commemorate him, the memory & benefit of his heroic efforts remains.

“Thus fell Major McClary, the highest American officer killed at the battle, the handsomest man in the army and the favorite of New Hampshire troops. His dust still slumbers where it was laid by his sorrowing companions in Medford, unhonored by any adequate memorial to tell where lies one of the heroes who ushered in the Revolution with such auspicious omens. His death spreads a gloom not only over the hearts of his men, but all through the Suncook valley; his sun went down at noon on the day that ushered in our nation’s birth.”

-Daniel Webster, at the Dedication of the Bunker Hill Monument

Bar story: Tonight, in 1863, the 54th Massachusetts Regiment led Union forces across the narrow beaches of Morris Island in the main assault on Fort Wagner; the key defensive position protecting the harbor of Confederate-held Charleston, SC.

The 54th Massachusetts - renowned as the first regiment comprised of African-American enlisted soldiers - was formed by Governor John Andrew following the Emancipation Proclamation. Recruitment was assisted by famous abolitionists such as Frederick Douglass (two volunteers being his sons) and Ralph Waldo Emerson (who also frequently attended their training in Boston).

Selected to command the unit was Robert Gould Shaw; the son of prominent Boston abolitionists, a veteran of many battles with the 2nd Massachusetts Infantry (including Antietam), and the recipient of 2 Purple Hearts. He accepted the assignment, was promoted to Colonel, then made for Boston to begin organizing and training the new regiment.

Although the Confederacy had recently issued a proclamation stating they would execute any captured African-American soldier - or white officer leading them - far more men came forward to volunteer than required. So many in fact, that the 55th Massachusetts was formed with the surplus. After months of training and with a building hunger to prove themselves in battle against the Confederacy, the 54th Massachusetts - 1,007 enlisted African-Americans and 37 white officers - gathered on the Boston Commons and, with great fanfare & celebration throughout the city, began their March south to join the fight.

Before departing, Shaw wrote to his father, “There is not the least doubt that we will leave the State with as good a regiment as any that has marched."

Upon arrival in South Carolina, Colonel Shaw was disappointed to find his regiment was not slated to join combat units at the front due to questions regarding their readiness & ability. After lobbying his commanders, the 54th was attached to General Quincy Gillmore’s division to assist in occupying James Island - located immediately south of Charleston - on July 8th as part of a larger campaign to take the city. It was here where Shaw’s men saw their first action: Confederate units moved to retake the island, but were successfully repelled by the 54th during the Battle of Grimball’s Landing on July 16th. Although not a major engagement, the men of the 54th had proven themselves in combat, earning a reputation for their effectiveness and composure.

The next day, Union Generals began planning their assault on the Confederate’s main defensive position protecting Charleston Harbor: Fort Wagner.

Fort Wagner was well protected, not just by its man-made defenses, but also by it's surrounding geography. With the Atlantic to the east, harbor to the north, and thick marshland to the west & south, the only ground approach was a narrow strip of sandy beach barely 60-yards wide; enough space to move only one unit at a time. Soldiers advancing on its walls would need to move quickly over a 1000 yards through this narrow stretch while under concentrated artillery and rifle fire.

Colonel Shaw - fresh off his first victory as commander of the 54th - requested his regiment lead the assault. General Gillmore granted his request.

In preparation, Union artillery and naval guns bombarded the fort throughout the day on the 18th of July. At dusk, the barrage ceased, and the 54th Massachusetts began their march forward, Colonel Shaw at the front.

----------

One soldier within the ranks of the 54th that night was a young man named William Harvey Carney.

Born a slave in Virginia in 1840, Carney escaped north to Massachusetts via the Underground Railroad, settling in New Bedford. Upon hearing of the formation of the 54th, he traveled to Boston to volunteer, not wanting to miss the opportunity to return south to fight. During training, Carney quickly emerged as a disciplined soldier and capable leader among his fellow volunteers and thus, was promoted to Sergeant in C Company.

Now standing on the beaches of Morris Island, with Fort Wagner ahead of him, Carney and his fellow soldiers set off and advanced quickly as the sun began to set. Almost immediately, the regiment began to take indirect fires from artillery, and endured continued fire throughout their approach. Although Carney would be hit during advance, and as many others around him fell, he continued forward towards Fort Wagner directly behind Colonel Shaw. The men cleared the narrow beach and neared the fort’s walls when the color guard (the soldier carrying the US flag into battle) took a fatal shot. Carney - charging beside him - quickly grabbed the flag and continued onward towards the wall.

Those of the 54th who made it to the fort began to advance up its sandy walls as reinforcing regiments attempted to make their way across the beach behind them. Shaw and Carney were among the first to make it to the top; Carney planted & waved the flag from atop Wagner’s walls to rally the charging men as Colonel Shaw and the rest of the 54th poured over the walls around him and engaged in hand-to-hand combat.

Yet, they would be the only Union men to enter the fort that night.

Regiments outside were unable to make it over the walls, and the 54th - now on their own - was eventually overwhelmed & pushed back. Colonel Shaw would fall fighting at close quarters atop the parapet; he was 25 years old, and buried in an unmarked mass grave in the sands outside the fort. Carney, severely wounded, ended up at the base of the walls. With his last ounce of strength he struggled to make it back across the beach to his lines, still maintaining a tight grip on the flag until he was finally carried from the field.

A writer from the United States Service Magazine, who witnessed the battle first hand, captured this moment: “As our forces retire, Sergeant Carney, who has kept the colors of his regiment flying upon the parapet of Wagner during the entire conflict, is seen creeping along on one knee, still holding up the flag, and only yielding its sacred trust upon finding an officer of his regiment. As he entered the field-hospital, where his wounded comrades are being brought in, they cheer him and the colors. Though nearly exhausted with the loss of blood, he says, ‘Boys, I only did my duty; the old flag never touched the ground.’”

For his actions and bravery under fire that day, William H. Carney would be awarded the Medal of Honor; the first African-American to do so. The official citation accompanying the award states:

“When the color sergeant was shot down, this soldier grasped the flag, led the way to the parapet, and planted the colors thereon. When the troops fell back he brought off the flag, under a fierce fire in which he was twice severely wounded.”

After nearly a year of recovery, Carney would be honorably discharged from service. He returned to New Bedford where he first took a job maintaining the city’s street lights, then made a career in the mail service. After retiring from 37 years with the postal service, he served in the Massachusetts Department of State office at the State House. William Carney died in December of 1908 at age 68, buried at Oak Grove Cemetery in New Bedford; an image of the Medal of Honor engraved on his headstone.

The performance of Sergeant Carney and the 54th Massachusetts at the Battle of Fort Wagner ended any debate about African-American’s ability to serve alongside their fellow countrymen. The 54th continued fighting throughout the South - as did the many other integrated units which followed - until the war’s end in 1865.

Bar Story: Today is the US Army's 244th birthday, having been formed on June 14, 1775 in the wake of the Battles of Lexington & Concord, and subsequent Siege of Boston.

Over 22,000 militiamen from across New England arrived outside of Boston in April, 1775, after the British failed to seize a key arms & munitions store in Concord, MA. Another 5,000 militia mobilized in New York once word of the marching British reached the city; those men seized the Battery and it's cannons at the southern tip of Manhattan. War had begun.

In response, the representatives of the 2nd Continental Congress were recalled to Philadelphia deal with the war effort. While they clung to the chance of reconciliation with England in hopes King George would agree to repeal the Coercive Acts (known in the colonies as the "Intolerable Acts"), they also knew the British making a move on the local population in New England was cause to organize a defense force. With thousands of armed militiamen already mobilized with victories under their belt, they had the beginnings of that army already in place.

On June 14th, the Congress agreed to establish & organize the new Continental Army, consisting initially of the soldiers occupying NYC and the hills surrounding Boston, while also raising several regiments of militiamen from PA, MD, DE & VA colonies. All agreed to one-year enlistments.

The next day, the Congress met again to decide who would be named Commander of the new army. While John Hancock of Massachusetts was thought to be the favorite for the role, fellow statesmen Samuel Adams & John Adams nominated Virginia farmer George Washington; a southerner & veteran of the French & Indian War. Since he was from Virginia, it was believed he could help unite the colonies against the British, rather than have New England alone fight the war. In an unanimous vote, Washington was granted command.

Washington accepted the position, stating to the Congress: "I do not think myself equal to the Command I am honored with." In closing, he stated he wished not to profit from his command and thus, refused any pay. Soon after, he mounted up and rode off for Boston, arriving on July 3rd to take command.

Washington would spend the next 8 years (very difficult ones at that) leading the Army before winning his final victory at Yorktown in 1783.

In the decades & centuries since, the US Army has continued to stand as the ultimate defender of these United States & our liberty. From it's modest beginnings as an army of New England farmers, to what is today the world's most powerful fighting force, the Army goes rolling along.

Image: George Washington leads the victorious Continental Army through the streets of New York City in November, 1783.

Bar story: Many of you likely know today marks the 75th anniversary of the D-Day landings on the beaches of Normandy in France, where the Allies successfully landed over 150,000 soldiers to combat the Nazi’s conquest of Europe.

What many don’t know much about are the thousands of men who jumped behind enemy lines prior to the invasion, and the brave pilots who carried them.

As early as 1942, Hitler & his generals were very aware of the potential for an Allied invasion, and knew a successful one could turn the tide of the war in Europe. With that in mind, Hitler ordered the construction of the Atlantic Wall, a 2500+ mile-long connected fortification of walls, batteries, bunkers & thousands of soldiers stretching from Norway to the France-Spain border, which would serve to defend Europe from any attempted landing. Between 1942 & 1944, over a million citizens were drafted to build it. Because of this, the Allied forces needed a way to out-maneuver the wall as part of the invasion.

Enter the Airborne.

The 82nd & 101st Infantry Divisions of the US Army were tasked with this mission: their Parachute Infantry Regiments would be dropped deep into Nazi territory hours before the beach landings at dawn. The plan called for 800 Douglas C-47 Skytrains to carry the roughly 13,000 American paratroopers over the Atlantic Wall - at low altitude - where they would jump into enemy territory just after midnight & disrupt Nazi operations from behind their lines.

The formations of C-47’s were subject to heavy enemy fire upon their approach to the coast, causing many of the drops to be off target. However, despite the chaos, the Airborne invasion was a tactical success, as the Nazi’s were unable to reinforce their defensive positions along the Atlantic Wall as the main Allied invasion of Normandy kicked off at sunrise on June 6th.

The plane leading the formations that night was piloted by Lt. Colonel John Donalson; his C-47 would be the first to enter enemy airspace as part of the D-Day invasion.

Donalson was a pilot with the Alabama National Guard’s 106th Observation Squadron, flying a C-47 he had named “Belle of Birmingham,” after a girl he’d met in his home state’s largest city. Yet, he was to be issued a new C-47 for the D-Day invasion. The new plane was manufactured in Oklahoma City, and delivered to the Army Air Corps at Dallas in the Spring of 1944, then made her voyage across the Atlantic. Once received in England, it was time for Donalson to give her a name. Believing that D-Day would mark the beginning of the end for the Nazi regime, he went with a personal message to Adolf Hitler himself: “That’s All, Brother.”

Bar Story: It was on the evening of April 18th, 1775, that Paul Revere climbed into the rowboat he hid days before along the north shore of Boston, and made his way across the harbor under cover of darkness. Behind him, two lights could be seen hanging in the steeple of the Old North Church, alerting the militia in Charlestown ahead of him. They received him on the banks of the Charles River, where he was provided a horse for his ride.

This is a moment years in the making: New England had already built a reputation of civil disobedience against British rule, with Boston becoming the most notorious. After a decade of insubordination, King George declared the colonies in outright rebellion, and ordered General Gage - commander of the British army occupying Boston - to arrest rebel leaders to stand trial for treason, as well as march his army out to the Massachusetts countryside and seize the arms & supplies of local militias.

However, the people of Massachusetts were prepared: their Provincial Government - led by rebels such as Samuel Adams & John Hancock - had spent the fall of 1774 building a system of routes, riders & militiamen designed to “alarm & muster” a large force trained to “turn out for service at a minute's notice.” In the greater Boston area alone, over 16,000 “minutemen” quietly enlisted and began to train.

As the sun set on the 18th of April, Doctor Joseph Warren of Boston - later General Warren of Bunker Hill fame - received word that the British were making their move, gathering the majority of their troops on the Commons to be ferried to Cambridge. He needed to get word out, but Boston was already under martial law, and with darkness setting in, mounted patrols were out & no one would be allowed to enter or leave the city.

At 9pm, he called on silversmith Paul Revere & tanner William Dawes, giving them instructions to ride to Concord - location of both the Provincial Government & militia stores - and trigger the alarm along the way. Revere was to try and go north across the Charles River, while Dawes would attempt to go south across the Boston Neck.

Contrary to popular belief, the lanterns hung in the Old North Church were not intended to alert Revere, but were Revere’s idea to notify the militia across the river of which route the British were taking in order to coordinate their movements, and in case he didn’t make it out of the city. That evening, on the way to his hidden boat, Revere stopped at the Old North Church and instructed Robert Newman - sextant of the church - to hang the lanterns.

And so it was that, just after 10pm, the lanterns were hung as Paul Revere rowed across the river, successfully sneaking past HMS Somerset sitting at anchor, which was providing protection over the British soldiers landing at Cambridge.

Revere would ride quickly through Charlestown, Somerville, Medford, Arlington and finally into Lexington, where he would arrive right around midnight. At each stop, he cried “the Regulars are coming out!” as minutemen poured into the streets and increasing numbers of riders were dispatched out to further communities. The alarm had been given, and the people mustered.

There were countless other riders, most of whose names have been lost to history, who spread the word across New England and the colonies beyond. Without their planning, determination and effort, the American Revolution would not have been. Riders Paul Revere, Samuel Prescott, William Dawes, Israel Bissel and the many others have thus earned their place in our nation’s history.

In addition to other express riders delivering messages, bells, drums, guns, bonfires, and trumpets were used for rapid communication from town to town, notifying the rebels across Massachusetts to muster their militias. This system was so effective that people in towns 25 miles from Boston were aware of the British army's movements while they were still unloading their boats in Cambridge. In matter of days, the news made it all the way to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia.

The quickly massing militias caused the British to fail in their mission; they met defeat at the Battle of Concord, and were forced to retreat back to Boston. Following the battle, General Gage offered a pardon to all who would "lay down their arms, and return to the duties of peaceable subjects.” There were no takers.

In the days which followed, militiamen from across New England arrived and surrounded the city, thus beginning a nearly year-long siege. General Washington would arrive & take command later that summer, and the British would finally evacuate Boston in March, 1776.

Fun fact: The Lexington Green hosted the start of the American Revolution for one reason only: it was the site of the Buckman Tavern (still standing), which was a favorite hangout for the Lexington Training Band (militia) after a day of training on the green. So much in fact that the tavern became the rally point for the unit when the alarm was sounded. On the night of April 18th, they mustered at the tavern in the middle of the night, and enjoyed pints of ale as they waited for the British to arrive. They also failed to stop the British advance 🤷‍♂️

Bar story: It was on this day in 1794 that Congress passed the “Naval Act,” which authorized the building of six frigates; our nation’s first warships.

Joshua Humpreys - a shipbuilder and naval architect from Philadelphia - was selected to design them. The challenge he was presented was much more than designing a few ships; since only six would not rival any of the other established fleets of the world, he had to reimagine what a frigate was in order for them to compete on the high seas. His vision: the largest, heaviest & fastest ships ever built; mighty enough to beat any opponent in battle, yet fast enough to outrun all others when outnumbered. Humphreys’ final designs were the most complex ever attempted to that point in the history of shipbuilding.

President George Washington selected the 6 shipyards where the ships would be built simultaneously. “Frigate B” was to be built at Edmund Hartt’s shipyard in Boston’s north end.

Frigate B would be one of the larger ships at 50-guns, and thus Humphreys’ design called for a complex bill of raw materials. Roughly 60 acres worth of trees were required for her construction: Live Oak - a sturdy, dense hardwood which is difficult to cut and work with - from St. Simon island in Georgia was used for her heavy frame. The keel and hull were built of White Oak from across New England, while her masts were of tall White Pine (of course) from Unity, Maine. From those masts, 36 sails made of flax at the Boston Manufacturing Company were hung, totalling over 42,000 square feet (or roughly one acre).

Her large, 5000+ lb anchors were cast by Nathaniel Cushing of Pembroke, MA. The anchor cable was woven of hemp, measuring 22-inches in diameter and over 700 feet long; it took nearly 300 men to carry the rope from Jeffrey’s wharf at the North Battery down the street to Hartt’s shipyard to be installed on the frigate. The North End’s own Paul Revere would cast the thousands of copper bolts & fasteners for her hull, as well as her 250-lb bell.

This was construction on a scale not yet seen for a frigate.

She was so large & heavy that when the builders attempted to launch her in September of 1797 (an event attended by President John Adams), her hull forced the ways (ramps) into the earth and she came to a stop after sliding only 27 feet. It took a month to rebuild the ways for another attempt.

Finally, on October 21st, 1797, she was successfully launched into Boston Harbor. With a bottle of Madeira wine broken over her hull, she was christened the USS Constitution.

The Constitution would become famous at the onset of the War of 1812: as the US declared war on Britain in June 1812, over 80 Royal Navy vessels were operating in American waters. The US Navy, by comparison, was a much smaller fleet of only 22 ships; the original 6 frigates among them. Yet, with a max expected lifespan of only 10 to 15-years after their completion, they were aging. Thus, the British were heavy favorites on the seas.

After a resupply, the Constitution set out of Boston in August of 1812 with the intent of raiding British merchant ships. She instead came face-to-face with the British frigate HMS Guerriere off the coast of Halifax, Nova Scotia. As they closed, Guerriere was first to break and fire off full broadsides at Constitution. It was during this initial barrage that cannonballs from Guerriere were witnessed “bouncing” off the sides of the Constitution. In this moment, a crew member is said to have cried out “Huzzah! Her sides are made of iron!”

Constitution continued to close rapidly as she took fire, maneuvering within 25 yards before opening up her first full broadsides of grape and round shot. This barrage brought down Guerriere’s masts and crippled her; the British surrendering shortly after. Captain Isaac Hull of the Constitution took Guerriere’s crew prisoner, then set fire to what remained of the tattered vessel. #BurntheShips

Word of their decisive victory spread quickly, and the Constitution was given a hero’s welcome upon her return to Boston. Although the loss of Guerriere was insignificant to the British (who maintained a worldwide fleet of over 600 ships at the time), the battle provided a tremendous boost to American morale & patriotism during the war, serving as proof we could hold our own against the world’s best. After the stories of British cannon being unable to penetrate her mighty, New England-built oak hull, the Constitution earned the nickname “Old Ironsides.”

Years later in 1830, when rumors the Navy was planning to scrap her, thousands of Americans from across the country wrote letters urging she be saved. The Navy obliged.

She has undergone many refits in the years since, but the USS Constitution still serves today as the oldest active vessel in the United States Navy, stationed at the Charlestown Navy Yard in Boston.

Fun fact: During WW2, 1st Armored Division (with whom Able brewers Mike & Carl both served with) was nicknamed “Old Ironsides” by General Bruce Magruder in honor of the Constitution.

Image: USS Constitution setting sail at her 200th anniversary in 1997, with destroyer USS Ramage, frigate USS Halyburton and the Blue Angels.

Bar story: It was in the early spring of 1826, as the snow and ice from winter began to thaw, that the waters of the Nashua River were set loose into the town’s newly dug canal, providing the first power to the turbines at Nashua Manufacturing Company’s Mill #1 in downtown.

This was a defining moment for Nashua, as the town would quickly grow to become a centerpiece of New England manufacturing. Downtown alone would go on to lead in the production of textiles, shoes, steam boilers, paper, tools, lumber, furniture and more. Even armor for our nation’s first iron-clad warship - the USS Monitor (which has its own story to tell) - was forged at the Nashua Iron & Steel Company on East Hollis Street. By the 1860’s, six separate rail lines would run through the city, with over 50 trains coming and going each day to bring its goods across the country.

This expansion was not the product of one person’s ingenuity & know-how, but of many.

Daniel Abbot - one of Nashua’s founding fathers - led a group of local entrepreneurs in chartering the would-be Nashua Manufacturing Company in 1823, believing the Nashua River and surrounding community held great potential. They envisioned a canal running from Mine Falls (today, a fantastic city park) into the center of town, where its waters would power a series of manufactories that would serve as the foundation for a new city. Daniel Webster was among the company’s founders, and its largest investor.

They hired James Baldwin - a young, ambitious civil engineer - to construct the canal. After surveying the terrain, he spent the entirety of 1825 with his crew of locals reshaping the earth from Mine Falls to near the Main Street Bridge (which was also first built in 1825 by the Nashua Mfg Co). At completion, the canal was 3-miles long, 60-feet wide, 6-feet deep, and handled a 33-foot change in elevation. The canal’s locks were constructed of solid stone measuring 24-feet high, 10-feet wide and 82-feet long, and set in place by Baldwin’s team.

The canal’s dams & locks, as well as Nashua Manufacturing Co’s first mill buildings, were all designed by famed New England architect - and one of the fathers of American Architecture - Asher Benjamin. He also designed Nashua’s Unitarian Church on Canal Street (still standing), as well as inspired many of the city’s historic Federal style homes in the north end, including Daniel Abbot’s (now the Abbot-Spaulding Museum operated by the Nashua Historical Society; go check it out). His federal building style became a staple in Nashua’s early architecture, including with the first City Hall (1843), designed by Nashua inventor & architect (and student of Asher's), Samuel Shepard.

In the years that followed the opening of the canal, Nashua became a boomtown. Within a decade, the population more than tripled as more factories, shops, homes, schools, churches and infrastructure were built. Nashua quickly evolved into a city of innovative builders, tinkerers, craftsmen and inventors, all who played a vital role in our country’s growth during those early, defining years. Very Able indeed.

“When we see the position Nashua assumed as the mother of new enterprises, we wonder at the results...Any history of Nashua that left the workers (the men & women who work with their hands) out of consideration would not be complete. It was the superior intelligence of the help, rather than their acquired skill, to which we are indebted for the results.”

- Edward Everett Parker, “History of the City of Nashua,” 1897