Arsenal manager Arsene Wenger criticised the rash of sackings in English football, saying coaches needed time to put their ideas into practice. Wenger's comments came a week after fan-favourite Martin Jol was sacked by north London neighbours Tottenham Hotspur.

Wenger said: "I think it is terrible. It is very bad for football, for the game. If you have a vision in football you need time to get that into the club."

Before yesterday, Wenger has been in charge of Arsenal for 632 games, winning 365, drawing 156 and losing 111.

Dunga to coach Olympic team

Brazil coach Dunga will also take charge of the country's Olympic team at the 2008 Games.

"Dunga is enthusiastic about this possibility and I'm sure he's the right person to be at the front of the team going to the Olympics," president Ricardo Teixeira said.

Brazil, who have already qualified for Beijing, have never won the Olympic soccer tournament which they take more seriously than most European teams. Brazil failed to qualify for the 2004 Athens Olympics, a tournament won by arch-rivals Argentina.

Forlan in squad despite injury

Striker Diego Forlan has been included in the Uruguay squad for this month's two World Cup qualifiers despite a thigh injury.

Last week, Forlan's club Atletico Madrid said he would be out of action for between two and three weeks after suffering a thigh injury during his side's 4-3 win over Sevilla.

However, he was among the 26 players named by Uruguay coach Oscar Tabarez for the games at home to Chile on Nov. 17 and away to Brazil in Sao Paulo three days later.

Crespo gets Argentina recall

Striker Hernan Crespo has been recalled by Argentina for this month's World Cup qualifiers at home to Bolivia and away to Colombia.

Crespo, who missed the opening ties against Chile and Venezuela last month because he was not match fit, was among 17 foreign-based players named by coach Alfio Basile for the matches.

The Inter player, who has 35 goals from 64 appearances, last played for his country in the Copa America match against Colombia in July, where he sprained a thigh muscle as he scored from a penalty.

De Ascentis caught on video

Video evidence was used in Italy to give Atalanta midfielder Diego De Ascentis a three-match ban yesterday. The Disciplinary Commission decided to use the TV footage of the match between Atalanta and Cagliari for an incident that was not witnessed by the referee.

De Ascentis was caught on camera lashing out with an elbow on Cagliari player Davide Biondini during the closing stages of Wednesday's 2-2 draw.

Eriksson wants winter break

Sven-Goran Eriksson believes the Premier League needs a winter break. The Man. City boss says a short shutdown is necessary in January.

"It would be good for the national team when they go to big tournaments and good for clubs in Europe," he said.

"I have been fighting for this for many years. There is too much football and not enough breaks. If you take one week off everyone will benefit.

"It's difficult to see but I think it will happen."

Derby at last for Trezeguet

David Trezeguet cannot wait to take on Inter. The Derby d'Italia has always been a bitter rivalry, but never more so than after the soccer scandal that saw Juve demoted to Serie B.

"Perhaps it is viewed as a 'normal' game by Inter but we have been waiting for this match for a year," the Frenchman said.

"We know full well that we will be meeting the Serie A champions but that will help us understand how far this Juve side can go."

Liverpool will make it - Gerrard

Steven Gerrard is convinced that Liverpool can rescue their Champions League dreams. After a dreadful start to their Group A campaign, which included defeats by Besiktas and Marseille.

Liverpool must win all three of their final three group matches, starting at home to Besiktas on Tuesday.

"Giving up or feeling sorry for ourselves is not something we have even thought about," the Liverpool captain said.

Totti comeback postponed

Francesco Totti is unlikely to recover in time to face Sporting Lisbon this week or Cagliari (Nov. 11). The Roma captain has been out of action since the Champions League 2-1 win over Sporting at home last month.

"Totti's recovery is not imminent. Hopefully, that could be before the break for international duty," chief of medical staff Mario Brozzi said.

Serie A grinds to a halt for the final Euro 2008 qualifiers against Scotland and the Faroe Islands on November 17 and 21.