Jan. 30—The Joplin Area Catholic Schools system is celebrating being united as well as its long history in Joplin during Catholic Schools Week, which is this week.

Catholic Schools Week is an annual initiative led by the National Catholic Educational Association to honor Catholic schools and their mission. Each year, Catholic schools observe the celebration with activities, emphasizing the importance of Catholic education.

"It's a good way to make our Catholic schools known and to let people know what they're about," said Kendall Ramsey, a senior at McAuley Catholic High School. "It's not just about going to a private school. It's about getting that Catholic experience and having a faith-rooted education too."

The schools consist of St. Mary's Elementary School, St. Peter's Middle School and McAuley Catholic High School. Enrollment across all three is about 255 students.

The national theme for Catholic Schools Week is "United in Faith and Community," and the JACS theme for the year is "ONE Family, ONE Legacy, ONE Body in Christ."

Events throughout the week reflect both themes. St. Peter's and McAuley Catholic are participating in a service project at the St. Peter's Outreach House. St. Mary's is assembling care packages for a parent who is deployed overseas. There are also events emphasizing the importance of the Mass, treating students to ice cream and a "Dress Like a Teacher" day.

Marjorie Comer, director of advancement for Joplin Area Catholic Schools, said Catholics are fortunate to have a Catholic school system in a town the size of Joplin and blessed to have donors help students pay for that education. For Catholic Schools Week, staff wanted events that give back to that community.

Service

"Jesus taught us to serve others, and he gave his life for us," Comer said. "It's so important for us to serve others as well."

On Tuesday, St. Mary's Catholic Church welcomed all three JACS schools and also students from from St. Ann's Catholic School in Carthage. Students assisted Bishop Edward M. Rice in celebrating the Mass.

Addressing the mission of Catholic schools, Rice encouraged the goal of education while attending to the full child.

"It's not just education but formation as well," he said. "We're more than just teaching about facts in school. If a student were to graduate from one of our schools and not know they are loved by God, then we have failed."

Catholic education began in Joplin in 1885 with the arrival of the Sisters of Mercy. It was fitting for Catholic Schools Week that Sister of Mercy Joan Schwager was honored as the Benefactor of the Year during Tuesday's Mass. For the past 14 years, she has taught religion and served as the librarian at St. Mary's. Schwager was the first teaching nun to lead classrooms in Joplin in 35 years.

Also honored Tuesday was first grade teacher Lorrie Hibbs-Estrada as the Joplin Area Catholic Schools' Educator of the Year for St. Mary's, and athletic director and coach Mike Howard as the Joplin Area Catholic Schools' Educator of the Year for St. Peter's Middle School and McAuley Catholic.

Ramsey has attended Joplin Catholic schools for 15 years — prekindergarten through high school. One of the things she said she values about Joplin Catholic schools is the smaller class sizes.

"It's been good. I feel like I've gotten a lot closer with all my classmates," Ramsey said. "It's like a sister-brother thing. Everyone in your class, you care about them like a family member. There's more one-on-one experiences, and it's definitely all rooted around our faith."

She said she also likes the freedom that comes from attending a Catholic school. In public schools, there might be a lot of competition to play on a team, but athletics and activities such as theater are more available for students at a smaller school.

There's also a freedom for students to grow in their spiritual lives. Students attend Mass every week. They can freely talk about God with their teachers and peers. If something happens in their lives like a death in the family, they can talk with friends and staff about their faith.

"I always feel like the teachers are pretty open to anything," Ramsey said. "If you have something going on or are just having an experience with faith, they're always open to talk to you about it."

She said that 15 years of Catholic education has prepared her for the future. As she faces changes after her senior year, it has given her comfort and structure in her life.

"I think being in Catholic schools has made me realize what I want to do with my faith," Ramsey said. "I want to continue going to church; it's a part of my life now. It's a routine now, and I don't think I could cut it out of my life."