A massive tornado may have torn through her hometown, but a Southeast Portland resident says her family and friends back in Joplin, Mo., are slowly picking up the pieces of lives turned upside down by the natural disaster.

Catherine Koch, 23, flew to Joplin last week with her brother, Mike, 26, to help loved ones rebuild from the damages. The two lived in the town of about 50,000 residents until they turned 18 then separately left

, and eventually the state, to pursue degrees and jobs.

As of Wednesday, the May 22 twister is said to have killed at least 134 people as well as destroyed more than 8,000 homes and apartments and more than 500 commercial properties.

"There's definitely some up and down days," said Catherine Koch. "But everyone is doing their best to hang in there and make the best with what they've got."

The siblings bought one-way plane tickets to Joplin the day after the tornado ravaged their hometown. They arrived in Missouri last Wednesday.

None of their family members or friends are among those killed or hurt, they said, and aside from uprooted trees, their parents' home, about five blocks south of the tornado's path, was unscathed. Many friends, however, have lost homes and personal possessions.

Other landmarks from their childhood are similarly devastated. For example, Catherine passed her old elementary school and found her third-grade classroom in shambles.

Mike Koch headed back to Portland on Tuesday, his sister said, after he was unable to take more time off of work. She intends to stay in Missouri for a few more weeks, past her coming birthday, then return to Portland before flying back to Joplin later this summer to continue helping loved ones.

"Hopefully, one of my friends will be able to find a new house by then," said Catherine. "I would like to be there to help move them in."

She spends her days working as a case manager and counselor at her old high school, McAuley Catholic High School, where she helps affected families figure out their next steps. The school has been used as a distribution center, she said, gathering donations of clothing, non-perishable goods and other items.

Catherine said while a visit from President Obama on Sunday helped to boost morale, his arrival, along with the tornado's damages, has led to a lot of sightseers coming through the city taking pictures and surveying the aftermath. She said it can make moving through the city difficult at times.

Memorial Day was a difficult time for a lot of people, she said. Services held for people who died made it hard to forget the lasting effects of the tornado. Then again, she added, it'll be hard to erase what's happened for a while.

"I know there has been so much work done here, but it doesn't look like it because there's been so much destruction," she said. "Unfortunately, it's going to look this way for the next few months, maybe even into the next year because everything is just gone or in pieces."

She said she's spent a lot of time getting together with friends and family members.

"Hugs are a lot more meaningful now," she said. "You see people that you haven't seen in years, you hug them and you just don't let go. It's so nice to see people and know that they're OK."

--