Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlevi was one of the world leaders in the past. He was known as the last Shah of Iran from 1941 to 1979, who maintained a pro-Western foreign policy and fostered economic development in Iran. He was born in October 1919 in Tehran, Iran, and died in July 1980 in Cairo, Egypt.

The charismatic leader was also known as a passionate watch lover. He owned several luxury watches that were popular in his era. That being said, nowadays, those timepieces became vintage, classic, and most likely expensive.

Let's check out the watch collection of the last Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.

Watch Collection of the Last Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi - Patek Philippe nautilus 3700

Watch Collection of the Last Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi - Patek Philippe nautilus 3700​​

The Patek Philippe Nautilus continues to be one of the most sought-after timepieces in the world, with a lengthy waiting list for anyone purchasing through an AD and secondary market prices fetching considerably above the retail price.

A brief history first. In order to compete with the Royal Oak by Audemars Piguet, which was introduced in 1972, the original Nautilus was introduced in 1976. Given their comparable aesthetics, it is perhaps not unexpected that both watches were created by Gérald Genta. In spite of the Patek Philippe Nautilus's recent explosion in popularity, not everyone has been supportive of the model's rise to fame. Some have said that the model's buzz is "killing it for collectors" as a result of the model's increase in price and demand. That doesn't matter to these well-known admirers, past and present, who regularly rotate a Nautilus.

It is a favorite of modern celebs like Mark Wahlberg, John Mayer, Erling Haaland, Robert Lewandowski, etc.

However, not only modern celebs are fans of this model. there are some other surprising owners in show business and elsewhere. And the last Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi belongs to one of the owners of the Patek Philippe Nautilus 3700, one of the first Nautilus models ever made.

Advertisement

Watch Collection of the Last Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi - Audemars Piguet 'Cobra' 5403BC

Watch Collection of the Last Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi - Audemars Piguet 'Cobra' 5403BC​​

The very first Royal Oak built by Audemars Piguet was purchased by the Shah of Iran. It was the Audemars Piguet 'Cobra' 5403BC in white gold. The sunburst blue dial has factory-set diamond hour markers and a double diamond index at 12 o'clock. The hallmarks on the 18k white case gold bracelet give the watch a 'Cobra' appearance.

It is called "The Cobra" due to its ultra chunky textured integral case and bracelet, this original factory set dressy diamond dial is juxtaposed by its sporty screw on case back

The market price is ~$16,000

Watch Collection of the Last Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi - Rolex 'The King of Day-Date' 1831

Watch Collection of the Last Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi - Rolex 'The King of Day-Date' 1831​​

Rolex 1831 is very unique in that it is the rarest reference of Rolex ever made to carry it its own movement. Only 9 pieces were ever made, all on special order by the late Shah of Iran in the 1970s. All were made in Platinum.

It is also known as 'The King of Day-Dates.' The case measures 36 mm and with its weight of 290 grams, it is thought to be the heaviest Rolex watch ever. The diamonds on the bezel and hour markers are set further towards the outer part of the case than is normally seen with Rolex day dates.

Its auction price: $225,000 (by Phillips Watches in 2016)

Advertisement