Description

Lovies Guitars has up for grabs a Parker Guitars PJ-14 Archtop Acoustic-Electric Guitar in a Natural Finish! The original Parker guitars have to be the most, if not the only, beautiful things ever birthed in Rochester, N.Y. (apologies to Steve Gadd). When Ken Parker began rolling these solidbody electrics out of his upstate New York workshop in the 90s, they instantly achieved an iconic identity. Parker’s designs had no clear antecedents in looks or construction, and that uniqueness led to popularity, which in turn led to the company’s inevitable sale, leaving Parker Guitars in the care of U.S. Music Corp., the parent company of Washburn guitars, since 2004. With the creation of two new Parker archtops, it seems those holding the reins at the post-Parker Parker are trying to maintain the brand’s market identity to a certain extent. The more purely “jazz” model of the pair, the PJ-14, sticks to convention where it counts most, but breaks from traditional ideas about shape and construction. The top is a solid piece of carved spruce adorned with a curvy, bound soundhole; the back is a carved piece of solid maple that matches maple sides. The five-ply rock maple and rosewood neck gets capped with an ebony fingerboard that extends to a mother-of-pearl inlaid headstock framed by gold Grover tuners that play off the body’s Art Deco-ish shape. There’s more inlay down at the tailpiece, an asymmetrical slab of dark abalone that looks and feels rock-solid sturdy. A floating mini-humbucker made by Egnater rests at the end of the neck, and two control knobs hide quite well beneath the plastic pickguard. The PJ-14 more or less toes the standard archtop line in terms of tonewood and accents-it just looks different. This Instrument is in MINT Condition, NO Issues! ALL Original-NO Breaks, Cracks or Repairs, Includes Original Hard-Shell Case!!

WEIGHS in at 6.20 lbs

.838″ at the 1st fret

.990” at the 12th fret

Serial: G06090744

SKU: 3196

14 Day Money back return policy. Buy with confidence.

All guitars are GUARANTEED to arrive in described condition for full refund will be issued. All guitars are fully insured and we will deal with it.

Lovies Guitars has CITES Master File and Certificates will be issued when and where needed. Also Declaration Friendly.