The Parker Fly Mojo is a bolt-on neck version of the 1993 Parker Fly, using carbon fibre on wood and humbucking pickups paired with active piezo bridge elements.

Founded in 1993, the Parker company and its designs are the result of a collaboration in New York between luthier Ken Parker and Larry Fishman, who has done an enormous amount of solid work in advancing piezo transducer technology. Fishman currently holds over 30 patents in that area. In 2004, the company was sold to U.S. Music Corporation, itself owned by JAM industries of Quebec.

Using the highly distinctive double cutaway shape of the Parker Fly, the Mojo uses a bolt on neck. For pickups, there is a pair of Seymour Duncan humbuckers and an active transducer system in the bridge. The body and neck core are mahogany, and the fingerboard is carbon fibre. Stainless steel frets are used, which can ultimately wear but for most players, not quickly at all. Sperzel locking tuners are at the headstock, and the trem bridge uses a rear-load system for string mount; on-stage change of a broken string should take well under a minute.

This guitar dates to 2009 and is in very nice, clean condition with little wear and virtually no fret wear. It’s very comfortable to play, and electronically works well. It is currently strung with a 9-42 set and the original molded hard shell case is included.

Here’s what Parker has to say about the current Parker Fly Mojo:

“The Fly Mojo is a result of not only our founders and employee’s vision, but input of the many players of Parker Guitars. The Fly Mojo was created to produce a warm and full-bodied sound, using the tried and true combination of a carved mahogany body paired with a mahogany neck and Seymour Duncan pickups. With a Fly Mojo, you will find a guitar that is designed to cast spells and influence others through its wide spectrum of sound. With its fully loaded system that includes our Graph Tech™ ghost® piezo saddles and Acousti-phonic Modular Pre-amp, this guitar delivers the quality that can only be attained by Parker guitars.

Mahogany is revered for its smoldering tone and acoustical range that extends all the way from deep octaves to a singing upper register. It is also value for its color, grain, stability and high-strength/low-weight ratio.”