The Philippine Veterans Affairs Office Administrator, Undersecretary Reynaldo B Mapagu, representing the Secretary of National Defense, Secretary Gilberto C Teodoro, Jr., participated in the 2023 Ministerial Summit on Veterans Affairs hosted by the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs (MPVA), Republic of Korea held at Signiel Hotel, Busan on July 26, 2023. The summit gathered ministries on veterans’ affairs from states that sent soldiers for the United Nations Command during the Korean War as part of the activities to commemorate the 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Armistice Agreement and the UN Forces Participation Day.

During the summit, USec. Mapagu discussed the activities in the Philippines to look after Philippine Expeditionary Forces to Korea (PEFTOK) veterans such as their pension and non-pension benefits especially medical care and the efforts to preserve their heroic legacy through commemoration events and publication of historical books.

USec. Mapagu also highlighted the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs and the Philippine Department of National Defense signed in 2022 to further enhance cooperation and partnership on veterans affairs between the two agencies. USec Mapagu also bared the plans to identify, locate, and repatriate the 16 PEFTOK soldiers who remain categorized as missing in action. This will be done through DNA testing and matching with family members in the Philippines.

At the summit’s closing, on behalf of Secretary Teodoro, USec. Mapagu also signed the Joint Statement on Solidarity for the Value of Freedom.

Furthermore, a Thank You Banquet for UN Sending States was hosted by the MPVA and was held at Signiel Hotel, Busan. During the banquet the Ambassador for Peace Medal was presented by Minister Park to 13 Korean War veterans including Vet. Bonifacio Talde of the 10th Battalion Combat Team. During the banquet Minister Park also presented the “One and Only Heroes Shoes”, a custom made shoes for veterans of the Korean War.

Earlier that day, the Mayor of Busan, Hon Park Heong-joon, hosted a luncheon for the delegations from the UN Sending States. During the luncheon Mayor Park Heong-joon expressed the appreciation of the people of Busan to the help extended by UN Sending States during the Korean War and for the aid received even after the signing of the armistice.

Wreath laying and Tribute paying ceremony held for Korean War Veterans

The following day, July 27, 2023, South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol led the Wreath Laying and Tribute Paying Ceremony held at the United Nations Memorial Cemetery in Korea, Busan to honor the Korean War Veterans. Delegates from UN Sending States also participated in the said ceremony.

The Philippines was represented by, PVAO Administrator USec. Reynaldo B Mapagu, who represented the Secretary of National Defense, Secretary Gilberto C Teodoro, Jr.; Philippine Ambassador to the Republic of Korea, H.E. Maria Theresa B Dizon-De Vega; and Philippine Defense and Armed Forces Attache to the Republic of Korea, Col. Enriquito R Deocadez, Jr. PA.

To cap off the week-long commemoration of the 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Armistice Agreement and UN Forces Participation day, President Yoon led the UN Forces Participation Day Ceremony held at the Busan Cinema Center, Busan. The venue holds a significant meaning as it sits on the former Pusan-Suyeong Airfield where the first American troops to support the Republic of Korea arrived and was subsequently used a military airbase in the duration of the war.

In his message, President Yoon expressed the Korean people’s deepest gratitude and infinite respect to UN Sending States and their veterans who came to aid the Republic of Korea in their most desperate times. Citing Busan as example from the last bastion of their Republic’s defense and a refugee site during the war to a shipping logistics powerhouse today, President Yoon recognized that their sacrifices laid the groundwork which helped the Republic of Korea become what it is today.

Korean Joint Security Area and the Monument of the Philippine Armed Forces in the Korean War visited

Prior to the formal events, the Philippine Delegation to the 70th Anniversary of the Korean War Armistice Agreement (KWAA) and UN Forces Participation Day commemorations joined the tour at the Joint Security Area or commonly referred to as Panmunjom on July 25, 2023.

During the tour, Filipino veterans of the Korean War including Vet. Ruben Aquino (19th BCT) and Vet. Bonifacio Talde (10th BCT) and delegates from various countries visited the Joint Security Area. The visit highlighted the importance of the Joint Security Area as a venue for negotiations between North Korea and South Korea.

Also, the Monument Dedicated to Philippine Armed Forces in the Korean War located in Goyang City, Gyeonggi Province, Republic of Korea was also visited by the PVAO Administrator, Undersecretary Reynaldo B Mapagu and party together with Philippine Defense and Armed Forces Attache to the Republic of Korea, Col. Enriquito R Deocadez, Jr. PA on July 28, 2023 before leaving South Korea.

The monument was built by the Republic of Korea Ministry of National Defense in 1974 to honor the gallant men of the Philippine Expeditionary Forces to Korea who valiantly fought in the Korean War.

During the Korean War, the Philippines deployed five (5) Battalion Combat Teams (BCT) with more than 7,400 personnel as part of the Philippine Expeditionary Forces to Korea to aid the Republic of Korea and UN Command in fighting the North Korean invasion.