“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying” – Quran 33:33

Inside the tomb of the founder of Tariqah Sufism Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham al-Sayyid al-Sharif Abi Muhammad Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Hasani al-Husayni al-Jaf’ari al-Jilani, Baghdad, Iraq

“O people of Iraq! O people of the Kingdom of the world, of its costumes, and its governors! I have clothes hanging in a wardrobe; you are welcome to any of them you would like to wear! You had better seek safety with me. Unless I provide you with soldiers, you lack the power to guarantee it. That is all I have to say to you. [Was’ salam].” [Utterances of Shaykh Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani (Malfuzat: Collected Sayings of the Crown of Saints. Al Baz Publishing Inc.), p.102].

The tomb of the founder of Tariqah Sufism Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham al-Sayyid al-Sharif Abi Muhammad Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Hasani al-Husayni al-Jaf’ari al-Jilani, Baghdad, Iraq

“Love gave me the goblets of union to drink, so I said to my wine: “Come here toward me!” It came running and walking toward me in tumblers, so I experienced ecstasy in my drunkenness among the Masters. I said to all the Cardinal Poles: “Assemble at my tavern, and enter, for you are my men! Experience ecstasy, and drink, you are my soldiers!’” – Khamriyya (The Wine Ode) by al-Baaz al-Ashab Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani

“One day the Holy Prophet salutations and blessings be upon Him, kissed the forehead of Imam al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali once, and that of Imam al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali twelve times. Sayyida Fatima al-Zahra, daughter of the Seal of Prophets, salutations be upon him, inquired of the reason for kissing her eldest son only once. The Messenger of Allah salutations be upon him responded, “In the forehead of my youngest grandson, I see twelve lights of the Twelve Imams, and so I kissed the Twelve Imams in this son, and in the forehead of my eldest grandson, I see only one light, which is the culmination (merging together) of the twelve lights of the Twelve Imams: He will flourish in Iraq and his name will be ‘Abd al-Qadir. I kissed the light of that illustrious child in the forehead of this Imam” – Allama Arbali’s Al Mawaddatul Qurba

“In the time of Abdul-Qadir Al-Jilani, a great Grandsheikh, there was another sheikh who heard about him and said to his pupils: “I have heard so much about this Sheikh Abdul-Qadir, but I have been waiting at the entrance of Allah Almightys Power Castle for thirty years, and up until now I haven’t seen him entering or leaving, so how is it that they are saying he is such a huge Sheikh?” When Abdul-Qadir heard this, he laughed and said: “How can a doorkeeper know who sits in the presence of the King, in the proximity of the Majestic Lord?” – Mercy Oceans Book Two: The Teachings of Mevlana Sheikh Abdullah Ad-Daghistani An-Naqshbandi by Sheikh Nazim el-Kibrisi

“When he (Mawlana Shaykh Nazim) had only two children, one daughter and one son, he was called by our Grandshaikh, Shaykh Abdullah ad-Daghestani. He told him, “I have received an order from the Prophet for you to make seclusion in the mosque ofAbdul Qadir Jilani in Baghdad. Go there and make seclusion…When Shaykh Nazim had finished his seclusion and was about to leave, he went to Sayyidina ‘Abdul Qadir Jilani’s grave to say goodbye. Sayyidina ‘Abdul Qadir Jilani appeared in the flesh to him and said, “O my son. I am very happy with the states you have reached in the Naqshbandi Order. I am renewing your initiation to me through the Qadiri Order.” – The Naqshbandi Sufi Way History and Guidebook of the Saints of the Golden Chain, by Shaykh Muhammad Hisham Kabbani

“Shaykh Abu Muhammad states that before his passing, the venerable Imam Hasan al-Askari (846-874) handed over his blessed Khirqa (cloak) and ordered it to be passed down to Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani. This blessed cloak passed down from the venerable Junayd al-Baghdadi (835-910) to Shaykh Danuri. From Shaykh Danuri it was passed down until it reached the venerable Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani in the year 1104 (497 Hijri)”

– Kitab Makhzan al-Qadiryya

“Once, while the venerable Junayd al-­Baghdadi (RadhiAllahu anhu) was in a state of spiritual ecstacy, he stated: “His foot is on my shoulders, his foot is on my shoulders!” After he had come out of this spiritual condition, his disciples questioned him concerning these words. He said, “I have been informed that a great Saint will be born towards the end of the fifth century. His name shall be ‘Abd al-Qadir and his title will be Muhyi al-Din. He will be born in Jilan and he will reside in Baghdad. One day, on the Command of Allah, he will declare, ‘My foot is on the shoulders of all the Awliya Allah’. While in my spiritual condition, I saw his excellence and these words were uttered by me without my control.”

– Junayd al-Baghdadi

“O ‘Abd al-Qadir, you have satisfied Allah and His Prophet with your proper adab. I see you in the future sitting on the highest place in Baghdad and speaking and guiding people and saying to them that your feet are on the neck of every Wali! And I almost see before me every Wali…giving you precedence because of your great station and honor”

– Khwaja Yusuf Hamdani related by Haytami in his ‘Fatawa hadithiyya’

When the Qutb of the Naqshbandi Tariqat; the venerable Khwaja i-Jahan Shah Baha al-Din Bukhari visited the holy tomb of Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani he recited these couplets with his hands folded in his presence,

“O Dear Benefactor! Give me such an illumination, that the people may call you Benefactor of Mankind, Dastagir.” The venerable Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham Dastagir replied from his tomb, “O Artisan of Mankind, take from me such a pattern, that people may call you the Pattern Maker (of Hearts) i.e. Shah Naqshband” – Diwan, Khwaja Baha al-Din Shah Naqshband

“Tasawwuf means to follow in the footsteps of Rasulullah (sall-Allahu ta’ala ‘alaihi wa sallam). Different paths have appeared as a result of [the differences in] men’s nature. The purpose of tasawwuf is to increase the ikhlas. A rehber is necessary on the way of tasawwuf. The Twelve Imams and ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani…were the rehbers.” – Imam Rabbani Mujadid Alf Thani Ahmad as-Sirhindi

“Ghawth-ul-adham (Abd-ul-Qadir Geilani) ‘quddisa sirruh’ and the great Shaikhs of Qadiri path ‘rahmat-ullahi alaihim’ visited me. With the arrival of these great people, I found myself in the haloes of the Qadiri nisbat (path)…” – Imam Rabbani Mujadid Alf Thani Ahmad as-Sirhindi

“From the 6th century onwards, as the madrassas crystallized and as the schools of law became much more delineated and many other social events took place, the Sufis felt that it was necessary to give greater organisation to their circle. It is at that time that the two of the great masters of Sufism, Abdul Qadir al Gilani (ra) and Shaykh Ahmed Rifa’i (ra), developed their tariqahs. Shaykh Abdul Qadir (ra) was from Gilan, from northern Iran, and migrated to Iraq…His tomb is in Baghdad…And Shaykh Ahmed Rifa’i (ra) was an Iraqi from southern Iraq. These two men began tariqahs in the sense that we have had them in the last eight centuries. They founded the first two Islamic tariqahs, the Qadiriya and the Rifa’iya, both of which are still very prevalent and spread throughout the Islamic world. The Qadiriya being the most universal of all Islamic Sufi orders…” – Dr. Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Professor Emeritus of Islamic Studies at the George Washington University, Washington D.C., Muslim Heritage

The Grey Falcon

Tomb of the venerable Sultan ul-Awliya in Baghdad, Iraq

The Grey Falcon [al-Baz al-Ashab] is an epithet by which Shaikh Abdul Qadir Jilani (may Allah be well pleased with him) is widely known. Since the Falcon always does the bidding of its master, without question, and returns directly to his hand, this bird has come to symbolize the faithful servant of the Lord of Truth (Almighty Allah and Glorious is He). The Shaikh (may Allah be pleased with him) once said: “All the other birds talk, but they do not act, whereas the Falcon acts, and does so without talking. This explains how the glove of Kings came to be its perch.” (shaikhabdalqadir.org)

Hierarchy

Tomb of the venerable Sultan ul-Awliya in Baghdad, Iraq

Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin said: “Know, the hierarchy of the descent of the Wiliyah (Divine Representative Authority, Amr) in this Ummah and the ranks accordingly among the Prophetic Household as per what is understood from the traditions of the Awliya Allah of Hindustan is the following: From Allah, His Authority descended exclusively on the Holy Prophet Muhammad sallallahu alaihi wa aalihi wa sallam, then it passed to Imam ‘Ali and the Ahl al-Kisa (Holy Five), then to each of the Twelve Imams, then Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani. From Ghawth al-Adham it is distributed to the general and exclusive body of the Ummah beginning with the Aqtab and Awliya down to the believing kings among the Ahl al-Bayt. Then the era of the twelve Mahdis from the sons of al-Husayn begins, and the Amr to guide with them is the culmination of all the previous Nur, culminated individually and elaborately in their foreheads (Mind), passed down genetically for twelve more generations…”

Exclusive Office

Inside the tomb of the venerable Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham radiAllahu ‘anhu

The venerable Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani announced, “Men have Mashaykh; Jinn have Mashaykh; Angels have Mashaykh; and I am the Shaykh of all” (Abul Hasan Ali Shatnufi’s Bahjat ul-Asrar). Furthermore, the venerable Sultan ul-Awliya Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani said, “The vibrational frequency of the Awliya Allah is like that of the prophets, except their names are different” (Fathur Rabbani). He said further, “Every Wali earns the frequency of a prophet (Nabi), and I have earned the frequency of my forefather, salutations and blessings be upon him. I have reached each of the stages of al-Mustafa salutations and blessings be upon him except the stage of prophethood to which a non-prophet can have no access” (Bahjat ul-Asrar).

Shaykh Nazim’s Patrilineal Descent from Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani through his eldest son and Successor Shaykh ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Jilani

Mawlana GrandShaykh Nazim Adil al-Haqqani qadasAllahu sirraul ‘Aziz’s illustrious patrilineal descent back to the founder of Tariqah Sufism Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani radiAllahu ‘anhu over twenty-four generations through his eldest son the venerable Shaykh ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Jilani

“Amongst his sons, Hadrat Shaykh ‘Abd al-Wahhab was the eldest; he was a great scholar. He was given charge of the Madrasa of his father in 543 A.H…” – AlGillani.com

Shaykh Abdul Rahman al-Qadiri (centre in Arab clothes) Shaykh Nazim’s great great grandfather – a direct paternal descendant of Shaykh Abdul Wahhab, the eldest son and primary successor of Ghawth al-Adham Sultan ul-Awliya Shaykh Abdul Qadir al-Jilani

Mawlana Shaykh Nazim’s paternal lineage from Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani is as follows: Shaykh al-Sayyid Muhammad Nazim Adil al-Qubrusi b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Ahmed b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Hasan b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Abi Salih Abdullah b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Abdul Rahman al-Qadiri b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Hasan b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Hamid b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Abdul Wahhab b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Muhiuddin b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Vicaruddin b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Musa b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Muhammad b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Tahir b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Husayn b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Ahmed b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Muhammad b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Yahya b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Zahid b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Salih b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Hasan b. al-Sayyid Majiduddin b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Muhammad Aoun b. Shaykh al-Sayyid Abdul Wahhab b. Ghawth al-Adham Sultan ul-Awliya al-Sayyid al-Sharif Abi Muhammad Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Hasani al-Husayni al-Jilani radhiAllahu ‘anhu.

Seven Awtad of Iraq

It is stated in Bahjat-ul-Asrar that Shaykh Abu Bakr bin Haw’war has said, ‘There are seven Awtad of Iraq:

Shaykh Ma’ruf Karkhi

Shaykh Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal

Shaykh Bishr Hafi

Shaykh Mansur bin ‘Ammar

Shaykh Junayd

Shaykh Sahl bin ‘Abdullah Tustari

Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani

This statement was made prior to the physical birth of the beloved Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham by Shaykh Abu Bakr bin Haw’war. Listening to this prediction, people asked Shaykh Abu Bakr bin Haw’war, ‘Who is ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani?’ Shaykh Abu Bakr bin Haw’war replied, ‘He will be an ‘Ajami ‘Sharif’ i.e. Shaykh Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani will be a Sayyid who by ancestral migration, not genes, will be a non-Arab who will reside in Baghdad, Iraq. He will be born in the 5th century Hijri and will be from among the Ṣiddiqin (i.e. the highest ranking category of saints). The Awtad are those who are the sovereigns of the world, and the Qutbs of the earth.’ (Bahjat-ul-Asrar, p. 385)

According to Tabrani, and narrated in Mullah Ali Qari’s commentary, “If one loses a thing in a desolate place he should say: “O Allah’s servants help me: O Allah’s servants help me: O Allah’s servants help me (Ya IbadAllah Ayinuni)”. Verily there are some of Allah’s servants who will come to your assistance which you cannot see.” Hence, Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham said, “If anyone seeks my help in difficulty, I remove the difficulty and if anyone calls me by my name in danger, I save him from danger; and if anyone seeks my medium (wasila) to Allah Almighty in need and necessity, these are fulfilled.” (Bahjat-ul-Asrar; Khulasat-ul-Mufakhkhar; Muhaddith Abd al-Haqq Muhammad’s Zubdat-ul-Asrar). Accordingly, people in distress shout: “O Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani help me for Allah’s sake (Ya Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir Jilani Shaiyan lillah) and this has been a popular formula from the life of the venerable Ghawth al-Adham to obtain help from Sultan ul-Awliya in the time of need.

Tafsir al-Jilani

Praise of the Twelve Imams of Ahl al-Bayt in Tafsir al-Jilani by Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham al-Sayyid al-Sharif Abi Muhammad Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Hasani al-Husayni al-Jilani radhiAllahu ‘anhu

Qasidah Ghawthiyya also known as Khamriyya (The Wine Ode) by Sultan ul-Awliya Ghawth al-Adham al-Sayyid al-Sharif Shaykh Abi Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Hasani al-Husayni al-Ja’fari al-Jilani (radhiAlllahu ‘anhu)

Ghaus al-‘Azam, Abdul Qadir Ghilani of Baghdad, c. 1800 (gouache with gold paint on paper) Deccani.

“Love gave me the goblets of union to drink, so I said to my wine: “Come here toward me!” It came running and walking toward me in tumblers, so I experienced ecstasy in my drunkenness among the Masters. I said to all the Cardinal Poles: “Assemble at my tavern, and enter, for you are my men! Experience ecstasy, and drink, you are my soldiers!’ So the cupbearer of the [Lord’s] people was quick to bring me sufficient supply. You drank what I had left over after I got drunk, but you did not reach my exaltation and my state of connection. High is your station, each and all, and yet my station is above you, higher still. In the presence of nearness I am on my own; the Lord of Majesty disposes of me, and He is enough for me! I am the grey falcon of every Shaikh. And who among men has received the same as I! He clad me in a robe in honor’s style, and crowned me with perfection’s crowns. He made me aware of an ancient secret, invested me with rank and gave me all I asked. He has appointed me over all the Cardinal Poles, so my decision is effective in every case. Were I to cast my innermost being into the oceans they would all become a depression in the void. Were I to cast my innermost being upon the mountains, they would be leveled low and disappear among the sands. Were I to cast my innermost being upon a fire, it would die out and be extinguished by the secret of my state. Were I to cast my innermost being upon a corpse, it would rise up through the power of the Lord and walk for me. Neither months nor long ages of time pass and go by without my getting news. They inform me of what is to come and to happen, and let me know when to cease from debate. My disciple, experience ecstasy, have fun, relax, sing, do what you will, for the name is a high one. My disciple, do not fear! Allah, my Lord, has given me eminence; I have attained the heights. Drums sounded in heaven and on the earth, and the sergeant of bliss appeared to me. The lands of Allah are my kingdom under my rule, and my time before my transformation has been happy for me. I looked upon all the cities of Allah together as a mere mustard seed compared to my connection [with Him]. I studied knowledge till I became a Cardinal Pole, and gained felicity from the Lord of lords. My men are fasting in the midday heat, like pearls in the darkness of the night. Every saint has a precedent, and I am in the footstep of the Prophet, the full moon of perfection. A Makkan Hijazi Hashimi Prophet is my ancestor by whom I obtained friends/followers. Who is like me among the Awliya’ of Allah and like me in knowledge and action. My disciple, do not fear a traitor, for I am a resolute slayer in the fray. I am al-Jili Muhyi’d-din is my name, and my banners are on the mountain peaks. I am al-Hasani and the inner chamber is my station,and my feet are on the necks of all saints. Well am I known by the name of ‘Abd al-Qadir, and my forefather is the very master of perfection.”

A piece from the cap of the venerable Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, from Baghdad, Iraq, preserved by the Ottoman Caliphs in Topkapi Palace, Turkey.

Manner of Reciting Salutation to Rijal al-Ghaib – Al-Baz.com

The manner of Shaikh ‘Abd al- Qadir’s salutation [salam] (may Allah sanctify his innermost being) to the men of the Unseen [rijal al-Ghaib] (sanctified be their innermost beings).

In the Name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate.

Bismi’llahi ‘r-Rahmani ‘r-Rahim.

Peace be upon you, O men of the Unseen!

as-salamu ‘alai-kum ya rijala ‘l-Ghaib.

Peace be upon you, O sanctified spirits!

as-salamu ‘alai-kum ya ayyuha ‘l-arwahu ‘l-mutaqaddasa.

O presidents, O noblemen, O overseers, O spiritual deputies!

ya nuqaba ya nujaba ya ruqaba ya budala

O mainstays of the earth, four mainstays! O two leaders!

ya awtada ‘l-ardi awtadun arba’a: ya imaman:

O Cardinal Pole! O matchless individual! O trustees!

ya Qutbu ya fardu ya umana’:

Provide me with assistance, look on me with favor,

aghithu-ni bi-ghawthatin wa ‘nDuru-ni bi-naDratin

treat me with compassion, fulfill my wish and my objective,

wa ‘rhamu-ni wa hassilu muradi wa maqsudi

and attend to the satisfaction of my needs,

wa qumu ‘ala qada’i hawa’iji

in the presence of our Prophet Muhammad

‘inda Nabiyyi-na Muhammadin

(Allah bless him and give him peace).

(salla ‘llahu ‘alai-hi wa sallam).

May Allah (Exalted is He) grant you peace in this world and the Hereafter.

sallama-kumu ‘llahu (ta’ala) fi’d-dunya wa ‘l-akhira.

O Allah, bestow blessings on al-Khidr!

Allahumma salli ‘ala ‘l-Khidr.

Star of Ishmael

The Gilani Dynasty of Baghdad, Iraq

Nuqaba of the House of Sayyid Abdulaziz Al Jilani

Descendants of Sayyid ‘Abd al-Aziz al-Jilani b. Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani : The first Prime Minister of Iraq during the Hashemite monarchy H.E. Qutb al-Aqtaab Naqib al-Ashraaf Sayyid ‘Abd Al-Rahman al-Gilani (center), Custodian of the Mosque and Tomb of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, with his sons and grandsons, an unknown Indian prince, and a pilgrim

Naqib al-Ashraaf fi Dar al-Islam Pir Sayyid Ibrahim Saif al-Din al-Gilani and his son Pir Sayyid Najm al-Din al-Gilani. These nobles descended from the line of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani through his illustrious son Sayyid ‘Abd al-Aziz al-Jilani

Naqib al-Ashraaf fi Dar al-Islam Pir Sayyid Ibrahim Saif al-Din al-Gilani and his son Pir Sayyid Najm al-Din al-Gilani. These nobles descended from the line of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani through his illustrious son Sayyid ‘Abd al-Aziz al-Jilani

Maternal lineage – Descendants of Sayyid ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Jilani

H.E. the Naqib al-Ashraaf al-Shaykh Sayed ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Jilani the Custodian of the Mosque and Tomb of Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, Baghdad, Iraq at Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin’s residence in Hyderabad.

“Amongst his sons, Hadrat Shaykh ‘Abd al-Wahhab was the eldest; he was a great scholar. He was given charge of the Madrasa of his father in 543 A.H…” – AlGillani.com

From his maternal grandmother, Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin is a 26th generation maternal descendent of Sultan ul-Awliya Sayyidina wa Mawlana Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani (may Allah be well pleased with him), the founder of tariqah Sufism through his younger son Sayyid ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Jilani . His lineage is as follows. Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin, son of, Sayyida Fazal un-Nisa, daughter of, Sayyida Habib un-Nisa Mohammedi, daughter of, Sayyid Shah Ahmad Badshah Qadiri al-Musawi, son of, Sayyid Shah Pir Badshah Qadiri, son of, Sayyid Husayni Badshah Qadiri, son of, Sayyid Shah Musa Qadiri, al-Musawi (Qadas Allahu Sirrah) son of, Sayyid Muhiuddin Muhammad son of, Sayyid Shah Darwaysh Muhiuddin Qadiri son of, Sayyid Muhiuddin Qadiri son of, Sayyid Shah Ghulam Mohiuddin al-Qadiri (Pir Shah Mohiuddin Thani Qadiri) son of, Sayyidul Abdaal Sayyid Shah ‘Abd al- Lateef Qadiri, Lawbali, al-Hamawi son of, Sayyid Shah Taher, son of, Sayyid Shah Sharfuddin Zahid Qadiri, son of, Sayyid Kamaluddin Arif Qadiri al-Hamawi, son of, Sayyid Shah Nasiruddin Hashim Qadiri, son of, Sayyid Qutbuddin Muhammad, son of, Sayyid Shabbuddin Ahmed, son of, Sayyid Badruddin Hassan, son of, Sayyid Shah Shaykh Alauddin Abul Hasan ‘Ali, son of, Sayyid Shamsuddin Mohammed Thani, son of, Sayyid Saifuddin Abu Zakariyya Yahya-Al- Hamawi Wa Baghdadi son of, Sayyid Zaheeruddin al-Baghdadi, son of, Sayyid Abu Nasr Shamsuddin, son of, Sayyid Imaduddin Abi Saleh Nasr Qadiri, son of, Sayyid Al Aqtab Sayyid Shah Tajuddin ‘Abd al-Razzaq Qadiri, son of, Qutb Al ‘Arifeen, Sayyid Al Mashriqayn, Naib Al Rasulullah, Arif Billahil Qaili Bi Amrillah ‘Qadami Hadhi ‘Ala Raqbati Kulli Waliyillahi’, Imamul Awliya I Fakhal Asfiyai Ghawthus Samadani Ma’shuqir Rabbani Sahibish Sharia’ti Madanil Tariqati Wal Haqiqati, Jaddina Wa Shaykhina Wa Sayyidina Wa Mawlana Sayyidina ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Hasaniul Husayni, al-Ja’fari, al-Jilani (radiallahu ‘anhu).

Initiation in Maternal Qadiriyya ‘Aliyya Ajdadiyya Silsilah

With the maternal cousin of his mother, the late Mawlana Sayyid ‘Abd al-Latif Muhiuddin Qadiri – (descent from younger son Sayyid ‘Abd al-Razzaq) (far left), and H.E. Naqib al-Ashraaf the late Sayed Ahmad Dhafar al-Jilani (centre), Custodian of the Mosque and Tomb of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, Baghdad, Iraq.

Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin was honored to be initiated and given a Khirqa in an exclusive chain of the first Sufi Tariqah in Islamic history – the Qadiriyya Aliyya Ajdadiyya (“The Most Distinguished Qadiri Sufi Order of Our Ancestors“) from Baghdad – as passed down generation to generation within the direct biological bloodline of the venerable Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani through his male descendants from his venerable son Sayyid ul-Aqtab Sayyid ‘Abd al-Razzak Jilani. The Khirqa of its luminous chain was given to Sayyid from his mother’s maternal cousin brother, the late Mawlana Sayyid ‘Abd al-Latif Muhiuddin Qadiri. Both the biological and spiritual lineages of this Silsilah – which are essentially one in the same – were authenticated in person by H.E. Naqib al-Ashraaf the late Sayed Ahmad Dhafar al-Jilani, previous Custodian of the Mosque and Tomb of Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, Baghdad, Iraq during his visit to Hyderabad.

Related

Bahjat-ul-Asrar wa Ma’dan-al-Anwar (بہجت الاسرار و معدن الانوار) By Imam Abul Hasan Shatnufi ash-Shafi’i (d. 713 AH) – Arabic Handwritten Manuscript

Bashair al-Khayrat: Glad Tidings of Good Things: Introduction by Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani

Bashair Al-Khairat – Arabic Text

Patrilineal Descent of Mawlana GrandShaykh Nazim Adil al-Qubrusi From Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani

Twelve Imams, Ghawth al-Adham and the Meaning of Tasawwuf by Imam Rabbani Mujaddid Alf Thani Ahmad Sirhindi

Re: Khwaja Yusuf Hamdani, the Naqshbandi Golden Chain & al-Khidr (alaihi salam) by Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin

Re: Naqshbandi Belief Regarding the Status of Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani (rad)

The Istikharah Attributed to Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani from Sufi Iqbal Ahmed Nuri`s Shama i-Shabastaan i-Raza of Imam Ahmad Rida Khan Qadiri by Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin

Regarding the Power of Intercession of Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani (rad)

Jesus Alaihi Salam Lived in Egypt: Ghawth al-Adham Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani radiAllahu ‘anhu

Iraqi Arab Sufism, the Illuminati, Kabbalah and Masjid Al-Aqsa by Sayyid Ahmed Amiruddin

H.E. Naqeeb ul-Ashraaf Sayed Ahmad al-Jilani

H.E. The New Naqib al-Ashraaf of Baghdad, al-Shaykh Sayed ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Jilani-April 24th, 2011

Links

AlGillani.com

AlGaylani.com

Al-Baz Publishing

Tafsir al-Jilani (Arabic-Sufism 5-volume set): Author: Al-Ghawth al-A‘zam, Shaykh Muhy al-Din ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani (d. 561 AH)