ROBERTO MARTINEZ will put any plans to sign Scott Sinclair on hold until the Chelsea starlet returns from international duty.

The Swans boss is eyeing up speedy forward Sinclair as a potential loan target following Paul Anderson’s Liberty Stadium snub.

But 19-year-old Sinclair is set to jet out to the Czech Republic as part of the England squad for the U19 European Championships, and Martinez will wait for the Blues youngster’s return before following up on his interest.

Swansea head off to Sweden today for a week-long fitness and team-bonding camp in Osterlund, with Wednesday’s behind-closed-doors match against the local side giving Martinez’s men their first taste of pre-season action.

But that hasn’t stopped the Spaniard continuing his summer squad building plans and it is thought Martinez has already made enquiries about Sinclair, below, to Stamford Bridge officials in the hope of securing the player on a long-term loan.

The arrival of new Chelsea boss Felipe Scolari may complicate matters for Martinez with the ex-Portugal manager likely to want to see Sinclair for himself.

But the Bath-born talent, who started out with Bristol Rovers before making a £200,000 switch to London in 2005, will find it tough to break into Scolari’s first-team options and it is still expected Sinclair will be loaned out again this season following successful stays at Plymouth and Crystal Palace in recent years.

Sinclair made eight appearances for the Eagles last term after arriving late in March, helping push the club into the play-offs, and it is known Neil Warnock is ready to take Sinclair to Selhurst Park again.

But Martinez, who is also tracking Liverpool youngster Adam Hammill, will hope his record in developing Anderson will hold him in good stead in persuading Chelsea to give Swansea the green light for a deal ahead of as many as eight Championship rivals.

Martinez has confirmed he is looking for one more striker following the sale of Darryl Duffy to Bristol Rovers last week and Anderson’s decision to join Championship rivals Nottingham Forest instead of returning to South Wales.

But the Swans boss has insisted he is no rush to add to his six summer signings so far and has already shown his intention to bide his time with another loan target, Manchester United’s Febian Brandy, with Martinez now waiting for a decision from old Trafford.

The Catalan is also chasing a goalkeeper to challenge No 1 Dorus de Vries, with Wales U21 Owain Fon Williams being heavily linked, while Swindon stopper Peter Brezovan is another who is reportedly attracting Swans’ interest.

The 28-year-old Czech, who has made 52 appearances for the Robins in 18 months, has claimed his agent has spoken to Swansea about a possible Liberty switch.

“I spoke to my agent,” Brezovan said. “He said he spoke with the manager of Swansea, but I am still under contract.”

TICKETS for Kris O’Leary’s testimonial with West Brom on August 2 go on sale today from the Liberty Stadium ticket office, £15 for adults and £7.50 concessions.