U-19: Poland beat Sweden

Managed by Wojciech Kobeszka, the Polish Under-19 national football team won 2:0 against Sweden in the third place match of the Nordic Tournament played in Denmark. The goals for the white and reds were scored by Junior Nsangou and Mateusz Kowalski.

Under-19: Call-ups for the national team training camp in Opalenica

Head coach Marcin Brosz has called up 25 players for the national team training camp in preparation for the UEFA European Under-19 Championship. The young footballers will spend five days (19–23 June) in Opalenica. On 3 July, the Poland national under-19 football team will begin competing in the European Championship. Poland's rivals will be Portugal, Malta and Italy.

U-19: Drama in the last match! A draw in Poland's match against Serbia and qualification for the EURO!

The Polish Under-19 national team's recent game against Serbia provided plenty of excitement. The Poles were losing after the first half, and after the change of sides, the rivals, despite playing one man down, scored again. Just when it seemed that qualification was already out of reach - the Polish team managed to score a goal after an opponent's own goal. Three minutes before the end of regulation time, Wiktor Matyjewicz scored to tie the game. The match ended 2:2 and this result put our team in first place in the group, ensuring their participation in the EURO!

U19: Match against Denmark cancelled

On Monday (12 October 2020), at 13:00 in Swinoujście, a friendly match of the Poland National Under-19 football team with Denmark was to be held. In accordance with the procedures of the Medical Committee of the Polish Football Association, two days before the match, swabs were carried out in the team, which indicated positive results in the members of the coaching staff. These people were isolated from the team from Sunday. Despite the preparation of the host team, on Monday the Danish team resigned from the match.

U19: Announcement about the match between Poland and the Czech Republic

On Monday (07.09), a friendly match between U19 Poland and U19 Czech Republic was scheduled to be played in Brzeg. Due to a positive coronavirus test result in the away team and the procedures applying to them, the match was cancelled.