Biography

Salaah Mansour (1923 – 1979) is an Egyptian actor born in Shebeen al-Kanaater – Kalyoubeyya (Delta of Egypt). He began his career in the theater school; he also participated in establishing the Ministry of Education School theater in 1938. After graduating in 1940, Salaah worked...Read more as editor at Rose al-Youssef magazine. He then joined the High Institute of Dramatic Arts under the supervision of the great Zaky Tolaymaat, before graduating in 1947. In 1954, he founded “Al-masrah al-horr i.e. The free theatre”along with his colleagues Abdul Mon’em Madbouly, Sa’d Ardash and Muhammad Reda. Mansour played various stage role like; “Malek al-shahhateen i.e. The king of beggars”, “Al-nass elly that i.e. Downstairs people”, “Bora’y ba’d al-tahseenaat i.e. Bora’y after modifications”, “Zokaak al-medakk i.e. Medakk alley”, “Rumulos al-‘azeem i.e. Rumulos the great” and “Zeyaarat al-sayyeda al-‘agouz i.e. Visit of the old lady”. Salaah Mansour began his film career in 1946 with the actor Baheega Haafez in “Al-zahra i.e. The flower”. He also participated in the film “Habeeb al-rowh i.e. XXX (1949)”with Anwar Wagdy and Youssef Wahby. In 1950, he played Henry Barakaat’s “Shaate’ al-gharaam i.e. Beach of love” with Layla Mouraad and Hussein Sedky. Among his famous films are; “Bedaaya wa nehaaya i.e. Dead among the livings”, “Ma’ al-thekrayaat i.e. With memories”, “Haareb men al-ayyaam i.e. Fugitive of time”, “Kandeel Om-Haashem i.e. The lamp of Om-Haashem”, “Al-bostagy i.e. The postman” and “Shay’ fee sadry i.e. Something in my heart”. Although he has been locked in second roles throughout his career, yet he won many awards for his performance. He is one of the most famous “Villains” of Egyptian cinema, he is the “’Omdet al-cinema al-Masreyya i.e. The Mayor of Egyptian cinema” after his great role of mayor in the film “Al-zawga al-thaaneya i.e. The second wife”, with Souaad Hosny, Shoukry Sarhaan and Sanaa Gameel. One can never forget her famous phrase “El-leila ya ‘omda i.e. Tonight O mayor”. Salaah Mansour won many awards for his roles in radio, cinema and theatre; best radio actor (1954), best actor for his role in the film “Lan a’taref i.e. I will not confess (1963)” and the film “Al-zawga al-thaaneya (1968)”. He was also awarded Egyptian order of Merit (1978). Salaah worked as a consultant, Department of Theatre Education at the Ministry of Education until his death.