BAMENDA SUNDAY SPECIAL COLLECTION 1st-2nd NOVEMBER

In 1974, a formal twinning link between the two dioceses was formed. It is the practical expression of co-responsibility in the Church.

Bamenda is the Provincial capital of North West Cameroon in West Africa. In 1970 the Bamenda Diocese was created and Paul Verdzekov appointed as the first bishop. Later the diocese of Kumbo was split from Bamenda and Cornelius Esua appointed its bishop. In January 2006, Archbishop Paul retired and Bishop Cornelius was transferred from Kumbo to succeed him.

Over nearly 40 years, 10 Portsmouth priests have worked in Bamenda, and number of Cameroonian priests have come here both to study and to work in parishes of this Diocese. Over the years, Bishops Derek Worlock, Anthony Emery, Crispian Hollis and more recently our own Bishop Philip have visited Bamenda, and Archbishop Paul has on several occasions visited us here. More than £800,000 from Portsmouth has been spent on the support of our priests and in many approved pastoral and development projects there.

The Bamenda Committee serves this link on behalf of the Diocese, as a channel of information and mutual support, and by administering the funds that are contributed from the annual Bamenda Sunday collection, and from parishes and other institutions who have taken on specific projects. If you want to know more, please make contact.

Jubilee Prayer

Almighty, ever-living Father, You are the Eternal Shepherd who never leaves his flock untended. We thank you immensely for the bond of love and friendship which has existed between the Archdiocese of Bamenda and the Diocese of Portsmouth now for forty years. We are deeply grateful to you for the spiritual benefits this union has yielded, through which many have come to experience inner conversion and the unfathomable warmth of your love.

As we celebrate forty years of this bond through the proclamation of your Word and the guidance of your Holy Spirit, may we receive the grace to grow continuously in partnership and understanding.

Bless those who have made selfless sacrifices to sustain us, especially the priests who have served in our dioceses. May their work be rewarded in the abundance of your grace.

May Mary our Mother, Queen of Apostles and Star of the New Evangelisation, St Joseph and St Edmund our Patrons, intercede for us. We make our prayer through Christ our Lord.

Amen.