December 1st, 2023, the Apostolic Nuncio to Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea, Archbishop José Avelino Bettencourt; gave messages of peace from the Holy Father Pope Francis, to the people of the Northwest Region of Cameroon, as Bishops, Priests, Religious and lay Faithful gathered at St. Thomas Aquinas Major Seminary (STAMS) in Bambui to commemorate the Golden jubilee of this noble house of formation.

Presiding over a pontifical High mass to thank God for Mother STAMS, the nuncio while thanking God and praying for peace, cheered the works of the priests as agents of peace and commended their desire to continue in this service .

It was also a privileged moment for the Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Bamenda and president of the National Episcopal Conference; His Grace Andrew Nkea, to commend this house of formation which he says focuses on forming priests after the heart of Christ. While delivering His Homily, Archbishop Nkea reminded Christians that many have come and gone, but the essence of STAMS Bambui remains the same forever. The essence of STAMS he noted is ; Christ the solid rock and teacher par excellence, who remains the same yesterday, today and forever. He used this moment to tell the priests that a priest should not only be a man dedicated to God, but should be one dedicated to the welfare of man through God. He called on them to be Holy men who are disciplined and ready for self-sacrifice.

It is worthy to note that Mother STAMS founded in 1973 by Bishop Pius Awa and Bishop Paul Verdzekov started with 12 seminarians and has grown into a mighty Oak Tree proud of birthing 791 Priests amongst whom are seven Bishops. It has also produced 52 Deacons, summing to 843 clergymen who have passed through the womb of mother STAMS.

The grand celebration marked by a pontifical high mass with the bishops and priests of the ecclesiastical province of Bamenda and beyond, the Governor of the Northwest Region Lele Lafrique Tchoffo Deben Adolphe, Religious and the lay faithful, goes down memory lane as the finest in its time.