Bobby Pinson (born Bobby Olen Pinson on August 10, 1972 in Tulsa, Oklahoma) is a country music singer-songwriter from the 2000s.

Bobby was born in Tulsa, Oklahoma, but he was raised in Pandhandle, Texas. He entered writing and storytelling contests after being influenced by poet & songwriter Shel Silverstein. By his high school years, he began writing songs. Due to his father’s job as a football coach, he was moved throughout the state of Texas and played football himself in high school.

After graduating from Claremore High School in Oklahoma, Bobby served in the United States Army for three years. While in the Army, he founded a band which began playing at local venues in California and met songwriters Larry Boone & Paul Nelson, who suggested that he move to Nashville, Tennessee.

In 1996, he moved to Nashville where he worked several odd jobs such as loading railroad ties for the Santa Fe Railroad and delivered phone books.

By 1999, Bobby was signed to a publishing contract with Sony\ATV Music where he wrote songs for artists such as Blake Shelton, LeAnn Rimes, Tracy Lawrence, Marty Stuart, McHayes, Chalee Tennison and Trent Willmon.

After performing at several artist and songwriter showcases, he was discovered by producer Joe Scaife who helped him sign a record deal with RCA Records Nashville.

In February of 2005, Bobby released his debut single, “Don’t Ask Me How I Know” which peaked at #16 on Billboard’s Hot Country Songs chart, staying on the chart for 21 weeks. It also crossed over to the pop charts where it peaked at #88 on the Billboard Hot 100.

In May of that same year, he released his debut album, “Man Like Me” which peaked at #108 on the Billboard 200 and #1 on Billboard’s Heatseekers Albums chart. His follow-up single, “Way Down” peaked at #58 on Billboard’s Hot Country Songs, staying on the chart for only a week.

By the end of 2005, Bobby left RCA Records; however, he did re-release an independent album that he originally recorded in 1994 called “I Mean Business.” Despite losing his record deal, he continued to write songs for various artists.

In 2006, he scored his first number one hit as a songwriter when Sugarland topped Billboard’s Hot Country Songs chart with their single, “Want To” (which he co-wrote with the duo’s members, Jennifer Nettles and Kristian Bush). In 2008, he began writing songs for Toby Keith which have managed to make the country music charts.

In 2007, Bobby released the album, “Songs for Somebody” independently on the Cash Daddy Records Label. The lone single released from the album, “Past Comin’ Back” didn’t appear to make the charts. These days (according to research), he continues to write songs for country music artists.

To see a video for “Don’t Ask Me How I Know,” go to:

To see a video for “Way Down,” go to:

To see a video for “Childhood Days” (from his album, “I Mean Business”), go to: