Born of triumph and tragedy, Bobby Pinson’s songs embodythe power and integrity to take them across the width of today’s musical landscape. Political statements, personal mantras, real-life situations and the examination of the human condition all find a place in Bobby’s diverse material.

In 2005, Pinson released his debut album on RCA Records, which was regarded as one of the most critically acclaimed records of the year. An effort hailed by USA Today and Entertainment Weekly as Nashville’s cream of the crop. Pinson’s “Man Like Me” packed a punch that landed him a highly coveted slot in Blender Magazine’s year end list as one of the top 50 albums in all genres as well as several year end Country Album “Top Ten Lists”.

Bobby has had over one hundred fifty (150) of his songs recorded by Country Music Superstars such as Toby Keith, Sugarland, Luke Bryan, Jason Aldean, Blake Shelton, Rascal Flatts, Brooks and Dunn, LeAnn Rimes, Tracy Lawrence and many many more.

The Panhandle Texas Native has had seven (7) #1 singles including “Want To," “All I Wanna Do,” “Already Gone,” and “It Happens.” with Sugarland and “She Never Cried In Front Of Me,” "Made In America," and Beers Ago with Toby Keith. He has had 30 plus hit singles in the Billboard Top Forty earning him the coveted BMI SONGWRITER OF THE YEAR Award in 2009.

Bobby continues to entertain audiences all across the country with his photographic delivery and one of a kind sense of humor, which have quickly become a brand of their own. His light hearted, good ole boy stage presence mixed with his unrivaled ability to command a crowd has not only served the Singer/Songwriter/Record Producer extremely well as a music man; his talent as a "Show Host/MC" has found its way to the Spot Light in recent years as well. Bobby has carved out his own little niche as a commentator/comedian, serving as the "Master Of Ceremonies at Countless Celebrity Galas, Charity Fundraisers, Music Festivals, and Corporate events throughout the United States and Canada.

When Bobby Pinson sings and writes of who he is, where he's been, and at what cost, his photographic voice rings with gritty truth. "I've been wrong enough to know what right is," he says of his life that's so vividly depicted in the music that he affectionately calls "Gutter and Grace."

“It’s not about what you look like, or how well you sing or play,” “It’s about how willing you are to be unvalidated ‘til that one day you are.” “There are songs in the struggle, you just have to dare to look.”

“You just have to figure out what else you can do other than music, and DON’T DO THAT!”