HENDERSON — After an ordinary athletic career in high school, Bobby Pinson followed his older brother to Furman University where he became a star basketball player in his own right.

A reserve on the basketball team at Henderson City High School, Pinson followed his more-heralded brother Byron to the Greenville, South Carolina, school.

Byron Pinson was a two-time all-state player, a member of City High’s 1955-56 basketball team that was the state runner-up and a 1990 inductee into the Henderson County Sports Hall of Fame.

Bobby Pinson, a 1957 graduate of City High, joins that group as a member of the 2017 class.

A year behind Byron in school, Bobby Pinson was still on the bench for his senior season at City High. He was admitted to Furman but without a basketball scholarship. He earned a starting spot on the freshman basketball team averaging 11.7 points a game in his first season at the school.

Pinson sat out his sophomore season but made the varsity team as a walk-on in 1959. He started the second game of the season against Georgia Tech and was awarded a full scholarship.

Over the final three seasons of his career at Furman, Pinson would start 75 games for the Paladins. He averaged 9.8 points a game as a sophomore and 10.4 as a junior when he led the Southern Conference in field goal percentage at 51.9 percent and was ranked 22nd nationally.

Pinson was named the team captain for his senior season in 1961-62 when he averaged 6.5 points for Furman, which finished 16-10 and placed third in the Southern Conference behind West Virginia and Virginia Tech.

“Bobby was the steadying influence on the team, not our highest scorer or highest rebounder, in fact he did not finish the season in double figures but his importance to the team can be measured in terms of his hustle and desire which has been contagious among other members of the team this year,” Furman coach Lyles Alley said in a 1962 story in The Gleaner at the end of Pinson’s collegiate career.

Pinson has been inducted into the Furman Athletic Hall of Fame as well as the Wofford College Athletic Hall of Fame as an honorary letterman.

This is one in a series of stories on the 2017 class of the Henderson County Sports Hall of Fame. The 2017 class will be honored at halftime of Friday's Henderson County-Gibson Southern football game. The Hall of Fame banquet will be Saturday at 6 p.m. at the high school cafeteria.