Chaco Sandals Review

Chacos produce one hell of a robust sandal. And for many hikers, campers and even people around water – these are the sandals they swear by!

Why do people love these babies so much? They are kinda built like a hummer! At least the hummer of the sandal world. That means they are solid, durable and will last you for years.

And just a quick side note, they also repair almost any part of their sandals, including sole replacements. So even when they wear out you can keep ’em running for years! Something I wish I could do with all my favorite and worn in shoes and sandals.

These Chaco sandals are also awesome for any kind of water activity. In fact, that is why the company started. So they specialize in this. The footbed is specifically non-slip, so if you hike through water, raft or even an inflatable kayak, these sandals are great.

One big downside is that Chacos sandals are quite heavy when compared to Teva sandals. Weighing 1.9lb to 1.25lb on an average pair of sandals, just to give you an idea.

However, one reason I prefer Chacos is the footbed. Although it takes a while to “bed-in” to your foot (for some people a few months) once it does, it can fit way better than most sandals. As you can see in the image above, it does not have all those heel and toes grooves that other sandals have which “assume” your foot shape. Instead, you have to work it in over time. But the end result is “your” own footbed.

Chaco Sandal Sole

In 2016, Chacos replaced their Vibram sole with their own branded one. They want to offer the best gripping outdoor sandals, so they made their own! For some people, Vibram (the renowned Italian sole maker) is the only way to go – because they are renowned for having insane grip. However, Chacos have built a solid sole and their focus on grip in wet conditions means it might even be better than the classic Vibram everyone else uses.

Chaco Sandal Strap System (the straps also go inside the sole to form a loop)

Another unique part of the Chaco sandals is their strap system. Unlike on most sandals where you just tighten the strap or buckle, they use a complete loop that holds “the whole foot”.

So, you start at the front, tightening and pulling as you go around until you get back to the buckle and can then keep the whole thing tight. The advantage is that the whole sandal strap is fully adjustable. And if you get the toe strap and don’t want to use it, you can tighten it down out of the way. (If you only want Chacos sandals without a toe strap – read this review)

One challenge with this system is that it can take a while to get it right. And it makes getting the sandal on and off a bit fiddlier. But the added hold is worth it.

Chacos Z1 vs Z2 (ZX1 vs ZX2)

Chacos sandals come with and without toe strap (z1 vs z2 models). So, if you are confused by these names don’t be.

Z1 is without the toe strap.

Z2 is with the toe strap

Some people love the toe strap as it secures the sandal to your foot a lot better. This is great if you are in the water a lot for example. Other people just find it annoying, especially if you want a more relaxed fit and are not planning on doing sport with it.

The ZX models have a double criss-cross strap instead of just the single wider strap (see images below). But the same applies with the ZX1 (without toe strap) vs ZX2 (with toe strap).

Are Chacos Too Heavy?

The last thing I want to mention is the weight of the sandals, as Chacos sandals are quite a bit heavier than the Tevas.

People who swear by these sandals don’t care because the extra weight means they are more solid and you don’t feel the ground as much. However, Chaco has also added their newer “cloud” variant which has a softer footbed, if that is something you are interested in.

You can read all about the differences between all the sandals models and choosing the right one for you on Chaco’s website.

PROS

Strong, durable and long-lasting sandal

Thick sole makes it a strong hiking sandal that protects your sole

Fully adjustable straps

Built for water activities with a non-slip footbed and great sole

Footbed moulds to your foot over time

They repair almost any part of the sandal when you send them in

CONS

Quite heavy, although there are lighter version than the “classic”

The long period of time required for molding the footbed to your foot might annoy some people

A little more expensive than similar models of other sandals

Chaco Z1 Women's Classic Sandals

Teva Sandals Review

Teva is the classic travel or hiking sandal. And for many people, there is no other brand of sandal.

Teva sandals are super comfortable, and I have almost cried when some pairs I have had broke and had to be thrown out!

The big thing you notice with Teva sandals is that they are great day-to-day sandals. Easy to get on and off with the velcro straps. Lightweight compared to the Chaco, and still with quite a decent grip. That is why I tend to use these for traveling when I don’t intend on hiking in them.

As I mentioned, the straps are a bit easier to handle on the Teva sandals, but they don’t have the toe holder. So, you do tend to move around in them a little more on the front. But if you tighten both straps (front and back) then you are usually good to go.

Teva sandals use a velcro system so it can wear out over time (we all know how velcro goes once it gets fluff on it). So, in this area, the Chaco sandals with their plastic buckle are built to last.

The Teva footbed also tends to be pretty comfy, especially right out of the box. But, they don’t have as good a non-slip as the Chacos (which, to be fair, are specifically designed for water!). The Tevas do tend to dry out quicker on the straps though.

Teva Sandal Sole

The sole on the Teva has a decent grip. But the sandal overall is not that thick as the Chaco. So, you might notice more of what you are walking on (eg. rocks). However, for most day-to-day and occasional water crossings (for hikers), this won’t be an issue.

A couple of other things worth mentioning on the Tevas: Anti-microbial footbed (less odor) and a shockpad in the heal.

All in all, I love the Teva as a lightweight travel sandal that can also double as something I use on small hikes (when it’s too hot for boots) or when I go on a kayak trip.

Note: I did a check of the Amazon reviews and there seems to be more quality issues than there used to be. Also, a lot of people complain that they oversize these things, so you may want to order it a little smaller than usual or know that you can easily exchange them.

PROS

Class travel and hiking sandal from the inventor of this sandal style

Super comfortable and little setup required

Fully adjustable straps

Anti-microbial footbed for less odor

Decent grip on the sole

Fast-drying straps

Lightweight (average 1.25 lb per pair)

CONS

Not as durable as other brands

A lighter weight means you feel more of the ground

Sizing seems a bit off for some people

Elevated edges of the footbed can be annoying

Teva HurricaneXLT2 Women's