Édouard Balladur, Former Prime Minister of France

The 91-year-old former French Prime Minister, Edouard Balladur, seemingly remains a captive of history and this is out of his own volition because he had a lot of time to cross to the right side of history but squandered it. At his golden age, he continues to peddle the well-debunked lies about the role of France in the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi.

In a recent interview with France 24, Balladur had the audacity to say that, initially when the killing machinery was put to work by the genocidal government and its militia, Interahamwe, the intention of France was to deploy some troops in Rwanda to deescalate the “Hutu and Tutsi civil war.”

This was such a deliberate misrepresentation of facts. First of all, while Balladur would have been able to show the Hutu side so easily by picking out the Hutu Power ideologues from MRND, CDR, MDR Power and other extremist outfits, he wouldn’t have been able to expose what he called the “Tutsi side” of the civil war.

The RPF has never been a Tutsi party nor has it ever been a Hutu outfit. It has always been composed of Rwandans with a shared ideology, and united under their conviction that they can all live in a country where everyone has a sense of belonging.

When Balladur argues that his government is the only one to have taken measures that meant to save lives in Rwanda in 1994, one gets totally confused. It probably means that for Balladur, the Tutsi were not human beings and deserved to be killed and the Hutu extremists who planned and executed the genocide were serving a “just cause” and deserved to be helped and saved.

When asked if he conceded with the statement made by some world leaders that had there been well-intentioned leaders, they would have considered the early warning signs that genocide was being organized in Rwanda, he answers tartly. “What was it then? I do not understand what these leaders mean by that.”

And he was not done. He sugar-coated his statement, saying: “I decided to defend, in all ways possible, the reputation and the honour of our troops in Rwanda.” He goes on to commend the work of the French troops who, according to him, saved lives in an unforeseen humanitarian operation.

Balladur had no shame to speak lies in the studios of Europe1 all the way to the end of the interview when a last question was finally addressed to him. It was whether he would allow the classified defense archives to be made public so as to shed some more light on the role of France in the genocide against the Tutsi. Caught off-guard, he answered, “yes, although I barely know what is in there.”

This is very odd a response from a former head of government. He certainly recalls all the alerts that the French government received from General Jean Varret who was deployed in Rwanda from 1990 to 1993.

According to the recently published Muse report, Varret, a French Army Corps veteran who in October 1990 was named head of France’s Military Cooperation Mission, once quipped, in hindsight, that Mitterrand’s Africa policy in the 1980s could be summarized in just a few words: “It’s the struggle against the Americans!” He would be one of only a handful of officials in Mitterrand’s administration to voice misgivings about France’s support for Habyarimana during the war in the early 1990s.

Mitterrand mistrusted the United States’ increased influence after the Cold War and sought to contain it. “Abhorrence is a bit strong, in my opinion,” Varret said. “But there was a wariness of the Anglo-Saxon, the kind that is deft, that double-crosses. [Mitterrand] had perfectly identified this devious policy of sidelining us.”

In 2014, as the invitee of Europe1 talk show, hosted by Jean Pierre Elkabbach, Balladur dubbed the condemnations of France for its role in the 1994 genocide as “interesting lies” and claimed that as soon as he became Prime Minister, his government suspended the supply of arms to Rwanda and ordered a pull out of all French troops, “except a few” who remained in the country.

For Balladur, the decision to pull French troops out of Rwanda was informed by the choice to not expose their soldiers to the civil war that was taking place in Rwanda at the time.

Far from the truth. Instead of pulling out, they not only reinforced their presence, but also invited other foreign troops like the then Forces Armee Zairoise from the current Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) to mount a joint force to counter the Rwanda Patriotic Army (RPA) in an operation dubbed Operation Sangaris.

This is explicitly reiterated by Col Laurent Serubuga, the then deputy army commander, who is quoted in the just released Muse Report on the role of France in the Genocide, where he is quoted saying: “these units, backed by France, gave Rwanda the October victory.”

Serubuga’s declarations are contained in a transcript of his discussion with a head of the French Military Cooperation Mission in Rwanda at the time.

In 1993, Balladur’s famous “humanitarian mission” was desperately a necessity as thousands of Rwandans, the Tutsi to be specific, remained incarcerated in prisons all over the country as hundreds others were killed by the regime. But Paris cheered the killers on and continued sending to Rwanda shipments upon shipments of ammunition.

Facts remain stubborn

In his recent testimony, Varret revealed how France ignored his pleas to stop extending its support to the Government of President Juvenal Habyarimana because it was designing a plan that would annihilate one section of Rwandans. A Rwandan Colonel of the Gendarmerie Nationale had broken the news to Varret that there were arms caches in different parts of the country.

According to Varret, when he alerted his superiors on the plan to exterminate the Tutsi by the then government, all he got in answer was total indifference. As if they had heard nothing, Paris continued to extend military support to Habyarimana and his government.

Someone like Balladur, who recently in the studio of France24, had no shame to reiterate his fallacies as he denied any implication of France in the genocide against the Tutsi, proved that the old Balladur had opted to age with his felony.