Heavy duty grey cotton drill Royal Australian Navy working overalls with reflective strips on the arms and Velcro fastenings at the collar, wrists and ankles. The overalls are fastened down the front by a series of press studs. There are two patch breast pockets. The right pocket has a concealed zipper and the left is open, with a small narrow pen pocket sewn on the edge. A further pen pocket is located on the upper left hand sleeve. There are remnants of some white paint on the upper right sleeve below the rank slide. Grey cotton tape sewn above the right breast pocket is machine embroidered in black cotton with the name 'EADES' and over the left breast pocket is 'NAVY'. A pair of grey cotton slides are embroidered with insignia for the rank of Chief Petty Officer in black. The left one has green ink stains green stains are also on the upper left shoulder. There is a patch pocket on the left thigh with a flap secured by two press studs. The right thigh has a narrow expandable patch pocket with an elasticised top opening. There are two slash pockets at the hips and a rear patch pocket on the right. The manufacturers details on the tag have faded.

This pair of grey combat coveralls are associated with the service of Chief Petty Officer (CPO) Shayne Eades who served onboard HMAS Toowoomba during Operation Catalyst in 2007.

He was posted to HMAS Toowoomba on 24 August 2006. His category onboard this ship at the time was CPO Marine Technician where his role was to be in charge of maintaining refrigeration units, air-conditioning units, cooling water pumps for the engine rooms, galley equipment including ovens, fry pans and deep fat fryers. He was also second in command for refuelling the ship while at sea with Coalition ships.

Opening Hours

10 am to 5 pm daily (except Christmas Day)

In preparation for the daily Last Post Ceremony,

galleries are progressively closed from 3:40 pm.

Public entrance via Fairbairn Avenue, Campbell ACT 2612

Book your ticket to visit: awm.gov.au/visit