ROBERTSON BARRACKS, Australia — A polished gold and silver insignia, displaying an eagle, globe and anchor on top of two crossed rifles and waves crashing against the sand rests above the shirt pocket of Lt. Cmdr. Joy Dierks’ blouse, right above the words, “United States Navy.”

The insignia she wears is known as the Fleet Marine Force Warfare Insignia, a United States Navy military badge earned by Navy personnel trained and qualified to support the Marine Corps.

The Fleet Marine Force Warfare Insignia, or FMF pin, symbolizes the sailor is part of the Navy/Marine Corps family. FMF sailors have earned the right to wear the Marines’ eagle, globe, and anchor together with the crossed rifles. The waves and the beach represent the “littoral zone,” the coastal regions where Sailors have served alongside Marines in battles such as Tripoli and Iwo Jima.

3rd Marine Expeditionary Brigade Commanding General Brig. Gen. Paul J. Kennedy awarded the pin to Dierks, a Navy surgeon with the brigade, during exercise Talisman Sabre 2015 at Robertson Barracks, Australia.

“I have a lot of people to thank,” said Dierks, from Ellicott City, Maryland.

The year-long process is tedious and difficult, deterring all but only the most determined sailors from earning the pin. Their dedication to the Marine Corps is tested both mentally and physically.

First, sailors have to serve with a Marine unit for at least a year. They are required to learn Marine Corps history and how a Marine unit operates. In Dierks case, this consisted of learning every component of a Marine Air-Ground Task Force and how it functions.

“You go to the Marines and see their job, and then they teach you about their specialties,” said Dierks. “That’s part of it.”

Individual Marines teach the aspirational sailor a section of Marine Corps knowledge. After the Marine feels the sailor has successfully learned a specific topic, the Marine gives a signature of approval.

“It is really important for me to learn about the Marine Corps, and to learn about the community and people I serve,” said Dierks.

After learning about different skills within the Marine Corps, sailors then demonstrate these skills. They are tested in different capabilities such as weapon breakdown and familiarization, land navigation and combat communications. The Corps’ physical and combat fitness tests, a six-mile road march and gas chamber training test the sailors physically.

“If you have this pin, you know something about the Marine Corps,” said Dierks. “It shows you can keep up with the Marines.”

Once a Sailor has completed all the requirements, they are put to a final test. After a written exam, a board of senior enlisted Marines and sailors scrutinize the sailor. If they believe the sailor is qualified, the pin is theirs.

“A lot of people supported me,” said Dierks. “It was a great experience, but it was also a bonding experience.”

Dierks said she encourages other sailors to earn their pin as well.

“Witnessing [Dierks] get her pin pinned on by the general has motivated me to push toward earning mine,” said Chief Petty Officer 1st Class Raymond J. Suiter a religious program specialist from Longview, Texas, with 3rd MEB, III MEF. “She’s a leader, and she definitely leads by example.”