About this Item

London, New York, & Dublin: T. Fisher Unwin, G.P. Putnam's Sons, Hodges, Figgis & Co., Ltd. & M.H. Gill & Son, 1896. Thomas Lough (1850-1922) was an Anglo-Irish liberal politician and agricultural innovator. This is his only published work, an interesting economic treatise. A Very Good (Plus) copy of the First Edition. Not common. Green cloth binding with maroon spine, gilt titling on the spine. Clean text; xv, 221 pages; appendix, indexed. Fold-out charts. There is no publication date, but agreed by bibliographers to be 1896. Rubbed at the margins, and two of the preliminary pages have ink smudges; the spine has faded to a rather attractive tan colour. Front gutter has cracked but is holding. First Edition. Hard Cover. Very Good (Plus)/No Jacket. 8vo - over 7¾" - 9¾" tall. Seller Inventory # 004423

Contact seller

Report this item

Quercus Rare Books has been an online resource for readers and collectors since 1999. We seek to provide noteworthy books in the First Edition. Our main focus is Modern Literature, in particular the great Irish writers of the early 20th Century. We also specialize in Irish History and the Politics of Ireland's liberation. Other areas of interest are American History and significant works of the 18th-and 19th-century. Quercus is a Member of IOBA - the Independent Online Booksellers Association.

Visit Seller's Storefront

Association Member Members of these associations are committed to maintaining the highest standards. They vouch for the authenticity of all items offered for sale. They provide expert and detailed descriptions, disclose all significant defects and/or restorations, provide clear and accurate pricing, and operate with fairness and honesty during the purchase experience.

Seller's business information

Quercus Rare Books

CA, U.S.A.

Terms of Sale:

We accept checks and money orders in US Dollars. Credit card orders are accepted through ABE. California residents must add appropriate sales tax (currently 7.25%). Items are returnable for any reason within ten days of receipt (please email or call first before returning item).

Shipping Terms:

Orders usually ship within 2 business days. Shipping costs are based on books weighing 2.2 LB, or 1 KG. Due to the recent turmoil in postal rates (particularly for International orders)shipping costs may need to be assessed on an individual basis. It is our policy to ship at the exact cost. If your book order is heavy or oversized, we may need to contact you to let you know that extra shipping is required. Our more valuable books will be sent with insurance.