Microsoft Corp. on Thursday followed the lead of Excite Inc. and Yahoo! Inc. and bought its own advertising network.

But industry experts said what Microsoft is getting has little to do with advertising -- instead, it is a move to reach out to the small businesses that typify LinkExchange's customer base.

"Companies have been reaching out more and more to the small-merchant market, that's the strongest trend out there right now," said Melissa Bane, industry analyst for Yankee Group.

LinkExchange's best-known service is Banner Network, which lets small businesses barter for advertising on the service's more than 400,000 member sites.

LinkExchange also sells low-cost advertising blocks on big sites such as Yahoo!, and services such as automatic e-mail mailing lists targeted at small businesses.

The low-cost services have attracted 800,000 members to LinkExchange, most of them falling into the small-business category.

Microsoft (Nasdaq:MSFT)sees small businesses as a big, untapped market, one that could purchase everything from advertising to back-end e-commerce software.

"The primary advantage for MSN [Microsoft Network] is the ability to expand our offerings for small business," said Marty Taucher, director of network communications for MSN. "Overnight, we become an almost full-service company for businesses looking to get on the Web and get things done. It fills a critical hole in our network."

LinkExchange's current features have already been integrated into Microsoft's MSN Web service, which competes with Yahoo!, Excite, Lycos Inc., Infoseek Corp., Netscape Communications Corp.'s Netcenter and others.

Users of LinkExchange will now get the opportunity to have their ads shown across MSN sites such as Sidewalk and Expedia.

"Now our 400,000 Banner Network members can have their ads appear across the Microsoft Network," said Deborah Whitman, VP of marketing for LinkExchange. "For our customers, it means the ability to reach a new set of consumers."

The Microsoft hook

Analysts said LinkExchange's free services will be a valuable hook to get businesses using Microsoft Web products. Microsoft can then sell them progressively more powerful -- and more expensive -- ways of running and marketing their sites, all the way up to back-end software and Web hosting.

"Microsoft is getting access to what they purport to be 800,000 mom-and-pop shops, and that's a great future channel to move any of its authoring products," said analyst Julia Pickar with Zona Research. "It's not easy to obtain that type of demographically correct audience."

The ability to exclusively offer LinkExchange's one-of-a-kind, popular commerce tools could also be a boost for the MSN Internet hub, which faces the challenge of distinguishing itself from the competition.

"Microsoft realizes it needs to hit the ground running [with MSN,]" said analyst Evan Neufeld, with Jupiter Communications. "It's behind the ball a little bit, and it's spending money to play catch-up. The advantage of LinkExchange is, it's unique. It's not like a free e-mail company, of which there are five."

That might help to explain why Microsoft spent $250 million in stock, according to industry gossip, to buy the company.

Now or never

The price might be a little steep, observers say. But on the other hand, Microsoft isn't about to let a one-chance deal slip away.

"It's kind of surprising, but on the other hand, think of the customers that were using services by Junglee before they were bought by Amazon.com," said analyst Bane. "If you see a strategic advantage, you'd better buy the company now, before someone else does."