Chief Bearhart, twice named Canada’s Horse of the Year, died of heart failure on September 18 at the age of 19, in Japan.

The Sam-Son Farms legend, who was inducted into the Canadian Horse Racing Hall of Fame in 2002, had been standing stud at the Japan Bloodhorse Breeders’ Association Shizunai Stallion Station (JBBA).

“As Chief Bearhart had been suffering from ill health since early April, we stopped breeding him at that time and had been treating him as best as we can, but unfortunately we are very much saddened that our efforts have come to an end,” the JBBA said in statement. “We were hoping he might recover and be able to sire many more winners. Although that did not happen, nothing changes the fact that he was a very good sire for us, and we are very happy to have had the opportunity to stand him.”

Unplaced in his lone two-year-old start, Chief Bearhart would be named Canada’s Turf Champion in his sophomore campaign taking the Breeders’ Stakes by a resounding 9 1/2-lengths, as well as a second-place effort in the Canadian International behind eventual Eclipse Award-winning turf male Singspiel.

In 1997, he was named Canada’s Horse of the Year, champion older male, and champion grass male, while also earning an Eclipse Award as North America’s leading turf male. The accolades came on the back of an extraordinary season that included a win in the 1997 Grade 1 Breeders’ Cup Turf at Hollywood Park in stakes-record time of 2:23.92.

Chief Bearhart’s 1997 campaign also included a famous Woodbine score in the Grade 1 Canadian International Stakes, as well as local wins in the Grade 2 Sky Classic Handicap, and the Grade 3 Niagara Breeders’ Cup Handicap. He also shipped to Keeneland to win the Grade 3 Elkhorn Stakes.

Rick Balaz, President and General Manager of Sam-Son Farms, held their former charge in high regard.

“We were very sad to hear of Chief Bearhart’s death,” said Balaz. “He was an exceptional individual. It certainly brings back memories of some very exciting times. None more special then his Breeders’ Cup win in California. We were certainly fortunate to have been able to campaign such a great champion.”

Bred in Ontario by Richard D. Maynard, Chief Bearhart was again named Canada’s Horse of the Year and champion turf male in 1998. His biggest win that year came in the Grade 1 Manhattan Handicap at Belmont Park.

Chief Bearhart completed his racing career with a fourth-place finish in the Group 1 Japan Cup, in Tokyo, on November 29, 1998. He retired with a record of 12-5-3 from 26 starts and earnings of $3,381,557. He was bought by the Japan Racing Association that year for stud duty and returned to Japan in 1999.

At stud, Chief Bearhart sired group stakes winners in 10 consecutive years beginning in 2003.