Keynote speakers

Keynote Speakers

Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), Doctor of Science (Phys&Math), Academic Director, Federal State Institution Scientific Research

Institute for System Analyses of the Russian Academy of Sciences (SRISA), Moscow.

Scopus, WoS, ORCID, Math-Net, Google Scholar, ZentralBlatt.

Doctor of Science (Phys&Math), Director, SRISA, Surgut Division, Surgut.

Scopus, Math-Net, Google Академия, ZentralBlatt, MathSciNet.

Topic of speech: Flows in complicated domains and the problem of the blood description in vessels

Academic RAS, Doctor of Science (Phys&Math), Vice President of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

Corresponding member of the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), Doctor of Science (Phys&Math), Chairperson of the Department of Informatics, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow.

Math-Net, Google Scholar, ZentralBlatt, MathSciNet, ORCID, Scopus.

Topic of speech: Problems of Numerical Modeling of Industrial Processes in the Arctic Zone

Corresponding Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), Doctor of Physics and Mathematics, Professor, Deputy Director for Research at the Institute of Applied Mathematics named after V.I. M.V. Keldysh RAS, Head of the Department of Software for High-Performance Computing Systems and Networks, Professor of the Basic Department of Mathematical Modeling at the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Professor of the Department of Computational Methods at Moscow State University. M.V. Lomonosov. Wikipedia, Scopus, ORCID, РИНЦ.

Topic of speech: Supercomputing technologies: algorithms and infrastructure

Corresponding Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Professor, Institute of Applied Mathematics M.V. Keldysh RAS Wikipedia, Scopus, ORCID.

Presentation topic: Some features of the application of the discontinuous Galerkin method for solving gas dynamics problems

Prof. Kashchenko Sergey Alexandrovich

Prof. Doctor of Science (Phys&Math), First Vice-Rector of P.G. Yaroslavl State University Demidov.

Topic of speech: Dynamic Behavior of the Delay Logistic Equation

Doctor of Science (Phys&Math), Assistant Dean, Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics, Lomonosov Moscow State University,

Deputy Director for Strategic IT, SRISA, Moscow.

Scopus.

Topic of speech: Computational Modeling of Multiscale Combustion Tasks: Problems and Solutions.

Doctorat d’Etat (Habilitation), mathematics, Director for Research (1st class), University of Strasbourg, The French National Centre for Scientific Research, Strasbourg, France.

ResearchGate.

Topic of speech: Pafnuty Chebyshev and His Impact on French Mathematics

Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Professor, Dean of the Faculty of Information Technologies of Novosibirsk State University, Deputy Director for Research of the Institute of Automation and Electrometry of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk. Scopus, ORCID.

Topic of speech: Pafnuty Chebyshev and His Impact on French Mathematics

Valentin F. Butuzov

Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Professor. Moscow State University named after M.V. Lomonosov, Faculty of Physics, Department of Applied Mathematics, Department of Mathematics. Scopus, ResearchGate.

Topic of speech: Singularly perturbed problems with multizonal interior and boundary layers.

Prof. Sergey O. Starkov

Doctor of Science (Phys&Math), Head of Division of Intelligent Cybernetic Systems, Obninsk Institute of Atomic Energy, Obninsk. Scopus, ResearchGate.

Topic of speech: AI - hype, technological platform, new economy?

Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Professor, Head of the Department of Mathematical and Computer Methods of Analysis, Moscow State University M.V. Lomonosov, Moscow. Scopus.

Topic of speech: P.L. Chebyshev's Research in Number Theory, their Further Development and Applications

Professor, Ph. D. (Physics)

Topic of speech: Maximum Entropy Method Applied to Time-series Data in Real-time Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory

Doctor of Science (Phys&Math).

Wikipedia, Scopus, РИНЦ.

Topic of speech: Maximum Entropy Method Applied to Time-series Data in Real-time Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory