Overview: A Sinful Life is a 1989 American comedy film directed by William Schreiner and written by Melanie Graham. The film stars Anita Morris, Dennis Christopher, Shelly Desai, Rita Gomez, David Labiosa and Rick ...

Release date: 30 June 1989

Genre: Comedy

Director: William Schreiner

Writer: Melanie Graham

A former 'Sonny and Cher' dancer tries to pull her life together when social services threaten to take her daughter away from her.

Overview: Mathnet is a segment on the children's television show Square One Television that follows the adventures of pairs of police mathematicians. It is a parody of Dragnet.

Overview: Square One Television (sometimes referred to as Square One or Square One TV) is an American children's television program produced by the Children's Television Workshop (now known as Sesame Workshop) to ...

Release date: 26 January 1987

Genre: Comedy, Family

In this sketch comedy series for preteens, principles of mathematics are presented through parody and music videos...

Overview: Dr. Hackenstein is a 1988 comedy horror film written and directed by Richard Clark and distributed by Troma Entertainment. After the death of his wife, Dr. Hackenstein (David Muir) concocts the perfect ...

Release date: 1 October 1988

Genre: Comedy, Horror

Director: Richard Clark

Dr. Hackenstein is a genial but somewhat misguided scientist. He murders the locals for their body parts, but it's not for power or scientific research; ...

Overview: Tapeheads is a 1988 comedy film directed by Bill Fishman and starring John Cusack, Tim Robbins, Sam Moore and Junior Walker. The film was produced by Michael Nesmith, who briefly appears as a bottled water ...

Release date: 22 January 1988

Genre: Comedy, Music

Director: Bill Fishman

A couple of creative losers accidently become big shots in the video music industry.

Overview: Wings is an American sitcom television series that ran for eight seasons on NBC from April 19, 1990, to May 21, 1997. The show is set at the fictional "Tom Nevers Field" airport, a small two-airline airport ...

Release date: 19 April 1990

Genre: Comedy, Drama

Brothers Brian and Joe Hackett and friend Helen attempt to run an airline on the New England island of Nantucket while surrounded by their various wacky ...

Overview: Eight Is Enough (stylized as eight is enough) is an American television comedy-drama series that ran on ABC from March 15, 1977, until May 23, 1981. The show was modeled on the life of syndicated newspaper ...

Release date: 15 March 1977

Genre: Family, Drama, Comedy

This comedy drama focused on a family with eight very independent children.