Travis Barker's ex-wife, Shanna Moakler, has admitted that she looks forward to the day she never has to see or speak to him ever again.

As you can probably guess from that wild opener, things between the Blink-182 drummer and his ex Shanna haven't exactly been great since they split in 2008.

Before he tied the knot with Kourtney Kardashian, Barker was married to Shanna Moakler for four years.

Shanna and Travis seemingly want nothing to do with each other these days, but the two are linked by their two kids, Landon, 19, and Alabama, 17.

Barker is also incredibly close with Shanna's daughter from a previous marriage Atiana De La Hoya, 24.

In a recent interview with the Miss Understood podcast, Shanna admitted that she's not on great terms with Barker, and is looking forward to the day their daughter Alabama turns 18 so they'll no longer have to co-parent.

"We tried our best, that's one thing we did do," Shanna told host Rachel Uchitel.

"But I don't have lots of fond memories anymore. I used to try to glorify it but looking back, it was a lot of in and out of court, lots of head-butting, I really just don't have too many great things to say about it."

Travis and Kourney confirmed they were dating in January 2021, and were engaged that October, getting married in May 2022.

Shanna said that she didn't have many good things to say about Travis and Kourtney's relationship - but snuck in a few comments for curious fans.

For starters, the former Playboy model and pageant queen has had enough of people calling her 'bitter' and 'jealous' about the overly-affectionate couple.

"You know, I've gotten so bullied in the media since this relationship ensued," she said.

"I mean, really treated unfairly and unjustly... it's really put a bad taste in my mouth."

Asked why she thinks she was bullied when Travis and Kourtney started dating, Shanna suggested it was probably because she 'wasn't a fan' of the couple.

"If I made any statement whatsoever I was called bitter and jealous," she shared.

Insisting that she had better things to do than obsess over an ex from over a decade ago, Shanna said that she doesn't even really know Travis Barker anymore.

"I don't know what his favourite movie is, I don't know what his favourite food or colour is... I've been in my own relationship," she said.

"We only have our 17-year-old, who will be 18 this year, and then our work is done here and we never have to see each other or talk to each other ever again, and I look forward to that day."