The Stepmother of the Year Award goes to Kourtney Kardashian! The reality TV star recently showed off her blossoming relationship with stepson Landon Asher Barker.

The "Keeping Up With The Kardashians" star is no stranger to supporting her husband Travis Barker's music career. However, the 44-year-old extended the same loving courtesy to the Blink-182 drummer's children from a previous relationship.

Following Landon's debut as a musician, the TV personality supported the rising star's new single in the sweetest way possible. Shortly after the entertainer's affectionate gesture, the patriarch revealed he had tested positive for COVID-19.

Kourtney Kardashian & Stepson Lip-sync To His New Song While Sharing A Secret Handshake

Trending:

Eminem Remains Silent On ‘8 Mile’ Co-Star’s Death

Swifties Attack Travis Kelce’s Ex On Social Media For Recent Activity

Travis Kelce’s Ex Has A Cryptic Warning For Taylor Swift

Kroy Biermann Shoots Down Kim Zolciak’s Request, Divorce Full Steam Ahead

Lil Tay Alleges ‘Abusive’ Father Created Instagram Death Hoax

The pregnant socialite promoted Landon's new song, "Friends with Your Ex," on the rising artist's TikTok page. In the clip, the soon-to-be mother of four rocked her bare face with a baggy black tee while her stepson donned a sleeveless red top.

A snippet of the 19-year-old's debut single played in the background as the pair lip-synced to the track. "I was friends with your ex. You were with him when we met. Guess he hasn't found out yet, but I know he's gonna kill me when he sees me with you," the lyrics read.

While Landon effortlessly stayed on beat and carried each verse, his stepmother tried to stay on track and laughed off her mistakes. Before hitting the final note, the pair showed off their close bond by sharing a secret handshake and dancing to the music.

The California beauty's support continued on her Instagram Story, where she shared a screenshot of Landon's YouTube page. The snap captured the official music video for "Friends with Your Ex," which Kardashian captioned with a pink neon heart and the platform's link.

The Blink-182 drummer's son released the pop-punk track on Friday, September 22, through his father's DTA Records label. The tattooed musician also served his skills on the drums for the song and acted as a production team member.

Landon dropped his debut single alongside its wild music video on the same day. The track's accompanying clip captured the teenage angst highlighted in the lyrics. The footage also featured the 19-year-old's influencer girlfriend, Charli D’Amelio, who played a vital role in the story.

D’Amelio served as the fictional lover of the singer's bandmate, and the video followed the 19-year-old's fantasies about the stunning TikToker. From garage band practice to wild car rides and skating scenes, the clip was filled with several fun moments.

Additionally, social media influencers like Chazdon Jeffery, Carl Dawson, Joe Chavez, Michael Tua, and Zack Lugo were also featured in the music video. Coincidentally, Landon's big moment fell on the day his father announced his COVID-19 diagnosis.

Travis Barker Revealed He Tested Positive For COVID-19 Weeks After Rejoining The Blink-182 Tour

On Friday, September 22, the "Meet the Barkers" star updated fans about his health on his Instagram Story. The 47-year-old shared a picture of himself holding a positive COVID test and expressed his sadness with three emojis.

The entertainer's illness came two weeks after the drummer's return to the ongoing Blink-182 tour. The band's concerts were briefly postponed after the tattooed heartthrob flew to the US following a family emergency.

The record producer went home to support his wife who underwent an "urgent fetal surgery" to save their unborn child's life. It is unclear how Travis' COVID-19 status would affect the band's scheduled performances.

Blink-182's next show is set to be held at the Altice Arena in Portugal on October 2. Additionally, the rock band's upcoming album shall be released on October 20. However, the group recently dropped a new song, “One More Time," on September 21.

Barker also addressed his reunion with bandmates Mark Hoppus and Tom DeLonge in a preview of his upcoming interview with Apple Music's Zane Lowe. The snippet shared on Blink-182's YouTube account featured clips of the band's new album and captured the 47-year-old laughing off his ill fortunes.

"Why does it take these catastrophes, like me being in a plane crash or me being sick, for our band to get back together?" the drummer said per PEOPLE, before reflecting on his relationship with his bandmates.

"I always knew that the brotherhood wouldn't ever deteriorate or wouldn't be there," the +44 band founder continued. "I really feel like Blink is us three, and as soon as we accept that and we don't settle for anything less than that, I just think that's the future."