Travis Barker Net Worth: Inside The Blink 182 Rockstar's Multi-Million Fortune

Kourtney Kardashian's husband Travis Barker has an incredible net worth thanks to his music career but exactly how much is he worth? And what is his fortune compared to his wife's?

Travis Barker is preparing to welcome his first baby with wife Kourtney Kardashian and as their already big brood expands, many are looking into the net worth of the Blink 182 star.

With a huge career in his band, who have also just done a reunion tour, Travis has had quite the life in the public eye which has in return, of course, helped out his bank balance along the way.

And as if his fortune wasn't enough, he's now married to one of the most famous women on the globe, Kourtney, who has a multi-million pound net worth of her own, making them quite the power couple.

Read more: Kim Kardashian Proves Feud With Sister Kourtney Is Officially Over

Read more: Has Kourtney Kardashian Had Her Baby?

So how much exactly is Travis Barker worth? And what's his combined net worth with Kourtney? Here's a look into his fortune.

What is Travis Barker's net worth?

Travis is best known for being the drummer in legendary rock band, Blink-182, which has been running since the 90s.

Blink-182 have sold tens of millions of records worldwide and toured endlessly, amassing a dedicated, global fanbase.

Aside from this, Travis has collaborated with loads of other artists including Kanye West , Eminem, Post Malone and countless other Hip Hop artists.

All in all, this music career has led Travis to have a net worth of around $50 million dollars (£41million).

The 45-year-old also has a clothing line, started his own music festival and has a record label, also massive earners!

What is Kourtney Kardashian's net worth?

Kourtney has of course got a few million behind her too thanks to her position in one of the biggest families on the globe. The eldest Kardashian sister is worth $65million (£48million) making her slightly more wealthy than her husband.

Her millions have been amassed through the decade long stint of Keeping Up With The Kardashians, now The Kardashians, endless, lucrative endorsement deals and her latest venture, health and wellness publication, POOSH.

Together, Travis and Kourtney have a combined net worth of $115million (£94million).

Travis popped the question to Kourtney in October 2021 with a stunning oval-cut diamond engagement ring, which is said to be worth upwards of $1million for the sparkler.

Together they had a number of weddings but ultimately tied the knot in Dolce and Gabbana's house in Capri, Italy with their children, friends and family.