Kourtney Kardashian Barker has explained how it was 'a given' she would take her husband's last name, following their multiple weddings earlier this year.

The reality TV star gushes about her and Travis Barker 's blended family, and admits having a pre-exisiting relationship with the Blink 182 drummer's children from a previous marriage for 10 years made things 'really easy' when the pair first sparked up a romance.

Travis, 46, is doting dad to Landon, 18, and Alabama, 16, as well as his step-daughter Atiana De La Hoya, 23 - while Kourtney shares Mason, 12, Penelope, nine and Reign, seven, with ex-boyfriend and The Kardashians star, Scott Disick.

Kourtney - who recently admitted she wouldn't 'eat poop' like her sister Kim Kardashian would in a bid to look younger - appeared on the Today show on Monday to promote her new line with fast-fashion company BooHoo, and reveal all about married life with her new husband.

The Kardashians star and Travis first tied the knot in April this year - walking down the aisle at the One Love Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas for a non-legal ceremony after indulging in plenty of PDA at the Grammy Awards earlier in the evening.

The love birds went on to make things official on May 15, 2022 in Santa Barbara, California, before going on to host a religious wedding ceremony in Portofino, Italy the following month - with all their loved ones and famous friends there to watch them exchange vows for the third time.

Speaking about her decision to officially become known as Mrs Barker, Kourtney told host Hoda Kotb, 58, on Monday: "It was a given, it wasn't even a thought, so now my middle name is Kardashian."

The Poosh founder went on to explain how she knew Travis was 'The One', telling the TV presenter and viewers: "Because it's just easy, when it's right, it's right. I think of times when it wasn't so easy in the past and it's just easy."

"It's figuring it out and working together and keeping the communication open," the reality TV star continued, as she explained how she and her new husband navigate as life as a blended family.

Kourtney - who revealed she and Travis had paused their IVF journey earlier this month - went on to admit her upbringing as part of a blended family helped her when she first sparked up a romance with dad-of-three Travis last year.

The star is the eldest child of Kris Jenner and the late Robert Kardashian, who also welcomed Kim, Khloe and Rob Kardashian into the world together before splitting after 13-years of marriage.

Kris went on to tie the knot with Caitlyn Jenner and give birth to Kourtney's younger half-siblings, Kendall and Kylie Jenner, and the whole family were raised together prior to Kris and the former Olympic athlete calling time their on their relationship in 2015.

"Because we knew each other, I've had my own relationship with his kids for about 10 years so it does make it really easy," Kourtney explained on the Today show when discussing her own blended family, adding: "We all know each other and know each other's intentions, and I think it makes it easy."

Travis popped the question to Kourtney in October last year, after the pair's relationship turned romantic following years of friendship during their time as neighbours.

The drummer proposed to his beau at a beachside hotel - using a large arrangement of roses and candles on the beach to set the mood, before getting down on one knee and asking the star to be his wife.

Prior to striking up an unlikely romance with her now-husband, Kourtney had enjoyed an on-off relationship with the father of her children, Scott.

The former couple were in a turbulent relationship together since meeting at a house party in Mexico in 2005 until their split in 2015.

Do you have a story to sell? Get in touch with us at webcelebs@mirror.co.uk or call us direct at 0207 29 33033