After two years of marriage, Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker have finally moved in together. During the latest episode of The Kardashians, which aired on Thursday (June 13), the couple shared that they are putting a lot of thought in how they are combining their blended family.

“Travis and I have really been taking our time with figuring out where it makes sense for us to live together because the kids are all so comfortable in their spaces,” Kourtney says.

She continues, “It feels like we kind of figured out a plan for now. We’re going to move into his house, which is a block away, and then redo my house at the same time so that we can all be together, living together under one roof with the baby.”

At this point in the reality series, Kourtney has not yet given birth to their first child together, Rocky Thirteen Barker. Prior to the two welcoming their baby boy in November, the couple have children from previous relationships. Kourtney shares Mason Disick, Penelope Disick, and Reign Disick with ex-boyfriend Scott Disick.

Travis on the other hand shares Landon Asher Barker and Alabama Luella Barker with ex-wife Shanna Moakler. He also is the stepfather to her oldest daughter Atiana De La Hoya, who Moakler shares with her ex-boyfriend Oscar De La Hoya.

Kourtney and Travis were friends for years prior to their romantic relationship. The two lived near one another, and their families also attended events with one another over the years. The two are currently a “block away” from one another, which Kourtney shared in an interview with Amanda Hirsch on the Not Skinny But Not Fat podcast prior to getting married.

“We're in the place where we're figuring out how to blend our households and our kids and what life looks like now,” Kardashian said at the time. “For the most part, we're getting those things in place. We do family dinner every Sunday night with all the kids at his house.”

She continued, “We want our kids to feel really comfortable. They have both lived in their homes their whole lives for the most part, and just, they each have their rooms. We are a block away.”

How do Kourtney Kardashian & Travis Barker manage their household

The two made living separately but together work out between their schedules shuffling children around.

“When the kids are at their dad's house, I stay at his house, and there's still nights when we'll stay at each other's houses in between,” she explains.

She continues, “I get up at six in the morning, and I carpool every morning, then I go straight to his house and have a matcha. He has it ready for me, and then we have matcha, talk, hang out and work out together, and then we start our day.”

The two felt “no pressure” to move in with one another once they tied the knot in 2022.