Take me back to April 21, 2005

Let's take a walk down memory lane.

The date is April 21, 2005, and it's a Thursday. Babies who are born today will have the star sign Taurus. The summer of 2005 is drawing closer, and temperatures have started to rise.

In America, the song "Candy Shop" by 50 Cent is at the top of the singles charts, while "(Is This The Way To) Amarillo" by Tony Christie & Peter Kay is the number-one song in the UK. George W. Bush Jnr. is the President of the United States, and the movie The Amityville Horror (2005) is at the top of the box office. Tony Blair is the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.

On television, people are watching popular shows such as "The King of Queens", "Charmed", "The Apprentice", and "My Super Sweet 16". In technology news, more and more people are beginning to gain access to the Internet. Internet speeds are increasing and MP3 sharing is beginning to threaten the existence of music stores. People are using a software program called LimeWire to share music, software, and videos. Unfortunately, it is also a haven for computer viruses.

Smartphones don't exist yet. There are no Androids or iPhones. Internet users are using MSN Messenger and AIM to chat with each other online. Cameras on phones have now become the norm. Furthermore, the quality of these cameras is continuing to increase with each new phone release. We are now entering an age where any event can be instantly photographed or recorded.

Practically every teenager and adult has a MySpace or Bebo account. It's 2005, so the music charts are being dominated by the likes of Mariah Carey, Gwen Stefani, Mario, Kelly Clarkson, 50 Cent, Kanye West and Ciara. Satirical factoids about actor Chuck Norris are extremely popular at the moment. These "Chuck Norris Facts" consist of absurd hyperbolic claims about Norris' toughness.

The trial of pop star Michael Jackson for child molestation is attracting international media attention. If you were to travel back to this day, notable figures such as Luther Vandross, Lloyd Avery II, Tara Correa-McMullen, and Rosa Parks would all still be alive. People are playing video games such as "Ratchet & Clank: Up Your Arsenal", "Halo 2", "The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap", and "Psychonauts".

Kids and teenagers are watching TV shows such as "Caillou", "Danny Phantom", "Postcards from Buster", and "The Backyardigans". Children are playing with toys such as the Xbox, Yu-Gi-Oh! Trading Card Game, Furreal Luv Cubs, and the PSP.