SFX master Steven Boyle’s effects work has been seen in 2005’s King Kong, Love and Monsters, Bait, What We Do in the Shadows, The Matrix trilogy, and so much more. Now, Boyle is set to make his feature directorial debut, The Demon Disorder, a new Shudder Original.

Shudder will release The Demon Disorder on September 6 on both Shudder and AMC+.

The film stars John Noble (“Fringe”), Charles Cottier, Christian Willis, and Dirk Hunter.

“The Australian demonic family drama centers on Graham, a man haunted by his past since the death of his father and the estrangement from his two brothers.

“Jake, the middle brother, contacts Graham claiming that something is horribly wrong: their youngest brother Phillip is possessed by their deceased father. Graham reluctantly agrees to go and see for himself. With the brothers back together, they soon realize they are unprepared for the forces against them and learn that the sins of their past will not stay hidden.

“But how do you defeat a presence that knows you inside and out?”

Toby Osborne (Pindam) co-wrote the screenplay with Steven Boyle.

The film is executive produced by Michael Spierig and Peter Spierig.

Strange Darling starring Kyle Gallner is headed our way later this month courtesy of Magenta Light Studios, and the final trailer has been released this afternoon.

Strange Darling will release in theaters August 23, 2024. Watch the official trailer below, which is loaded with rave reviews including high praise from Stephen King.

King calls the upcoming film “a clever masterpiece.”

“We are thrilled to be bringing nationwide theatrical audiences this unique and exceptional film with terrific performances by Willa Fitzgerald and Kyle Gallner. This second feature from talented writer-director JT Mollner is destined to become a cult classic that defies conventional storytelling,” Magenta Light’s Bob Yari said in a recent statement.

Strange Darling is currently 100% Fresh on Rotten Tomatoes with 21 reviews, one of which comes courtesy of Trace Thurman right here on Bloody Disgusting. Trace reviewed the film out of Fantastic Fest, giving the cat-and-mouse thriller a 3.5/5 star rating.

Trace writes, “Writer/director JT Mollner’s Strange Darling [is] a film that dares us to question the roles men and women are expected to play.” He goes on to say that the film ends up being “a smarter-than-you’d-expect entry into the cat and mouse thriller genre.”

“What we are left with is a grim little thriller whose lofty ambitions prove to be too much for it in the end, but you’ve got to give it credit for trying,” Trace also notes in his review.

Distributed by Magenta Light Studios, Strange Darling is a Miramax and Spooky Pictures Production. The film is produced by Bill Block, Roy Lee, Steven Schneider, Giovanni Ribisi and Chris Ivan Cevic, with Giovanni Ribisi also serving as the Director of Photography.