Barbra Streisand is currently gearing up for the release of her tell-all memoir, which will hit bookstore shelves tomorrow.

In the new book, My Name Is Barbra, the hitmaker and actress will give readers a front-row seat on her six-decade career as a singer, actor, and director. But within the confines of the cover, Barbra won't just talk about her career, because she'll also dish about past loves and regrets, all while setting the record straight.

Barbra, who will turn 82 next year, has been married twice. Her first husband was actor Elliott Gould, whom she married in 1963. The couple met when Barbra auditioned for a play called I Can Get It For You Wholesale, in which Elliott was the leading man.

For all the latest on news, politics, sports, and showbiz from the USA, go to The Mirror US.

READ NEXT: Barbra Streisand had 'flirty' relationship with 'utterly charming' King Charles

During their union, the couple welcomed one child, a son called Jason Gould who is now 56 and works as an actor and director. But their romance wasn't to stand the test of time, with them announcing their separation in 1969 before getting divorced officially in 1971.

Between 1969 and 1970, amid her divorce from her first husband, Barbra dated Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau. And then in 1973, she began a relationship with Jon Peters, a hairdresser and producer whom she stayed with until 1982.

And in 1974, she even had a flirty relationship with the current King of England, King Charles III. In an extract of her new book which was seen by The US Sun, Barbra explains that she and the King initially met when Charles was on duty with the Royal Navy in San Diego.

Reportedly, Charles made a beeline for Los Angeles, where Ms Hello gorgeous herself was working on the set of Funny Girl. When asked what he wanted to do in LA, he was said to have replied that he'd like to meet Barbra, “the woman behind the voice".

The King, 74, is rumoured to have had Streisand, now 81, as his “only pin-up” while studying at Cambridge University as a lad and previously described her as “devastatingly attractive” with “great sex appeal".

She is also thought to have had a relationship with Richard Baskin, the heir to the American ice cream brand Baskin-Robins, with her living with him from 1983 until 1987. She then dated actor Don Johnson from 1987 until September 1988.

Barbra was then linked to Richard Gere in 1983, before being romantically linked to Clint Eastwood in 1989. And from 1989 until 1991 she struck up a romance with James Newton Howard, a famous composer.

From 1992 until 1993, the musical icon then dated tennis champion Andre Agassi. At the time she was 28 years his senior, and he even wrote about their age gap in his 2009 memoir. "We agree that we're good for each other, and so what if she's twenty-eight years older? We're simpatico, and the public outcry only adds spice to our connection. It makes our friendship feel forbidden, taboo – another piece of my overall rebellion. Dating Barbra Streisand is like wearing Hot Lava," he penned.

Other famous faces that Barbra was linked to include the likes of newsreader Peter Jennings, renowned actor Liam Neeson, actor and Angelina Jolie's father Jon Voight, and Peter Weller.

In 1998, Barba then settled down once again and married James Brolin, whom she is still married to and very much in love with. James is best known for his TV and movie roles, with him having appeared on Marcus Welby MD, Life in Pieces, and more recently the 2022 Toy Story spin-off Lightyear.