Sterling Price Holloway, Jr. was an American actor and voice actor. He was best known as the original voice of Winnie the Pooh, as well as the Cheshire Cat in Alice in Wonderland, Kaa in The Jungle Book, and Roquefort in The Aristocats. He was also the narrator of the cartoon shorts The Pelican and the Snipe, Goliath II, Susie the Little Blue Coupe, The Little House, The Cold-Blooded Penguin segment of The Three Caballeros, the Peter and the Wolf segment of Make Mine Music, and the Mickey and the Beanstalk segment of Fun and Fancy Free (as seen in The Wonderful World of Disney episode "The Adventures of Mickey Mouse"). Additionally, he voiced Mr. Stork in Dumbo and again in the Lambert the Sheepish Lion which he also narrated, the adult version of Flower in Bambi, Amos Mouse, and the lead character and narrator in Ben and Me. He also narrated several Disneyland Records releases.

Holloway said that Winnie the Pooh was his favorite role that he did for Disney. In addition to his work as a voice actor with his distinctive high-pitched voice, Holloway was also a movie and stage actor and appeared in films, such as Meet John Doe (1941) and It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963). He also appeared in a few Gene Autry movies, as well as on television in The Andy Griffith Show, A Family Affair, and Gilligan's Island.

Holloway was awarded the Disney Legend of 1991.[1] He was escorted by the character of Pooh himself to receive the award.

Holloway died on November 22, 1992 at the age of 87 from cardiac arrest. He was never married but did adopt a son named Richard Holloway who survived him. Following Holloway's death, Jim Cummings took over many of his characters for Disney.

Roles[]

Gallery[]

Trivia[]

Holloway also voiced Peter, Sasha, Sonia, and Ivan in the Peter and the Wolf segment of Make Mine Music, in which he was also the narrator.

His voice can be heard in many commercials and TV spots, such as Morton Salt and Libby's, as well as commercials featuring Disney characters, such as Peter Pan Peanut Butter (Tinker Bell) and Jell-O (characters from Alice in Wonderland).

Jim Cummings took over many of the characters who were voiced by Holloway after his death in 1992.

When he died on November 22, 1992, Scarlett Johansson turned eight years old. She would later voice Holloway's character Kaa in the 2016 live-action adaptation of The Jungle Book.

He was considered to voice Sleepy, Sexton Mouse, Deacon Owl, and Scuttle in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Robin Hood, The Rescuers, and The Little Mermaid (respectively).[citation needed]

References[]

[]

Sterling Holloway on Wikipedia