Neethane Enn Ponvasantham Mp3 Songs Free Download :

Neethane Enn Ponvasantham Mp3 Songs Free Download :

Neethane Enn Ponvasantham Full album Download(.zip file)

1. “Kaatrai Konjam” Karthik 05:34 2. “Pudikale Maamu” Suraj Jagan, Karthik 06:00 3. “Yennodu Vaa Va” Karthik 04:19 4. “Saayndhu Saayndhu” Yuvan Shankar Raja, Ramya NSK 06:07 5. “Pengal Yendral” Yuvan Shankar Raja 04:06 6. “Mudhal Murai” Sunidhi Chauhan 03:55 7. “Sattru Munbu” Ramya NSK 05:57 8. “Vaanam Mella” Ilaiyaraaja, Bela Shende 06:02 Total = 42:00

Neethane Enn Ponvasantham Mp3 Songs Free Download From http://www.mu6tan.com

Neethaane En Ponvasantham is a Indian Tamil musical romance film written and directed byGautham Menon, featuring Jiiva and Samantha in the lead roles. The venture is jointly produced by Menon’s Photon Kathaas and RS Infotainment and will have cinematography by M. S. Prabhu and Om Prakash . The film’s score and soundtrack are being composed by Ilaiyaraaja. The film was simultaneously shot in Telugu as Yeto Vellipoyindhi Manasu with actor Nani playing Jiiva’s role. The film was released worldwide on 14 December 2012 to mixed reviews.

Directed by Gautham Menon Produced by Reshma Ghatala

Venkat Somasundaram

Elred Kumar

Jayaram

Gautham Menon Written by Reshma Ghatala

Gautham Menon Screenplay by Reshma Ghatala

Gautham Menon Story by Reshma Ghatala Starring Jiiva

Samantha Music by Ilaiyaraaja Cinematography M. S. Prabhu

Om Prakash Editing by Anthony Studio Photon Kathaas

RS Infotainment Release date(s)

14 December 2012

Running time 155 minutes Country India Language Tamil Budget 10 crore

Gautham Menon met Jiiva to discuss a potential collaboration in May 2011 for his next venture after the Hindi remake of Vinnaithaandi Varuvaayaa.Menon decided to cast Jiiva in the Tamil version of a bilingual film he was set to make featuring Ram andSamantha. Menon’s “regular crew”, film editor Anthony, cinematographer Manoj Paramahamsa and composer A. R. Rahman were all touted to be a part of the film however M. S. Prabhu replaced Paramahamsa and in December 2011 sources indicated that Rahman too would probably not work for this film, owing to his other commitments. Reports subsequently suggested that Harris Jayaraj may work with Menon again, but the composer dismissed those few days later. Menon clarified that he never announced any music director for the film and that he wanted to keep it as a surprise. In late January 2012, Ilaiyaraaja confirmed that he would be working with Gautham Menon.

A Telugu and a Hindi version, titled Yeto Vellipoyindhi Manasu and Assi Nabbe Poorey Sau are also being simultaneously made, withNani in the former and Aditya Roy Kapoor essaying the lead role in the latter, while Samantha would play the female lead in all versions. Initial suggestions indicated that the film was also set to be titled Nithya, after Samantha’s character in the film, but this turned out to be untrue. The title was revealed through the first publicity posters to be Neethaane En Ponvasantham, inspired by a song from the 1982 film Ninaivellam Nithya An official announcement was made by the producers of the film, RS Infotainment, that a photo shoot was planned in August and the film would also shoot portions across the United Kingdom. Jiiva had to lose weight for the film and had to undertake diet regimens and work out sessions to get in shape for the character. Furthermore it was revealed that he would sport three different looks in the film as the film encompasses 15 years.Ravi Raghavendra and Anupama Kumarwere added to the cast to play Jiiva’s parents, while Santhanam was also chosen to play a college student in the film.For the Hindi version, actress Sonam Kapoor was initially approached to do Samantha’s role, but the maker felt she wouldn’t have felt the part as the film’s protagonist had to go from age 15 to 20 to 25, hence Samantha was retained for the Hindi version.