Goutham Vasudev Menon returns to the genre he shines in, romance, with Neethane en Ponvasantham.

NEETHANE EN PONVASANTHAM (9/10)

INTRODUCTION

Jiiva and Samatha Ruth Prabhu play the lead roles, supported by Santhaanam, Ravi Prakash and Anupama Kumar.

STORY

NEETHANE en Ponvasantham tells the story of the love that grows between Varun (Jiiva) and Nithya (Prabhu). There are neither villains nor cruel blows from fate, but their romance is a rocky road because of a variety of issues. These include personal ego, family and life commitments and, often, a simple failure to communicate.

Reshma Ghatala, who penned the story, takes simplicity and credibility to new levels, but what is a strength for some is a weakness for others.

PERFORMANCES

JIIVA handles his role brilliantly, especially with his ability to express emotions.

Santhaanam provides good support in a role that transcends the usual, but it is Prabhu whose performance lingers long after the film ends. Her powerful expressions dominate her interpretation of the role. She also chose to dub herself in the film and uses her slightly stammering Tamil to her advantage.

DIRECTION

MENON infuses sensibility into a well-narrated story and the result is an easy-paced film that is anything but boring. One gets into the minds and hearts of the characters and the result is a love story that deserves a place in the classics.

CINEMATOGRAPHY

CINEMATOGRAPHY by MS Prabhu and Om Prakash is, for the most part, brilliant. However, there were two scenes - one where Varun's family is introduced and the second in the long scene just before interval - where a single camera is used in an extra-long shot. It is possible that this is a new technique but the effect is unimpressive.

SCREENPLAY AND SCRIPTING

THE film has been criticised for its slow pace but I appreciated it because the characters are credible. It is also refreshing to have a love story without comedians, villains or any other sideshows. The main characters are villains to each other.

MUSIC

NOT enough can be said about the contribution by Isai Nyaani Illaiyaraja. Apart from the mesmerising songs, his background score lives up to his usual high standards. This is truly a musical feast.

OVERALL

LIKE Kaadhalil Sodhupuvadhu Yeppadi, whatever your experience in love, you will find something to warm your heart and move you to the core in Neethane en Ponvasantham.

Last week's questions and answers

Q: Name the two female lead actresses in Paandiyarajan's 'Aan Paavam'.

A: Seetha and Revathy.

Q: Who played the female lead in Kamalhassan's 100th film?

A: Madhavi.

Q: Who directed the hit film 'Vasantha Maaligai', which had Sivaji Ganesan and Vanishree in the lead roles?

A: KSPrakash Rao.

This week's questions

1. Who scored the music in Jiiva's debut film, 'Aasai Aasaiyaai'?

2. Who played the two male leads in the debut film of Goutham Vasudev Menon?

3. Which film features the hit song 'Madras Nalla Madras'?