San Francisco Bay Area thrash veterans Death Angel, have released a live rendition of the song “Execution / Don’t Save Me”, streaming below. The track comes from their upcoming The Bay Calls For Blood – Live in San Francisco album, which will also be included with the release of their a thrashumentary DVD.

A thrashumentary was directed, shot and edited by Tommy Jones (Kataklysm, SOILWORK, Lamb Of God, Carcass, Testament) of Videohammer Studios. It will be released on July 24th via Nuclear Blast Records. The release will also include a bonus full live album, The Bay Calls For Blood – Live In San Francisco.

The Bay Calls For Blood – Live In San Francisco will also be available on LP exclusively through Nuclear Blast mail-order on July 24th. The release will also be made available in the digital format. Artwork for the LP version was created by Joey James Hernandez.

a thrashumentary DVD Chapter List:

1. Start

2. We Grew Up In The Bay Area Thrash Scene

3. The Original Lineup Of Death Angel

4. Kill As One

5. The Ultra Violence

6. Frolic In The Park

7. Act III

8. The Accident

9. The O

10. Swarm

11. Thrash Of The Titans

12. I Like Everything About Ted

13. The Art Of Dying

14. Killing Season

15. Relentless Revolution

16. I’m Looking For Will Carroll

17. And Then Damien Came In

18. Relentless Retribution

19. Impressions Of Suecof

20. Relentless Touring

21. Thrashers

22. Death Angel Is

23. The Last Song Of The Evening

24. Credits

Extra:

25. Mistress Of Pain Live

The Bay Calls For Blood bonus live album and individual LP tracklisting:

“Left For Dead”

“Fallen”

“Buried Alive”

“The Dream Calls For Blood”

“Execution / Don't Save Me”

“Truce”

“Detonate”

“Bored”

“Caster Of Shame”

“Territorial Instinct / Bloodlust”

Death Angel have updated their European summer tour schedule with several new festival and headliner shows, including four dates in Scandinavia with Flotsam & Jetsam. Check out the complete itinerary for July and August below:

July

10 - Acordes de Metal Festival - Sevilla, Spain

11 - Rock Arena - Alicante, Spain

12 - Sala Bóveda - Barcelona, Spain

14 - Rock Maraton - Pecs, Hungary

15 - Chelsea - Vienna, Austria

16 - Bang Your Head Festival - Balingen, Germany

17 - Schlachthof - Wiesbaden, Germany

18 - Dynamo Metalfest - Eindhoven, Netherlands

20 - Z7 - Pratteln, Switzerland

21 - Circolo Colony - Brescia, Italy

22 - Metaldays - Tolmin, Slovenia

23 - Backstage - Munich, Germany (with Sepultura)

24 - K7 - Berlin, Germany

25 - Headbanger's Open Air - Brande-Hörnerkirchen, Germany

26 - KB 18 - Copenhagen, Denmark (with Flotsam & Jetsam)

27 - Revolver - Oslo, Norway (with Flotsam & Jetsam)

28 - Sticky Fingers - Gothenburg, Sweden (with Flotsam & Jetsam)

29 - Debaser Medis - Stockholm, Sweden (with Flotsam & Jetsam)

31 - Wacken Open Air - Wacken, Germany

August

1 - Schollenpop Festival - Scheveningen, Netherlands

2 - Covent Garden Studios - Éragny, France

4 - Slade Rooms - Wolverhampton, UK (with Mordred)

5 - Marble Factory - Bristol, UK (with Queensrÿche)

6 - Electric Ballroom - London, UK (with Queensryche and Armored Saint)

7 - Concorde 2 - Brighton, England

8 - Alcatraz Metal Festival - Kortrijk, Belgium

9 - Sylak Festival - Saint Maurice de Gourdans, France

11 - Turock, Essen, Germany

12 - Summer Breeze, Germany

Death Angel: "We look forward to our long overdue, blistering reunion with the truest metal fans out there!"