The Predator: Trailer for latest film in blockbuster series

The Predator has found itself at the centre of a controversy it could have avoided.

Star of the newest Predator movie Olivia Munn was alerted to the fact that an extra in a scene with her was a convicted sex offender.

The actor, Steven Wilder Striegel, had been convicted and spent six months in jail for sending explicit emails to a 14-year-old relative.

When Munn found out, she called the studio - and though the studio cut the scene, Munn didn't stop there.

She went public with what she knew, and how the system at play in Hollywood was designed to keep it quiet.

Though director Shane Black defended his casting of his friend, Munn was outspoken about her feelings.

But who is Olivia Munn, besides a crusader for transparency?

Munn started as a television journalist before becoming an actress.

In 2006, she starred as Mily Acuna on the series Beyond the Break.

After this, she co-hosted Attack of the Show! from 2006 to 2010 and was a correspondent on The Daily Show from 2010 to 2011.

She continued getting supporting roles in television series, like Sloan Sabbith on the series The Newsroom from 2012 to 2014.

Her movie credits include Magic Mike (2012), the horror film Deliver Us from Evil (2014), and Mortdecai (2014).

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

Munn's biggest role came in 2016 when she appeared in X-Men: Apocalypse as Psylocke.

In 2017, she provided the voice of Koko in The Lego Ninjago Movie.

Her movie credits are not the only thing Munn is known for.

She worked multiple times with PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) on issues surrounding the use of fur in fashion.

Munn is set to reprise her role from X-Men: Apocalypse as Psylocke and will reprise the role in 2019's X-Men: Dark Phoenix.

For The Predator she plays Casey Bracket, a disgruntled science teacher and biologist.

She joins Quinn, played by Boyd Hollbrook, and his crew's mission to take down the Predator.

During an interview on the Ellen Degeneres show, Munn discussed her decision to go public with her knowledge.

After she found out she told the studio, who cut the scene from the final film.

But that wasn't where it ended for Munn - she went on to contact her co-stars and to go public with what she knew.

She said: “When I did call my co-stars, I got chastised the next day by people at the studio for telling them.

"[The studio said] ‘It got deleted — what’s the big deal?’ … When I did speak out, I had no idea of the details of that case and what happened to that girl.

"The reality is that the people who collude to keep people like this in positions of power, that’s the real problem.”

The Predator is in cinemas September 13, 2018.