The Predator franchise continued last year with, well, The Predator, a 2018 film starring Boyd Holbrook, Trevante Rhodes, Jacob Tremblay, Keegan-Michael Key and Olivia Munn. The film, directed by Shane Black (aka the guy who wrote and directed Iron Man 3) was the fourth film in the Predator franchise. The plot, basically, is that some kid messes up causing the Predator to return to earth. A team of ex-soldiers and one scientist (Holbrook, Rhodes, Key, Jane and Aguilera) are the only ones who can stop him.

Yadda, yadda, yadda—the point is, Predator is here to kick ass, as he always is. If you’re looking for a fourth movie featuring your favorite helmet-wearing aliens, you’re going to get what you asked for. If you missed the film when it came to theaters last September, the good news is it will be available on HBO Go and HBO Now, and airing on HBO on Saturday night.

Many, of course, did not love The Predator. Reviews were mixed to bad, and its Rotten Tomatoes score is 32 percent. Variety‘s Dennis Harvey called it “an exhaustingly energetic mess.” It did just OK in the box office grossing $160.5 million worldwide, compared to a production budget of $88 million. It did not help that the film was plagued by controversy: Steve Wilder had a minor role in the film, despite being a registered sex offender since 2010. Black defended the casting choice but later issued an apology. When Munn learned of Wilder’s past, she insisted his scene be cut.

So how does The Predator stack up to the other Predator films? Let’s find out.

Predator

Year: 1987

RT score: 80 percent

Box office: $98 million

Budget: $15 million

Obviously, nothing will beat the original Predator film starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, which was not only critically acclaimed but also a smash box office success on a relatively small budget. The 80s were simpler times!

Predator 2

Year: 1990

RT score: 27 percent

Box office: $57 million

Budget: Unknown

Does this movie even really exist? I’m kidding, it does. Danny Glover was in it! But even adjusted for inflation, I think The Predator comes out on top in box office and acclaim when it comes to Predator 2.

Alien Vs. Predator

Year: 2004

RT score: 20 percent

Box office: $172.5 million

Budget: $60 million

The Predator technically topped this film when in RT score, but certainly not in box office, or in legacy. I mean, c’mon, how can you not love Sanaa Lathan?

Aliens Vs. Predator: Requiem

Year: 2007

RT score: 11 percent

Box office: $128.8 million

Budget: unknown

At least The Predator had a better RT score than 11 percent! Woof!

Predators

Year: 2010

RT score: 65 percent

Box office: $127 million

Budget: $40 million

If you take the budget into account, The Predator didn’t hold a candle to the 2010’s Predators in box office or critical reception. Unless Adrien Brody is feeling merciful, the future of Predator films does not look bright!