Anna Maria Francesca Enriquez Perez de Taglé (born on December 23, 1990 in San Francisco, California) is an American teen actress, model, and singer. She is known for her role as Ashley Dewitt on Hannah Montana and Ella on Camp Rock. She was also known as Miracle on Cake T.V, which airs on Saturday mornings.

Personal life

Anna Maria Francesca Enriquez Perez de Taglé was born in San Francisco to Filipino parents of Chinese and Spanish descent. She was raised in San Jose. Her cousin is actress Sarita Perez de Taglé. She is Catholic. She attended Piedmont Hills High School. After she graduated from St. Justin she moved to southern California with her family when she accepted the role of Ashley Dewitt in the Disney Channel show Hannah Montana and played Ella in the new movie Camp Rock with star Joe Jonas. She is the granddaughter of Filipino singer Sylvia La Torre and fourth cousin of Enrique Iglesias

Career

Perez de Taglé competed on Star Search 2 in 2003, singing the song "Somewhere" from the movie West Side Story. Perez de Taglé also had a non-speaking role in the movie Bee Season. She has starred in local productions of Cinderella, Bugsy Malone, and The King and I. Perez de Taglé is best known for playing Ashley Dewitt in the Disney Channel show Hannah Montana.

Perez de Taglé has also done a lot of modeling work. She has been featured in many catalogs, including Macy's and Mervyn's. She was also on the cover of the magazine Filipinas, which featured a two-page article about her.

Perez de Taglé also stars as Miracle Ross in the CBS Saturday morning show Cake, as well as providing the voice of the Safety Patrol Kid in Higglytown Heroes.

In 2008, Perez de Taglé starred in the Disney Channel Original Movie Camp Rock as Ella.

Perez de Taglé is recording a CD called Listen.... It's A Miracle.

She has been announced as a member of the cast of MGM's Fame, playing Joy Moy.

Filmography

Camp Rock 2

Ella

pre-production

Hannah Montana: The Movie

Ashley Dewitt

Currently In production

A Forgotten Innocence

Allysa

pre-production

2008

Bleachers

Amber

pre-production

Camp Rock

Ella

Disney Channel Original Movie

2007

Just Jordan

Veronica

1 episode (Slippery When Wet)

2006

Higglytown Heroes

Safety Patrol Kid

1 episode (Spell It Safe)

Hannah Montana

Ashley Dewitt

2006-present (recurring role)

Cake

Miracle Ross

2006-present

2005

Bee Season

Bee Season #1

-Unknown- An earthquake occurred