Movies

Music & Sound Effects

Academy Award for Best Original Score: Top Winners Ranked

The Academy Award for Best Original Score is one of the most prestigious honors a composer can be given. Over the years, some of the world’s most acclaimed composers, like John Williams and Max Steiner, have won the award. We’re going to list every Academy Award for Best Original Score winner, then rank some of the best. By the end, you’ll know the Best Original Score category better than ever before.

Original score Oscar movies

All Best Original Score Oscar Winners

Before we pick our favorite Best Original Score Oscar winners, let’s recap every single recipient of the award to date:

best original score academy award

All best original score Oscar Winners

1934, Victor Schertzinger and Gus Kahn, One Night of Love

1935, Max Steiner, The Informer

1936, Erich Wolfgang Korngold, Anthony Adverse

1937, No composer credit, One Hundred Men and a Girl

1938, Erich Wolfgang Korngold, The Adventures of Robin Hood

1938, Alfred Newman, Alexander’s Ragtime Band

1939, Herbert Stothart, The Wizard of Oz

1940, Richard Hageman, W. Franke Harling, John Leipold and Leo Shuken, Stagecoach

1940, Leigh Harline, Paul Smith and Ned Washington, Pinocchio

1940, Alfred Newman, Tin Pan Alley

1941, Bernard Hermann, The Devil and Daniel Webster

1941, Frank Churchill and Oliver Wallace, Dumbo

1942, Max Steiner, Now, Voyager

1942, Ray Heindorf and Heinz Roemheld, Yankee Doodle Dandy

1943, Alfred Newman, The Song of Bernadette

1943, Ray Heindorf, This Is the Army

1944, Max Steiner, Since You Went Away

1944, Morris Stoloff and Carmen Dragon, Cover Girl

1945, Miklos Rozsa, Spellbound

1945, Georgie Stoll, Anchors Aweigh

1946, Hugo Friedhofer, The Best Years of Our Lives

1946, Morris Stoloff, The Jolson Story

1947, Miklos Rozsa, A Double Life

1947, Alfred Newman, Mother Wore Tights

1948, Brian Easdale, The Red Shoes

1948, Johnny Green and Roger Edens, Easter Parade

1949, Aaron Copland, The Heiress

1949, Roger Edens and Lennie Hayton, On the Town

1950, Franz Waxman, Sunset Boulevard

1950, Adolph Deutsch and Roger Edens, Annie Get Your Gun

1951, Franz Waxman, A Place in the Sun

1951, Johnny Green and Saul Chaplin, An American in Paris

1952, Dimitri Tiomkin, High Noon

1952, Alfred Newman, With a Song in My Heart

1953, Bronislaw Kaper, Lili

1953, Alfred Newman, Call Me Madam

1954, Dimitri Tiomkin, The High and the Mighty

1954, Adolph Deutsch and Saul Chaplin, Seven Brides for Seven Brothers

1955, Alfred Newman, Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing

1955, Robert Russell Bennett, Jay Blackton and Adolph Deutsch, Oklahoma!

1956, Victor Young, Around the World in 80 Days

1956, Alfred Newman and Ken Darby, The King and I

1957, Malcolm Arnold, The Bridge on the River Kwai

1958, Dimitri Tiomkin, The Old Man and the Sea

1958, Andre Previn, Gigi

1959, Miklos Rozsa, Ben-Hur

1959, Andre Previn and Ken Darby, Porgy and Bess

1960, Ernest Gold, Exodus

1960, Morris Stoloff and Harry Sukman, Song Without End

1961, Henry Mancini, Breakfast at Tiffany’s

1961, Saul Chaplin, Johnny Green, Irwin Kostal and Sid Ramin, West Side Story

1962, Maurice Jarre, Lawrence of Arabia

1962, Ray Heindorf, The Music Man

1963, John Addison, Tom Jones

1963, Andre Previn, Irma la Douce

1964, Sherman Brothers, Mary Poppins

1964, Andre Previn, My Fair Lady

1965, Maurice Jarre, Doctor Zhivago

1965, Irwin Kostal, The Sound of Music

1966, John Barry, Born Free

1966, Ken Thorne, A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum

1967, Elmer Bernstein, Thoroughly Modern Millie

1967, Alfred Newman and Ken Darby, Camelot

1968, John Barry, The Lion in Winter

1968, Johnny Green, Oliver!

1969, Burt Bacharach, Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid

1969, Lennie Hayton and Lionel Newman, Hello, Dolly!

1970, Francis Lai, Love Story

1970, The Beatles, Let it Be

1971, Michel Legrand, Summer of ‘42

1971, John Williams, Fiddler on the Roof

1972, Charlie Chaplin, Raymond Rasch and Larry Russell, Limelight

1972, Ralph Burns, Cabaret

1973, Marvin Hamlisch, The Way We Were

1973, Marvin Hamlisch, The Sting

1974, Nino Rota and Carmine Coppola, The Godfather Part II

1974, Nelson Riddle, The Great Gatsby

1975, John Williams, Jaws

1975, Leonard Rosenman, Barry Lyndon

1976, Jerry Goldsmith, The Omen

1976, Leonard Rosenman, Bound for Glory

1977, John Williams, Star Wars

1977, Jonathan Tunick, A Little Night Music

1978, Giorgio Moroder, Midnight Express

1978, Joe Renzetti, The Buddy Holly Story

1979 Georges Delerue, A Little Romance

1979, Ralph Burns, All That Jazz

1980, Michael Gore, Fame

1981, Vangelis, Chariots of Fire

1982, John Williams, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial

1982, Henry Mancini and Leslie Bricusse, Victor/Victoria

1983, Bill Conti, The Right Stuff

1983, Michel Legrand & Alan and Marilyn Bergman, Yentl

1984, Maurice Jarre, A Passage to India

1984, Prince, Purple Rain

1985, John Barry, Out of Africa

1986, Herbie Hancock, Round Midnight

1987, David Byrne, Ryuichi Sakamoto and Cong Su, The Last Emperor

1988, Dave Grusin, The Milagro Beanfield War

1989, Alan Menken, The Little Mermaid

1990, John Barry, Dances With Wolves

1991, Alan Menken, Beauty and the Beast

1992, Alan Menken, Aladdin

1993, John Williams, Schindler’s List

1994, Hans Zimmer, The Lion King

1995, Luis Bacalov, The Postman

1995, Alan Menken and Stephen Schwartz, Pocahontas

1996, Gabriel Yared, The English Patient

1996, Rachel Portman, Emma

1997, James Horner, Titanic

1997, Anne Dudley, The Full Monty

1998, Nicola Piovani, Life is Beautiful

1998, Stephen Warbeck, Shakespeare in Love

1999, John Corigliano, The Red Violin

2000, Tan Dun, Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon

2001, Howard Shore, The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring

2002, Elliot Goldenthal, Frida

2003, Howard Shore, The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King

2004, Jan A. P. Kaczmarek, Finding Neverland

2005, Gustavo Santaolalla, Brokeback Mountain

2006, Gustavo Santaolalla, Babel

2007, Dario Marianelli, Atonement

2008, A. R. Rahman, Slumdog Millionaire

2009, Michael Giacchino, Up

2011, Ludovic Bource, The Artist

2012, Mychael Danna, Life of Pi

2013, Steven Price, Gravity

2014, Alexandre Desplat, The Grand Budapest Hotel

2015, Ennio Morricone, The Hateful Eight

2016, Justin Hurwitz, La La Land

2017, Alexandre Desplat, The Shape of Water

2018, Ludwig Göransson, Black Panther

2019, Hildur Guðnadóttir, Joker

2020, Jon Batiste, Trent Reznor, and Atticus Ross, Soul

2021, Hanz Zimmer, Dune

2022, Volker Bertelmann, All Quiet on the Western Front

Now that we’ve recapped all of the Best Original Score Oscar winners, let’s rank our favorite winners and highlight their exceptional work.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

20. Chariots of Fire

Academy Award for Best Score Winners • Chariots of Fire Theme

Only one word comes to mind when I think of the Chariots of Fire soundtrack and that word is iconic. Over the years, Vangelis’ music from Chariots of Fire has become a mainstay at the Olympic games.

Although the soundtrack as a whole hasn’t aged as gracefully as some of its contemporaries, it still remains a fixture during moments of sports excellence and times of enduring achievement.

Oscar Original Score Winners

19. Lawrence of Arabia

Best Score Oscar Winners • Lawrence of Arabia Wins a Music Oscar

Lawrence of Arabia is a big, sweeping movie, and Maurice Jarre’s score plays an integral role in conveying its epic scope. Jarre won three Academy Awards for Best Original Score; for Lawrence of Arabia, Doctor Zhivago, and Passage to India — but his work on Lawrence of Arabia remains his most iconic work.

Academy Award Winning Scores • Lawrence of Arabia Theme, Performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra

After listening to Jarre’s score, you’ll never think about traversing the desert sands the same way again.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

18. The Devil and Daniel Webster

Best Score Oscar Winners • The Devil and Daniel Webster, Performed by the London Symphonic

You’d be hard pressed to find many modern film composers who don’t cite Bernard Hermann among their greatest influencers. Hermann composed the scores to many of the greatest movies of all-time, like Citizen Kane, Vertigo and Taxi Driver.

But although Hermann received a lot of critical acclaim in his lifetime, he only won the Academy Award for Best Original Score once. He did receive four other nominations in the category: for Citizen Kane, Obsession, Anna and the King of Siam, and Taxi Driver.

Best Original Score Oscar Winners

17. The Hateful Eight

Academy Award for Best Score Winners • Ennio Morricone Wins Best Original Score

Ennio Morricone’s Oscar win for Best Original Score was more than 70 years in the making. Someway, somehow, Morricone didn’t win for The Good the Bad and the Ugly, Cinema Paradiso, or The Untouchables — but he finally did for The Hateful Eight.

Academy Award Winning Scores • The Hateful Eight Soundtrack

We often wonder why certain individuals, like Leonardo DiCaprio and Brad Pitt, were snubbed at the Oscars, but I’d argue that nobody has been snubbed more than Morricone. It was great to see him win the Academy Award for Best Original Score in 2016, four years prior to his death in 2020.

Oscar Original Score Winners

16. The Lion King

Academy Award for Best Original Music Score • Hans Zimmer Wins Best Original Score

Did you know that Hans Zimmer composed the score for The Lion King? Like the Hans Zimmer? Is it just me or is that completely insane?

Best Score Oscar Winners • The Lion King Original Score

The Lion King soundtrack isn’t just awesome because of Zimmer’s compositions — Elton John and Jeremy Irons offer great performances as well.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

15. The Wizard of Oz

Academy Award Winning Scores • The Wizard of Oz Soundtrack Suite

The Wizard of Oz was responsible for a lot of innovation in the industry of movie-making — visually, narratively, and acoustically. Perhaps the most obvious groundbreaking facet of the film was its eye-catching use of Technicolor, but there’s a lot more to The Wizard of Oz than just that.

Herbert Stothart’s score for The Wizard of Oz complimented Harold Arlen and E.Y. Harburg’s songs, such as “Over the Rainbow,” which also took home an Academy Award.

Oscar Original Score Winners

14. The Best Years of Our Lives

Academy Award for Best Score Winners • The Best Years of Our Lives Soundtrack

Hugo Friedhofer’s score for The Best Years of Our Lives really added a needed layer of emotional resonance to the picture. That’s not to say that The Best Years of Our Lives was bad by any means. Quite the contrary, many critics regard it as one of legendary director William Wyler’s best.

The Best Years of Our Lives is a story about personal intimacy in the face of sweeping change. Friedhofer’s score communicates this mood to a tee.

Best Original Score Oscar Winners

13. The Adventures of Robin Hood

Best Score Oscar Winners • The Adventures of Robin Hood, Performed by the John Wilson Orchestra

Erich Wolfgang Korngold is widely regarded by contemporary critics as one of the greatest film composers of all-time. Korngold wasn’t quite as prolific as the other titans of his era, like Alfred Newman and Max Steiner, but one could argue he’s been just as influential.

The Adventures of Robin Hood soundtrack created an adventurous and whimsical mood that’s come to be synonymous with its title character.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

12. Jaws

Academy Award Winning Scores • John Williams Wins Best Original Score for Jaws

John Williams is going to appear more than once on this list, simply because his body of work is so good. Williams won his second Oscar for Best Original Score for Jaws four years after he won for Fiddler on the Roof.

Academy Award for Best Score Winners • Jaws Theme Song

If you want to learn more about leitmotifs, look no further than the iconic, low-hum Jaws theme song. Everytime we hear that theme, we know there’s a shark lurking in the water.

Oscar Original Score Winners

11. Titanic

Best Score Winners • James Horner Wins the Academy Award for Best Original Score

People love the Titanic soundtrack. And when I say love, I mean really, really love the Titanic soundtrack. The appropriately titled “Titanic: Music from the Motion Picture” soundtrack sold over 30 million units worldwide!

Best Score Oscar Winners • Titanic ‘Hymn to the Sea’

The Titanic soundtrack wasn’t just a hit with the public either — critics adored it as well. Horner also won the Oscar for Best Original Song for the film's most enduring theme “My Heart Will Go On.”

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

10. Breakfast at Tiffany’s

Best Score Winners • Henry Mancini Wins Best Song

Henry Mancini won the Academy Award for Best Original Score, as well as the Academy Award for Best Song for his work on Breakfast at Tiffany’s. Here's a sample — take a listen to the jazzy, romantic, and melancholy suite.

Best Original Score Oscar Winners • Breakfast at Tiffany’s Soundtrack Suite

Audrey Hepburn performed the winning song “Moon River,” which was written by Johnny Mercer and composed by Henry Mancini. Mercer and Mancini collaborated on several projects, including their other win for Days of Wine and Roses.

Oscar Original Score Winners

9. Let it Be

Best Original Score Oscar Winners • The Beatles Win the Academy Award for Best Original Score

How could we not put The Beatles on the list? The world’s four most loved lads from Liverpool found a way to receive acclaim in just about everything they did; including but not limited to music and cinema.

Best Score Winners • The Making of Let it Be

Let it Be brings us behind the scenes of the last days of The Beatles as they work around the clock to finish what would be their last official album.

Best Original Score Oscar Winners

8. How the West Was Won

Best Score Oscar Winners • How the West Was Won Soundtrack

Alfred Newman was like the Mozart of film composers. At the age of 13, he travelled the world as part of a vaudeville act. By 30, he had conquered Broadway and moved to Hollywood.

We often say that an artist is prolific if they put out a “full-length” work each year — Alfred Newman gave new meaning to the word prolific. In less than 40 years in Hollywood, Newman composed more than 200 original scores! He was nominated for 45 Academy Awards and won nine.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

7. Up

Best Score Winners • Up Soundtrack

Michael Giacchino has quite the resumé, having created iconic scores for projects like Lost, Ratatouille, The Incredibles, Mission: Impossible - Rogue Nation, Star Trek, Rogue One… We could go on. Giacchino won the top award in his field, however, for Up, and deservedly so.

Think of the oft-cited opening montage of the Pixar film. It’s a tear-jerker for many reasons, but for our money, the biggest reason is because of “Married Life,” the utterly heartbreaking piece by Giacchino.

Giacchino’s score nails the wistful, nostalgic, innocent, and melancholy emotions present throughout Up. It’s a masterful work, and it’s not even his best– that award goes to The Incredibles.

Oscar Best Film Scores

6. La La Land

Oscar Best Film Scores • La La Land Opening Number

The 2010’s were a great decade for the Best Original Score category at the Oscars — and perhaps no score is more emblematic of this period’s boundless creativity than Justin Hurwitz’ La La Land.

Director Damien Chazelle deserves a lot of credit for the excellent La La Land soundtrack as well. Hurwitz and Chazelle have worked together since they made Guy and Madeline on a Park Bench in 2009. It’s safe to say that the duo bring out the best creative aspects of each other.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

5. The Godfather Part II

Best Original Score Oscar Winners • Nino Rota and Carmine Coppola Win Best Original Score for The Godfather Part II

Nino Rota is one of the most underappreciated film composers of all-time. Although he produced a lot of acclaimed scores, especially for his friend and collaborator Federico Fellini, he was only nominated for two Academy Awards. Actually, he was only nominated for one — his nomination for The Godfather was rescinded because it included previously produced material.

Academy Award for Best Score • The Godfather Part II Soundtrack Suite

Nonetheless, Rota finally received the recognition he deserved for composing the score to The Godfather Part II — which was conducted by Francis Ford Coppola’s father Carmine Coppola.

Best Original Score Oscar Winners

4. The Shape of Water

Best Score Oscar Winners • You’ll Never Know ft. Renee Fleming

Full disclosure: I don’t like The Shape of Water. The whole monster love allegory just doesn’t sit right with me. Is the fish-man really sentient? Seems like a stretch to me. That said, I love The Shape of Water soundtrack from Alexandre Desplat — I mean, how could you not?

Desplat is one of the greatest composers in the world. Over his career, Desplat has been nominated for nine Oscars and won two; one for The Shape of Water, and one for The Grand Budapest Hotel.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

3. Star Wars

Best Original Score Oscar Winners • John Williams Wins Best Original Score for Star Wars

John Williams had to beat out some tough competition in 1978 to win the Academy Award for Best Original Score, including… himself? Ah, yes Williams was so acclaimed in ‘78 that he was nominated twice, for Star Wars and Close Encounters of the Third Kind.

Academy Award for Best Score • Star Wars Theme Song

The importance and influence of Williams’ score for Star Wars can’t be quantified. Had it been released a year earlier, it probably would’ve been included in the Voyager Golden Record, floating into galaxies far, far away.

Academy Award for Best Original Score Winners

1. Schindler’s List

Oscar Best Film Scores • John Williams Wins Best Original Score for Schindler’s List

If you ever need a good cry, just turn on John Williams soundtrack to Schindler’s List and let the waterworks flow. There’s simply no denying that Williams' score for the film is akin to the great works of Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven.

Best Original Score Oscar Winners • Schindler’s List Theme Song

No adjective can do the score justice — but I will say that it’s intoxicating, arresting, haunting, and defyingly resolute.

UP NEXT

Academy Award for Best Original Song

The Academy Award for Best Original Score is a great honor — but did you know there’s a separate Academy Award for Best Original Song too? In our next article, we rank every Best Original Song Oscar winner, from “Man or Muppet” to “Lose Yourself.” See where your favorite Oscar winning original song ranks up next.

Up Next: Original Song Winners →

Showcase your vision with elegant shot lists and storyboards.

Create robust and customizable shot lists. Upload images to make storyboards and slideshows.

Learn Mo re ➜

55 Shares

52 Facebook

0 Pinterest

0 Reddit

3 LinkedIn

0 Twitter