Behind every hit ball in our Academy there are stories of great human beings who share and pursue a dream: to be professional tennis players. Born on January 26, 2000 in Togliatti, Russia, Nina Rudiukova has already spent two years working with us to train as a player in a sport that made her fall in love through a small screen.

That magic captivated an astonished girl determined to live and enjoy her passion.

When and how did you start in the white sport?

Starting at the age of six, I had just watched a tennis match on television and asked my parents to put me in tennis school.

Why tennis?

I fell in love with this sport at first sight. I was full of energy and I liked hitting the balls, so I chose tennis.

Do you want to be a professional tennis player? Why?

Of course I want to because I have been playing tennis for 14 years and all this time I have wanted to be a professional.

What is being a professional tennis player for you?

The professional tennis player improves and exceeds every day, whatever happens. Maybe he or she should have a WTA / ATP ranking, maybe I don’t understand the question correctly.

What is your favorite surface and tournament?

Hard court and the Australian Open.

What does tennis and this job (if we can call it our passion) mean to you? How do you live it?

It means a lot. I spend all day playing tennis, practicing, if I don’t practice I think so and, of course, I love this game and the life of tennis.

The biggest dream that doesn’t leave your mind?

A Grand Slam.

How was your stay at the Academy?

Perfect i love this place

The most fun, rewarding and difficult part of this profession

The funniest thing is the friends and the coaches, our jokes and the time we spend off the court. Most rewarding, perhaps health and improving yourself as a player and person. The most difficult thing is work, you have to improve yourself day by day.

How long have you been at the Lozano-Altur Academy? Why come here?

Since July 2019. Because a friend told me about the process and coaches at the academy and I liked it.

How do you describe your game, what is your favorite shot or the one you consider best?

I love the attack, but sometimes it is unreasonable. The short angle is my favorite.

What are your short, medium and medium term goals?

Short: you should get a single ranking. Medium would be to win futures. Long term for a year: I have to be 600 on the WTA.

How do you describe yourself? Both as a person and as a player.

I am a sociable person, but I also like to spend time alone with myself. I love to work and improve. I’m usually the calmest person, but on the court I can be so angry.

What are your hobbies?

Read books and write sometimes.

What do you dream of when you hear the word tennis?

A Grand Slam.

Who is and has been your idol? Why this figure?

I don’t have idols, but I like Svitolina. She is a good tennis player and I like her game.

What do you think of physical work and on the court?

I think it’s perfect but we have to make more ball baskets.

What do you like most about training at Lozano Altur Tennis Academy?