Many children in our Academy work and strive to achieve their dreams and live all that they have had in their thoughts since childhood, to be professional players in this wonderful sport. Thousands of strokes, hours of training, hundreds of repetitions of exercises in gyms, eating well and taking care of themselves are already pre-established habits in these young people, who are also forming as people for a bright future.

Born in Saint Petersburg, Russia, on May 28, 1999, Anastasia Veselova lives her first year in our house, one more member of our family, always smiling, enjoying each practice session, in which she leaves soul and body.

When and how did you start in the white sport?

When I was a child I practiced chess, gymnastics, sports dance and tennis. My father likes tennis a lot and for me it was also very interesting. I was doing much better at tennis than at other things. And a little later my father decided that I would continue only in tennis.

What would it be for you to be a professional tennis player?

First of all I want to be a professional because tennis is what I like the most in my life. For me, being a professional is trying to improve more and more every day. It’s doing your best in every practice. Tennis gives you many opportunities in the future, even if you are not top you can see many places and also meet many people, who perhaps in the future could be your friends.

How is your game, how do you describe it?

My game is to try to be consistent and make the opponent run, if I feel like I’m not failing, it gives me confidence. And I’m using my strong first serve to take the lead. I also like to change the rhythm with the slice. My favorite hit is the backhand on the line.

Favorite surface and tournament

I prefer to play more on clay, because I spend more time practicing on this surface. And my favorite tournament is Roland Garros

What does tennis mean to you? How do you live it?

Tennis is my passion. I really enjoy playing tennis, and I even really like the sound of the ball bouncing. I have to control many things like food, sleep, rest time in my life to be one hundred percent on the court.

What do you dream of when you hear the word tennis? What are your short, medium and medium term goals?

It is difficult to talk about the biggest dream. Because when you talk about this you are thinking ahead and it usually stops you. Of course I want to be the best and win tournaments, but the most important thing for me is to be one hundred percent on the court, to be consistent, to try to be competitive in every game, it doesn’t matter if it’s a training session or a tournament. The results are important, but not the main objective.

Who are you currently working with?

I work a few days with a coach, other days with another coach and I try to listen and do what each one of them tells me because they all think in one direction, but they have different things anyway.

The most fun, rewarding and difficult part of this profession.

For me, the most fun part of this profession is meeting my friends or maybe doing something new in training or tournaments. The rewarding part is realizing when you did a good job on the court. And the hardest part is when you leave the house and sometimes you are alone.

Why come to Lozano-Altur? What do you like the most about training at our Academy?

I came here because Spain is one of the best places to work. I like this place and this city, Valencia. Here many players can share the court with you. Also comparing with Russia in Spain much better climate and you can play outdoors all year round.

What are your hobbies?

I especially like to study the psychology part. I also like cooking and of course spending time on social media.

Who is and has been your idol? Why this figure?

My favorite tennis player was Pete Sampras, it was nice to see how he was serving and volleying. And now I like Novak Djokovic, Stan Wawrinka and women Elina Svitolina and Simona Halep. I like his style of play and his character.

Hit after hit, dreams are built at Lozano-Altur Tennis Academy.