I AM WRITING AS AN UGLY ONE FOR THE UGLY ONES: THE OLD hags, the dykes, the frigid, the unfucked, the unfuck- ables, the neurotics, the psychos, for all those girls who don't get a look in the universal market of the consumable chick. I'm making no excuses for myself. I'm not complaining. I would never swap places, because it seems to me that being Virginie Despentes is a more interesting business than anything else going on out there. I think it's wonderful that there are also women who love to seduce, who know how to seduce, others who know how to get a husband, women whose perfume is sex and others who smell of home-baked cakes for the children's…

the hottest thing since Cher went solo

Even though I watched Desperate Teenage Lovedolls just a few weeks ago, when my physical copy was waiting for me when I got home from work, I just had to watch it again.

You see, I first discovered Lovedolls somewhere between 1989 and 1992. I know the date range because that's when I was in college, commuting daily. There was a Blockbuster Video on my route. I stopped in frequently, eventually working my way through their entire "Drive-In Movie" section. Lovedolls was a movie I found there and I immediately added it to my massive bootlegged movie collection that I was compiling through an "input VCR-TV-recording VCR" loop that I had set up…

Planets will collide when these bitches hit the stage

In this chronicle of the rise and fall of the Lovedolls, a punky rock band comprised of three teenage women, Kitty Carry-All, Bunny Tremolo, and Patch Kelly must overcome a plethora of obstacles on their way to the top: sexual assault from their blue-legged manager, a knife fight on the beach with their rivals the She Devils, etc. The Lovedolls themselves will stop at nothing to make their rock and roll dreams come true: pickpocketing, shoplifting, theft, murder, matricide, slipping someone a massive drug overdose.

Desperate Teenage Lovedolls is lo-fi and grungy, punk-rock and funny. The leads, Jennifer Schwartz as Kitty and Hilary Rubens as Bunny, are fun and charismatic, even…

Working with an ex-punk rocker featured here in the Leafs jersey and tiny shorts circa 1984 means that once in a while I'm privy to some pretty great stories of yonder year. Yesterday after bonding over our mutual love of Redd Kross he was shocked to find out I'd not only never seen Desperate Teenage Lovedolls but not even heard of it (the horror!).

I think people nowadays take it for granted how easy it is to watch any movie ever released with a few clicks of a mouse, Desperate Teenage Lovedolls for one is available on YouTube in it's entirety. Apparently back in the day, as I've now learned, if you wanted a copy of this you had to…