MySQL Workbench is a complete visual database design tool that integrates SQL development, administration, database design, visual data modeling, change management, creation and maintenance into a single, seamless environment for the MySQL database system.

MySQL Workbench enables a database administrator, developer, or data architect to visually design, generate, and manage all types of databases including Web, OLTP, and data warehouse databases.

Whilst MySQL Workbench is the successor application of the DBDesigner4 project, it is a complete rewrite.

The software is available in two editions, the Community Open Source edition, and the commercial standard edition. The feature set below relates to the open source edition.

Features include:

General:

Database Connection & Instance Management.

Unlimited Undo/Redo.

Advanced Find.

Wizard driven action items.

Fully scriptable with Python and Lua.

Export Model Diagrams (PNG, SVG, PDF, PS).

Print Model Diagrams.

Support for user plugins.

SQL Editor:

Schema Object browsing.

SQL Syntax Highlighter and Statement Parser.

Multiple-, editable Result Sets.

SQL Snippets Collections.

SSH Connection Tunneling.

Unicode Support.

Data Modeling:

ER Diagramming.

Drag’n’Drop visual modeling.

Reverse Engineering from SQL Scripts and Live Database.

Forward Engineering to SQL Scripts and Live Database.

Schema Synchronization:

Schema Diff.

Schema Synchronization to SQL Scripts.

Schema Synchronization to Live Database.

Printing of Models.

Import from fabFORCE.net DBDesigner4.

Database Administration:

Start & Stop of Database Instances.

Instance Configuration.

Database Account Management.

Instance Variables Browsing.

Log File Browsing.

Data Dump Export/Import.

Website: www.mysql.com/products/workbench

Support:

Developer: MySQL Workbench Developer Tools Team (Oracle Corporation)

License: GNU GPL or proprietary

MySQL Workbench is written in C++, C#, and Objective-C. Learn C++ with our recommended free books and free tutorials. Learn C# with our recommended free books and free tutorials.

Return to MySQL Tools