Several years ago I was a regular user of the MySQL open source database system. It was relatively simple (at least compared to the beast systems from Microsoft and Oracle) and was well suited for lightweight database needs. Although MySQL … Continue reading →

One of my work machines running Windows 10 is relatively new (I imaged it a few weeks ago). I’m slowly putting software onto the machine. Today I installed the MySQL database. The bottom line: the installation program is relatively quick … Continue reading →

The Wild Wild West TV show ran four seasons from 1965 to 1969 (104 episodes). It was basically James Bond set in the 1870s (just after the Civil War) where Secret Service agents Jim West (played by Robert Conrad, all … Continue reading →

I use several different programming languages. Most of my programming is done in C# but I use a lot of Java too. Like many things, it’s important to practice a programming language or you can get stale. It had been … Continue reading →

I was a speaker at the Big Data Innovation Summit, held January 25 – 26, 2017, in Las Vegas, Nevada. The event was part of three co-located conferences: Big Data, Business Analytics, Supply Chain. I estimate there were a total … Continue reading →

I’ve always liked PHP for creating dynamic Web pages. I find PHP to be much simpler than ASP.NET for some kinds of Web sites. However, installing PHP on a Windows machine has always been kind of a pain in the … Continue reading →

Zoltar is my NFL prediction computer program. Here is Zoltar’s prediction for week 21 (Super Bowl LI) of the 2016 NFL season: Zoltar: patriots by 3 dog = falcons Vegas: patriots by 3 Zoltar predicts the New England Patriots will … Continue reading →

I wrote an article titled “R Language OOP using S3” in the January 2017 issue of Visual Studio Magazine. See https://visualstudiomagazine.com/articles/2017/01/01/r-language-oop-using-s3.aspx. The R language has been around for decades and is used mostly for interactive data analysis. For example, you … Continue reading →

Vowpal Wabbit (VW) is a command line, open source, machine learning tool. I ran into the creator of VW, John Langford, at work the other day which inspired me to take a look at VW because I hadn’t used VW … Continue reading →

I was interested by the 2013 research paper “Intriguing Properties of Neural Networks” by C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, et al. One of the “intriguing properties” is that it is possible to trick image recognition. See https://cs.nyu.edu/~zaremba/docs/understanding.pdf. There are several examples … Continue reading →