Of course! OneRepublic is a self-proclaimed “genreless” and “internationally-appealing”* band from Colorado Springs. They are inspired by groups such as U2 and the Beatles. You can trace their roots back to 1995, when members Ryan and Zach met playing soccer in high school. They reconnected after college and formed a band with Drew and some other original members, originally called Republic. They had a record deal with Columbia, but were dropped just months before their album release.

The band recovered from this in two ways, the first being Ryan’s connections with the artists he worked with, and the other being their MySpace profile. Producer Timbaland signed them in late 2005 and the band began work on their first album, Dreaming Out Loud. By this time, the line up included lead guitarist Zach, singer Ryan, bassist Brent, drummer Eddie, and rhythm guitarist Drew. Their hit single “Apologize” launched them into the big leagues, and with each album release they have become more popular.

In support of their second album, Waking Up, they toured in Europe on the Good Life Tour, and more recently the extensive Native World Tour for their third LP, Native.

OneRepublic’s greatest accomplishments would be Ryan’s mega-producing for popular artists such as Taylor Swift and Adele, the band’s hits, including, “Counting Stars” and “Apologize,“ and their contributions towards charities such as the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. They were the first band to ever hit one billion views for a Vevo music video (“Counting Stars” in October 2015) and have performed at events such as the Apple September Event in 2015 and the Billboard Music Awards in 2014.

Since the release of the new album, OneRepublic has been busy with lots of booked shows and TV segments. If they aren’t in the studio or traveling to a show, OneRepublic is probably checking out a local coffee shop or art fair. The best way to check up on them is to follow the band’s Twitter or Instagram.

As of July of 2017, they have embarked on their Honda Civic Tour in support of Oh My My, playing fifty shows across the United States and Canada.