OneRepublic Booking Profile

Featuring the anthemic songwriting of Ryan Tedder, OneRepublic rose to prominence in 2007 when “Apologize” began its reign as the most popular digital download in American history. OneRepublic then signed with Sony BMG’s Columbia label in 2003; three years later, they were dropped from Columbia’s roster but popularity continued to soar on MySpace. Tedder helped raise the group’s profile by penning songs for artists like Blake Lewis and Hilary Duff. Hip-hop producer Timbaland (with whom Tedder had already worked for several years) took notice of the group’s audience and signed OneRepublic to his own Mosley Music Group, a joint venture with Interscope Records. Timbaland also remixed one of the group’s most promising tracks, “Apologize,” and included it on his own album, 2007’s Timbaland Presents Shock Value. The song quickly became a platinum-selling single in many countries, breaking airplay records in the U.K. and selling an unprecedented 4.3 million digital downloads in America alone. Later that year, OneRepublic stepped out on their own with Dreaming Out Loud, a debut album filled with piano-fueled songwriting and pop/rock melodies. The album quickly went gold, and “Apologize” continued to top the singles charts in multiple countries. Another Tedder-penned track, Leona Lewis’ “Bleeding Love,” experienced similar success at the same time, thus making Tedder one of the year’s most celebrated songwriters. OneRepublic began writing songs for a second album in 2008, and the group later decamped to Colorado Springs to avoid outside distractions. Although initially planned for a summer release, Waking Up wasn’t completed until September 2009. “All the Right Moves,” the album’s lead single, was released to radio that same month, while the entire album followed in November. In 2013, OneRepublic returned with its third studio album, Native, featuring the singles, “Feel Again” and “If I Lose Myself.” Please contact SME today to book OneRepublic!

SME Entertainment Group (a Live Nation Company) is your leading source for booking entertainment and booking keynote speakers

SME Entertainment Group (“SME”) is an event producer working with corporations and leading associations around the world to provide musical acts, comedians, and all types of keynote speakers for talent booking services for corporate events and private events. With SME book OneRepublic for live and virtual events and special engagements. SME Entertainment Group specializes in booking keynote speakers and booking entertainment for special engagements and corporate events, private events, virtual events, charity events, advertising agencies, and production companies. SME is a leading producer that works in a non-exclusive manner coordinating with talent agencies for corporate events and private events. The profiles on the site represent talent SME can book for your next event. SME works on behalf of event coordinators and event planners for booking talent and booking keynote speakers. Please contact an SME sales representative to book talent for your next event.