OneRepublic is a band that many confuse for One Direction, but it should not be treated as the laughingstock of pop music. Starting in 2002, the Colorado Springs natives all came together with the help of bandmates Ryan Tedder and Zach Filkins, eventually producing music that would hit its peak during the span of the 2010s.

While many know the band’s biggest hits like “Apologize” and “Counting Stars” because of its renowned success, they also are simply just great performers. Many don’t realize that OneRepublic is multi-faceted, incorporating different kinds of musicians into its music throughout the last 20 years.

For example, Brent Kutzle serves as the band’s cellist. He has aided the band immensely, especially on its 2014 album “Native.” This album serves as a transition period for OneRepublic, moving away from creating radio hits. Being its most experimental album to date, it proved the band’s dedication to authenticity and creativity.

Yet, where did Kutzle’s contribution come into play during this era? His cello playing. Arguably one of OneRepublic’s best songs, “Au Revoir” was a track that for once didn’t fit the mold of stereotypical pop music, instead combining Tedder’s vocals with Kutzle’s instrumentation to make a postmodernist work.

From then on, this theme continued in OneRepublic’s discography, allowing them to evolve, even if it meant disappearing from the pop scene. This disappearance is still why many don’t realize that this band is still around, but it was a decision that is now its best, especially looking at what they’ve created since “Native.”

Two years after reaching a climax in its career and touring worldwide, OneRepublic made “Oh My My,” an album centered around the toll that touring and creating music has on artists. This was clear with tracks such as “Better” and “Let’s Hurt Tonight,” as the band members all admitted to feeling stressed and burnt out due to the high demands that come with their careers.

Unless you’re a die-hard OneRepublic fan, you probably wouldn’t think much of this record, but it integrated genres from disco-tech to funk music, proving that the band members were still going outside their comfort zones even during a time of darkness.

After this album came a long hiatus from the band, taking five years off from touring and making music for various reasons. One was that Tedder had become a major music producer in the industry, writing songs for artists such as Lil Nas X and the Jonas Brothers, as well as taking time off to travel and be with his family. Another was that the COVID-19 pandemic halted all artists’ production process, causing OneRepublic to stop working on what would become its fifth album.

With many delays and setbacks, OneRepublic finally came back in 2021, releasing “Human.” While the band had been teasing tracks from this album for years, such as “Wild Life” and “Wanted,” its debut helped bring them back into the mainstream again, even if the last few years had seen the band sadly lose some of its recognition.

The success of “Human” opened new doors for OneRepublic, with the band being asked to create a song for the “Top Gun: Maverick” sequel. Made in just one day, the band recorded and released “I Ain’t Worried,” a song that saw the band channel the relaxation and fun of a summer day on the beach with friends.

To all of the band’s surprise, the song became an instant hit, landing within the Top 10 of Billboard’s Hot 100 over the summer, as well as staying on the music charts for 621 weeks. The single signaled a rebirth for the band, once again establishing themselves as one of pop music’s best bands.

Since then, the band recently toured over the summer, promoting “Human” and reminding fans of its old and new hits. It’s important to consider how influential OneRepublic’s music has been on its fans and the average music listener, as they’ve proven how to jump between genres and focus on taking mental breaks for themselves with ease and little calculation.

@grace_koe