'Perfect Lady Housewife' (which features Elton John playing Hammond organ), 'Isn't it Nice ?' and the later released 'Love Makes The World Go Round' were all songs Clarke-Sylvester wrote for the 'Oh ! Flux !' production which had a short stage run

'Separated' was the third Allan Clarke song re Nash's exit from his life after 'Goodbye Tomorrow' and 'My Life is Over With You'

this is probably meant for the section here re 'Survival of The Fittest' song itself - but re the earlier August 1968 era Clarke-Hicks-Nash final song, the piece was quite possibly all about Nash's own situation then re having to perform and 'act' a part to perfection looking happy onstage and on TV etc that for him (or the actress / performer lady in the song) just no longer cuts it hence;

'what a good show she gave, can she go on feeling strange...'

also; 'At the start of the show she was true to herself and everything went as reported...'

- which might refer to the band's earlier halcyon days over 1964-66 being a fun time for Nash in the band

but then;

'she's so empty inside, lies to herself and her public...'

- which could refer to Nash feeling deeply unhappy by 1967 and turning on a smiling face to perform as a 'Hollie' when feeling frustrated, unloved and unhappy on an artistic level

and for Nash himself the screaming girl audience was a BIG turn off (hence he suggested they try doing the more mature cabaret circuit instead) which might possibly be reflected in the line;

'public acclaim not the same such a shame...'

Bobby has said that he came up with the song title - never mentioned in the song itself - and that DID refer to Nash and The Hollies future destinies being a case of....SOTF

so we do know the title at least had a Hollies band situation meaning circa 1968 - albeit then dressed up as a tale re an unhappy female performer having to give of her best when feeling low (as Nash wrote back in 'Clown' and curiously Sylvester would also later in 'Mr. Heartbreaker')

it would seem quite possible that SOTF did relate to Nash's situation then in 1968 and re-cutting the song for the 'Confessions' album some two years later is interesting, it doesn't seem out of place at all but that being a 1968 song plus a third song by Clarke re Nash exit from his life together with two of the 'Oh ! Flux !' production numbers and Tony's song 'Frightened Lady' would seem to rule out any 'concept' idea as such

they also re-cut 'Wings' over 9-13 March 1970 during the 'Confessions' sessions with amended lyrics at Ron Richards suggestion with view to a possible single - so far the 1970 'Sylvester version' of 'Wings' remains unissued in parallel with the earlier 1968 'Nash version' of 'Survival of The Fittest'

'I Wanna Shout' was recorded together with six other songs that made the album (plus another two that didn't) during November 1969. 'Survival of the Fittest' was pulled out about half way through the sessions in early 1970. What makes me think that there was a concept is the fact that the Hollies unusually went into the studio with so many new songs at once. They had ten songs down by the end of 1969 towards the album, with a few new ones in May 1970, with the connecting thread of them being that they were the songs that lyrically link the story together. 'Bobby's Prologue' was also recorded in the same session as 'Survival of the Fittest', which by all accounts is a piece of poetry that was designed to link the songs together. It was culled from the album at the very last minute, hence only 11 tracks instead of the usual 12, because Bobby's Prologue would have bulked out the overall length of the album. I think the fear over including it was that they would sound similar to what the Moody Blues were doing at the time with prologues by their drummer Graeme Edge.

Of course the real answer would be to ask the Hollies themselves. Maybe someone viewing the thread might be able to do that. It's a shame that they're always just asked about how 'He Ain't Heavy' came about and what did they do when Graham Nash left... there's SO many unanswered questions about their recorded output. I'm hoping that Bobby's book (due in April 2020) might reveal some gems.....

Bobby alludes that he gave them the song title and pushed them into a room in Sweden somewhere on their last tour there in 1968. He'd noted the breakdown in their songwriting partnership, so it was his intervention to get them to come up with something. We've discussed before that the 1970 release IS the 1968 recording, just with re-cut vocals and a re-cut guitar part. You can clearly hear Nash's laboured acoustic guitar strumming in there...

I'm wondering if Tony's maturing writing style, coupled with Clarke's sort of stillborn 'Oh Flux!' musical made them reconvene what they'd already got and shape it into a new story, 'Confessions of the Mind'. Like I said in my above post, the songs recorded in 1970 are all the songs that link the story together and drive it along... Who's to say there wasn't some behind the scenes idea to turn the LP into a play like the Kinks' 'Arthur' started out in the same year? There was a lot of that vibe going around. I'm still convinced that the "concept" on the LP is intentional, just perhaps derailed at the last moment by a panicking EMI who just wanted a new LP out. It's worth noting that 'Confessions' was the ONLY Hollies studio album promoted on the EMI inner sleeve after 'For Certain Because...', so EMI must have wanted to get behind it.

It is possible The Hollies may have self produced 'Confessions' as the original Parlophone LP has NO producer credited !

Assumed to be just an oversight at the time it gets more confusing later as a cassette copy DOES credit Ron Richards as producer however a CD release carried EMI Staff Producer John Burgess (a colleague of Ron's and George Martin and a fellow partner in AIR studios along with Decca's Peter Sullivan the following year) as being producer

it might possibly be that for whatever reason Ron didn't handle production, if so maybe The Hollies did it themselves with John Burgess (Manfred Mann, Paul Jones, Freddie & The Dreamers etc) signing off the sessions as overall 'producer' ?

it certainly seems strange that Ron Richards or anyone else was not given a producer's credit on the original LP when Johnny Scott gets credited as arranger of the orchestrations used - and the later CD credit to John Burgess might just be an error tho' specifically naming him seems strange if he were not involved at all

'Confessions' tracks are a bit more 'riskay' - re in 'Lady Please';

'as the morning sun lights up our bed you are there to stroke my head...'

and 'Too Young To Be Married' - which once brought an edition of BBC TV's 'Top of The Pops' to a standstill in the short lived 'albums spot' when they sang;

'...they were gonna have a BABY !!' - gasp !

we know Ron drew the line on a few tracks - Nash's 'blowin smoke rings from the corner of my mouth' upset him re the assumed drug connection in 'Marrakesh Express' while 'Eleanor's Castle' line re 'lets her drawbridge down' probably ensured it was left in the can at the time as was 'Sign of The Times' re openly discussing the 'shame' of living together !

and many people then still assumed The Beatles and The Stones had riskay lyrics never The 'safe clean imaged' Hollies (er 'Stop Stop Stop' in 1966 ?)

so perhaps their 'schoolmaster' producer was absent then and they slipped their more realistic songs through under John Burgess authority ?

That could be true of 'Maker', since the two tracks were recorded merely months apart. The musicians that the Beatles used for 'Love You To' and 'Within You Without You' were from the London based group the Asian Music Circle. Though I recall Tony once saying that he "borrowed" George's sitar which had been left at Abbey Road in the studio. I can't hear any more than two sitars on the track, so it's likely that they had a professional player as well as Tony "fluffing away on George's Sitar" to quote the man himself! But there's also some Indian percussion on the track in the form of a tabla, which it's highly likely was also kicking around at Abbey Road, and Bobby could have played that. But I'm not hearing many extra musicians - if any - on 'Maker'. There's none credited on the recording logs. The Asian Music Circle actually first worked with the Beatles on the soundtrack of the film 'Help!'.

As for 'The Inner Light', it's impossible that they were the same musicians as 'Separated' as 'The Inner Light' as it was recorded in Bombay with an array of studio musicians who were helping to record George's debut solo LP 'Wonderwall Music'. These musicians were among the finest in India for classical music, who recorded at Bombay's HMV Studios exclusively. George directed the session that produced the backing track, and added the vocals at Abbey Road with George Martin producing. It's the only Beatles song recorded outside of Europe.

I have to be honest, of all the songs mentioned, and as I said above, 'Separated' is the roughest sounding of the lot. It could be that the musicians were bought in for 'Maker' and it was 'Separated' that the Hollies themselves made work, though I can't see George's sitar kicking around Abbey Road in 1969/70.

*EDIT* I just did some googling, and the Asian Music Circle had broken up by 1970, so it's possible that if they did play on 'Separated', it was one of their last recordings under that name, or the musicians individually were contracted by EMI to work on the Hollies' session.