One of my on going projects is to create a directory of places in Springfield. Here is another one.

Pharley’s House – Phillip Spaulding and Harley Cooper considered moving in together even before they got married. Phillip bought this house and they came back to it from their honeymoon in November of 1998. It was decorated in a southwestern style, reflecting Phillip’s time living in Arizona. In fact the large dish/plaque thing above the fireplace was used on a wall behind Phillip whenever they had him “call” from Arizona while he was off the show. Again, reflecting the southwestern influence there is a tiled patio outside the door. The door leads into a great room, there’s a short entryway and then the rest of the room. On the same wall as the door is a fireplace, but is detached from the wall. The fireplace acts as an independent column on the reverse side of the fireplace is a coat closet. The living room seating area is centered around this fireplace. There is a large door opening between the living room and a wide open, straight staircase with a cast iron railing. This staircase leads to a hallway with a series of bedrooms upstairs, including the master bedroom and bedrooms that later would house Zach, Jude, and Susan. Opposite the bottom of the staircase is a large wall of windows out onto the patio, covered with decorative ironwork. Standing at the bottom of the stairs you can see back to a hallway that presumably leads to a kitchen and you can see the backdoor from there. The address is 4217 Springfield Drive.

There is a red tile roof and a second story balcony. You have to crawl in and out of a window to access the balcony. It overlooks the garage which is an out building. The house is has an attic and a basement, too. After 2001 when Phillip and Harley divorced, Harley was allowed to stay in the house, but it remained in Phillip’s name. The house comes into the Manny story twice. Once in 2000 when Manny babysit & Carmen (who is supposed to be dead) appears to gaslight Michelle. Then again during the Mission: Impossible plot Rick moves into the house, leaving Manny alone in the Bauer House until Harley and Rick break up. Harley then moved Gus in after she got involved with him and GusH was formed. In 2004, after Phillip began a decent into madness, he bulldozed this house (then shared by Harley and Gus and Phillip’s children) as an act of revenge after Gus manipulated the endangered species act to keep Phillip from completing his plan of tearing down Company. Since Phillip still technically owned the house this wasn’t a crime, but Harley was able to get title to the empty lot and she and Gus began to rebuild in a seemingly endless fashion.

http://www.youtube.com/user/IIheartbreakerII#p/u/11/fEOIQmbyRzg Begins at 1:40, Living Room

http://www.youtube.com/user/IIheartbreakerII#p/u/0/E5mbIiEhHvI Shows southwestern tile roof and upstairs balcony

For more on Harley and Gus’s replacement house see:

https://glmanny.wordpress.com/2011/03/14/faq-harley-cooper-paint-walls

Tags: GL, Guiding Light, Gus Aitoro, Harley Cooper Spaulding, Pharley, Phillip Spaulding, Places of Springfield, Rick Bauer, Springfield Places