Info about Halych, Ivano-Frankivs’ka Oblast’ (Ukraine)

Halych is a place of Ivano-Frankivs’ka Oblast’, in Ukraine (UA).

It is also called Aliche, Galic, Galich, Galič, Galıç, Halica, Halicas, Halici, Halicz, Halicʻ, Halitsch, Haliča, Haličas, Halyc, Halych, Halytch, Halytsch, Halytsj, Halytx, Halyč, Halîci, galichi, hallichi, halych, halytsh, haru~ichi, jia li qi, Галич, Галіч, Հալիչ, האליץ, هاليتش, هالیچ, გალიჩი, ハールィチ, 加利奇, 할리치, its latitude is 49.1217900, and its longitude 24.7257800.

In Halych are settled 6.196 citizenry, this city timezone is Europe/Kiev (Europe/Kiev_cet).

Halych is popular for playgrounds, national parks around Ukraine.

.

More details about Halych in Ukraine (UA)

It is the capital of Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia. It’s official name is Галич (AT, KT).

Halych time zone is UTC+02:00 (valid for standard time).

In Halych there are 6.196 citizenry, related to 2019 last census. Do You want to use telephone for calling local numbers. You can use 380 as local dialing code for local phone numbers. Halych postal code is 77100, this is why for post delivery it can be used the postal code as per description above.

Its size is 24 square km. so Halych is nicely quiet city , an ideal place for trippers that like quiet destinations as base location on a trip, a quiet city without loudness typical of big cities. In Halych you can save money because of their low room prices, and for this reason you can use it like your basecamp if you want to move across Ukraine and Halych near places.

Halych meters above sea level, that is meters above mean sea level (MAMSL) is over 2061 meters. For this it is the perfect travel destination if you and your family want tall areas to see for your next holiday and love mountain rails if you are on holiday somewhere in the world.

Near Halych you can find nice cities like Krylos, Zakarpattia Oblast, Lviv Oblast, Maramureș County, Chernihiv Oblast, Ternopil Oblast, Chernivtsi Oblast. As those cities are very close you and your family can easily go to those close travel destinations for new Ukraine adventures.

If you’re looking for detailed information for Halych please check its official webpage http://www.galych-rada.gov.ua/index.php?newlang=en.

Halych things to do and activities: best trip destination for: