About 35 Russell Township residents were very quiet last Wednesday when Fiscal Officer Chuck Walder explained the township’s problems and how officials propose to solve them.

“Significant outside factors have changed Russell Township’s funding,”he said. “Without your support, our solutions will not work.”

Unless there are changes in the township’s organization and three levies pass in November, the township could be in the red by 2015, the fiscal officer explained.

“We will consume the bulk of our carryover balance in the general and police funds by December 2014. By January 2015, there would not be enough carryover cash for the first quarter of 2015 expenses,” Walder said.

He displayed a number of charts and figures showing the general fund will be depleted by the end of 2014 due mainly to the state’s elimination of the estate tax and Gov. John Kasich’s budget, which decimates the intergovernmental funds.

They have shrunk from more than $100,000 in 2008 to about $15,000 in 2013, according to Walder’s chart, which showed revenue from these funds has averaged $622,000 per year. This year, the figure is just over $21,000.

“We call this the Mueller chart,” Walder said, crediting the township trustee. “Jim made copies and said, ‘This is what you need to think about.'”

Overall, the township will be receiving about $583,000 less in 2014 than they did in 2008.

“The general fund would run a deficit of $583,000 per year,” Walder said. “That converts to 2.31 mills in today’s market.”

Trustees took a holistic look at the township’s finances, not excluding the 3 mills of “inside” millage the township receives that the state levies without the vote of the people.

The income from those 3 mills goes to the township to operate their business, Walder said.

Historically, the township has allotted 2.1 mills of the inside millage to the road department, which also receives revenue from levies, the chart shows.

The police department has been subsidized by the general fund, as have maintenance, zoning and the cemeteries, while the fire department depends on voted levy revenue and monies that come in from their emergency medical services.

In case of a catastrophe, the general fund with the estate tax boost, served as the bank, Walder said.

“The carryovers are just plummeting,” he said, adding the township needs $1 million or more to stay out of the red and moving the problem from department to department is not an option.

“Each department must move towards fiscal self-sufficiency. The general fund bank has closed,” he said.

Walder and trustees are undertaking six initiatives to change the townships’ fiscal landscape:

• Merge the maintenance and road departments

• Pursue intelligent regionalization opportunities

• Consider selling or re-purposing township-owned properties

• Enact procedural checks and opportunities

• Move toward departments standing on their own, fiscally

• Reduce operational costs such as gas, electric, phones, cleaning, etc.

With that in mind, they have cut 12 phone lines, eliminated cleaning services and reduced trash pickup. Elected officials voluntarily reduced their pay by 10 percent and will pay for their own meals at the Geauga Township Association quarterly meetings. They have suspended employee pay raises except those under contract and increased the amount employees pay for health insurance from 10 percent to 15 percent.

Officials are also looking at longevity pay whereby employees get automatic raises at given periods in their employment.

The road department has been receiving 2.1 mills of the 3 inside mills, so the officials are reallocating that $277,310 to the general fund and placing a replacement road and bridge levy of 1.1 mills on the November ballot, Walder said.

“This road and bridge levy is not additional revenue for the road department, it is merely replacing funds (that are going) to the general fund,” he told the audience.

Trustees have also agreed to place a 0.25-mill cemetery levy on the ballot, which, if passed, will cover most of the cemetery operating expenses, Walder said.

The five-year levy will generate about $60,000 per year and the cemeteries take about $88,000 per year.

“It takes a big chunk out of that $88,000. We anticipate making up the balance with increased fees and cost reductions,” Walder said.

A 1975 police levy will be replaced with a 1.5-mill continuing levy to provide Russell police with enough revenue to be self-sustaining, he said.

The eight-officer police department is dependent on the general fund for about $160,000, Walder said, adding if passed, the levy would make it possible to replace the full-time and part-time officers who have taken jobs elsewhere.

The fire department does not require funds from the general fund, but with the advent of the Affordable Healthcare for America Act, that could change, he said.

However, the fire department is not part of the reorganization plan, yet, Walder said.

The road and bridge continuing 1.1-mill levy would cost a homeowner $37.90 annually per $100,000 property valuation.

The five-year, 0.25-mill cemetery levy would cost the same homeowner $8.61 per year and the 1.5-mill continuing replacement levy for the police department would cost a homeowner about $38.48 per year, Walder said.