RUSSELL - Chuck Walder likes to tinker with old cars to restore them and bring back their beauty and performance.

As Russell’s newly appointed Fiscal Officer he will tinker with but not make immediate wholesale changes in the way the township conducts business and keeps its books.

That’s due in part to the prudent financial keep that outgoing clerk, Gerri Heck had for 20 years.

“Gerri did a wonderful job in managing the finances conservatively and leaving the township well poised despite the weak economy and state cuts in funding,” Walder said. “It makes my job easier. Other communities around us are currently challenged, but Russell is not under stress.”

Nonetheless, he sees a growing need for communities to share some equipment and services, but stops short of advocating regionalism.

“We will see more, not less sharing,” he said.” “Times have changed, it’s a different world. We will have to find ways to economize using technology and other means. Regionalism has a pull, but we have to avoid it where it doesn’t fit.”

He explained that Russell’s large-lot zoning and residential base sets it apart from more commercialized, developed neighbors such as Chester, Newbury and Bainbridge. Both the tax base and the needs are different in those communities, he said.

It was the large tracts of residential land and the lack of commercial development that attracted him to move to Russell in the first place.

It’s not going to be easy street for Walder, who is stepping into the position at a time when state funding to local governments is shrinking.

Russell has lost 75 percent of its undivided local government funds over the past three years. The loss of inheritance tax money is a double whammy to the township’s general fund, which has historically been used to fund capital improvement projects.

Land acquisitions, the police station, fire station, ambulances, road equipment and other capital purchases have been purchased through the years with inheritance tax money.

Township services, such as fire, police and roads are funded through voter approved property tax levies.

Walder’s background is in private business. He is the general partner in CK Properties, Ltd., a commercial and residential real estate company based in Russell.

He serves on the boards of three condominium associations and is the general partner in CK Auto Restoration, a collector car shop that specializes in early Corvettes and pre-war classics.

Walder is still adjusting to government work.

The private sector is more sure footed, and can make and act on decisions quicker, he explained.

“Something that can be done in two days in business can take two weeks or two months in government,” he said. “In the private sector, it’s often an individual’s money being spent. In government, it’s the entire community’s money. It will take some getting used to, sometimes I feel like a sports car at a stop light. I’m trying to not get ahead of myself.”

Heck tried to begin her government service in zoning

There was an opening in the Zoning Commission, she applied for it but instead they offered her a job as a secretary, assisting the then fiscal officer Peg Hetrick.

The budget was about $1 million. The fire department was all volunteer. The police department consisted of five officers and some of those were part-time positions. The road crew had just four people.

Heck learned the ropes from Hetrick.

“She was a good teacher,” Heck said. “When she decided to retire in 1988, I was encouraged to run for the position. I said I would do it for one four-year term, but time got away from me.”

Today, the township’s budget is $7.5 million. The police department has nine full-time officers and the road department employs eight. The fire department employs about 30 part-time emergency medical workers, while the firefighters continue to be volunteers.

Today's challenges

Although the township has more income, It costs more to operate. Balancing the needs and expectations for services with the community’s desire for a low tax rate and reduced state funding will challenge Walder’s leadership.

But, he won’t have to face it alone. Heck will continue to work with him as a consultant on an as-needed basis.

In addition, Walder noted that the current board of trustees are working constructively as a cohesive group.

“They have differing opinions and debates,” he said. “But they are able to compromise, make decisions and move on, unlike some governing boards that reach an impasse.”

See more local news at cleveland.com/west-geauga.