Russel Walder - Pure Joy (2002)

| FLAC (Tracks+Cue) | 271MB | Smooth Jazz, Oboe, Instrumental | Covers |

New Zealand/American composer Russel Walder blends jazz, atmospheric ambient music and Middle Eastern traditions, making his music tough to classify. If you are one of those who relish musical passages with the uniquely lovely and sensual voice of the oboe, imagine the feast to be enjoyed when one of the world’s foremost contemporary masters of the oboe creates an entire album. The musician is Russel Walder, and his new album is Pure Joy.

Russel Walder is a man of many passions – musician, actor, director, painter, writer -- and he pushes the boundaries in everything he does. The oboe is little known outside of classical music and rarely played to its full potential and yet Walder has toured the world as a soloist, and his discography includes a composition on the Grammy nominated, double platinum album Winter Solstice. He has recorded three albums with pianist Ira Stein and guested with prominent new age artists Will Ackerman and Suzanne Cianni. On Pure Joy, Walder’s debut album with Real Music, he has composed music featuring the oboe that is passionate and expansive, soulful, yearning, intimate, and filled with radiant joy. Pure Joy may well be the world’s first pop album for oboe. (Amazon)

Tracklist:

01. Faith Embrace (5:17)

02. State of Grace (4:40)

03. This Moment Now (3:55)

04. One (5:08)

05. Through the Gates (5:31)

06. The Road to You (5:05)

07. Spark the Sun (4:55)

08. Holding the Space (5:44)

09. More than Words (5:05)

10. Divine In Me

CM | BD | MG | Demo1 2 | Buy The Original CD From Amazon

© I am currently in the process of removing ADF.ly links from my website. There's a large number of ADF.ly links on this website, so it's not possible to remove them all at once, especially considering my busy schedule with daily tasks! For any links where I have removed ADF, they will not redirect to "downloads.html" notification page.

The download links will be redirected to the page "redirect.html" with URL encoding, and this redirect page contains my advertisements. Thank you for reading and listening!