Fisher Scientific International Inc. said yesterday it will acquire closely held Athena Diagnostics Inc. and 9 percent of Nanogen Inc. to expand gene testing and other diagnostic services. Nanogen shares rose 15 percent on the news.

Fisher, a Hampton-based provider of laboratory supplies and services, said yesterday in a statement it will pay $283 million for Athena and $15 million for the stake in Nanogen. Athena, based in Worcester, Mass., is owned by Behrman Capital LP, a private investment firm in New York.

The cash purchases will increase Fisher’s share in the emerging market for genetic and other tests used to identify disease and personalize medical care.

Athena sells diagnostics for Alzheimer’s disease, multiple sclerosis and other neurological and muscular disorders. Nanogen, based in San Diego, sells equipment and supplies for molecular tests.

Athena Diagnostics employs 200 at the Massachusetts Biotechnology Research Park, off Plantation Street in Worcester. Fisher spokeswoman Gia L. Oei said the operations will remain in Worcester, with no changes in the work force.

“Athena carries a well-respected brand name and it would run as a separate business unit with existing management,” she said.

Founded in 1989 as Genica Pharmaceuticals Corp., the Worcester company was purchased by Athena Neurosciences Inc. of South San Francisco, Calif., in 1995. The following year, Irish drug maker Elan Corp. Plc bought Athena Neurosciences and Athena Diagnostics.

In 2002, Elan sold its 80 percent stake in the Worcester business to Behrman Capital for about $82 million.

“With these acquisitions, Fisher is entering the DNA-based molecular diagnostics market,” said Un K. Kwon, an analyst at Infinium Capital in Toronto, in a note to clients. The market “is currently immature, but should start to expand in the next five to 10 years.”

The acquisition of Athena, which had $55 million in revenue last year, is expected to close early in the second quarter. It should have no effect on 2006 earnings per share, Fisher said. Athena holds dozens of patents on its technology.

Fisher’s shares fell 13 cents, to $69.75, yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. The shares have risen 16 percent so far this year before yesterday’s announcement. Shares of Nanogen rose 37 cents, to $2.89, in Nasdaq trading. The increase was the biggest since May 2005.

The Telegram & Gazette staff contributed to this report.