Hello, I would love to suggest that we add NKVD Divisions to the Soviet side. As we know the NKVD took part in WW2 such as the 10th Rifle NKVD Division in Stalingrad. I would love to fight as an NKVD Division and I think it could bring some interesting squad and personnel upgrades. Thanks.

I think you’re going off on a tangent given my previous reply. The problem of historically representing NKVD units lies only with the fact that it is illegal to represent in an equally historically accurate context their respective counterparts, which some could argue would be equally interesting to play for the very reasons the OP has cited.

The point you raise that they have already been sort of implemented is noted and I concur.

Yes, I would love to live in a world where nothing is censored, but since we got lots of cry babies running around and poisoning our society with their brain farts we won’t get NKVD and SS criminals murdering each other.

Deal with it, you can’t change the world.

The Second World War was very politicized, this is a historical fact, and in a game with a title that implies a soldier as a central character, this element must be represented.

Here are excerpts from a scientific article by the Russian Academy of Sciences on the ideological background of the Red Army:

…class illusions about the “fraternal German working class” melted away in the very first days of the war … the reasons, meaning and goals of the war were clearly and clearly defined by the supreme power. They affected the vital interests of every Soviet citizen and were communicated to every soldier. The question stood squarely: to win or die, in the “best” case - to be enslaved, in the position of “subhuman”…

…The fact, - reported … General M. MacFarlane, - that Stalin, who is a truly national hero, and his inner circle did not leave Moscow in the days of the crisis, significantly strengthened the position of the government…

…the authority of the party was strengthened by the deployment of hundreds of thousands of communists to the most dangerous sectors of the front, as well as by the massive entry into the ranks of the party of fighters in combat conditions…

…from the very beginning of the war, the guidelines were translated into clear, chased formulas and slogans … and were brought to the attention of every soldier … “Our cause is just. Victory will be ours!" - convinced the people of the just nature of the war on the part of the USSR and inspired confidence in the inevitability of Victory … “Death to the German invaders” - was the directive for the soldiers of the Red Army…