10th NKVD Rifle Division | WWII PVP

Introduction

Greetings Comrade,

We are a brand new unit looking for anyone that is interested in joining a Soviet WWII unit which is set to take on the 18th Volksgrenadier Division in the coming days, weeks and months. We are currently outnumbered so we need all hands on deck.

If you enjoy competitve PVP then give us a go.

What is the NKVD, and what are its responsibilities?

There are many things the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs (NKVD/НКВД) are responsible for. Their specific organisation is not all that comparable to any other German or allied unit. They are often referred to having responsibilities such as:

> Secret police

> Intelligence agency

> Law enforcement

> Gendarmerie

> Border guard

> Prison services

With their jurisdiction being the entirety of the Soviet Union and occupied territories. Their field operations also consist of:

> Anti-partisan operations

> Rear guard defence

> Preventing retreat

> Disruption of enemy operations and supplies

> Working with local communist or anti-fascist partisans.

> Arresting anti-communist figures or partisans.

So while not directly intended for frontline combat use, the NKVD were frequently engaged by and engaged German forces. Specifically for the 10th (10VV) they were the first Soviet unit to be engaged by the 6th Army in Stalingrad in 1942 - a monument was erected in Chekist Square, Stalingrad (now Volgograd) to pay tribute to the men of the 10th NKVD.

A Spot of History

The 10th NKVD was made famous in the Battle of Stalingrad where it was the first Soviet unit to engage German forces. A quote from the commander of the 62nd Army Vasiliy Chuykov: "The fighters of Colonel Sarayev's 10th Stalingrad Division VV must have been the first defenders of Stalingrad, and they overcame the difficult challenge with flying colours, courageously and selflessly fighting against superior enemy forces until the arrival of the 62nd Army."

Events and Times

Usual daily PVP and/or training. Special events on weekends. All events take place around 20:00-23:00 GMT (UK Time) and can last anywhere from 1-5 hours.

How Do I Join?

Very simply, first thing you need to do is request to join our Steam group. Once you're accepted you should go ahead and join both our Discord server and Arma 3 Units page. Once you're all connected with our communications we can get to know you and fully welcome you to the unit. And of course, help you get your mods setup.

STEAM GROUP: https://steamcommunity.com/groups/10vv