NEW YORK — Ladies, Hugh Grant is back on the market.

The “Music and Lyrics” star, 46, and his girlfriend, 33-year-old British socialite Jemima Khan, “have decided to split amicably,” the actor’s representative, Robert Garlock, said yesterday in a statement to The Associated Press.

Grant, who rose to fame in the romantic comedies “Four Weddings and a Funeral” and “Notting Hill,” previously dated Elizabeth Hurley.

Khan, the daughter of billionaire James Goldsmith, has two sons from her marriage to politician Imran Khan.

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — The question of who will inherit Anna Nicole Smith’s estate was thrown into further confusion yesterday with the release of a 2001 will in which the former Playboy centerfold said her fortune should be held in trust for her son — who died last year.

The 19-page will did not say how much Smith was worth, so it is still a mystery how much money those battling over her and her baby daughter could get.

The document said Smith’s lawyer and boyfriend, Howard K. Stern, should be her executor and hold her estate in trust for son Daniel Smith. But her son died last September at age 20 of apparently drug-related causes, days after the birth of the pinup’s daughter, Dannielynn.

And the will explicitly leaves out anything for anyone other than the son.

“I have intentionally omitted to provide for my spouse and other heirs, including future spouses and children and other descendants now living and those hereafter born or adopted,” Smith said in the will, which was signed under her legal name, Vickie Lynn Marshall.

LOS ANGELES — Nicole Richie was charged yesterday with misdemeanor driving under the influence.

In addition to the single count, the case contains an allegation that Richie had a prior misdemeanor DUI conviction in June 2003, the Los Angeles County district attorney’s office said.

The California vehicle code specifies that if convicted of DUI twice within 10 years, a person can be sentenced to between 90 days and a year in jail, fined between $390 and $1,000, and have driving privileges suspended.

The complaint alleges Richie was under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and an unspecified drug when she was arrested Dec. 11.