10 years ago, Cartier launched “How Far Would You Go for Love” as a challenge. This film will get you into the greatest adventures, to experience total love, at full speed. A journey on the road paved with intensity, an epic love story that you need to see.

With the ability to capture the emotions of the time, Cartier entrusted the video’s creation to Cedric Klapish, the famous French director. Before him, there are also three filmmakers that Cartier has asked to film love; Oliver Dahan, Luca Guadagnini, and Sean Ellis providing various styles, narratives, and cinematic universe.

Cedric Klapish, as the fourth filmmaker on this film, successfully plunges us passionately into the heart of a couple’s intimacy throughout their timeless road trip. Their love is an eternal beating heart, with a declaration, arguments, and reconciliations, on it. Every moment has been captured forever in multiple Cartier creations.

Read:

How far would you go for love? A metaphor for a romantic journey and the adventure of a lifetime. All emotions are exposed within the intimacy of the car, and gradually, as the years go by, the bond stays just as strong and shared emotions remain just as intense.

“Throughout its history, Cartier has always expressed love with intensity, through powerful, bold creations holding great symbolic value. Carrying a strong message, Cartier’s jewellery celebrates each story as the greatest of adventures. Nothing defines this vision of love and passion better than the question ‘How far would you go for love’, which Cartier asks once again, ten years after its creation, with its latest campaign.” Arnaud Carrez, International Marketing and Communications Director – Cartier International

The new “How Far Would You Go for Love” by Cartier and Cedric Klapish was launched on 20 January 2020 in cinemas and all of Cartier’s social media channels. You can catch many Cartier products in this film, such as Cartier Santos Dumont, Ballon Bleu de Cartier, and Cartier’s Jewellery collection.