British actor Ben Kingsley is divorcing his wife of one year because his spouse's friends will not call him "Sir," according to the New York Post. Kingsley, 60, famed for his role in Gandhi, was knighted in 2002. He married Alexandra Christman, 30, in 2003. As it happens, Kingsley grew up poor, while Christman comes from aristocracy. The Post reported that Kingsley told Christman's pals, "You should call me Sir Ben."

Bob Marley's estate seeking to make him a Jamaican hero

KINGSTON, Jamaica _ Members of Bob Marley's estate are lobbying the government to proclaim the dreadlocked reggae singer a national hero, Jamaica's highest honor. Marley died of cancer in Miami in 1981 at 36, and some of his family members have lived in South Florida.

The Bob Marley Foundation is also seeking to have his birthday _ Feb. 6 _ declared a national holiday. The group is planning special celebrations, including a concert and a block party in the capital of Kingston, to mark his 60th birthday next year.

Marley was awarded Jamaica's third-highest honor, the Order of Merit, in 1981, one month before he died.

Fire breaks out on movie set in Arizona, injuring five

TUCSON, Ariz. _ Fire broke out on the set while a television movie was being filmed at the Tucson Convention Center, injuring five people and forcing the evacuation of thousands arriving for a country music concert in another part of the building.

The fire started Friday night on the set of ABC's Desperation, written by horror writer Stephen King.

Three people were taken to hospitals for burns and injuries caused by falling debris, and one remained hospitalized Saturday, Deputy Fire Chief Randy Ogden said. Two others were treated for smoke inhalation.

It damaged the set, which was made to look like a mine shaft, but not the convention center. Preliminary damage estimates ranged from $750,000 to $1-million, Ogden said.

USDA cites animal company in "Siegfried & Roy' show

LAS VEGAS _ The U.S. Department of Agriculture has ticketed the company responsible for the exotic animals used in the Siegfried & Roy show, ending a lengthy investigation into the near-fatal tiger attack on illusionist Roy Horn.

S&R Productions received the citation Monday, more than 14 months after the bloody attack that left Horn partially paralyzed, USDA spokesman Jim Rogers said Friday.

Rogers declined to discuss why the company received the citation, but said it does not carry any penalties. He described it as a warning and said it concluded the agency's investigation into the attack.

Dave Kirvin, a Siegfried & Roy spokesman, said Friday the company was not aware of the citation.

Horn, 60, was attacked by a 380-pound tiger named Montecore during a live performance Oct. 3, 2003, at the Mirage hotel-casino. The 7-year-old tiger bit into the performer's neck and dragged him off stage.

Compiled from Times wires.