Grant Doyle Suggest updates

Born Adelaide.

Australian baritone.

Grant Doyle studied at the Elder Conservatorium in Adelaide and at the Royal College of Music Opera School in London. He was a member of the Jette Parker Young Artists Programme at the Royal Opera House 2001-3. At Covent Garden he created Billy Wayne Smith Anna Nicole (Turnage) and Abraham Clemency (MacMillan). Other roles at the Royal Opera included Bizet (Dancaïre), Puccini (Schaunard, Bello La fanciulla del West, Ping); Strauss (Harlequin); Janáček (Chekunov From the House of the Dead); and Britten (Tarquinius, Demetrius).

His debut at Garsington was as Count Almaviva, returning as Forester Cunning Little Vixen and Don Giovanni. He sang Schaunard on the Glyndebourne Tour and Marcello and Yeletsky with Opera Holland Park. Appearances with Opera North have been as Robin Oakapple Ruddigore, Albert Werther and Sacha Paradise Moscow. At Grange Festival he sang Sir Thomas Mansfield Park.

With ETO he has sung Handel (Emireno Ottone, Tiridate Radamisto); Rameau (Teucer Dardanus); Gluck (Oreste Iphigénie en Tauride); Rossini (Figaro); Donizetti (Nello Pia de' Tolomei, Eduardo L'assedio di Calais); Verdi (Paolo Simon Boccanegra, Macbeth); Puccini (Marcello) and Tippett (Hector King Priam).

His Scottish Opera debut was as Svatopluk Čech in The Adventures of Mr Brouček (a co-production with Opera North), and he returned for Abraham in Clemency. (a co-production with Covent Garden).

With the State Opera of South Australia (Adelaide) he has sung Count Almaviva, Zurga Les Pêcheurs de Perles and Starbuck Moby-Dick (Jake Heggie). Other Australian appearances include Opera Australia in Sydney (Oreste), Opera Queensland (Zurga) and Pinchgut Opera.

He has sung two Britten roles abroad - Demetrius in Madrid (Teatro Real) and Berlin (Komische Oper), as well as Ned Keene on Gran Canaria (Teatro Prez Galdoz). In Rome (Teatro dell' Opera) he sang Mike in I was looking at the Ceiling (John Adams).

He has recorded the Forester Cunning Little Vixen (BBC TV), created Carlo in Weir's Armida (Channel 4) and portrayed the lead role in The Eternity Man (ABC/Channel 4).

May 2019