The new wave was one of the significant, unique genres of music which is quite different from other genres of music. Though the new wave is unique, it shares some characteristics like diversity, electronic productions, stylings with other genres of music, the wave music has attracted so many people. The new wave music impacted the entire entertainment industry to a great extent. Many people belonging to the era of the 1970s can very well relate well with the characteristics of the new wave music. The tunes, lyrics of the new wave bands attract people who are interested in knowing the various aspects of music.

The Style Of New Wave Band Music

There has been plenty of wave music bands hits which brought a great new flavor to the music entertainment industry. There were many wave music bands in the early ’80s that had their own style of music, lyrics. Some of the creators of the new wave bands in the early ‘80s include Duran Duran, The Cure, INXS, The Smiths. These new wave bands were very popular during the ‘80s and can easily be considered as the new wave band start albums of the golden era. It is very important that people don’t forget the golden era of the new wave music, the new wave music band stars.

Popular Wave Band In The Early 70s And 80s

The new wave band, Duran Duran contributed to the new wave band music big time in the period of ’80s. This band was based in England and the musicians in the Duran band included the great Simon Le Bon, John Taylor, Nick Rhodes, Andy Taylor as well as Roger Taylor. They were one of the very first new wave band music to become popular all over the world. The best part of this band is that they are known for offering excellent custom-made packages and was one of the very first bands to gain worldwide stardom. The fact is that in recent years, there is not much clue over the existence of the band and its members. It’s a must that people who love wave music must listen to the Duran Duran brand of music.

Another very significantly popular wave music band belonging to the period of the 1970s was ‘The Cure’. This wave music band was started by the lead named Robert Smith in the England country. The significant characteristics of ‘The Cure’ band is that there was a lot of focus on dark music and also the melodic wave music. These were the genres that were focused initially by ‘The Cure’ wave music band. As years progressed, ‘The Cure’ band started to switch to the depressing lyrics and that attracted a wider range of audiences from all parts of the world. Some of their top albums include Close to Me, In Between Days, Boys Don; t Cry and the Caterpillar. People who love to listen to some wave music with a depressive tune must listen to the music of this band.

‘The Smiths’ was one another popular wave music band that attracted a lot of music lovers. The best part of this wave music band was that there was an extensive focus on the lyrics, and this made them attract people of different ages especially the ones who value the lyrics in a song. One of their best albums is ‘The Smiths’ which helps their wave music band gain commercial success in the England country. This wave music band turned out to be a brilliant college sensation in the early ’80s in the United States. Some of their famous song albums that helped them gain attraction include The Charming Man, Ask, Cemetery Gates. These albums are a must to listen as the lyrics involved in these songs have a lot of meaning.

New Wave of Porn: Sis Loves Me

Step sister porn has been around for a few years only but it made as huge impact as the whole new wave genre in music. When it comes to step siblings playthings you need to be aware of its fantasy factor. Sis Loves Me is a perfect example of materialising the very best when it comes to step sisters. They are silly, they get convinced pretty quickly and they actually love to have sex.

The new wave music has been more about the attitude and enthusiasm that prevails through the music tunes. The waveband starts of the golden era and their albums are always to be remembered and listened to. Now the wave music bands have switched in style to a music style that gives a lot of importance to humor. There are some very popular new wave artists in the New wave band music that is still in force and makes the people all over the world listen to and feel happy.

Pinning down what truly constituted the 80s new wave music is as easy as plucking a guitar string. We think that the rebellious nature and the 80s new wave hits evolved from bands like Duran Duran, The Cure, INXS, Devo and more. In our opinion, “new wave” changed the music scene forever which was attributed to these experimental, as well as revolutionary icons of rock music.

We can see the way this music genre was able to give us many enigmatic bands. According to us, what can be cited to be among the most fascinating aspects of this music genre was its level of open-mindedness when it came to style. It is because of this that it had contributions from an expansive range of groups as new wave music was not confined to a particular musical homogeneity.

Rise of Brother Crush

New Wave impacted not only the music style of the era, but the entertainment industry as a whole. Times were great for many people and good times certainly affected LGBT communities, because they came up with idea of launching project called Brother Crush – where step family relations of brothers are taken to the new level, very taboo one. It wasn’t easy to promote such content in the old days, but guess what? With Internet we are proud to say that today’s interpretation of Brother Crush is going to be launched in new form – of gay videos!

As mentioned in Lexicon Magazine, the characteristics of New Wave with other genres when it comes to diversity, use of synthesizers, electronic productions among others.

You can also agree with us that what was the most important aspect of this genre of New Wave was not only the lack of strictness to specific rules in songwriting but rather the unrelenting attitude and strong spirit that yielded what we think was a combination of both punk and pop riddled with a sheen of slick production coupled with a whole lot of thought-provoking sounds and lyrics that was not typically of the 80’s music scene.

We would be lying to you if we say the new wave era can be defined by one best band or song, but among them is definitely Buggles’ hit track ‘Video Killed the Radio Star’ which was the first video to be broadcasted on MTV in 1981. We believe that this is what set the stage for the hostile takeover of the 80s television by new wave music. With this said, let us take you for a small walk further down memory lane and look at what we believe to be the top bands that helped in defining the 80’s New Wave music genre.

There is Duran Duran, a band we believe that to have basically been impossible to have lived through the 80’s without having grooved to at least one of their song. The 80s had some highly commercialized, often televised new wave songs such as their hit single “Hungry Like the Wolf” which is often considered to be the greatest New Wave song to have been recorded.

There were some New Wave bands that took the unconventional and sometimes murky path towards fame and fortune such as The Cure who we believe were the Genesis of Goth, as it is. This is because their musical focus was originally centered on dark and deep melodic sound which got to be known as Goth genre. And from where we stand we think that this was best seen with their hit singles like The Cure “Just Like Heaven” as well as The Cure “Why Can’t I Be You?”

The New Wave genre was also felt very deeply in Australia thanks to the band INXS. They best captured new wave’s blend of rock and pop sensibilities recording hit track INXS “Original Sin” which is considered by some as the greatest New Wave song.

You will agree with us that 80s new wave genre had bands and songs that can only be said to have been plain weird. Devo band and their songs best exemplifies this. This can best be seen in hit track Devo “Whip It,” which we think was their greatest New Wave song. Aside from that, their out of the world costumes still grace Halloween costumes such as “power dome” hats.

There may be debates about which track was the best or which band reigned supreme but what can’t be debated is the fact that the 80s new wave forever changed the music scene…

The term new wave is not that easy to pin down as it includes numerous artists from late 70s and early 80s. Later it started becoming a bit different from the mainstream, with a post-punk which was edgier and had more attitudes. The 80s new wave songs list includes some of the incredible hits which were anti-social but with great music and lyrics.

The new wave music included many influential bands of those times and a wide range of bands contributed to the genre. It was also an influence for lots of future projects, like the one that has been just launched in the end of 2017 – called YoungPerps, where young guys acting like old-school punks try their luck stealing objects from certain shops. Of course it won’t work, but their rock’n’roll approach to life will punish them pretty soon after being caught.

New wave music was all about attitude and an enthusiastic spirit which amalgamated both punk and pop with a planned production, striking and influential lyrics which was quite a common thing in 80’s playlist. While we are digging deep into new wave hits, it is impossible that we miss the creators of some of the amazing songs which were ruling the hearts of the audience in 80’s.

Duran Duran

The 80’s would have been incomplete without grooving to Duran Duran’s songs. They were based in England, and started gaining popularity in 1981 after working throughout the late 70’s on their brand image. Simon Le Bon, Nick Rhodes, John Taylor, Andy Taylor and Roger Taylor were the members of this band. They managed to make custom-made packages for the video age, and then became the first band to gain stardom.

Top 5 song list/ albums: – The View to a Kill, Save a Prayer & the Chauffer, Girls on Film, Rio and Come Undone.

The Cure

Another popular band was “The Cure” which was started by band’s lead Robert Smith in England in the year 1976.

The Cure mainly focused on a dark as well as melodic sound which defined the band as the Goth genre.Later they switched from depressing lyrics 80s new wave song in 1982, to reach a wider audience.

Top 5 song list/ albums: – Close to Me, In Between Days, Fascination Street, BoysDon’t Cry and the Caterpillar.

INXS

INXS spent the early part of the 80’s consistently touring and releasing albums particularly for the Australian audience.

“The One Thing” which was released in 1982 was successful and it convinced many record companies to release all their further masterpieces.

Top 5 song list/ albums: – New Sensation, Devil Inside, Original Sin, Burn for You and The Loved One

The Smiths

The Smiths were active in the year 1982 to1987, and this was enough for this talented and creatively inclined band. They were largely lyrics-driven, and this made them a part of new-wave. They gained commercial success mainly in their native land, England with an album, “The Smiths”, which ranked second. This band was truly a college sensation in those days in the US, even though they never toured in this country unlike other new wave bands.

Top 5 song list/ albums: – The Charming Man, Half a Person, Ask, Cemetery Gates and Well I Wonder.

Rock Lobster

This song was written by Ricky Wilson and Fred Schneider, both of whom were members of the larger B-52s. The song was released in two distinct versions. The longer version which was included in the debut album of the band was released by the internationally recognized DB Records. The shorter version of the song was produced and released by the well-known DB Records in the year 1978. Since the song was part of the tunes that the band used as signature tunes, it was very instrumental in launching the success of the band.

It is said that Rock Lobster was the first single hit song to be listed on Billboard Hot 100. In this list, the song managed to reach position 56 which was an incredible performance. Being a significant hit in Canada, the song rose to the top in the RPM rank of national singles. The song that followed it in the rank was Private Idaho. Critics received Rock Lobster well and they unanimously placed the song at position 147 as far as Rolling Stone’s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time was concerned.

The lyrics of the song include ludicrous lines that refer to a beach party as well as thrilling rants referring to real or imaginary marine mammals.

Such lines include, “There comes a sea robin, a dog-fish running from a dog-fish, here comes a narwhal, and there goes a bikini whale.” The lyrics are accompanied by pitched tunes which are relatively higher for the ordinary singer.

[Rock Lobster]

The song is done in C Minor Key while the chorus is partially raised. Some of the instruments that are played in the song are Mosrite electric guitar, drums, and Farfisa Combo Compact organ.

Birds Fly (Whisper to a Scream)

This song was played by the Icicle Works, a British band. The song had a title which was reversed as “Whisper to a Scream (Birds Fly) and it first hit the airwaves in the year 1983. Ian McNabb who was leading the band in singing was the one who wrote the song. Hugh Jones is the brain behind its production.

The song was originally produced as a single in the year 1983 in Britain. At the United Kingdom independent charts, the song was ranked number 2. The next single of the band, Love is a Wonderful Color, was ranked number 15 on the same independent charts of the United Kingdom. Birds Fly (Whisper to a Scream) was given a new lease of life when it was reproduced by the Beggars Banquet Records in the year 1984. The new release had a new B-side and a brand new cover.

Don’t You Want Me

The Human League (a British Synthpop group) released the song in the year 1981. It was the fourth single from the group. The songs were all in the album called Dare of 1981. This is the best song from the band and it has experienced immense commercial success. In the year 1981, the song was ranked as the best Christmas song. It has sold over 1.5 million copies making it to be ranked among the most successful singles in the history of the United Kingdom singles. Moreover, the song stayed at the top of Billboard Hot 100 for a record 21 days. Fast-forward to the year 2015, the song was voted as one of the most favorite songs in Britain. This poll was done by TV Network.

The brain behind the lyrics was none other than Philip Oakey. He thought and recorded the song as a male solo and his main inspiration was the movie A Star is Born.

Before the band released the dare album, they had already done three songs which included Open Your Heart, Love action, and the sound of the crowd. With the three singles already in the market, the chief executive officer of Virgin, Mr. Simon Draper, decided that it was time that Don’t You Want Me became the next big single. Oakey vehemently rejected this arguing that there were other singles in the market which were not doing well. Oakey was of the idea that releasing another single would a recipe for disaster. However, the song was released after agreement and it became an instant hit.

Many people who were born in the 1970s can relate well with the new wave music genre. It was a real sensation and any concert that played new wave music songs attracted large crowds

If a musician wanted to have an emphatic crowd in those years, he or she would definitely need to have some knowhow of new wave music. The late 1970s and early 1980s saw new wave have a new term for the music that was produced by then. New wave was believed to follow punk rock since the new wave genre disguised itself as punk rock. In retrospect, it was clear that the music which followed punk could be divided into two large categories which were named new wave and post-punk.

Post punk genre of music was difficult, arty, and thought-provoking whereas new wave was simple, pure, and pop music.

New wave remained with the fresh stamina of punk music in addition to having fascinating artistic moves, style, and electronics. It is therefore evident that new wave had a lot of diversity to itself and it pulled many people to watch and enjoys.

The very act of having new wave as part of the rock and roll genre made it possible for various other artists to compose songs with a lot of ease.

Rock Pile and Graham Parker were some of the synth rockers as well as Elvis Costello. Other rock bands who preferred new wave genre to be sand as rock music were Squeeze, the Police (who were lovers of pop reggae), the Pretenders (whose main interest was rock and roll), and Madness and Specials. Even though these bands were automatically famous, there were other hits that emerged in the early days of new wave. These groups were mainly credited with producing one-hit songs and they were loved for their diversity. They shared a love of amalgamated production, pop hooks, and an allure of being at the center of attraction.

New wave is different from other music movements since it has an array of characteristics that look similar to pop music – a trait that endears it to many people. New wave music is an incorporation of the ancient rock and roll music as well as the ethos that were used in production of rock music.

It is a definitive genre that came with such huge fame and the ability to attract large crowds whenever it was played. Be that as it may, it is note that the healthy relationship between new wave and other genres of music began to become blurry. This was not about to reduce the impact that new wave had as compared to other genres. In the 1990s, new wave began to realize a new level of resurgence after new artists arose who preferred to sing through the use of new wave.

It is said that the term new wave was used by Charles Shaar Murray when he commented about the Boomtown rats. It is also believed that new was the genre that replaced punk. In spite of this developments, new wave and punk were terms that were used in place of each other and no one ever thought that the world of music would survive without the two genres.

John Foxx observed that New York Dolls were the main galvanizers of the scene since they arrived. He further asserts that they proved that galvanizing the musical scene was a possible occurrence since they erased every person who was deemed to be desperate.

[John Foxx]

In the year 1976, a music historian named Vernon Joynson observed that many bands dissociated themselves from punk as new wave genre was entering the scene. From that time onwards, any music that was deemed to be following the garage band, it was named punk while the music that seemed to be largely complex, experimental, and polished in production was named new wave music. Hilly Kristal who owned CBGB is believed to have pioneered new wave in the Television band. Moreover, any other artist who was earlier termed as punk was now being referred to as a new wave artist.

New wave has since gone under intense evolution and it is believed that this will go on. The current generation seems to love rock music but new wave genre is not utterly dead.

New wave music is a well-known category of rock music. It was mainly popular in the 1970s to the early 1980s. The genre was tied to the punk rock music of the 1970s

A remarkable difference of new wave music is that it moved away from the conventional rock and roll rhythms and blues to come up with pop music. The newly developed pop music was an incorporation of experimental music, electronic, disco and mod. New wave was seen to have close ties with punk rock but it later changed and became a standalone distinct genre. As a result of becoming a distinct genre, new wave music engendered fusions and subgenres which included gothic rock, college rock, and synthpop.

New wave is different from other genres that are tied to the first-wave punk. New wave music has similar characteristics to pop music even though it has maintained the original ethos of punk rock sound. It however displays characteristics that are complex both in lyrics and music. New wave has common characteristics with other genres such as diversity, electronic productions, making use of synthesizers, and significance of styling among others. New wave is certainly a definitive genre of the early 1980s. The genre has enjoyed a huge following from all walks of life and it has continued to evolve more in the contemporary ages so as to benefit even more people. If you do not love the genre today, it will evolve in a way that you will love tomorrow. New wave artists are believed to be so attached to their music that they do not even think of setting up a band. New wave music is said to have borrowed its names from the French New Wave cinema that was shown in the 1950s.

There were many styles that new wave music worked with. Most of the styles were a major sense of humor and insouciance.

The broad spectrum of new wave music was part of the larger B-52 in the United States and was also incorporated in an upcoming music prospect in Athens, Georgia. The B-52 had a dance group that mixed vocal testing like the one of Yoko Ono and harmonies from the girl group. Other harmonies included were the vocals of Deborah Harry, Modern Lovers and Jonathan Richman tunes, and the talking heads and Devo’s avant-grades.

New wave catch-all nature has been a major source of controversy and confusion. It had originally been produced under the name punk in the United States. Since the new was seen as delivering little to no sales at all, it was agreed that punk be replaced by new wave. New wave music was however absorbed in the United Kingdom than it was absorbed in the United States. Punk began as a major phenomenon in London as compared to its reception in the United States. Punk was of little or no influence in the United States when it started gaining mileage. It was just a common theme in most of the rock clubs and various discos. After punk paved way for new wave music, the genre was considered as a major cultural event in Britain as well as London.

In order to make it more famous and acceptable across the world, the British music press pioneered a campaign that would see to it that New wave music was promoted. Some of the post-punk acts included the eclipsing of Elastica by Britpop. Moreover, there was Metric, Brainiac, No Doubt, and Six Finger Satellite. In the 1990 decade, trance and Euro disco dance were mainly influenced by some European and British new wave acts which were relatively heavy dance sounds.

In the 2000 decade, there were several acts that emerged which dwelt more on diversity of new wave as well as post-punk mechanisms. Some of the acts of the millennium decade included Interpol, the Bravery, Yeah Yeah Yeahs, and the Strokes. Strokes have won several accolades and nominations as well and they have continued to produce new songs which are adored by their fans. Strokes won the ASCAP College Vanguard Award.

During the presentation of the award, Strokes were hailed for their debut album, Is This It, after it achieved critical and substantial acclaim in the world over and the U.S. ASCAP said it was proud of the songwriting prowess displayed by the young group.

[ASCAP Award]

New wave genre has thus grown in strides and will evolve even more in the coming days.