If we take a broad definition of New Wave as being the movement that followed punk and covered groups as diverse in style wise as New Order, Madness and Squeeze.

In the US the term came to cover many of the synthpop groups from the UK and Europe that hit the charts. When In Rome (The Promise) is a late example of this and is maybe one of the last, as it was released in 1989, New Wave singles or maybe at this point it was already a revival.

Anyway what do you think is the first New Wave song? Discogs says Yoko Ono in 1972:

Yoko Ono / Plastic Ono Band – Now Or Never (1972, Vinyl)

Wikipedia says:

As early as 1973, critics including Nick Kent and Dave Marsh were using the "new wave" tag to classify such New York-based groups as the Velvet Underground and New York Dolls. In the US, many of the first new wave groups were the not-so-punk acts associated with CBGB (e.g. Talking Heads, Mink DeVille and Blondie).

Critics first ascribed the term “new wave” in the early 1970s to the New York Dolls and Velvet Underground. However, in my recollection the term didn’t really gel until about 1978. That summer, The Cars broke through with some smash hits. That October, Devo had an unforgettable performance on Saturday Night Live. More and more people became aware of the Talking Heads. Many consider the Ramones “new wave” in the more broadly encompassing sense, although, in my mind fit better as a punk band. Then Blondie broke through in early 1979 - a genre was gelled.

So, the best answer by my understanding is The Cars, but New Yorkers would prefer to say one of these other bands I’ve highlighted. Londoners might proclaim Elvis Costello who had hits there throughout 1977 - unless they consider punk “new wave”, which would then point to the Sex Pistols.

But if you count punk as new wave, then I would point back to another New Yorker: Patti Smith. I was impressed by her 1975 debut album, which was almost artsy enough punk to be described as new wave, her biggest national hit of Springsteen’s “Because the Night” was certainly poppy enough to be considered new wave - and that predated the Cars’ first hit “Just What I Needed” by a month or two.

Yes new wave is an umbrella term that to some includes any bands that broke through up until the early 80's. So everything from the Pistols to Split Enz to the synth-pop and new romantic bands

This is the correct answer. The term 'new wave' has been around for many decades, in literature, art, politics, etc., but New Wave as a (sub) music genre emerged in 1977 to describe the more user-friendly side of punk rock. An album I bought in '77 in my native country the Netherlands was called 'Geef Voor New Wave' (contribute to New Wave). And this compilation is actually proof that New Wave was far from defined yet, it included everything, from the Sex Pistols to Tom Petty and Motörhead!

As for the first Punk/Wave signs, I always credit those to the NYC groups; Patti Smith, Modern Lovers, Blondie, Television, Wayne County, etc. (plus Cleveland bands Rocket From The Tombs/Pere Ubu and Devo). To me the first bonafide New Wave song is "Road Runner". This is a 1975 version credited solely to Jonathan Richman, but there exist Modern Lovers versions of the song going back to 1972:

I'd go with She Cracked as the most "New Wave" Modern Lovers track.

Some of Roxy Music's early stuff sounds a bit New Wave.

Interesting topic.

I didnt hear of the term "new wave" until The Cars and Blondie had arrived.

Thinking about it, and Im sure theres exceptions, Id always notice the "new wave" bands had synthesizers, and a rather stylish, modern, cutting edge image fashion-wise.

Later on, in my neck of the woods, these bands became derisively labelled as "haircut bands" right around the time Flock of Seagulls and Kajagoogoo were high on the charts.

The punks seemed exclusively guitar based, and more ratty looking, taking great pride in that image.

Suffragette City has everything I want from new wave music. Everyone in the new wave scene listens to that song. Ziggy has the look down. Other commenters talked about the instrumentation, I want to look at the genre starting because of the people. Your first new wave song was sung by a new waver, who only had old wave up until then.

Like the chicken or egg, it was an egg laid by a non chicken, so until you had its egg you had no chicken, but how would you know that if you only had the egg, so it hatches a chicken, but you never saw the chicken or whatever lay the egg, so it must be the egg that comes first, especially since eggs can get switched without anyone finding out.

So whoever it was, that was the first new waver person, their new song would be it. They might have been singing old wave for a while already, and kept at that even after starting the new wave.

And here is where the american definition of new wave differs from the european one. In Europe new wave was considered artists who combined the punk spirit very consciously with music styles that predated the punk rock explosion; many sixties influences, reggae/ska, pubrock. If there were keyboards involved it was mostly a farfisa organ. Typical new wave artists were Elvis Costello, The Cars, Squeeze, Blondie, early XTC, The Police, Ian Dury. The synth-oriented bands you describe, such as Flock Of Seaguls or Duran Duran were in Europe filed under Synthpop.

Yes, no-one was using the term New Wave by the time Duran Duran or Flock of Seagulls were on the scene. Plus have we forgotten the New Romantics already!