Actress Zlata Petković passed away today at the age of 58, the medical team on duty at the Emergency Center confirmed to Tanjug.

Zlata Petković was one of the most unique and beautiful actresses in this area, said actor Voja Brajović upon the news that his colleague passed away today in Belgrade.

"Our gold just left. It's hard for me. Memories of our work and our cooperation come flooding back. She was an unusually kind and positive person and collaborating with such a beauty was a gift," Brajović told Tanjug.

Actor Dragan Nikolić, who worked with Zlata Petković in the series "Return of the Written Off", was very shaken and short: "I really don't know what to say, they took the air out of me".

Actor and director Lazar Ristovski said that he was shaken and shocked by the news of the death of his classmate. "It just sounds like a tragedy. It's so unexpected. I'm shocked and surprised," he told Tanjug.

Zlata Petković was born in Svrljig on February 11, 1954. She finished elementary school in Smederevo, and attended high school in Smederevo and part-time in Zagreb. After an audition in 1970, Zlata was offered to participate in the competition for the most beautiful teenage girl in Yugoslavia in Zagreb, where she was chosen as the first runner-up to Anita Baturina, the future wife of Miša Kovač.

The title of first runner-up allowed her to go to the world contest for the most beautiful teenage girl in Tokyo, where she was chosen as Miss Photogenic.

Participating in the competition for the most beautiful teenage girl also brought her her first film role in Milan Jelic's film "Bubašinter".

After filming the film, she decided to enroll in the Academy of Dramatic Arts in Belgrade, but she gave up because she had only finished the first grade of high school, even though she was shortlisted. Next, in 1971, Zlata participated in the contest for Miss Yugoslavia.

She entered the Academy after finishing high school and graduated in 1976, and her colleagues were Bogdan Diklić, Ljiljana Stjepanović, Snežana Savić, Ivica Klemec, Radoš Bajić and Lazar Ristovski. After graduating, director Aleksandar Đorđević offered Petković the role of Maria in the film and series Return of the Unwritten.

She recorded a large number of compositions for children, and also participated in pop music festivals. In the famous television show "Ja sam ja" she sang more than 30 songs from the world's most beautiful musicals.

She appeared on the stage of the Yugoslav Drama Theater for the first time in 1978 in the role of Rosina in the play Trilogy about summer vacation. She performed other important roles in the plays Romantic Moods, Crossroads, Marathon, The Deceased, Communist Paradise, Migrations, Dozens of Silk Socks, Serenity and Fire, Valjevska Hospital, Revolution of the Holy Virgins, Never Despair, Florentine Hat, Powder Kegs. Her filmography includes the following works: Buba šinter, Vagon li, Partizanska eskadrila, Otpisani, Maestro...

Zlata Petković has two children, Gvozden and Andrej. The date and time of the funeral will be announced later.