Lazar Ristovski was born in Ravno Selo in the province of Vojvodina. He graduated from the Teacher College in Sombor, and then completed the Belgrade Academy of Dramatic Arts, graduating as an actor. He lives and works in Belgrade. At the beginning of his career, he was deeply dedicated to theater performance where he masterfully played the classical repertoire including Shakespeare and Moliere; his creations of Hamlet at the Dubrovnik Summer Festival - directed by Oscar winner Jiri Menzel, and his interpretations of Don Juan and Amadeus are well-known. He appeared in many productions of plays by local writers such as Ducan Kovacevic, Aca Popovic, Stevan Koprivica, Sinisa Kovacevic, Radoslav Pavlovic. He delivered more than 4,000 performances. He also appeared in more than 80 films, TV series, and TV dramas - mostly in leading roles. His memorable roles are those in Podzemlje (Underground), Tito i ja, Do koske, Tako se kalio celik, Bure baruta, Balkanska pravila, Boomerang, Pad u raj, Mali svet, Sveti Georgije ubiva azdahu. He also appeared in Hollywood productions: The November Man, Casino Royale, and Along the Roadside. He starred in several European movies as well. As a producer, he completed thirteen feature films and has directed two: The White Suit and Beli Lavovi. The White Suit - his fully authored project - had its world premiere at the Cannes Film Festival in 1999 and was the Yugoslav candidate for the Academy Award. He made one of the most significant movie roles in his directorial debut with his son, Petar Ristovski, in "King Peter I". He is the recipient of numerous national and international prizes and recognitions. The Sterija Award, The October Prize of the city of Belgrade, the Zivojin Zika - Pavlovic Award, the Sergey Bondarchuk Award, three Grand Prix at the Nis Film Encounters, the Crystal Prism, the Zoran Radmilovic Award, the Golden Orlando at the Dubrovnik Festival, the Best Actor prize at the Valladolid Festival, as well as many others... He is the honorary citizen of Zemun. He has also written two novels, one collection of poems, and two storybooks. In collaboration with his two sons - Petar and Jovan, Lazar is the owner of the production company Zillion film.