"NARF!"

- his catchphrase

“Pinky are you pondering what I’m pondering” -The Brain

“I think so, Brain” at which point he says something nonsensical - Pinky

Pinky is one of the main characters of the Animaniacs franchise, serving as one of the major characters of the original series and its reboot, one of the minor characters of Wakko's Wish, and one of the two titular main protagonists (alongside Brain) of Pinky and the Brain and Pinky, Elmyra and the Brain. He's a white lab mouse with an open-minded and empathetic personality, and he is the best friend and sidekick of Brain. Pinky often says random nonsense words and loves to have fun. Brain often claims Pinky to be the main cause of the downfall of his plans, although in reality many of his failures can be attributed to his own miscalculations and overconfidence.

Personality[]

He's lovable, sweet, friendly, open-minded and compassionate, and he is very affectionate towards his companion Brain. He's not intelligent book-wise, but he is emotionally intelligent and has a vast knowledge of pop culture. Pinky and Brain have a close bond that borders on romantic, although Pinky is usually the only one to show emotion and/or affection towards Brain.

Appearance[]

Pinky is an white mouse with big blue eyes and a small tuft of fur on his head. He has a severe overbite and a big, red, shiny nose. He has a long and slender body and a light pink tail. In older models his back was often bent and in both older and newer models his arms are tucked in, like real mice are when they stand on their hind legs. In the X-Ray scene his snout has a crack in it and his brain is extremely small and resembles a peanut.

Name[]

"Out of curiosity, how do you know that that's your name?"

"Oh, well I answered, didn't I?"

The origin of Pinky's name was shown in Project B.R.A.I.N. Pinky's name originated when Brain stated that he had more intelligence in his little "pinkie" than the scientists at ACME Labs had in their collective brains. Pinky believed Brain was calling his name. Pinky has also stated in the episode "Leave It To Beavers" that "Knee-jerk" is his secret middle name, but it's unclear if that's true or if it's just a joke.

Abilities[]

While Brain has an uncanny intelligence, allowing him to come up with his complicated plans for world domination, Pinky is not quite as bright . However, he has been shown to have superior survival instincts to Brain in "Welcome To The Jungle", making him the leader of the duo for most of the episode. He has also been shown to be an expert in trivia, possibly because his affinity for watching TV. Pinky has an incredibly high pain tolerance, remaining decently unharmed in comparison to Brain on multiple occasions.

Although Brain is quite smart in terms of logic, Pinky surpasses his mind when it comes to imagination. On several occasions, it has been shown that Pinky has a very active imagination. His seemingly random and nonsensical remarks have often been the inspirations for Brain's schemes for world domination.

In one episode, Pinky is briefly shown levitating several pieces of fruit, but when Brain questions him he stops and it is never addressed again.

Trivia[]

He is implied to regenerate

He knows the lyrics to Yakko's World in "Brain Noir"

He can name all of the world's cheeses

On several occasions, it has been indicated that Pinky has masochistic tendencies