Neighborhood dogs like our Paşa (pash-ha), whose name means “a high ranking officer,” are treated like royalty. They are given a name, made a home and supplied with more than they could ever eat which is probably why they tend to be a little bit on the hefty side. In addition, there are the park dogs. Locals leave them food and the community supplies watering bowls.

Then there are the roaming dogs. For the most part the neighborhood and park dogs are friendly. Sometimes they want a little affection and sometimes they want to be left alone. The roaming dogs can be a little unpredictable. However, the dogs that most are weary of are the packs that can be found in uninhabited areas. Last year I had a couple of introductions to these packs when being chased down while running on a trail by a lake. I have always been a lover of street dogs but am now much more cautious.

The relationship of Turks and dogs is an interesting phenomenon. Most everyone would say they love all animals, including dogs. However more than half of people would freely admit that they are afraid of dogs. When Turks think of dogs what comes to mind are street dogs which can be unpredictable and sheep and guard dogs which are dangerous. It is only in recent years that having dogs as pets at home has become popular.

Everyone agrees that these dogs should be taken care of as they are living creatures. It is said they have a “soul.” They are even protected under no kill no capture laws though many disagree about how they should be taken care of. Because street dog attacks of people and pets are not infrequent, locals are concerned about the situation.

I have felt the love and fear relationship that locals have with dogs more than ever since getting Noel. She is a 6-month-old “Ankaralı” (meaning from the city of Ankara) golden retriever. She is a bundle of joy who cannot get enough attention or playtime. I joined the tide of increasing dog ownership in Turkey during the pandemic and got Noel from a pet shop in Ankara. Well, technically I got her from the bus station. She was put on a bus in Ankara and sent to me in Adana.

While I was considering getting Noel I asked my local roommate if she liked dogs. She said that she loved them. Only later on did I find out that she is actually afraid of dogs! Thankfully, Noel quickly helped to calm her fears.

It was a couple months before I could take Noel outside. Because there are street animals on every corner, I had to wait for her to be fully vaccinated. However, when I did begin to take her outside not only was she excited but so were many neighbors, especially the children!

Many people in my neighborhood have dogs, so it hasn’t been strange to have Noel. It has actually been a means of meeting many people who want to play with Noel or introduce their kids or dogs to her. Especially during lockdowns when we have been unable to go outside besides a market run or to walk your dog, it has been a great way to spend time in the community getting to know people.

Although most everyone thinks that Noel is cute and want to pet her, many go out of their way to avoid us on the street or jump back if she even looks at them. Kids will come running up to us but then hesitate until I convince them the worst she can do is give them a kiss.

There are many things that I have learned from having a dog in Turkey, both about culture and the extra work it takes to be a dog owner. In order to take Noel outside I have to be cautious about street dogs. Also, as I am opting for not making her wear doggie shoes, I must thoroughly clean her paws when returning home. Turks keep their own floors immaculately clean and always take their shoes off when entering the home. I am thankful for the way people love Noel and have much to learn from them about hospitality to all neighbors, even hospitality to the street dogs and cats.