Scottish developer, formed in 1996. Since its inception, Vis has worked with major publishers, gaining an international reputation, and has grown from 8 to over 110 employees. Vis develops games software for major console platforms and PCs and provides interactive content for the converging technology, media and telecommunications (TMT) sectors, particularly in Interactive Digital Television ("iDTV") and broadband telecommunications. The company is headed up by Chris van der Kuyl, CEO.

The company you are trying to view is not available on IndieDB. Only publishers and developers which have games, mods and other content released on IndieDB are listed. View VIS Entertainment on ModDB.

Continue browsing the company list, to find the profile you are after.

IndigoBlue Game Studio

1 member Developer

Independent game creator group. Developers of SPLIT BULLET.

Google

6 members Developer

Google Inc is a multinational public cloud computing, Internet search, and advertising technologies corporation. Google hosts and develops a number of...

Team Meat

No members Developer

Team Meat is the brain child of Edmund McMillen and Tommy Refenes.

Star Vault AB

5 members Developer

Star Vault AB (publ) is a game developer with the goal to become the leading innovator in development of Massive(ly) multiplayer online role-playing games...

Unity Technologies

9 members Developer

Unity is all about technology that's both uniquely usable and extremely powerful. Focusing on clear interplay of features and functionality from your...

Team Jolly Roger

9 members Developer

A jolly good dev team, deep in the heart of Finland. Also the creators of Interplanetary.

The Balance Inc

4 members Developer

Founded in 2011, The Balance Inc. is an indie game development studio, born as result of a common passion for game development. Our goal is to unite immersion...

Interstellar Game Studios

1 member Developer

Behind Interstellar Game Studios stands Reinhard Zach, single-handedly responsible for design and development. After working the last couple of years...

Kollide Entertainment, LLC

1 member Developer

Kollide Entertainment is founded by industry veterans Joeyray Hall and Kevin Caldwell whose experience spans over 23 years of game and software development...

Gamieon, Inc.

1 member Developer

Gamieon is a one-developer part-time studio focused on creating video games for the desktop and mobile platforms. Since 2010 Gamieon has developed and...

HTC

1 member Developer

Founded in 1997, HTC built its reputation as the behind-the-scenes designer and manufacturer of many of the most popular OEM-branded mobile devices on...

Uber Entertainment

6 members Developer

Uber Entertainment Inc. is a small, privately held video game development studio located near Seattle, WA. Founded in March 2008 by a team of veteran...

No groups were found matching the criteria specified. We suggest you try the group list with no filter applied, to browse all available. Join now to share your own content, we welcome creators and consumers alike and look forward to your comments.