BIS 487 (LN 2064)

Topics in American Literature:

Cyberpunk

Spring 2005

David S. Goldstein, Ph.D.

Group Discussion Leadership Assignment

due as assigned below

The purpose of this exercise is to help you collaborate with classmates to help yourselves and your classmates learn more about the novels we are reading.

You will assign roles in collaboration with your group. Some of you will do parts of the presentation, some of you will help write discussion questions, and all of you will meet with the other discussion groups to assist. You may do more than one of these assigned roles.

The novel assignments are as follows:

Group Numbers:

Novel:

Discussion Questions Due at 10:50 a.m. on:

Presentation Date:

Roles Document Due at 10: 50 a.m. on:

1 and 2

Neuromancer by William Gibson Mon., April 25 Wed., May 4 Wed., May 11

3 and 4

Noir by K. W. Jeter Sat., May 7

Mon., May 16

Mon., May 23

5 and 6

Snow Crash by Neal Stephenson Mon, May 16

Wed., May 25

Wed., June 1

Discussion Questions:

In collaboration with your groupmates, write four good, substantive discussion questions. Remember that a good discussion question comes from genuine curiosity on your part, and stimulates good dialogue among group members. Good discussion questions rarely can be answered with a "yes" or "no." You may use one discussion question that you find from another source, but if you do, make sure you provide proper attribution. You must always give others credit for their intellectual property, and that includes discussion questions.

You will submit your group's questions to me as a Microsoft Word document in Blackboard (click on "Group Pages," and then on "Discussion Board," and then on "Group Discussion Leadership Questions") no later than 10:50 a.m., nine calendar days before your group is scheduled to lead the discussion (i.e., 10:50 a.m. on Monday, April 25 for Groups 1 and 2; 10:50 a.m. on Saturday, May 7 for Groups 3 and 4; and 10:50 a.m. on Monday, May 16, for Groups 5 and 6). Please have every group member's name on the document, even the ones who did not help write the discussion questions. Although some group members might not be assigned to help write the questions, every group member is responsible for their content, so I strongly encourage all group members to check and approve the questions before they are submitted to me. The questions should be carefully proofread. Do not assign the questions to particular groups. I will do that.

Article:

Every group member must read a scholarly article related to the novel or author they are helping to teach. Groups 1 and 2 must read "William Gibson's Construction of Cyberspace" by Sabine Heuser (in eReserves); Groups 3 and 4 must read "A Long Guide to K. W. Jeter" by James Cappio and "Has Success Spoiled K. W. Jeter?" by Ariel Haméon (in the "File Exchange" area of your Group Pages in Blackboard); and Groups 5 and 6 must read "Neal Stephenson's Metaspace" by Sabine Heuser (in eReserves).

Presentation:

On your group's assigned day, you will make your presentation to the class. (Remember that your classmates, not I, are your audience.) I strongly recommend practicing your presentation. Remember that you need to project your voice so that everyone in class can hear you, even in the back of the room. Frequent eye contact and a well-modulated voice helps maintain your audience's attention.

Your presentation should have these elements:

A brief biography (about five minutes) about your author, using information that you gather from research in an academic database. (I recommend any of the top three databases listed on the UW Library's guide to sources in literature at <http://www.lib.washington.edu/subject/English/>, especially the Literary Resource Center. Note that you need to log in for off-campus access, using the link at the top of the English Resources web page, if you want to use the databases from off-campus.) Your biographical sketch should cover basic information such as dates of birth and other details that help us understand the author's place in the American science fiction tradition.

A brief discussion (about five minutes) of the novel's critical reception, using information that you gather from research, using print sources, online sources, or both. (I recommend any of the top three databases listed on the UW Library's guide to sources in literature at <http://www.lib.washington.edu/subject/English/>, especially Expanded Academic Index, and Research Library Complete, which is listed near the bottom of the Library's web page. Note that you need to log in for off-campus access, using the link at the top of the English Resources web page, if you want to use the databases from off-campus.) Give us a general sense of what critics have said about the novel.

A brief summary of what you think the novel's significant themes are. Imagine that a friend asked you, "What is that book about?" If you had five minutes to answer (which you do!), what would you say?

A brief summary (about five minutes) of your assigned article's main points.

Discussion Leadership:

After your group's presentation, the members of your group will split up and join the other four discussion groups to help lead their discussions. Your job will be to keep the conversation going, and to provide insights that the host group might not have had on their own, since you are now experts on the novel, but also make sure you let the host group do most of the talking. Your group also will be responsible for running the discussion after the small groups reconvene.

Roles Document:

No later than 10:50 a.m. one week after your group's presentation, you will submit, in the "Group Pages" of Blackboard, a single Word document that describes, briefly, what each group member did for the group presentation. By that same deadline, I also want each group member to e-mail me, separately, to give me a very brief, narrative evaluation of what each presentation group member (i.e., the members of both discussion groups that collaborated on your presentation) contributed, which I will use as a "checks and balances" in conjunction with the self-reported descriptions and my own observations. If you do not know what a particular group member did, please just say so. Your comments will remain confidential, although if the majority of members of your group share an opinion about a group member that differs from that group member's self-perception, I will point out the discrepancy to that individual so he or she will have a chance to respond. Be sure to read your group's "Roles" document before you write your evaluations. Some of your group members might have done work that you did not know about.

I will e-mail the members of your group within one week to provide feedback and grades. Except for unusual circumstances, everyone in your group will get the same grade, so you have a strong incentive to help each other.

Criteria for grading:

If you have problems with any of your group members, please let me know as soon as possible.

This page last updated May 4, 2005.

Back to BIS 487 Gateway