I know what you mean. I really liked that style too. Have you read the two sequels to Neuromancer? I think they're both better books, if slightly less original. Count Zero is a particular favourite of mine.

Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? is weirder than the film Blade Runner, but it's still got that downbeat, private eye feel.

KW Jeter wrote three sequel novels to Blade Runner. I remember them having the same feel that you're looking for. They were... acceptable, but not great.

Chasm City by Alistair Reynolds might be of interest to you.

I know what you mean. I really liked that style too. Have you read the two sequels to Neuromancer? I think they're both better books, if slightly less original. Count Zero is a particular favourite of mine.

Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? is weirder than the film Blade Runner, but it's still got that downbeat, private eye feel.

Androids roughly takes place along the west coast. Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said, also by PKD, delivers a gritty Los Angeles setting. Flow's the White Jazz of Science Fiction. And here's what one critic says about White Jazz:

"Blacker than noir... Makes most other crime novels seem naive."--Publishers Weekly.

I love Neuromancer and think this is a great question.

The first 2 books I can think of that have the same feel for me are The Bohr Maker by Linda Nagata and The Windup Girl by Paolo Bacigalupi.

I'll keep thinking about this and maybe have a look through my kindle books.

The Moreau Quartet by S. Andrew Swann. An excellent mix of cyberpunk, uplift, and noir science fiction. The protagonist is an uplifted Bengal tiger private detective.

The Marîd Audran series by George Alec Effinger. Very noir set in the Middle East.

Voice of the Whirlwind by Walter Jon Williams, set in the same universe as Hardwired, another excellent cyberpunk novel.

Trouble and Her Friends by Melissa Scott. Noir cyberpunk hackers.

Noir by K. W. Jeter. The clue is in the title.

I do not know if

Daemon & Freedom by Daniel Suarez

would be regarded as cyberpunk. I did not finish Altered Carbon and read Neuromancer before Gibson became famous and could never understand what is supposed to be so great about it.

I consider Daemon & Freedom to be way more thought provoking and entertaining.

Jeff Noon's Nyquist Mysteries are pretty noir (A Man Of Shadows, The Body Library and Creeping Jenny - and there's another one, Within Without due out soon too).

Jeff Vandermeer's Finch

Graham Edwards' String City

I'm sure I have others as I like noir-ish stuff