". Kew Advertisement».

SELECT Board and 'Residence. Mr«. Weaver,

next door to Dr..Bennett, King.William,

street, ColUngwoeelr1-_j»---« "jjffî*

TWO Gentlemen con havo a Room, with Board*.

_at224Lonsdale-strcot cast -'605

AUCTION ROOM toXet, 174EllaabcUi-sticet.

COMFORTABLE Two-roomcd Cottago tobo

Let, in Little .Collins-street. Apply to Mr.

John M'Grath.'bnck of tho Protestant HaU.

_._ 401

GENTEEL Boarding House to Let, furnished.

Rent low. 229 Swaittton-street._41)3

A ROOM to Let, with fire-place. 13HusseU.

street, near Fllnders-strcct._ 020

A ROOM to Let, furnished or unfurnished, iii

Clarendon-street, Emerald HUÍ, near Scnnot'g

.torc. _ 200

A GOOD Papered Boom to Let : yard, Bemt

rato cn tranco : 13s. per week : 0 Little Oxford,

Street Collingwood._342

. "J\ FARTMENTS to Let Furnished or Unfurnished.

**? with or without Board. Napier-street, Col-

lingwood, first houso with balcony south or Ger.

strudc-stroot 350

C~0LL1N8-STREET.-To Lot, a Shop and Uouso,

or Business Premises. Robert R. Rogers,

architect survoyor, and land agent, opposlto '

ofllce of this pnper._ 100

A8TLEMAHÍE. - Hotel to ScU or Let Apply

after two o'clock at Odd PcUbws' Hotel, Little

Xonsdalc-strcet_ 00

TJMJRNISHED Apartments to Let, commanding

JJ extensivo views. Mrs. Weaver, King WiBinm

«ircct. Collingwood. Next Dr. Bennett's. 400

TTODR-ROOMED Cottage« to Let, cheap, on

JJ . Emerald Hill. A rare chance to now arrivals.

Apply to Mr. Fowler, Raleigh's Wharf. 657

GOOD Stabling foT Horses, Nine Shillings Weok

ly. 117 FRudore-lano cast Board [and Real

dence._034

OUSE and Shop to Lot Kitchen detached, in 1

a business situation. Rent moderate. M,

Sullivan, Harp of Erin, 103 King-street

_ 244scp23

HOUSE toLet,containing six rooms and kitchen,

situated In La Trobe-street cast four doors

from KUzabcth-atreet Apply at the Bundera?

Arm«, Cardlgnn-strcot_Ila sop 23 '

INNS to Let and for Sale Nicholson and Roach,

Bonrke-Btrect_d42 ,

MARKET-GARDEN. - To Let within three1

miles of Melbourne, 4 acres or Land, in full

rultivation, with excellent Cottago ana Stable.I

Rent very moderate, and tho present crop, which is

ready for market, to be taken at a valuation.

Colclough ami Whyte, 51 Swanston-street 158

MARKET GARDENERS.-To Let on Lease, Six

Acres of rich black soil, with frontage on tho

Darebin Creek. C. Manton, 1S5 Lonsdalc-Btrcot

west_257 I

rlJ.TON COTTAGE. - ToLet a Four-roomeJ

M1

a

»tono Cottage In Sinlth-etrect CoUingwood,

at the Junction of JohnBon-street_32 . ,

FFICES to Let, Cheap. Ingles, Adam, and

Gresham, 41 Collins-street weat. 369 oct 2

1CHMÖND on tho Hill.-to be Let a Four. |

^.v roomed Brick Cottago, with largo Yard, Ice.

i 11. Clark, Si Colllns-strcet cimt._ 410

i T> ICI IM OND.-To Let, a Three-roomed detached

XV Brick Cottage, In Highctt-strect, with largo

Îorden. Apply toMr. Py tikes, Mr. Homo's, solicitor

lucen-strcot ._312

i ~R OOM to Let, Ivy Cottage, rlght-or.way, oppo- '

' Xli sito Governor Bourke Hotel, Little Lonsdale.

street east 3

ÍT) ARK Chance Tor a Grocer-Shop, and DwcRIng

JX house, Sign, owl Fixtures to Let, four doors

«outh of Studley Arms, WclBngton-strcet Colllng

wood j rent low._251

OOMS to Let, furnished, with or without

boord, 229 Swanston-street Terms moderate,,

R

S

OOM to Lot, |ncar Colllns-Btreet £1 per week.

Address Room, ofUco of this paper. 475

HOP to Let in Swanston-street Inquire at

No. 14, near Bank of-Victoria._350 '

TABLES for~Ten Horses, with Haylofts and

Cottages adjoining, 155 Lonsdalo-strcet xvest*

_230 y

(t^llOP and Wurchouscs to Let together or sopa

?O rate, near Post Office. 49 Bourke-street east.

_240

a IO Let, a comfortable Four-roomed Brick Cot

. togo, with kitchen, at 232 King-street 23P

TU Let, a Houso of two rooms, and a large shed

and yard, at 159 Russell-atrcet_218

TO Let, cheap, Five-roomed Brick House, South

Melbourne, opposlto Government Paddock.

Apply John Day, premises._130 sep 33

O Let a four-roomed Brick House, 33 Perry

ttrcct cast, CoUingwood, near Sawyers' Arm».

T

TO Let, two Cottages, In Romeo-tcrracc. off

Bourke-street cast, opposite tho Black Bull

Inn. ' 0

aiO Let a Bakehouse awl Oven, in a central situ-

ation, in working orJcr. Apply by letter,

Baker, ofllce of this paper._10

TO Let a House nnd premises, Ti Fllndere-lnne

west, lately occupied by Walton, Butt nnd

Co. ns a »tore. Apply to Jeremiah Corcoran, Dova

Motel, Richmond._5

Wvivb small Cottages to Let rent low. Apply ta

J. Mrs. Wilson, Bcudigo-strect, North Mel

Jponnic._P2_

J|U> Let situated at the corucrof Smith and Peel

X street», Collingwood, a first rato Eight-stalled

Stable, xvith coach house, hay loft, Ac. Apply f

Mr. Risby, on tho premises._23y

TO Let, Chnpcl-strcct Prahran, near Gardlnor'a

Creek Road, largo Shop, l8 x 23, with Ikltchcn

Jjelilml and four roomn up stairs. Rent only

j.4 10«. per week. Apply nt tho house, or to Mr.

Maxwell, Punt Road, opposite South Yarra Board

Jug House._107 y

>|!0 Let, in Lu Trobo-Btrcct cast, a Shop nnd

X House, containing six rooms and kitchen,

with n thrcc.stttUed stable and hay loft nnd largo

cellar, bakchouso and oven complete. Tho shop la

atted completo, with counter«, shelve«, aud Ut-

ting», <tc. Enquire of Potcr Davis and Co., City

Mart, Colllns-strcet

105 1

TO Let, n Four-roomed Cottage. Apply to Jame J

Watson and Co., Bourke-street west 304

TO Let, Brick" Cottago. two Room«, Stable« at

tachetl. Apply M. Sullivan, Harp of Erin,

King-street_ 245 sop 23

TO Let next Dr. Long's, Stephen-street, a Thrco

roomed Verandah Cottage, Apply S3 Flin

»ltTS-lnno east. _ 354

TO Let, a Shop with thrco Room«, nnd Fixture«

complete. HS Little Lonsdalo-strcet east.

lient moderato. Inqulro at the back. 410

T"~0 I.ct Stone-built Corner Store, Krrol-Btreot,

opposlto Empira Hotel, North Nclbourne.

lient moderato._373 y

Ö Lct-ComTortablo Two.roomod Cottage.

Apply Doctor Atkins, opposlto Kraplro Hotel,

Krrol-Btrcet, North Melbourne_372 y

TO Let, two comfortable Blx-roomeU Cottages in

North Melbourne. A. Fraser and Co., 14 Col.

Hns-strect_ *»<>''

TO Let, Stono Cottago, ono room and chamber,

near Wcsleynn Home Torms moderato. Ap.

ply David Lumsden, Paragon ClubBoardingHouso,

on tho grouniL _ 847

TO Let, two neat Four-roomcd Cottages, at-

tached: situation healthy, Stables, Ao.;

rent most moelcrato. Morton, Heidelberg House,

»mlth-strcot, Collingwood._ M3

s/tiO Lot In Chotvrynd-strcot, North Melbourne,

J. a nlco wdl-flulsbcd two-roomed Cottago, with

Enabling._ 'o2

JTiO Let, a flrat-rato Shop, with plate-glass liront,

JL centrally situated, "tor further particulars,

apply ot 42 Qucou-streot, opposlto tho Wesley*»

¿tstO Let, with lodgors, a Board and Lodging

X House; good-will and fixtures; terms «70s

101 Swaustoii-strcot. 310

/pOI.ct, a llouflo in Brunnwick-Btrcct, Colllng

X wood, with Stable and Coach-houBo attached.

Apply to Mr. Mackinnon, ofllco of thin paper.

_«Qloot 3

TO Let, In tita beat part of Richmond, a Cot-

tage, containing four rooms, pleasantly situ

»ted In a nice gurdon. Apply 70 Cuauoery.lanc.

22T

IO Lot, a Tn'o-roomcd Cottage, rear ol' r>l Swan«

dton-Birt'ct, near Great Bourkc-strect.

__ 828

TWO-KOOMED HOUSES, Stovo ando von, 21s,

weekly. Fowke'd-buildings, Bank-street west.

Kmerald Hill. _ 180 y

TO Let, Three Four-roomod Cottages in Colling-

wood. Bent very moderate. Apply to Fulton

nnd Smith, Foundry, opposite Colo's wharf. SOO

TO~J.Pt7 n comfortablo Boom, with flrc-plnoo.

i Bent l8«. 103 Lonsdalo-strcot cast- 002

TO Let, n now Four-roomod Brick Cottage, lu.

nulro back, 135 Littlo Culllns-strcot cast.

_ 617 _

TO Let, a Three-roomed HouBC.'wlth yard. Hone

ti per week. Apply to Mr. Saint, l8 Groat

Colllns-Htrcctcsst._B13

TO Let, that Shop and Premisos adjoining tho

Victoria Bank. Apply 00 Swanston-Btrcot.

_»_000

TO Lot, n Tivo-roomcd Cottage. Apply to Mr.

Tully, Albert-street, next tho Baptist Chapel.

O Let, cheap, a largo Iron Store. Apply to Mr.

Tully, nest tho Baptist Chapel, Albert-street.

_ _6o7»Qii«H

TO Lot, a Two-roomed liouso, plastered and pa

pcrcd. Apply Hot Bourke-stroot east. OOP

TO Grocers, Ac-Pino Premisos to be Lot, olios«

in a good stand. Apply Bato, offlco of thin

»«per. _OHO

~0 Let, two capital Booms, first floor Iront, omi

._ very largo ; W Kltenbotli-strcot. 448

TO bo Let, an Uiifurnlabod Boom, Inquire on

UioprcmitOB, 4 Carson's Cottages. Colllns-stroet.

*" «83sop2B

rpO «-.i, CiipUui shop, 17« liUmboth-Biroet.

-

New Advertisements.

TO Let, Shop and Three Booms, In one or tlkt

best situations in Great Bourke-strect. An«

ply toDwwiuidM'Ki3anl*5«Iteiulte-sUt^w»snV *

401 sep 28 i

TO bo Let, the splendid family Residence, til

BusecH-Btrect. Apply 83 Bnsscll-streeL

s 474

TO Let, that new Shop, and Two-story Stort

behind, in Bourkc-strcet wosf," opposite tho'

Horse Basaar; the shop is 40 x30, and the stott,

«ill contain four or five hundred tonsofgootls,

. aplendld opening for au enterprising man ai

auctioneer, wholesale grocer, and wine merchant,

or for a rostaraunt; rent moderate. DAVTD

YOUNG, S ColUns-street, upstairs 132 sop 30

TO Let, the FamUy Residence of the late M.

Davis, Esq. ; it is situate on the Punt Road,

South Yana, a few yards the Punt side of

Gardiner's Creek Road, and next to W. Powell,

Esq. ; it contains seven rooms, kitchen, scullery.

Coachhouse, stables, loft, watertank, and every

other convenience necessary for a family: rent

£350 per annum, if for two years, or ¿400 ter one.

Further particulars al the house, or G. WENDEN,

Esq., Survey Office._170 y

;XO Lot, Houso and Shop centre of Smith-street.

-. alBO, Cottago of four roomB and kitchen, £310s,

per week, Brunswick. For Solo, 100 feet to Weston,

street, by 135 deep, on which is erected a subston«

tial two-roomed Cottage ; the wholo for 1300-ono.

fourth coal!, remainder three, six, and nine months.

Also, nt Collingwood, Building Allotments, 33 by

100, £3 per foot- long credit. Jtfnrybynong.-Two

and a-linlf aero Allotment, fine rich land, price MO.

Apply to Mr. DASHWOOD, Collingwood House

nnd Land Registry Office, Gertrude-street. 6801

TO Let, a Houso In one of the principal business!

streets in tho city, presently used ns coffee

and refreshment rooms, and doing a flrst-rata

business in that line. Tlio IIOUBO conslts of large

front shop, two bed rooms, kitchen and yard ad

{oining, with an entrance from both front and

lack. Apply next door to Mclboarno Baths, Littlo

CoUlnt-strcet east._031

FOB Sole, two fine Singing Bclglun Canaries. Ap.

ply at 27 Flinders-street weat._00

lOB Sale, two good Feather Beds. Apply at «si

Fllitders-etreet weat. 67

F

OB Sale, Zino House, lined wood, price ¿£¿10.

. Apply Wood, 215 SwanBton.Btrcot. 3.7

OK Snlc, a First-rate Slate Bagatelle Board,

Apply at 42 Qucen-Btrcct. 222

FOB Side, a splendid French Organ, quite new

with trumpets. Mrs. Fraiser, oil Bourkc-strect,

east._210 sop 28

XTOK Sale 21 acres of Land, fenced in, two mile*

JD from South Yarra Pound. Address ii. G., 78

EBsabctb-strect. 203

F°.

R Sale, Two Hobson's Bay Ballway Shares'.

Apply to B. Grcssen, solicitor, Chancery-lane.

34»

FOB Stile, a handsome Pony, quiet in saddle,

and light harness; a fair trial given. Apply

to J. Roger«, 103 Stephen-street._131 eep 30

*CK)B. Sale, cheap, Chapel Doors and Frames,

J? complete. Boot. Huckoon, builder, Welling-

ton-street, Collingwood. 133 sep 2D

FOB Sale, an Allotment of Land in Burney

strcct. near the Cremorne Gardens, and st

corner allotment near the Star and Garter, Rich-

mond ; price £310s. per foot. Apply to B. Gresson,

solicitor, Chancery-lane._370 y

TpOR Sale, at ¿Mount Fraser, Sydney Road, 25

JP miles from Melbourne,-20 Primo quiet Milcli

Cows, ti Hil Calves at foot. Also, about 20 weU.

bred young Cattle, of various ages, John Fi oser,

Mount Fraser. ltu oct 20 d and b

F

OR Sale, two splendid Dog Carts, Jual arrived,

two Spring Curta, sovcrnl acts of Gig and Cart

Harness, Saddles, Ac. like« lae, Lyona' Patent

Sausage Machine, at the iron store opposite tho

Fitxlloy Hotel, Great Naplcr-atrcct, Coiliiigwood.

_'_144 sep 30

TJiOB Sale, very cheap, on liberal terms, a Plect»

J} tof Land, 00 feet, to a street of 30 feet, by 200 feet

deep, close to Simpson's-road and Church.street,

containing good stone under first-rate soil. Pullar,

Prichard, and Co., Eureka Store, Simpson's-roso.

»ear Simpson's Hotel._130

FOR Sole a Portable Steam Engine of eight

horno-powor, working up to twelve, with

tuws complete. ¿Uso a Bcrdnn's Quartz Crushing

¿Machine, largo size, together or separately. Apply

to Thos. 31. Machattie, Abbott's Hotel, Lonsdalc

strcct. 200 sep 23

"UK)R Sale, a thorough-bred Saddle Horse, trained

J? to cross country, and unequalled by any linos.

In leaping. WiU bo sold lo«', his owner « Ishing

si horao broken to harness. Apply to J. W. Torroy,

«FUndera-strcct, third door from Elizabeth-street.

_:_L.I

TJtOIl Sale, cheap, the Store 40 Western Market

JP Great Collins.Btreet, opposite tho Clarendon

Hotel; tlio situation being flrat-rate for many

PUSillL'S3C3, _ SOI

_JI011 Salo 2 Amorican Weighing Machines, and

JP n sot of splendid Show Cannistcrs, cheap.

Argus Stores, past Bed Lion, Hawthorne. 187

OB Sale, on easy terms, choice Allotments of

Land, facing tho Government Beserve, on

Emerald Hill. Apply to Robert Goodwin, Auc-

tioneer, Croira Auction Booms, 34 Collins-street

west._530

XpOBSale, cheap, a Quarry Allotment of Land.

XV Apply at 34 Little Bourkc-strect east. 015

FOR Salo a Water Cart, nearly ne«-. Apply to

John CuUcn, Emerald Hill, or Mr. Fornam'tl

Hotel._._007

TJtOR Snle, Spring Curt, Horse and Harness, cora.

JJ pletc, very cheap. Argus Store, past Boil

Mon, Hawthorne._685

FOB Sale, n First-rateOnc-HorBePhaeton; prion

£40. Apply to J. Scott, at Murray's Livery

Btablcs, Little Cullins-strcct weat;_270

KGLE IKON and Sheet Lead on Sale, at B. and

A. Porters, 05 WHHam-atrcct._328 _

A KGLE IRON for Snlc. Apply to John Kinross,

coachbulldcr, Klng.atrcct,_348 *

JiOARDINGHOUSE for Solo on reasonable

terms.K Apply to T. Darton, 0 Eastern MaT

kot._351

A HANDSOME Cat, with her first four Kittens,

for Sale. Address B., office of this paper.

ALE nnd Porter.-Four thousand donen anti

fifty hogshcaels. Burton Pynscnt, 205 Elina,

freth-strcot_450

ARTIFICIAL Flics, in any quantity to order,

at Morgan and Gosbcll's, 70 EUzabcth-etreet.

_193

APIECE or Land, opposite tho Medíanlos'

Arm» Inn, Llttlo Collins-street cast, to bo

leased entire, or in lots. Apply to Knight, Kemp,

and Kerr, 49 Swanston-street. 430 y

MERIGAN Sawn Laths, also Venetian Blind

Lnths, on Sulo nt E. Crawley'» Melbourne

fSteam Saw anil Moulding MiUs, Bourke-street

west, near King-street_578 sop 30

ADELAIDirFlour.-Magarey'« and Duffield'«!

bruiid« on Sale. Bernard Martin, 31 Flinders.

lano wi'Bt._625 oot 2

AVERY small mid ivell-selcctcd Invoice, of

30 tbrco-tocd Grape», l8 Tour-toed do., ia

Muck linkes, mid 37'Huy Forks, without hundios.

Address Invoice, ofllce ol' this paper. 404

LACK Pepper, on Solo by Thomas Kldston,~82

1 Sivauston-strcot_127 oct 2

BRANDY.-Flvo hundred cases and twenty

hogsheads nt Burton Pynscnt's,205 Elizabeth

ttreet_.451

BERDAN'S Quarts Crushing Machine, in lull

operation. Can bo nuppllcd with Quicksilver,

by Tootul Brown and Co., Collina- street west.

_i400 ^

RAN-1000 Bushels, cheap. Butler and Nell

son, Eastern Market_,633

BEAUTIFUL COLLECTION or Birds, Parrots,

Cockatoos, Sholl Parrots, at 133 Llttlo Collins,

street east_048

BRAN.-For Sale, Adelaide Bran, ex Stoamor

Manchester. Craw-ford Maine, 70 l'Endors

lano west_.007

BUTTER, Double Boso Cork, very superior

sample. Cooper and Davies, 123 Flindnrs.

«Arcot, Wharf._1625

BOOKS, Watches, Flute», Guns, any tiling, ovory

thing, Purchased by Ninnis, 123 Llttlo Col.

llns-strect enst 004

B

BRICK MACIIINE.-Patont Brick, Pipe, nnd

Tile Machino on Snlo by Josephs, Lnngelnn,

«mel Co., 55 Llttlo Colllns-atreet cast_291

»RICKS, Flro nnd Building, on Sale. Slmmor»,

> Pullar, ami Co., 103 Collins-street west 3JÎ

C*n7ÖWN-GLASST^Tyno nnd Tees Company's

l8 x 12, upwards. Neavo and Co., 29 Markot

«treot_70_

CRUC111LES, Assay Apparatus, and Elght.elny

Clocks, fur Sale. S3 Queeii-stret-t 173 y

AÛDrJ^bear, where'« tho Cheeta ? Tho Rou

catii?' Go to.17 Wllllnm-strcet-got n Box

Ilnrridge'a Sarcx Pill», mid kill tho vermin. 433

OALS, at rciiuoed prices, delivered in town

or suburbs. Cooper and Davies, 123 Fllmlor«.

»troot, Wharf._Mia

COCHIN -CHINA FOWLS' EGGS, warrantai

from pure bred fowls, nt Mr. John Y ewer's,

Merri Creek. Price, 40s, por dosen. Order« loft uu

Iluysom'», confectioner, Bourko-strcot, next »loor

to tho Albion._433 sep '¿i

CORRUGATED Gulvunlsed Iron on Snlo by tho

uwlerfllgnetl ¡ vnrlou» dimensions, mid nil

rungo«, In lot» to suit purehaser«. Abo, Gnlvunlseil

Staves, üntter», und Vnsteulngs. David Mooro,

Daurkcstioetwcst .450

?

ilTY BAW MILLS, Bourke.stroot onst-W. mid

P. Grlpo rcspcollUlly invito tho'nttontton of

mo trnelo to their nrcsont »took of overy dekorln. I

tionof iinibei-, Bolld und cut, or sawn to ordor, by

tho most approved machinery, in a suporioc

manner,_.601 ]

COLONIAL GARDEN SEEDS or every vuYioty. j

Miicilomilil, seedsman, Scotch btore, 103

Bourke-street east._' 00«

OAL, x'ery cheap, only £4 per ton on tlio Whiirf

by Thorne, Kimber aud Co., 9l.Fllndera.lnno

west. _.__?Í2jí',l'.,''J

ÏGARS, Grnwlsoñ, on Snlo, A. Bnumgurtner,

__S9 Fllntlers-litno west_2tU out 0

DAREBIN-ON-CHEEK.-For Snlo Kovorul throo.

nor« Allotmont« In this splendid now town-

ship, Apply to W. S. Chnuncey, 30 Qucon-streot.

t_ 233

ENGLISH COA1.B.-For Sale, 80 Ton« English

Stettin Coal». In tlio Bay, ready tor lmmodtuta

delivery. Apply to Robert Davison, 121 l'Uiuler».

street, opposite Colo1« Whurl, 049 '

O

c

New Advertisements.

EMERALD HILL.-An AUotment cheap,'ne*

the Myrt Hotel. J. Martin1, opposite-dé»*,

lower ferry. - - -.500 sop «B

EMERALD HILL,-For Salo, ono of tlio most

fashionable and unlqno Residences ever

erected in Victoria. It consists of six rooms, with

an ornamental verandah front, French windows,

looking over an extensive ' government reserve,

with a splendid view in tho distance of Uobson's

Buy and the Yarra Yarra. It has also a view of the

high road to Melbourne and tho Bench, where eon«

vcyanccs pass dally. A convenient walk from the

Botanical Gardens and St. Kilda, and in every re-

spect adapted for a suburban residence for arrivât«)

gentleman, officers under Government, or others in.

the higher Bpbcres of life.

Apply to J. KENNEDY and CO., 41 BwOnBton

Strict.

Price, £1000, half cash and three and six months,'

Title good, being a direct grant from the Crown.

FISH, fresh every morning, at Morgan and Go#"

bcH's noted dopot, 70 Elizabeth-street, 100

FARMS-Farms.-Fine Agricultural Farms, of

from 5 to 600 acres, at easy distances front

Melbourne, for Solo by James Watson, 51 Queen.

Btreet. 270 oct 2 bl

FIFTY COUPLE Laying Hens, Fat Goose, Rsb

tlts, Pigeons, at 133 Little CoUlns-strooC

cast. 649

Paterson, 130 FUnders-streot west.

?fjUREWOOD.-To bo Sold, tho Growing Wood on

JP Two Thrce-acre Allotments at Darebin, three

and n-lialf miles from Melbourne. One allotment

contains the heaviest timber on thia estate, whlclt

is reached by an excellent road. Offers addressed

to A.B.C., olllce of tills paper, will rccelvo early at

tcntton._ 809

BUYERE CHEESE on Sale, A. Baumgartuflr,

.B9 Flindcrs-lano west. 203 oct 0

G

G

BAIN, Coffee, Pepper and Spices Ground at

City Saw Mills._500

¿OOAT.-Splendid Irish Goat ter Sole, recently

\JC imported. Apply to Mr. Prince, Moorc-strcct,

Colllngnood. 80

GALVANISED Tinned Iron.-Morewood, Rogers

mid Co. have this day reduced tho price of

their Patent Galvanised Tinned Iron Tiles. D. A.

Cannau, agent, 20 FUndcrs-lano cast, September

25th. 158

OENERAL MERCHANDISE, Old Silver, Cari-

osities, Booka, Purchased by Ninnis, 123

Littlo Collins-strcct cast. 005

H

AXAI J., Adelaide, and Chilian Flour, on Sale

by Thomas Kidston, 82 Swanston-strcct.

124 oct2

HOTELS and Restaurants, regularly supplied

with «UBII. Morgan and Gosbcil, 70 Elizabeth

HAY, Flour, Posts and Bails, and Paling, in

quantities to suit purchasers, for Sale. H.

W. Patton nnd Co., 8 Minclng-lane. 635

HOTEL.-For Solo the Goodwill of a superior

Hotel. Terms moderate and cosy. Nichol-

son and Beach. 010

HOUSES for tho now diggings, ready fitted fot

erection, and easy of transport, on Sale, by

A. Wolfen, Flindcrs-lancwest, next William-street.

253

LHON Hurdles.-700 Iron Hurdles for Sale at

Kidner'i Timber Yard, St. Kilda. 183 oct 0

IRON HURDLES for Sale, suitable for sheep

stations, or as ornamental fences in gordons,

all put together, nnd have merely to be struck into

tho ground. Apply at the stores of Lango anil

Ploos van Amstel, 153 LaTrobc-strcct west. ,

208 sep 28 I

JONES nnd THOMAS'S Dress Shirts, bnndsomost

in Melbourne. Elegant style, beautiful fit,

splendid material. Prices moderate. 045

JONES and THOMAS'S ESTABLISHMENTS,

-Lonedale-airoct. above Bowe'a Circus ; Eliza,

bcth-strccl, above Cctholic Chapel, opposite side.

_-_MO '

JUST LANDED.-For Sale, superior Spring

Carts, with patent axles, Water Carts, anti

Box Drays. To be seen cn tltu Whan, opposite tho

Custom-hoUBO. two sop 27

LIAIK, of ovcry description, at Wharf prices

Hutchison's Stores, Great Brunswick-street,

Collingwood._ 83

T IVE Shrimps, every Saturday, at Horgan and

JJ GoBsbcU'B, 70 Elizabeth-Btrcct._19*_

LANGHOLM.-If this should meet the eye of

Neil Shaw, late of Langholm, Dumfrieshire,

Adam Beattie, and Janet Dalgliesh wish him to

write them immediately, at John Tate's, Teviot

Cottege, Emerald Hill._ 537

MILCH COW, accustomed to St. Kilda, for

Salo; quiet, and Just Halved. Greenwood

Vllln, Ackland-strecL_430 sop 27

MA

Of Turkey, Russia, Austria, and Black Sea f ho

North and Bullio Sen« with plans of St Petl r»

burg, level, Ac, Chart« of the Mediterranean, wl h

apian or Fortified Town« JAMES BLUNDELL

and CO 44 Collins street west_ 413

AGM1 ICbNT Moire Antique», Choleo Ball

and Dress Vestlngs, beautiful bllk\ clxtt and

flush Jones and Thomas_043

ARR b Patent Fire proor bafe» largo «lie«., at

29 William street Market square 047

AIT Malt-Splendidsample,40s pcrbushcL

Simpson and Co., corner Mincing lane.

Wharf_529

MÏS1ERH-S OF THh COURT, io., lent to

read by Ninnis, 123 Llttlo CoUins street

east_603

MUSICAL BOM- 3 on Sale, by A. Baumgartncr,

89 Hinder« lano weat_2C2oct 0

MILL BOARD, and Royal, Medium, and Doiñy

Writing Papers, on Sale Lucas Brothers,

Collins street_230

MARINE ItrSIDFNCh, Brighton, for Solo -

The undersigned la instructed to bell a »nug

Family Residence at this dcBghtful watering

place, with four and a half acres of garden nud

cultivation paddock. There i« every convenience

connected with the property, including four stall

Stable, largo fowl) ard, piggeries, Ac

A E WHEATI EY, corner of Market-square

255y

NORTHCOTL. Merri Creek.-Four Government

Allotments for Salo by James Watson 51

Qnoen street 280

NORTH MM HOUKNE -Quarter Acre Allot-

ment, in Wreck) n street, for Sale. Colclough

awl Whyte, 51 Swanston street. 157

01

OLD Curiosity fahop -Gentlomcn tilth dtrly

boots, expend 2s. for a good set of Shoo

Brushes_72

OLD Curiosity Shop -rho Cha«o Tho Chase.

Two splendid Hunting Costs for bale, re.

marknblo cheap 73

LD Curiosity Shop-Strung Cart and Gig

Spring», 0 plato scroll irons, complete, 30«

per pair 74

0

LD Curiosity Shop -A Ught bpring Dray for

Snlo, Prlco 113 a decided bargain_78

ON Salo at David Mortimcn'», 61 Htlo Bourku.

street cast, 3 tons Whlto Lead, J do stono

colour 1 do bluo and greca, 800 gaUons Lamp aud

faint Oils _ 480

POSTS 'and "RAH S on Sale, James Keele, 41

Market squaro west_622

PANAMA HATo (wide brimmed) Clovo

Brothers mid Co, 114 Lonsdale street west

353

PATENT 8110r, throe tons Maotlcr nnd Thom

son, 175 and 104 Llltabcth atrcct 3sl sep 30

PANAMA HArs on Salo by tho undersigned.

David Moore Bourke-street west_457

Vllll bl RV11) FRUITS Jam», and Ploklc«, at

X Burton Pynscnt's, 205 Elisabeth street

_419

POUI TRI, Wild Fowl and Game, may bo re-

gularly obtained, al Morgan and Gotbtlls,

7l)I Utnlctli strcot_ 102

POIir Sherry, Spirit«, Guinness «extra Stout, all

ol the very beat description Imported by

W F Brow ii, I a Trobe «tree» between Bwan»ton

nnd Ultnbotit Btrcots_123 oct 2

Pulli Ml nnd Ale-For bnle, 1301 Doten, ne

Lauree It P Harris nnd Co, 31 Queen street

_000y__

Pubis and HAU a Paling, and other Van Die

men s I nnd Produce or superior quality, de

llvcrcd at Sandridge, WUUarottown, baltwntet

Uiver, or Queen s Wharf U W Patton and Co,

S Mincing lane, Wharl 638

Killi Cilanco -I-or Sale tlio wholo or part ol a

well established catii business enterprise,

xil Ich requires no further outlay, has no compe-

tition , I« e nimble ol almost indefinite extension,

nnd IB not dependent upon the state or tho time«

The busiuesD öfters un unusual opportunity lbr nn

ictlie man wishing to insure it few hundred

pound» Particulars made known by addressing

M N O nfllco ol till i pnper_1120 _

111 I P Sill ARS I and IL Sorbey», on Bile,

William Bu) los and Co , 07 Collius street

_'_?3i_

Sri AM S \W Mil I -englno eight to ton hone

»lower, Wanted Roxburgloy Thomson. Vi

Hinder» lane tust 2i)7

SPRING ( Alt 14- 1 ti o mott substantial bprliur.

Carl« lui Snle To mnrkot (cordonera nul

partie« l rociedliig to digging» with good», thoy

uro most uilinlrabl) adapted, being iñudo un 1er

the sin erlulemleneo ol a gentleman who had bren

a numb r ut }onrs In the colon) On view and

Íiric» t malm ii nt 4 Knight mid Allison s build,

ng» No1 til Molbouruo_ 40J

TO Di ii) men -"bcotoh Oat«, splendid sampln

11» »cr bushel blmpsou and Co, importers

corner Mlitctng lane, Wharf 628

rno Din)men-Cracked Muire sploudld sample,

JL io» Uti btixhel Simpson and Co, Importers,

corner Mluclw, lime, Mharf_ 627

ritO Dru) U» n- Ilne«t Colonial Hay, 23« pee

J. ow t Simpson nnd Co, corner Mincing lane,

S

T

I] NI llir bule elienp Can re milln on tho

ground lonllttloDourkontrootitest (Wl

ÍTlJMAN S MOU!, III wood, on Snlo hy llloma»

Kleinton, to! bttiuitttOJi street )2A oct i

New Advertisements.

TARTARIC Acid, on 8alo by .Thomas KUstc* .

y taswanrton-sttcet.. J, . .. 7Ti28oeit»

KMT for Saleras x15, G-tmte-Miid.Boardin«..

house, near ToU Bar, Richmond-road. 70

O Be Sold, a small Store, snltsble tera Married

Couple without Family, In a healthy and

first-rate situation. Inquire at Ur. Palmer's store,

Victoria-parade, CoUlngtvood._84, .

TO Bo Sold a Bargain, a flrst-rato Framed Tent,

13 x lu, boarded floor, lined, and American

Btovo, tdl complete. Early application ia necessary.

Inquire at Mr. Kerr1«, snilmtvkcr, Coveutry-street,

?BmeraldTIlll._ 108y

O bo 8old, a Square Piano, by Stoddart. As it

must bo disposed of immediately, it will be

sold for £25. Apply to Mr. Court, chemist, ¿Made«,

line-street, North Melbourne. 293

TO Timber Merchants and Shippers of Building'

Materials.-MeBsrs. II. PEACHEY and CO.,

having opened a Yard on tho Richmond-road for

the Solo of every kind of Building Stock, are wil-

ling to undertake the sale of gooda on Commission,

No charge for storage. Highest- references.

Orders received at Mr. Knight's Offices, 07 Swan

iton-strcct._ 307

THE Land Que-tion.-Just published "Tho

Band," 8vo., price 4s. Importance of it*

culture to the general prosperity of Victoria. Con-

tents, inclado ..-the EffcctB of Immigration Is)

tending to piodnco a Commercial crida, without

due attention being paid to tho encouragomont of

Husbandry; the Land Question; Monopoly; Be

molly suggested ; the Labor Question, «to., Ac.

JAMES BLUNDELL and CO., 44 Collins-street

west._455

TO bo Sold by private burgnin.tho following

Articles belonging to tho estate of Tolsen ana

Stewart :-Plle-driving machine, monkey anil

chain, chain-cable, double block and full, a boat,

SOO feet red-gum planking, beams stringybark,

windows and door-iramcul 2 double benches, anti

» few sundries._507 Bep 27

O Wine Merchants and Cordial Manufac-

turers.-Belt's Patent Canaula for Wlno Bot-

tles. Apply at ¿VL Ford's, Chemist, Swanston

Street. Tliob ' '"-'

T

.titutc for wax.

TO Innkeepers and others.-Gruyere Chceso on

Sale, by A. Buumgartncr, 89 FRndcrs-lano

west._ 205 oct 8

TO bo Sold, on the Banks of tho Merri Creek,

four and a-hnlf miles from Town, a well-builc

Six-roomed Stono Cottage, with Verandah, anti

Twenty Acres of very superior Land, delightfully

situated on ono of the prettiest Rends of the Creole.

Tho Cottage; tho late residonco of T. W. Good-

win, Esq., lins been furnished regardless of coat,

with everything that can contribute to comfort,

and is so situated as to be effectually screened front

tho hot winds, and yet to command a varied land-

scape of considerable extent. It la surrounded

by n Garden of about two acres in a high state of

cultivation, planted with vines and fruit-trees, Ac,

Tcrma very Bberal.

Apply to P. DAVIS and CO.. 43 Colllns-stroet

cast._3403 oct a

VEBY Desirable ADoimcnts, on tho most accom-

modating terms, for Sate on Emerald Hill ;

a good chance for thoso in quest of freeholds.

Apply to Robert Goodwin, Auctioneer, 334 Great

Coulns-Btrcct «-oat, Crown Auction RoomB. 505

VICTORIA LAND SOCIETY Sharea particl

patingin next Distribution for Solo. Share.

holder, 127 Buasi'll-atrccL_151

W

ZINC on Sale, cheap. Mactlcr and Thomson,

175 and 104 Elisabeth-street. 380 sop 30

met ACRES Farm, nine miles from Melbourne,

4J O fronting Ballaarat-road, and cloao to Koro-

roit Creek, for Solo by James Watson, SI Queen.

street,_207

?lf\ f\f\f\ FEET Baltic Deal, soUd and out*

1\JAAMJ on Solo at City Saw Mills.

'_589

O-Ta /~B¿ralrB FEET Floorlng.boarda on SalcJ

a.U)UUU cheap. City Saw Mills. 588

O/T, i~\f\f\ FEET Lining-boards on Sale,

¡J*J.\J\J\J at 20s. per hundred feet. City

SawM'llls._881,

t_f\ r\r\f\ FEET Weatherboards on Sale

QKJAJKJVj at 2d. per foot. City Saw MlBs.'

7_580

-IA A An A BEST Flemington Bricks, on Salo.

1UU.UUU Silvcrlock and Lane, 30 Queen's

street._164

COLLINGWOOD_Mrs. Anderson, Mrs. Drum

mond's, Cambridge-street, thrco doors from.

Stirling-street, washes and dresses clothes. 840

CHRISTIAN YOUNG MEN'S ASSOCIATION_

An adjourned Special Meeting of this Associa-

tion will bo held at tlio Victoria Grammar School

Honse, Collins-strect oast, thia evening, at half

5nat aoven o'clock, to consider tho expediency of

liaolvlng tho Association._543

CHAMPION.-This powerful draft horso wiU

stand for the season at tho Brickmakers' Arms,

Simpson's Road. Champion is a light-grey out or

a Clydesdale mure by a champion horse, bred by

Mr. Getanbiiry. He ia freo from all vice and Is a

euro foid-gctter. Imported from Van Dlomon'si

Land by David Nesbit. Terms, ti, guarantee

¿£8 8s. ^^^^^ 332 Bep 27

C~AUTÍON.- My wife, Adah Zilicr Mundar

having left mo without a just cause, I w11,

not bo nns« érable for anv debts she may contract

from this date. Daniel Munday, St. John's-lanet.

Melbourne._80 ,

EARTH, ready dug, may bo lind for carting

away. Apply 204 Bourkc-slrcet cast. 073 y

EXHIBITION, Melbourne, 1854.-Notice.-Ex-

hibitors of Machinery and heavy objects aro

requested to Bend Hiern in forthwith, or they will

le excluded from tho Exhibition.

(By order) J. II. BROOKE, Agent to the Com

mlssloncrs.

Exhibition Office, September 25.1854.

3410 pep 29

GH. WILLIAMS, Retail und Dispensing Che.

. mist and Druggist, (cstiibBshcd 1850), Great

Brunswick-street, beg» to inform his friends and

the public generally, thnt lie hit» returned to his

old premise«, and U now conducting the business

as formerly,-the greatest attcution bciug paid to

every department_'_433

HENRY BAKER, Deceased.-All persons having

nny claims or demnnds aguliist tho Estafo

and Kfl'ccts of Henry Baker, late of Heidelberg,

»ear Melbourne, Innkeeper, deceased, ure reques-

ted forthwith to send in the particular« or such)

claims to Mr«. Baker, or Heidelberg, aforcaid,

«blowan»! administratrix ol tho deceased, or to

Messrs. ¿'BECKETT uiiel HASTALL, «olieltor«,

Melbourne ; and oil persons Indebted to the Estâtes

arc requested to pay the name as above.

Melbourne, 25th Sept, 1854._213 sep «

IF James Whltcros» does not Remove hi« Boxes

within »even days from till» date, they will bo

Sold, to defray expense«. Joseph Bolster. 801

"rVMiY~8TABI.ES most convenient Tor Car.

lier»; price« low. Hutchison'«Stores,Mul.

bourno cud ol Brunswick.street, Collingwood.

_ 81

LIVERY nnel Unit Stables. Wm. Doll and Co.,

corner M'Klllop-strcct and Llttlo Collin«;

street west. ?_892

MARBLES put up, Clenncd and Repaired, by

Win. Smart, warble mason, Great Oxford

street, Collingwood._432 sep 23

M~ It. UÖnT7l~Twi.INO, Portrait and Miniatura

Painter. Studio, at Messrs. Lush and Co.'«.

Ko. 31 Collli»8.Blrcet_329 oct 2

MISS BURNEY hnvlng removed to n moro com.

modlous house, 120 Collliis-Btreet enst, baa

Vacancies for several Pupils. Private Lesson« In

French, Musio, Dancing, Ac._012

MARINE LAW and Custom» or Port Phillip_

W. Pentland, Solicitor, Attorney, mid Proo

tor, 20 Wllllnm-tlreet, Melbourne,_Oil

MERCHANTS' BOOKS kept, nt per annum. A.

Pricstloy, accountant, (lato of tho Oriental

Bank Corporation,) 67 Queen.street_235

P"*IÄNÖFORTE3 Tunod and regulated by F

M'Cultoch ; orders lett at Mr. Ferguson'«, Col.

Hn«-streetxvcst._435 y

RICHMOND.-Important to Ladle» mid Drapers.

-Parasols Repaired. II. Bracher, back of Iron

Blore, lllohmond-lerracc._271 scp_27

STORAGE, in Warehouse, Cellar, or Yard. 81m,

mer«, Pullar and Co., 103 Colllns-strcet west

_'_'_334

ÏORAGE for 50(1 Ton« ol Merchandize. Apply

to John On' and Co., Mlndcrd-luno west

S

T

SOUIII Ml-Ll'OUR.NL - btro)tdii»to my yard

12 month«ago, n Buy Pony, two hind loot

white: lilli bo sold In right ela)» to pay ex-

penses JOHN MORIUbON.

bopte mliir 25th, 1834_481

TO Dru» mon -Four cw I. Loading for Bendigo ut

Mueller and thomson'«1,lOlEUrnboth streot.

_JS2

fliO Cnrter«-îxow open, nt low price», Livery

X blal)].«,auJoiiilngiIiitchtsoii'dShocIngl'orge,

Brunswick «trcet, Collingwood._IO

ThNDl.Rb Required folríñoo of tho Best Slate-.,

tolioelellieixd at Wllllnnistow II J mid Tun.

der« lilli bo ixeiliitd till tho 5th of Ootobor.

Dlreot to Tobin and Power, builder«, Williams-

town_232

ill. únelerslgneel withdrawing from husillos«,

_ reqw st thnt nil claim» against them may bo

presentid for polmont boforo the 1st November

next It P Harri« and Co , Queen-street. tua

T '101 II LI), (¡old Chaser, Ornamental Engril

' i » r, und Fiiucy Luumollor, UJ Llttlo Bourko

slrcetiitst._853 «cp 23

THE Dissolution of tlio Young Mm'« Christian

Aesoilutlon will luke placo at the Victoria

Crnmmiu School till» evening, at hair past naven

o'cloek. Christian Young Men mut lill others In-

terest! d uro requested to nttond its obsequie« aC

that timo mid plnce._614

rixllh JEWS, their I nil mu! Rt«limitlou Two

X llltiourso« preach» d lu Chalmer»' Church, on »

beptember Ird, ou behalt ol the Sufi» ring Jew» lu

Palestine, by the Rev Adam Cairn, DD 8vo,

prlocVs JimiciJ,Blundell nnd Co, 44 lolllns-BtrcoO

XMHt._451

TO Hqunttcrs.Stockholtlors, Ac-Auotloneornnit

Commission Agent JAMES M. ROBERT.

bON,l«|i» respcctlully to inform lil« frienels nwl

lho publlo gowrnll), flint ho lins connutnexd tlio '

oboiabiirtliiesii In tlio township of (Usborne, nu I

trust« Bom lit« extensivo connection, nwl by

prompt attention lo business, to obtain ashnro of

their fin or». . . .. , , "

'Hiern uro extensivo Block ¡yard» ml Joining tho

township, mid ampio paddock ncoom niodntlou in

tlio lulim (Unto vleinlt),

Gisborne, '.'2ud Uvptvmbor, 183« . " , ,,

1VJ out a dirndl)

'«.sew Advertisements.

jpHEJitliabitantsofCoUingwootUvIll And their

X clock» and< watches tri¡DO carefully repaired

and cleaned at very moderate charités, and glasses

nttcd.ltta. ed. each, ttH'MaiVs, Napicr-jitrcot,

8 Ringwood,_ 334 sep 27

HE Saltwater Hiver Navigation.-A Meeting of

the landowners, shipowners, and others, hold

tag property In and contiguous to the Saltwater;

.River, will bo bold at tho Criterion Hotel, Collins

street, Melbourne, on Wednesday, tho 27th day of

September instant, at twclvo o'clock, to take into

consideration the necessary steps to be taken to

Srevcnt tho WRliamstown, Mount Alexander, and

lurray Hiver Railway Company constructing n

Íicrmanont bridgo over the Saltwater River, at tho

unction of the Saltwater River with the Yarra.

_215 y

TRADESMEN'S BALL. Tradesmen's Ball-700

WrcothB and Garlands, of tho most elegant

design and choicest description, just received from

Paris, on Salt, at Fnlfor»W»antf Smith's, confeo

tloncrs, 48 La Trobc-strcct coat.

THE Collingwood Equitable Mutual Building

Society.-Tho Annual Bcport and Balance

Sheets are now printed, and may bo obtained at

tho office, Gcorgc-strcot (removed from Napier

street).

By order of the Committee, John Bellin, Secre

b'eptembcr 25tli, 1854._205

UNION HOTEL, Grent Bourko-Btrect. - Tho

Proprietor bogs to inform tlio Public that ho

has reduced bis list of charges, «o aa to moot tho

heavy pressure of the times, and trusts, that by a

continuance of a first-rate supply of wines and

Spirits, and likewise of every articlo purveyed,

that he will meet witli a liberal support from tho

public, and in return, every assurance is given that

no exertions will bo spared to make tlio Hotel a

genuine English Home.

A Concert io held every evening, in a largo

spacious room, buUt for the occasion, whoro flrsi

rate talent Is engaged, and ns charge for admission.

_\_230 oct 10

WHAT can a Galvanised Iron Store bo put up

and finished for in town, to cover n piooo

of ground 48 feet by 11 or thcrenbouts ? Address1

P. Marwick, 2 Carson's Cottages._409

9 COLLINS-STREET West.-The most magnifi

cent Daguerrean Gallery in Australia. Artists:

Duryea and Macdonald. 486 sep 30

9 COLLINS-STREÉT West.-Daguerrean Gal-

lery, distinguishable by an immense flag

inscribed Duryea and Macdonald. 487 sep 30

-sPK-Ts T0Icnd on Hopoalt of Deeds. Robert R.

¿töv/ Rogers, Architect, Surveyor, and Land

agent, oppoalte the office of this paper. 108

aMIE LIVERPOOL AND LONDON FUIE AND

. LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY.

Subscribed Capital, £1.500,000.

Paid-up Capital and Accumulated Funds, £670,000,

AU losses poid in Melbourne.

The lion. J. F. Palmer, M.L.C., Chairman.

Tliis Company offers great advantages to parties

desirous of effecting Life Assurance.

Bates for n simplo Insurance for £100.

Ago

Payment.

Ago

35

40

Payment,

Age

45

50

Payment.

20

30

£1 17 8

2 2 0

£2 8 0

2 10 3

£3 0 4

3 10 8

Rates for £100, witli Guaranteed Bonus.

Ago

Payment.

Age

40

Payment.

£2 18 5

3 5 5

Ago

45

50

Payment.

25

30

£2 3 10

2 0 5

£3 17 2

4 12 T

'Hie Bonus being guaranteed is not, as In most

other companies, dependent upon proiltB, and is as

follows :

If a policy for £100 Is token out at 23 years, It

would, in Ki years, represent £10315s. 10d.; in 20

Î'cnrs, £120 7B. Cd. ; in thirty years, £15215s. ; and

n 40 yenra, £187 18a. 4d. Or, if the life «lied

between nny of these periods, the policy would bo

added to at the rate ol 17B. ed. per annum,

Tho many various modes of effecting Life Insu-

rance, so OB to make provision for a family, or to

accomplish some financial object, can be learned

on application to the Secretory.

MURRAY ROSS, Resident Secretary, Collins

street West, opposite tho Western Market.

_21 sep 30 alt

IN the Insolvent Estate of Joseph Haynes, of Tho

J. city of Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria,

confectioner. - Whereas the catato of Joseph

Ha) nea, of Melbourne, in tho Colony of Victoria,

confectioner, wits on the twenty-ihira day of Sep-

tember, ono thousand cighthundrod nnd fifty-four,

placed under sequestration in my hands, by order

of his Honor the Acting Chief Justice of the Su

firemc Coin t of the Colony oi"\ ictorin, and who by

urtlicr Order under lils band did nppoint Edward

Courtney, Esquire, of Melbourne, ono of tho

olHcial usslgnccs of insolvent catates, to bo tho

Official Assignee ol mid for this estate; I hereby

appoint a public meeting of the Creditors ol tho

Bald Joseph Haynes to be Holden before mc, at my

office, Supremo Court Hous, La Trobo-tirect, Mel-

bourne, on Monday, the twenty-third day of Octo-

ber next, itt tho hour of hnlf-past two o'clock in

the nftcrnoon, for proof of debts: nnd another

public meeting will be holden before mc, at tho

same place, on Wednesday, the first day of No-

vember next, at the hour of half-past ten o'clock

in the forenoon, for tho like purpose, and if tho

creditors think fit, to diet an assignee of their own

choice to act with the said Official Assignee.

Dated at Melbourne, thia twenty-fifth day of

September, a.it,, 1854.-FREDK. WILKINSON,

Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates. 3303

IN the Insolvent Estate of WlUiam Hall, O7MCÏ"

bourne, in the Colony of Victoria, lruit mer-

chant.-Whereas tho estate of William Hall, of

Melbourne, In tho Colony of Victoria, fruit mer

t hont, was, on tue twenty .fifth day of September,

One thousand eight hundred mid fifty-four, placed

under sequestration In my hunda, by order of His

Honor Mr. Justice Williams, ouo of tho judges of

the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria, and

who did hy further order under lila band appoint

Robert Elwall Jacomb, Esq., of Melbourne, one of

the official assignees of Insolvent Estates for tho

Colony or Victoria, to bo the Official Assigne« of

and ter this estate: I hereby appoint a publia

meeting of the creditors of the Bald William Hall

to bo holden beforo me, at my office, Supremo

Court House, La Trobe-Btreot, Melbourne, on

Tnesdny, the twenty-fourth day of October next,

at the hour of eleven o'clock in the forenoon, for

proof of debts and ter the election of nn assignee.

if necessary, to act vi 1th the official assignee; and

unless it shall be shewn at such meeting that tho

roods and effects of the said William Hall exceed

the sum of Ono hundred pounds, I shall sum-

marily proceed to rank the debts which shall then

bo proved upon tho sold estate, and direct tlio

proceeds to be distributed accordingly.

Dated at Melbourne, the 25th day of September,

¿t,D. 1854.

FBEDK. WILKINSON, Ciller Commissioner of

Insolvent Estates. 3300

IN the Insolvent Estate of John James Meaburn,

of Elphinstone, in the Colony of Vlctoria,

storekeeper. Whereas the estate of John James

Meaburn, of Elphinstone, in the Colony of Vic-

toria, storekeeper, was, on the twenty-flfth day of

September, one thousand eight hnndrcd and fifty-

four, placed under sequestration in my hands, by

order of His Honor Mr. Justice Williams, one of

the Judges of the Supreme Court of the Colony of

Victoria, and who, by further order under his

hand, did appoint Edward Courtney, Esquire, of

Melbourne, one of the assignees of insolvent estates

to be the Official Assignee of and for this estate;

I hereby appoint a public meeting of the creditors

of the said John James Meaburn to be holden

before me at my office, Supreme Court House, La

Trobe-street, Melbourne, on Tuesday, the Twenty-

fourth day of October next, at the hour of half-

past eleven o'clock in the forenoon, for proof of

debts, and another public meeting will be holden

beforo me, at the same place, on Wednesday, the

first day of November next at the hour of half-

past twelve o'clock in the afternoon, for the like

purpose, and, if the creditors think fit, to elect an

assignee of their own choice to act with the said

Official Assignee.

Dated at Melbourne, this twenty-fifth day of

September, 1854 FREDK. WILKINSON,

Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates. 3398

IN the Insolvent F «tate of Andrew Hoy and

Gcorgo Thomas Mathison, of Melbourne, in

tho colony or Victoria, merchants -Whereas on

tho petition or OttoTheodoro Fullcnsteln, of tlio

elty of Melbourne, In tlio said colony of Victoria,

merchant the estnto of Andrew Roy nnd Georgo

Thouin» Mathison, tlio nboie named insoliente,

was on Saturday tlio 23rd day of September, 1854,

by order of His Honor the Ae log Chief Justlco ol

the Supremo Court or tho colon) of Victoria, placed

Tinder sequestration In ni) bands until the sama

should b) tlio «nld Supremo Court bo ndjudped to

be tequestrated or tlio said petition discharged ac-

cording to law, and Hit Honor (Rd appoint Thurs-

day, tho Sth da) ol October next for tho «aid in-

solvent« to appear lwfore tho Bald Supreme Court

to shew cause iihi their estate should not by Ben.

tenco of the «nld Court bo adjudged to bo sequel,

trnted Tor the benefit or their ciedltor«; and His

Honor did at tho same time appoint Robert Llwall

Jacomb, Esquire, of Melbourne, ono oftho Ollkiul

Assignees of Insoli ont F »tates is itliln the said co-

lony, to bo the Oflltlnl Assignees of tilt» Estate

Dated nt Melbourne, tilla twcnty.flfth day of

«September, t »> 1354

FRl-.DK WILKINSON, Chlci Commissioner or

Insolvent Estates._3393

IN tho Insolvent Estate of John Napoleon Rey-

nold», oftho Clt) of Melbourne, in tlio Colony

ol Victoria, Merchant Whereas the Estnto of

John Napoleon lle.inolcls, or tho City of Mel.

bourne, In tho Colony ol victoria, Merchant was

onthoiwoiity-tldrddny of September, ono thou

»mid tight hundred nnd fifty-lour, placed under

pequoBtiutlon in ni) hands, by ordor of His Honor,

tlio Acting Chili Justice of the Supremo Court ol

tim Colony ol Victoria ; and who, by further order

under lil« bond, did appoint Robert Elwall

Jacomb, 1 squire, of Melbourne, one ot the Ofllclal

Assignees ol Insolvent Estates, to bo tboOfllcIal

ArcIpnco ol mid tor this estnto I hereby appoint

n publlo meeting oftho creditor« ol tlio said John

Napoleon Re) nobls, to bo holden beforo me, nt my

office, Supremo Court House, I.n Trobe-ettcot, Mel

bourne, on i'uosdny. tlio twenty-fourth dny ol

October next, nt the hour ol half-past ten o'clock

in tho forenoon, tor prool ol debt«; nnd another

publlo meeting u 111 bo holden beforo me, at tho

Kamo place, on Wednesday, tho first day of No-

vember next, nt tho hour of half past tlovcn

o'clock in the lorenoon, lui the like purpose, nnd it

tho Creditor» think fit to cleott mi Asslgnoo of thoir

oven choleo to net with the «aid Olllclal Assignee',

Doted nt Melbourne, thi« twenty .fifth ¿loy ot

Boplemlier, * i> 1*11

Fltl.DK WlbKItx&ON, Ohlct CoinmlsBlonrr of

IiifOlxeiit Estate»._3J0J__

NOTICE-lo Dr Wc«ton, St Killin-Uni <»i

tho btoxe owl other articles purchased by

you 1)0 removed ultliln eight da)«, they will bo

«tared nt your risk mid expense'. Mueller nwl

Xliomsou, IPIihllsnbnlli-itreet._3__

VrOTICi: -J. Wtttl» hu» thUdny retired from

JM the Clothing nwl Outfitting Business, ntl ni

fcllinbcih-streut, in fnior of W E, Milne», for

whom ho solicit» tho patronngo ot lils friend«.

brpteuiUrlKtll. 223

New Advertisement«.

In the Insolvent Estate of George Melville Milne,

of Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria, Wine

and Spirit Merchant.

Notice is hereby given that a special meetingo f

Creditors in the above estate will be holden before

me at my office, Supreme Court House, La Trobe-

street, Melbourne, on Monday, the second day of

October next, at the hour of eleven o'clock in the

forenoon, at which day and hour the said meeting

will be holden before me for proof of debts upon

the said estate.

Dated at Melbourne the twenty-fifth day of Sep.

tember, A.D., 1854.

FREDK. WILKINSON,

3397 Chief Commissioner of Insolvent Estates.

IN the Supreme Court of the Colony of Victoria.

Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.-In the goods of

Robert Collier, late of Lygon-strec-t, North Mel

bourne, In the Colony or Victoria, carpenter, de

ceased.-Notice ia hereby given, that alter the ex

piration of fourteen days from the date of the

publication of this notice, application will be made

in this Honorable Court, in its Ecclesiastical Juris

diction, that Letters of Administration of the

goods, chattels, credits, and effects of the above

named Robert Collier, deceased, be granted to

Eliza Collier, the widow of the said deceased.

Dated this twenty-fifth day of September, 1854.

SMITH and WILLAN, Proctors for the said Eliza

Collier._200

THE Heart of Kilmore.-The largest and most

flourishing inland township in the noble co-

lony of Victoria, well worthy of a visit by the en-

terprising men of business, or the capitalist

anxious to make a safe investment. A rare oppor-

tunity now occurs of purchasing a really first-rate

property, situate in the very centre of Sydney-

street (the main Sydney-road), through which

passes the whole of the traffic. The property will

be divided into lots to suit purchasers.

Lot 1.

The very pick and cream of frontage allotments,

being situated in the choicest part of Sydney-

street, and has a frontage to that street of 58½ feet,

by a depth of 135 feet, and stands in its glory

alone, having a right-of-way of l8 feet next to the

Dunrobin Castle Inn on the one side, and a right

of-way of 12 feet to Lot No. 2. It is almost need-

less to allude to the value of this allotment for

building purposes, but it may be remarked that

for a Banking Establishment (which is much re-

quired here), or for the purpose of establishing a

Local Press (which would receive good support).

the situation is second to none in the colony.

Lot 2

Is a fortune of itself, having a frontage of 61½

feet to Sydney-street, by a depth of 235 feet, on

which is erected two substantial and well-finished

brick stores, with outoffices complete; one for-

merly in the occupation of Mr. R. Clarke as a

wine and spirit store, the other by Mr. P. Morris as

a bakery and cordial manufactory. It is super-

fluous to say anything more in favor of this lot, as

it speaks for itself.

Lots 3 and 4

Have each frontages to Melbournc-street of 66

feet, by a depth of 293 feet, and are situated at the

rear of Lots 1 and 2, and have a right-of-way of 13

feet to Sydney-Street.

Lot 5

Consists of four acres, more or less, of land in

Clarke-street. The land is of the best description,

and well suited for market gardening. A ready

market is at hand, and the profits to be made are

unmentionable.

For further particulars apply to A. M.

WHEATLEY, Esq., land and commission agent,

Market-square, Melbourne ; or to Mr. R.

CLARKE, Kilmore._3402 oct 11

COLONIAL SECRETARY'S OFFICE, Mel

bourne, 22nd September, 1854.

Tenders will bo received until Monday, 2nd of

October, for

2000 bushels of sound sweet feeding oats

1000 do. do. do. do. bran

The price to include delivery at the Commis'

sariat Stores, Great Bourke-strect, and packages,

which must be of a strong and serviceable descrip-

tion.

Tenders to be endorsed, "Tender for Oats and

Bran," and accompanied by samples, properly

marked and addressed to the Civil Commissary

General, or deposited in the tender-box of the

Civil Commissariat, Great Bourke-street east.

By His Excellency's command,

Signed, JOHN FOSTER.

_3389 sep 30

GOVERNMENT TENDER.-Colonial Engineer's,

Office, Melbourne, 23rd September, 1854.

Tenders will be received until eleven o'clock on

Tuesday, 23d October, for effecting certain altera-

tions at the Custom's quarters, Sandridge.

Plans and specification may be Been at the

Colonial Engineer's Office, Melbourne.

Tenders to be endorsed "Tender for Alterations

at the Custom's Quarters, Sandridge," and

addressed, prepaid, to the Chairman of the Tender

Board, Melbourne.

The decision of the Government will be made

known on 10th October.

(Signed) C. PASLEY.

_3392 oct 2 alt

GOVERNMENT TENDER.-Colonial Engineer's

Office, Melbourne, 23rd September, 1854.

Tenders will be received until eleven o'clock on

Tuesday, 3rd October, for effecting certain Repairs

required at the Old Jetty, Williamstown.

Plans and specification may be seen at the Colo

nial Engineer's office, Melbourne.

Tenders to be endorsed "Tender for repairs to

Old Jetty, Williamstown," and addressed, prepaid,

to the Chairman of the Tender Board, Melbourne.

The decision of the Government will be made

known on the 10th October.

(Signed) C. PASLEY.

3391 oct 2 alt

H

HEIDELBERG ROAD-Tenders will be re

ceived until 11 o clock on Friday, 29th inst,

for constructing a Culvert on the Heidelberg road,

near the Merri Creek Bridge, according to plan

and specification, to be seen at the Central Road

Board Office, Little Bourke-street west. Tenders

to be endorsed, Tender for Heidelberg road, and

forwarded, prepaid, to the President of the Cen

tral Roda Board, Melbourne The Board will not

necessarily accept the lowest or any tender.

3390 sep 29

MEDICAL -Drs. Milton and Moat, 138 Flinders

lane east, Melbourne-Dr W. C. MOAT,

surgeon, apothecary, and accoucheur, from No 29

Upper Berkeley street, Portman-square London,

late surgeon of the Invincible, from Liverpool, is

happy to announce that he has joined the medical

practice of his esteemed friend Dr Milton

Drs. M. and M. having in view the future well

being of their qntlcuts, confine tilt Ir practico aa

fur as practicable to the uscof i ci,e tillie compounds, I

their meilleiiled nipor bath«, and the properly di

retted use ot electricll), which oro In tlio great

majority ot casts nil sufficient for restoration to '

1 enltli J heir loee table tonto und aperient pills)

aro adapted for all ages and constitutions. At

lirmo until 2 and after 6 p in.

September 25th, 1854 ._

EL M1 lroy and Jones. Inselientn, Into of

i Bourke street-On Wednesday next, 270»

Inst , at tu i he o clock, a Divide nd v 111 bo paid

on this 1- slat nt tho office» of Hird, GrccnhUl, awl

Co, 801 lUtil i lb street_107

PUBIIC Notict -\\ anted nU parties expecting

I tit» rs directed to tho care of the firm of

J. M Corinaek und Co, Labor Market, 92 Great

Bourke street, to bo informed thnt nil letters and

ncHBiinper« arris ed b) the lute mall« from I urope,

America, or au) of tho Colonies, can until furtlnc

notice, be lind on application at 15 William atroct,

next thu S) liney Hotel 633

ÖTICl'^-lo'all Parties who baie left Boxes» i

Bag«, or Parcels, at lato Tucker« Boarding I

Houso No 2, off Littlo Bourke-street in tho

year 1851, If they aro not fetched aw ay x\ Ithln tlio |

epaco of one month, will bo se Id to defray ox- I

pense« Apply to Mrs M bren, Commercial Inn,

Prnhrnu. _213 y

UCilONl I lib Notice-Smith owl Lorimor,

Auetlowers 8 and 10 Bourke street wost,

respectfully intimate thut the) »ontliiuc to mnko I

1 lierai mil une» s en every description of ino» cable)

propcrt) sent there for posltlx o silo

Tho ci utrul position of their rooms, and the ex-

cellent ?toriiKt» accommodation, offer a flrst-rata

medium tor re ullslng fair prices for good« Prompt

nccount »iii s ri ml» reel, j,oods cleared or not

cleared Wharf and nil out door »ules conducted

in the subserll ers' usual tfllclout manner

_SMI1H und 1 OR1M1 li _ 675 octa

TO 1 urnllurc Deniers, Publlcnns, nnd Others -

Uiirese ried Sale ofliow llouseholdl urnlturc.

-Benjamin nwl MnrkH «111 sell, nt one o clock

Íiicclsily, n new nnd splendid assortment of useful

louse hold tmnlturc, on the pn lubes ol Mr R.

Long, sit unto comer of Palmer undi lee t BtrocU»,

oft Nicholson street, Colline, «noel

Tho houso lins orlklwill) built lind flirnlshoil

expressly for un hotel, to le eulie el the Mount

Gambit r He tel, but, in const «pt» nee i f tho kontlfl

liiini not obtaining a license fi r the sume, ho Isj

cenipilleil to oiler to publlo corni . t It ion tho u bolo

or th» spl» milli (iTtcts, on 1 burila), 2oth Ins!, at

oneoeloek without reseñe

flin nuetliiiiier« Imite esjieetnll) tulillcani

to iittend this « iii a» nil the flttlni,» ima uti nslH

nre ot tim most modem »lyle, ami well »ulled t ir

the bnslws» of »in hotel, lind lilli posltlxely bo

«old xtlthout reseño ut oiioo clock precise!)

THE Friends of the late John Fawkner, Esq.,

father of John Pascoe Fawkner, Esq., M.L.C.,

are most respectfully invited to join the Funeral

Procession, which will move from his residence,

Pascoe Vale, on Wednesday, the 27th inst., at one

o'clock precisely, arriving at the Flemington Hotel

at three o'clock, proceeding thence to the New

Cemetery. THOS. CROFT, undertaker, No. 87

Queen-street, and 76 Madeline-street. — Conductor

of the funeral cortege, Hugh Murray. 659 y

THE Friends of Mr. James Wiseman, are re-

spectfully invited to meet at his residence,

Moore-street, Collingwood, to follow the remains of

his late Son to the New Cemetery, this day (Tues-

day), at three o'clock. Mr. Lewis, undertaker.

632

THE Friends of Arthur Wells, Esq. are respect-

fully invited to attend the remains of his late

wife, Eleanor, to the New Cemetery, leaving the

residence, Gore-street, Collingwood, at half-past

two o'clock this day. GEORGE BISHOPP, Under-

taker, Wellington-street, Collingwood. 142

VICTORIAN INSTITUTE. —

The First General Meeting of the Members

of the Victorian Institute, for the reading of

papers and reception of reports, &c., will be held

in the Mechanics' Institution, on

Tuesday Evening, 26th inst.

Members intending to furnish communications

are invited to give early intimation to the

secretary,

WM. SYDNEY GIBBONS, Honorary Secretary;

9 Bourke-street west. 482

TtillCllAMth' INb'U'lUIION IEC1 UHE.-Ofl

JLVl Wi dm stint < \ i nlng T. L. Bright, Kio , Hill

di lit cr his 'i hlul Lccturo-Russia aud lho War.

87»

RK-Ol'l NINO or Braid ? Assembly HoomiThJ

l.ionlng Admlsiioil Uontlwncn, X». M.

Indies, tree, I

Hew Advertisements.

A

ROWE'S CIRCUS*

Solo Proprietor, Mr. J. A. Rowe.

Equestrian Manager, Mr, T. Nunn.

Another Grand Chango.

Brilliant Succession of Novelties.-* - -

Howe's Gymnast«, Riders, Vaultcr», and Panto,

mimtsts aro ? ? .

Perfect Master« or their Art

To-Klght, .Tuesday, 2ßth September, tho pro-,

trammo is a Gem, commenciug with a novel!

Equestrian Evolution, entitled

The Baltic lieiot, or tho Wooden Walls of Old

England, '

Raphael's Pantomimo ou Horseback, Tho Frenolt

Reaper.

Cardoxn, as the Imlian Cliicf.

Golding'« Song» ot tho Eraorald IBIC

Carter and Raphael's Trial or SklU.

Mrs. Venman«' Graceful Act on n pet palfrey, as

Lurline, tho Spirit or the Rhino.

Raphael, the Startling Rider, on Ids Swift-rooted

Charger«.

Tnylor, tho Peculiar Performer.

Howe's llfgbly Trained Steeds.

_Pantomimo and Parce. 3418

MISS C. HAYES.

A Card.

Mr. T. Mooney, proprietor of Astley'« Amphi-

theatre, Snrlng.strcot, respectfully requests a

meeting ni tho Friends awl Muslcnl Admirer« of

Miss C. Hayes, "Tlio Brilliant Star or Erin," at

Astley'« Amphitheatre, Spring-street, on Mondav

next, Outobcr 2nd, at Three o'clock, to hear ii com

mutucation from that distinguished Lady, relative

to lier oppronching visit to Melbourne, and to

ranko arrangement« for offering her a reception

.worthy of her talents, her «tatlou, and her country.

Spring-Btrcct, 25th September.

STLBV'S AMPHITHEATRE.

Spring-street,

Sole I.cseco, Mr. Gcorzo Lewis.

Conductor, Mon», Floury.

Greatest Combination of Talent over offered to

n Melbourno Audience.

Tuostlay, September 20th, 1854.

The roUowlng Artiste« will appear :

MIBS O. Hamilton,

Miss Warde, her second appearance,

Mrs. Omi,

Messrs. Johnson, Hartigan, Reed, King, Coozc,

Baker, Ac.

Herr Stroblngcr.

Mr. Lyons, who has just arrived from London.

The inimitable Barlow, the King of Ethiopian«.

Mr. G. Lewis and Lilliputian Tom.

Particulars of tho Entertainment in Small BUI». |

MR. LEWIS AND LILLIPUTIAN TOM,

Tim wholo to concíllelo with

BARLOW'S NEGRO ENTERTATNMENT!

Consisting of Songs, Dance«, Joke«, Wit, Animal«,

Bird«, Insect«, Ac., which cannot be described In

writing, in print, in painting, in prose, nor ia

poetry.

Grand Fimtlo by the Fall Band.

Mr. Barlow's Benefit on Friday.

Tlio Doors will Open at half-past Seven, and th«

Concert will commence precisely at Eight

Price« or Admission-Dress CIrole, S3. : SIdtt

Boxes, 7«. j Pit, 5«. ; Gallery, 2s. ed.

N.B.-The Box and Pit Entrance« aro in Spring

Street, The Gallery Entrances nro from tho «Ide of

the Nattonnl Hotel, Great Bourke-street, and front

tho rear of the Thcntro in Llttlo Bourke-street.

Notlcc.-Sinoklng wlU bo strictly prohibited ia

all parts or the Theatre.

Persons or Improper chaaactor will bo strictly

excluded from tho Dress Circlo mid Sido Boxes.

_4S5_

MELIIOURNE CASINO, VIctoria-strcct-Thcso

elegant room«, entirely redecorated, arc norn

open Ior the season._154

MELBOURNE CASINO, Vlctoria-strcct -

Dancing every evening from eight till half.

past eleven. Admission, 2«. Oil._155 _

ALLE DE VALENTINO.

S

Second Grand Concert I

A Brass Band in attendance.

Admission to Boxes, 6s. ; Promenade, 2s. 63.

Doors open nt quarter pnst seven, commence al

eight precisely. J. P. NASH, agent_43

BRAID'S open every night till furtlier|fnotlce.

Doors open nt half-past seven, dancing at eight.

Gentlemen, 2«. Où. ; Ladies, free._652

LOf?T on Sunday, near tho Junction, a Sabla

Riding Boa ; whoever wlU bring it to Hobson

»nd Barr, Windsor, wlU bo Rewarded._425

LOST, a Pocket Book, containing papers of na

valao to any ono except the owner. A reward

Of One Sovereign will bo paid on Itsbcinf: returned

«t the olHcoofl'cterLaiv, 33 King-street. 45

ROKE adrift from tho door of the Beehive

Hotel, North Melbourne, a Bay Pony, switoti

tail, branded JS on near shoulder, having a saddla

cn at the time._207

STOLEN, on the night of the 24th inst., from the

stable of the undersigned, Queensberry

street -

One Bay Horse, branded TS on each shoulder and

on near rump; has a white spot on near rump

close to the tail.

One Grey Mare, branded TS on each shoulder and

near rump; has a small lump between the

flanks.

A Reward of £5 will be given on recovery or each

Horse. THOMAS STEPHENS, Mall Contractor,

Queensberry-street. 484 sep 27

>pWO TOUNDS REWARD.-Lost on Saturday

J. night "a smaU Black Bitch, white star on tua

breast, whllo tip on tho fore foot, and curly tall.

Whoever will bring tho samo to Mr. Daniels,

gmltli-strect, wBi receive tho obovo reward. 37

"CUVE POUNDS REWARD.-Lo«t a Purse, con.

JP tabling about £10 in gold, near Bell Vue Hotel,

St Kilda. Whoever may und the «ame, and return

it to Mr. HawklnB, Commercial Hotel, Elisabeth

street, wlU receivo tho abovo Howard_138

ÎèUVE FOUNDS RKWARD.-Strnycd on Friday

P morning, tho 22nd inst, from Mr. Irwin'««

ulgravo Arms, Dandenong Road, a Bay Mare,

.bout fifteen hand«, «witch tail, hind feet white,

30 on off shoulder, ncU bred, black mauo and tall.

s_y person delivering the Bamo to Mr. IRWIN OB

io J."V. C11AGO, ironmonger, opposlto St Paul's]

-Church, Swanston-street will re-cclvo thonbova

Toward. 418

IVE POUNDS REWARD.-Stolen or Strnyod,

from tho Quarries, a Black Horse, branded

LD conjoined on both shoulder«, and u blnxe down

the face. Any person bringing the »aid horse to Mr.

W. Richard«, butcher, Ste-phcn.strcct will receivo

tbenbovo Reward. John Dale._103

ÏFÏY POUNDS REWARD.-The undersigned

will elvo tho above Reward to any person or

Ítenon« «ho will give «ucl» information that «hall

rai to the appri'lientlou or tho following person«,

and »hose descriptions aro a« follows:

John William Jonc», formerly or illawarra, Now

South Wales, about 5 feet 11 in. height, well made,

iltik hair and c) es, «allow complexion, no beard

or xi biskcr«, very largo hand«, mid about 22 or 23

ye«r«ofagoj when hut seen, ho woro a cabbage-

tree lint, tartan plaid jumper, drab cloth trouser«,

and high boot«,

Robert Clilnery, allot Jimmey, formerly of

Sullolk, England, about 6 root Oin. height. thlcK

M f, rather a Irosli complexion, black curley hair,

dark eye«, black beard and moustache, slight;

dcrect in one or his nostrUs, about 20 year« or age,

can neither read or write, and when last «cen ho

nore a cabbagetree hat red worsted shirt, blaolc

cloth walseout, rustían trouser« and lacc-up boots.

This I« to gix'o notice that a warrant lins been

irswil lor their apprehension by tho FoUco Ma.

eistratc ol' Beechworth.

(Signed) THOS. CARPENTER.

Yackandandah, September 2nd, 1354.

201 sep 27 oct 0 b awl b