The quintessentially English cottage in Surrey that inspired Christmas classic, , was once a real-life holiday home available to rent on Airbnb.

While the quaint cottage is no longer on the rental website, we've highlighted some similar properties in England for a Holiday-inspired staycation (scroll down to see our picks).

Fans of the 2006 festive film will know that Amanda (Cameron Diaz) and Iris (Kate Winslet) swap homes for the holidays. They both end up falling in love with a local guy: Amanda meets Iris' brother Graham (Jude Law) in the snowy Surrey countryside, while composer Miles (Jack Black) steals Iris' heart in sunny Los Angeles.

Honeysuckle Cottage, in the London commuter village of Holmbury St Mary, inspired Iris' home in the movie. The crew based the specially-designed set for Rosehill Cottage on the three-bedroom period property, recreating it brick for brick at a studio in London.

Cameron Diaz, Jude Law and Kate Winslet at the UK premiere of The Holiday, December 2006.

Many of the character features Iris fell for can be found at Honeysuckle Cottage. There's a cosy inglenook fireplace with Jotul log burner in the lounge, exposed timbers and oak joinery throughout, exposed brickwork in the bedrooms and leaded light windows.

The bespoke, craftsmen-built, handpainted kitchen with oil-fired Aga is enough to impress any potential suitor, while underfloor heating makes for cosy movie nights in.

HONEYSUCKLE-INSPIRED COTTAGES

In 2018, Honeysuckle Cottage was on the market for £650,000 via Hamptons, and some four years later the property was available to book via Airbnb. New owners bought the property in 2019 and decided to rent it out after learning of its popularity and link with the film, which was welcome news for fans of The Holiday, even if only for a short period.

Located in the heart of the Surrey Hills, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Holmbury St Mary is rich in wildlife and woodland, and boasts some of the best walks in southern England.

It offers lovely views of the Surrey countryside direct from the garden, and the local pub is just a short stroll away, making it the perfect place for a festive break or winter staycation.

Take a tour...

Want to book a Holiday-inspired staycation? Here are five of our favourite alternative Airbnbs to help you live like Cameron Diaz on a staycation...

Holmbury St Mary, Surrey

Just like the cottage in The Holiday, this 16th-century property is located in the heart of the Surrey Hills in Holmbury St Mary. It features a lovely private garden and interiors that will make any city dweller want to move to the country – there's a cosy AGA, pretty farmhouse-style tiling and even a log burner in the master bedroom. An additional twin room makes it suitable for family getaways, too.

SEE INSIDE

Wirksworth, Derbyshire

This idyllic 300-year-old property is so reminiscent of Honeysuckle Cottage that previous guests have raved about their Holiday-inspired stays here. Equally popular are the country walks taken from the front door, with plenty of cosy pubs and restaurants to try, and the stunning views over the Derbyshire Dales and historic town of Wirksworth. A secluded, sunny garden and log burner inside make this a treat at any time of year.

SEE INSIDE

Clipston, Northamptonshire

Set on a rolling 14-acre Northamptonshire estate, this immaculate cottage offers a modern take on a Holiday-inspired staycation. Custom-made furniture and original art add character to the freshly refurbished interiors, with dark wood panelling and jewel-toned furnishings for a glam take on rural living. Tranquillity reigns, though you'll be just 10 minutes from the hustle and bustle of Market Harborough.

SEE INSIDE

Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire

This Airbnb feels like a larger version of the cottage from The Holiday, with space for 12 in six sumptuous, recently revamped bedrooms. It's located on a 2,400-acre estate and surrounded by beautiful woodland, so it's a perfect spot for a big group getaway in the country. The large farmhouse-style kitchen and dining area are highlights, as is the hidden hot tub awaiting outside.

SEE INSIDE

Sennybridge, Powys

This lovely cottage in Wales is the ideal base from which to explore the Brecon Beacons National Park, taking in lakes and mountains on a romantic break or trip with friends. Indoors, a muted, earthy colour palette makes for the most soothing of settings for your stay, while the wood and stone exterior creates an image of fairy tale charm, complete with fragrant crawling roses.

SEE INSIDE