...are spacious. 2 Bathrooms and big veranda. Double automated garage and parking for approximately 6 vehicles. Please note: Separate cottage...

...Furnished: No Pets Allowed: No Available: 05/08/2024 Region: Gauteng. Krugersdorp Posted: 3 days ago Ad Type: Owner Viewed: Ad ID: bdgjsmy...

2-Bedroom Cottage for Rent. (On a Plot) Discover this delightful 2-bedroom cottage nestled on a serene plot in Nooitgedacht, conveniently...

This one bedroom bachelor cottage is ideal for the single person who enjoys living in the country. Bathroom with shower, kitchen, open-plan...

Lock up n go cottage out in the country! 1 bed 1 bathroom (shower), lounge, kitchen, patio, carport. Rent inc water and alarm with armed...

Looking for a peaceful lifestyle, then this lovely 2 bed 1 bath garden cottage is for you! The unit features: An open plan living area. Decent...

This is a bachelor cottage. Single person only. There is an open plan kitchen and room. Seperate bathroom. The price includes electricity...

Looking for a peaceful lifestyle, then this lovely 2 bed 1 bath garden cottage is for you! The unit features: An open plan living area. Decent...

Looking for a peaceful lifestyle, then this lovely 2 bed 1 bath garden cottage is for you! The unit features: An open plan living area. Decent...

1 Bed, 1 bath (shower) cottage, lounge, kitchen, patio & carport. Out in the country on a plot in Nooitegedacht. Regret no dogs as no private...

This Beautiful Cottage consist of: Lounge Kitchen 2 Bedrooms 2 Bathroom Main bedroom with build-in Cupboards En-suite Bathroom. Bath, Toilet...

This Beautiful Cottage consist of: Lounge Kitchen 2 Bedrooms 1 Bathroom Main bedroom with build-in Cupboards Second bedroom with build-in...

Newly renovated 1 Bedroom garden cottage to let in Witpoortjie. R4700 rent includes water, electricity uncapped wifi, swimming pool fascility...

Working in Johannesburg and want to stay close to Hartbeespoort? Then this one bedroom garden cottage will be ideal for you. Water and...

The cottage in Mindalore has a lot to offer! 2 spacious bedrooms with 1 bathroom. Open-plan lounge and kitchen area. Spacious garden and ample...

Two Bedroom Cottage for Rent in Rietfontein AH/ Muldersdrift Bedrooms: Two Bathroom: Bath and shower Living Area: Open plan lounge and dining...

Hurry and grab this stunning cottage to rent in popular area. Very neat. Water and electricity included in rent. Spacious lounge with carpeted...

2 bedroom 1 bathroom cottage excluding water and electricity and no pets on a plot near cradlestone mall walking distance category: property...

1 Bedroom cottage available in Lanseria. The unit features: open plan kitchen, living/bedroom area an en suite bathroom and kitchen. Plumbing...

1-Bedroom Unit to Let on a Plot in Tarlton Experience tranquil living on a secure farm in Tarlton. This 1-bedroom unit offers a peaceful lifestyl...

2bedroom house special. Rent is 4600 and deposit 3000 water and electricity excl. There's also no stove. Id Subtitle 1284834---...