Safe and secure Bachelor unit near Acts Church Olifantsfontein Road. Suitable for one professional individual with sober habits. No children...

Safe and secure Bachelor unit near Acts Church Olifantsfontein Road. Suitable for one professional individual with sober habits. Cottage is on...

Spacious garden cottage to rent in clayville east OLIFANTSFONTEIN. Own geyser and toilet. Dstv connection point. Automated entrance. Next to...

Available to let in clayvile east Oliffantsfontein is a one bedroomed cottage in a quiet neighbourhoods Category: Property. Residential...

TRV67607---. Immaculate, furnished property to let suitable for corporate rental attention to detail, no expense spared broadacres/chartwell beau...

TRV67607---. Partially furnished. Unfortunately no children or animals at owners request this special home offers 3 bedrooms, 3 bathrooms, huge l...

TRV67606---. Modern 2 bedroom 2 bathroom apartment to let in houghton estate spacious open plan kitchen, dining room and lounge leading to a sunn...

TRV67606---. This truly beautiful home has a magnificent view over Riviera/Killarney Modern 2 bed, 2 bath, fully furnished! Rooftop garden and Ja...

Spacious Bachelor To Let Bachelor Newly Renovated Prepaid electricity Secure parking Utilities included in rent 24 hour security Quite neat and s...

2 Bedroom Flat To Rent in Yeoville, Johannesburg Spacious 2 bedroom flat to rent in Yeoville at La Contessa, 23 Cavendish Street. This lovely...

TRV67606---. Spacious well-maintained home in the heart of Parkhurst! 3 Bedrooms, 2 bathrooms. Wooden floors. Light, bright kitchen to lounge and...

TRV67606---. This unit comes with the following appliances: Fridge, washing machine, dishwasher, oven, microwave. It's a garden unit in the beaut...

TRV67607---. Bespoke designer furniture. Furnished appartment sort after locationthis furnished apartment is on the 17th floor with amazing views...

TRV67606---. Modern 3 bedroom duplex in the sought after Alinta complex. This modern unit comprises of open plan living areas, well equipped kitc...

Property Address 240 Main City Suburban, Johannesburg A sanctuary in the city Perfectly positioned within the Maboneng Precinct, Black Ginger...

1 Bedroom Flat To Rent in Fairview, Johannesburg Spacious 1 bedroom flat to rent in Fairview at Signorina, 72 Hans Street. This lovely 1...

TRV67606---. Lock-up-and-go Living at The Houghton with excellent security. Open-plan lounge, dining area and kitchen. 3 Bedrooms, 3 bathrooms an...

...Johannesburg Zoo, Parkview has an established feel, being one of the oldest and most exclusive neighborhoods in South Africa, you can enjoy...

...Johannesburg and Kensington Golf Course. The kitchen with upmarket fittings and finishes features Caesarstone tops, white high-gloss...

...available to rent at Telmond complex in Bramley Park. The complex is located at the top of the Grayston Bridge and 3 minutes from Sandton city...

2 Bedroom Flat To Rent in Yeoville, Johannesburg Spacious 2 bedroom flat to rent in Yeoville at La Contessa, 23 Cavendish Street. This lovely...