American Football - Quick Guide

American Football - Overview

American Football originated in United States resembling a union of Rugby and Soccer; played in between two teams with each team of eleven players. American football gained fame as the people wanted to detach themselves from the English influence. The father of this sport is Walter Camp who altered the shape and size of the ball to an oval-shaped ball called ovoid ball and drawn up some unique set of rules.

Objective

American Football is played on a four sided ground with goalposts at each end. The two opposing teams are named as the Offense and the Defense, The offensive team with control of the ovoid ball, tries to go ahead down the field by running and passing the ball, while the defensive team without control of the ball, targets to stop the offensive team’s advance and tries to take control of the ball for themselves.

The main objective of the sport is scoring maximum number of goals by moving forward with the ball into the opposite team's end line for a touchdown or kicking the ball through the challenger's goalposts which is counted as a goal and the team gets points for the goal. The team with the most points at the end of a game wins.

Team Size

American football is played in between two teams and each team consists of eleven players on the field and four players as substitutes with total of fifteen players in each team. It is played in both men’s and women’s category.

American Football - History

The history of American Football starts from November 6, 1869, when the first game was played between the two college teams which were Princeton and Rutgers. Each team consisted of 25 players and had to play the game by foot only. Hands were not used to carry the ball. Players could use their hands, feet, head, and sides to kick the ball. The aim of each team was to reach the goal of the opponent and kick the ball into the goalpost.

The game was won by Rutgers as they were able to gain 6 points while the other team got 4 points only. This type of game was played between colleges for several years and the rules of the host school were followed.

Fixing Game Rules

Later, colleges decided to fix a set of rules for the game so representatives of the following colleges held a meeting on October 19, 1873 −

Yale

Columbia

Princeton

Rutgers

In the meeting, it was decided that the number of players on each side would be reduced to 20. The size of the field was 400 x 200 feet. No representative from Harvard University participated in the meeting as they wanted to follow the rules for this game similar to Rugby.

Harvard played two games with McGill University. In the first game, American rules were followed and in the second Canadian rules were followed. Harvard gave preference to the Canadian rules and involved the following −

Only 11 players on each side

Players can chase the ball and will not be chased by the opponent

Oblong ball should be used rather than the round one

The forward pass and tackling were also included

Harvard and Yale played the game in 1875 which was watched by the two athletes of Princeton so they started playing the game in their university. Later, an association was formed by Yale, Columbia, Princeton, and Harvard and they also decided to make modifications to the rules. The association was named as Intercollegiate Football Association. Yale joined the association in 1879.

Father of American Football

Walter Camp from Yale University made changes to the rules and came to be known as the Father of American Football. He reduced the number of players to 11 on each side and also made rules to reduce the chaotic environment.

Evolution of American Football

In Rugby football, scrum occurred often. Scrum is a part of Rugby in which players used to handle the ball for an indefinite period and the game has to be restarted.

Yale and Princeton played a game in 1881 and used the rule of holding the ball for an indefinite period. None of the teams could score any point and the game ended in a tie as both teams scored 0. This game became unpopular among the audience, teams and fans also did not like it.

In 1882, Walter Camp changed the rule and each team was limited to 3 downs or tackles, and the ball had to be taken till 5 yards. If the team is unable to take the ball to 5 yards, the ball will be handed to the other team. The change in this rule gave birth to the American Football. A five-yard line was also drawn on the field.

Some more changes were made to the rules which are as follows −

The field size was reduced to 100.6m x 48.8m

Four points were given for a touchdown

Two points were awarded for safety

Five points for a goal from the field

Two points for a goal following a touchdown

Players can tackle below the waist

Threat to abolish the game

The rules were changed but still, it was a violent game and players were injured and some also died. President Theodore Roosevelt threatened that the game would be abolished if major changes in the rules were not made as 19 players died in 1905.

In order to make changes, a meeting was held in New York City by 62 colleges and universities on December 18, 1905. This led to the creation of an association called Intercollegiate Athletic Association whose name was changed later to National Collegiate Athletic Association. The changes made in the rules are as follows −

Forward pass was introduced in 1906

The duration of the game was reduced from 70 minutes to 60 minutes

The first down was increased from 5 yards to 10 yards

A neutral zone was created so that chaos could be reduced

Points for a field goal were reduced to 3 in 1909

Points for touchdowns was increased to 6 in 1912

The size of the field was also reduced in the same year which included the following −

The length of the field was reduced to 100 yards

Two end zones of 10 yards each were created

Teams were allowed for four downs which previously was 3

Another rule was added in 1914 where a penalty was added for roughing the passer

In 1918, players were allowed to catch the ball anywhere on the field

Professional Era

In the 1880s, players were given extra benefits like getting a job. Trophies were also given to them by the athletic clubs. Some clubs also paid double for the money spent by a player but there was no direct payment.

On November 12, 1892, A sum of $500 was paid to Pudge Heffelfinger for playing a game for the Allegheny Athletic Association. The opponent in this match was Pittsburg Athletic Club and this was the first game in which direct payment was made to the players. This led to a rise in the number of professionals and salaries were given to the players. This also led to illegal payments to the players who were still studying in colleges.

National Football League (NFL)

The National Football League (NFL), established in 1920, decided to resolve this problem. Bidding wars for players was ended and college students were not allowed to play the game. It also made a rule that if a player changes the team, no payment will be made. NFL became the premier professional football league in 1922.

At this time, American Football was played mostly by college students at the college level. In 1925, an exhibition game was held in which the Pottsville Maroons defeated Notre Dame all-stars. Football became a popular game due to the 1958 NFL Championship game which was played between the Baltimore Colts and New York Giants. Millions of people watched the game and Colts scored 23 points while Giants scored 17.

The popularity of American Football led to the creation of the American Football League which helped to increase the popularity of the game in the United States. NFL was the dominating league and it was challenged by AFL by getting a television contract with ABC Television Network.

This forced the NFL to increase its capacity to Minnesota and Dallas to curb the expansion of AFL. AFL was able to introduce new features in the game in the United States. The features added by the AFL are as follows −

The time was based on the scoreboard rather than the watch in the referee’s pocket

Two points were given to run after touchdowns or by pass

The names of the jerseys of the players were changed

The role of the minority players was also enhanced

College players that were selected by the NFL were also selected by the AFL. AFL New York also signed Joe Namath which increased the competition of player selection between NFL and AFL. In order to end this competition, the NFL offered AFL for a merger which was done in 1970. This merger led to the arrangement of the World Cup each year in which the champions of both leagues will compete. This World Cup came to be known as the Super Bowl.

American Football - Terminology

Before knowing the game rules and playing guidelines, it’s very important to get familiarized with the terms used in the game.

Tee − a cone shaped platform which holds the ball

Yard Space − Space gained by the player to measure the progress of the game.

Line of Scrimmage − The lines parallel to goal line and next to each team’s end, the two lines are termed as the offensive & defensive line of scrimmage.

Offense − Team with the control of the ball.

Defense − Team opposing the offense, without the possession of the ball.

Center − Player in the offense, with the control of the ball.

Tackle player − Position of the players on both offense and defense lines.

Tight end − Position of offensive team player also called as the Y receiver, placed next to the offensive tackle.

Wide Receiver − Position of offensive team player 7 yards away from the formation.

Quarterback − Position of offensive player right behind the center.

Halfback − Position of offensive player behind the wide receiver near to the goal line.

Fullback − Position of offensive player placed behind the quarterback in forming a T shape structure.

End player − Position of defensive player placed on the defensive line of scrimmage exactly opposing the center.

Nose tackle − Position of the defensive player opposing the center, effective in stopping the running and rushing the pass.

Linebacker − Position of defensive player placed right behind the end players.

Cornerback − Position of defensive player positioned behind the linebackers to disrupt the passing.

Safeties − Position of defensive player behind the linebacker ready to take control of the ball from the offense.

Dead ball − The ball not anymore in the play

Kickoff − The ball is placed on a tee at the defense’s 35-yard line, and a special kicker also kicks the ball to the offense.

Placekick − It is a style of kicking the ball when put on the tee.

Drop kick − When the ball is being dropped to the ground and is being kicked before it hits the ground again.

Free kick − It is a kicking form to place the ball in the play.

Down − Time period in which the individual plays in a certain duration, outside of which the ball is dead or not in play.

First Down − When the offensive team effectively passes and moves the ball 10 or more yards, they earn a first down.

Run − A player advancing the ball gaining the necessary yard space.

Pass − A player passes the control of the ball to other player of the same team.

Forward pass − A player passing the ball, might touch an object, a person, or the ground nearer to the other team’s end line or is unintentionally lost in a forward throwing motion.

Tackle − When the player holding the ball whose knee touches the ground the play comes to an end with tackle.

Touchdown − It is a scoring system worth 6 points ideally when a player carries the ball and touches the opponent’s end zone.

Point after touchdown (PAT) − After the touchdown the team will try for an extra 1 or 2 points by kicking the ball through the goal post or throwing it to the end zone.

Field Goal − Worth of 3 points occurs if the ball is place kicked, drop kicked or free kicked in between the goal posts in the opponent’s end zone.

Safety − Scoring system worth of 2 points occurs by making the player possessing the ball out of his own end zone and out of bounds, or driving the other team to fumble the ball to exit the end zone. A safety is also presented if the offensive team does a foul in its own end zone.

Turnover − Happens when one team loses the ball the other team gains.

Fumble − Occurs when the player drops the ball by chance.

Interception − Takes place when a player regains the ownership of the ball from an opposing player.

American Football - Playing Environment

American football, rightly known as the game of collision, is a battle of the teams for more points aiming for the win of their respective territories and the field predominantly serves as a way to measure the momentum of this sport. The game is played on large fields similar to that of Rugby and Soccer.

American Football Field Design

The rectangular green field measures 360 feet long by 160 feet wide and has end zones at each end. Based on the NFL rulebook, 30-foot deep scoring end zones, horizontal lines drawn every five yards, with yard lines numbered in multiples of 10 positioned accurately twelve yards in from the side-lines. All lines and field markings are painted in white on green grass. The slingshot goalpost measuring 10 feet which was redesigned and relocated in the late 90’s, is now placed at the back of the end zone as shown in the below layout −

The two vertical lines in the centre of field are known as the line of scrimmage, the offensive & defensive teams with 11 players take the possession of the ovoid ball at their line of scrimmage. The line marked with 50 is the centre of the field and that is where the ball is first placed before the start of the match. The players position themselves in their own yard spaces to start the game.

Timing of the Game

American football is played for 1 hour with four 15-minute quarters, divided by a 12- minute break at half-time. With 2-minute breaks at the finish of the first and third quarters, and the teams change ends of the field after every quarter of the game. But at the end of the first and third quarters, the team retaining the ball would be heading into the following quarter. The second half of the game starts with a kick off similar to the beginning of the game in the first quarter.

Both the teams have 40 seconds after the end of a play and they must snap of the ball for the start of the next play. The team which is not successful in snapping the ball gets penalized. The game clock stops at the end of every incomplete passing plays, or a player goes out of boundary, or when a penalty is called. The clock starts again when the ball is re-spotted by the match referee.

In a tie game scenario, 15-minute overtime is given for the play and the team that first scores a point wins. A coin toss is made to determine the ball possession for the overtime.

American Football - Equipment

There are many American Football equipment that are used by players to play the game safely. Players have to touch each other physically and they may fall down or get hurt due to any other reasons. This equipment will help them to be safe and reduce the chance of injuries. We will discuss all the equipment in detail.

Arm Sleeves

Arm Sleeves are optional pieces and only a few players in a team use them like quarterbacks, wide receivers, running backs, etc. The sleeves are designed in such a way that they can prevent or reduce any kind of injury during the game. They also provide muscle support which is helpful for the players to play the game.

Balls

The size and structure of the ball has changed. In the 1800s, round-shaped balls were used in the game but now the shape of the ball is similar to the pig's bladder. Leather is used to make the football and it can be held easily with the help of laces. A football can be purchased from an online store or sporting goods stores.

Belts

Belts are used to keep the pants tight. They are tied on the waist to hold the pants in perfect position. All players have to use the belts designed by the NFL These belts can be found in the sporting goods store.

Chin Straps

Chin Straps are considered as one of the important equipment as they are valuable for the safety of the chin. The piece was first used in 1976 which decreased different types of injuries in the game. It can be uncomfortable but it creates a protective layer for the safety of the chin.

Cleat Cleaner

Cleat cleaners are used to clean the mud from cleats so that injuries can be prevented due to increased traction. If the game is being played on a wet field, cleat cleaners are very helpful.

Cleats

Cleats are required to help the players to run at a fast pace. Ordinary footwear cannot help the players to run fast while holding the ball. Cleats also help in the protection of ankles. Cleats also have grooved soles which provide traction to the runner.

Compression Apparel

Compression apparel is tight-fitting clothes which help the players to run on the field for a long time. These apparels are also good for safety from different kinds of injuries. Wearing these apparel is comfortable in comparison to shorts. They can absorb sweat and rashes and burns are also reduced.

Compression Shorts

Compression shorts are worn under the pants and they are used for protection from injuries. Muscle fatigue is reduced and it is also helpful in preventing strains. These shorts can be purchased from sporting goods stores.

Cones

Different sports including American Football use cones during the practice sessions. Cone drills help players to run at a fast pace and also develop the ability of body control.

Duffel Bags

The duffel bag is developed from a durable fabric and it also consists of a handle which helps players to take it from one place to another. These bags have been designed so that players can keep their equipment and move comfortably. Such bags are easily available in the sports goods stores.

Eye Black

Eye black is a strip that players apply to protect the eyes from the glare of the sun. It is a beneficial item that protects the vision of players. Eye blacks are also worn to make the opponents fearful.

Flag Football Belts

Flag Football belts are the pieces that are useful in playing flag football. Flags are taken by the opponents so that they can take possession of the ball. Tackling down is not allowed in the game.

Flags

Flags or penalty flags are the cloth of different colors and players of all the teams have to wear these flags. The flags of one team are of the same color. These flags can be easily taken off as they are tied to the belt.

Flak Jackets

Flak jackets are protective equipment which can be used to protect the rib areas as they are wrapped over them. The jackets are also attached to the shoulder pads. Ribs and abdominal injuries can be reduced and prevented through these jackets.

Girdles

Girdles are the pieces that can be used for the protection of the lower part of the body. A girdle consists of different types of pads that can be used in thighs, tailbone, and hip areas. These girdles are provided by the football team to the players.

Gloves

Gloves are an important protective equipment for football players. They help the players to protect their hands and fingers from getting injured. Receivers and linemen are more prone to hand injury as they have to catch the ball which may come by force. Receivers have to catch the ball and hold it to prevent other team members from snatching it. Linemen use gloves to protect their hands from bruising.

Hand Warmers

Hand warmers are the equipment that can be used by the players to keep their hands warm. This equipment is helpful in these areas where the climate is very cold. Players cannot play with cold and wet hands as this can lead the ball to slip away from their hands while catching.

Helmet

Helmet is considered as one of the most important pieces of equipment to be used in the game. The equipment is used for the protection of the head from any type of injury. Helmets are designed in such a way that they protect the head from any type of falling or damage caused by flying balls. The head is also protected from the pushes and force from other players.

Helmet Pump

Helmets consist of pads which can get deflated with time. Helmet pumps are used to inflate these pads to provide more comfort to the head. A deflated helmet is easy to store.

Helmet Radios

Modern helmets also consist of radios and at least one player in each team has to wear such a helmet. These helmet radios are specially designed to be used during college football. The radio is used as a mechanism of communication between the coaching staff and players.

Helmet Visors

Some players use helmet visors to improve their visibility. Visors help in protecting the eyes from the glaring sun and also prevent physical contact with the eyes.

Jerseys

Each member of both teams has to wear a jersey which consists of their name and number. The last names of the players can be found on jerseys. Teams offer jerseys to the players with names and numbers.

Jockstrap and Cup

Groin has to be protected during the game of American football and this can be done with the help of Jockstrap and cup. The cup will protect the groin all the time during the game. It also reduces the chance of injuries in the sensitive areas.

K-Balls

K-balls are the balls which are used for kickoffs and field goals. These balls are a replacement for the regular ball when kickoffs and field goals have to be done. These balls are hard in nature in comparison to the regular ball. The structure of these balls helps in making an accurate kick.

Mouth Guard

Mouth Guard is another essential piece of equipment that is used for the protection of teeth and mouth. A tooth can be broken due to a punch or force from another player. As there is always an encounter and chaos on the field so there are chances that the jaw can be broken. A mouth guard is the best protector of the mouth, teeth, and jaw.

Neck Collars or Neck Rolls

Neck Collars and Neck Rolls are useful for defensive linemen and linebackers. Both of them help these players to protect their necks, especially in awkward conditions. The neck guard is comfortable for the players.

Pants

Every player has to wear the pants before the game starts. These pants consist of inbuilt pads which are seven in number and are used to protect hips, thighs, knees, and tailbone. The common color of these pants is white but they are also available in other colors.

Shoulder Pads

Shoulders are very useful in any type of sport like cricket, football, American football, etc. Shoulders may not be able to bear the force caused due to tackles. Players should wear the shoulder pads to protect their shoulders from such injuries. These pads reduce the chances of tearing of ligaments, muscle strain, shoulder pain, and other injuries and problems related to shoulders.

Skull Caps

Skull caps are optional and are worn to prevent sweat from reaching the face. Skull caps can be worn in place of helmets to provide comfort to the players. Helmets are hard and may also damage hairs.

T-Shirts

T-shirts of players are very popular and can be used as a replacement for jerseys. The cost of T-shirts is less than jerseys and can be found in different sports goods stores.

Tees and Holders

Tees and holders are used to hold the ball before kicking and starting the game. The ball is kept on a holder if a kick-off has to be made. For extra points and field goals, these items are not used. Tees and holders are used especially during the training sessions.

Thigh, Hip, and Knee Pads

Arms and legs are always in use during the game. Players have to run continuously and they also have to hold the ball and prevent the members of other time to get the possession. Knees and elbows can easily get hurt during the chaos. In such a case, knee pads and elbow pads are needed for the protection of these organs.

Throwback Jerseys

These are the jerseys that are put on during a special match. The designs and brands of these jerseys have changed with time. These jerseys are worn by players to honor and pay tribute to the senior players.

Towels

Some players like quarterbacks wear the towels so that hands and the ball can be dried easily. Players may lose grip if their hands are wet Towels are available for all the players which they can use to dry their hands before catching or throwing the ball.

Whistles

Whistles are used by referees and coaches when they have to give a signal for starting or stopping the game. Coaches also have to use the whistles to maintain law and order amongst players.

Choosing the right equipment

Players have to choose the right type of equipment which will help them to protect their body parts during the game. A loose or worn-out piece can be uncomfortable and may even be dangerous. In the case of purchasing the equipment online, buyers need to check the reputation of the company. Here are the things that should be taken into account while purchasing American Football Equipment.

Size

All players have different heights, weights, foot sizes, etc. so the equipment has to be purchased accordingly. Players have to keep an account of the size of their various body parts so that American Football accessories can be easily purchased. The equipment that they purchase should properly align with their body parts.

Quality

The next thing that should be considered while purchasing American Football equipment is the quality of the product. If you are purchasing the equipment online, you have to verify whether the products that are being sold are new. Internal working conditions of the second-hand product would be checked if you are buying any.

Fitting

You have to check the fitting of the uniform, helmet, mouth guard, and other equipment. If the equipment is tight and uncomfortable, you will face difficulty during the game. Loose items may fall down and fitting them during the game can be a waste of time. It is better to choose the pieces that are perfectly fit.

Condition

The condition of the equipment should be checked before purchase. It is better to purchase a new one but if you are going for a second-hand product, check whether it is worn out or not and also the internal conditions like helmet, mouth guards, etc. Damaged and worn-out knee pads are not good for the knees. Purchase the knee pads that have excellent shock absorbers.

By position

Different equipment has different positions. In the case of shoulder pads, they should be cantilevered for linebackers as they are bigger in size. Linebackers have to deal with collisions from the front and these pads will keep their shoulders safe. Flat shoulder pads are suitable for quarterbacks and receivers.

In the case of gloves, linemen need full gloves which can be used to cover the hand while receivers need such gloves that can be helpful for them to move their hand freely.

American Football - Players and Positions

American Football is a popular game played between two teams each having 11 players. Each player has his own position and they have to play a special role in the game. All the members of a team have to perform their job all the time to prevent the opponent from reaching the goalpost or the end zone. Before knowing about how the game is played, you need to know the position of the players.

The game consists of 3 teams listed below −

Offensive Team

The offensive team consists of 11 players whose job is to take the ball to the end zone of the opponent. The offensive team has to go for a touchdown or settle for a field goal.

Defensive Team

The defensive team also consists of 11 players and their job is to tackle the offensive team and prevent their attack. They have to tackle the player of the offensive team who carries the ball. They can also catch the pass or knock it down.

Special Team

The offensive and the defensive teams are not allowed for kickoffs and extra points tries. They also cannot go for field goals and punts. All these actions have to be performed by the special team

Players and Positions in the offensive team

The positions of these players are discussed here in detail.

Quarterback (QB)

The player at this position has to control the ball coming from the center. This player has the option to pass the ball to a running back, wide receiver, tight end, or a passing play. QB also has the option of taking the ball and running. He needs to have knowledge about the position of each player so that he can throw the ball to a player of his team.

Offensive Lineman

There are five offensive linemen on the field in the offensive team. These linemen are −

Left Tackle

Left Guard

Center

Right Guard

Right Tackle

The center lineman is the most important as most of the time the ball is with the center. The Center has to snap the ball, hand, or toss it between his feet and pass it to the Quarterback or another player to start the game. Usually, the Center position is held by the captain of the team. He is responsible for communication with the team.

After the ball is in the hands of the Center, none of the players in the offensive team are allowed to touch the ball till the time the center passes the ball or the ball falls down from the hands of the center of the offensive team. This event is known as fumble and in such a case, the offensive team players try their best to push the defensive team so that they could not get the ball. Offensive linemen have the job of blocking the defensive team to get the ball.

Running Back

The job of the Running Back player is to get the ball thrown by the quarterback and run. Running Backs need to be powerful and fast so that they can be able to pass the ball to the other players of their team. They have to look for the best place where they can run and make a sudden stop to change the move. Usually, an offensive team has one running back but sometimes there can be two. If there are five receivers in the offensive team, then there will be no Running Backs.

Fullback

Fullbacks are considered as a mixture of lineman and running back. Their position is between Quarterback and Lineman. Their job is to block the running backs and then carry the ball. In the modern American Football game, Fullbacks are not required.

Tight End

The position of Tight Ends is bigger than the Wide Receivers but smaller than the Offensive Linemen. Their job is to block the linemen by catching the pass. They have to run in a similar way as that of Offensive Linemen. They have to catch the ball and run.

Wide Receiver

The position of Wide Receivers lies at or near the line of scrimmage. They are responsible for carrying the ball and they also have to block running plays. They are also tasked with catching passes. They have the option to jump in the air to catch the ball and run. They have to run on the known routes so that it is easy for the Quarterbacks to pass the ball.

Wide Receivers also have to hide their intentions from the defensive team. Wide Receivers are also allowed to wear face shields to hide the places where they are seeing and throwing the ball.

Players and Positions in Defensive Team

The positions of different players in the defensive team are discussed here.

Defensive Linemen

Defensive linemen have to start playing from the line of scrimmage. This is the line where the ball is kept before the game starts. A defensive team can have 3 to 4 Defensive Linemen who are allowed to keep one or both hands on the field. Defensive Linemen are positioned in the middle and are called defensive tackle. If the number of defensive tackles is only one, he is known as a nose tackle.

The Defensive Linemen are responsible for stopping the Running Back of the offensive team. They also have to pressurize the Quarterback to throw the ball as soon as possible. They also have to tackle the Quarterback and it is known as sack. Defensive Linemen also have to stop the receivers and block them from catching the pass. These players need to be more active in the game.

Linebacker

There are four Linebackers in the defensive team if there are three defensive linemen. In case there are four linemen, the number of linebackers is three. Linebackers have to work faster in comparison to the Defensive Linemen. They have to focus on passes and also have to keep an eye on the tight ends and wide receivers. The middle linebacker has to keep an eye on the quarterback before the play.

Cornerback

Cornerbacks are also known as Defensive Backfield or Defensive Backs. They are positioned outside of the defense and have the responsibility of dealing with the receivers of the offensive team. Cornerbacks try to prevent the receivers from catching the ball. The prevention can be done by batting down the ball or coming in its way while the receiver is going to receive it.

There can be five cornerbacks in a team and the fifth one is known as nickel back. The fifth defensive back is necessary if the offensive team has more number of receivers. If there are six cornerbacks in a defensive team, the sixth one is known as a dime back.

Safety

The last player of the defensive is known as Safety. Safety has the responsibility to play at the back of the defensive team. Safeties have to check that none of the players of the offensive team cross the defense. Safeties have to take care of the large area of the field.

A defensive team has two safeties. One of them is called strong safety and the other one is free safety. The strong safety is positioned at a place where the tight ends of the offensive team are lined up. The strong safety has to reach the line scrimmage while the free safety has to be available at the back of the defense.

Players and Positions in the special team

The members of the special team are discussed below.

Kicker

The kicker is responsible for kicking off the ball and also going for a field goal. He is also responsible for earning point after touchdown (PAT).

Punter

If the offensive players have gone for a fourth touchdown, they may or may not go for the first down. This is so because if they are unable to succeed the first down, they have to give the ball to the defensive team at the place where they have stopped their offense.

The punter has to kick the ball in such a way that the offensive team can be kept away from the end zone. Punters can also give the ball to the kicker to go for a field goal.

Kick Returner

A Kick Returner is a player who has to catch the ball kicked by the kicker and run to the end zone of the opposite team. These players have to run at a fast speed and they can also act as wide receivers or cornerbacks.

Punt Returner

The punt returner has to catch the ball punted by the Punter. The player does not have to return the ball as the special team of the other team has to tackle him. The Punt Returner may return the ball. He can also run towards the end zone of the other team.

Long Snapper

Long Snapper is a special center whose job is to snap the ball to the punter or kicker. The ball has to be kept in between the legs and passed to the punter.

American Football - How to Play?

Getting Ready

American Football starts with the toss of a coin, just 3 minutes before the game. The referee meets both team captains and calls for a toss. The winner of the toss has can choose from either receiving the kickoff or just kickoff to start the game. Apart from that the winning team chooses an end of the field and the loser of the toss other end of the field.

Players and Positioning

American Football has two teams and each of them has 11 players. The players have their own positions which depend on whether they belong to offensive, defensive, or special teams −

To know more about players and positions refer to the link below −

American Football - Players and Positions

Quick Glimpse of the Game

The offensive team with 11 players takes possession of the ovoid ball and tries to advance the ball by throwing and running to the opponent team’s goal post to score points. Both the teams try to gain points by crossing the goal line and getting into the end zone. The opponent team called the defense tries to stop the offensive team and takes the control over the ball. Out of both the teams, the team with the ball has to score more points or the team is forced to give up the possession of the ball. The offensive and defensive teams change roles (the offensive team goes on defense and the defensive team goes on offense). The same continues back and forth, until all four 15 minute quarters of the game have been played.

The game starts with the kickoff. The ovoid ball is placed on a tee (a cone shaped platform which holds the ball) at the defense’s 35-yard line, and a special kicker also known as a placekicker kicks the ball to the offense. Any player from offense team will try to catch the ball and advance to the defense. When a kickoff is caught in the offense's end zone, the kicker has two options to play. First option is to run the ball away from the end zone and second option is to kneel down in the end zone to gesture a touchback and to stop the play immediately. The ball is positioned on the 20-yard line and game is started again.

The offensive team tries to get as much space as it can to try and move closer to the defense’s end zone. Every time the offense gets hold of the ball and has four downs or chances to gain 10 yards. If the offensive team effectively passes and moves the ball 10 or more yards, they earn a first down and similarly other set of four downs. If the offense fails to gain 10 yards’ space, then they lose control of the ball. The defense tries to prevent the offense from scoring and gaining the 10 yards needed for first down. If the offense reaches fourth down, then they end up punting the ball (kicks it away). This makes the defense team to begin its game from further down the field.

One of the important game rules of American Football is the play from scrimmage. It is the movement of the game during which one team tries to advance the ball, get a first down, or a point, and the other team tries to stop them or take the ball away. These plays from scrimmage include–field goal attempts (from either a place kick or a drop kick), passing the ball, retaining the ball and running, punting the ball (dropping the ball from the hands and then before it reaches the ground, kicking the ball), or freekicks such as kick-offs and fair catch kicks. The game also consists of a series of downs, referred to as a time period in which the individual plays in a certain duration, outside of which the ball is dead or not in play.

Replacement of players can be made only between the downs, which allows for a great deal of choice for the team to send in the best suitable player for that particular situation.

Moving the Bal – The Run and The Pass

Usually the game begins with the snap of the ball at the line of scrimmage. The quarterback of the offense calls out a play in code and the center player passes or snaps the ball under his legs. The quarterback than continues from there and takes a quick decision on either to throw the ball or run with it.

The offense can advance the ball in two ways. First one is The Run and this happens when the quarterback player passes the ball off to a running back player, who attempts to gain as many yards as possible by escaping the defensive players. The quarterback is also one of the runners and is permitted to run with the ball.

Another alternative to taking the ball is to Pass it. The quarterback player generally passes the ball to trick the defense. Any other player from the offensive team can also pass the ball as long as the pass is thrown from behind the line of scrimmage. A pass is complete after another offensive player catches the ball, typically the wide receiver or tight end player of the catch the ball. If the ball smashes the ground before any other player catches it, then it’s an incomplete pass.

The defense players stop the offense from progressing with the ball by getting the ball to the ground. A player is said to be Tackled when the players’ knees touch the ground. This results in end of the play. A play also finishes in case if the player runs out of boundaries.

Scoring System

The game is played on a point based scoring system. The main objective of the players is to score points and team with scoring highest number of points is declared winner of the game. According to the scoring structure points can be scored in four methods that is Touchdown, Extra point (PAT), Field goal, and Safety points.

To know more about Scoring system, refer to the link below −

American Football - Scoring System

American Football - Scoring System

The scoring system in American football is different in comparison to other games. The game is played between an offensive and a defensive team. Both teams have the aim of reaching the goal post or end zone of the opponent team to gain points. The winner of the game is the team that has earned more points. The single play in the game is called down and the offensive team has four of them.

The team has to use the four downs till ten yards. If they are able to reach ten yards, they will get four downs again to reach the further 10 yards. If the offensive team is unable to reach the 10 yards in four downs, the ball is transferred to the other team.

Types of American Football Scores

A team can earn points in different ways to increase their score. The highest point that they can get is through touchdown. The other ways through which points can be scored can be found in the table below −

Touchdown

This is the most important way to earn points as each team gets six points for each touchdown. When the ball crosses the goal line of the opponent team, the offensive team earns six points. Another way to earn points through a touchdown is when a player catches the ball while he is in the end zone of the opponent team.

The rules of gaining points through touchdowns differ in college and pro football. In the case of pro football, both feet of the receiver should be on the ground or in the in-bounds when he catches the ball. In the case of college football, only one foot is enough to be in the in-bounds to get points through a touchdown.

Field Goal

The points which a team gets through the field goal is three. A team can score points through the field goal if a kicker kicks the ball that crosses the uprights of the goalpost. The center has to pass the ball to the punter or quarterback. The punter or the quarterback has to put the ball on the ground so that the kicker can kick it to the goalpost. The defense has to block the ball to stop the field goal.

Field goals can be scored from anywhere on the field but teams usually prefer a distance of 40 yards. Kickers have to position themselves along the offensive line to go for the field goal. Players can also use dropkick to get the field goal. The kicker in this case has to put the ball on the ground and kick it to the goalpost. This trick is very rarely used.

Two-Points Conversion

Two-point conversion can be attempted after getting a touchdown. In modern games, a team uses this option when they need two points to win the game or go for a tie. The team who wants to attempt a two-point conversion has to reach the end zone. In such a case, the game has to be started from a two-yard line. Many teams go for this type of scoring but analytics reveal that Per attempt a team receives 1.002 points while the average of the extra points is 0.938.

Extra Point

The extra point is a type of field goal in which the goal has to be kicked from a 15-yard line. On being successful, the team gets only one point. Until 2015, players were allowed to go for a field goal from a two-yard line for getting extra points. This helped the kickers to earn extra points easily but after the change of rule, it became a little difficult to earn extra points.

Safety

Safety is a way of scoring in which the defensive team has to tackle the offensive team. The defensive team receives 2 points. After earning the points, the defensive team gets the possession of the ball and also gets the chance of punting. As per the strategy, a team always tries for safeties to earn points when the game is about to end.

American Football Scoreboard

Now we will know about the American Football Scoreboard.

Team Names

The scoreboard has the names of the two teams participating in the current game. The name of the home team can be found on the top or left while the visiting team’s name can be found on the bottom or right. In some scoreboards, HOME and AWAY can also be found for the home and visiting team respectively.

Scores

The current score of each team can be found next to the name of the team. The score is updated continuously till the end of the game.

Quarter and Time Remaining

There are four quarters in each American Football game. The duration of each quarter is 15 minutes. The scoreboard shows the quarter in which the game is being played for example second or third quarter. The time remaining for the current quarter is also displayed.

Down and Distance

American Football is a game in which the offensive team has the option of four downs when the game starts. The downs are displayed on the scoreboard as 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th. The scoreboard also shows the distance which the offensive team has to cover to get four downs again. A TO GO number is also displayed which lets the offensive team know the distance to be covered for a 10-yard goal so that 1st down can be earned.

Ball On

Ball On is an indicator which shows the current location of the ball on the field. The number displayed also shows the distance of the ball from each end zone.

Possession Indicator

The possession indicator shows the name of the team which is currently possessing the ball. Usually, the ball is in the possession of the offensive team.

Timeouts Remaining

Three timeouts are allotted to each team per half. The number of timeouts is displayed on some of the scoreboards.

American Football - Rules

American Football has many rules and they are listed here.

The game is divided into four quarters and the duration of each quarter is 15 minutes.

A break of 2 minutes is provided between 1st and 2nd and 3rd and 4th quarter.

A break of 15 minutes is provided between the 2nd and 3rd rounds as it is half-time.

The offensive team has the option of four downs which it has to use to gain ten or more downs

If the offensive team successfully attains ten yards, it gets 4 downs again but if it fails, the possession of the ball is given to the defensive team and makes it the offensive team.

A lot of different types of plays are available and the teams make these plays which results in organized chaos.

The captain of the offensive team calls for the plays and the same thing is done by the captain of the defensive team.

A toss is done at the start of the game to decide which team will possess the ball.

When the offensive team reaches the fourth down it has to decide whether to cover the remaining yards or kick the ball. If the team goes for the kick option, it can go for a punt or field goal.

The game is played between two teams of 11 players each.

One of the teams is offensive and the other is defensive.

The offensive team comes with the objective of reaching the end zone of the other team while the defensive team has the objective of preventing the offensive team from reaching the end zone.

Points can be earned in different ways which can be found in the table below −

American Football - Variants

American Football is the descendant of Rugby Football and has many variants which are played with different rules. The teams in the NFL play American Football and the main aim of each team is to win the Super Bowl. Let us discuss some of the variants of American Football in detail.

Arena Football

Arena Football is an indoor variant of American Football. The speed of the game is much faster comparatively and both teams have the opportunity to score high. The sport was invented in 1981 and it got its patent in 1987. The field of the game is made in a similar way like basketball or ice hockey. The width of the field is 85 feet and the length is 200 feet. Each team consists of 8 players and the game is in the control of Arena Football League. It is one of the popular variants of American Football.

Canadian Football

Canadian Football is a variant of American Football but is also considered as a variant of Gridiron Football. There are two teams in the game and each has 12 players. The field of Canadian Football is 10 yards longer and 10 yards wider than the field of American Football. Its end zone is also 10 yards deeper.

The Canadian Football League is the only league for this game. The season for the game starts in June and ends in November. Teams have to compete for the Grey Cup. A women football league for the game has also been created in 2004 and the game is becoming popular.

Six-man Football

Six-man Football is a modified version of the American Football game. This is a game in which each team consists of six members. A teacher from Chester Nebraska is the inventor of the game for high school students. The rules of the game are similar to American football and some of them are listed below −

The dimensions of the field are 80 x 40 yards.

Four points are awarded for each field goal.

The first exchange is snapped at the center and the players cannot advance the ball till the second exchange

A forward pass can be caught by anybody.

First down should be done on 15 yards

Two points are rewarded for a kick after touchdown

One point is awarded for a run or pass

If a team has got 45 points more than the other team before or after half-time, it can end the game and win it.

The duration of each quarter is 10 minutes

Breaks between two quarters are 2 minutes and the half-time break is of 15 minutes

Eight-man Football

Eight-man Football is also a variant of American Football which has been developed for high school students. The schools that are having a small number of enrolments play this game. The game has become so popular that in 2015, the game was played in 1,561 schools in the United States. The rules of this game have much similarity with the original American Football game. The special team is not there in this game. There is no fourth down and two-point conversion.

The size of the field is either 40 yards x 80 yards or 40 x 100 yards. Each team has eight players and the team can earn points through.

Touchdowns

Extra point conversions

Field goals

Safeties

There are four quarters in the game and the duration of each of them is 15 minutes.

Nine-man Football

Nine-man Football is another variation of American Football in which each team consists of nine players. The game has been developed for high school and 116 schools adopted this variant in 2015. The rules of the game are similar to American Football. The game is played in a field whose dimensions can be either 40 x 80 yards or 40 x 100 yards. Teams can score points through −

Touchdowns

Field goals

Extra point conversions

Safeties

There are four quarters in the game and the duration of each of them is 15 minutes. This game is also popular in small schools in Canada, Australia, Italy, Norway, France, and Argentina.

Flag Football

Flag Football is another variant of American Football and the rules of both games are similar. Tackling is not a part of this game. The defensive team has to remove a flag or the flag belt from the player who is handling the ball. Players are not allowed to touch each other and this makes it an enjoyable game for people of every age.

The game is played between two teams and each of them can have 5, 7, or 8 players. The game is played on a field having the dimensions of 70 x 30 yards. Each end zone is allotted a space of 10 yards. Teams have to carry the ball through four downs. The defensive team has to pull out the flag to prevent the offensive team from advancing. Touchdowns provide six points and teams can also score points through two-point conversions and extra points.

Flag Football is popular in North America, Asia, and Europe and it will also become the part of Olympics in 2028.

Sprint Football

Sprint Football is a variant of American Football in which the weight of the players should be 172 pounds or less. The body fat should be only 5%. This game is played in the United States at the college level only. The weight restriction has been kept so that the game can be played at a fast pace.

The size of the field is similar to the American Football and the offensive team gets the possession of the ball. Points are scored through the following −

Touchdowns: 6 points

Field goals 3 points

One point conversion

Two point conversion

Safeties

The game comes under the control of the Collegiate Sprint Football League (CSFL). The members of CSFL belong to nine universities and the sport is held every year. There are nine teams in the competition and each of them has to play seven matches. The championship is awarded to the team that has won most of the matches. If more than one team has won the similar number of games, the championship is shared.

Touch Football

Touch Football consists of all the rules that are followed in the American Football game. The only rule that is not followed is the full-contact aspect. Players just have to touch the players of the other team to end a play. There is no need to wear any protective gear. The size of the field and the number of players vary. There are different variations of the game which are as follows −

One of the formats is one-touch or two-touch tackle where players have to touch other players with a single or both hands.

In the second format, all forms are kicking are not available in this game and points can be scored only through touchdowns.

There is a third format in which the time duration of the games is not fixed and the players have to score a fixed number of points

Ultimate Football

Ultimate Football is also known by the name of Ultimate Frisbee or Frisbee. The game is played with the help of a flying disc which is called Frisbee. The game was started in the 1960s and was played at Columbia High School in New Jersey.

The game is played between two teams each having seven members. The aim of the game is to throw the disc so that it can reach the end zone of the opposition team. If there is an interruption in the pass, the disc is handed over to the other team. Many leagues of this game are arranged and some of the popular ones include USA Ultimate and Ultimate Canada.

Kayak Football

Kayak Football is a game that has been developed by combining Kayaking, American Football, and Frisbee. A swimming pool is one of the best places where the game can be played. A kayak with a double paddle is used along with a small soft football. The aim of a team is to reach the end zone of the other team.

The game is played between two teams each having ten players. Players can throw the ball to their team members or in the water and a team member can paddle up to it. Holding the ball is not allowed in the game and paddle with it. A pass in the air can be prevented with the help of a paddle.

Players have to catch the ball to score points. Each catch leads to one point. Ramming the boats and hitting players with paddles is not allowed.

Lingerie Football

The American Football that is played by women who wear lingerie is known as Lingerie Football. The game was started as a half-time show for the Super Bowl but now it is played for full time. The game is played between two teams of seven players each. The equipment used in the game is −

Pads

Knee pads

Elbow pads

Helmets with visors

There are four periods of ten minutes each in which the game has to be completed. Only touchdowns can be used to score points. No field goals can be done for scoring. One-point conversion from one-yard and two-point conversion from the three-yard line can be performed for scoring points. The game is popular in the United States, Canada, and Australia.

Unicycle Football

Unicycle is a variant of American Football in which players have to use a unicycle to move around the field. Marcus Garland from Texas invented the game. This game can be played in parking lots, indoor arenas, or any place having a small or large space. Each team can have four to 11 players.

The number of players is decided on the basis of the size of the field where the game has to be played. Players have to use a helmet to play the game with a regular-size football.

A Unicycle Football League is also available which consists of 9 teams that have to play 56 games in a season each year.

American Football - How to Learn?

American Football is easy to learn and practice. There are many things that you can do to practice the game and learn it. Continuous practice of everything is needed to become a great American Football player. You will have to learn kicking, catching, holding, and many other things. Here we will discuss some processes which will help you to learn each aspect of the game easily.

Physical strength, speed, alertness, etc. are needed to play the game effectively. Besides this, you also need to learn technical skills so that you can become proficient in different types of moves.

Footwork Drills

One of the essential aspects to learn is the footwork and you can follow the footwork drills to become proficient. There are three types of drills that you can practice each for 30 minutes. Let us discuss these drills in detail.

Ladder Drills

This is a practice in which you have to set up a ladder and use different types of patterns to run. Some of these patterns are as follows −

Side shuffles

High knees

Quick feet

Each of these three steps should be performed for 30 seconds. After 30 seconds, take a break for a few seconds and start the next one. This will help you in improving your footwork pattern.

Dot Drills

This is a type of practice in which you have to draw dots. After drawing these dots, try to jump from one dot to another in different patterns. You can jump at the front and then go back. You can also go for in and out. You have to practice each of these steps for 30 seconds and repeat it to improve your jumping skills which is needed in this game.

Cone Drills

This is a type of practice in which you have to design or set up a zigzag pattern and practice in such a way that directions are changed quickly. Repeat this step five times daily and also take rest in between.

Ball Handling Skills

There are different things that you have to improve so that the ball can be handled safely and comfortably. You need to learn agility, control, and grip, and here are things that you can do to practice ball-handling skills.

One-Handed ball Control

This is a type of practice in which you have to handle the ball in a single hand flip it in different ways and then catch and hold it. You can throw it up and catch and you can also spin it. All these movements should be done for a few seconds and take rest in between. Also, you need to repeat the steps 5 to 6 times.

Ball Slams

This is a practice in which you have to handle the ball with both hands. Now you need to throw the ball forcefully on the ground and then catch it on every bounce. This step has to be repeated for half a minute or more and then take rest in between every half minute.

Agility

Create a zigzag pattern and start running while having the ball in one of your hands. You need to put the ball from one hand to another while running in different patterns. This instep has to be repeated and after finishing take rest and then start again.

Blocking Drills

Blocking is one of the important parts of the game as you have to block the players of the opposition team from reaching the end zone of your side. The blocking skills are required by offensive and defensive teams. You can perform different things that can help you in improving power, footwork, and technique of blocking. Let us discuss some of these drills.

Wall Drive

This is a practice in which you have to face a wall while holding the ball in both of your hands. The next step that you have to do is to push the ball against the wall as hard as possible. The step has to be repeated for 30 seconds and then take rest and repeat it.

Shadow Blocking

This is a practice where you have to stand in front of a mirror. Take into account footwork, stance, and hand placement. Perform this step for 30 seconds and repeat it as much as you can.

Footwork Blocking

This is a practice in which you have to set up cones in a straight line Now run through these cones while practicing different types of blocking techniques. Some of these blocking techniques include cut blocking, drive blocking, and many more. These steps should be practiced continuously for 30 minutes.

Route Running Skills

Route Running Skills have to be practiced by those people who want to become a receiver, tight end, or running backs. You need to focus on your speed, agility, and precision. Here are some of the drills that you can follow −

Cone Routes

This is a practice in which you have to set up and arrange cones in different patterns to make different types of routes. Some of these patterns are ins, outs, slants, and many more. You need to run on each route after creation accurately.

Reaction Route

This is a type of practice in which you need a partner. You need to tell the partner to run on different routes. You should then tell him the correct way of running on different routes. This will help you to be alert while reacting quickly to any situation.

Mirror Routes

This is a type of practice in which you have to stand in front of a mirror. You can practice repeat running while using different patterns. The practice has to be performed for 30 seconds or more.

Tackling Drills

Players in the defensive team must have tackling skills. The skill is necessary as they have to take the offensive player who is holding the ball. There are different types of tackling skills to practice that we will discuss here −

Tackle Dummies

This is a practice in which you have to set up dummies and try to tackle them. You have to use different techniques of tackling. You need to concentrate on the target while going for tackling.

Agility Tackles

This is a practice in which a zigzag pattern has to be made and tackle the dummy while running in this pattern. You need to concentrate on your balance along with speed while tackling the dummy.

Shadow Tackling

This is a practice in which you have to stand in front of the mirror. Try to focus on your stance, hand placement, and footwork while practicing the ways of tackling.

American Football - Tournaments

American Football also popular as Football in the United States is loved by the people of America. There are many tournaments held all over the year and we will discuss some of them here. All these tournaments are listed below −

Alamo Bowl

Army Navy Game

Cactus Bowl

College Football Playoff National Championship

Cotton Bowl Classic

East-West Shrine Game

Fiesta Bowl

Gator Bowl

Holiday Bowl

Music City Bowl

NFL Playoffs

NFL Pro Bowl

Orange Bowl

Peach Bowl

Rose Bowl

Sugar Bowl

Super Bowl

Alamo Bowl

The Alamo Bowl is played in San Antonio, Texas. The game was started in 1993 and is held annually between two college teams. It is a post-season game and the teams from Big 12 and Pac-12 conferences participate in the tournament. The game is popular as the finishing is exciting.

Army Navy Game

The Army-Navy game is a tournament that is played between two college teams. The game was started in 1890 and is held once in a year. The game is played between the United States Military Academy and the United States Naval Academy. This tournament is held for paying tribute to the armed forces in the United States.

Cactus Bowl

The Cactus Bowl is a game that is played between two college teams. The tournament was started in 1989 and is played once in a year. Another name of the Cactus Bowl tournament is Guaranteed Rate Bowl and it is a post-season game which is held in Phoenix, Arizona. The teams are selected from Big 10 and Big 12 conferences.

College Football Playoff National Championship

The competition is held in different parts of the United States. The game was started recently in 2014 and is organized once in a year. The game is played between two college teams. The tournament decides the winner of the NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) championship. The College Football Playoff National Championship has been created as a replacement for the Bowl Championship Series. The game is played between the two top teams selected by the selection committee. The team of Alabama has won three titles since the time the tournament has started.

Cotton Bowl Classic

Cotton Ball Classic is a tournament which is held between two college teams and is held once in a year. The tournament was started in 1937 and is held once in a year in Arlington, Texas. The game is played between two college teams. It is a tournament in which two college teams of different conferences take part.

The College Bowl Classic Tournament is a part of the College Playoff Football rotation since 2014. The stadium where the game is played is known as the AT&T stadium which is located in Arlington, Texas.

East-West Shrine Game

East-West Shrine Game is a tournament which can be played in any part of the United States. The tournament was started in 1925 and is played between two college all-star teams. The game is held once in a year. The game is held for the seniors in the universities all over the USA. The game is played by seniors to make a great career. East-West Shrine Game is also held to support Shrine’s Hospital for Children.

Fiesta Bowl

The Fiesta Bowl is a game that is played between two college teams once in a year. The game was started in 1971 and is played in Glendale, Arizona. This tournament is a part of the College Football Playoff rotation. The game is popular among the fans. Besides game, colorful festivities are also arranged.

Gator Bowl

Gator Bowl is a tournament that is held in Jacksonville, Florida. The game was started in 1946 and is held once in a year. The game is played between two teams which are selected from SEC, ACC, and Big Ten Conferences. The game is very popular among the fans. Another name for the Gator Bowl is TaxSlayer Gator Bowl.

Holiday Bowl

The Holiday Bowl Game is held in Santiago California. The game was established in 1978 and is played between two college teams once in a year. The teams from Pac-12 and Big Ten conferences participate in the tournament.

Music City Bowl

Music City Bowl is a tournament that is held in Nashville, Tennessee. The game was started in 1998 and is held annually. The game is played between two college teams which are selected from the Southeastern Conference and Atlantic Coast Conference. The game is popular among fans and tourists. A musical heritage is also a part of the game which makes it memorable for the audience.

NFL Playoffs

NFL Playoffs is held annually in the United States. The tournament was established in 1933 and is played between 14 professional teams. The game is played to select a team that has to play the Super Bowl. The game consists of wildcard teams and division winners. From the two conferences of the leagues.

NFL Pro Bowl

The NFL Pro Bowl is a game that is played between two professional all-star teams The tournament was started in 1951 and is held once in a year in any part of the United States. The game consists of top players that are selected by coaches, fans, and players. Many changes have been made to the tournament which is held a week before the Super Bowl.

Orange Bowl

Orange Bowl is a tournament that is played in Miami Gardens, Florida. The tournament was started in 1925 and is played between two college teams. The game is held once in a year. It is a part of College Football Playoff Rotation and teams from Atlantic Coast Conference and other conferences can participate in this tournament.

Peach Bowl

Peach Bowl is a tournament which is a part of the College Football Playoff Rotation and was established in 1950. The game is held between two college all-star teams. The place where the game is played is Mobile, Alabama. The game is held for the football seniors so that they can enhance their NFL Draft stock. The game is played between North and South Squads and is played for the evaluation of players. A good number of stars were produced by this tournament.

Rose Bowl

Rose Bowl is a tournament that is held in Pasadena California. The game was started in 1902 and is played between two college teams. The game is held once in a year. The Rose Bowl Game is also known as Granddaddy of Them All. It is the oldest game which is played on the new year's day. The game is played between the winners of the Big Ten Conference and Pac-12 Conference.

Sugar Bowl

The Sugar Bowl is a tournament that is held once in a year and is played between two college teams. The game was started in 1935 and is played in New Orleans Louisiana. It is considered as one of the prestigious games and it is also a part of the College Football Playoff Rotation. The teams from the Southeastern Conference and the Big 12 Conference take part in this tournament.

Super Bowl

Super Bowl is a tournament that is held anywhere in the United States. The tournament was started in 1967 and is held once in a year. The game is played between two professional teams. It is the game of the National Football League (NFL) in which the game is played between two top teams who compete to win the Vince Lombardi Trophy.

The game is popular among people all over the world. Most of the victories have been done by two teams - New England Patriots and Pittsburgh Steelers. Each of them has won 6 trophies.

American Football - Participating Countries

Many other western sports like baseball, rugby, soccer and Formula 1 Racing are being successful in branching to other nations and have gained hype in the international markets. American football has struggled in this regard and was more of American than any other sport. Just recently the game is gaining action worldwide with different championship league matches, out of which the most popular being the National Football League (NFL). There are two important federations viz European Federation of American Football (EFAF) and International Federation of American Football (IFAF).

Countries Participating in American Football

Around 40 countries are currently participating in this sport listed below alphabetically −

United States of America (USA)

The teams included in the United States of America are as follows −

National Football League (NFL)

Super Bowl

United Football League (UFL)

Ohio League

Anthracite League

Regional Football League (RFL)

World Series of Football

American Football Women's League (AFWL)

American Indoor Football League

Arena Football League (AFL)

Champions Indoor Football (CIF)

Continental Indoor Football League (CIFL)

Champions Professional Indoor Football League (CPIFL)

Indoor Football League

Legends Football League (LFL)

Lone Star Football League (LSFL)

National Indoor Football League

Professional Indoor Football League (PIFL)

Southern Indoor Football League (SIFL)

Supreme Indoor Football

Ultimate Indoor Football League (UIFL)

li>

United Indoor Football

X-League Indoor Football (X-League)

All American Football League

Mid Continental Football League

Minor League Football Association

North American Soccer Football League

United National Gridiron League (UNGL)

World Football League

Stars Football League (SFL)

American Football - Champions

The roots of American Football hail from United States of America, being quite obvious the American teams and players are the best performing teams worldwide. As per the International Federation of American Football (IFAF) ranking of the participating countries is listed as follows −

American Football Scenario in India

American football has been more widespread as just an American sport. In India this sport has been known by very few of them, young Indians have never grown up playing this game. The league matches of this sport are hardly being broadcasted on Indian television channels hence nowhere is this sport more ardently prevalent than it is in the United States.

In the year 2012 the first season of Elite Football league of India (EFLI), the American football league, has kicked off. It was very new and the third game anyone on the field had ever played. Yet this was an experimental football league having players who have never played the game professionally and the viewers who have never indeed watched it.

The EFLI arranged five teams in Indian metropolitans, one in Pakistan and two in Sri Lanka to increase the awareness and viewership of the game.

American Football - Surprising Facts

American Football is much popular in the United States as many tournaments are held each year. The last of them is the Super Bowl to win the Vince Lombardi Trophy. There are many surprising, fun, and interesting facts about American football which are discussed here in detail.

Combination of Soccer and Rugby

American Football is a combination of two games called Soccer and Rugby. The USA wanted to develop a football game which should be different from other similar games. The first American Football game that was officially played was held in a college.

Size of the Field

The size of the field on which the game is played is 360 feet by 160 feet. The length of the end zones is 10 yards. Safety equipment like helmets, pads for shoulder and thighs, mouth guards, etc. should be worn.

Change of Safety Rules

The game was previously played without wearing helmets and this happened till 1943. But due to the safety of the players it became mandatory to wear helmets. Another security material that players have to wear is protective gear.

Duration of Game

The duration of the game is 60 minutes which is divided into four quarters of 15 minutes each. The game is stopped frequently so there are chances that the duration can reach from 2.5 hours to 3 hours. The duration of the game for high school for each quarter is 12 minutes. The time of the game is shorter for young students.

Getting Best Players

Initially, the games were arranged between amateur clubs and college athletic departments. The aim of both teams is to look for the best players. In order to achieve this aim, illegal payment and rewards were started by Athletic clubs.

Date of First Game

The first game was played on November 6, 1869. Very few rules were there that had to be followed by the teams. Later, Walter Camp changed the rules which are now being used.

APFA

APFA stands for American Professional Football Association which was formed in 1920This is the same organization which led to the formation of the NFL (National Football League. The number of games managed by the NFL is 256 which starts from Labor day to New Year day.

Number of Spectators

The game is viewed by more than 115 million people each year.

Cost of Advertisement

The cost of an advertisement having the duration of 30 seconds for Super Bowl 2023 was $7 million.

Two Divisions of NFL

NFL consists of two divisions and these divisions are NFC and AFC. NFL has to manage 32 teams. Playoffs are arranged to get the champion in AFC and NFC. Both of them should have one champion each.

Average Earnings

Average Earnings for a player is around $2.1 million per year. The payment is made to the player on the basis of contract, team, and performance. Some top players can also earn 20 million per year.

Popularity of the Amateur Football

Many colleges in the 1880s played a kind of game which similar to soccer or football. The main aim of these colleges in the United States is to improve and expand athletics. After the Civil War, amateur football became very popular.

Cheating

Amateur football clubs offered jobs to the top players so that they could play for them. Some clubs also provided expensive trophies to the best players. Best players also received double amount as remuneration.

Shortest Duration for Season

The shortest season for the game was of 17 weeks during which fans enjoyed, cheered their teams, watched the annual Super Bowl, and did a lot of things.

Most Super Bowl Wins

Pittsburg Steel has won 6 Super Bowl Trophies which is the highest number of trophies won by any team. The next name is of Dallas Cowboys who won 4 trophies and the England Patriots have won four.

Most Scored Points

George Tech College made a record by scoring 222 points which is the highest and the team that it defeated scored 0 points.

Longest College Football

A match was held between Kentucky and Arkansas which lasted a little less than four hours.

Longest Professional Game

The longest professional game was played between the Kansas City Chiefs and Miami Dolphins. The duration of the game was 82 minutes and 20 seconds. Each quarter was of 15 minutes followed by an overtime of 22 minutes and 20 seconds.

Winning Most Championships

Princeton has won 28 championships which is the highest number of winning collegiate national football championships.

First College Player to win awards

Vinny Testaverde was the first college player who win the following awards in his senior year −

Maxwell

O’Brien

Walter Camp

Heisman

Multiple records Holder

Steve McNair has made a large number of records. He has a record of 5,799 yards in a season, career passing yards of 14,496, and 400 yards in many games.

Winning and Losing

Prairie View College won two national championships – one in 1953 and the other in 1964. The same college also has a record of losing 80 games in a row.

Conference Championships

Conference Championship is played by all the teams since 1998 except Houston.

Highest Number of Fans

Green Bay Packers is one of the oldest teams of the NFL and has so many fans that more than 100,000 people are on the waiting list to get season tickets.

First Super Bowl Winner

The Green Bay Packers won the first Super Bowl in 1967.

Highest number of Yards

Emmitt Smith has more than 18,000 yards which is the highest number.

Most number of not getting defeated continuously

Canton Buildings has a record of not being defatted in the 25 straight games held between 1921 and 1923. There were 22 wins and 3 ties.

Most number of losing continuously

Tampa Bay Buccaneers has the record of losing 26 games continuously. The record was made between 1976 and 1977.

Richest NFL Player

Tom Brady had a long career from 2000 to 2022 in which he earned $332,962,392 and became the richest NFL player. The second richest NFL player is Aaron Rogers is the second richest NFL player who earned $305,608,010 since 2005. He played 18 games since he started his career.

American Football - FAQs

Many people have a dream of becoming a player and playing American Football. They also want to make a career because earning potential is more. Many have questions before making an attempt to become an American Football player. Here are some of the Frequently Asked Questions with detailed answers.

1. Why American Football is called football?

American Football has its origins in Rugby Football that originated from Football or Soccer. In Rugby Football, William Webb Ellis made the rule of picking up the ball and running rather than kicking. In the USA, Rugby was played in colleges with different rules, and that gave birth to American Football.

2. Why college players are not paid?

There is a difference between NFL and college football. Players who participate in NFL football are paid but this is not the case with college football as it is considered as an amateur game. NCAA has stated that students should focus more on their studies but the US Court of Appeals said that college football players can get money to pay their fees and also get an allowance to manage their travelling and living costs.

3. Who is the inventor of American Football?

American Football was invented by Walter Camp who made consistent rules that players have to follow during the game. The game had many variants during the 1870s This is the reason that Walter Camp is known as the father of American Football.

4. Is American Football a part of Olympics?

In spite of being a popular game American football is not a part of the Olympics. European Football League has also been created and the game is played in Europe also but still, it is dominated by the USA.

5. How many players does each team have?

Each team has 11 players. But the roster is very large as substitutes are also needed. NFL has 53 players who can be used as a substitute. A player in each team has to play at only a single position so each team will have a total of 22 players out of which 11 are on the field.

6. What is the duration of the game?

The game whether it is a college tournament or a professional game has a time period of 60 minutes. This 60 minutes is divided into four quarters. Each quarter has a duration of 15 minutes. In the case of high school, the duration of each quarter is 12 which ends the game in 48 minutes.

7. Who is the best American Football Player?

Tom Brady is the best American Football player. His position was quarterback for 20 seasons when he played for the New England Patriots. He helped his team to win 6 Super Bowls from 2001 to 2019.

8. What is the dimension of the field to play American Football?

The length of the field is 100 yards which also includes goal lines and end zones along with goal lines. The width of the field is 160 feet or 53.3 yards.

9. How players can get points in the game?

There are many ways which players can use to make points. The different types of points can be found in the table below −

Way to earn points

Points

Touchdown

6

Field Goal

3

Two-Point Conversion

2

Extra Point

1

Safety

2

10. What is a turnover and what are its types?

Turnover in American Football means that the possession of the ball is changed from one team to another. There are different types of turnovers and we will discuss them here.

Interception

An interception occurs when the ball thrown by the quarterback is caught by the player of the defensive team. The players of the defensive team have to show their talent by jumping and catching the ball. it can result in a touchdown for the defensive if the player who has caught the ball runs in the opposite direction.

Fumble

Fumble is a situation when the ball in the hands of an offensive player falls before he is tackled. If the player possessing the ball falls due to any obstacle and the ball falls down, it is not considered as fumble and the offensive team player will not lose possession of the ball. If the ball has fallen down, both teams struggle to get possession.

Turnover Downs

Turnover downs occur in the fourth down. Teams have the option of going got a fourth down if they have enough confidence that they will be able to get a new set of downs. If offensive players fail to complete the fourth down, the possession of the ball is given to the defensive to become an offensive team.

11. What is the meaning of a line of scrimmage?

The imaginary line which is used to separate the two teams is called the scrimmage line. None of the teams are allowed to cross this line till the time the football has been snapped.

12. What is meant by the neutral zone?

The area that separates the offensive and the defensive team is known as the neutral zone. The player in the center position is only allowed to snap the ball.

13. What is the role of the special team in American Football?

The special team consists of members like a punter or kicker. The job of the special team is to kickoff, punt, kickoff return, punt return, field goal block, and many more. A special team is present in the offensive and defensive teams and helps in earning points.

14. What is the meaning of down in the game?

Down is a term which is used for one play. Four downs are allotted to the offensive team. The aim of downs is to cover the ten yards and if the offensive team succeeds, it gets another four downs to cover the next ten yards. If the offensive team fails to use the four downs, the ball is transferred to the defensive team.

15. Which area on the field is called red zone?

The area between the 20-yard line and the goal line is known as the red zone. The offensive team has to face a lot of difficulty to take the ball forward. This is an area which the offensive team can use to earn points.

16. What equipment are used in American Football?

The equipment used in the American Football are −

Helmets

Mouth Guards

Jerseys

Shoulder Pads

Cleats

Football

For more information, visit the link below −

American Football - Equipment

17. Why American Football is popular?

American Football is a popular game because of its rules which are easy to follow. Essential safety equipment has to be worn so that chances of getting hurt are reduced.

18.Where is the NFL Hall of Fame located in the USA?

The NFL Hall of Fame is located in Ohio.

19. Who Founded the NFL?

The founder of the NFL was George Halas.

20. What is the total number of referees available in an NFL game?

The total number of referees available in the NFL game is 7.

21. Which NFL teams are the oldest ones?

The oldest NFL teams are Arizona Cardinals and Chicago Bears which were formed in 1920.

22. Which NFL team won most of the matches in the 1970s?

The name of the team was the Dallas Cowboys.

23. How a team can earn 3 points through a field goal

The offensive team has a player called a kicker who has the right to kick the ball from anywhere to the end zone. A chance of a field goal usually occurs after the fourth down.

24. What is an offside in American Football?

When a player from an offensive snaps the ball and a player from the defensive team is lined up in the neutral zone, this results in offside. There are many reasons due to which offside occurs.

25. What is holding?

Holding is a penalty which occurs when a defensive player holds an offensive player in such a way that the offensive player cannot move. A penalty of ten yards is imposed on the defensive team.

26. When is a team considered as a winner?

A team is considered as a winner if it has scored more points than the opposition. Teams have to win in the regular seasons so that they can become a part of the postseason. The main of each team is to win the postseason.

27. What is the full form of NFL?

NFL stands for National Football League.

28. How many teams are available in the NFL?

There are 32 teams in the NFL.

29. What is the size of the football?

The size of the ball is as follows −

Length: 11 inches

Short circumference: 6.7 inches

Long circumference: 22 inches