♦ ♦

-->> UK Horror Legend portrayed a much, much siniter version of Sweeney Todd in 1936's film of Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street.

..years back a PBS station broadcast this movie late one weekend. I watched it and had no idea i was witnessing an unsung horror master !!

I left it alone in my mind and forgot about it.. until NOW !! IRK ~~**

♠ ♠

"British Forror Actor "Tod Slaughter"

"Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street - 1936 | 65 mins | Drama | B&W

The Production Team

Director: George King.

Script: Frederick Hayward and H.F. Maltby.

Cinematography: Jack Parker.

Film Editing: John Seabourne Sr.

Art Direction: Percy Bell.

Sound Department: John K. Byers.

The Cast

Tod Slaughter - Sweeney Todd

Stella Rho - Mrs. Lovatt

John Singer - Tobias Rag

Eve Lister - Johanna Oakle

Bruce Seton - Mark Ingerstreet

D.J. Williams - Stephen Oakley

Davina Craig - Nan

Jerry Verno - Pearley Plot Synopsis

Splendid vintage melodrama based on the mythical 1800’s urban legend of the Demon Barber of Fleet Street which first appeared in the cheap Penny Dreadful’s. Todd Slaughter produces his quintessential theatrical performance with predictable relish – a role Slaughter played on stage over 4000 times on stage.

Told in flashback, we first meet the mad barber Sweeney Todd (Tod Slaughter) casting a romantic eye on Johanna Oakley (Eve Lister), the beautiful daughter of a business partner whom he is threatening to ruin financially. She, however, is in love with a handsome seaman Mark Ingerstreet (Bruce Seton) who has boarded the Golden Hope and embarked on a trip to earn the money he will need to wed her.

Todd makes additional money by picking the pockets of unsuspecting wealthy customers or slitting their throats slit in the barber chair. When a victim is being readied, Todd sends his young apprentice Tobias (John Singer) next door to buy a penny pie from his accomplice, Mrs. Lovatt (Stella Rho), grinds the victims into the meat pies she sells in her pastry shop. When Mark returns from his sea voyage a wealthy man to his bride-to-be, he first stops for a shave at Sweeney's barber shop. The demented barber sharpens his razor to make the young man his next victim!"

"In this, perhaps his most notorious role, Tod so delighted audiences at the "Elephant and Castle" theatre during the early '20s, that even London society from the West End would arrive to sit in the stalls, share a pork pie and join in with cheering the hero and hissing the villain. Tod also recorded a 78rpm record with his wife Jenny Lynn of 'Sweeney Todd', which was able to offer a somewhat stronger rendition than what was later deemed permissible in the cinemas.

SWEENEY TODD is Tod's second feature-film appearance, directed by his new found collaborator, producer and director George King, whose partnership would end in 1940 with Crimes at the Dark House."

"Tod Slaughter reprises his role of Sweeney Todd in two short films produced by Pathé in 1936 and 1938, and a short vignette titled Bothered by a Beard (1945). In 1954 he appears again as the infamous character reciting a monologue in PUZZLE CORNER NO. 54." ..

**Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street" on the Internet Archive..

** Sweeney Todd, The Demon Barber Of Fleet Street (Full-Length Movie. 1936) Download @ Bittorrent

**'Slaughter as Sweeney Todd on Missing Link Horror..

**Horror-wood's 'Slaughter Page..

**Tod slaughter's Tribute Myspace Page ..

**Tod slaughter's Tribute Myspace Page ..

♦ ♦

..ok ..this psycho ol' dude is flippin cool !! O GAWD !! >v<