A tough guy with perpetual five 'o clock shadow, a leather jacket and a whip may not be everybody's idea of a good time, but when it's Indiana Jones making his debut on next generation consoles, you're talking about tons of fun waiting to be discovered. Indiana Jones and the Emperor's Tomb is coming to the Xbox, PlayStation 2 and PC this fall with development being handled by The Collective, the crew most recently responsible for Buffy the Vampire Slayer.

Since Indy's got more videogames than movies at this point in time, we're going to be looking at an original plot for this third person adventure. We're going even farther back in Indy's timeline for the Emperor's Tomb, with the action taking place in 1935. The beauty with this is you still have all of the potential fun of Nazis, like goose-stepping, but without all of that messy World War II stuff.

The Features

10 Levels

Locales include China, Prague and Istanbul

Interactive environments

Immersive "brawling" combat system.

Improvised weapons like table legs and shovels

This time, in the much more action-centric Emperor's Tomb, Junior is coming powered by The Collective's proprietary Slayer engine (God I hope that's what it's called). For those unaware, Slayer is the same thing that powers the Xbox's Buffy, a technology inspired by the team's work on the rather cool DS9: The Fallen.

This fall, next-gen console owners will be able to whip, jump, shoot, step on, and punch Asians, Indians, and Nazis in atypical Indy fashion. Expect the punches to loudly go "thwack" in the "taking a steak and smacking it through a stick" kind of way.

It's 1935 and the world is embroiled in crisis. Long sealed in the tomb of an ancient Chinese emperor rests the Heart of the Dragon, an artifact of incredible power, one that supposedly grants its possessor the ability to "mold minds" in a very unpleasant non-Play-Doh fashion. In league with the Black Dragon Triad, a German Mercenary by the name of Albrecht Von Beck is out to swipe this artifact. After that, it's all mind molding.

Marshal K'ai, an Asian businessman wanting to preserve his mind's current mold, charges Dr. Jones with securing the artifact for the Chinese government (always a good place to keep a mind control device) and even considerately provides his beautiful assistant Mei Ying to go along for the ride. So as Indiana, a tall white man with cowboy hat, brown pants, leather jacket, pistol, and whip, players must blend into greater China and stop the menace, but it's not as simple as walking into a Mr. Chau's and ordering something with MSG. First Indy must navigate 10 levels including bustling Hong Kong streets, crocodile ridden Ceylon waters, 15th century castles, underwater palaces of the Istanbul variety, and more. Why? Because the only way into the tomb is by first collecting the many scattered pieces of the Dragon Seal, key to the crypt. Only once the pieces have been assembled can Indy and Mei "unlock" the tomb with a crane and some dynamite.

Hoping to expand and improve the third-person action adventure genre, The Emperor's Tomb will incorporate a new camera and fight system. Pistol whipping and whip lashing can only get a hero so far. Eventually there will come a time when he needs to rely on his knuckles and nearby shovels and whatnot to get the job done. The new "brawling" hand-to-hand combat system employed should provide us all with impromptu opportunities to get friendly on foes with an assortment of interactive environmental objects (those above mentioned, chairs, and still more). It can't all be rickshaw chases across Hong Kong and gondola battles around the South China Sea. Sometimes a bad guy just needs a good table leg clubbing.

We'll have more as it comes. On the game that is, not the table let clubbing. For now, please enjoy the media contained below.