It's '2010: A Love Story' for Bollywood actress Manisha Koirala, who tied the knot with beau Samrat Dahal in a traditional ceremony here today.

The 41-year-old Nepalese beauty exchanged wedding vows with Dahal, 34, in a private function at the Gokarna Forest Resort, 10kms east of the capital, attended by family close friends only.

Dressed in a yellow saree, Manisha garlanded Samrat and exchanged wedding rings as priests recited Vedic mantras in the presence of her father Prakash Koirala and mother Sushma.

Besides her family members, close relatives and friends, those attending the function were Bollywood actress Suman Rajnathan, Manisha's co-star in her debut film Saudagar Bibek Mushram and Govinda'a wife Sunita.

Jackey Shroff and Govinda are also expected to attend the wedding reception to be held at Hotel Soaltee Crowne Plaza on Sunday.

The celebration included traditional Nepali music Panchai Bazaa and a cultural dance. Nepali, Indian and continental dishes were served at the resort, sources said.

Spread over three days, the main ceremony will be held tomorrow when the bride will go to the groom's house after performing hour-long rituals as per the Hindu tradition.

President Dr Ram Baran Yadav, Prime Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal, Maoist chief Prachanda and former King Gyanendra are expected to attend Sunday's grand dinner party in which some 3,000 guests have been invited.

The actress will continue with her movie career even after the marriage, her father Prakash Koirala, nephew of late prime minister Girija Prasad Koirala, told PTI.

Manisha will live in Nepal and will mostly devote time to Nepali films, which she has already begun by acting in Dharam opposite famous actor Rajesh Hamal, said Koirala.

Manisha, who caught the imagination of film lovers with her 1991 Subhash Ghai film Saudagar, later went on to give memorable performances in Vidhu Vinod Chopra's 1942: A Love Story, Mani Ratnam's Bombay, Dil Se and Sanjay Leela Bhansali's Khamoshi.

The actress, grand daughter of Nepal's first elected Prime Minister Bishweshwor Prasad Koirala, will also throw a lavish party two days later at Hotel Soaltee Crowne Plaza.

The marriage comes two months after the demise of Girija Prasad Koirala.

Dahal, who the actress met on Facebook a year back, has completed Master's Degree in Alternative Energy from US and he is currently involved with his family business, shoe manufacturing.

The actress had evaded marriage over the years and broke off two engagements in the past.

She was reportedly engaged to ex-Australian ambassador to Nepal Crispin Conroy in 2001, but broke up with him soon.