The Singers 2014-2015 Subscription Series

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

The Singers announce 2014-2015 Subscription Series

Minneapolis, MN (January 28, 2014) – The Singers and Artistic Director Matthew Culloton present their 2014-2015 Subscription Series dates. The Subscription Series is based in various venues throughout the Twin Cities. Bookended with new music by Pulitzer Prize-winner Kevin Puts and Craig Carnahan, then back in time for stunning music of the Renaissance Era, the 2014-2015 season will showcase the virtuosity and versatility of The Singers. “We are moving Minnesota’s choral tradition forward.” Artistic Director Matthew Culloton notes. “By combining new and established works over the course of the season, we are creating vibrant musical contexts that awaken and stir meaningful responses in our audiences and our performers.”

To Touch the Sky [October 18 & 19, 2014]

Kevin Puts’ (the Pulitzer-Prize winning Director of the MN Orchestra’s Composer Institute) To Touch the Sky features texts by nine female poets and philosophers including Emily Bronte, Christina Rossetti, and Hildegard of Bingen. Paired with this work is Jake Runestad’s Spirited Light, an exciting new offering from one of America’s most innovative composers, and Eric Whitacre’s whirling and imaginative Leonardo Dreams of His Flying Machine. Click here for Season or Individual Tickets.

What Sweeter Music: Christmas with The Singers [December 6, 7, 13, & 14, 2014]

Hugo Distler’s haunting variations on Es ist ein Ros’ entsprungen (Lo, How a Rose E’er Blooming) set the mood for The Singers’ program in which the Christmas Rose is the focal point. René Clausen’s Magnificat and Herbert Howell’s A Spotless Rose are paired with Marian carols, showcasing poignant and celebratory works of the holiday season. Daniel Kantor’s beloved Night of Silence, newly arranged for The Singers by Jocelyn Hagen, will be premiered alongside Arvo Pärt’s Magnificat Antiphons and carols arranged by Matthew Culloton. A celebratory and eclectic array of music will help you greet the holidays! Click here for Season or Individual Tickets.

A Choral Icon: Honoring René Clausen [February 19,20, & 21, 2015]

The Singers are proud to honorthe contributions and work of acclaimed choral composer René Clausen, one of the most accomplished and celebrated choral composers in the world. Since 1986, Dr. Clausen has been recognized for his success as conductor of the accomplished Concordia Choir in Moorhead, MN. His teaching legacy is evident throughout the state where a large number of his students have become the state’s leading choral directors and educators, including The Singers’ Artistic Director Matthew Culloton. Click here for Season or Individual Tickets.

The Singers Festival Closing Concert – Saturday, February 21, 7:30 PM, House of Hope Presbyterian Church, St. Paul, MN

Join us for these non-subscription events!

High School Choral Outreach Event – Thursday, February 19, 7:00 PM, St. Andrew’s Lutheran Church, Mahtomedi ($15 tickets available at the door)

René Clausen Community Sing Event – Friday, February 20, 7:30 PM, First Lutheran Church of Columbia Heights (Music Packets are $15, No charge for non-singing audience members)

Underground Renaissance [April 11 & 12, 2015]

For the first time in the ensemble’s history, The Singers present a concert of music solely from the Renaissance era. As the political and religious winds changed rapidly throughout the Tudor Era, William Byrd composed his Mass for Four Voices late in life after a conversion to the Catholic Church (while serving the Protestant Queen Elizabeth I). The Singers will also share portions of The Triumphs of Oriana, a 1601 madrigal collection assembled by Thomas Morley in the Queen’s honor. Click here for Season or Individual Tickets.

Ghost Camp (A World Premiere Performance) [May 29 & 30, 2015]

The Singers, Zeitgeist, and narrator James Ramlet

Walt Whiman’s poetry contains a vivid recount of his time as a Civil War nurse. Minneapolis composer Craig Carnahan has based his large work, Ghost Camp, on these profound texts by one of America’s revered poets. Written for male chorus, narrator, piano, cello, clarinet, and percussion, The Singers are honored to present the world premiere of this moving work with musicians from the chamber ensemble Zeitgeist and narrator James Ramlet. Click here for Season or Individual Tickets.

Ticket Sales

Tickets are on sale now!

More information available online at https://www.singersmca.org and by calling 651.917.1948.

For additional press information, including photos, reviews, and biographies, please visit:

https://www.singersmca.org/news/press-room/photos