Polycom

Polycom has completed the acquisition of SpectraLink Corp., a specialist in workplace wireless telephony which will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Polycom. "We are delighted to complete our acquisition of SpectraLink," says Robert Hagerty, chairman and CEO of Polycom. "SpectraLink's technology, products, partnerships, and people provide Polycom with immediate leadership in the wireless telephony market. Now, by leveraging Polycom's proven strength in voice and video over IP (V2oIP), we have the unique ability to provide fixed and mobile solutions that seamlessly encompass voice, video, and content collaboration solutions from the desktop, to the meeting room, to the mobile individual."

Sanarus Medical

Sanarus Medical, a Hacienda company which is developing new, minimally-invasive technologies for the diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up of breast disease, closed its fifth round of venture funding after raising $15 million. Easton Capital Partners and Mosaix Ventures led the round, while other investors such as U.S. Venture Partners, Forward Ventures, Alta Partners, Federated Kaufmann Fund, Pequot Ventures, Industry Ventures and Channel Medical Partners also took part.

Trapeze Networks

Trapeze Networks, the Hacienda-based award-winning provider of Smart Mobile wireless solutions, was named a "Leader in WLAN Infrastructure" in the highly respected Forrester Wave report. Forrester, an independent research firm, named Trapeze as only one of three companies that "lead in innovation" with "the most comprehensive suite of features and tools." Trapeze earned the top score in scalability and performance. The report noted, "The Smart Mobile architecture is well-suited for WLAN deployments that will likely face expansion, increasing complexity, or the piloting of new technologies such as voice or 802.11n."

WANdisco

WANdisco, a Hacienda company which specializes in real-time multi-site software development solutions, is now providing professional support services for Subversion, a popular open-source revision control system which allows software to be developed by a distributed group of programmers. "We see professional support for Subversion as a critical requirement of any enterprise deployment," says David Richards, president & CEO of WANdisco. "Our existing customers have been telling us that there is a gap in the market for these services and we have the staff with the unique skills required to solve this problem."