PLEASANTON, CA--(Marketwire - January 09, 2012) -

Highlighted Links

Polycom SpectraLink

Polycom News Room

Polycom, Inc. (NASDAQ: PLCM), the global leader in standards-based unified communications (UC), today launched the Polycom® SpectraLink® 8452, the first enterprise-grade Voice-Over Wi-Fi handset with an integrated 2D barcode scanner. The handset combines a mobile phone, pager, push-to-talk functionality, barcode scanner and access to Web-based applications in a single lightweight device. As an easy-to-use, multi-function solution, the SpectraLink 8452 improves workplace efficiency by allowing workers to communicate and access data in a variety of ways from anywhere within the enterprise Wi-Fi network.

The barcode scanner in the Polycom SpectraLink 8452 handset has the capability to read both 1D and 2D barcode images in hundredths of a second from a scanning distance of up to 34 inches and from a wide range of horizontal and vertical scan angles. The handset also features the legendary Polycom HD Voice™ sound quality for natural, crystal-clear conversations; a large color display with a simple and intuitive user interface; enterprise-grade durability; simple provisioning and management; and support for accessories such as battery packs and headsets. The Polycom SpectraLink 8452 handset is in the process of qualification to display and share call and directory information via Microsoft® Lync™, which includes features such as presence and instant message information. For long-term investment protection, the Polycom SpectraLink 8452 is the first enterprise-grade voice-over Wi-Fi handset to combine barcode scanning, web-based application integration with support for latest IEEE Wi-Fi standard (802.11n), and offers best-in-class warranty, maintenance and service offerings.

“The award-winning Polycom SpectraLink 8400 series, including the new 8452 phone, improves productivity and responsiveness of workers and meets the critical communication needs in rigorous environments such as hospitals, retail stores, factory floors and hotels,” said Sten Dyrmose, general manager, wireless solutions, Polycom. “The multiple benefits of the handset also extend to the bottom line, delivering up to 40 percent lower total cost of ownership than competing solutions.”

With the capability to encode about 65 times more data than 1D barcodes into a physically smaller label, 2D barcodes are quickly gaining popularity in the enterprise. This is especially true for industries where work is highly mobile and employees need instant access to data from the network in order to do their jobs. By integrating 2D barcode scanning technology in an enterprise-grade, durable handheld communications device, Polycom solves these challenges across a number of industry use cases, such as:

Healthcare, where clinical staff can increase patient safety by scanning barcodes on wristbands to obtain medical records and verify patient medication

Retail, where staff can offer better customer service by scanning barcodes for product inventory checks while interfacing with customers on the sales floor

Industrial manufacturing, where manufacturers scan barcodes to track parts and products through the supply chain

“Nurses and other clinicians at Florida Hospital have counted on SpectraLink phones to communicate on-the-go for over 10 years,” said Todd Frantz, Associate CTO, Florida Hospital. “As we explore technologies to support processes such as bar-coded medication administration, the desire not to require nurses to carry another electronic gizmo was clear. There are many good barcode scanning solutions on the market, and we may use several solutions to address various needs, but most require the nurse to manipulate yet another device. When we saw that the 2D barcode scanner is built into the SpectraLink 8452, we wanted to be the first to test it out. If the SpectraLink phone with which workers are already familiar can provide additional functions, everyone wins. Keeping at the forefront of new products like the SpectraLink 8452 should help our staff collaborate and be more productive, while increasing patient safety.”

The SpectraLink 8452 is available today. For more information, visit the product series page at www.polycom.com/sl8400.

About Polycom

Polycom is the global leader in standards-based unified communications (UC) solutions for telepresence, video, and voice, powered by the Polycom RealPresence Platform. The RealPresence Platform interoperates with the broadest range of business, mobile and social applications and devices. More than 400,000 organizations trust Polycom solutions to collaborate and meet face to face from any location for more productive and effective engagement with colleagues, partners, customers and prospects. Polycom, together with its broad partner ecosystem, provides customers with the best TCO, scalability, and security -- on-premises, hosted or cloud delivered. Visit www.polycom.com or connect with Polycom on Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn.

NOTE: The product plans, specifications, and descriptions herein are provided for information only and subject to change without notice, and are provided without warranty of any kind, express or implied. Polycom reserves the right to modify future product plans at any time. Products and related specifications referenced herein are not guaranteed and will be delivered on a when and if available basis.

© 2012 Polycom, Inc. All rights reserved. POLYCOM®, the Polycom “Triangles” logo, and the names and marks associated with Polycom’s products are trademarks and/or service marks of Polycom, Inc. and are registered and/or common law marks in the United States and various other countries. All other trademarks are property of their respective owners.