Photo Prints From Mary Evans Picture Library

Aimo Cajander

Aimo Cajander (1879-1943) Prime Minister of Finland 1939-1940

Mary Evans Picture Library makes available wonderful images created for people to enjoy over the centuries

Media ID 7240843

© Mary Evans Picture Library 2015 - https://copyrighthub.org/s0/hub1/creation/maryevans/MaryEvansPictureID/10469913

12"x8" Photo Print

Bring a piece of Finnish history into your home or office with our exquisite photographic print of Aimo Cajander, the esteemed Prime Minister of Finland from 1939 to 1940. This high-quality print, sourced from Mary Evans Prints Online, captures a striking image of Cajander in his prime. Adding this print to your collection not only showcases your appreciation for Finnish politics and history, but also elevates the aesthetic appeal of any space. Each print is produced using premium materials and meticulously crafted to ensure vibrant colors and sharp details, making it a cherished addition to any room. Order yours today and relive the past with the Media Storehouse range of photographic prints.

Photo prints are produced on Kodak professional photo paper resulting in timeless and breath-taking prints which are also ideal for framing. The colors produced are rich and vivid, with accurate blacks and pristine whites, resulting in prints that are truly timeless and magnificent. Whether you're looking to display your prints in your home, office, or gallery, our range of photographic prints are sure to impress. Dimensions refers to the size of the paper in inches.

Our Photo Prints are in a large range of sizes and are printed on Archival Quality Paper for excellent colour reproduction and longevity. They are ideal for framing (our Framed Prints use these) at a reasonable cost. Alternatives include cheaper Poster Prints and higher quality Fine Art Paper, the choice of which is largely dependant on your budget.

Estimated Product Size is 20.3cm x 30.5cm (8" x 12")

These are individually made so all sizes are approximate

Artwork printed orientated as per the preview above, with portrait (vertical) orientation to match the source image.

MADE IN THE USA

Safe Shipping with 30 Day Money Back Guarantee

FREE PERSONALISATION*

We are proud to offer a range of customisation features including Personalised Captions, Color Filters and Picture Zoom Tools

SECURE PAYMENTS

We happily accept a wide range of payment options so you can pay for the things you need in the way that is most convenient for you

* Options may vary by product and licensing agreement. Zoomed Pictures can be adjusted in the Basket.

Related Images