Sancho I of Portugal was born on November 11, 1154, in Coimbra, Portugal. The first legitimate surviving son of King Afonso I, the prince became his father’s heir. Fifteen years before his birth, Afonso established Portugal as an independent kingdom. However, Portugal’s independence remained at risk. To secure his kingdom against neighboring Leon and Castile, Afonso allied himself with the papacy and the king of Aragon. In 1174, Prince Sancho married Alfonso II of Aragon’s younger sister, Dulce, to ensure their alliance.

King of Portugal

Foreign Policy

Afonso I had spent the final decade of his reign expanding Portugal’s borders and securing the throne for his son. Despite his successes, the king left behind several unresolved issues. Upon Afonso’s death on December 6, 1185, Sancho I became Portugal’s second king. One of the new king’s first acts was to end the wars over the Galician borderlands. With these costly conflicts concluded, Sancho focused on the Moors in southern Iberia.

After an invasion by the Almohad Prince Abū Yūsuf Yaʿqūb al-Manṣūr, Sancho I responded by recruiting a passing crusader army. With the crusader’s aid, Portuguese forces captured Silves, a vital Moorish town, in 1188. Although Sancho made efforts to secure Silves, Portuguese control only lasted until 1191. By that time, the king had to re-focus on defending his vulnerable kingdom from Leon and Castile.

Domestic Policy

Sancho I’s domestic policy primarily focused on resettling less populated areas of Portugal. The king granted charters to new towns and renovated old castles to accomplish this. Sancho also gave lands to nobles, religious orders, and military organizations to attract foreigners. His efforts in populating northern Portugal were so successful that Sancho earned the nickname “the populator.”

Due to Portugal’s recent establishment, Sancho I understood that he needed to strengthen his kingdom’s standing. In turn, the king encouraged the growth of the Portuguese economy by supporting new industries and merchants. As the economy flourished, the monarchy’s treasury increased, allowing the monarchy to build its wealth.

Conclusion

On March 26, 1111, the 56-year-old king died and was succeeded by his son, Afonso II. Sancho I left behind a legacy of progress and growth. The king continued Afonso I’s work by creating new towns in northern Portugal and improving the kingdom’s economy. Afonso II would continue his father and grandfather’s work by introducing reforms. However, his efforts would begin an era of conflict with the papacy.

Sources

Disney, A. R. (2009). A History of Portugal and the Portuguese Empire: From Beginnings to 1807 (Vol. 1). New York City, NY: Cambridge University Press.