Summary Description

Nardin Academy is an Independent Catholic School located in Buffalo, New York. Nardin asks all in our community to “Inspire hearts and minds to do amazing things for the world through faith, character, academic excellence, and service.” Nardin’s values include Embracing All, Nurturing Talent, Fostering Connection, Living and Serving through Faith, and Igniting Possibilities. Nardin is a diverse and welcoming community that fosters an inclusive environment that celebrates the background and experiences of all.

Nardin Academy is seeking a candidates for a Montessori Teacher.

A Nardin Academy Montessori teacher is dedicated to the mission of the Academy, committed to the study of Montessori pedagogy, motivated to work collaboratively, and committed to self-reflective practice and professional development.

The Montessori teacher will co-teach in a 6-9 environment, and be responsible to themselves and the team; to be self-motivated, self-directed and able to manage time effectively while fulfilling curriculum.

Duties and Responsibilities

Supervises and plans for the developmental needs of the children, on an individual and group level, in the areas of academic, emotional, social and psychomotor growth.

Executes Montessori philosophy and curriculum in an appropriate manner.

Supports the mission and goals and objectives of the Nardin Academy Montessori School.

Designs curriculum areas and arranges furniture for optimum use of space and prepares an environment with well-defined curriculum areas and a complement of materials appropriate to the needs of the children.

Develops and implements individual and group lessons.

Supports and implements standards of AMS accreditation and state recognition.

Creates and prepares materials to meet the needs and interests of the children.

Maintains inventory of classroom materials and furnishings.

Monitors student progress.

Maintains and updates academic records.

Uphold professional standards of personal presentation, punctuality, professional courtesy, and discretion.

Appropriately carry out specific assignments, including but not limited to, service learning, advisory programs, assigned supervision, and other areas as determined by their supervisor.

Prepares a welcoming and nurturing learning environment to facilitate the needs of all children.

Establishes a professional relationship with parents

Engages in self-reflection and annual development of a growth and renewal plan based on the Characteristics of Professional Excellence.

Develops and implements weekly, monthly and annual classroom goals.

Comply with the policies and procedures as articulated by the school’s Faculty Handbook.

Overtly supports and acts in accordance with the Academy’s mission.

Establishes professional relationship with staff, working cooperatively to meet the needs of the children at all times, to include before and after school programs.

Works collaboratively with co-teachers.

Commits to professional growth as a Montessori Teacher and employee of the Nardin Academy Montessori School

Maintains professional credentials as appropriate.

Other Duties

This job description is not designed to cover or contain a comprehensive listing of activities, duties or responsibilities that are required of the employee for this job. Duties, responsibilities and activities may change at any time with or without notice.

Qualifications

AMS/AMI certification required, (Primary or Early Childhood: 3 – 6 years)

Bachelor’s degree from an accredited institution.

First Aid/CPR training or willing to obtain

Working Conditions

The work environment is a Montessori classroom setting. The noise level in the work environment is usually low to moderate, but occasionally high depending upon student population and activities. The employee is occasionally exposed to wet or humid conditions and/or outdoor weather conditions. The employee may be exposed to bloodborne pathogens.

Physical Requirements

While performing the duties of this job, the employee is regularly required to talk or hear. The employee is frequently required to walk, stand, sit, use hands for fine manipulation, handle or feel and reach with hands and arms using a keyboard and video display terminal. The employee is occasionally required to stoop, kneel or crouch. The employee must regularly lift and/or move up to 25 pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job include close vision, distance vision, ability to adjust focus and peripheral vision.

Salary

$36,000 - $40,000 per year commensurate with experience

To apply, please submit the following materials as a .pdf or .docx to hr@nardin.org. Please include:

Cover letter expressing your interest and qualifications

Current resume

Minimum of 3 references with names, telephone numbers and email addresses

EEO

Nardin Academy provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability or genetics. In addition to federal law requirements, Nardin Academy complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, and layoff, leaves of absence, recall, compensation, training and position transfer.