Summary

Nardin Academy is an Independent Catholic School located in Buffalo, NY. Nardin asks all in our community to “Inspire hearts and minds to do amazing things for the world through faith, character, academic excellence, and service.” Nardin’s values include Embracing All, Nurturing Talent, Fostering Connection, Living & Serving through Faith, and Igniting Possibilities. Nardin is a diverse and welcoming community that fosters an inclusive environment that celebrates the background and experiences of all.

The Academy is seeking a Director of Institutional Advancement who is a strategic leader with a proven record of success identifying, developing, stewarding and expanding philanthropic support and community relationships. The individual in this position will communicate directly with donors to build a culture of gratitude and philanthropy, making sure all donors are recognized, appreciated and informed. The Director will work in coordination with School Principals and the Administrative team for defined scholarships and awards.

The Director of Institutional Advancement reports directly to the Executive Vice President for Institutional Advancement and is responsible for assisting in the leading and managing of all aspects of a comprehensive advancement program including fundraising, marketing, and constituent relations.

Duties and Responsibilities

Helps to develop, update and follow a vision for the advancement program appropriate to the institution

Assists with leading the development and implementation of programs with community-based partners that align with our mission

Assists in the establishment of policy and procedures on all issues pertaining to the advancement program

In partnership with the Executive Vice President, establishes an annual plan for advancement which includes goals and priorities, action plans, and a budget

Ensures that all fundraising programs – annual giving, major giving, planned giving, and special campaigns – are planned, implemented, and celebrated successfully

Identifies, cultivates, solicits and stewards major gifts. Personally engages an active portfolio of major donors and major donor prospects and ensures that the prospect management program is implemented successfully

Ensures that all alumni and constituency-based programs are planned and implemented successfully

Works closely with the Board Trustees by providing support for individual Board members who are natural partners for major gift prospects, for the purpose of cultivation and solicitation

Is consistently updating notes and applicable data about donors within Blackbaud Raiser’s Edge NXT.

The ability to analyze and interpret data from donor databases and online fundraising systems is essential for making informed decisions and developing effective fundraising strategies

Travel (up to 50%) is required. Flexibility of work schedule to accommodate evening and weekend appointments and events

Other Duties

This job description is not designed to cover or contain a comprehensive listing of activities, duties or responsibilities that are required of the employee for this job. Duties, responsibilities and activities may change at any time with or without notice.

Skills & Abilities

Strong leadership and management skills with experience leading a team of fundraising professionals

Strong oral and written communication skills

Must possess strong time management skills and the ability to multi-task and change direction on short notice

Must display professionalism and the ability to work cohesively with other team members to achieve departmental goals

Qualifications

Bachelor’s degree in nonprofit management, business administration, or related field required

A minimum of 5 years’ experience in major gifts, annual giving, corporate and foundation giving, capital fundraising and special events

Knowledge of Blackbaud Raiser’s Edge NXT and/or similar CRM database software required

Knowledge of Microsoft Office and Google Suite required

Knowledge of the grant writing process preferred

Working Conditions

This job operates in a professional office environment. This role routinely utilizes standard office equipment such as laptops, computers and various digital devices.

Physical Requirements

The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. This position requires good visual and auditory acuity. The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 35 pounds. Additionally, the position requires the ability to open filing cabinets and bend or stand as necessary.

Salary

$80,000 - $85,000 per year, commensurate with experience

To apply, please submit the following materials as a .pdf or .docx to hr@nardin.org. Please include:

Cover letter expressing your interest and qualifications

Current resume

Minimum of 3 references with names, telephone numbers and email addresses

EEO