Summary Description

Nardin Academy is an Independent Catholic School located in Buffalo, New York. Nardin asks all in our community to “Inspire hearts and minds to do amazing things for the world through faith, character, academic excellence, and service.” Nardin’s values include Embracing All, Nurturing Talent, Fostering Connection, Living and Serving through Faith, and Igniting Possibilities. Nardin is a diverse and welcoming community that fosters an inclusive environment that celebrates the background and experiences of all.

A Nardin Academy teacher is dedicated to the mission of the Academy, committed to the study of pedagogy, motivated to work collaboratively, and committed to self-reflective practice and professional development.

Nardin Academy is seeking a High School French Language teacher. The qualified individual must be available to commence employment in August 2024 for the 2024-2025 school year.

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities

Ability to teach all levels of French, including Advanced Placement (AP)

Strong organizational and classroom management abilities

Demonstrated people skills for effective collaboration in a team environment

Able to communicate effectively orally and in writing

Demonstrates strong content knowledge as well as the ability to employ various instructional practices

Plans for the developmental needs of the children on an individual and group level in the areas of academic, emotional, social, and psychomotor growth

Executes curriculum in an appropriate manner

Supports the mission and goals of Nardin Academy

Demonstrate a working knowledge of Google Suite, Learning Management System (LMS), Blackbaud

Performs all other related work delegated or required to accomplish the objectives of the total school program

Duties and Responsibilities

Overtly supports and acts in accordance with the Academy’s mission

Designs curriculum areas and arranges furniture for optimum use of space

Prepares an environment to facilitate the learning needs of all children

Demonstrates planning and preparation for instruction

Upholds professional standards of personal presentation, punctuality, professional courtesy, and discretion

Appropriately conducts specific assignments, including but not limited to; service learning, advisory programs, assigned supervision, and other areas as determined by their supervisor

Maintains professional credentials as appropriate

Honors the confidentiality of school and student information

Complies with the policies and procedures as articulated by the school’s Faculty Handbook

Engages in self-reflection and annual development of a growth and renewal plan based on the Characteristics of Professional Excellence

Develops and implements individual and group lessons

Establishes a professional relationship with parents

Maintains inventory of classroom materials and furnishings

Monitors student progress

Maintains and updates academic records

Develops and implements weekly, monthly, and annual curricular goals

Establishes professional relationships with staff, working cooperatively to always meet the needs of the children including before and after school programs

Other Duties

This job description is not designed to cover or contain a comprehensive listing of activities, duties or responsibilities that are required of the employee for this job. Duties, responsibilities, and activities may change at any time with or without notice.

Qualifications

Bachelor’s degree in French, education, or a closely related field from an accredited institution. Master’s degree preferred

NY State or comparable certification in teaching in appropriate subject area

Fluent in French (Education degree; French degree)

Previous teaching experience in a professional setting is preferred

Working Conditions

The work environment is a standard classroom setting. The noise level in the work environment is usually low to moderate, but occasionally high depending upon student population and activities. The employee is occasionally exposed to wet or humid conditions and/or outdoor weather conditions. The employee may be exposed to bloodborne pathogens.

Physical Requirements

While performing the duties of this job, the employee is regularly required to talk or listen. The employee is frequently required to walk, stand, sit, use hands for fine manipulation, handle or feel and reach with hands and arms using a keyboard and video display terminal. The employee is occasionally required to stoop, kneel, or crouch. The employee must regularly lift and/or move up to twenty-five pounds. Specific vision abilities required by this job include close vision, distance vision, ability to adjust focus and peripheral vision.

Wage

$40,000 - $50,000 Annually

To apply, please submit the following materials as a .pdf or .docx to Human Resources at hr@nardin.org. Please include:

Cover letter expressing your interest and qualifications.

Current resume

Minimum of 3 references with names, telephone numbers and email addresses

EEO

Nardin Academy provides equal employment opportunities (EEO) to all employees and applicants for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, or genetics. In addition to federal law requirements, Nardin Academy complies with applicable state and local laws governing nondiscrimination in employment in every location in which the company has facilities. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment, including recruiting, hiring, placement, promotion, termination, layoff, leaves of absence, recall, compensation, training, and position transfer.