Welcome to Nardin Academy High School, the oldest independent, Catholic all-girls upper school in Western New York.

Located in the heart of Buffalo’s Elmwood Village, Nardin Academy has been nurturing confident, college-ready young women for more than 165 years. A community of inquiry grounded in the tradition of the Daughters of the Heart of Mary, Nardin is committed to academic rigor, service to others, personal excellence, and fostering relationships between students and faculty.

Our young women learn to lead with confidence, embrace challenges and discover their best selves. Our academy of athletes and artists, musicians and scholars are young women of integrity who are committed to serving others with humility and compassion in their local, national, and global communities.

At Nardin, we uphold the highest standards of excellence in academics, athletics, the arts and service. Our students gain an exceptional academic foundation with innovative programming that prepares them for life. They can compete on 22 teams in 14 sports and participated in chorus, orchestra, band and theatrical productions. Service is woven into our daily life and provides our students with numerous opportunities to give back.

Through our signature curriculum programming of wINTERMISSION, our students explore their passions during one week of experiential learning each January. From our business entrepreneurial club to our nationally ranked TARC rocketry team, our young women have the opportunity to get involved outside the classroom during the school day. Our all-girls engineering course and media maker space also allow for hands-on exploration in STEAM related fields.

In September of 2020, our 20,000 square foot state-of-the-art Gymnasium and Wellness Center opened at the Main Campus complete with a regulation sized gym, workout room and space for yoga and meditation. Two miles north, Nardin also opened the outdoor Nardin Academy Community Athletic Complex located at 97 Rosalia Street, featuring lacrosse, softball and soccer fields. This facility complements the adjacent indoor athletic center, featuring seven international squash courts and an indoor turf field. Life at Nardin looks even brighter and more exciting.

Lastly, the heart and soul of Nardin is our dedicated faculty. We are committed to creating authentic meaningful learning experiences that promote compassion, creativity, and critical thinking. We want our students to foster independence and dependability, while enhancing their social responsibility to the world.

I am proud to be a part of the unique characteristics that make up Nardin Academy and look forward to the future. The Best is yet to Be!

Warm regards,

Colleen Robertson

Principal