Data is up-to-date Last updated for version 1.0.8.0

Last mentioned in changelog 0.17.12.0

The current game version is 1.5.9.1

Hammerhead

ID: Hammerhead Stats Health

350 (Boss: 400)

Sight: 2 Hearing: 1 Armor

Head, Tail, Fins, Arms, & Claws (see values in Defense section)

Weakpoints

None

Immunities Vulnerabilities

Poisons x 0.6

Behavior Walk speed

1

Swim speed

8 slow - 12 fast

Aggressive?

Always

Can Enter Submarine?

No

Drops

only 1 of the items marked with an asterisk * may drop at a time Items Chance Swim Bladder 100% (1/1)

Alien Blood *

75% (1/1.3)

Hammerhead Ribs *

25% (1/4)

The Hammerhead is an uncommon creature found in the frigid oceans of Barotrauma.

Description

Hammerheads are medium-size shark-like creatures. They have at least two pairs of eyes, four claws, four fins, and a long tail, which is their primary mode of locomotion.

Their most distinctive feature is their flat head, which is reminiscent of the head of a claw hammer.

Hammerheads are somewhat solitary creatures, but are sometimes seen in groups of up to five, though they typically come in groups of two to three.

In-Game

Hammerheads are capable of inflicting considerable damage to the outer walls of a Submarine, utilizing their flat heads to bash holes in a given surface. They will relentlessly pound at the outer hull of the submarine and its occupants, being capable of stopping a fast moving sub dead in its tracks.

Hammerheads will protect Hammerhead Matriarchs, and attack any other creature on sight regardless as to whether the creature is stronger, or if the Hammerhead is wounded.

Combat Strategies

The Railgun is an incredibly effective weapon to use against the Hammerhead, as its high damage output allows the player to kill it in one to two shots depending on where they hit and what is loaded into the Railgun Shell. The Coilgun is slower but equally as effective, even with Regular Ammunition in use. Utilizing Piercing Ammunition can increase the speed of which the Coilgun kills the Hammerhead. Finally, the Pulse Laser is an incredibly effective, albeit expensive alternative to the Coilgun or Railgun.

The use of melee weapons is not recommended whilst fighting the Hammerhead. However, in a dire situation in which all other options have been exhausted, the player can use small arms weapons such as the SMG, Assault Rifle, Shotgun, or Autoshotgun. These weapons may not be as effective as onboard submarine weaponry, but they can be used in a crisis situation to neutralise the threat.

Attacks

Hammerhead Bosses inflict +15% Affliction strength and structure damage.

Attack Target type Afflictions on hitAfflictions InsideArea of EffectStructure DamageItem DamageDurationCooldownKinetic Force Nose Attack 1 Character 0 0.25s 10 10 Nose Attack 2 Structure Stun 3s 3m 75 (Direct hit)

150 (AoE) 60 0.25s 7 10 Claws Character 0 10 0.2s 3 60

Defense

Limb Burn Bleeding Damage (all) Head x 0.25 x 0.1 x 0.1 Tail, Fins, & Arms x 1 x 0.75 x 0.75 Claws x 0.5 x 0 x 0.5

Variants

Hammerhead Bosses are 15% bigger than regular Hammerheads and have 5 sight and hearing. They are the targets of "Killing a Hammerhead" Missions obtained in Outposts.

Moping Jack is a unique Hammerhead found during Captain Hognose's random event. It has 600 vitality, deals 30% more damage from attacks, and is 30% bigger than a regular Hammerhead.

Golden Hammerhead

Hammerhead Matriarch

Hammerhead Spawn

Trivia

The Hammerhead's internal ID used to be "Hammerheadboss"; in version 0.9.10.0, it was changed to "Hammerhead_m".

The Hammerhead's head has the shape of a hammer. The name is likely also a reference to the Hammerhead shark.

The Hammerhead is seen to have a mouth in some promotional materials for the game.

Media

A Hammerhead compared with a Dugong

A Hammerhead attacking a submarine

A Hammerhead compared with a Human

Idle

Attack

Damage

Death