Hammerhead is one of the vehicles introduced in Twisted Metal (1995). It appears in every Twisted Metal game, except for Twisted Metal 4 and Twisted Metal: Black. Hammerhead also appears in Twisted Metal (2012), albeit as a non-playable boss vehicle.

Hammerhead has always been a monster truck and distinctively has been driven by different contestants in every appearance it has made. Its Special Weapon always involved crushing opponents using its giant wheels.

Twisted Metal (1995)[]

"A MONSTER that crushes its enemies under its giant tires. It handles for crud, but its power is awesome!"

—Twisted Metal - Hammerhead's Bio

Hammerhead makes its debut in Twisted Metal, the first game in the series.

When Driving It: Move in close to your enemies and CRUSH them under your massive tires.

When Fighting It: Stay away from its front end. You'll take massive damage if you get caught under its giant tires.

Special Weapon

Crusher: Smash opponents to a pulp under your giant treads of death! NOTE: Hammerhead's special move occurs automatically if you are within "crushing range" of an enemy and if you have enough Special Weapon energy units left. You do not have to hit the special weapon button to execute this attack.

Twisted Metal 2[]

Hammerhead returns in Twisted Metal 2, with a new design and new drivers.

Special Weapon

Monster Crush: Hammerhead's Special Weapon allows the monster truck to crush an enemy under its wheels. Simply drive into another vehicle and the wheels do the rest! The weapon is automatic; it is not necessary to press the fire button. Be careful when chasing a victim! Though they cannot stop your hit-and-run, your enemies can still defend themselves!

Twisted Metal III[]

"Like most grandmothers, she drives a monster off-road vehicle that comes in handy when she needs to pick up her tea-sipping biddies for Bingo night."

—Twisted Metal III - Instruction Manual

Hammerhead returns in Twisted Metal III, now as a jeep driven by an old lady.

Special Weapon

Stomp: Useful for ramming opponents and sending these foul-mouthed hooligans running back to their mommies.

Twisted Metal: Small Brawl[]

"This monster truck is meant for crushing cars! Its tires can grow spikes and shred other cars to pieces. Get close to your opponents and press the Fire Weapon button [L2 button] for car crushing action!"

—Twisted Metal: Small Brawl - Instruction Manual

Hammerhead's appearance in Twisted Metal: Small Brawl.

Special Weapon

Monster Crush: Spikes will come out of the wheel and the monster truck will pounce on the vehicle three times before jumping off.

Twisted Metal: Head-On[]

Hammerhead returns in Twisted Metal: Head-On and is operated by Catfish. To unlock it, you have to beat the Sky Track mini-game (in Tokyo Rooftops) by coming in first place.

Special Weapons

Monster Crush: Leaps into the air and crushes cars underneath its wheels. It will only work if there's a blue rectangle around the car when near other vehicles.

Mega Monster Crush: After getting the Special Weapon upgrade, it's possible to mash the fire button to increase the damage the crush will deal.

Twisted Metal (2012)[]

In this installment Hammerhead appears in Sunsprings, California as the final enemy in Needles Kane's campaign (The Brothers Grimm), along with Slayer. They look identical, but have different colors - Hammerhead is red and Slayer is yellow.

Special Weapon

Shockwave: A shockwave similar to Warthog's special.

Unused Entries[]

Trivia[]

General[]

Hammerhead, along with Spectre, has always had a different driver in every game.

Hammerhead was scheduled to be in Twisted Metal: Harbor City, and the model was the same from Twisted Metal: Head-On but green like the early version found in an older build when Head-On was still known as Twisted Metal: Rage. The model was a placeholder and would be changed if the game was more developed.

Twisted Metal (1995)[]

Hammerhead's color in the game is green, but in the lost ending, it's blue. Hammerhead could have possibly been colored blue in the beta because of this. It is unknown why Hammerhead's color changed.

Hammerhead, having two drivers in the first game, was the first vehicle to introduce a concept of having two drivers in a vehicle instead of one. This concept was later applied to Twisted Metal (2012), although the passengers acted as gunners.

Hammerhead's license plate (KILRGRN) means "Killer Green".

Twisted Metal 2[]

Hammerhead's original name in the Twisted Metal 2 beta was Deadhead.

In a later beta version of Twisted Metal 2, Hammerhead was renamed to Hammer Head.

Hammerhead's license plate (BLUDEE WHLS) means "Bloody Wheels".

Twisted Metal 4[]

On Create Car mode, it is possible to create a monster truck and name it Hammerhead. However, you cannot give it its signature Special Weapon.

A Hammerhead-like vehicle simply named Monster Truck was originally going to be in the main game and not simply a feature of the Create Car mode according to early footage.

Twisted Metal: Head-On[]

Hammerhead's ending may be a reference to Mr. Grimm's ending in TM(1995), as they both wanted Calypso (yet Catfish failed to capture him, while Mr. Grimm took him without a problem).

There is a glitch that involves Hammerhead's Special Weapon. If activated at a precise distance, one of two events will happen: 1. Hammerhead disappears and reappears with the game treating it like the player had fallen into water or a pit. 2. The screen will go blank showing only the HUD and nothing else. You will have to quit if the latter happens.

In an early build of Head-On, when the game was known as Twisted Metal: Rage, Hammerhead couldn't be selected normally. The model, however, was still in the files. It used to have a solid green paint job similar to the original design from TM1, but with hammerhead shark stickers on the sides.

Gallery[]