Data is up-to-date Last updated for version 1.0.8.0

Last mentioned in changelog 0.16.6.0

The current game version is 1.5.9.1

Golden Hammerhead

ID: Hammerheadgold Stats Health

400

Sight: 4 Hearing: 2 Armor

Claws, Head, Tail, Fins, & Arms (see values in Defense section)

Weakpoints

None

Immunities Vulnerabilities

Poisons x 0.6

Behavior Walk speed

1

Swim speed

8 slow - 15 fast

Aggressive?

Always

Can Enter Submarine?

No

Drops

only 1 of the items marked with an asterisk * may drop at a time Items Chance Swim Bladder 100% (1/1)

Alien Blood *

75% (1/1.3)

Hammerhead Ribs *

25% (1/4)

The Golden Hammerhead is a creature from Barotrauma which may occasionally spawn as a replacement for the Hammerhead.

Description

Golden Hammerheads are tougher variants of the Hammerhead. They possess a hardened blunt head strong enough to punch holes in hulls, and also feature the Hammerhead trademark; four scythe-like limbs, each of which can inflict very heavy Bleeding on any living creature, with 360ยบ of reach. As its name implies, the Golden Hammerhead has gold-colored, somewhat shiny skin, and two motionless fins to act as stabilizers.

In-Game

The Golden Hammerhead will attack the Submarine in hit-and-run attacks, punching holes in the hull with its head and retreating to strike again. Lone Divers will be chased and mauled to death.

Golden Hammerheads may spawn as a replacement for a Hammerhead, the chance of which depends on the game difficulty. Golden Hammerheads present a similar threat level to the common Hammerhead. In higher difficulties, Golden Hammerheads will spawn in couples, supported by three Hammerheads. This poses a significant threat to the submarine's hull integrity.

The Golden Hammerhead is the only creature in the game which has a mass of 202. If two of its limbs are severed, Sufforin will work on the creature as it applies to creatures with masses of 200 or lower.

Combat Strategies

Due to its heavy resistances, the Golden Hammerhead can be difficult to kill. The Pulse Laser is one of the most effective methods of neutralising this threat, as its Burn resistances are the weakest. Alternatively, the Railgun and Coilgun using Piercing Ammunition are viable alternatives if a Pulse Laser is unavailable, as the damage output of these weapons is still high despite the resistances. It is not recommended to use Physicorium Ammunition on the Golden Hammerhead, as it has incredibly high bleed resist (and is immune to bleeding in some areas).

The use of small arms weapons or melee weapons is not recommended. The damage output of weapons such as the SMG or Shotgun is nowhere near enough to be a viable option against the Golden Hammerhead. Additionally, utilising melee weapons is likely to result in a swift death of the diver involved.

Despite being a "tougher" variant of Hammerhead, it will retreat from the submarine as soon as it take a single high enough damage from turret on its head unlike a normal Hammerhead, the only ammunition that cannot fend it off is Piercing Ammunition as a trade off for a quicker kill against it. This does not apply when it attacking a human directly however.

Attacks

Attack Target type Afflictions on hitAfflictions InsideArea of EffectStructure DamageItem DamageDurationCooldownKinetic Force Nose Attack 1 Character 0 0.25s 10 10 Nose Attack 2 Structure Stun 3s 4m 200 (Direct hit)

100 (AoE) 75 0.25s 10 10 Claws Character 0 15 0.2s 3 60

Defense

Limb Burn Bleeding Damage (all) Head x 0.25 x 0.1 x 0.1 Tail, Fins, & Arms x 1 x 0.75 x 0.75 Claws x 0.5 x 0 x 0.5

Variants

Golden Hammerhead Golden Hammerhead bosses have 5 sight and 5 hearing. They are one of two possible targets of "Killing a Hammerhead" Missions obtained in Outposts.

Hammerhead

Hammerhead Matriarch

Hammerhead Spawn

Trivia

The Golden Hammerhead's internal ID used to be "Hammerheadgoldboss"; in version 0.9.10.0, it was changed to "Hammerheadgold_m".

The Golden Hammerhead is the third fastest creature in the game, surpassed only by the Charybdis and the Endworm.

Media

A Golden Hammerhead attacking a submarine

A Golden Hammerhead compared with a Dugong

A Golden Hammerhead compared with a Human

Idle

Attack

Damage

Death