This site has some good information on the 32nd Division, http://www.32nd-division.org/history/ww1/32-ww1.html which includes the 127th Infantry Regiment. Here is the info for August 4, 1918:

On 4 August the 127TH moved out toward Fismes, while the 63D Brigade attacked the railroad yards on their front. The enemy had no intentions of yielding without a bitter battle and by means of very heavy artillery and machine gun fire was able to hold the town and railroad yards during the early hours of the afternoon. In its attack on Fismes, the 127TH was badly cut up and late in the day Colonel Langdon organized a provisional battalion out of what was left of his regiment and sent it forward to storm the town. His shattered companies made a desperate assault and finally succeeded, about nightfall, in passing through the town and establishing a position on the south bank of the river. On the left, the 63D Brigade took the railroad yards and succeeded in getting a few small patrols across the river during the night, but was unable to maintain them there so they were withdrawn.

The 3D Battalion, commanded by CPT Byron Beveridge, was the assault battalion for the 127TH Infantry's attack on Fismes. The 3D Bn. commenced their attack at 1430, covered by machine gun fire from Co. A, 121ST Machine Gun Battalion and some artillery from the 120TH Field Artillery. The authorized strength of the battalion was 20 officers and 1,000 men; the 3D Bn. was down to 12 officers and 350 men when they started their assault on 4 August. They suffered many more casualties as they advanced over 2,100 yards of mostly open ground while subjected to intense German artillery and machine gun fire. The 2D Bn., 127TH Inf., commanded by CPT George F. O'Connell, also understrength due to the recent fighting, was brought into to assist the 3D Battalion's push toward Fismes. The 127TH Inf. was able to capture Fismes, but at terrific cost. That night, the 3D Bn. was down to 2 officers and 94 men; the 2D Bn. had 5 officers and 104 men. The 1ST Bn., commanded by CPT William Smith, was held in reserve during this attack.

Lisa Sharik

Dear Shirley Klyne,

Thank you for posting your request on History Hub!

We suggest that you request a copy of his Official Military Personnel File (OMPF). OMPFs and individual medical reports for enlisted men of the U.S. Army who were separated from the service after October 1912 and before 1960 are in the custody of NARA's National Personnel Records Center (NPRC) in St. Louis. In many cases where personnel records were destroyed in the 1973 fire, proof of service can be provided from other records such as morning reports, payrolls, and military orders, and a certificate of military service will be issued. Please complete a GSA Standard Form 180 and mail it to NARA's National Personnel Records Center, (Military Personnel Records), 1 Archives Drive, St. Louis, MO 63138-1002. Veterans and next of kin of deceased veterans also may use eVetRecs to request records. See eVetRecs Help for instructions. If there is any information requested by the form that you do not know, you may omit it or provide estimates (such as for dates), but the more information you provide, the easier it will be to locate the correct file if it survived the fire. For more information see Official Military Personnel Files (OMPF), Archival Records Requests.

Please be aware that the NPRC is prioritizing the requests for separation documents needed by veterans and their dependents to prove eligibility for a variety of benefits. The NPRC has restored service levels to pre-pandemic levels for requests related to burials, homeless veterans, medical emergencies, congressional inquiries, and routine separation documents. It will take a considerable amount of time to eliminate the backlog on other types of requests, such as genealogical requests for complete copies of records. For more information, please refer to Onsite Operations at the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis.

Archival OMPFs may also be requested by visiting the Archival Research Room at the National Archives at St. Louis. Please see the linked web pages for more information. Please email stlarr.archives@nara.gov for further assistance prior to making an appointment.

We searched the National Archives Catalog and located the series Records of Divisions, 1917 - 1920 in the Records of the American Expeditionary Forces (World War I) (Record Group 120) that includes records related to the 82nd Division, 163rd Infantry Brigade and the 32nd Division, 127th Infantry. We also located the series Records of the 1st Through 338th and the 559th Infantry Regiment, 1916-1921 in the Records of U.S. Regular Army Mobile Units (Record Group 391) that may contain some useful information. Please note that these records generally do not contain details about individual soldiers; rather, they provide information about the activities and engagements of the unit as a whole. For more information about these non-digitized records, please contact the National Archives at College Park - Textual Reference (RR2R) via email at archives2reference@nara.gov.

We hope this is helpful. Best of luck with your family research!