In recent times, there has been massive infrastructural development due to the expansion and development of the Namma Metro in Bengaluru, Karnataka.

With time, Namma Metro has looked to expand its network in order to improve connectivity to different parts of the city. Amid all the new developments, there has been good news for all commuters as the Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) has been given a green signal for its Phase 3 construction by the Union Government.

The Public Investment Board (PIB) of the Union government has approved the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Namma Metro’s Phase 3.

The Bengaluru Metro’s Phase 3 project will be 44.65 kilometres long and will feature two new lines: JP Nagar 4th Phase to Kempapura and Hosahalli to Kadabagere.

According to a report by the Deccan Herald, an official from the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) has confirmed that the PIB has cleared the DRP for the Phase 3 project but has also stressed that the union cabinet’s approval is still awaited.

The cabinet is expected to give its approval soon. Talking about the two new lines, the first one will cover the western part of the Outer Ring Road and have 31 stations. While the second line will run along Magadi Road and will have nine stations.

Earlier, the metro authorities had already started the pre-construction for the Outer Ring Road line, which includes utility shifting, tree enumeration, and land acquisition.

During the construction, the union government has set a condition that three-coach trains will have to operate on the 12.5-kilometre Hosahalli-Kadabagere line in place of the six coaches on the existing lines. However, all nine stations of the line will have the standard 135-metre-long platforms, giving them the potential to upgrade to six coaches in the future.

Earlier, it was found that the Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) has set a deadline to complete the Namma Metro Phase 3 project by 2028. It has also been found that the total cost of the project is estimated to be around Rs 15,611 crore.