The Bengaluru Metro, also called the Namma Metro, is a rapid transit system for large groups of people. It has stops at ground level, on platforms, and underground. In recent news, the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) said that travellers in the city can now use the metro until late at night on both the purple and green lines. Also, the Purple Line opened on October 9, 2023, running from Whitefield (Kadugodi) to Challaghatta.

In October 2011, the Namma train began running. The idea is unique because it will be the first metro in Southern India to have underground routes. Read on to learn more about Bangalore Metro:

Details on the Bangalore metro

Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited is in charge of the Namma Metro project, which is in a growth phase. Parts of Phase 2 and Phase 1 of the Bengaluru Metro are already open. The rest will be available by 2025.

The Karnataka Government has approved the construction of Phase 3, which would be 45 km long. The project's estimated cost is Rs 16000 crore, which should be completed by 2028.

Timings

The Bangalore Metro starts running at 5 a.m., and the last train leaves at 10:35 p.m. On regular days, like the second and fourth Saturdays, services begin at 6 a.m. and end at 10:35 p.m. On Sunday, though, the first metro comes at 7 a.m., and service ends at 11 p.m.

Lines of the Bangalore Metro and Namma Metro

The Bangalore metro map only has two route lines: purple and green. Four new route lines are being built and will be ready to use in a few months. Here is a discussion about the metro map Bangalore.

1. The purple line

The Purple Line was the first Namma metro line to open and run. As part of phase 1 of the Bangalore route, it began with 37 stops and four interchanges. The Purple Line began in Bangalore with the opening of its first metro stop.

2. The green line

The second line that runs on the Bangalore metro is the green line. The Namma Metro map Bangalore shows that it has 29 stops and a length of 31 km.

3. The yellow line

The new yellow line will run from Rashtriya Vidyalaya Road to Bommasadra, more than 18 km away on the Bangalore metro stop map. It will run on 16 stations and soon will also link to Hosur.

4. The blue line

It will be the first metro in Bangalore to connect Kasturi Nagar to the airport. According to the Bangalore metro plan, this line will have 30 stops and cover 58.19 km.

5. The pink line

To the south of Namma Bangalore, the pink line will connect Nagawara to Gottigerre. It will have 18 stations, some of which will be below ground.

6. The orange line

Phase 3 of the Bangalore metro line plan will build this line. At a single stop, it will link two lines, Phase 2A and Phase 3A. By 2028–29, this new line in Bangalore should be ready to use.

Conclusion:

In conclusion, Bangalore Metro keeps improving its services and facilities. The recent extension of metro hours and the start-up of new lines were significant steps forward. The current expansion projects show that it is serious about making commuting more accessible and encouraging real estate growth in the areas connected to the metro. This reinforces its central role in the development of Bangalore's cities.