Namma Metro, also called the Bengaluru Metro, is a rapid transit system that runs in the capital of Karnataka.

It is India’s second-longest operational network, just behind Delhi Metro. In order to expand their network, the Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) is all set to introduce 16 new interchange metro stations in the city.

Currently, the Nadaprabhu Kempegowda on the Majestic station is the sole interchange metro station in the Namma Metro that connects the purple lines and green lines in the city. Roughly 50,000 travellers use this sole interchange station daily, making it extremely crowded.

The Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) will have 16 more interchange stations in the upcoming Phase 2 and Phase 3 projects, which will connect various lines of Namma Metro.

According to Hindu, the BMRCL officials said, “The main aim of planning 16 interchange metro stations is to ensure that commuters can easily travel on any metro line, thereby increasing passenger reliance on the metro for their daily commute. In the coming years, these interchange stations will connect the purple, green, yellow, pink, and blue lines of the metro.”

It has been found that the upcoming 16 interchange metro stations in Bengaluru will be located at Jayadeva Junction on Bannerghatta Road, M.G. Road, K.R. Puram, Hosahalli, Mysuru Road, Peenya, R.V. Road, J.P. Nagar, J.P. Nagar 4th Stage, Dairy Circle, Nagavara, Kempapura, Hebbal, Agara, Central Silk Board, and Sumanahalli Cross.

It is expected that the multi-level interchange Metro station located at Jayadeva Junction on Bannerghatta Road will open by the end of this year. It is said to be the largest metro station in the city and will connect the Yellow and Pink lines of Namma Metro, becoming a pivotal point for both lines.

The Jayadeva interchange station will be part of the yellow line from the RV Bommasandra and the pink line from Kalena Agrahara to Nagawara. The BMRCL officials have revealed that they are expecting that after Majestic interchange station, Jayadeva may become the busiest interchange station as it links to major lines of Namma Metro. They revealed that around 80,000 to 90,000 people are expected to use the station when both lines are open to the public.