— It would be deeply gratifying, with a nice sense of irony, if Derek Fisher picked up his sixth NBA championship ring before Kobe Bryant.

Fisher, who was the face of everything good about the Los Angeles Lakers, was unceremoniously dumped by the Lakers during the regular season.

He ended up with the Oklahoma City Thunder, and Monday night was part of that team’s domination of the once powerful Lakers, 119-90. It wasn’t as close as the score.

For his part, Fisher had 26 solid minutes, mostly on defense. He finished with 5 points, but he also had 2 steals, 1 blocked shot and 2 assists.

He was a calm, steady playoff force for the Thunder.

It is very likely most of America is pulling for Oklahoma City, and not just UALR’s Fisher, because it seems that if Metta World Peace — formerly known as Ron Artest — has any friends, money must be changing hands.

He makes the Miami Three seem like Disney characters.

Just a couple of weeks ago, World Peace — and to be honest, those words look ridiculous on the back of his jersey — threw a vicious elbow to the head of the Thunder’s James Harden, the NBA’s Sixth Man of the Year.

Of course, he denied it was intentional. He claimed Harden flopped. Harden ended up with a concussion from WP’s cheap shot.

Those who tuned in to see if WP would do something vile again were disappointed. He was not a factor. Not on or off the floor.

In 2004, when the game was essentially over with his Indiana Pacers team leading the Detroit Pistons 97-82 with 50 seconds to play, WP fouled Pistons center Ben Wallace hard.

Wallace objected and shoved WP, who fell back about 6 feet. An altercation broke out near the scorer’s table, and WP ran into the stands. Maybe in part to get away from Wallace.

Only WP grabbed a fan who he wrongly thought had thrown Diet Coke at him and started beating him up. He received the longest suspension in NBA history for a game violation, 86 games.

The next year he asked for a month off because he was tired from promoting a R&B album he had produced. Instead he was suspended for two games.

During his rookie season with the Chicago Bulls, he applied for a job at Circuit City in hopes of getting an employee discount. Once with the Pacers, he showed up at practice in a bath robe.

He’s been suspended four times, and was arrested for domestic violence in 2007 and sentenced to 20 days in jail.

When Charles Barkley said athletes should not be considered role models, he could have been talking about WP.

Granted, there have been times when you wonder if he just needs some love and lots of counseling. He auctioned off his 2009-2010 championship ring and reportedly donated the proceeds to various mental health agencies.

Of course, he’s offered to forgo or donate his salary at least three times and has yet to give up a penny. He’s making almost $7 million this season.

If he’s not enough of a reason to pull for OKC over LA, the Thunder’s payroll is 27th in the NBA at $56 million while the Lakers’ payroll is No. 3 at $86 million.

Everyone loves the underdog, even one that used its nine days of rest to make the Lakers look as tired as they played.

And there is Derek Fisher, a really nice person who was dumped by the Lakers.