mediaset.es

Contact

With whom I can contact if I need additional information about the shares or the company?

For more information contact the Department of Investor Relations. You can get contact details in the "Investor Center", in the Contact us tab.

With whom I can contact if I need to talk to programming or an actor?

For issues unrelated to "Investor Relations you can get in contact with us, through internet, on the following link: https://seguro.telecinco.es/contacta.html

Or call our central number +34 91 396 6300

If you prefer, you may send an ordinary mail to:

Mediaset España Comunicación S.A.

Carretera de Fuencarral a Alcobendas n.4

28049 Madrid

How can communicate a change of address?

If you want to notify a change of address for communications to shareholders, you must send an email to inversores@mediaset.es indicating:

Name and Surname

ID nº

Number of shareholder (if available)

New full address (street, town and zip code)

You must also communicate the change to your bank, where you have shares are deposited.

Mediaset España Group

What businesses make up the new group Mediaset Spain?

The Mediaset España Group consists of a group of companies engaged in business related to the audiovisual sector. Its core business is the advertising exploitation on its seven channels: Telecinco, Cuatro, Factoría de Ficción, Boing, Divinity, Be Mad and Energy.

The Mediaset Group also produces films and carries on audiovisual news agency activities. Telecinco Cinema, the film-producing subsidiary of Mediaset España, has produced successful films which have received world-wide recognition, making this company a benchmark operator within the Spanish film industry.

Furthermore, the company has stakes in various companies in the audiovisual sector. These participated companies allow Mediaset España to follow closely all the production process related to its main business. Mediaset España currently holds stakes in some 20 different companies.

What accounting principles are used for the preparating of the accounts?

The accounting policies and measurement bases used in preparing the Group's consolidated financial statements comply with the International Financial Reporting Standards adopted by the European Union.

How many employees are in Mediaset España?

As of December 31, 2018, the Group Mediaset España has a total of 1,267 employees, located mostly in Spain.

General Shareholder´s Meeting

When will the next Annual Shareholder´s Meeting be held?

The Annual General Shareholder’s Meeting is convened once a year, within the first six months of each year. This year’s AGM was celebrated the 10th April.

Next one will take place the 4th September.

Where will the next Annual Shareholder´s Meeting be held?

The Annual General Shareholder’s Meeting is usually held at Mediaset España’s registered address in Madrid, Carretera de Fuencarral a Alcobendas 4.

The Notice of the call will be sent in advance to every shareholder, stating the place, the date and time of the meeting.

Map

How do I get to Mediaset España?

You can reach Mediaset España via the following public transport:

Metro: Las Tablas or Fuencarral (Line 10 both).

From Chamartín:

- Bus 152 A and 154 A (to Crta. Fuencarral a Alcobendas, opposite the Army)

- RENFE, direction to Colmenar Viejo or direction to S.S de los Reyes/Alcobendas. Stop “Fuencarral” and then take the bus “T61” to Crta. Fuencarral a Alcobendas, opposite the Army.

From Plaza Castilla

- Bus 176 (EMT).

Parking is available at Mediaset Spain?

Mediaset Spain has no parking spaces. Metrovacesa building, located next door, has public parking.

What is discussed in the Annual Shareholder´s Meeting?

Its main purpose is the approval of the Annual Accounts for the previous year, approved and to decide on the distribution of the profit that goes to reserves and to dividends.

General meeting of shareholders is the Company's highest decision-making body which deliberates and decides important issues concerning the Company, reflecting the opinions of shareholders. Hence, as a shareholder, the Annual Meeting is your opportunity to be directly involved in some decisions of the company. You will be asked to vote on important matters and will be able to ask questions to Board members.

Where can the shareholders obtain the information relating to the Annual Shareholders´ Meeting?

In section AGM, in the tab for the year, you will find all the necessary information.

Who is entitled to attend the Annual Shareholders' Meeting?

Those shareholders registered as holding any number of shares with voting rights and speaking rights may attend the General Meeting. In accordance with the provisions of Article 26 of the Articles of Association, of Section 15 of the General Meeting Regulations and of Section 179 of the Limited Companies Act, shareholders are requested to register their shares on the relevant book entry system five (5) days prior to the date of the General Meeting and to be in possession of Attendance/Proxy Cards issued by the Company.

How to exercise or delegate the right to vote?

The proxy will be granted by filling in the proxy section of the Attendance/Proxy Card or by any other legally approved procedure. The proxy form shall include or append the Agenda, the representative’s identity, application for instructions on voting and voting orders for the proxy in the event no specific instructions have been provided. In this event, proxy will be assumed granted to the Chairman of the Board of Directors.

Unless otherwise stated, when the board of directors prepare a public request of representation, the exercise of the rights to vote corresponding to the shareholders shares will be exercised by the Chairman. Unless otherwise stated, it will be considered that the shareholder gives precise instructions of affirmative votes to the proposed resolutions in the Board Meeting in every General Meeting.

The Company's website will enable, one month prior to the Meeting, an Electronic Forum Meeting, which will be accessible to both the individual shareholders as well as the voluntary associations under the provisions of the Public Limited Companies Act, which may constitute, in order to facilitate communication prior to the convening of the General Board. The Forum will be available until the Annual General Meeting is held.

What should I do if I don´t receive or if I lose the attendance, proxy and voting card for the Meeting?

You should either contact the financial institution where your shares are deposited so that they can provide you with a duplicate card or failing a certificate proving your status as a shareholder, or you should fill in your details on the standard attendance, proxy and voting form available on Mediaset España’s website in the AGM section.

What is the purpose of the Shareholders' Electronic Forum? How I can access it?

The Forum is enabled in order to facilitate the communication between shareholders and Mediaset España (both individuals and corporations, and voluntary associations that may be established) on the occasion of the Annual Shareholders' Meeting. The Forum is not a mechanism for online electronic conversation among shareholders, or a virtual discussion, nor is a communication channel between the Company and its shareholders.

In the Forum, shareholders may perform the following actions:

a) Proposals that are intended to be submitted as a supplement to the agenda announced in the call notice.

b) Requests for seconding such proposals.

c) Initiatives for achieving a sufficient percentage to exercise a minority right as provided for by law.

d) Offers or solicitations for voluntary proxies.

The forum will go live for each Shareholders General Meeting on the date of the call for the Shareholders' Meeting, and will end the day before the General Meeting. Without prejudice to the limits established under the Public Limited Companies Act.

To access the Electronic Forum, shareholders will have to be registered as User of the Shareholders Electronic Forum and obtain a password through the Company website following the instructions and terms of use for this purpose.

Is there attendance bonus or gift?

The Company does not intend to give attendance bonus or a gift for attending the Annual General Meeting.

How can I receive a copy of the information distributed in the Shareholders General Meeting?

In the Shareholders section, in the tab for the year you will find all the information provided during the Meeting.

Financial Information

How often do Mediaset España publish financial results?

In addition to the annual financial information, Mediaset España presents results on a quarterly basis which are published on the web page of the Spanish Securities and Exchange Commission: Comisión Nacional del Mercado de Valores, on the Mediaset España web page and they are also promptly reported to investors.

Where can I see Mediaset España’s Annual Accounts?

The information is available online in the Financial Information section of the “Investor Center” tab.

For more information you can contact the Investor Relations Department. You can find the contact details in the “Investor Center”, in Contact Us.

Shares/Dividends

What is Mediaset España’s (previously Telecinco) in the share ticker in the stock exchange?

The Ticker of a company of a company are the letters that identify a stock. Mediaset España’s (previously Telecinco) ticker in the stock Exchange is TL5.

What is Mediaset España’s share Price?

You can follow the price evolution of Mediaset España’s shares by consulting the graphs which are available on the website, in the shares section which you can Access from the “Investor Center”.

In which markets are Mediaset España’s shares traded?

Mediaset España’s shares are listed on the Stock Exchanges of Madrid, Barcelona, Bilbao and Valencia being incorporated into the Spanish Stock Exchange Interconnection System (Continuous Market) from the IPO date on June 24, 2004 and entered the IBEX 35 in January 2005.

Since 2008, Mediaset España’s shares are listed on the FTSE4Good Ibex including Ibex 35 companies that meet the FTSE4Good inclusion criteria. These criteria are a set of Corporate Responsibility good practice standards created from a consultative process with the market and are constantly evolving.

How many shares make up the share capital of the company?

Mediaset España Comunicación, S.A. share capital is 163.717.608€, divided into 327.435.216 shares of 0.50 euros nominal value each.

The volume of shares traded during 2018 has been 342,3 million shares, equivalent to 2,576.6 million euros. Mediaset España's shares reached its annual maximum in 2018 on January 5th trading at 9.83 euros, while its annual minimum took place on December 27th at a price of 5,37 euros per share.

Who are the Principal shareholders?

Share capital is fully subscribed and paid-up and the breakdown of ownership is as follows:

Titular ) (31.05.2019)

Mediaset Spa: 51.63%

Free Float: 44.16%

Treasury shares: 4.20%

Shareholders

30th 2019. (Relevant Fact).

You can see the details in: "Investor Center" under Dividends which details the benefits of recent years, as well as dividends distributed under these profits and reserves.

Capital Transactions

What are the details of the capital increases carried out by the company?

Mediaset España Comunicación, S.A share capital, as at December 31st 2018, is 163.717.608 euros, divided into 327.435.216 shares of 0.50 euros nominal value each, represented by a book-entry system. Share capital is fully subscribed and paid-up.

The Company has made two capital increases:

April 18th 2019

Following AGM approval of the cancellation of 9,282,274 treasury shares of €0.5 nominal value each, the social share capital was reduced to €163,717,608. After the shares cancellation, the company's number of shares is 327,435,216.

April 13 2016

Following AGM approval of the cancellation of 29.457.794 Treasury Shares of €0.50 nominal value, the social share capital will be reduced to €168,358,745. Once the cancellation has taken place, the company's number of shares will be 336.717.490. The cancellation will be effective from the moment it is recorded in the Official Register.

April 15th 2015

Following AGM approval of the cancellation of 40.686.142 Shares of €0.50 nominal value each, the social share capital will be reduced to €183,087,642 and the number of shares s will be 366.175.284.

December 24th 2010

On 24th December 2010, pursuant to the resolutions adopted by the shareholders of Mediaset España Comunicación, S.A. in a general meeting held on 24 December 2010, a non-monetary capital increase was carried out consisting of the entire share capital of “Sociedad General de Televisión Cuatro, S.A.U.” for a nominal amount of 36,700,935 euro through the issue of 73,401,870 new ordinary shares of EUR 0.50 par value each, all of the same class and series of those already outstanding.

The new shares were issued at their par value (EUR 0.50) plus a share premium of EUR 7.30 per share, leaving an issue price of EUR 7.80 per share. The total amount of the capital increase was EUR 572,534,586.

December 16th 2010

AGM 14th April 2010, approved a capital increase for a nominal value of 43,408,850 Euro through the issue of 86,817,700 new ordinary shares, all of the same class and series of those already outstanding and with pre-emptive rights for existing shareholders. The issue price of new shares was 5.75 Euro per share, the total amount of the issue being 499,201,775 Euro. The new shares were listed on the Spanish stock market December 16th 2010.

More information

What is Mediaset España’s Corporate Responsibility commitment?

Mediaset España’s Corporate Responsibility model is the answer to how the company reconciles the development of its business model and the management of social and environmental impacts that implementation involves either from the immediate area from which their activities develop and through to the management of relations with its employees, shareholders, advertisers, competition, institutions, governments and suppliers.