I think that Natalie should be with Jared Banks. He may seemed like a jerk in the begining but I think he’s begining to grow to Natalie cause she knows what its like being the outsider since she was adopted by Roxy Balsom and then later finds out that she’s a Buchanan. Natalie and John would’ve never lasted long in a marriage I don’t think that John McBain is the marrying type. John McBain has been so wierd lately but I do like his story line with Marty Saybrooke though. It was getting hot. I’m sorry to see Christina Chambers leave the role of Marty Saybrooke. I was just getting used to her character.

Quote natashastarrs: I think that Natalie should be with Jared Banks. He may seemed like a jerk in the begining but I think he's begining to grow to Natalie cause she knows what its like being the outsider since she was adopted by Roxy Balsom and then later finds out that she's a Buchanan. Natalie and John would've never lasted long in a marriage I don't think that John McBain is the marrying type. John McBain has been so wierd lately but I do like his story line with Marty Saybrooke though. It was getting hot. I'm sorry to see Christina Chambers leave the role of Marty Saybrooke. I was just getting used to her character.

Neither. Especially since it looks like Jared is going through with his plan to pretend to be Natty’s long-lost UNCLE!!

Also, she should not be with John either, as they brought out the absolute worst in each other. Why can’t Natalie be alone for a bit - become a strong, savvy, INDEPENDENT business woman and eventually find someone worthy of her?

It’s a hard decision. Personally, I like her with John, but it seems that they both totally gave up on each other. I loved how John would always come to her rescue and how he was always there for her. I don’t think they should have broke up. Now, I finally got used to the idea of John with Marty and now she’s probably dead. If it wasn’t for John, I do really like the chemistry between Natalie and Jared. They both have the same feisty personality, which I like.

I thought that Jared would be perfect - and then TPTB just screwed us all with this horrid storyline! I mean, Christian was too nice, and John too mopey and sad - but Jared was the right amount of hot, strong, and playful to deal with Natalie, who basically needs someone who can keep her in line but also run free with her. (Remember that talk they had at the ranch, when he opened up all the way to her? Perfect.)

Now, they’ve ruined a great romance storyline, ruined a promising character in Jared (because there’s NO way to walk this back) and damaged the character of Nigel, as well!

Note to the writers and producers: WHAT WERE YOU THINKING?! You had the beginning of a gold mine with Jared/Natalie - a storyline that you could have spun off for years (through their romance, marriage, dealings at BE, possible children, people trying to come in between them as a couple - and don’t forget that there’s ALWAYS going to be friction between Jared and Jess/Tess)…

…and you threw it away. Seriously, this storyline is making me really think about not watching OLTL anymore because it’s so horrible that it’s hard to watch. Combine this with the asinine Marcie-on-the-run storyline (note to producers: Please. Let. It. End.) and you really can’t watch the show without a mute button.

Thank God for Vicki and Dorian. They both make the show worth sifting through this idiotic paternity storyline.

I’m really hoping that Jared is going to start to really regret his little scheme and regret it soon!!!

I figure that he’ll be working with Natalie, seeing her everyday, he’ll see her helping Miles out, and getting closer to John again, and he’ll be ssooo jealous and not be able to do anything about it. He’ll realise that she is more important to him then his scheme to be a Buchanan.

I also hope that Natalie enjoys making him jealous, she deserves some payback!

I think it’s time for Nat to take herself out of the dating pool for awhile and reflect on some of her past choices:

Mitch Lawrence: Terrorized her family in the past, she’s warned to stay away from him, so she marries him.

Miles Lawrence: Creepy brother of former husband. Warned not to get involved with him. He darned near kills her Uncle Todd. She brings him home to live in her mother’s home.

Jared Banks: Worming his way into the Buchanan clan. Everyone except Renee tell her to watch out. She invites him to Texas for the reading of Asa’s will.

Hey, Natalie, how’d you like to meet my cousin, Jack the Ripper. I just know you two will hit it off. :]