1. Join a Winning Sales Team at Information Builders Build a Successful Career with Outstanding People, Software, and Clients

2. Information Builders at a Glance Founded: 1975 in NYC Employees: 1,500 Direct customers: 9,000+ OEMs: 10,000+ End users: Tens of millions Our Mission: Deliver the industry’s best-engineered software and service excellence to ensure customer success.

3. Celebrating 40 Years of Customer Success 40 is Fabulous 40 years of customer achievements and awards 40 years of riding the waves of breakthrough technologies from web to mobile to big data to the next big thing 40 years of leading the industry – one of the top vendors in every major analyst report 40 years of being independent, committed solely to our customers’ and partners’ success 40 years of dedicated employees passionate about what we do

4. What We Do Transforming Data into Business Value

5. What We Do Complete “3i” technology set built by industry experts  Best-in-class business intelligence and analytics platform  Comprehensive data integrity solutions  Standard-setting integration technology Transforming Data into Business Value

7. Don’t Take Our Word For It Customers Tell the World What We Do For Them

8. A Unique Company Culture  Privately held  Focused on what’s best for us and our customers  Very flexible with deals, people, partners, and development  Lots of great smart people  Longevity and dedication  Problem solving, can-do attitudes  Good work/life balance Competitors Can’t Copy This “Niche BI vendors don’t provide the level of support and professional services that Information Builders does, and the big BI providers don’t have the personal touch we were looking for.” — Lih Hann Chiu, Client Solutions Director PIERS, a subsidiary of JOC Group

9. What You Can Expect A Superior Global Team

10. What You Can Expect A Superior Global Team

11. Superb Team Spirit We’re All in It Together  Community of professionals who want to work with you to succeed  Second-to-none, refuse-to-lose field sales and tech organization  Tremendous corporate, regional, and executive support

12. Industry Leadership Analysts Agree BARC Business Intelligence Study  Highest ranking in 32 Key Categories Gartner  Leader in Business Intelligence Platforms  Visionary in Data Integration  Visionary in Data Quality Forrester  Leader in Business Intelligence Platforms Wave  Leader in Agile BI Platforms Wave Dresner Advisory Services  Highest Rank in Business Intelligence Platforms Ventana Research  Hottest Vendor in Business Intelligence

13. That’s Us. The Rest is All You. Sales, Systems Engineer, and Systems Architect jobs are Available Now Call your local office informationbuilders.com/about_us/world_wide Call our corporate recruiter (212) 736-4433 Search our current openings bit.ly/ib-jobs Reach out on social media informationbuilders.com/social Join Our Team