Information Builders (IBI), the leading data and analytics company, announced today the appointment of Carol McNerney as chief marketing officer (CMO). Reporting to CEO Frank J Vella, McNerney will drive the organisation’s marketing and communications strategy.

With nearly 30 years of experience, McNerney will focus on driving greater brand awareness, scaling a global demand-generation organisation, and mobilising a community of passionate customers and partners that rely on the IBI platform. With clients that range from Fortune 100 enterprises and federal agencies, to innovative data-driven companies of every size in every major industry, McNerney has the opportunity to make the IBI community a competitive advantage for the company.

Before joining Information Builders, McNerney served as CMO at Savills North America, a provider of commercial real estate advisory services, where she led the marketing organisation and drove a global rebrand. Prior to Savills, McNerney served as a senior marketing executive at a number of global technology and software organisations, including IBM, Pitney Bowes, Bloomberg, FocusVision, Bell and Howell, and TRIRIGA. She holds a BA in International Relations and French from the University of Virginia and an MBA from the University of North Carolina’s Flagler-Kenan Business School.

IBI has been leading the pack in data and analytics innovation for more than four decades. Unlike other vendors who have evolved their technology through acquisition, or are focused on point solutions, IBI provides an organically built data and analytics platform that runs in the cloud and can power the coming generations of innovation and growth.

“The way businesses operate today requires dynamic, expert marketing leaders to drive growth,” said Frank Vella, CEO of Information Builders. “Carol is a perfect match for that role as we align our staff and capabilities with our goals and aspirations for 2020 and beyond. Her expertise, passion, and enthusiasm will be key in guiding Information Builders’ success and successfully positioning us in the marketplace.”

“The data and analytics space is in such an exciting place right now, and IBI is at the forefront of that,” said McNerney. “This opportunity to work with an organisation that’s established as a leader but always pushing to evolve is a dream for a marketer. I’m thrilled to be a part of this great team and organisation and to help move IBI forward into this new decade.”