NEW YORK, NY--(Marketwire - October 27, 2008) - Information Builders, the leader in operational business intelligence (BI) solutions, today announced that it signed an agreement with Central and North West London (CNWL) National Health Service Foundation Trust (NHS) to deploy a custom-built BI solution across the organization. Information Builders WebFOCUS platform will enable the Trust to measure its performance and make process improvements against government and local targets as part of the NHS commitment to providing quality patient care for all. The system will gather key performance information from disparate sources to allow NHS Foundation Trust managers to make more informed decisions on improving patient care and driving performance. The solution will automatically measure data against all key targets to enable improvements both at an operational and strategic level. The solution will extend beyond CNWL to gather details from multiple organizations, including Primary Care Trusts and the Department of Health, as well as from patients, to give Trust management a holistic view of its performance. Using WebFOCUS, authorized users, including all CNWL staff, can access, drill down, and analyze data relating to their specific area of the Trust and use it to make necessary improvements and drive performance metrics. "The decision to implement the Information Builders solution is part of our commitment to high-quality care for everyone who uses our services," said CNWL's John Vaughan, director of partnerships and commercial development. "We have approximately 3,400 members of staff at CNWL and a vast amount of information is held across different systems. This platform will integrate these systems, giving the Trust visibility into specific areas for improvement. Most importantly, CNWL management will no longer spend so much time sifting through vast quantities of data and instead can focus on putting improvement initiatives into action quickly." "Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust is already recognized for its outstanding accomplishments, having achieved Foundation Trust status as a leader in its field and a performance rating of Excellent from the Healthcare Commission," said Gerald Cohen, CEO and founder of Information Builders. "This project will be instrumental for the Trust, not only in helping it to achieve its key performance targets, but also enabling it to make continuous improvements to take patient care to the next level." The Central and North West NHS London Foundation Trust operates from more than 100 healthcare sites across nine boroughs in London. About Information Builders As a leading independent business intelligence (BI) company for the past 30 years, Information Builders has provided innovative solutions to more than 12,000 customers, including most of the Fortune 100 and numerous U.S. federal government agencies. The company's flagship WebFOCUS product is the world's most widely used BI platform. Superior architecture and intuitive nature enables WebFOCUS to address the needs of everyone in the extended global enterprise -- executive, analytical, operational, and beyond. It provides the agility to adapt to changing business conditions with the security, scalability, and flexibility to support dozens to millions of users. Unique to the company is the integration expertise it brings to the BI market. Information Builders iWay Software suite solves complex integration problems with pre-built components that require minimal custom programming. The award-winning combination of WebFOCUS and iWay gives Information Builders customers the ability to embrace the company motto: "Because Everyone Makes Decisions." Information Builders is committed to customer service excellence with a Professional Services division that specializes in building custom applications using WebFOCUS and iWay Software. Headquartered in New York City with 90 offices worldwide, the company employs 1,450 people and has more than 350 business partners. Visit informationbuilders.com.

Contact Information: Press Contacts: Kathleen Moran Information Builders (917) 339-6313 Karyn Martin Emerge PR (617) 729-3173