NEW YORK, NY--(Marketwired - Sep 26, 2013) - Information Builders, a leader in business intelligence (BI) and analytics, information integrity, and integration solutions, today announced that the company's president and CEO, Gerald Cohen, has been named to The Channel Company's inaugural Top 50 Midmarket IT Vendor Executive list, featuring the industry's most influential IT vendor leaders who serve the midmarket and midsize customers.

Information Builders' WebFOCUS business intelligence (BI) platform also was named the Best Midmarket Solution during the Midsize Enterprise Summit (MES) held September 22 to 25 in Phoenix, AZ. Gerald has led Information Builders, one of the software industry's largest independent, privately held companies, since he founded the organization in 1975. The company's WebFOCUS BI platform was honored as the leading business intelligence solution for midmarket enterprises for its customizable, interactive reports and dashboards, enabling both technical and non-technical users to use BI for enhanced decision-making. Information Builders' iWay integration and integrity solutions can also be deployed to ensure the quality and consistency of enterprise information.

Under Gerald's guidance, Information Builders has consistently increased its focus on the midmarket segment. Today, a large percentage of its business is with midmarket companies, such as ABC Financial, Hercules Tire, Securities America, and Taylor University. More than half of the customers participating in Information Builders' user groups and on its advisory council are midmarket.

"Gerry has always believed that innovation is the foundation of success," said Michael Corcoran, chief marketing officer, Information Builders. "While the BI industry has evolved considerably in the five decades since Information Builders' inception, Gerry's passion for innovation has helped us anticipate these changes and develop innovative solutions such as WebFOCUS and iWay. Not only has this allowed us to better serve our existing customers, it's also enabled us to penetrate new market segments as more organizations look to unlock the potential of their existing information."

Executives were selected based on the strength of their relationships with midmarket customers, demonstrated leadership, strategic thinking, and solution excellence in the midmarket. The midmarket is defined as companies with 100 to 1,000 workers and/or those with sales of between $100 million and $1 billion. The Midmarket Awards are voted on by more than 250 CIOs.

Additional information about Gerald Cohen and all of the Top 50 Midmarket IT Vendor Executive winners is available in this slideshow on CRN.com.