NEW YORK, NY--(Marketwire - Apr 11, 2012) - Information Builders, a leader in business intelligence (BI), information integrity, and integration solutions, today announced that United Automobile Insurance Company (UAIC), a national provider of non-standard automobile insurance, is using the company's holistic, end-to-end P&C insurance application to combine data from both its legacy and new systems, enabling better decision-making across the organization. UAIC is leveraging Information Builders' Insurance Performance Foundation (IPF) to develop a consolidated view of enterprise activity and profitability across all levels of its business and arm its employees with actionable information in real time.

Information Builders' IPF is a comprehensive application leveraging 37 years of organic expertise in insurance data integration and business intelligence, specifically targeted to P&C insurers. The unique offering allows UAIC to receive a quick, high-value P&C insurance focused solution, as well as prompt configuration to fully fit the company's specific line of business and processes. The IPF solution gives employees at all levels of the business, including senior executives, mid-level management, underwriters, claims managers, pricing staff, analysts, front-line operational staff, and even its external independent agencies and agents, access to a customizable BI reporting and analytics solution so that they can easily answer their own business questions in a matter of seconds or minutes, not days or weeks. Through its partnership with Information Builders, UAIC is ensuring that all business users have access to the most up to date information they need in order to do their jobs effectively, from the highest level of summarized information all the way to the smallest level of granular details. These users can easily drill down into or across all of this critical information from a seamless, self-service front-end dashboard.

UAIC had identified that manual reporting processes and IT systems needed an upgrade in order to increase the employees' ability to make prompt, fully informed decisions. Additionally, the company lacked a way to integrate data from its core systems in a single comprehensive view across the enterprise so information related to claims, billing and policy administration had to be accessed and reported on separately (as "silos of data"). This challenge was further compounded by the influx of additional data from UAIC's new core systems being implemented. The company recognized the opportunity within Information Builders' IPF solution for business ready information to not only address these challenges, but also to improve the speed-to-market and precision of rate actions, reduce losses, better segment its books of business, change the entire nature of agent interactions and increase loyalty in their channels. As a result of this investment in Information Builders' IPF Application, UAIC is targeting a bottom line impact as large as or larger than those from the new core systems.

"The true value of information can only be derived when organizations seamlessly integrate new core systems data with important legacy information, and then bring a whole new layer of visibility to that information through easy-to-use self-service business reporting and analytical interfaces," said Gerald Cohen, president and CEO of Information Builders. "UAIC is doing exactly that with this investment. Information Builders commends them on this critical step which will differentiate the company from other insurers whose view of transformational initiatives end up being more purely transactional in nature."

"UAIC has extremely unique customers and offerings and, as such, it was imperative that we find a solution that was fully configurable to meet our specific business needs yet could be implemented in a matter of months not years, which is exactly what Information Builders' IPF Application does," said Dean Kozlowski, Vice President of Product Development for UAIC. "We've recently completed implementing both Guidewire Claim Center and Guidewire Billing Center in our new evolving technology environment. These new core systems combined with the enhanced ease of data access and business insights provided through our partnership with Information Builders and their valuable software solutions, makes UAIC well positioned to deliver enhanced value to both our internal employees and external customers as a result."

About UAIC

United Automobile Insurance Company (UAIC) provides a high quality and low cost insurance product to the Non-Standard Automobile Insurance Market. The company is family owned and is one of the largest privately held property and casualty insurance companies in the United States. In 1998, UAIC had operations in two states, Illinois and Florida. Now almost 15 years later, UAIC is providing auto insurance in 13 states and continues to add new states. The key to our growth and success is a commitment to providing quality service to our agents and customers combined with disciplined underwriting, and fast and fair claims handling.

UAIC has a world class information technology department. Our web technology is rated year after year as the easiest to use and most dependable by our agents. On our website, agents can write new and renewal business, do endorsements and reinstatements, check the status of a policy, reprint documents and pay by cash, check or credit / debit card. UAIC has invested, and will continue to invest, substantial resources in personnel and technology to assure the most efficient and professional operations in the industry. Through our affiliates, United Group Underwriters and United Premium Finance Company, UAIC provides additional products and services tailored to the needs of the independent agent. We will continue to strive to be the leading non-standard automobile insurance company in the industry. We are proud that our agents and customers have recognized this commitment by making UAIC a market leader in every state where we do business.