This updates a story posted at 10 a.m. Wednesday.

BOSTON — In what became a unamious vote on Wednesday afternoon, the Massachusetts state Senate voted Sen. Stan Rosenberg the next Senate president.

The Amherst Democrat's ascension to the post makes him the first Western Massachusetts senator to hold the position since Maurice Donahue of Holyoke served as senate president in 1971. Rosenberg now also holds the distinction of being the first openly gay and first Jewish president of the Massachusetts Senate.

Rosenberg was nominated for the job by state Sen. Harriette L. Chandler, the Democratic assistant majority leader from Worcester, who praised his ability to work with everyone, regardless of political party affiliation.

"It could be said that each of us, Democrats and Republicans alike, have been the beneficiary of his authenticity, intellect and great love for this institution," Chandler said. "Senator Rosenberg's life story is the American Dream."

Rosenberg's nomination was seconded by Sen. Dan Wolf, a Harwich Democrat, who also cited the Amherst resident's pragmatism as a benefit to the entire legislative body.

"He is honest and trustworthy, but never judgmental," Wolf said. "Senator Rosenberg believes to reach our full potential we must all be at the table. As senate president, he will create that collaborative vision."

Although the Republican minority nominated Sen. Bruce Tarr of Gloucester to become president, the vote along party lines paved the way for Rosenberg to take the job, as was expected. But it was Tarr who called for the vote to go unanimiously to Rosenberg, which the Senate moved to do.

While he talked about the divisiveness which often dominates the news of the American political system, Tarr said in Rosenberg there is a chance to change that.

"Our Senate has the opportunity to become a beacon of hope in a sea of cynicism," he said.

State Sen. Benjamin Downing, a Pittsfield Democrat, said Rosenberg at the helm of the Senate is certainly a good thing for the residents living west of Worcester.

"We're all excited," Downing said. "He knows the issues we face and he cares to engage the entire Senate to solve them."

Northampton Mayor David Narkewicz was also in attendance, as he praised Rosenberg as an elected official making his home region proud.

"We're really excited and proud that our own state senator from Hampshire County has become the new Senate president," Narkewicz said. "He's been a great voice for not only the region, but the whole commonwealth."

State Sen. Don Humason, R-Westfield, said he is optimistic that legislators from both parties can come together and compromise with Rosenberg leading the Senate and Republican Gov. Charlie Baker in the corner office.

"I'm very optimistic about the upcoming session," Humason said. "And with Senator Rosenberg serving as (senate) president, the focus of the commonwealth will be on Western Massachusetts, as it should be."

Rosenberg delivered a moving speech, which recounted his personal journey and showed appreciation for the scores of people he said helped him along the way. He also announced that there will be a series of grassroots forums held across the state to "create a true dialogue with Massachusetts' residents about the challenges ahead."

"By doing so, we acknowledge clearly and emphatically that the best ideas are often not found within these halls, but in our neighborhoods and our coffee shops, in our board rooms and union halls, in our office break rooms and at our family tables," Rosenberg said. "So today signals a new era of shared leadership, not just inside this great institution but among the people of the commonwealth."

As Rosenberg took over as Senate president, state Rep. Robert DeLeo, a Winthrop Democrat, retained his position as speaker of the house. Gov. Deval Patrick is prepared to make his exit this afternoon paving the way for Thursday's inauguration of Governor-elect Baker.

Stick with MassLive.com for the latest from the inaugural ceremonies and festivities in Boston.