72094 Ginger Rogers Rd, Rancho Mirage, CA 92270 (MLS# 219076292) is a Lots/Land property that was sold at $1,700,000 on May 18, 2022. Want to learn more about 72094 Ginger Rogers Rd? Do you have questions about finding other Lots/Land real estate for sale in Rancho Mirage? You can browse all Rancho Mirage real estate or contact a Coldwell Banker agent to request more information.

Based on information from the California Desert Association of REALTORS © as of 7/25/2024 . All data, including all measurements and calculations of area, is obtained from various sources and has not been, and will not be, verified by broker or MLS. All information should be independently reviewed and verified for accuracy. Properties may or may not be listed by the office/agent presenting the information. The information provided is for consumers' personal, non-commercial use and may not be used for any purpose other than to identify prospective properties consumers may be interested in purchasing. All properties are subject to prior sale or withdrawal. All information provided is deemed reliable but is not guaranteed accurate, and should be independently verified. Data Updated: Jul 24 2024 10:7PM

Protect your home and budget with an American Home Shield® home warranty. Learn more!

Coldwell Banker Realty and Guaranteed Rate Affinity, LLC share common ownership and because of this relationship the brokerage may receive a financial or other benefit. You are not required to use Guaranteed Rate Affinity, LLC as a condition of purchase or sale of any real estate. Operating in the state of New York as GR Affinity, LLC in lieu of the legal name Guaranteed Rate Affinity, LLC.

Real estate agents affiliated with Coldwell Banker are independent contractor sales associates and are not employees of Coldwell Banker.

CalRE# - 00616212 Southern California 300 Commerce, Ste. 250, Irvine, CA 92602

©2024 Coldwell Banker. All Rights Reserved. Coldwell Banker and the Coldwell Banker logos are trademarks of Coldwell Banker Real Estate LLC. The Coldwell Banker® System is comprised of company owned offices which are owned by a subsidiary of Anywhere Advisors LLC and franchised offices which are independently owned and operated. The Coldwell Banker System fully supports the principles of the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Opportunity Act.