Oscar-winning actress Ginger Rogers, who secured her place in cinema history via a series of musical films opposite Fred Astaire, has died at the age of 83.

Rogers died Tuesday at her Rancho Mirage home, apparently of natural causes.

Apart from her natural musical flair, Rogers was also a strong comedienne, and excelled at playing tough, wisecracking, cynical young women. In films such as Garson Kanin’s “Bachelor Mother” and “Tom, Dick and Harry,” as well as “Stage Door” and “Roxie Hart,” she was hilariously astringent, a tough shell with an only slightly softer center.

During her heyday, the late 1930s, Time magazine favorably compared Rogers to her peers: “Less eccentric than Carole Lombard, less wordly wise than Myrna Loy; less impudent than Joan Blondell, Ginger Rogers has a careless self-sufficiency they lack.”

Dancing and romancing

Yet, though her non-musical career was certainly respectable – she won an Oscar for the 1940 drama “Kitty Foyle” – she never achieved the giddy filmic heights that she enjoyed when she danced and romanced in her 10 films with Astaire.

It was the dance numbers of the Astaire/Rogers musicals, “The Continental,” “Let’s Call the Whole Thing Off” and especially “Let’s Face the Music and Dance,” and “They Can’t Take That Away From Me,” that have passed into legend, with the two exhibiting effortless ease and sophistication.

Rogers’ life was dominated by one large presence: her mother Lela Rogers, a classic stage mom. Lela, Rogers later recounted, instilled drive and ambition in her daughter, often at the cost of a personal life (Lela Rogers was married and divorced five times).

A lifelong Christian Scientist and a longtime union activist, Rogers was one of the earliest members of the Screen Actors Guild, joining in 1933. She also actively fought for artists’ rights in the early 1980s, speaking out in Congress and the California State Legislature against colorization and other forms of material alteration of film.

Rogers’ last public appearance at an industry event came at the SAG Awards Feb. 25, where she was recognized for her pioneering efforts for the union.

Rogers was born Virginia Katherine McMath on July 16,1911, in Independence, Mo., but was nicknamed Ginger almost from the start.

Her mother’s second husband, John Logan Rogers, legally adopted Virginia. Lela Rogers’ ambition propelled her daughter into vaudeville early on and young Ginger grew up fast. At age 17, she was married briefly in 1928 to Jack Pepper, with whom she toured in an act called Ginger & Pepper, until her mother came between the young couple.

Brassy flapper

She worked consistently on Broadway and in films under contract to Paramount, usually in roles as brassy young flappers. The work was generally unmemorable, although she introduced the much-repeated line “Cigarette me, big boy” in the 1930 film “Young Man of Manhattan.”

That same year, she asked to be let out of her contract to appear on Broadway in George Gershwin’s “Girl Crazy,” for which she received dance instruction from Fred Astaire, then paired with his sister Adele. In the successful musical (Ethel Merman was also in the cast) she intro’d the songs “Embraceable You” and “But Not For Me.”

More second-string work followed, until director Mervyn LeRoy convinced her to appear in 1933’s “42nd Street.” She was rewarded with a larger role and the opening number, “We’re in the Money,” in “Gold Diggers of 1933.”

Clicking with Astaire

Her work led to a contract at RKO, and in ’33 she danced with Astaire for the first time in “Flying Down to Rio.” It was her 20th film and his second, but for the first time, both clicked.

Though the two were supporting characters in “Rio,” they proved so popular that RKO devised eight profitable and memorable pix for them in the next six years: “The Gay Divorcee,” “Roberta,” “Top Hat,” “Follow the Fleet,” “Swing Time,” “Shall We Dance?,” “Carefree” and 1939’s “The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle.”

With scores by the likes of Gershwin, Jerome Kern and Irving Berlin and extraordinary choreography by Astaire and Hermes Pan, most of the films were frothy concoctions with inconsequential, improbable plots – just the sort of escapism Depression-era audiences were looking for.

Despite the air of romance, there were no love scenes. In her 1991 autobiography, Rogers wrote that Astaire’s wife Phyllis “didn’t want him kissing other women.”

The musicals made the two first-rank Hollywood stars. They were consistently among the top 10 moneymakers and by the latter part of the decade Rogers was earning $3,000 a week.

Her non-Astaire vehicles, mostly comedies, were much stronger, including “Vivacious Lady,” “Stage Door” and “Bachelor Mother.” Yet, Rogers wanted to distance herself from musicals and comedies and venture into serious parts, winning her Oscar for “Kitty Foyle.”

Her popularity, however, continued to be based on comedies and musicals. She received some of her best notices for Billy Wilder’s directing debut, the 1942 “The Major and the Minor,” and Leo McCarey’s ’42 “Once Upon a Honeymoon,” though the latter was ill-timed as a comedy about World War II.

Highest-paid star

She starred in a financially successful film version of 1944’s “Lady in the Dark,” and the next year “Weekend at the Waldorf.” In 1945, she earned $292,159, making her the highest-paid Hollywood star and the eighth-highest salary earner in the U.S. In 1949, she and Astaire were reunited for the last time, replacing Gene Kelly and Judy Garland in their only color musical, MGM’s “The Barkleys of Broadway.”

Even in the 1950s, when her film career was mostly on the decline, she had a few fine moments in comedies such as Howard Hawks’ 1952 “Monkey Business” with Cary Grant and “Dreamboat,” opposite Clifton Webb.

Rogers persisted in trying to establish herself as a dramatic actress, sinking her own money into a 1951 Broadway failure, “Love and Let Love,” and a later dud, “The Pink Jungle,” which never even made it to New York. But audiences clamored for her, and she delivered, in stock runs of “Bell, Book and Candle,” “Annie Get Your Gun” and “The Unsinkable Molly Brown.”

In 1953 she appeared in “For ever Female,” the first motion picture to premiere on television in Paramount’s short-lived Telemeter fee-TV system. Her last film role was as Jean Harlow’s mother in the 1965 Electrovision biography “Harlow” – in which, once again, she replaced Garland. In the late ’70s she put together a nightclub act and played large venues in Las Vegas and London.

Besides Pepper, Rogers was married to Lew Ayres, Jack Briggs, Jacques Bergerac and William Marshall. She had been single since the mid-’70s and never had children.

Richard Natale, with contributions from Timothy M. Gray and Associated Press