Rancho Mirage is in the heart of the Coachella Valley and is set at the bottom of the Santa Rosa mountain range. It is close to the freeway system of Southern California which will take you to all the exciting nearby attractions. Not only is there sunshine in abundance, the climate makes the perfect area for the luxury resort life. Famous leaders in political history, top company executives, and well known celebrities make their home in Ranch Mirage. The quality of life in this city is second to none.

The first settlements can be traced back to the 1920 and 1930 decades. Rancho Mirage got its famous beginnings after the Second World War. Bob Hope, Frank Sinatra, Ginger Rogers, Fred Astaire, Harry Caray, Lloyd Campbell, and Mary Martin have made their mark on Rancho Mirage. A few of the United States presidents have also had the please of coming here. Gerald Ford was a visitor on a regular basis and finally bought a home in Ranch Mirage so he could come and go whenever he chose. President Ford was living in Ranch Mirage when he passed away.

The golf side of Ranch Mirage is apparent in the twelve golf courses found here. The first resort this city had was the Thunderbird Guest Ranch. It opened in 1946 for popular celebrities and business clients. The other Ranch Mirage resorts sprang up afterwards to include; Mission Hills, the Springs, Tamarisk, and Sunrise.

The residents of Rancho Mirage are the majority of the makeup of the community. The high image of Ranch Mirage is made better by the three resort hotels in the area. They are the Rancho Las Palmas Resort and Spa, the Westin Mission Hills, and the Ritz Carlton. Many facilities in the area are also thought to be top quality in the United States as well as international best places to frequent. Combine the strong residential coverage with the others and you have one of the most prominent resort communities in the Coachella Valley area.

Speaking of the Coachella Valley, Rancho Mirage was one of the first communities to take part in the demand and need of the best quality resort/residential housing units in the same. Because of this, the city of Rancho Mirage has always offered the traditional and unique amenities of having such a recognized name

Within the limits of the Coachella Valley, growth is seen and the available land is ready for the able buyer or for those who have the idea of a great resort community. In 2006, construction of Rancho Mirage totaled about 478 million dollars in just money spend for building permits. Single family homes came to about $32 million for construction. Additions, public property, and renovations cane to a total of $46 Million. Today many residential projects, medical facilities, retail developments, and office spaces are being created and are in many carried stages of progress.

Mission Hills Country Club is a private club known for its unparalleled golf, tennis, fitness and luxury Real Estate. Its first rate facilities represent a world class country club. Its one of the most prestigious clubs in the Coachella Valley. Mission Hills Country Club continues to grow in service and great amenities that are offered to its Members.

The city of Rancho Mirage is famous for the Rancho Mirage Country Club. Its rich history is distinguished by the fact that streets like Bob Hope Drive and Frank Sinatra Drive exist in this city. The golf course at Rancho Mirage opened in 1985 and is one of the newer courses of play. It gives the golfer a lovely mature tree lined fairway and conditions which are perfect for playing golf year round. The view of the Coachella Valley and the San Jacinto Mountains are visible from the course. The Thunderbird Country Club is also famous with members such as Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz, Bing Crosby, Presidents Ford and Eisenhower, Ginger Rogers and more.

There is no denying that Rancho Mirage Real Estate and its amenities can offer you a get away from the hectic rat race of the fast paced lifestyle, and offer a slower and more relaxed atmosphere. Come experience the great things Rancho Mirage can give you and your family because only then can you truly appreciate peace and serenity.

If you would like to see property in Rancho Mirage, please call us at the numbers below. Were committed to helping you find the home of your dreams.

With over 20 years of experience in Real Estate market, Elaine truly enjoys helping people in the process of buying or selling a home.