RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. (AP) -- Ginger Rogers, the glamourous

blonde who made dance floor magic with Fred Astaire in a string of

unforgettable musicals and won an Academy Award as best actress for

"Kitty Foyle," died Tuesday at 83.

Miss Rogers died at her home here, apparently of natural causes,

Riverside County Coroner Veronica Martinez said.

Miss Rogers' career spanned 65 years in every field of show

business from vaudeville to television. During the 1940s, she was

one of the highest paid, most sought-after Hollywood stars.

She was most remembered for the blissful partnership with

Astaire in sparkling musicals that brightened Depression America.

He in top hat and tails, she in a flowing gown, they glided over

polished floors in a perfect display of grace and romance.

She once called their teaming "just a wonderful happening. It

wasn't planned. I thought it turned out to be magic. I was told

even in the first picture people could see something was happening."

Miss Rogers continued performing her musical show into her late

70s until ill health confined her to a wheelchair. Even so, she

toured extensively to promote her 1991 autobiography, "Ginger: My

Story," and received honors at film festivals and tributes. The

most notable were the Kennedy Center Honors in December 1992.

Miss Rogers married and divorced five times. She had no children.

"I yearned for a long, happy marriage with one person," she

wrote. "But my life has been blessed in so many other ways that I

wanted to share the good times and the hard times with a public

that has shown me unbounded appreciation and loyalty."

She was born Virginia Katherine McMath on July 16, 1911, in

Harry Truman's home town of Independence, Mo. Her father had

abandoned his pregnant wife.

A cousin couldn't pronounce Virginia and the name came out

"Ginja." It was Ginger thereafter, and she adopted her stepfather's

last name to begin performing as Ginger Rogers.

Miss Rogers won the prize as Charleston Champion of Texas, and

soon was touring the country in a vaudeville act created by Lela

Rogers, her mother, "Ginger Rogers and Her Redheads." An engagement

with the Paul Ash orchestra at the Paramount theater brought her

first New York engagement. She began appearing in musical short

films and on Christmas 1929 opened in a Broadway musical, "Top

Speed."

She began her movie career in 1930 with Paramount's "Young Man

of Manhattan." It was a secondary role as a society flapper, but

she made a strong impression, especially with her line, "Cigarette

me, big boy." The phrase became part of the vernacular.

"Girl Crazy," a tune-filled Gershwin musical of 1930,

established Miss Rogers' stardom, despite the sensation of Ethel

Merman singing "I Got Rhythm." During rehearsals, the producers

were dissatisfied with the "Embraceable You" number and called in

the expert help of Astaire, then starring on Broadway with his

sister Adele. Astaire watched the routine in the theater lobby and

said, "Here, Ginger, try it with me."

In her book, Ginger dealt with the legends about her

relationship with Fred. She emphasized that he was no Svengali; she

had made 20 films before they joined on "Flying Down to Rio" in

1933, he had appeared in one. They didn't hate each other, "despite

occasional snits."

"We had fun, and it shows," she wrote. "True, we were never

bosom buddies off the screen; we were different people with

different interests. We were a couple only on film."

After the breakup of the team, some industry observers believed

Rogers' career would languish without Astaire. She defied them by

playing a dramatic role in "Kitty Foyle" that won her the Oscar.

Miss Rogers' film career thrived for 25 years because of her

adaptability to the times.

She proved herself with comedy and romance in the musicals with

Astaire and with drama in "Kitty Foyle," "I'll Be Seeing You,"

"Tender Comrade" and "Storm Warning." She could be down-to-earth in

"Roxie Hart" and "Primrose Path" or sophisticated in "Lady in the

Dark" and "Forever Female."

Miss Rogers' last film came in 1965 as Jean Harlow's mother in

one of two quickly made versions of the blonde star's life. In

interviews she expressed her distaste for the new frankness in

Hollywood films.

"We made happy pictures that people enjoyed seeing, not the kind

that audiences have to go through a trauma to see nowadays," she

said.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.