Miroslav Svoboda

Country Leader, Deloitte Czech Republic

Miroslav Svoboda has been the Country Leader of Deloitte Czech Republic since 1 June 2022. He is a senior Partner in the Tax & Legal function. Previously, he was Partner in Charge of the Financial Advisory team. He specialises in mergers and acquisitions and in complex projects in international taxation and the legal and accounting structuring of mergers and acquisitions. He is also leader of the Deloitte Private platform, which focuses on the provision of services to private owners and companies, and the Czech Best Managed Companies programme recognising leading privately owned companies in the Czech Republic. Miroslav joined Deloitte in 2003 and has gradually become a Partner. He graduated in Economics and Management at Mendel University in Brno.

David Batal

Audit & Assurance Partner in Charge

David Batal is the Partner in Charge of the Audit & Assurance function at Deloitte Czech Republic and Slovakia. He joined Deloitte in 1999 following his graduation from the Prague School of Economics where he majored in corporate economics and management. In 2003, he graduated from the ACCA certification programme and became a member of the UK Association of Chartered Certified Accountants. Since 2009, he has been a statutory auditor registered by the Chamber of Auditors of the Czech Republic. In 2017, he became a member of The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ACA). In his career, he has gained extensive experience in auditing real estate and construction companies and financial institutions. In recent years, he has led audit advisory services comprising accounting advisory, internal auditing and financial risk management.

Adham Hafoudh

Tax & Legal Partner in Charge

Adham Hafoudh is the Partner in Charge of the Tax & Legal function at Deloitte Czech Republic and Slovakia. He focuses mainly on VAT and has broad experience mainly with VAT structuring of international business transactions, dealing with Tax Authorities and the tax technology agenda. He also has a wealth of experience covering broader tax advisory assignments. His clients are both multinational and local companies across a variety of industries. Adham is a member of the Czech Chamber of Tax Advisors.

Pavel Šiška

Consulting Partner in Charge

Pavel Šiška is the Partner in Charge of the Consulting function at Deloitte Czech Republic and Slovakia. His experience includes focusing on business–IT alignment, analytics and innovation. Pavel has spent most of his professional life in the banking and insurance industries. Prior to joining Deloitte, he worked for IBM, Commerzbank and BNP Dresdner Bank.

Miroslav Linhart

Financial Advisory Partner in Charge

Miroslav Linhart is Partner in Charge for Financial Advisory at Deloitte Czech Republic and Slovakia, leading also the Real Estate and Construction advisory team. He specialises primarily in corporate finance services related to real estate transactions, real estate valuations, commercial due diligence, market analyses, searching for acquisition targets, economic feasibility studies or the elaboration of investment and business plans. Miroslav is a UK-Chartered Certified Accountant (ACCA) and writes articles for economic and other specialist media and is a frequent speaker at professional conferences.