Table of Contents

Kids aren't the only ones who get excited about birthday gifts. You can be a full-grown adult and still lose your shit when you open up the gift that topped your wish list. But as you get older, it does become a little more difficult to come up with a list of birthday gift ideas. You can't just ask for all the coolest new toys anymore. Well, you can if you want — we're not going to stop you.

If your birthday is coming up and you're struggling to think of what you want, don't sweat it. We compiled the ultimate birthday wish list, with gifts ranging from tech to outdoor essentials to home goods. Read on for some birthday inspo and start casually dropping hints to your friends and family. And hey, happy birthday!

P.S. Some stellar birthday gifts will be on sale during Prime Day on July 16 and 17.

The gift of clean air

Credit: Levoit

I know, I know, an air purifier is not the sexiest gift, but it is a practical one. The Levoit Core 300S is a smart air purifier with a companion app that lets you control the device and see real-time stats about your home's air quality. It's suitable for spaces up to 1,095 square feet.

Coffee from around the world

Credit: Atlas Coffee Club

Atlas Coffee Club is a coffee subscription that sends you coffee beans and postcards from a different country each month. So, you get to try roasts you probably can't get from your grocery store and you get to learn about a new place — and maybe get some travel inspo. You can select from whole beans, grounds, Keurig pods, and Nespresso pods. Subscriptions can be three, six, or 12 months.

A puzzle with a few tricks up its sleeve

Credit: Magic Puzzle Company

Magic Puzzle Company makes incredibly fun 1,000-piece jigsaw puzzles that have a secret envelope for you to open when you're done. This surprise envelope unlocks a "magical twist ending," so placing that final piece will be even more exciting. The intricate designs feature tons of Easter eggs and some of the puzzle pieces are even shaped like items throughout the scene. The Big Rock City puzzle has a hot dog-shaped piece and music note-shaped piece to name a couple.

Somewhere to put your headphones

Credit: Coreminded

Rather than laying your headphones throughout your home or having them clutter up your desk, ask for a universal headphone stand for your birthday. This one is compatible with almost any pair of over-ear headphones or gaming headsets — and it has a pretty sleek look, too.

A stylish candle warmer lamp

Credit: Geezo

Big candle fan? Then a candle warmer should be on your birthday list. It helps your candle last longer and you don't need an open flame burning in your home. And if you're going to ask for a candle warmer, make it a cute one. With glass lamp shade, this warmer blends seamlessly into your home decor.

Sony's latest bass-heavy headphones

Credit: Joe Maldonado / Mashable

Sony released its new ULT Power Sound lineup in April, and we adore the headphones. The ULT Wears have Sony's impressive sound quality and noise cancellation, and are made even more impressive by the addition of the ULT button, which punches up the bass two additional levels. These headphones are booming, and the best part is they're relatively budget-friendly.

A personalized Yeti mug

Credit: Yeti

This Yeti Rambler 24-ounce mug is a great size for both true coffee lovers and beer drinkers. It can also hold two Moscow mules, according to Yeti, if that's more your speed. The Rambler is available in an array of fun and neutral colors. Plus, you can customize it with an etched design or monogram. For just $6 to $10, you can choose designs from Yeti's library or upload your own file. I personally own the king crab orange mug with a cowboy boot and flowers etched on the side.

Mini zodiac cupcakes

Credit: Baked by Melissa

Birthday cake is the standard, but might we suggest this fun alternative: mini cupcakes selected by an astrologer specifically for your zodiac sign. This Baked by Melissa offering comes with 25 cupcakes and the flavors vary depending on your sign — though there are some fan-favorites that show up in each zodiac variation. These also make for a great last-minute ask if you're in Manhattan or Boston, as there's same-day delivery for select locations.

A desk you can take anywhere

Credit: Miller Kern / Mashable

If you work remotely, you gotta get this portable desk from Logitech. The Casa Pop-Up Desk includes a wireless keyboard, wireless trackpad, and a desk stand that doubles as a discreet and stylish carrying case. It comes in three colors so you can match your aesthetic. This is an especially great tool if you like working from coffee shops or move around while you work.

A portable, smokeless fire pit

Credit: Solo Stove

Whether you're a hardcore camper or you just like unwinding with a few beers by the fire, Solo Stove's Ranger fire pit is a fantastic gift to ask for. It's designed to be smokeless and portable, making it great for balconies, backyards, beach hangs, or camping trips. Mashable Senior Shopping Reporter Haley Henschel reviewed the larger Solo Stove Bonfire and wrote that it burns "beautiful, clean fires when conditions are right." The best part? The Ranger is typically on sale for $199.99, so whoever gifts it has 30 extra dollars to spend on your birthday.

A fancy desk chair

Credit: Branch

My favorite type of birthday gift is something I want to buy myself but just can't justify spending my own money on. The Verve chair is a prime example of that. It's super comfy and ergonomic, and it comes in really cute colors, but it's definitely on the luxury end of pricing. If you work from home or just spend a lot of time sitting at a desk, put this at the top of your wish list.

Film vibes from a digital camera

Credit: Paper Shoot Camera

Film photos are back in a big way, but not all of us have the patience to fill up an entire roll and then wait for it to get developed. Paper Shoot is a really neat camera that takes film-esque photos and stores them on an SD card so you can pull them to your computer or phone and post immediately. The design is super low-profile, making it easy to slip into your purse or pocket on a night out. Plus, there are a bunch of cute designs to choose from for the outside case.

A handheld gaming console that's not a Switch

Credit: Kimberly Gedeon / Mashable

Mashable Tech Reporter Alex Perry described the Lenovo Legion Go as "beefier and more powerful" than the Nintendo Switch. It has a huge display, solid performance, and all-around great specs. It's not a one-to-one competitor of the Switch, but rather a portable way into PC gaming that's "really good at running all kinds of games."

A Bluetooth record player

Credit: Sony

Are your Spotify playlists just not cutting it anymore? Switch it up and go retro with a vinyl music collection. This turntable connects to Bluetooth speakers and headphones, or you can hook it up to a traditional sound system using cords. It costs $249.99 (but you can sometimes find it on sale for under $200).

A smart speaker

Credit: Amazon

If you don't have a smart speaker by now, it's time to make a change. The Echo Dot is an affordable voice-controlled companion that'll keep you in the loop on the weather, current events, and keep track of your most important reminders. Also, they're great for playing music. Get one for $49.99.

A portable, waterproof speaker

Credit: Bose

Beach days and outdoor adventures are made complete with your favorite playlist. The Bose SoundLink Flex is a portable speaker that can handle the elements while still providing stellar sound quality. It's waterproof, rust and drop resistant, and even floats. Plus, it comes in five fun colors. For even bigger sound, try the Bose SoundLink Max.

A pair of AirPods Pro

Credit: Stan Schroeder / Mashable

When you already own a pair of earbuds, it can be hard to justify splurging on a new pair — even if you really, really want to. And that's why the new AirPods Pro (Gen 2) earbuds are an ideal birthday present. For people still using lightning cables (gross), the new USB-C version will be a welcome upgrade. Apple stepped up its audio game with these buds, which feature improved sound quality and active noise cancellation. For a cheaper alternative, ask for the latest 3rd Gen AirPods, which start at $169.

A massage gun

Credit: TheraGun

Whether you're working at a desk all day, running around, or just inexplicably tense, a massage gun will get you limber and relaxed again. What better gift than the gift of painless movement? Our best recommendation? Go for the TheraGun. Their Prime model costs $299, but if that's not quite in your budget, then check out our gadget gift guide for more gifting inspiration.

A cool drone with a 12MP camera

Credit: DJI

This drone is small and super lightweight, but it takes stunning photos and videos. It's great for traveling or for use at home. DJI is one of the top names in drones and the Mini 2 SE costs $339 with a remote control.

A personal blender for smoothies

Credit: Nutribullet

Make smoothies in your own kitchen with a NutriBullet personal blender — it's fast and easy. The NutriBullet Nutrient Extractor comes with the 600W motor base, blender blade, 24-ounce blending cup, travel lid, and lip ring, plus a recipe book if you're sick of the same old smoothies. It costs $58 at Walmart.

A new phone

Credit: Apple

Still living that single-camera iPhone 8 life? Don't spend your own money on an expensive phone — have someone who loves you spend their money! The new iPhone 15 starts at $799 while the iPhone 15 Plus retails at $899 and up. (Group gift, anyone?)

A camera to rival your phone

Credit: Nikon

When giving your friends and family birthday gift ideas, it's usually best to look for gifts under $50. But if you have a partner or parent who really loves you, then it's okay to dream big.

An easy-to-use mirrorless camera designed with creators in mind, the Nikon Z 30 boasts video, camera, and live streaming capabilities at an affordable price. The camera body can be purchased alone or with one or two kit lenses. There’s also the creators’ accessory bundle which comes with a mic, tripod grip, and Bluetooth remote.

Or a pack of disposable cameras

Credit: Fujifilm

We mentioned the Paper Shoot Camera above, but sometimes you really just want that classic disposable camera experience. You'll capture some fun, in-the-moment memories with no do-overs. A three-pack of disposable cameras costs $79.99 (these have become kind of expensive since the invention of digital/phone cameras).

An Apple Watch

Credit: Apple

An Apple Watch lets you access smartphone features conveniently on your wrist. You can control your music, send and receive texts, monitor your health, and tons more. The Apple Watch Series 9 is $399 at Amazon, but you can usually find it on sale.

A media streaming stick

Credit: Amazon

The Amazon Fire TV Stick 4K is one of the best streaming devices we've tested, and it's also one of our favorite birthday gift ideas. If you don't already have a smart TV but want to access Netflix, Hulu, HBO, Disney+, and all the other streaming apps directly from your TV, ask for a Fire TV Stick for your b-day. Amazon's streaming stick has better voice control than similar products from Roku, and the 4K version normally goes for $49.99.

Cold hard cash

Credit: Pixabay

You really can't beat the gift of cold, hard cash — or a gift card. A Visa card is a perfect birthday gift because you can spend it on literally whatever you want; buy yourself something fun or get some help with groceries. Best of all, you don't need to decide exactly what you want before your birthday. The gift card starts at $10.

A delicious-smelling candle

Credit: Bonita Fierce

Candles are a timeless gift that you can ask for at every single gift-giving opportunity (and will likely receive anyway if you don't specify what you actually want). We are firm believers that you can never have too many candles. Add some sweet scents from Bonita Fierce, a Latina-owned small business, to your b-day wish list this year and every year. Candles start at $16.

The delicious scent without the fire hazard

Credit: Pura

If candles are a no-go, opt for a Bluetooth-enabled diffuser to make any room in your home smell divine. The Pura Smart Fragrance Diffuser ($49.99) holds two fragrances and is controlled entirely through the app. Schedule one smell to wake up to and one to fall asleep to with the in-app calendar feature. Pura collaborates with brands like NEST, Anthropologie, Disney, and The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City to source their scents, so whatever the occasion calls for, they’ve got your back.

A cast iron skillet

Credit: Lodge

A cast-iron skillet is the true sign that you're graduating from cheap nonstick cookware and all mismatched plates. It's something you probably want, but don't particularly want to spend the money on. Lodge has different sizes depending on what you're wanting to cook. A 10.25-inch skillet costs $40.75, but we've seen it drop below $25 recently.

A pressure cooker and air fryer in one

Credit: Instant Pot

Maybe not quite as heavy duty as a cast-iron skillet but just as useful: a pressure cooker that can air fry, roast, bake, dehydrate, slow cook, prepare rice, steam, sauté, and more. Impress guests with your culinary skills (that are in fact just throwing all the ingredients listed in the recipe into this thing and then waiting a few hours). The Instant Pot 11-in-1 Electric Pressure Cooker will cost your gift-giver $199.99, but they can reap the rewards when you cook for them with it.

A custom pet portrait

Credit: LeFlore Studio

Sometimes, the best birthday gifts are the ones made just for you. If you're obsessed with your pet, these custom pet portraits need to be on your birthday list. There are many different styles to choose from, each one super freakin' adorable. Prices vary depending on size.

Color-changing smart light bulbs

Credit: Philips

Turn your bedroom into a party with these color-changing smart light bulbs. You can control the lights from your phone and set whatever mood you're feeling. This kit includes two smart Bluetooth bulbs for $99.99.

A portable projector

The portable projector fits in the palm of your hands. Credit: Anker

All of your friends will start calling your home the "cool house" if movie nights involve this mini portable projector. Use it to play movies, shows, or games outside on a screen or indoors on a blank wall. The Anker Nebula Capsule in black costs $299.99.

A new bike

Credit: Schwinn

Head outdoors with this hybrid bike designed for both leisure and more adventurous rides. It comes in different colors and a couple of different styles for men and women. The 18-inch Schwinn GTX 2.0 bike normally goes for $549.99.

An app for exploring

Credit: AllTrails

Love to be outside, but can’t fold a map to save your life? Enter AllTrails+, the app designed to get you off your phone and into the wild. Featuring over 400,000 curated trails all over the world, the app allows you to download maps in case of a poor signal, record your hikes, create your own trails, and more. A yearly subscription costs $35.99.

A MacBook Air

Credit: Apple

MacBook Airs are super nice computers, but they can definitely be a bit pricey... which is what makes them such a great addition to a birthday wish list. Someone who loves you can drop the big bucks for you! A 13.6-inch MacBook Air M2 with 8GB RAM and 256GB SSD goes for $1,099 at Best Buy.

A robot vacuum

Credit: iRobot

Stop manually vacuuming your house every day and let a robot vacuum clean your floors for you. The Roomba 694 has WiFi connectivity for mobile and voice controls and it's tough on pet hair. This robot vacuum costs $274.99.

A more advanced robot vacuum

Credit: Timothy Beck Werth / Mashable

The Ecovacs Deebot X2 Omni is a combination robot vacuum and mop that has a squared design for getting dust along walls and corners. It features spinning mop heads that don't just drag water along your floors but actually scrub and clean. After it's done cleaning, the vacuum returns to its charging dock where it empties its dustbin and cleans and dries its mop pads. The vacuum even has an onboard camera onboard so you can watch where it's cleaning.

A weighted blanket

Credit: Quilty

For what seems like an extraneous expense, an extra-heavy blanket can be a total game-changer. Besides providing all the comfort of a partner without the snoring, a weighted blanket can reduce tossing and turning and keep you extra warm. This one at Amazon comes in a bunch of colors, sizes, and weights, but the 60-inch by 80-inch 15-pound blanket (a good place to start) costs $76.99.

A new Kindle

Credit: Stan Schroeder / Mashable

The Mashable team has tested every Kindle e-reader, and we think the Kindle Paperwhite is the right e-reader for most people. Instead of asking for a book, ask for a Kindle for your birthday and save yourself money and space. Yes, it doesn't smell the same as a new book, but now you'll have no excuses for not keeping up with your yearly reading resolutions. The newest Kindle Paperwhite with 16GB storage and onscreen writing is $149.99 at Amazon.

Something to make your life a little more eco-friendly

Credit: Stasher

Whether you're packing your lunch or storing leftovers, using plastic bags should be your last resort. Heck, you should be trying to stay away from all single-use plastics if you're able to. But, if you want to start small, these Stasher bags are a great option to make your daily life more eco-friendly. These silicone bags are secure and completely reusable — either wash them by hand or stuff them in the dishwasher. Grab a starter pack for $99.99.

A new comforter

Credit: Buffy

Comforters, like a mattress, shouldn't be an item you cheap out on. They're supposed to last you a while, so why not have something a little more luxurious? The Buffy Cloud comforter is a sustainable comforter made from recycled fiber and eucalyptus. Mashable Shopping Reporter Leah Stodart reviewed it here, calling it "the first piece of bedding I've used that actually feels kind of dreamy." Snag a full/queen size comforter for $195 at Buffy.

A trusty pet camera

Credit: Furbo

If you're anything like us, you view your pet like it's your actual child. We support that. Now, you can up your pet parent game by picking up a Furbo pet camera. Not only does it livestream what your pet is up to while you aren't home straight to your phone, but it also has the ability to toss treats and produce two-way audio for quick check-ins. This pet camera is often on sale, so check for the latest price at Amazon.

A reusable water bottle

Credit: Hydroflask

It's always a good time to get more serious about hydration. A HydroFlask is a perfect way to make sure you have a cool (or hot) beverage on-hand, and they're super durable during outdoorsy activities. Grab one for $49.95 at Amazon.

Elegant chopsticks

Credit: Pingto

Step up your take-out game and do right by the environment with a set of elegant, reusable chopsticks. The bundle of six bamboo chopsticks comes in two color palettes and retails for $32.

Local flavors delivered

Credit: Goldbelly

Speaking of take-out: if you’ve maxed out your city’s culinary offerings, see what’s available from the rest of the country. Goldbelly makes it possible to order meals and gifts from restaurants around the United States. No matter your craving, a Goldbelly gift card at any price point is bound to satisfy.

A habit tracker

Credit: MochiThings

You’re one year older, so it's time to get your shit in order and form some healthy habits. Whether there’s an exercise regimen you’re hoping to stick to, a project you want to finish, or a vice you’re trying to quit, this weekly habit tracker will keep you on track without judgment. It only costs $10.95 to become a better person.

Mashable Deals

Want more hand-picked deals in your inbox?

Sign up for Mashable's daily Deals newsletter.

By signing up you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Thanks for signing up!

A tiny bag

Credit: Nanobag

There’s running errands and there’s running errands. If you’re prone to getting in a few miles before you stop at the grocery store, ask for a Nanobag, a tote bag that can fold up into a pocket-size ball. The standard size starts at $13.95 and comes in ten different colors and patterns.

A photo printer

Credit: Canon

Have some photos on your phone or Instagram that you want to pin to your fridge? Ask for the Canon SELPHY CP1500 Compact Photo Printer ($139). This sleek gadget connects to your Android or iPhone through WiFi, SD card, or USB stick and prints out your favorite pics in a layout design of your choosing. The printing isn’t instant (the color ink layers print one at a time), but the quality of the final product makes it worth the wait.

Stronger abs

Credit: Plankpad

Who says ab workouts can’t be fun? (Most people). The Plankpad PRO ($129) turns core exercises into games through the specialty balance board and synchronized app. In addition to games, the app also has the standard exercise series if you’d prefer to suffer through it without some silly graphics to distract you.

An inconspicuous fanny pack

Credit: FlipBelt

Whether you’re going for a run or heading to a music festival, keep your necessities at the ready with a FlipBelt Zipper pack. This handy belt can hold your phone, money, credit card, keys, and all sorts of everyday necessities. Coming in multiple sizes, the FlipBelt doesn’t bounce or chafe and is machine washable. Choose a color or pattern you like and add it to your Amazon cart for $39.

A new kind of jump rope

Credit: Crossrope

Turn traditional jump roping on its head with Crossrope. The weighted jump rope (available in 1/4, 1/2, one, and two-pound weight options) and associated app keep you on your toes and strengthen your entire body through guided workouts. For those with downstairs neighbors or curious pets, the weighted ropeless option provides a silent solution for an otherwise noisy activity. Upgrade to the Bluetooth-connected AMP handles for a more individualized experience.

A cookie cutter of your pet

Credit: FormaCookieCutters

Celebrate your favorite furry creature by eating their face — in a good way. Send in a photo of your best pet friend to this Etsy store and get a four-inch-wide, food-safe PLA cookie cutter of their likeness in return. Whether you’re taking care of the baking or you’re leaving the prep work for the recipient, you’re going to be hailed as an absolute gift-giving wizard. Order these custom birthday gifts for $30 from Etsy seller the FormaCookieCutters.

Authentic chai

Credit: Kolkata Chai

Not satisfied with supermarket-bought chai? Get the real thing from New York-based chai-preneurs at Kolkata Chai. This small business will send authentic chai straight to your door with the Chai Trio Variety Pack ($62) or the Chai Starter Kit ($45). For devoted chai drinkers, Kolkata Chai offers subscription packages to keep that tea coming.

New reading materials

Credit: Getty Images / iStock / Extreme-Photographer

Support independent bookstores from around the country with a gift card to Bookshop. Starting at $10, the gift cards can either be used to buy books from a specific shop you love, or the purchase can feed the site’s profit-sharing pool to benefit all of Bookshop's partner stores.

A one-of-a-kind planner

Credit: Papier

Are you a proud Type A over-planner and over-thinker? Or maybe your meticulously organized BFF is having a birthday soon? This planner can be customized with the recipient's name and three personal photos, and despite the personalization, this spiral-bound planner costs just $35.

A Lego set that doubles as decor

Credit: LEGO

One of our favorite gifts under $50 is this Lego Orchid that's fun to build and adds a nice touch of greenery to your space that feels more unique than a plastic plant. This set is part of the Lego Icons line, which also features succulents, a bonsai tree, and a bouquet, in case orchids aren't your thing.

An endless supply of veggies and herbs

Credit: AeroGarden

Whether you're an enthusiastic home chef, like a bit of greenery, or simply can't stand running to the grocery store every time a recipe calls for some cilantro, a hydroponic garden is a great way to keep veggies and herbs on hand, even if you don't have a green thumb. We're fans of AeroGarden, which has gardens that start at $57.72.

The smart temperature-controlled mug

Credit: Ember

There's a lot of debate about what makes a good gift, but getting something that is a) practical and b) something just extravagant enough that you'd never get it for yourself may be the infallibly perfect combo. We think for coffee and tea drinkers, that combo is found in the Ember Mug 2, which retails for $129.95. This temperature-controlled mug may be unnecessary (and expensive), but boy does it feel good to take a hot sip of coffee after forgetting you poured it an hour ago.

Year-round spa days

Credit: Molly Flores / Mashable

You can ask for a day at the spa, or you can ask for the gift of getting a facial whenever you want and from the comfort of your home. In her review of the device, Mashable's Deputy Reviews Editor Miller Kern wrote the TheraFace Pro is "a hell of a lot cheaper than getting regular professional facials, and I truly feel like I've received a spa treatment every time I use [it]."

Credit: Bethany Allard / Mashable

Instead of asking for the $600 Dyson Airwrap, you can get a product that performs nearly identically for half the price in the Shark FlexStyle (trust us, we tested them head to head). Pick up a version for textured hair or straighter hair for $299.99.

A necessary Nintendo Switch upgrade

Credit: Nintendo

It's never too late to upgrade your Switch set up, and the Pro controller can help you do just that. This controller is perfect for when you connect your device to a larger display, and it has the added bonus of zero Joy-Con drift.

Design-friendly humidifier

Credit: Vitruvi

There's something to be said for a product that can marry form and function, and this Vitruvi humidifier does just that. Admittedly, $229 is probably a hefty price for a humidifier you're buying for yourself, but it's a great splurge gift if you prefer your household appliances not be eyesores.

A custom neon sign

Credit: GITM Store

Pick out a funny phrase, inside joke, or a family name and get a custom sign in as little as one week. It might sound too good to be true, but Mashable editors have ordered from this Amazon storefront before and had a great experience. In fact, this is one of our favorite undiscovered gems on Amazon, and you can buy signs for as little as $53.96.

A tea and coffee lover's best friend

Credit: Cosori

There's a certain electric gooseneck kettle that's beloved by design nerds, but that's also a tad overpriced (more than a tad, really). Instead, make the smart choice and opt for the infinitely more practical Cosori Electric Gooseneck Kettle. It still has plenty of charm — not to mention pre-set buttons for tea, coffee, and boiling water — and it's available via Prime for $69.99 or less.

Enjoy artisanal cocktails at home

Credit: Shaker & Spoon

Why go out for overpriced cocktails when you can make them at home? Shaker & Spoon sends you a new cocktail kit every month with all the ingredients you need to make 12 delicious cocktails. All you need to do is buy the alcohol and follow the recipes to recreate the same cocktails mixed up by award-winning bartenders. The company also makes it easy to give a subscription via email, so no excuses. Subscriptions start at $59 per month.

Learn something new

Credit: Coursehorse

You’ve successfully completed one more trip around the sun, so to celebrate, develop a new skill or indulge a passion by taking an IRL class on the subject of your choice. Coursehorse partners with real-world instructors and schools in major cities to offer nearly 70,000 classes in subjects such as art, language, music, cooking, self-defense, gardening, and anything else you could possibly want.

Affordable no-worry earbuds

Credit: Anker

Worried your earbuds will fall out of your ears and be lost forever? Get peace of mind with the affordable Soundcore Sport X10 wireless earbuds ($79.99). Designed for athletes but perfect for anyone, these headphones hook around your ears and stay put no matter how sweaty or active you get (a fact we can personally attest to). Keep them in their case for on-the-go charging.