Coming up on Carte Blanche‎ on M-Net & M-Net HD [101], Sunday 28 July 2024 at 19:00

A Predator’s Grip

Derek Bezuidenhout was a gymnastics coach popular with his colleagues and students. But for ten years, Bezuidenhout allegedly physically, sexually and emotionally abused multiple gymnasts at a club in the Free State. When his alleged crimes were uncovered, he took his own life. Red flags about Bezuidenhout’s conduct started early in his career but no one believed the children, and the club failed to investigate the allegations. Now, several of Bezuidenhout’s victims are speaking out about the predator who groomed and targeted them for years while the club and the Gymnastics Federation allegedly stood idle. Carte Blanche investigates why Bezuidenhout’s alleged abuse was permitted to continue for so long.

Producer: Tarryn Crossman

Presenter: Lourensa Eckard

Watch the Trailer

Khayelitsha

In June this year, four-year-old Enzokuhle Dladlu was playing outside on the street in Khayelitsha when four gunmen entered a barbershop in her neighbourhood and opened fire. One man and three children were killed in the shooting: Enzokuhle was one of them. In Khayelitsha, these mass shootings have become tragically common as rival gangs force businesses and civilians alike to pay protection fees or risk being killed. In a new report, the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organised Crime has identified four growing extortion economies in the province, including transport, construction and township economies. Carte Blanche examines how protection rackets in Khayelitsha are expanding their illicit business portfolio, targeting street vendors, spaza shops, and even churches.

Producer: Catherine Rice

Presenter: Govan Whittles

Watch the Trailer

Wimbledon Wonder

At just 12 years old, Limpopo’s Kgothatso Montjane – who was born with a congenital deformity – had her leg amputated. But she refused to be deterred. An energetic child with big dreams, she first pursued competitive ballroom and Latin American dance, despite her disability. That is until her schoolteachers introduced her to wheelchair tennis. It was a decision that would change her life and see her become one of the country’s best players. Now, she’s a three-time wheelchair tennis grand slam champion and she’s eager to pay it forward and give other athletes the same opportunities to succeed.

Producer: Sinethemba Nogude

Presenter: Macfarlane Moleli

Carte Blanche: The Podcast

Unique stories. Unique perspectives. Carte Blanche: The Podcast delves beneath the headlines into South African and global issues, bringing you the stories that matter. Like what you hear? Drop us a rating or review.

Want to listen to Carte Blanche: The Podcast on the go? You can find us on Spotify, Apple Podcasts and many other major podcast platforms.

Join the conversation using #CarteBlanche on:

Facebook | Twitter | Instagram | YouTube | Website

Please note Carte Blanche line-ups are subject to change.