Arabic-language television news channel

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent, third-party sources. (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted. (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

(Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Television channel

RT Arabic, formerly known as Rusiya Al-Yaum (Arabic: روسيا اليوم, lit.'Russia Today'[1]) is a Russian state-owned free-to-air television news channel broadcasting in Arabic and headquartered in Moscow, Russia.[2] Rusiya Al-Yaum started broadcasting on 4 May 2007. The parent company of RT Arabic is TV-Novosti, which is an Autonomous Non-Commercial Organization owned by the Russian Federation.

The channel covers a wide variety of events worldwide from the point of view of the Russian government. It also features interviews, debates and stories about cultural life in Russia and major cities.

History

“Rusiya Al-Yaum” was first conceived in February 2006 following the launch of its English counterpart RT in December 2005. Test broadcasts began on May 4, 2007, with a full launch being made later. By this point, it used satellites to broadcast across the Middle East, North Africa and Europe, with a potential audience of 350 million people. The channel can also be watched on the Internet. As of November 2012, it was available on myTV, an over-the-top technology platform in North and South America.[3]

Editor-in-chief

Previously, when ANO TV-Novosti announced plans to launch an Arabic-language channel, the editor-in-chief's position was taken by Akram Khuzam, who had previously been Al Jazeera's former Moscow Bureau chief. He eventually decided to move back to Syria, leaving Margarita Simonyan, RT editor-in-chief, to be appointed as his successor. In her new post, Margarita Simonyan became responsible for the work of RT's English and Arabic channels. Aydar Aganin was appointed Deputy Editor-in-chief of the Arabic channel.[4]

Demographics

The channel staff includes Russian and Arab journalists, Russian Arabists and Orientalists, overall having more than 500 employees including natives of Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Iraq, Yemen, Lebanon, Mauritania, Morocco, Palestine, Syria, Sudan, Tunisia, Oman and other countries. The channel has correspondents in Lebanon, Palestine, Iraq, Egypt, Israel, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States. The channel also stated in 2007 that it planned to get its own exclusive materials from Syria, Jordan and Iraq in the near future.[5]

Assessment and reactions

RT Arabic, along with other RT channels, has been subject to criticism for its explicit connections with the Russian government. The parent company of RT, TV-Novosti, is registered as a state-owned ANO. According to figures from the Russian Ministry of Justice, TV-Novosti, the Russian state provides 176.7 billion rubles in financing and 42.3 million rubles in other funding.[6]

On November 9, 2017, RT announced that it had been given a notice deadline to register under the U.S. Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) by the U.S. Justice Department.[7] Although the U.S. Justice Department has never finalized the demand nor made it public, the action has generated a series of reactions from RT and the Russian government. Margarita Simonyan referred to this letter as a "cannibalistic deadline" and argued that this was an attempt to limit RT's functionalities.[8] Top Russian officials have also reiterated their stand with RT on this matter, and have stated that a retaliation was likely to follow on U.S. foreign media.