Peter has always loved music, even in the womb. One Sunday afternoon as we watched the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, I remember seeing him kick through Claire’s belly for the entire performance! Now, I’ll throw on a record and dance around the apartment with him, soaring around the living room as he smiles. I want to start making a lullaby album for him by turning songs that mean something to our family into lighter, more sleep friendly versions. Stay tuned to see the following songs come to life!

Lullaby List

Violin Concerto in D, Op. 35 – Tchaikovsky

This is one of Claire’s favorite classical pieces. It is in fact one of the pieces played on that day we went to see the orchestra in Baltimore. I love putting this record on now with Peter, and dancing around pretending we are in a Russian palace. The main theme also sounds strikingly similar to this Star Wars theme.

Cante y Dance – Pink Martini

This song comes from my favorite Pink Martini record, Hey Eugene! It has a breezy melody that lifts you right up, as if you were sitting on a windy beach basking in the sunshine. The chorus translates to “Sing and dance: where life takes us, God only knows.” This song is perfect.

Us Against the World – Coldplay

Another of Claire’s favorites, this song’s title took on a new meaning for me when Peter was born. I can’t wait for him to take on the world, with us supporting him every step of the way!

Oceans (Where Feet May Fail) – Hillsong

You can’t help but be moved by this song. It is incredible. And of course it is a Peter song, as it calls forth the story of St. Peter walking on water to meet the Lord.

Home – Ingrid Michaelson

I have a soft spot for Ingrid Michaelson and when we first started dating, Claire had just got her album Lights Out. This opener reminds me of going to Claire’s parents to ask for their permission to marry her, and the subsequent joy we felt as we drove back home, reveling in what was to come.

Be Still/ Fix You – The Killers/ Coldplay

We found out that we both loved the album Battle Born by The Killers. When I first heard this song, I ran to the piano and was happy to hear that it was in the same key as Fix You by Coldplay. I’m excited to do a mashup/ reprisal cover that is perfect for a lullaby.

Always – Switchfoot

Back when we were dating, before I left Claire’s apartment for the night I would sing her a song. She had never heard this one and really enjoyed it. Switchfoot is my favorite band, so I had to include a song by them on this list.

You Speak – Audrey Assad

This is a powerful song from a powerful album, Fortunate Fall. This album was on repeat for 11 hours during Peter’s birth, and we still love the message and the music from this amazing artist.

We Are One – Mike Couche

I wrote this song for Claire and she expressed her desire to have it be our first dance at our wedding. Whenever we hear or sing it, we are transported back to that day with all of its beauty and goodness. It is also one of the first songs that I sang to Peter when he was home from the hospital to calm him.

– M