Written by Diana Sánchez

In Francois Truffaut’s film Bed and Board, Antoine Doinel (Jean-Pierre Leaud) attempts to write a book about his tumultuous childhood, seeking the advice of his wife Christine Darbon (Claude Jade). All she can say is “a work of art can’t be a settling of old scores; if it is, then it’s not a work of art.” Francois Truffaut’s semi-autographical series of Antoine Doinel, chronicled in five segments, The 400 Blows (1959), Love at Twenty: Antoine and Colette (1962), Stolen Kisses (1968), Bed and Board (1970), and Love on the Run (1979), are marvelous works of art. Truffaut slowly came to settle old scores through the colorful canvas of Leaud’s ingenious features and superb acting; Truffaut’s cinematic alter-ego. The series are downright absorbing, funny, romantic, and historic. Truffaut carried out a constant theme and emotion: how a character may cope in a flourishing France, crystallizing an entire movement up to the 80’s. Just think of the Antoine Doinel series as the original and talented version of Richard Linklater’s Boyhood idea.

Since the beginning, the Antoine Doinel of Truffuat’s emblematic first feature would only be a frozen image of childhood in post-war France. The 400 Blows ends with an ambiguous tracking shot of Antoine at the beach. It was a detailed sketch of Truffaut’s young and damaging years. Each Antoine Doinel film personifies a historic moment, and the 400 Blows marks the beginning of a new cinema. In contrast with his French colleagues, who crafted characters rather political and revolutionaries, Truffaut focused on designing his political character as a misfit in society. Antoine Doinel doesn’t move along the societal waves, he moves to his own current. In two decades, Antoine never grows up emotionally or mentally, only physically. Leaud maintains intact the innocent image of Antoine and the symbol of French New Wave, no matter its apparent physical change. One may be ambivalent of these series– if utterly obsessed and seduced by the ambiguity of the 400 ending– as Truffaut easily destroys audience’s imaginative future of older Antoine. In the end, the series naturally work because Antoine is a representation of luck, charm, and ingenuousness.

Truffaut didn’t plan the adventures of Antoine Doinel, until a short film Antoine and Colette in Love at Twenty, where he depicts Doinel now as a teenager having his first love and professional experience. Truffaut settles more obstacles and psychological crises on the character. Antoine lingers on nostalgia, unresolved matters, and thus reflecting this on his lovers and decisions. He has the mind and soul of a child; the child we once saw in The 400 Blows. Here is a character who persists on personifying the end of childhood and Truffaut’s adulthood and his more joyful years. The character Antoine is part of Truffaut, but not entirely; a part of Lead, but not wholly, it’s a piece of you, me, and everybody.

Each series have a rather aimless, yet never frivolous plot. Six years later, Truffaut directs Stolen Kisses, where he comments on the Cinémathèque Française incident. The May of 1968 marked Henry Langlois’, the director of the Cinémathèque Française, substitution with Pierre Barbin– the change was orchestrated by the government and the Ministry of Culture. Kisses is dedicated to the everlasting film preservation made by Langlois. In other words, dedicated to the love of cinema. Two years later, Bed and Board, then Love on the Run nine years later. And as we witness Truffaut’s comedic and meticulous character development, we know that France is changing too. Antoine’s mischievous charm leads him to incredibly comical, whimsical, and melancholy circumstances that survey his morality. Truffaut makes Antoine take different jobs and fail at each one of them. He works at a record company in Antoine and Colette. He is a detective, shoe salesman, and TV repair man in Stolen Kisses. Antoine is pure magic, even a magician himself on-screen, justified by his first job in Bed and Board as he transforms white flowers into different colors. He toys with work and love as if it were magic. Antoine’s love affairs are ironic, dismal, and childish. After being released from the military, the first thing he does is seek emotional refuge in a prostitute. In Stolen Kisses, Antoine falls in love with the wife of his boss. In Bed and Board, a Japanese women seduces Antoine, and Antoine has no choice but to cheat on his wife Christine.