There’s no friends and family deal at this royal inn.

King Charles III is “miffed” at his son, Prince William, after the 74-year-old ruler was informed he would have to shell out a hunk of cash to stay at the family’s Welsh holiday home, according to a new report.

The Prince of Wales, 41, plans to rent out the quaint cottage, which the king purchased in 2007 for an estimated $1.5 million, and has since renovated with the help of architect Craig Hamilton and input from Queen Camilla and her interior designer sister Annabel Elliot, The Mail on Sunday has reported.

After Queen Elizabeth II’s death at 96 last year, Prince William took over the Llwynywermod property, located in Brecon Beacons National Park, where King Charles has apparently stayed for a week or two every summer.

Now that the prince has taken over ownership of the three-bedroom lodging, he will allegedly be renting it out as a holiday home despite the king’s alleged “disappointment.”

“The King was quite miffed but that was the deal,” an anonymous source dished to the UK outlet.

“It means he can continue to stay there but he will pay rent to the Duchy and the rest of the time it will be rented out.”

The monarch traditionally spent summer vacations at Llwynywermod — but William opted not to renew his father’s lease, and will require his pops to fetch his personal belongings from the space, according to the insider.

The picturesque bungalow — built on 192 sprawling acres of land — will supposedly set to be open to vacationers after September, adding to the impressive list of royal real estate marketed for rent nearby.

The sustainable cottage, equipped with a wood-chip broiler, includes a roomy barn with dining room seating for up to 16 guests, as well as custom carpeting inspired by 18th Century Welsh blanket design.

The gardens are blooming with roses, honeysuckle and jasmine in addition to six maple trees that were used in Kate and William’s 2011 wedding, which have been replanted on the cottage grounds.

“The King has agreed to pay for the topiary upkeep as he doesn’t want to see all the good work in the grounds go to waste,” the source added.

The Post has reached out to reps for the Prince and Princess of Wales for comment.

Meanwhile, royal insiders have previously revealed that Kate and William want to support the tourist economy and have rented out properties and rooms to do their part.

But lately, the couple have been in hot water, as tensions run high within the royal family amid overseas drama with Prince Harry and Meghan Markle.

Most recently, royals expert and author Valentine Low speculated that Kate hoped to be a peacemaker between the feuding brothers.

“She was often the peacemaker, or tried to be the peacemaker, with Harry,” Low said on a recent episode of the “Scandal Mongers” podcast.

“You saw that after Philip’s funeral, when she kind of brought the brothers together.”