University (Metro Rail)

University (formerly South Campus until September 1, 2003) is a Buffalo Metro Rail station located near the intersection of Main Street and Niagara Falls Boulevard on the University at Buffalo South Campus and is not only a major transfer point betw…

Prospect Point Park observation tower

The Prospect Point Park observation tower is a tower located in Niagara Falls, New York, USA and just east of the American Falls.

City Honors School

City Honors School at Fosdick-Masten Park, known colloquially as City Honors, or CHS, is a college preparatory school in Buffalo, New York. City Honors is part of the Buffalo Public Schools system. The school was founded in 1975 by three faculty mem…

Buffalo and Erie County Botanical Gardens

The Buffalo and Erie County Botanical Gardens are botanical gardens located within South Park in Buffalo, New York, USA. These gardens are the product of landscaping architect Frederick Law Olmsted, glass-house architects Lord & Burnham, and botanis…

Buffalo Museum of Science

Buffalo Museum of Science is a science museum located at Martin Luther King, Jr. Park in Buffalo, New York USA, northeast of the downtown district, near the Kensington Expressway. The historic building was designed by August Esenwein and James A.

Buffalo Metropolitan Transportation Center

The Buffalo Metropolitan Transportation Center is located on the southeast corner of North Division and Ellicott Streets in Downtown Buffalo, New York.

Boulevard Mall

Boulevard Mall, which opened in 1962, is a shopping mall located north of City of Buffalo at the western edge of the Town of Amherst in Erie County, New York, USA. The name derives from its location on Niagara Falls Boulevard (U.S. Route 62), which …

Blasdell, New York

Blasdell is a village in Erie County, New York, United States. The population was 2,553 according to the year 2010 census. The name is derived from Herman Blasdell, the first station master of the Erie and Pennsylvania railroad depot.

Bennett High School (Buffalo, New York)

Bennett High School is located in the University Heights section of Buffalo, New York. The current principal is Bert Stevenson. It is named for Lewis J. Bennett, who donated the land for the school and for All High Stadium. Portions of the movie The…

Battle of Fort Erie (1866)

The Battle of Fort Erie was a bloody skirmish in the afternoon immediately following the Battle of Ridgeway on June 2, 1866 in Canada West.

All-High Stadium

All-High Stadium (Robert E. Rich All-High Stadium) is a football stadium in Buffalo, New York. It was opened in 1926, and received a Memorial Day dedication on May 29, 1929. The stadium was modeled after classic European soccer stadiums of the time.…

Toronto Power Generating Station

The Toronto Power Generating Station is a former generating station located along the Niagara River in Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada, slightly upstream from the newer Rankine power station. Completed in 1906 in the Beaux-Arts-style, the station was…

South Grand Island Bridge

The South Grand Island Bridge is a pair of twin two-lane truss arch bridges spanning the Niagara River between Tonawanda and Grand Island in New York, United States. Each bridge carries one direction of Interstate 190 (I-190) and New York State Rout…

Lafayette Square (Buffalo)

Lafayette Square (formerly Court House Park or Courthouse Square) is a park in the center of downtown Buffalo, Erie County, New York, United States that hosts a Civil War monument. The block, which was once square, is lined by many of the city's tal…

Falls Incline Railway

The Falls Incline Railway, originally known as the Horseshoe Falls Incline is a funicular railway in the city of Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada. It is located beside Niagara Falls at the Horseshoe Falls. The line was built in 1966 for the Niagara Pa…

Derby, New York

Derby, New York is a hamlet in Erie County, New York, USA. It is the Postal Address for much of the Town of Evans, within which Derby is fully contained. The Derby zip code is 14047. Derby is also home to the North Evans fire District which includes…