In 1876, Wilfrid Laurier ordered the construction of this beautiful Victorian style house according to the plans of architect Louis Caron, Sr. The Laurier couple lived in this house until 1897, the year they left to establish themselves permanently in Ottawa. However, the Laurier's remained the owners of their home to which they regularly came back during the summer season as well as during holidays.

In 1928, the house was sold to two Montreal businessmen who in turn gave it to the Government of Quebec under the condition that it be transformed into a museum in honor of Sir Wilfrid Laurier. The Musée Laurier (Laurier Museum) opened its doors in 1929.

Moreover, the lovely home of this renowned Prime Minister of Canada was officially listed as a Monument Historique du Québec (Historical Monument of Quebec) in 1989 and as a National Historic Site of Canada in 2000.

Click to enlarge images.

1. In the parlor is displayed the original furniture, of Neo-Grec inspiration, as well as the square grand piano (dates 1887) which belonged to Lady Laurier.

2. The ground level allows one to admire the spacious apartments in which the Laurier couple lived.

3. The Laurier's bedroom, which was moved to the ground level in 1914, allows one to discover Victorian style furniture of Neo-Renaissance type.

4. Sir Wilfrid Laurier would often spend time in the library where he would do some reading, one of his great passions.

5. A room on the first floor is dedicated to a permanent exhibition revealing the various aspects of Sir Wilfrid Laurier's personality.

6. Two rooms on the first floor are dedicated to temporary exhibitions which, year after year, have as a theme the fascinating world of politics.

WILFRID LAURIER BIOGRAPHY

Wilfrid Laurier was born in Saint-Lin, Quebec, on November 20, 1841. He did his law studies at McGill University in Montreal and three years later, he opened his lawyer's office in Arthabaska.

In 1871, he became deputy of the provincial Liberal Party. He then pursued his career at the Federal level. In 1887, Wilfrid Laurier was appointed Chief of the Liberal Party of Canada. In 1896, he became the first French Canadian to accede to the prestigious office of Prime Minister of Canada. Fifteen years later, he lost this title; however, he remained Chief of the Liberal Party of Canada. At the same time, he became the Chief of Opposition and this, until his death on February 17, 1919.