Laurier University is one of Canada’s finest undergraduate universities that offers the largest Laurier business degree co-op program in Canada. It is a public university named after Sir Wilfrid Laurier, the seventh Prime Minister of Canada. Laurier first opened as the Evangelical Lutheran Seminary in Waterloo more than 100 years ago in 1911. In 1973 it was renamed from the Waterloo Lutheran University to Sir Wilfrid Laurier University. The Laurier campus in Brantford was opened in 1999. Laurier athletic complex is open for all WLU students enrolled in various Wilfrid Laurier University courses and Wilfrid Laurier University programs. Laurier athletic complex is located on the Waterloo campus and offers some of the finest facilities in Canada to all WLU students on the Wilfrid Laurier University campus.

When was Wilfrid Laurier University Established?

Sir Wilfrid Laurier University was established as Waterloo Lutheran University in 1911.

Where is Wilfrid Laurier University?

Wilfrid Laurier University (WLU) is located in Waterloo, Ontario. There are two biggest Laurier campuses in Waterloo and Brantford, but the college also has a Faculty of Social Work in Kitchener and a weekend Wilfrid Laurier University MBA program in Toronto. In 2019, Laurier established the first phase of its presence in Milton. All the Laurier campuses and locations of WLU University are about an hours’ drive away from Toronto, Canada’s biggest city.

Wilfrid Laurier University Accreditation

Wilfrid Laurier University is the first university in Canada to receive accreditation from Imagine Canada under The Standards Program. This signifies that WLU is operating at the highest standards in board governance, financial accountability and transparency, fundraising, staff management, and volunteer involvement. The Lazaridis School of Business and Economics is accredited to the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB).

Education at Wilfrid Laurier University

WLU University offers 100+ undergraduate and graduate-level degree programs in the field of business, communication studies, Laurier psychology, criminology, economics, and biology to over 19,500 WLU students full-time students from all around the world. The Wilfrid Laurier University acceptance rate is 70%.

Why Choose Wilfrid Laurier University?

Laurier College is one of the best global universities in Canada providing the largest Laurier business degree co-op programs in the country. It has over 69 partner institutions across 28 countries for various exchange programs. The other facts and figures for Laurier are mentioned below:

Total Laurier student enrollment

20,000

Total campuses

6

Faulty: Student ratio

1:25

Number of courses/ programs

100+

Alumni candidates

1,00,000+

Number of faculties

9

Co-op and Employment Facts

Employment rate: 98%

The number of employers at Laurier: 900

Total number of jobs every year: 4900

The employment rate for Laurier Business and Economics co-op: 99.8%

Events and workshops held at Laurier’s Career Centre every year: 800+

Wilfrid Laurier University Campuses & Locations

The Sir Wilfrid Laurier University offers university-level education through its various campuses located across Canada. It has several campuses in Canada and also an overseas campus in Chongqing, China.

Waterloo Campus: Out of the 19,000 graduate and undergraduate students enrolled in WLU, 16,000 are enrolled at the Waterloo campus. It has the faculties of Arts, Music, Science, Education, Graduate Studies, and the Lazaridis School of Business and Economics.

Brantford Campus: More than 3,000 Laurier students are enrolled in the Brantford campus. This campus is known for its Liberal Arts and Human and Social Sciences education.

Milton Campus: WLU University offers a high-quality academic and student experience along the Toronto-Waterloo Innovation Corridor which leads to the fast-growing community of Milton.

Kitchener Office: The Kitchener office was opened in 2006 and has close to 300 graduate students enrolled in the social work programs based in the heart of the downtown area. This office is located minutes away from Laurier’s Waterloo campus.

Toronto Office: Laurier Toronto provides the staff, faculty, alumni, and WLU students with free space in the heart of downtown Toronto. The space is multi-functional and has hosted roundtables, poetry readings, receptions, professional development sessions, workshops, and more. It offers part-time alternate weekend Wilfrid Laurier University programs with over 250 MBA student enrollments each year.

Yellowknife Office: Wilfrid University operates a research office in Yellowknife. The office was opened in 2017 and allows researchers associated with the partnership to be based out of the Northwest Territories full-time.

Faculties and Departments at Wilfrid Laurier University

Wilfrid Laurier University offers a range of full- and part-time graduate and undergraduate degree programs through its 9 faculties and one federated institution. These faculties are spread across its multiple campuses at Waterloo, Kitchener, Brantford, and other Waterloo locations. All faculties and institutions at Wilfrid Laurier University are listed below:

Faculty of Arts

Faculty of Education

Faculty of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies

Faculty of Music

Faculty of Science

Lazaridis School of Business and Economics

Faculty of Human and Social Sciences

Faculty of Liberal Arts

Lyle S. Hallman Faculty of Social Work

School of International Policy and Governance

Martin Luther University College

Financial Aid and Scholarships at Wilfrid Laurier University

Wilfrid Laurier University offers financial support to international students in the form of scholarships and part-time employment. Several competitive scholarships, awards, and bursaries are also available that can be applied by filling an online student profile. These awards are granted based on the information provided such as interests, financial need, academic achievement, and more. Some of the scholarships for Wilfrid Laurier University international students are as follows:

Entrance Scholarships: These scholarships are based on the final grades of the students and accessed when the student applies for any program at Wilfrid Laurier University. No separate application is needed. The President’s Gold entrance scholarship is a renewable scholarship worth $5,000 CAD per year and is renewed if the applicant meets the renewal requirements annually.

New $10,000 Scholarships: These scholarships are provided to first-year undergraduate students. Several scholarships worth $10,000 are offered to students maintaining the eligibility requirements. It is a renewable scholarship.

Upper-Year Scholarships: International students are automatically considered for these scholarships based on the grade point average (GPA) of the Laurier courses from the previous academic year. Students with a GPA of 10.0 (approximately 80%) and above are generally awarded these scholarships. The scholarship amount ranges between $500 and $1,500 CAD annually.

Inspiring Lives Scholarships: Multiple scholarships are awarded to incoming international students who demonstrate leadership and purpose in their respective communities through extracurricular activities and more.

Student Services

Wilfrid Laurier University provides a range of support and services to all students on-campus. These academic and campus services are provided for the overall development and growth of the students. Listed below are some of the amenities provided at different levels at Wilfrid Laurier University:

Residence and Dining

Financial Aid Services

Health and Wellness Center

Indigenous Initiatives and Services

Academic Advising and Support

Tech Services

Enrolment Services

Varsity Athletics

Fitness and Recreation

International Student Support

Library

Intramurals and Club Sports

Wilfrid Laurier University Library Stats

Laurier Student study spots in the Wilfrid Laurier University Library: 1000

Number of electronic journals in the Wilfrid Laurier University Library: 37,000

Laurier’s Residence & Housing for International Students

Laurier College offers dormitory and apartment-style housing facilities to the students on all its campuses. The residence facility is guaranteed for all first-year students. The residency costs for the different WLU campuses are given below: