The Hansal Mehta directed biopic "Shahid" which is based on the life of a lawyer and human activist has impressed critics with its story-line and stellar performances of the actors.

Most of the critics have given more than four stars for the film upon its release calling it a "one of the best Indian films".

The social media buzz surrounding the film "Shahid" is also very positive.

Raj Kumar Yadav plays the role of Shahid Azmi, the lead character in the film and has impressed critics with his brilliant performance.

Read the critics review below:

Saibal Chatterjee of NDTVsaid: "Gritty, gutsy, bold and brave are words that are sometimes bandied about in the context of films. But rare is the Indian film that actually measures up to those adjectives. Hansal Mehta's Shahid does.

"The film details the facts of the amazing and tragic life of the intrepid TADA detainee-turned-human rights lawyer Shahid Azmi, who was killed in cold blood in early 2010 for defending a 26/11 accused (who, incidentally, was acquitted two and a half years later).

"Shahid deserves more than just a standing ovation. It deserves accolades for standing up to be counted and narrating the kind of story that is usually buried under mainstream media cacophony.

"The fact that Shahid has got to a multiplex near you should also be applauded and made the most of. Go and watch the film - it is one of the most important films to come out of Mumbai in a long, long time."

Madhureeta Mukherjee of The Times of Indiasaid: "You can escape a terror attack. You can fight terrorism. But what happens when you are branded a 'Terrorist' for life? On the grounds that your name reads 'Zahir', 'Faheem', 'Khan', 'Shaikh' (and not Matthew or Donald? God help!).

"Even if you're acquitted, the right to live a life in fairness and dignity is permanently adjourned. Case closed! The story of 'Shahid' (fact remixed with fiction) confronts us with hard-hitting questions on religious fundamentalism, flawed legal investigations, and injustices suffered by the underdogs.

"Raj Kumar is superb; he peels layers to strip to the core of his character. He magnifies the most intense scenes with sheer brilliance of an understated, realistic performance. It warrants applause. And an unadulterated encore. Catch it if real cinema is what you crave.

"You might not like this film if gritty, real-life dramas are not your idea of entertaining cinema."

Mihir Fadnavis of Firstpostsaid: "Bollywood hardly ever churns out realism and even when the odd 'true story' comes along, it treads the commercialized tightrope. Hansal Mehta's Shahid is one exception to that rule because it chronicles an underappreciated man while still delivering an entertaining movie.

"Shahid is not a flawless movie and Mehta takes a few too many shortcuts in the process of telling Shahid Azmi's life story. But there's some real angst powering Azmi's story and it's tough to not admire a guy who went through what Azmi did and sought to act against daunting obstacles like human ignorance and an unacceptable law.

"Unlike the commercial hogwash that sloshes around movie screens every week, Shahid is a brave and ballsy film made for grown-ups who like a little intelligence in their entertainment."

Mohar Basu of Koimoi.comsaid: "I would strongly recommend you to watch Hansal Mehta's Shahid. Based on the controversial life of human rights lawyer Shahid Azmi, Mehta's tale is taut and convincingly told. Showcasing the grim side of police machinery, the film shows how the police doesn't shirk before victimizing the minority on the basis of mere suspicion.

"Raising potent questions about the prevalent attitudes, mores and laws in our country, especially TADA, Shahid is a quintessential humane story sketched with utter simplicity. It gently draws your attention beyond the media reported truths about the terrorist attacks which brand the rumored accomplices as terrorists. They are often just as victimized as the rest out the crowd, perhaps a little more bruised, a little more stigmatized!

"Shahid Azmi should be one of the most memorable dissidents of recent times and Hansal Mehta's filmShahid does justice in paying the perfect tribute to the slain activist! Quite aptly named, Sahid did turn out to be an angel for many who were serving years behind the bars based on needless false accusations!"

Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungamasaid: "A stunning documentation on the life and times of Shahid Azmi, SHAHID is brave, courageous and often disturbing and that's one of the prime reasons why it makes for a fascinating cinematic experience.

"With SHAHID, Hansal takes a giant leap as a storyteller, bringing his creativity out to the fore. By casting the most appropriate names for the parts, Hansal only cements the fact that it's the material that can sweep you off your feet.

"On the whole, SHAHID is a brave film. Its gripping story, exceptional execution and bravura performances continue to reverberate much after the screening is over. Strongly recommended!"