Before Living, the celebrated adaptation of Akira Kurosawa’s ’50s classic Ikiru, Kazuo Ishiguro’s last produced screenplay was 2005’s The White Countess, the final movie to be made by the storied team of producer Ismail Merchant and director James Ivory. (Merchant died a few months before the movie’s premiere.) Poorly received by both critics and audiences, the period piece revealed to Ishiguro that he, perhaps, wasn’t quite seasoned enough as a screenwriter. Never mind that a novel of his, The Remains of the Day, had already been adapted in the Merchant-Ivory family to Oscar-nominated success, or that in the same year as The White Countess’s release, he’d publish Never Let Me Go, one of the novels that would later win him the Nobel Prize in literature. Actually working in Hollywood required particular skills—both formally and socially—he hadn’t yet developed.

Fast-forward nearly two decades and here sits Ishiguro, a first-time Oscar nominee for Living. His canny, heartfelt take on a film that meant a great deal to him as a child has rightly brought him to a new stage in his career—“the next step,” as he puts it, in his development as a writer focused on expansion and growth. But competing in a category alongside returning nominees like Sarah Polley (Women Talking) and Christopher McQuarrie (Top Gun: Maverick), Ishiguro admits in this week’s Little Gold Men interview that he’s still working out his feelings on being in their company. Below you can listen to our full conversation and read excerpts on how he took on Kurosawa, his turbulent history in Hollywood, and what happened to FX’s canceled adaptation of Never Let Me Go.

Vanity Fair: How did you experience the road to this Oscar nomination, as someone coming in from the outside?

Kazuo Ishiguro: I know I’m not really a part of this filmmaking community that you know so well, David. And I’m aware from my last few visits to Los Angeles that it is a very tight-knit, very supportive community. They work together. I’m from outside of that. I have to say there’s a part of me that feels like I’m an imposter, becoming an Academy Award nominee when so many incredibly talented screenwriters and other filmmakers have been working for decades and have not received such an accolade. Part of me feels like this kind of fell on me. I mean, is this right? On the other hand, in my defense, my trajectory is a different one. It’s not a typical one, I’ve been thinking about stories for about 45 years, every single day.

It’s an incredible honor to get an Academy Award nomination now. I’ve received other things in the past; I’ve received the Nobel Prize in literature, I’ve received the Booker Prize. This seems to me another step on that journey. I don’t think of it as something different. I don’t think of it as something I did when I was moonlighting from my day job. It feels to me like a very logical step in what I’ve been doing. The natural thing that I had to do next.

How would you broadly describe your relationship to screenwriting?

I’ve dabbled with screenplays because I’ve just been a film fan. Right at the beginning of my writing career, after I finished my first novel in 1983, I was able to make a living as a writer because I was commissioned to write some television. I was kind of thinking, Is my life going to be as a screenwriter or is it going to be as a novelist? I was predominantly a novelist. This is probably the first time I fully initiated a screenplay myself.

Ikiru goes back a long way. I was a Japanese boy growing up in England. I knew no other Japanese kids, no other Japanese people apart from my parents in that part of England. It was very difficult to see any Japanese movies or read any Japanese books. I’m going back to the 1960s here…. Ikiru actually had a huge impact on me because as I was growing up as a teenager, as a student, so that question of what is important in life? How do you avoid wasting your life? Is life essentially meaningless? Do you just kind of get through it and just die? Do you just eat and sleep and reproduce and die? Is that it? Or is there some way to, some way to push back against that sense of emptiness? These are things a lot of young people think about, and although the movie was about an old guy dying of cancer, it made a big, big impact on me. I would say that it had a big impact on my books.

There was a part of me that wanted to very faithfully adapt the Kurosawa film. But of course, it’s a very split personality thing, adaptation—there’s another part of me that said, No, no, that won’t do. People might say it’s a masterpiece. I don’t care. That’s gonna go, that doesn’t work, I don’t like that tone. That third act just drags, you know? Of course as an egotistical artist, I’m used to getting my own way as a novelist. I had a whole bunch of stuff that I wanted to bring to the material.

Was any adaptation choice particularly difficult for you?

My feeling that this film had to be about Bill Nighy, that he had to be in that main part was a crucial part for me of how our film would differ from the original Kurosawa because it was a question of tone. It’s not exactly a criticism of the original Kurosawa film. Maybe it’s a question of taste, but I always thought about that original. Kurosawa is a great action director. I always wondered what that film would have been like had it been directed by Ozu, or one of those great home drama directors—it’s a genre in Japan, these domestic, quiet, understated dramas. I always wondered what that movie would have been like with a different main actor, somebody who didn’t obviously show his emotions so much. Somebody who would approach it in a kind of English way. Like Bill Nighy.

You previously wrote The White Countess for the screen. How do you look back on that? It’s a lesser remembered Merchant Ivory film now.

I have to take a lot of the blame for why The White Countess wasn’t a better movie. I think it’s beautifully shot by James Ivory. The circumstances were difficult. It was shot in China at a time when Western film crews didn’t really go to China. There were all kinds of cultural difficulties and misunderstandings. It was also a sad production in that Ismail Merchant died in post-production. Subsequently, Natasha Richardson, one of our great stars in that film, died of a freak accident not long afterwards. It’s a movie that’s got a lot of sad associations for me. But I didn’t perhaps understand screenplay writing. I was learning on the job. My friends Ismail Merchant and James Ivory really wanted me to write a screenplay and gave me that chance. I didn’t understand as much about screenwriting as I do today.

I take full responsibility for that. The interesting thing I’ve discovered is that if you’re a screenwriter, you’ve got to hit an interesting balance between being open to collaboration, working as part of a team, but at the same time, you can’t be too open. You’ve got to always put your cards firmly on the table, and argue for the things that you think are really important. To not do that is reneging on a crucial responsibility. There are moments when you’ve got to be really pigheaded. And then moments when you have to be egoless.

I also think of your decision to essentially cut the voiceover from Ikiru—which wouldn’t necessarily be the choice I would expect a novelist adapting the movie to make. But it’s a good example of making what I felt was a smart cinematic choice.

I sometimes really love voiceovers in cinema. I’m not dogmatic about that. I have a bit of a problem with omniscient narration, whether it’s in books or, or whether it’s in film. If there’s a narrator’s voice, I want to know who it is. I want to be able to associate it with one of the characters. That’s just me. There are all kinds of dimensions to that narration. How much of it is self-deception? How unreliable is this person? What’s the relationship between what the narrator says and what you’re seeing? So I don’t really like the God-like voice. that you get in the original Kurosawa. That was one of my first decisions. But I also wanted to go into the thing through the eyes of a young person from outside of that world; that he should be our second protagonist. He starts the film for us and finishes the film for us. But I didn’t want a narrator.

I was saddened to learn of a recent FX decision to not move forward with a Never Let Me Go adaptation. I’m not sure what your level of involvement was with that one, but I am generally interested in how you think of adaptations of your own work, and what happened with that one, maybe, as an example?

I was very disappointed. It had been greenlighted, there was a pilot that had been [00:28:00] shot, and then it just crashed. It wasn’t an adaptation of my novel. There was a Searchlight movie with Carey Mulligan and Keira Knightley and Andrew Garfield and, uh, Andrea Riseborough. I thought it was a super movie that is a faithful, fairly accurate adaptation of my novel. The FX series was going to be adjacent. The parallel would be the Fargo TV series. I was, I was really sorry that it’s not gonna work. I found the idea really interesting.

Perhaps I’m in a privileged position in that my books are pretty well known in their own right, and so I feel I can afford to say that when people take that material, they should take it somewhere. It should be slightly different. The story should evolve. Don’t just translate it like you’re translating it into French or German or something; bring something different to it. Because for me, it feels like a great thing, like we’ve had stories that are passed through the generations. Like myths and fairy tales—even like what we call genre in books and in cinema: a certain kind of story that gets told in different variations all the time. This is one of the really important things about storytelling, and as I was saying to you at the beginning, I just think all the time about stories and how they work. It would be a great honor if I could be part of that chain, if something I put out there was taken up and it evolved into something different. It’s almost like the old oral tradition of people telling a story, and it changes from campfire to campfire, from generation to generation.