The Undertones

“Teenage Kicks” is everything its title suggests it should be: an energetic romp that lasts no longer than the average youthful fumble but is all the sweeter for it. The Undertones formed in Londonderry in 1976 but the conservative climate in their home town left them struggling to find venues in

Song facts

Composer John O’Neill Genre Rock Album The Undertones Year of Release 1978 UK Chart Position 31

which to play. With little hope of finding a record deal they were on the verge of quitting when the small but influential Belfast label Good Vibrations took them on. They released “Teenage Kicks” as their debut single in September 1978 and although it failed to chart, it did attract the attention of a certain DJ by the name of John Peel. It’s easy to see why. A yearning tale of youthful lust which owes much to the pop-punk sound of the Buzzcocks, its greatest strength lies in its simplicity from the buzzsaw guitars to the two angst-ridden verses and the singalong chorus, there’s nothing out of place and no real room for improvement. Peel played it incessantly, helped the band win a major label deal with Sire and proclaimed it the greatest single ever. And 25 years on, he has yet to change his mind.

Listen to Fergal Sharkey on Teenage Kicks

Fergal Sharkey talks about how hard it was to get Teenage Kicks off the ground - "Our only hope was John Peel, and we sent him a copy - that was the only copy we sent anyone".

Other versions

Listen to Busted's cover version of Teenage Kicks.

Songwriting tips

Being on stage is nervewracking but part of the process. And, you never know who's watching. More in Performing

Don't waste your cash, make sure you're prepared when you go into the studio. More in In The Studio

Test your knowledge

Test your knowledge of Teenage Kicks and The Undertones.

TAKE THE CHALLENGE!

50 Annie's Song

Like this song? Try these...

This Charming Man

The Smiths

I Am The Resurrection

The Stone Roses

DON'T MISS Doves

Special guests on Dermot's show this week

What's on

Radio 2 Documentaries

Find out more about current and forthcoming documentaries on Radio 2.