Score Group PLC Strengths

They operate in five continents and within wide range of sectors which include oil and gas, nuclear and marine.

Established in 1982, Score Group PLC has experience of over 30 years.

They have strong employee base of 1700 and places importance on training with over 300 apprentices employed within the group.

They have largest stock of valves and actuators (80,000 in stock, $500 million in value).

In 2013 Score Europe was awarded Large Employer of the year by Skills Development Scotland.

Score Diagnostics Ltd. is leader in valve leak detection and monitoring. It uses Acoustic emissions (AE) leak detection technology in its MIDAS Valve Diagnostics range of products.

Above are the strengths in the SWOT Analysis of Score Group PLC. The strengths of Score Group PLC looks at the key internal factors of its business which gives it competitive advantage in the market and strengthens its position.

Score Group PLC Weaknesses

Oil and prices have declined majorly due to abundance of shale resources and efficient production. This can harm their business opportunities and profitability. Their profits fell by 29% due to low oil prices in 2014.

Industry confidence for oil and gas industry has declined. This is a concern for their business.

These were the weaknesses in the Score Group PLC SWOT Analysis. The weaknesses of a brand are certain aspects of its business which it can improve.

Score Group PLC Opportunities

There is opportunity in subsea services.

Opportunity lies in investment in infrastructure and research & development.

Above we covered the opportunities in Score Group PLC SWOT Analysis. The opportunities for any brand can include prospects of future growth.

Score Group PLC Threats

Various environmental laws and regulations are there in this industry and this creates a risk for the business as any unfavorable policy can harm business.

Large competitors.

The threats in the SWOT Analysis of Score Group PLC are as mentioned above. The threats for any business can be external factors which can negatively impact its business.

Hence this concludes the Score Group PLC SWOT analysis.

About Score Group PLC

The table below gives the brand overview along with its target market, segmentation, positioning & USP

Score Group PLC Overview Parent Company

Score Group PLC

Category

Engineering Services

Sector

Energy & Power

Tagline/ Slogan

Intelligent valve and gas turbine solutions

USP

Safe working and quality service

Score Group PLC STP Segmentation

Engineering Services

Target Market

Industrial

Positioning

Safe working and quality service

This article has been researched & authored by the Content & Research Team which comprises of MBA students, management professionals, and industry experts. It has been reviewed & published by the MBA Skool Team. The content on MBA Skool has been created for educational & academic purpose only.

Browse marketing analysis of more brands and companies similar to Score Group PLC. This section covers SWOT Analysis along with Segmentation, Target Market, Positioning & USP of more than 2000 brands from over 20 industry sectors.

Continue Reading: