Bang Bros American pornographic film studio

0 0

rank #2 · 2

Bang Bros is a pornographic film studio operating from Miami, Florida. It was founded in 2000 by Kristopher Hinson while a student at the University of Florida. He started Bangbus.com and later dropped out. It operates a network of 60 websites as of June 2018. The network is owned by WGCZ S.R.O., owners of Xvideos.com which purchased the network and its associated sites in 2017.

The Score Group American adult-entertainment publishing company

0 0

rank #3 · 1

Quad International, Inc., doing business as The Score Group, is a publishing company based in Miami, Florida that engages in the production and distribution of adult entertainment. Founded in 1991, The Score Group (TSG) publishes several monthly magazines including its flagship publication Score, and several others including Voluptuous, 18eighteen, Naughty Neighbors and Leg Sex. TSG also publishes quarterly magazines including, XL, 40something, 50Plus Milfs, 60Plus Milfs and New Cummers, as well as a mainstream men's magazine Looker. In addition it distributes adult content through its websites which include Scoreland.com, SCOREVideos.com, PornMegaLoad.com, Voluptuous.com, 18eighteen.com, XLgirls.com, LegSex.com, 40SomethingMag.com, 50PlusMilfs.com, 60PlusMilfs.com and NewCummers.com. It also produces and distributes full-length adult films under its Score Videos label.

1991 establishments in Florida · 100T

Magazine publishing companies of the United States · 139T

Adult magazine publishing companies · 11T

Helix Studios American gay pornographic film studio

0 0

rank #4 ·

Helix Studios is an American gay pornographic film studio. Founded in 2002 by Keith Miller and based in Las Vegas, Nevada, it primarily features twink performers. The company began in Fort Lauderdale, Florida as a maker of niche spanking films before transitioning to mainstream hardcore pornography in 2004 and relocating to San Francisco, California in 2006. They have primarily operated on a subscription business model since their inception and have released also their films in various other formats, including on DVD, video on demand, a Roku channel, pay-per-view, and a website.

NightMoves Award Adult entertainment industry award

0 0

rank #5 ·

The NightMoves Awards are given annually in the pornographic film industry by NightMoves, an Oldsmar, Florida-based magazine which was first published in 1987 and initially titled Sports South. The awards began in 1993 and were initially titled the Central Florida Adult Entertainment Awards. It is the third oldest continuously running adult awards show in the United States, after the AVN Awards and the XRCO Awards. It also marks the start of the porn industry's awards season. In addition to the show's national awards, local awards are also given to sexually oriented businesses and dancers in the Tampa Bay Area. Two awards are given for each national category: one which is chosen by fans and the other one which is chosen by the editors of NightMoves magazine. An online voting ballot is available for approximately three months every year for the fan's choice awards. Recipients of the editor's choice awards are chosen based on film reviews.

Annual events in Florida · 23T

American pornographic film awards · 27T

1993 establishments in Florida · 95T