Story & photos courtesy Lisa Hunter, Westfield Village

You don’t need a time machine to see what life was like for Ontario’s first settlers more than 200 years ago. You simply have to walk through the gates of time at Westfield Heritage Village! When you pass through those gates, you’ll meet all kinds of interesting characters - blacksmiths, musicians, farmers, cabinetmakers, shopkeepers, printers, innkeepers, boot makers and more, all living and working in Westfield’s village of homes, shops and public buildings. There is always something going on, and it’s a magnificent way to experience the thrills and trials of Ontario’s pioneers and founders.

Westfield Heritage Village is a 465-acre property within the City of Hamilton, midway between Cambridge and Hamilton, near Rockton, Ontario. The property was purchased in 1960 and in 1964 was officially opened with seven relocated and restored heritage buildings from Southern Ontario. It began as a community project initiated by Glenn Kilmer and Goldie MacDonell, two Brantford high school teachers, and it is managed by the Hamilton Conservation Authority. Operated year round as a living history museum, the Village provides special events for the general public, educational programs for students, unique heritage activities and wedding, business rentals and filming opportunities.

An average of 40,000 visitors come to Westfield each year for a wide range of programs, including nearly 12,000 students coming for specialized educational experiences. More than 400 volunteers make a range of valuable contributions to Westfield year-round, with several hundred more volunteers participating in special events and projects.

Westfield’s unparalleled collection of architectural holdings makes it a unique destination and resource for the large and diverse audience it serves. Nearly forty historic structures, including rare historic homes, businesses, agricultural and manufacturing buildings ranging from the late 1700s through to the early 1900s, have been preserved at the museum. The rich artifact collection used to furnish these buildings is from throughout Southern Ontario, and serves to vividly illustrate the environments of early Ontario. Visitors are able to enter these buildings and immerse themselves in the sights, smells, sounds and tastes of earlier times. Authentically dressed interpreters in these buildings illustrate historical themes through period activities and demonstrations. Historic buildings of note include the 1793 Queen’s Rangers log cabin, believed to be one of the oldest preserved log structures in Ontario, and the c1810 Westbrook Home, historically significant in that it was originally situated at the site of the 1814 Battle of Malcolm’s Mills, the last land battle of the War of 1812.

Westfield is open every Sunday and holiday in July and August from 12:30 – 4:00 p.m. with a unique historical Fashion Show daily at 2:00 p.m. Visit the heritage buildings to see demonstrations such as blacksmithing, printing and woodworking. Enjoy the trails, gardens and picnic area. The beautiful rural setting of Westfield Heritage Village is the ideal place to escape to on a summer day. Canada Day, July 1st, will be a great opportunity for new Canadians to experience the history of Canada. Free Canada pins will be available for all visitors on this day.

Ice Cream Carnival is a favourite event for all visitors. During this popular event, the costumed interpreters of the village will be cranking out many, many batches of delicious, cool, hand-churned ice cream, and visitors are encouraged to help turn those cranks. If you’ve never tasted ice cream made with real cream, fresh fruit and other delicious ingredients, you are in for a wonderful surprise! There will be lots to see and do during this special event. Enjoy an old fashioned Edwardian Carnival with lots of skill testing games and activities. Traditional carnival foods will add to the fun, with cool lemonade, bottled soda, baked goods and old-fashioned candy at the General Store. Families are always welcome to bring their own picnic to enjoy under a shady tree. Cool off with come delicious summer treats, take in the carnival, and enjoy a day with your family and friends tasting a little history.

Fibre Day is in August as well. Come to the village and enjoy learning about how different types of textile fibres are produced and used. Watch the labour-intensive process that transforms the coarse flax plant into a material that can be used to make lovely linen fabric. Discover the interesting process of spinning and dyeing wool and see what the weaver is making on the loom.

Enjoy the beautiful autumn colours in the fall at Westfield. Bring your camera and capture the amazing fall colours that form a vibrant backdrop to Westfield’s period architecture and costumed interpreters. Telling Tales, held in September, is a day for celebrating stories. Over twenty-five of Canada’s leading children’s writers, illustrators, musicians and storytellers will present to children of all ages. Parking for this event only is at Rockton Fairgrounds with a free shuttle service to Westfield. More information can be found at the Telling Tales website.

Westfield has good roads and a large parking lot that easily accommodates RV’s and other large vehicles for access and parking. There is a lovely shaded picnic area and walking trails through our Teaching Forest and much more. Don’t forget to bring your camera!

For more information, visit www.westfieldheritage.ca or call (519) 621-8851.