HOLLYWOOD is often full of celebrities getting together and breaking up, these two actors are no different.

Amy Poehler and Will Arnett are both actors famous for their comedy and were once married.

Why did Will Arnett and Amy Poehler divorce?

The former couple met back in 1996 and began dating soon after meeting.

Poehler, 50, and Arnett, 51, divorced two years after the birth of their second child Abel.

"They drifted apart, like a lot of couples do, but there’s no malice in the split, nor was anyone else involved," a source told Radar Online at the time.

On February 8, 2022 The Guardian published an interview with Arnett who reflected back on his divorce six years later.

During their separation, Arnett was working on season four of the hit show Arrested Development.

He described the shooting of the season as: "almost excruciating … Just brutal, brutal, brutal. I was driving to the set one day and I pulled over to the side of the road and cried for an hour."

He also told The Guardian that he channeled his pain from the divorce into his work on Arrested Development and later the Netflix show BoJack Horseman.

He also spoke on his narcissistic character on BoJack saying the show was: "an amalgamation of characteristics that I didn’t like about other people and other stuff about me that I didn’t like.

"Yeah, what a weird thing to do. But it was kind of the only thing I knew how to do. It was a painful couple of years, but I had to go through it, I guess."

Do Amy Poehler and Will Arnett have kids?

After a total of five years of marriage in 2008, the two welcomed their first child, Archie, 13, and later welcomed Abel, 11, in 2010.

"I love my boys so much I fear my heart will explode. I wonder if this love will crack open my chest and split me in half. It is scary, this love," Poehler wrote in a 2014 essay published in The Globe and Mail.

Even though Abel and Archie are the children of high-profile celebrities, the Arnett children are often kept out of the spotlight.

What are Amy Poehler and Will Arnett up to now?

Six years after their divorce the two continue to co-parent Archie and Abel.

Arnett says he is no longer a sad divorced man but a happy single father focusing on his comedy career.

The actor commented on how much he has evolved: "It is crazy to me how much my whole life has shifted in five years in such a dramatic way. Isn’t that wild?"

His latest show Murderville is now streaming on Netflix.

Poehler has also kept busy working since their divorce starring and producing hit shows and movies.

Poehler executive produced Comedy Central's hit show Broad City with Ilana Glazer and Abbi Jacobson.