Will Arnett has three children. His ex-wife "Parks and Rec" star Amy Poehler is the mother of two of his eldest children, and he welcomed his youngest in 2020 with his girlfriend.

Comedy actor Will Arnett is most known for his role in "Arrested Development" and recognized for his voice acting work in "Bojack Horseman" and "The Lego Batman Movie."

Although his fans know a lot about his professional life, a few might not be clued up on his personal life and know he was married twice and has three sons.

Will Arnett during an appearance on "Jimmy Kimmel Live" in 2020 [Left] Amy Poehler and Will Arnett during the 69th Annual Golden Globe Awards, 2012 [Right] | Photo: YouTube/JimmyKimmelLive & Getty Images

His first wife was actress

The couple's marriage was short-lived and lasted from December 1994 to January 1995. Miller married James Patrick Higgins in 2000 and has two children with him.

Miller is an acclaimed actress with many impressive highlights in her career. Her most notable projects include "The Artist," "The Birth of the Nation," "Carlito's Way," "The Freshman," "Awakenings," and "Chaplin."

After Arnett's divorce from Miller, he married Amy Poehler. The couple started dating in 2000, but Arnett once admitted he had a crush on her since 1996 after watching her an improv performance with Upright Citizens Brigade.

The "Blades of Glory" costars dated three years before tying the knot in 2003. During their marriage, they welcomed two sons; Archie in 2008 and Abel in 2010.

Actors Will Arnett and Amy Poehler speak during the Worldwide Orphans Foundation's Seventh Annual Benefit Gala, 2011, New York City. | Photo: Getty Images

Despite seeming like the perfect Hollywood comedy couple, after ten years of marriage, welcoming their sons, and working together on different projects, they decided to separate and filed for divorce in 2014.

Both Poehler and Arnett have been tight-lipped about the reasons for their divorce. However, rumors from insider sources indicated that their relationship lost its spark, and they realized they were close friends rather than romantic partners.

Although Poehler and Arnett did not share details of their breakup, the actors have spoken about how they felt following the divorce and their 10-year relationship.

In her memoir, the "Sisters" actress wrote that "getting a divorce really sucks." However, she also noted that she was proud of how she and Arnett handled raising their children, and she is happy Arnett is their father.

Arnett was upset about how the media portrayed his divorce after one journalist wrote they were on "Team Amy" because their relationship, children, and divorce were not a game.

Although the divorce was tough for both partners, they have seemed to move on. Arnett found solace in his children as, following his divorce from Poehler, he explained he found happiness in his children.

Poehler and Arnett started dating other people. In 2013, Poehler began dating "Big Mouth" voice actor Nick Kroll. They two dated for two years before breaking up because of conflicting schedules.

Arnett started dating businesswoman Alessandra Brawn in 2019. A year into their relationship Brawn and Arnett welcomed a son, Alexander Denison Arnett. The "30 Rock" alum was thrilled to welcome his third child as he once said watching his children grow up was the most significant gift.

ncG1vNJzZmimlazAb63MqKSapZFjsLC5jmtvb2hma3q4tculZJqqnprBtb%2BMnq9mr5mrsrR5wKucZpqfqbVursuopZ1lkZjBb7TTpqM%3D