The Heart Specialist: Online DVD Giveaway Opportunity

Here’s your once-in-a-lifetime free chance to WIN a DVD copy of the “Heartwarming Romantic Comedy” featuring an All-Star Ensemble Cast HEADlined by my girl Zoe Saldana, Wood Harris and Brian J. White (nope…sadly not me) available on Blu-ray and DVD October 4th. What’s the film all about? Well, I’m glad you asked that because I have all that information and more for you. So please, read on!

In the world of modern romance, there are players and there are experts. But when you want to trade your swagger for a sweetheart… you need a specialist. Get ready for some heart-stopping, jaw-dropping comedy when the hilarious romantic indie film THE HEART SPECIALIST drops onto Blu-ray and DVD on October 4 from Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment. Making its debut at the Boston Film Festival (“Audience Award” winner) and the Urban World Film Festival (“Best Film” winner), THE HEART SPECIALIST tickles the funny bone as it resuscitates the love lives of a sassy cast of characters.

Smooth-talking lothario Ray Howard (Brian J. White, “Men of a Certain Age”), a young Harvard Medical School graduate, arrives for his internship at a hospital in South Florida to pursue his ex-girlfriend Valerie (Grammy Award®-winner Mya, Chicago) who can’t forgive his womanizing ways. When his supervisor, Dr. Sidney Zachary (NAACP Image Award®-nominee Wood Harris, “The Wire”), discovers that Ray has put the moves on his own girlfriend, nurse Donna (BET Award®-winner Zoe Saldana, Avatar, Star Trek), the two conspire with the rest of the hospital staff, patients, and friends to teach Ray a lesson—not just about medicine, but also about true love.

THE HEART SPECIALIST features stellar supporting performances from Marla Gibbs (“The Jeffersons”), Leon Robinson (Cool Runnings), Method Man (How High), Thomas ‘Nephew Tommy’Miles (“The Mo’Nique Show”), Jasmine Guy (“Another World”), Scott Paulin (“Castle”), Kenneth Choi (Captain America: The First Avenger), Terrence J (“106 & Park”), and comic legend Ed Asner (Up).

To win a copy of this DVD, simply answer the following question:

What does Ray get a lesson in?

Manners

True love

Hygiene

Here’s all you got to do. Fill in the blanks below with your email and mailing address and the name of the contest (Heart Specialist + your answer from above) and you’re automatically entered. Could it be any easier?! I don’t think so. Three lucky winners will be picked on Tuesday, October 4th and notified via email. Good luck!