TY - JOUR

T1 - The Political Economy of Swift's Satires and other Prose Works

AU - Prendergast, Renee

PY - 2014

Y1 - 2014

N2 - Jonathan Swift wrote perceptively about the emerging commercial societyin Britain in the early eighteenth century. His particular focus was on thefinancial revolution and its implications for economic and political stabilityas well as for shifts of power between the landed and commercialclasses. Following his return to Ireland Swift’s focus shifted to the developmentalproblems of his native country. In several pamphlets he advocatedconsumption of domestic products, challenged existing politicalstructures and made trenchant criticisms of absenteeism and other dysfunctionalaspects of the land tenure system. Swift’s politico-economicconcerns are fully reflected in his best known work, Gulliver’s Travels buthis most pointed criticism of the emerging commercial system is containedin A Modest Proposal. Written in the form of an economic pamphlet, AModest Proposal is ostensibly designed to address the problem of povertyin Ireland. In addition to its implicit criticism of economic policy in Ireland,the pamphlet challenges the separation of economics and morality asevidenced in the writings of William Petty and Bernard Mandeville. Swiftparodies Petty’s political arithmetic but it is suggested here that he alsohad in his sights the consequentialist reasoning present in the work ofboth authors but explicitly so in Mandeville.Keywords: financial revolution, public debt, paper credit, rationality, politicalarithmetic, consequentialism, Petty (William), Mandeville (Bernard)

AB - Jonathan Swift wrote perceptively about the emerging commercial societyin Britain in the early eighteenth century. His particular focus was on thefinancial revolution and its implications for economic and political stabilityas well as for shifts of power between the landed and commercialclasses. Following his return to Ireland Swift’s focus shifted to the developmentalproblems of his native country. In several pamphlets he advocatedconsumption of domestic products, challenged existing politicalstructures and made trenchant criticisms of absenteeism and other dysfunctionalaspects of the land tenure system. Swift’s politico-economicconcerns are fully reflected in his best known work, Gulliver’s Travels buthis most pointed criticism of the emerging commercial system is containedin A Modest Proposal. Written in the form of an economic pamphlet, AModest Proposal is ostensibly designed to address the problem of povertyin Ireland. In addition to its implicit criticism of economic policy in Ireland,the pamphlet challenges the separation of economics and morality asevidenced in the writings of William Petty and Bernard Mandeville. Swiftparodies Petty’s political arithmetic but it is suggested here that he alsohad in his sights the consequentialist reasoning present in the work ofboth authors but explicitly so in Mandeville.Keywords: financial revolution, public debt, paper credit, rationality, politicalarithmetic, consequentialism, Petty (William), Mandeville (Bernard)

KW - financial revolution, public debt, paper credit, rationality, political arithmetic, consequentialism, Petty, Mandeville

M3 - Article

VL - 4

SP - 593

EP - 619

JO - Oeconomia

JF - Oeconomia

IS - 4

ER -