First Look Studios was a former American independent film distributor, that specialized in home video releases of films and television series.

History[]

In 1980, Robert and Ellen Little founded Overseas Filmgroup as a film sales company for foreign markets. Overseas Filmgroup expanded towards film financing to give the company greater control over its output. From the beginnings, it competed with fellow, also-defunct film producers J&M Film Sales (later J&M Entertainment), Manson International and Producers Sales Organization as the most successful company with film sales.

Overseas Filmgroup decided to paid $3 million in order to set up operations for different areas such as Spain, Arizona, Texas, Taiwan, Italy, southern California and Colorado in the mid-1980s, and by 1986, the company became active, setting up a number of domestic theatrical, home video and television syndication sales with New World Pictures and other distributors.

In 1987, while other sales companies is gaining production outfits, the Littles told that they would avoid production, so Overseas Filmgroup had set up a company policy that they would acquire new films via distribution advances, and the three new movies, namely those directed by Roland Emmerich, will be offered to various Mifed buyers. The company is the original international home video distributor for the show Tales from the Darkside, until it was sold off to Lorimar-Telepictures in late November 1987 after Lorimar International president Jeff Schlesinger saw all episodes of the show that was well-suited and combined to become eight ninety-minute episodes from the show.

Films ranged from genre titles such as Blue Tiger (starring Virginia Madsen) and No Way Back (starring New Zealand actor Russell Crowe) to art house films, including Antonia's Line, Mrs. Dalloway, The Secret of Roan Inish, Waking Ned Devine, and Titus. In 1993, the company expanded towards North American distribution through its First Look Pictures subsidiary.

In 1998, Overseas Filmgroup went public. Two years later, EUE/Screen Gems acquired a minority interest in the company. In January 2001, as part of a restructuring, Overseas Filmgroup and First Look Pictures became subsidiaries of First Look Media. Overseas Filmgroup was eventually renamed First Look International. Robert and Ellen Little left First Look in 2003.

On July 29, 2005, after a merger with Canadian businessman Henry Winterstern's Capital Entertainment, the combined company became First Look Studios. Winterstern became CEO of First Look and shared the role as chairman with EUE/Screen Gems' Chris Cooney. In November 2005, First Look acquired DEJ Productions from Blockbuster.

In March 2006, First Look acquired Ventura Distribution, a home video distribution company, and acquired the domestic television syndication rights to fifty six films from Pinnacle Entertainment. By 2006, First Look had a seven hundred film library to its own name, and continued to add more with the financing of in house productions. Henry Winterstern resigned from First Look in March 2007. The organization started out First Look Television, a TV syndication company in 2006.

That March, Nu Image acquired the rights to First Look. In November 2010, Millennium Entertainment acquired First Look's assets. Currently, the company had been dissolved.

Films[]

10 Items or Less (released theatrically by ThinkFilm)

All About You

American Adobo

An American Crime

Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters (the only animated film by the company)

As Good as Dead

August

Back in the Day

Bad Lieutenant: Port of Call New Orleans

The Breed

A Brother's Kiss

Chopper

Chrystal

Cool Dog

The Contract

Danika

Day of the Dead

Day Zero

Dedication (co distribution with The Weinstein Company)

Eat Your Heart Out

Ernest Goes to Africa (re released by Mill Creek Entertainment and Image Entertainment)

Ernest in the Army (re released by Mill Creek Entertainment and Image Entertainment)

Evelyn (co-distribution with United Artists)

Finding Rin Tin Tin

Firecracker

Flu Birds

Forty Shades of Blue

Four Sheets to the Wind

Frank

Freeze Frame

A Gentleman's Game

Glass Trap

God's Gift

A Guide to Recognizing Your Saints

Hydra

Immortal (United States distributor)

In a Dark Place

Infinity

Journey to the End of the Night

Kill Switch

King of California

King of the Avenue

Labor Pains

Leaves of Grass

Leo

A Little Trip to Heaven

A Map of the World

Marcello Mastroianni: I Remember

Mayor of the Sunset Strip

Meet Bill

Minotaur (co distribution with Lionsgate)

Miranda

Monster (co distribution with Newmarket Films, Media 8 Entertainment and DEJ Productions)

Mrs Dalloway

My Son, My Son, What Have Ye Done?

Nature Unleashed: Tornado

Paris, je t'aime

Party Girl

The Prophecy (co distribution with Dimension Films)

The Pumpkin Karver

Relative Strangers

The Secret of Roan Inish

Sex and Breakfast

Silence Becomes You

Smiley Face

Stiletto

Sukiyaki Western Django

Tara Road

Target of Opportunity

The Thing Below

Thick as Thieves

This Is The Sea

Trading Mom (co distribution with Trimark Pictures)

Transsiberian

The Volcano Disaster (also called Volcano: Nature Unleashed)

War, Inc.

Distributed lines[]

Ultimate Fighting Championship

Video Asia

[]