Olainfarm JSC, the leading pharmaceutical company in the Baltics, was awarded second place under the “Most Human Brand” category at the Baltic Brands Forum, while its subsidiary, Silvanols, was ranked the second greenest brand in Latvia. JSC Olainfarm has also maintained its position among the top 10 greenest brands in Latvia.

“High appreciation of people in Latvia for Olainfarm and Silvanols brands and our products is the greatest recognition a company can receive for its work. We are proud to be among the most humane and green brands because humanity, care and social responsibility towards society, environment and our employees are at the heart of what we do. Over the past two years as a part of the AB City Group, we have invested even more purposefully and strategically in the well-being, health and growth of our communities, and the public’s appreciation is proof that we are on the right track.” says Juris Bundulis, the Chairman of the Management Board at JSC Olainfarm, noting that the company is currently investing heavily in expanding its product portfolio to provide a broader range of medicines in new areas, such as oncology and diabetes, in addition to existing medicines for the nervous system, cardiovascular health, antiviral, antibacterial and anti-allergy products.

“I would like to thank the people of Latvia for their trust! Silvanols’ values remain the same – to improve people’s health and quality of life. The consumer has become more knowlegable and appreciates innovative product solutions to improve long-term health. We continue to work on modernising production and expanding the product portfolio to make Latvia’s favourite health brand even more diverse and interesting both in the domestic and export markets,” says Liene Puriņa, Chairwoman of the Management Board at Silvanols.

In the Baltic Brand Forum 2023 study, Olainfarm has managed to improve its position compared to last year, as in 2022 the company was ranked fifth in the category of the most human brands. Silvanols, on the other hand, has managed to climb another position on the list of greenest brands over the year. Last year, it was the third greenest company in Latvia, according to people’s ratings.

The survey confirms that the people of Latvia highly appreciate the performance of Olainfarm Group companies and their role in Latvia’s economy, public health and national security, emphasising their contribution to the sustainable development of society and economy.

It should be noted that both companies have managed to achieve very impressive growth over the last two years, for example, in 2021 Olainfarm was ranked 57th in the “Most Human Brands” category, while Silvanols was ranked 40th in the “Greenest Companies” ranking.