Herman Melville: Biography and Fascinating Facts

Herman Melville was born on August 1, 1819, in New York City. His father, Allan, was a well-off naval merchant. Melville began school at the New York Male High School in 1824 at the age of five and soon moved to the Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School. In his early years at school, Herman Melville did not perform well; however, as time passed, his academic skills improved, and he would eventually become a devoted scholar. In fact, he was recognized as a good student by the city of Albany, New York, in 1831 after the family moved there and he transferred to the Albany Academy.

Both of Herman Melville's grandfathers were heroes in the American Civil War. Melville was proud to be related to them and drew inspiration from them in some of his writing.

Though Melville’s childhood and his relationship with his parents were happy, his father Allan had a habit of overspending and borrowing money he could not repay. It was due to his debt that Melville’s family frequently moved house and that Melville's education was broken up at different schools. By October 1831, Allan’s debts were so bad that Herman Melville dropped out of school to cut the cost of his tuition. Allan’s health and mental state began to deteriorate, and in 1832 he died, leaving his family deeply in debt.

Herman Melville took a job at a bank in Albany for several years, but in 1834 he switched to a position at his brother’s fur store. The next year, having funds for tuition once again, he enrolled in the Albany Classical School and then switched again in 1836 to the Albany Academy, only to drop out again in 1837 due to financial stress. When his brother's fur company went bankrupt in 1837, Melville taught at Sikes District School for a semester. Following this, he spent a term studying engineering at the Lansingburgh Academy; in 1839, Herman Melville sought an engineering career but got nowhere with it.

Despite his patchwork education, Herman Melville’s writing shows that he had read and studied such authors as William Shakespeare, John Milton, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and Lord Byron. His writing style tends to be thick with allusions and other references to their works.

After these turbulent years, Herman Melville published his first essay, “Fragments from a Writing Desk,” in an 1839 issue of Democratic Press and Lansingburgh Advertiser, a local newspaper. This instance helped Melville develop a taste for publishing his writing. Despite this, Melville’s first book would not come for several more years.

In 1839, Herman Melville joined the crew of a merchant ship and sailed from New York to Liverpool. He soon set sail again, this time on a whaling ship in 1841. The ship reached the Marquesas Islands in the summer of 1842; there, Melville and a shipmate left their crew and spent about a month living on the island of Nuku Hiva. This experience would inspire Melville’s first book, Typee (1846). His continued adventures after leaving Nuku Hiva—which include further sailing, a mutiny, and time spent on various other islands—inspired a sequel that followed Typee named Omoo (1847).

Following these exploits, Herman Melville served on another whaling ship, lived in Hawaii for several months, then briefly joined the US Navy. He then returned home to New York state and wrote his first two books. Both books were hugely popular and brought Melville swift success as a writer. The income from these books put Melville in a good place financially, and on August 4, 1847, after only a three-month-long engagement, he married Elizabeth Knapp Shaw. The two moved to the area of New York City, now known as Park Avenue.

Herman Melville continued to write; his next publications were Mardi (1849), Redburn (1849), and White-Jacket (1850). Melville’s next work would be the one that is most famous today, though, during his lifetime, he was best known for Typee. Melville published the book under two names: The Whale in Britain, and Moby-Dick in the US, both released in 1851. Though in later decades this novel would be considered a classic of American Literature, it did not bring in the money that Melville hoped for.

In an attempt to write something that would be a sure hit and bring in enough money to cover his growing debts, Melville released Pierre: or, The Ambiguities (1852). However, the book was not well-liked by readers or critics and was the first in a string of disappointing releases for Melville.

More than just a disappointing reception, Pierre: or, The Ambiguities earned Herman Melville harsh words from critics. One news story released in Day Book on September 8, 1852, attacked Melville’s writing and sanity. The headline for the article read “Herman Melville Crazy.”

Between Fall 1856 and Spring 1857, Herman Melville toured Europe and the Mediterranean. In April 1857, Melville published his last finished novel, The Confidence-Man, which was not liked at the time but is now well-regarded. Over the next decade, Melville both worked as a lecturer and published poetry, though his works continued to receive lukewarm reviews.

Herman Melville took a job as a customs inspector in New York City starting in 1866; he held the position for 19 years. He deteriorated with time, treating his wife unusually poorly and growing weak in both mind and body. He no longer attempted to make a career of his literary works, though he was still dedicated to writing. Melville retired from his customs job on December 31, 1885, then lived a quiet life until he died of heart failure at 72 on September 28, 1891.

Herman Melville: Quotes

The quote below is from Moby Dick; or, The Whale. It describes the pull that the ocean has for the speaker, Ishmael. Ishmael is an experienced sailor with a love for the ocean—it is this love that leads him to join Captain Ahab's crew and witness first-hand their crazed mission to kill the giant whale.

“Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knocking people's hats off - then, I account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can.” (Moby Dick, ch 1)

The following quote from Billy Budd, Sailor, is part of the buildup to Billy Budd accidentally killing a man. The quote describes the unstable mental state of Claggart, the man who falsely accused Billy Budd. This leads to Billy Budd striking Claggart and then facing the consequences of his actions—even though the rest of the crew members are relieved that the insane Claggart is gone.

“Who in the rainbow can draw the line where the violet tint ends and the orange tint begins? Distinctly we see the difference of the colors, but where exactly does the one first blendingly enter into the other? So with sanity and insanity.” (Billy Budd, Sailor, ch 21)

The quote below is from Typee: A Peep at Polynesian Life. It gives a glimpse into Herman Melville's feelings about the prejudice held against the Marquesan Islanders during his lifetime. Having spent time living on their islands, Melville wrote about his impressions of the people he met. As seen in this quote, Melville felt that the island inhabitants were not the “savages” that many considered them to be—in fact, he believed that their values would be good for the Americans of the time to learn.

“The term 'Savage' is, I conceive, often misapplied, and indeed, when I consider the vices, cruelties, and enormities of every kind that spring up in the tainted atmosphere of a feverish civilization, I am inclined to think that so far as the relative wickedness of the parties is concerned, four or five Marquesan Islanders sent to the United States as Missionaries might be quite as useful as an equal number of Americans despatched to the Islands in a similar capacity.” (Typee: A Peep at Polynesian Life, ch 17)

Herman Melville - Key takeaways

Herman Melville was born on August 1, 1819, in New York City.

Melville is considered a highly influential American author and poet.

His writing is part of the Dark Romanticism literary movement.

Today, Melville is best remembered for the novel Moby-Dick; or, The Whale (1851).

Herman Melville died at the age of 72 on September 28, 1891