October 9, 2021

Jimmy Carter (1924) was the 39th president of the United States. He is an American politician. He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2002 for his humanitarian work.

James Earl Carter Jr. was born in Plains, Georgia, United States, on October 1, 1924. He was the first son of a traditional peanut growing family to complete high school. He studied at the Southwest Georgia College and the Georgia Institute of Technology.

In 1946, Carter graduated from the United States Naval Academy in the state of Maryland. That same year she married Rosalynn Smith. The couple had three children and one daughter. In 1953, after his father's death, Jimmy Carter returned to Georgia to manage the family's peanut farm.

He started politics by joining the Democratic Party. He was elected leader to the Georgia Legislature in 1962 and 1964. In 1966 he ran for state governor but lost the elections. However, he stood out for his policy in favour of the rights of blacks and women. In 1970 he ran again and came out a winner.

In July 1976, Carter was chosen as a candidate of the democrats to the Presidency of United States and indicated the senator Walter F. Mondale to the vice-presidency. However, in November 1976, Republican Gerald Ford won by a small margin of the vote, thanks to the Republicans' discrediting Richard Nixon in the Watergate affair.

During his tenure, Carter worked to defend democracy and human rights on an international scale. It contributed to the fall of dictator Somoza in Nicaragua, claimed for the first time the rights of the Palestinian people in the face of Israeli atrocities, and succeeded in getting Egypt and Israel to sign the historic peace agreement. In addition, on January 1, 1979, it established full diplomatic relations between the United States and China.

On November 4, 1979, Iranian students invaded the US embassy in Iran when they made more than 50 hostages; they have only released in January 1981, which shook the American public. In 1980, Carter lost the election to Republican candidate Ronald Reagan.

After leaving the White House, Jimmy Carter and Rosalynn Carter founded the Carter Center in 1982 in Atlanta, Georgia, a non-profit organization to promote peace and human rights. Jimmy Carter has made numerous trips to help resolve international conflicts. Through the Habitat for Humanity organization, it helped build housing for the poor.

In 2002, Jimmy Carter awarding the Nobel Peace Prize for his humanitarian work. In December 2015, Jimmy Carter revealed that he was free of brain cancer discovered in August of the same year.

November 9, 2010

I love this man! The smartest, most honorable, noble man I know.

April 16, 2022

I've long been a supply-sider who had been a lifelong 5th Generation Lincoln Republican; Until Trump made me not a Republican. As a Reagan guy I've always been impressed how many times I've heard from my fellow Republicans say something along the lines of "Carter was probably the smartest, most well read, highly qualified, hardest working, most honest president we've ever had. He was just a terrible president." All probably true, but over the decades I increasingly question if he was necessarily that terrible a president.

You will learn a lot about Carter but the most impressive thing I find is how hard work and drive hit so many generations in a row. His mother was an impressive sort. At age 68 she was watching TV and saw a Peace Corps commercial where they pointed out there is no max age limit to serve. She got a hair up her butt to apply and headed off to India to serve as a nurse for 21 months. Over the next two years she learned two languages in this job. I'm impressed, I'm not learning a new language at 70.

Carter claims that his mom tells the story of the hardest thing she ever did in India was working with an advanced leprosy case in an 11-year-old girl. She was shocked and afraid when she first saw this girl to give injections. After giving that first injection she was ashamed of herself for extensively washing her hands with alcohol and then taking a long shower. After weeks of giving these injections Carter's mom says, "We finally got her in a leprosarium-they have a long list of people waiting-and six months later she came out, and she came running there one day to me and she brought me a flower-all Indians love flowers-and she put her arms around my neck and kissed me. And you know, I didn't wash my face or hands.......(p.86.)"

Great stuff. This is the kind of lady who raises a kid to swing a hammer for Habitat for Humanity as an ex-president into his 90s.

July 21, 2007

There are some interesting points Carter presents in this book. 1 is how African Americans were treated in the South when he was growing up. Which in that case there are small details presented that are only natural, but it reminds you of the history. The other good point was how he took on voting count corruption to become governor.

November 14, 2010

President Carter was a hero while he was in the military service, as presidentual candidate he promised us he would never lie to us -and he was good to his promiae. As president of the US, I can't remember him accomplishing anything, except more government, run away inflation, and astronomical debt.

July 18, 2007

I read this book when I was 16 and Jimmy Carter was running for president the first time. His vision of the country in its bicentennial year drew me to his campaign.

April 28, 2009

Read many years ago and recall liking it enough.

April 1, 2023

I ran across a news article that mentioned the books that Jimmy Carter wrote. President Carter was the first president I voted for, so I logged into my Barnes and Noble account to search for his books. I must say, I was surprised to learn how many he has written, If you ever thought Jimmy Carter was a hick peanut farmer, this book is a must read to redirect your thoughts.

Amongst, the many great stories in the autobiography, book, my favorite was when Jimmy applied for a job after graduating from the Navel Academy during which Admiral Rickover asked him during a job interview, "Did you do your best?" Rickover asked. Carter initially answered, "yes sir" but after some thought said, "no sir, I didn't always do my best." Describing the scene years later, Carter writes, "He asked one final question which I have never been able to forget-or to answer. He said, "Why not?"

November 9, 2020

Even though this book was written 30 years ago, it is still very relevant today.

July 29, 2021

This book was really good. And, even though it was published 45 years ago, it's incredibly relevant to things going on now.

June 29, 2023

As Jimmy Carter enters the final act of a long life of accomplishment, this is an appropriate time to revisit (or in my case, visit) the book which he used to introduce himself to America. On one level, this books reads like the typical campaign biography. Events follow in his life, arranged to show Carter's belief in this nation's potential. A heaping helping of praise for the American people is included, which any smart politician knows to be essential to victory.

On reflection, having had Carter in our national life for almost half a century, this book can be seen as the blueprint for the type of leader he would be. He comes off here as an independent thinker (who was an opponent of Jim Crow even as a young Georgia politician) who had a strongly developed sense of morality. He shows a bit of the idealist who would go on to win the Nobel Peace Prize as well as the rigid loner who would have so much trouble getting his proposals passed by Congress. Most importantly, the book shows a man still growing, one who would live a life of purpose. The Presidency was not and would not be enough achievement for a man such as the one in these pages. While Carter has written more detailed and thorough books about himself, Why Not the Best is an essential guide to understanding this most fascinating of Americans.

March 14, 2023

#19 of 120 books pledged to read during 2023