The “Afghan National Anthem” was adopted and officially announced as such by a Loya Jirga in May 2006. According to article 20 of the Afghan constitution, the national anthem shall be in Pashto with the mention of “God is Greatest” as well as the names of the various tribes of Afghanistan.[1] The lyrics were written by Abdul Bari Jahani and the music was written by German-Afghancomposer Babrak Wassa [de].[2]

History:

Afghanistan’s first national anthem was adopted during its period as a monarchy. It was instrumental and had no lyrics.[3]

National anthem (1943–1973)

This was Afghanistan’s second national anthem, during when it was a monarchy.[4]

Lyrics

Persian romanization English translation shahi ghajur-o-mehrabane ma Our brave and dear King, Hastem as djan moti-e-schoma We are your faithful followers. Ma farsandane tu im! We are your sons! Ma feda kare tu im. We are ready to sacrifice to you. Ei shahi ma Oh, our King! Ei shahi ma Oh, our King! Ei shahi mellat cha-e-ma! Oh, our King and friend of the people!

A national anthem was adopted in 1973 after the abolition of the Afghan monarchy, when the Republic of Afghanistan was set up by President Daoud Khan.[citation needed] Its lyrics were written by Abdul Rauf Benawa and the music was composed by Abdul Ghafoor Breshna.[5]

Pashto lyrics Latin transliteration English translation څو چي ده ځمکه او اسمان وي So Che Da Mezaka Asman Wee So long as there is the earth and the heavens; څو چي دا جهان ودان وي So Che Da Jahan Wadan Wee So long as the world endures; څو چي ژوندي په دي جهان وي So Che Jowand Pa De Jahan Wee So long as there is life in the world; څو چي پاتي يو افغان وي So Che Pati Yaw Afghan Wee So long as a single Afghanbreathes; تل به دا افغانستان وي Tel Ba Da Afghanistan Wee There will be this Afghanistan. تل دي وي افغان ملت Tel De Wee Afghanistan Melat Long live the Afghan nation. تل دي وي جمهوريت Tel De Wee Jumhouriat Long live the Republic. تل دي وي ملي وحدت Tel De Wee Meli Wahdat Forever there be our national unity; تل دي وي افغان ملي جمهوريت Tel De Wee Afghan Meli Jumhouriat Forever there be the Afghan nation and the Republic. تل دي وي افغان ملت جمهوريت Tel De Wee Afghan Mellat Jumhouriat Forever the Afghan nation, the Republic and ملي وحدت ملي وحدت Meli Wahdat, Meli Wahdat! National Unity, National Unity!

National anthem (1978–1992)

Another national anthem was adopted after the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan was set up in 1978. Its lyrics were written by Sulaiman Layeq on behalf of the government of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan(PDPA) headed by Nur Muhammad Taraki, who decided to change the national symbols after the Marxist coup d’état of 1978.[6][7][8] The music was composed by Jalīl Ghahlānd and was arranged by Ustad Salim Sarmad.[9][10] It is known alternatively by the title of “Garam shah lā garam shah” (English: “Be Ardent, Be More Ardent”), which is also the song’s incipit. Like many national anthems, it was sometimes sung abbreviated with only the chorus and the first stanza. In 1987, Afghanistan officially abandoned communism but this song was kept as the national anthem until 1992, when it was discontinued.

Lyrics

National anthem (1992–1996)

From 1992 to 2006, Afghanistan used a song composed in 1919 by Ustad Qasim as its national anthem.[11][12][13] It is also known alternatively by the title “Fortress of Islam, Heart of Asia” (Persian: قلعه اسلام قلب اسیا‎), which is also the song’s incipit.[14][15][16]

Lyrics:

Dari lyrics[20] Latin transliteration English translation[21] قلعه اسلام قلب اسیا جاویدان Qal’a-ye Islam, qalb-e Asiya, Fortress of Islam, heart of Asia, ازاد خاک اریا Jawidan azad khak-e Ariya, Forever free, soil of the Aryans, زادگاه قهرمانان دلیر Zadgah-e qahramanan-e bozorg, Birthplace of great heroes سنگررزمنده مردان خدا Sangar-e razmande-ye mardan-e khoda Fellow traveler of the warriors of the men of God, الله اکبر الله اکبرالله اکبر الله اکبر Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar. God is great! God is great! God is great! بنداستبدادراازهم گسست Tigh-e imanash be meydan-e jihad, Arrow of His faith to the arena of Jihad, تیغ ایمانش به میدان جهاد Band-e estebdad-ra az ham gozast Removing the shackles of suppression, ملت ازاده افغانستان Mellat-e azade Afghanistan The nation of freedom, Afghanistan, در جهان زنجیرمحکومان شکست Dar jehan zanjir-e mahkuman shekest. Breaks the chains of the oppressed in the world. الله اکبرالله اکبرالله اکبر الله اکبر Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar. God is great! God is great! God is great! پرچم ایمان به بام مابود Sar-e khatt-e qur’an nizam-e ma bowad, Let the lines of the Koran be our order, سرخط قران نظام ما بود Parcham-e iman be bam-e ma bowad, Let the banner of faith be on our roof, وحدت ملی مرام مابود Ham seda o-ham nawa ba ham rawan, With the echoes and the voices going together, همصداوهمنواباهم روان Wahdat-emelli muram-e ma bowad. Let national unity be what we strive for, الله اکبرالله اکبرالله اکبر الله اکبر Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar. God is great! God is great! God is great! ای وطن درنورقانون خدا Shad zey, azad zey, abad zey, Live happy, live free, live and prosper, شادزی ازادزی ابادزی Ey watan dar nur-e qanun-e khoda. Oh homeland in the light of God’s law, مردم سرگشته راشورهنما Mash’al-e azadegi-ra bar firaz, Lift the torch of freedom high, مشعل ازادگی رابرفراز Mardom-e sar-goshte-ra shou rahnama. Become a leader for the people who are oppressed, الله اکبرالله اکبرالله اکبر الله اکبر Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar. God is great! God is great! God is great!

During the late 1990s, the Islamic Emarat of Afghanistan under the Taliban took control over most of Afghanistan from the UN-recognized government and ruled most of the country until late 2001. The Taliban outlawed music throughout the territory that they controlled, which consisted of most of the country.