The Afghan National Anthem (Pashto: ملی سرود‎ – Milli Surood; Persian: سرود ملی‎ – “Surūd-e Millī”) was adopted and officially announced by a Loya Jirga in May 2006. According to article 20 of the Afghan Constitution, the national anthem shall be in Pashto with the mention of “God is Greatest” as well as the names of the various tribes of Afghanistan. The lyrics were written by Abdul Bari Jahani and the music was written by German-Afghan composer Babrak Wassa (de)

Milli Surood Original Pashto Lyrics Pashto Transliteration Dari Translation Dari Transliteration English Translation First stanza دا وطن افغانستان دی

دا عزت د هر افغان دی

کور د سولې، کور د تورې

هر بچی يې قهرمان دی Dā watan Afğānistān di

Dā izat da har Afğān di

Kor da sole, kor da tūre

Har bačay ye qahramān di این وطن افغانستان است

این عزت هر افغان است

میهن صلح، جایگاه شمشیر

هر فرزندش قهرمان است īn watan Afğānestān ast

īn ezat-e har Afğān ast

mīhan-e solh, jāygāh-e šamšīr

har farzandeš qahramān ast This land is Afghanistan!

It is the pride of every Afghan.

The land of peace, the land of the sword.

Its sons are all brave. Second stanza دا وطن د ټولو کور دی

د بلوڅو، د ازبکو

د پښتون او هزاره وو

د ترکمنو، د تاجکو Dā watan da ṭolo kor di

Da Balotso, da Uzbəko

Da Pax̌tūn aw Hazārawo

Da Turkməno, da Tājəko این وطن میهن همه است

از بلوچ، از ازبکها

از پشتون، هزاره‌ها

از ترکمن و تاجیکها īn watan mīhan-e hame ast

az Baloč, az Uzbakhā

az Paštūn, Hazārahā

az Turkman o Tājīkhā This is the country of every tribe,

The land of Baloch andUzbeks,

Pashtuns and Hazaras,

Turkmen and Tajiks. Third stanza ور سره عرب، ګوجر دي

پاميريان، نورستانيان

براهوي دي، قزلباش دي

هم ايماق، هم پشه يان Wər sara Arab, Gūjər dī

Pāmīryān, Nūristānyān

Brāhawī dī, Qizilbāš dī

Ham Aymāq, ham Pašayān هم عرب و گوجرها

پامیری‌، نورستانیها

براهویی است و قزلباش

هم ایماق و پشه‌ئیان ham Arab o Gūjarhā

Pāmīrī, Nūristānīhā

Brāhawī ast o Qizilbāš

ham Aymāq o Pašaiyān With them, Arabs andGujjars,

Pamiris, Nuristanis,

Brahuis and Qizilbash,

Also Aimaqs andPashayis. Fourth stanza دا هيواد به تل ځلېږي

لکه لمر پر شنه اسمان

په سينه کې د آسيا به

لکه زړه وي جاويدان Dā hīwād ba təl źaleǵī

Ləka lmar pər šnə asmān

Pə sīna ke da Āsyā ba

Ləka zṛə wī jāwīdān این کشور همیشه تابان خواهد بود

مثل آفتاب در آسمان کبود

در سینهٔ آسیا

مثل قلب جاویدان īn kešwar hamīše tābān xāhad būd

mesl-e āftāb dar āsemān-e kabūd

dar sīna-ye āsyā

mesl-e qalb jāwīdān This Land will shine for ever,

Like the sun in the blue sky.

In the chest of Asia,

It will remain as the heart forever. Fifth stanza نوم د حق مو دی رهبر

وايو الله اکبر

وايو الله اکبر

وايو الله اکبر Nūm da haq mo day rahbar

Wāyū Allāhu Akbar

Wāyū Allāhu Akbar

Wāyū Allāhu Akbar نام حق است ما را رهبر

می‌گوییم الله اکبر

می‌گوییم الله اکبر

می‌گوییم الله اکبر nām-e haq ast mā rā rahbar

mīgūyīm Allāh-o-Akbar

mīgūyīm Allāh-o-Akbar

mīgūyīm Allāh-o-Akbar We will follow the one God;

We all say, Allah is great!

We all say, Allah is great!

____

NOTE: National Anthems of various Countries are presented here (on alphabetical order) for educational purposes only with a good intention to spread peace and harmony among nations and mutually respecting one another. In no way the comments should hurt the other country’s sentiments and patriotism. Every Country has its own national pride. Let us value it.