Afghan National Anthem 1.0

Continue to app

Free Version

Publisher Description

Afghanistan's National official Anthem.

Powered by:

ShamshadTech.com

About Afghan National Anthem

Afghan National Anthem is a free app for Android published in the Recreation list of apps, part of Home & Hobby.

The company that develops Afghan National Anthem is ShamshadTech. The latest version released by its developer is 1.0.

To install Afghan National Anthem on your Android device, just click the green Continue To App button above to start the installation process. The app is listed on our website since 2014-09-30 and was downloaded 11 times. We have already checked if the download link is safe, however for your own protection we recommend that you scan the downloaded app with your antivirus. Your antivirus may detect the Afghan National Anthem as malware as malware if the download link to com.shamshadtech.afghannationalanthem is broken.

How to install Afghan National Anthem on your Android device:

Click on the Continue To App button on our website. This will redirect you to Google Play.

Once the Afghan National Anthem is shown in the Google Play listing of your Android device, you can start its download and installation. Tap on the Install button located below the search bar and to the right of the app icon.

A pop-up window with the permissions required by Afghan National Anthem will be shown. Click on Accept to continue the process.

Afghan National Anthem will be downloaded onto your device, displaying a progress. Once the download completes, the installation will start and you'll get a notification after the installation is finished.

Program Details

General

Publisher ShamshadTech Released Date 2014-09-30 Languages English

Category

Category Home & Hobby Subcategory Recreation

System requirements

Operating systems android

Download information

File size 19.92 MB Total downloads 11

Pricing

License model Free Price N/A

Version History

Here you can find the changelog of Afghan National Anthem since it was posted on our website on 2016-10-04. The latest version is 1.0 and it was updated on soft112.com on 22 April, 2024. See below the changes in each version:

version 1.0

posted on 2014-09-30

RELATED PROGRAMS

Our Recommendations