Though Boston is often considered the big draw when it comes to historic sites to visit in Massachusetts, nearby Quincy (properly pronounced Kwin-zee) is no slouch either and makes for a great day trip whether your interests lie in American presidents, architecture, shipbuilding, granite quarries or even a cup of coffee and a donut.

Located about 90 miles north of Norwich and a mere 10 miles south of Boston, the City of Presidents is the birthplace of our second and sixth U.S. presidents — John Adams and his son John Quincy Adams — as well as John Hancock, president of the Second Continental Congress and the first signer of the Declaration of Independence. While you can’t visit Hancock’s birthplace in Quincy (the house burned to the ground in 1760), you can still visit the site where it once stood. Home of the Quincy Historical Society, the Quincy History Museum (8 Adams St.; quincyhistory.org) occupies the former Adams Academy building, a college preparatory school that was funded by an endowment left by John Adams and built on land that he donated to the town, which included the site of Hancock’s former home. Opening in the fall of 1872, the school, which was built from local Quincy granite from the Adams’ holdings, closed in 1908 and was used for other civic purposes until the building was taken over by the Quincy Historical Society in 1972 when they renovated it and created a museum. Open year-round except for holidays, the museum’s comprehensive permanent exhibit “Quincy: Of Stone, Of Ships, Of Minds” tells the story of not just the town’s most famous residents but its 400 years of history from Native American times through the early 21st century, including its shipbuilders, granite workers and local entrepreneurs. It’s a great starting-off point.

Still standing all these years later, the birthplaces of John Adams and John Quincy Adams, the oldest presidential birthplaces in the United States, are part of the Adams National Historical Park (1250 Hancock St.; nps.gov/adam/) which consists of 11 buildings that tell the story of five generations of the Adams family, from 1720 to 1927. Visits to the historic homes are by guided tour only; they begin at the Visitors Center located in The Galleria at Presidents Place. There you can watch the 26-minute movie “Enduring Legacy: Four Generations of the Adams Family” before boarding a trolley that brings you to the Presidential birthplaces. There you can take a 30-minute tour with a park ranger, who walks you through the house where John Adams was born in 1735 and lived until he married Abigail in 1764. The tour then moves on to the small house 75 feet away where their first son and future president John Quincy Adams was born in 1767, as well as where John maintained his law office and launched his political career. Afterward, the trolley takes you on a short ride across town to the Old House at Peacefield that John Adams described as “... but the farm of a Patriot” in a letter to Thomas Brand Hollis dated Dec. 3, 1788.

Peacefield consists of 40 acres of farmland and orchards, along with a small house constructed in 1731 by a sugar-planter from Jamaica who, being a Loyalist, fled during the American Revolution. The house was greatly expanded during the 12 years that John served in Philadelphia — first as Vice President and then as President. From 1788 to 1927 the house was home to four generations of the Adams Family, including Presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams; First Ladies Abigail and Louisa Catherine Adams; Civil War Minister to Great Britain Charles Francis Adams; and literary historians Henry and Brooks Adams. It was at Peacefield that Abigail died of typhoid fever in 1818 and where, on July 4, 1826, 50 years to the date of the signing the Declaration of Independence, that President John Adams died at the age of 90. His last words were “Thomas Jefferson still survives,” but he was mistaken as his friend and former political ally had taken his own last breath just five hours before Adams did.

The tour of the house, which contains a vast collection of original artifacts and furnishings, includes the medieval-style Stone Library located adjacent to the house. It was constructed in 1870 in accordance with the will of John Quincy Adams, who requested a fireproof structure be built separate from the house for his books, papers and maps. The library contains more than 12,000 books that belonged to the Adamses. Following the tour of the house and library, visitors can stroll the grounds, which include a historic orchard and 18th-century style formal garden containing thousands of annual and perennial flowers, before boarding the trolley back to the Visitors Center.

Tickets to the house tours are sold on a first-come, first-served basis and are limited to 10 visitors at a time for the protection of the historic houses and artifacts. Allow about 2-½ hours for a full park tour; they are available from April 19 to Nov. 10; the first tour leaves at 9:15 a.m. and the last leaves at 3:15 p.m. Tours cost $10 for adults and are free for those ages 16 and under. Free validated parking is available in the Presidents Place Parking Garage accessed via Saville Avenue.

Not part of the National Park but definitely a must-see site in Quincy is the United First Parish Church (1306 Hancock St.; ufpc.org), also known as the “Church of the Presidents” as, like their ancestors before them, both Presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams were life-long members of the church. Though not the same building at the time, John Hancock was baptized in the church by his father, the Reverend John Hancock, who served as minister from 1726 to 1744. Replacing the wooden Hancock Meeting House that was located on the same site, the current church building was completed in 1828 and built of locally quarried granite donated by John Adams. One of the finest Greek Revival church buildings in New England, each of the church’s four columns is a single piece of granite 25 feet tall and weighing an estimated 25 tons cut from a local quarry — though not from the Adams’ family quarry as it wasn’t deep enough.

Visitors taking the tour can step into the Adams Family Crypt in the basement of the church where both Presidents and their First Ladies are interred. They can also view and maybe even sit in the former Presidential Pew that is marked by a plaque and ribbon. The only other church in the United States to contain a Presidential tomb is the Washington National Cathedral in Washington, D.C., where the remains of President Woodrow Wilson are interred. Daily tours are offered April through November. Suggested donations are $5 for adults; $3 for seniors and students; under age 12 is free.

If you walk across the newly constructed Hancock Adams Green, which is part of the revitalization of Quincy Center, you can tour Quincy’s Old City Hall (1305 Hancock St.). It was built in 1844 from Quincy granite and designed by the same architect who designed the Bunker Hill monument, also built from Quincy granite. At this point it’s probably easy to see why Quincy was also called The Granite City at one time. One of the oldest functioning seats of government in the country, the building was recently restored and welcomes visitors to its Great Hall and historic exhibit.

Next door is the oldest piece of the original settlement in Quincy, the Hancock Cemetery, which was founded circa 1640 and named for John Hancock’s father. Sixty-nine veterans of the American Revolution as well as veterans from the War of 1812 and the Civil War are buried in the 375+ year old cemetery. The two Presidents Adams and their wives were buried in Hancock Cemetery before being reinterred in the basement crypt at United First Parish. The City of Quincy offers free guided walking tours starting at City Hall should you like to learn more about the Heart of Quincy. The tours are offered from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through Friday from mid-May to December.

A short walk from the Hancock Adams Green, the Thomas Crane Public Library (40 Washington St.; thomascranelibrary.org), designed by the prominent American architect Henry Hobson Richardson in 1881, is a masterpiece of 19th century Romanesque architecture and is considered to be the best library of the five that Richardson designed. Funded by the Crane family as a memorial to Thomas Crane, a wealthy stone contractor who got his start in the Quincy quarries, the original Richardson section of the library features ornate woodwork and stained glass windows by John LaFarge (the man who inspired Tiffany). If you’re there from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. Thursdays or from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturdays, stop in at The Friends of the Library Bookstore and pick up a used book or two to add to your collection. Local note: Union Station in New London was designed by H.H. Richardson in 1885.

For history of a different variety head to the Weymouth Fore River and visit the USS Salem and United States Shipbuilding Museum (739 Washington St.; uss-salem.org) located on the site of the former Fore River Shipyard that started building ships on Quincy Point in 1901. During shipyard operations that ran until 1986, yard workers constructed hundreds of ships for both civilian and military clients, including the USS Lexington (the Navy’s first aircraft carrier), as well as two early submarines for Electric Boat. The USS Salem CA-139 was laid down on July 4, 1945 and launched on March 25, 1947; following a distinguished 10-year career as the flagship of the US Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean and the Second Fleet in the Atlantic, the USS Salem was returned to her birthplace in October 1994 where she now serves as a museum ship as part of the United States Shipbuilding Museum. The ship’s third deck has several interesting exhibits, including the U.S. Navy Cruiser Sailors Memorial Room, US Navy SEALS Memorial Room, and a Model Exhibit Display Room. The ship is purported to be haunted and was even featured on an episode of “Ghost Hunters” in October of 2006. Currently open from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturdays and Sundays from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.,admission is $10 for adults, $8 for senior citizens and children ages 4 to 12; under 3 are free. The ship is currently not handicapped accessible.

Another interesting bit of Quincy history is the Granite Railway, America’s first commercial railway built in 1826 specifically to transport Quincy granite to Charlestown for the construction of the Bunker Hill Monument. Unfortunately, there’s not much left of the railway except for the site of the railway’s incline, which began operation in 1830 and was used to haul granite from the Pine Ledge Quarry to the railway level 84 feet below. Until operations ceased in the 1940s, wagons moved up and down the 315-foot- long incline in an endless conveyor belt hauling tons of granite. Today there are plaques located on Granite Rail Court that mark the spot of the incline as well as several parkland trails that reveal vestiges of the original railway trestle and the incline.

The trails connect to the Quincy Quarries Reservation (Ricciuti Dr.; open from dawn to dusk), a 22-acre section of former quarries that are owned and operated by the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation. The quarries feature hiking, rock climbing, views of the Boston skyline and a lot of graffiti art — some of which is quite impressive. For safety reasons most of the quarries are now filled with dirt from Boston’s Big Dig highway project as, following the closure of the last quarry in 1963, many people were injured — some killed — while diving into the abandoned quarries that had filled with water. To learn more about granite quarrying in Quincy, there are exhibits on display in the Presidents Place Galleria (1250 Hancock St.) near the Adams National Historical Park Visitors Center.

Quincy is not just the birthplace of presidents. It’s also the birthplace of New England’s favorite coffee emporium, Dunkin’ Donuts. On Memorial Day in 1948 William Rosenberg opened a restaurant selling just coffee and donuts (52 varieties instead of the usual five or six) after his experiences selling food at factories and construction sites showed that those were the two most popular items. Originally called Open Kettle, the restaurant was renamed Dunkin’ Donuts in 1950 and proved to be so successful that Rosenberg starting selling franchises in 1955. Today there are more than 12,000 franchises in 36 countries, but the place where it all started is still serving up coffee and donuts at 543 Southern Artery. In 2011 the shop underwent a retro-remodel to revive its look from 1950, complete with a horseshoe counter with stools and a retro display case. The only thing that’s really missing are the old cars out front and the 1950s prices, but I guess you can’t have everything.

Finally, no day trip to Quincy would be complete without a stop at Tony’s Clam Shop (861 Quincy Shore Dr.; tonysclamshop.com), which has been serving up delicious seafood to Quincy residents and visitors since 1964. It is located along Wollaston Beach (WollastonBeach.org), Quincy’s largest beach, featuring 2-½ miles of clean sand, lifeguard-protected swimming and views of the Boston skyline. Tony’s began as a walk-up/take-out stand when the Kandalaft family started the business more than 50 years ago. Now they offer seating for more than 100 customers both indoors in their greenhouse-style dining room and outdoors on the patio. Some of the items you can order from their extensive menu are: mountains of melt-in-your-mouth Ipswich fried clams with the biggest bellies you’ve ever seen; overflowing and fresh-fried seafood platters; clam chowder chock full of clams and thick enough for your spoon to stand up in; and lobster rolls made from 1-¼ pounds of 100% lobster meat lightly dressed in mayonnaise and piled high on a grilled roll then dashed with Old Bay seasoning (the menu includes a lot of delicious choices for non-seafood lovers too). Tony’s is open mid-March through Columbus Day and is a great place to to end your day trip to Quincy by sitting down and enjoying a great meal while watching the sunset over Boston less than 10 miles away.

--

For more information on planning an escape to Quincy, go online to DiscoverQuincy.com or when you’re in town, pick up one of their historic walking, driving, or other brochures with lots of great information on things to see and do.

--

GETTING THERE:

The best route to Quincy from Norwich that will avoid traffic and construction on I-95 around Providence is to take I-395N merging onto Route 6E in Killingly. Follow Route 6 to I-295N in Johnston which you’ll stay on for 17 miles until you merge onto I-95N for 20 miles, then merging onto I-93N towards Boston. From there, follow the signs for the exit to Quincy Center; it can be a bit tricky so pay close attention or you’ll find yourself in Boston instead!