Our Quincy facility is in Norfolk County, MA. Quincy is the largest city in the county and is a major part of Metropolitan Boston. Quincy is known as the “City of Presidents” as it was the birthplace of two U.S. presidents – John Adams and his son John Quincy Adams. Located 15 minutes from Boston, this site is the best of both worlds – close to the city but located in the suburbs. Quincy is full of historic sites, culture, and commerce, it consists of 27 miles of coastline and has incredible views of the Boston skyline.

Learn more about living and working in Norfolk County, MA here.

Innovation

The ocean is a vast and complex environment. We are innovators and explorers, finding ways to bring cutting edge technologies to solve our customers’ hardest problems. From our beginning - as one of the first developers and manufacturers of unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) - our team continues to drive state-of-the-art autonomous systems forward in new and exciting ways.

People-Focused

Our employees are our greatest asset. Each employee contributes to the success of our business – employee recognition, success, and growth are top among our priorities. We believe our team functions best when our employees have the flexibility they need to maintain a healthy work-life balance. Outside of the office, our teammates enjoy participating in a host of social events and community volunteer opportunities. Our annual “Summer Series” events are a favorite among our employees in the warmer months, organizing fun sporting competitions followed by social mixers and networking

We closely partner with our community and local organizations to support development and growth in the Norfolk county area. Our employees support local initiatives including:

Quincy Food Pantry

Toys for Tots

FIRST Robotics and more

Our employees are also very involved in worthwhile philanthropy through:

Placing Memorial Day and Veterans Day Flags and wreaths for Wreaths Across America at Mt. Wollaston Cemetery

Participating in Carry Forward Wounded Warriors 5K

Donating to Wounded Warriors for the Annual Giving Campaign