A new volume, the sixth, of the series Juanelo Turriano Lectures on the History of Engineering has now been released.

While iron was used as a construction material from very early times, it was with the advent of the Industrial Revolution that it gained prevalence, imposing its personality and transforming the art of building. In De Re Metallica prominent historians, engineers and architects discuss the iron-induced transformation of nineteenth century engineering and architecture that contributed so decisively to shaping modern society.

READ ONLINE (In Spanish)

DOWNLOAD PDF (In Spanish)

The book entitled José Echegaray (1832-1916). El hombre polifacético. Técnica, ciencia, política y teatro en España [José Echegaray (1832-1916), man of many talents: engineering, science, theatre and politics in Spain], published by Fundación Juanelo Turriano on the occasion of the centenary of his death, was presented on 27 September at Madrid’s Residencia de Estudiantes.

The sizeable audience attending the event was addressed by Residencia de Estudiantes Manager Alicia Gómez-Navarro, Fundación Juanelo Turriano President Victoriano Muñoz Cava and José Manuel Sánchez Ron, foundation trustee and author of the book. In his introduction to the work, Sánchez Ron highlighted José Echegaray’s scientific dimension over and above his callings as politician, mathematician, Nobel prize playwright and member of Spain’s Royal Academy.

VIDEO OF THE EVENT

BOOKTRAILER

Madrid’s La Zarzuela Racecourse will be the venue of the 23 October opening of the Eduardo Torroja Museum.

The hall that will house the museum is located underneath the racecourse stands, one of Eduardo Torroja’s most emblematic works. Photographs, design drawings and scale models will be on permanent display.

Pepa Cassinello, Fundación Eduardo Torroja Director and member of our Advisory Commission, curated the museum project.

The exhibition entitled Watermarks was officially opened to the public at Segovia’s Royal Mint Museum on 6 October.

Spain’s National Mint, in conjunction with the Royal Mint Museum, invites the visitor to discover the world of paper, its history, production and use, and the watermarking procedure.

The showing will run through 10 January 2017.

More...