Collections

Ad Montem Exhibition Viewed by Thousands

Ad Montem: Eton’s Lost Procession was seen by over 3,000 people including Eton boys and other members of the school community, members of the public, special interest groups and local schools, making it the most visited special exhibition at Eton to date. The online version of the exhibition can be viewed here: Ad Montem: Eton’s Lost Procession – Eton College Collections

Activeyes Visit

George Fussey, Keeper of the National History Museum, and Amy Stone, Exhibitions & Access Coordinator, joined some Year 12 boys in welcoming a group called Activeyes to the Natural History Museum for a tactile session. Activeyes is a social group for adults living with sight loss and visual impairment who meet regularly to attend local events and activities together. The group were given a brief introduction to the museum before exploring different parts of the collection including mammals, shells, replica fossils and natural specimens through touch.

A Loan for a Loan

The painting of Sir Galahad by G.F. Watts has returned from Falmouth Art Gallery where is was on loan for the exhibition The Legend of King Arthur: A Pre-Raphaelite Love Story. Sir Galahad will soon be displayed in another special exhibition, Pre-Raphaelites: A Modern Perspective, which opens at Musei San Domenico Forlì in Italy in February.

During its absence, Old Etonian artist Roger Wagner, has loaned his evocative painting of the Hougoumont Crucifix for display in its place at Eton. The original Hougoumont Crucifix remarkably survived the Battle of Waterloo, despite French artillery setting fire to the building it which it was displayed.

Royal School of Needlework Event

We were delighted to host a partnership class with the Royal School of Needlework inspired by an item from the Museum of Eton Life collection, on display as part of the exhibition Ad Montem: Eton’s Lost Procession. The group, under the tuition of a Royal School of Needlework tutor, learned a variety of goldwork techniques required to produce a fleur de lys brooch. The participants visited the exhibition to see the piece which had inspired the session as well as other hand-embroidery featured in the display.

Boeckhorst’s Crucifixion

The Crucifixion scene on display in College Chapel is a remarkable painting by Flemish Baroque painter Jan Boeckhorst (1604–1668), a pupil of Rubens. Formerly on loan to the College, it was recently converted to a bequest. Following this change of status, we have sent the 17th-century frame to the City & Guilds of London Art School. There, it will be researched and treated by a final year student on the frame conservation course.

Richard III Society Visit

Members of the Croydon branch of the Richard III society recently visited the Eton College, seeing the historic 15th century buildings and a display of items from the College Archives relating to the protagonists in the Wars of the Roses, including a signed letter of protection from Edward IV and a general pardon of the Provost and Fellows from all “trespasses, murders and outlawries”, sealed by Richard III.