Synopsis

Yoshitsune leaves Kyoto with a few close retainers under Benkei’s guidance. They form a group of twelve fugitives disguised as yamabushi. They move towards Michinoku where Yoshitsune expects to find refuge. On their way, they arrive at the barrier of Ataka that Yoritomo, the new ruler in Kamakura, had built. Yoritomo is attempting to capture his half-brother, Yoshitsune, whom he suspects of disloyalty. Togashi, the guard in charge of the barrier, had heard that Yoshitsune is fleeing with his closest retainers disguised as yamabushi and becomes suspicious. Benkei insists that his group is on a journey to collect money for the rebuilding of the recently burnt Tōdaiji temple in Nara. Togashi is unconvinced and asks Benkei first to tell him about the origins and special features of yamabushi. Pleased with Benkei’s excursus, he then questions him about his subscription list. Benkei, of course, has no such document, but pulls out an ordinary paper scroll from his luggage. He then improvises the reading of a highly formal introduction to his funding task in a thunderous voice frightening everybody. After finishing his performance, Togashi allows the group to pass.

Then, however, one of Togashi’s aides becomes suspicious about a luggage carrier who very much resembles the description of the wanted general. This low class fellow is indeed Yoshitsune in disguise. The group is immediately ordered to stop. Benkei makes a display of great anger about his “servant,” and in order to prove that the luggage carrier is not Yoshitsune, harshly scolds him and beats him with his stick. As it was unthinkable in feudal Japan that a retainer would beat his lord, Togashi is convinced of the luggage carrier’s identity and gives again the order to let the yamabushi pass

After a while the group reaches a shore where they rest. There Benkei falls on his knees in front of Yoshitsune apologizing for his rudeness. Yoshitsune, however, forgives him understanding the reason of the beating. In the meantime, Togashi’s aids arrive with bottles of sake to bid farewell to the group. Benkei sings and dances joyfully and the group moves on towards Michinoku.

Notes

5. Eleven retainers… In the Kabuki-version of Kanjinchō, only five retainers are mentioned. 7. KAMEI, KATAOKA, ISE, SURUGA…The full names of Yoshitsune’s four retainers are: KAMEI Rokurō, KATAOKA Hachirō, ISE Saburō and SURUGA Jirō. They are sometimes called “The Four Heavenly Kings” 8. Yamabushi…The literal meaning of the term yamabushi is “one who lies/hides in the mountains”. Yamabushi were mountain ascetics who followed Shugendō doctrine, an amalgam of religious elements taken primarily from esoteric Buddhism of the Shingon sect, but also including aspects taken from Shintō. While mostly solitary, they also formed loose confederations and associations with certain temples. Their distinctive attire included an undersized black round hat placed high on the forehead, a kesa (a Buddhist stole), and robes known as suzukake. They invariably carry a shakujō, a long pilgrim’s staff topped with loose metal rings that make a unique jangle or clink when the staff strikes the ground. Yoshitsune’s retainers disguised themselves as yamabushi to fool the guards placed at the borders by Yoritomo in his hunt for Yoshitsune. 11. Pass of Ōzaka… Ōzaka is the pass between present-day Kyoto and Otsu in Shiga Prefecture. This word is a commonly used as utamakura, words of five or seven syllables codified for poetic use. Many of these utamakura refer to the seasons, flora, fauna, and the names of famous places. 14. Kaizu Mikuni and Koshiji…Kaizu is a stretch of the northern shore on Lake Biwa in present-day Makino-chō in Shiga Prefecture. Mikuni, the present-day city of Sakai, was in Echizen, today’s Fukui Prefecture. Koshijigata plays upon the multiple meanings imbedded in the Chinese character used for koshi, which when read as koshi means “crossing”; the other reading, however, is echi, or etsu, which refers to the geographic name Echizen. 15 Ataka… Ataka was part of Kaga and corresponds to the present-day city of Komatsu in Ishikawa pref. 19. Tōdaiji temple…The Tōdaiji temple in Nara, still famous for the colossal bronze statue of the Great Buddha, had been severely damaged by fire during TAIRA no Shigehira’s attack on the 15th of the first month in 1181. 20. Raising funds… A fund raising to rebuild the Tōdaiji temple, the priest Shunjōbō Chōgen (1121-1206) organized a system for the collection of donations, or kanjin. This list, known as a kanjinchō, is normally rendered as “subscription list” in English. 21. Hokuroku… present-day Hokuriku includes the present-day regions of Fukui, Toyama, Ishikawa and Niigata Prefectures. 24. Discord… Yoritomo and Yoshitsune had the same father, but different mothers. After Yoshitsune succeeded in destroying the HEIKE, he became the victim of slander. The elder half-brother began to question Yoshitsune’s loyalty, and subsequently pursued him and his men, forcing them to travel in disguise as they sought shelter in Michinoku (see notes line 26). 26 Hidehira… FUJIWARA no Hidehira (1122? – 1187) in Mutsu or Michinoku (present-day Tōhoku) was a childhood guardian of Yoshitsune’s and had sheltered him in the mountains of Kurama to the north of Kyōto where he was instrumental in providing Yoshitsune with an education. 38. Buddhist rosary… The yamabushi rosary they were rubbing consisted of one hundred eight beads each representing one of mankind’s afflictions. The figure of one hundred eight is arrived at by multiplying the six senses – sight, sound, smell, taste, touch, and consciousness – with the three reactions – positive, negative, and indifference – to create the eighteen “feelings”. Each of these feelings can then either be attached to pleasure or detached from pleasure for the thirty-six “passions”, each of which may be manifested in the past, present, or future, the total of possible combinations then being one hundred eight. This same number is used in Japanese New Year Eve’s services when temple bells are rung the same number of times. 45. Sanzō Hōshi… This legendary “Priest of the Three Holy Treasures”, Genjō (602-664), is said to have brought and translated the core of the Buddhist scriptures from India. He is best known from the epic story, the Xiyouji (Jap. Saiyūki), that recounts his adventures during his travel in the company of a monkey, a pig and a river goblin (kappa). What the connection may be with the yamabushi is unclear. 46. Ennogyōja… The founder of Shugendō (yamabushi-sect) En no Ozuno is normally referred to as Ennogyōja. 47. Fudō Myōō… The “Immoveable One” is a manifestation of Dainichinyorai, “The Great Illuminator”, the central deity in Shingon Buddhism. Fudō Myōō is one of the Godaimyōō, “The Five Radiant Lords”, and especially venerated by the yamabushi. Effigies of him in temples show a deity with a horrifying facial expression engulfed in flames. This frightening appearance is explained as the deity’s fervor in overcoming worldly passions and in protecting Buddhism from evil. 52. Twelve Karmic Sources… The karmic cycle of Buddhist birth and rebirth consists of twelve levels of existence and visualized as the karmic wheel (Karma Inada). 53. Garment… this refers to the suzukake which is the persimmon-colored garment of the Nine World Mandala, a mandala being a geometric representation of the Buddhist universe. 54.1. Eternal Womb Mandala… This refers to the Taizōkai Mandala, another term for the literal womb of the Dainichinyorai-Sutra, in which mercy and benevolence are situated. 56. Eight-Petal Lotus…this is the center of the Taizōkai Mandala. 58. A/Un… These two syllables, “a” and “un”, symbolize beginning and end, the alpha and the omega, of the entity of the world. 72. Nine Word Spell… The “Nine-word ward” served as a spell for spiritual protection. 75. Fudō Myōō… see notes line 47. 76. Yuya Gongen… This is a deity of the Kumano Shrine in present-day Wakayama Pref. 90. Nirvana…is the state of perfection that Gautama Buddha attained when he left this world. His death is allegorized with the autumn moon disappearing behind clouds. 94. Shōmu Kōtei… During the reign of Emperor Shōmu (701-756), the Tōdaiji Temple was completed. 95. The beloved consort… The wife of Emperor Shōmu died in 760, four years after the Emperor: In medieval legend, however, Emperor Shōmu built the Tōdaiji Temple in his grief over the death of his wife. 99. Rushana-Butsu… Vairocana, the “True Buddha of Esoteric Sects”. The most famous statue is the Great Buddha of the Tōdaiji Temple in Nara, which Emperor Shōmu created in 752. 100. The era of Jishō… In the fourth year of the Jishō period (1180), TAIRA no Shigehira (1157-1185) set fire to the Tōdaiji Temple. 103. Shunjōbō Chōgen… This priest (1121-1206) was instrumental in rebuilding the Tōdaiji Temple. He organized the nation-wide fund-raising efforts, in which Benkei pretended to be participating. 110. Hachiman… Hachiman refers to “Hachiman Daibosatsu”, the bodhisattva revered by the warriors. 124. Noto… refers to present-day Ishikawa Prefecture. 129. Kongō zue… is the name of the four or eight-sided pilgrim staff yamabushi priests customarily carry. 131.The “Four Heavenly Kings”… are KAMEI, KATAOKA, ISE and SURUGA: Yoshitsune’s four main retainers. (See line 7.) 178. Tokiwa… was Yoshitsune’s mother. 179. Fushimi… lies to the south of Kyoto. When Yoshitsune’s father, Yoshitomo, was killed in the Heiji war (1159), his wife fled to Fushimi with Yoshitsune and his two elder brothers Imawaka and Otowaka. 180. Kurama… is to the north of Kyoto, where Yoshitsune spent about 10 years of his childhood. 185. Suma and Akashi… are both located in present-day Hyōgo Prefecture. Yoshitsune fought one of his most ingenious battles, the Battle of Ichinotani, on the shores of Suma. 187 White banners… are the GENJI flags. 196. Chrysanthemum wine…Chrysanthemum petals scattered in a rice wine cup have an auspicious meaning. 201. Mai ennen no toki no waka… Ennen was a felicitous dance (mai) associated with temple ritual, and waka here means song. Benkei sang as he danced. 203. The waterfall is thundering… This line is taken from an imayō, a genre of song popular at the end of the Heian period.