Jean-Luc Dehaene, the former Belgian prime minister who has headed UEFA’s Financial Fair Play (FFP) investigations, has died, it has been announced.

Dehaene, 73, had been suffering from cancer but died following a fall in France, according to media reports in Belgium.

UEFA has been informed of his death but it is unclear what effect it will have on the ongoing case in relation to sanctions for Manchester City’s FFP rule breaches, though a further delay is likely.

Dehaene was chairman of the Club Football Control Body and was struggling with his illness during recent weeks. He still took an active role in the investigations and had been kept updated with all the documentation.

Lovren and Jelavic in Croatia squad

Southampton defender Dejan Lovren and Hull striker Nikica Jelavic have been named in Croatia’s preliminary 30-man squad for the World Cup.

The Premier League duo will be hopeful of being included in Niko Kovac’s final line-up, with the manager set to trim seven players from the list on May 31.

One man who has not been named is veteran Josip Simunic.

The 36-year-old is Croatia’s third highest capped player (105 matches) but he will not get the chance to add to his haul after losing his appeal against a 10-match FIFA ban.

Eto’o hits back at ‘fool’ Mourinho

Samuel Eto’o has described Chelsea manager Jose Mourinho as a “fool” for questioning his age and vowed to play on at the highest level for some time to come.

Eto’o, who is out of contract this summer, plans to continue to ply his trade in one of Europe’s top leagues.

“Thanks for informing me that it will be my last World Cup. Today, I am 33 years old. And it is not because a fool called me an old man that you must believe it,” Eto’o said.

“Some believe I am going to retire in the US but I have regained the joy of the Champions League and I am going to carry on playing in the Champions League. Where? I am not going to tell you.”

Thiago out injured

Bayern Munich and Spain midfielder Thiago Alcantara will miss the World Cup as well as this week’s German Cup final after tearing a knee ligament.

The 23-year-old, who was named in Spain’s World Cup squad on Monday, has been out since March with a different ligament injury in the right knee and was hoping to play in the Cup final against Borussia Dortmund on Saturday.

“This is bitter for Thiago Alcantara,” said Bayern CEO Karl-Heinz Rummenigge.

“We will take care of him now and make sure he is fit at the start of the season.”

Pirlo close to new Juventus deal

Andrea Pirlo has revealed he is close to signing a contract extension with Juventus.

The veteran playmaker could become a free agent this summer but is set to pen a new two-year deal with the recently-crowned Serie A champions.

“More or less we have reached an agreement. I hope the an-nouncement will be made in the coming days,” Pirlo said.

Pirlo, who was voted the 2012-13 Player of the Year in Serie A by his peers, joined Juve from Milan in 2011.

The 34-year-old, who is set to play for Italy at this summer’s World Cup, scored four goals in 29 league appearances to help Juve clinch their third straight Scudetto.

Dinamo Bucharest file for insolvency

Troubled Romanian club Dinamo Bucharest have filed for insolvency after running up serious debts.

“I searched for all possible solutions and I hoped until the very last moment but a new debt of several million lei came out of nowhere,” Dinamo president Ionut Negoita said.

“Our conclusion is that (filing for insolvency) is the only solution at the moment.”

Dinamo are one of the two most successful clubs in Romania alongside bitter city rivals Steaua. They have won 18 league titles, 13 domestic cups, two Supercups and reached the 1984 European Cup semi-finals.

Carbone joins Leeds as consultant

Leeds have appointed Italian Benito Carbone as a consultant responsible for their “technical and football operations”.

The 42-year-old, who spent six years as a player in the Premier League from the mid-90s, has a remit to advise the new board of directors at Elland Road on first-team matters.

Meanwhile, Leeds owner Massimo Cellino cast doubt on the future of Brian McDermott in an interview on Wednesday when he questioned the manager’s decision to take a holiday.

McDermott is understood to have taken a break after attending the League Managers Association’s awards dinner in London on Monday night.

Carbone retired as a player at Pavia in 2010.