898 relations: A Biographical Dictionary of Civil Engineers, A Christmas Carol, A Salty Piece of Land, A54 road, Abarat, Absecon Lighthouse, Achillbeg, AD 42, Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog, Aerodrome beacon, Ailsa Craig, Ajaccio, Aksi, Alan Stevenson, Alboran Island, Alcatraz Island, Alexander Mitchell (engineer), Alexander Nasmyth, Alexander Parris, Alexandria, Alexandru Macedonski, Alfred Eisenstaedt, Alpena County, Michigan, Alpena, Michigan, Alte Weser (lighthouse), Ambrose Light, Amelia Island Light, Amoco Cadiz, Ancient Roman architecture, Anda Lighthouse, Andrew E. K. Benham, Angel Island (California), Angelo Secchi, Annisquam, Massachusetts, Anticosti Island, Apostle Islands Lighthouses, Aransas Pass, Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina, Archipelago Sea, Architecture of Africa, Ardglass, Ardnamurchan, Ardrishaig, Arranmore, Asahi, Chiba, Ashland Harbor Breakwater Light, Assateague Light, Astola Island, Atlantic City Line, Atlantic City, New Jersey, ... Expand index (848 more) » « Shrink index

A Biographical Dictionary of Civil Engineers

A Biographical Dictionary of Civil Engineers in Great Britain and Ireland discusses the lives of the people who were concerned with building harbours and lighthouses, undertook fen drainage and improved river navigations, built canals, roads, bridges and early railways, and provided water supply facilities.

See Lighthouse and A Biographical Dictionary of Civil Engineers

A Christmas Carol

A Christmas Carol in Prose, Being a Ghost-Story of Christmas, commonly known as A Christmas Carol, is a novella by Charles Dickens, first published in London by Chapman & Hall in 1843; the first edition was illustrated by John Leech.

See Lighthouse and A Christmas Carol

A Salty Piece of Land

A Salty Piece of Land is a 2004 novel by bestselling author and songwriter Jimmy Buffett.

See Lighthouse and A Salty Piece of Land

A54 road

The A54 road is a road in England linking Chester in Cheshire with Buxton in Derbyshire.

See Lighthouse and A54 road

Abarat

Abarat (2002) is a fantasy novel written and illustrated by Clive Barker, the first in Barker's The Books of Abarat series.

See Lighthouse and Abarat

Absecon Lighthouse

The Absecon Lighthouse is a coastal lighthouse located in the north end of Atlantic City, New Jersey, overlooking Absecon Inlet.

See Lighthouse and Absecon Lighthouse

Achillbeg

Acaill Bheag (Achillbeg) is a small island in County Mayo, Ireland, just off the southern tip of Achill Island.

See Lighthouse and Achillbeg

AD 42

AD 42 (XLII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.

See Lighthouse and AD 42

Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog

Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog is an American animated series produced by DiC Animation City and Bohbot Entertainment that was based on the Sonic the Hedgehog video game series produced by Sega.

See Lighthouse and Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog

Aerodrome beacon

An aerodrome beacon or rotating beacon is a beacon installed at an airport or aerodrome to indicate its location to aircraft pilots at night.

See Lighthouse and Aerodrome beacon

Ailsa Craig

Ailsa Craig (Creag Ealasaid) is an island of in the outer Firth of Clyde, west of mainland Scotland, upon which blue hone granite has long been quarried to make curling stones.

See Lighthouse and Ailsa Craig

Ajaccio

Ajaccio is a French commune, prefecture of the department of Corse-du-Sud, and head office of the Collectivité territoriale de Corse (capital city of Corsica).

See Lighthouse and Ajaccio

Aksi

Aksi (also known as Väike-Prangli (Little Prangli) or Äksi) (Lilla Wrangelsö) is an Estonian island in the Gulf of Finland with an area of 59 hectares.

See Lighthouse and Aksi

Alan Stevenson

Alan Stevenson FRSE MInstCE (1807, Edinburgh – 1865, Portobello, Edinburgh) was a Scottish lighthouse engineer who was Engineer to the Board of Northern Lighthouses.

See Lighthouse and Alan Stevenson

Alboran Island

Alboran Island (Isla de Alborán) is a small islet in the Alboran Sea, part of the western Mediterranean, about 50 km (31 mi) north of the Moroccan coast and 90 kilometres (56 miles) south of the Spanish province of Almería.

See Lighthouse and Alboran Island

Alcatraz Island

Alcatraz Island is located in San Francisco Bay, offshore from San Francisco, California, United States.

See Lighthouse and Alcatraz Island

Alexander Mitchell (engineer)

Alexander Mitchell, (13 April 1780 – 25 June 1868) was an Irish engineer who from 1802 was blind.

See Lighthouse and Alexander Mitchell (engineer)

Alexander Nasmyth

Alexander Nasmyth (9 September 175810 April 1840) was a Scottish portrait and landscape painter, a pupil of Allan Ramsay.

See Lighthouse and Alexander Nasmyth

Alexander Parris

Alexander Parris (November 24, 1780 – June 16, 1852) was a prominent American architect-engineer.

See Lighthouse and Alexander Parris

Alexandria

Alexandria (or; Arabic: الإسكندرية; Egyptian Arabic: إسكندرية; Ⲁⲗⲉⲝⲁⲛⲇⲣⲓⲁ; Ⲣⲁⲕⲟⲧⲉ) is the second-largest city in Egypt and a major economic centre, extending about along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea in the north central part of the country.

See Lighthouse and Alexandria

Alexandru Macedonski

Alexandru Macedonski (also rendered as Al. A. Macedonski, Macedonschi or Macedonsky; March 14, 1854 – November 24, 1920) was a Romanian poet, novelist, dramatist and literary critic, known especially for having promoted French Symbolism in his native country, and for leading the Romanian Symbolist movement during its early decades.

See Lighthouse and Alexandru Macedonski

Alfred Eisenstaedt

Alfred Eisenstaedt (December 6, 1898 – August 23, 1995) was a German-born American photographer and photojournalist.

See Lighthouse and Alfred Eisenstaedt

Alpena County, Michigan

Alpena County is a county in the U.S. state of Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Alpena County, Michigan

Alpena, Michigan

Alpena is a city in the U.S. state of Michigan and the county seat of Alpena County.

See Lighthouse and Alpena, Michigan

Alte Weser (lighthouse)

The Alte Weser Lighthouse is located offshore from the estuary mouth of the river Weser in the German Bight, southern North Sea.

See Lighthouse and Alte Weser (lighthouse)

Ambrose Light

Ambrose Light, often called Ambrose Tower, was the light station at the convergence of several major shipping lanes in Lower New York Bay, including Ambrose Channel, the primary passage for ships entering and departing the Port of New York and New Jersey.

See Lighthouse and Ambrose Light

Amelia Island Light

The Amelia Island Light is the oldest existing lighthouse in the state of Florida in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Amelia Island Light

Amoco Cadiz

Amoco Cadiz was a very large crude carrier (VLCC) under the Liberian flag of convenience owned by Amoco and transporting crude oil for Shell.

See Lighthouse and Amoco Cadiz

Ancient Roman architecture

Ancient Roman architecture adopted the external language of classical Greek architecture for the purposes of the ancient Romans, but differed from Greek buildings, becoming a new architectural style.

See Lighthouse and Ancient Roman architecture

Anda Lighthouse

Anda Lighthouse (Anda fyrstasjon) is a lighthouse on the island of Anden in the municipality of Øksnes in Nordland county, Norway.

See Lighthouse and Anda Lighthouse

Andrew E. K. Benham

Andrew Ellicot Kennedy Benham (April 10, 1832 – August 11, 1905) was an American admiral.

See Lighthouse and Andrew E. K. Benham

Angel Island (California)

Angel Island is an island in San Francisco Bay offering expansive 360° views of the San Francisco skyline, the Marin County Headlands and Mount Tamalpais.

See Lighthouse and Angel Island (California)

Angelo Secchi

Fr.

See Lighthouse and Angelo Secchi

Annisquam, Massachusetts

Annisquam is a small waterfront neighborhood in the city of Gloucester, on the North Shore of Massachusetts.

See Lighthouse and Annisquam, Massachusetts

Anticosti Island

Anticosti Island (French, Île d'Anticosti) is an island in the province of Quebec, Canada at the outlet of the Saint Lawrence River into the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, between 49° and 50° N., and between 61° 40' and 64° 30' W.

See Lighthouse and Anticosti Island

Apostle Islands Lighthouses

There are several historic lighthouses on Lake Superior on or near the Apostle Islands in Wisconsin.

See Lighthouse and Apostle Islands Lighthouses

Aransas Pass

Aransas Pass is a navigable salt water channel connecting the Gulf of Mexico with Aransas Bay on the Texas Gulf coast in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Aransas Pass

Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina

Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina (Archipiélago de San Andrés, Providencia y Santa Catalina), or, in everyday language, San Andrés y Providencia, is one of the departments of Colombia.

See Lighthouse and Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina

Archipelago Sea

The Archipelago Sea (Finnish: Saaristomeri, Swedish: Skärgårdshavet) is a part of the Baltic Sea between the Gulf of Bothnia, the Gulf of Finland and the Sea of Åland, within Finnish territorial waters.

See Lighthouse and Archipelago Sea

Architecture of Africa

The architecture of Africa, like other aspects of the culture of Africa, is exceptionally diverse.

See Lighthouse and Architecture of Africa

Ardglass

Ardglass is a coastal fishing village, townland (of 321 acres) and civil parish in County Down, Northern Ireland, in the historic barony of Lecale Lower.

See Lighthouse and Ardglass

Ardnamurchan

Ardnamurchan (Àird nam Murchan: headland of the great seas) is a peninsula in the ward management area of Lochaber, Highland, Scotland, noted for being very unspoilt and undisturbed.

See Lighthouse and Ardnamurchan

Ardrishaig

Ardrishaig (Rubha Àird Driseig) is a lochside village at the southern (eastern) entrance to the Crinan Canal in Argyll and Bute in the west of Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Ardrishaig

Arranmore

Árainn Mhór (English name: Arranmore) is an island off the west coast of County Donegal in Ulster, Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Arranmore

Asahi, Chiba

is a city located in Chiba Prefecture, Japan.

See Lighthouse and Asahi, Chiba

Ashland Harbor Breakwater Light

The Ashland Harbor Breakwater lighthouse, also known as Ashland Breakwater Lighthouse, is an operational lighthouse located near Ashland in Ashland County, Wisconsin, USA.

See Lighthouse and Ashland Harbor Breakwater Light

Assateague Light

Assateague Light is the lighthouse located on the southern end of Assateague Island off the coast of the Virginia Eastern Shore, United States.

See Lighthouse and Assateague Light

Astola Island

Astola Island, also known as Jezira Haft Talar (Balochi: زروان ءِ هفت تلار) Satadip or 'Island of the Seven Hills', is a small uninhabited Pakistani island in the Arabian Sea approximately south of the nearest part of the coast and southeast of the fishing port of Pasni.

See Lighthouse and Astola Island

Atlantic City Line

The Atlantic City Line (ACL) is a rail line operated by New Jersey Transit (NJT) in the United States between Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Atlantic City, New Jersey, operating along the corridor of the White Horse Pike.

See Lighthouse and Atlantic City Line

Atlantic City, New Jersey

Atlantic City is a resort city in Atlantic County, New Jersey, United States, known for its casinos, boardwalk, and beaches.

See Lighthouse and Atlantic City, New Jersey

Augustin-Jean Fresnel

Augustin-Jean Fresnel (10 May 178814 July 1827) was a French civil engineer and physicist whose research in optics led to the almost unanimous acceptance of the wave theory of light, excluding any remnant of Newton's corpuscular theory, from the late 1830s until the end of the 19th century.

See Lighthouse and Augustin-Jean Fresnel

Auskerry

Auskerry (Austrsker, east skerry) is a small island in eastern Orkney, Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Auskerry

Australian Maritime Safety Authority

Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) is an Australian statutory authority established in 1990 under the Australian Maritime Safety Authority Act 1990 and governed by the Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997.

See Lighthouse and Australian Maritime Safety Authority

Automatic identification system

The automatic identification system (AIS) is an automatic tracking system used on ships and by vessel traffic services (VTS).

See Lighthouse and Automatic identification system

Axim

Axim is a coastal town and the capital of Nzema East Municipal district, a district in Western Region of South Ghana.

See Lighthouse and Axim

Axis mundi

The axis mundi (also cosmic axis, world axis, world pillar, center of the world, world tree), in certain beliefs and philosophies, is the world center, or the connection between Heaven and Earth.

See Lighthouse and Axis mundi

Île de Batz

The Île de Batz (Enez Vaz in Breton) is an island off Roscoff in Brittany, France.

See Lighthouse and Île de Batz

Öckerö Municipality

Öckerö Municipality (Öckerö kommun) is a municipality in Västra Götaland County in western Sweden.

See Lighthouse and Öckerö Municipality

Øygarden

Øygarden() is a municipality in Hordaland county, Norway.

See Lighthouse and Øygarden

Świnoujście

Świnoujście (Swinemünde, both names meaning Świna mouth) is a city and seaport on the Baltic Sea and Szczecin Lagoon, located in the extreme north-west of Poland.

See Lighthouse and Świnoujście

Back-Room Boy

Back-Room Boy is a 1942 British comedy film directed by Herbert Mason, produced by Edward Black for Gainsborough Pictures and starring Arthur Askey, Googie Withers, Graham Moffatt and Moore Marriott.

See Lighthouse and Back-Room Boy

Baileys Harbor Light

The Baileys Harbor lighthouse is a lighthouse located near Baileys Harbor in Door County, Wisconsin.

See Lighthouse and Baileys Harbor Light

Baileys Harbor Range Lights

The Baileys Harbor Range Lights are a pair of lighthouses arranged in a range light configuration, located near Baileys Harbor in Door County, Wisconsin, United States.

See Lighthouse and Baileys Harbor Range Lights

Baily Lighthouse

The Baily Lighthouse is a lighthouse on the southeastern part of Howth Head in Dublin, Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Baily Lighthouse

Bajo Nuevo Bank

Bajo Nuevo Bank, also known as the Petrel Islands (Bajo Nuevo, Islas Petrel), is a small, uninhabited reef with some small grass-covered islets, located in the western Caribbean Sea at, with a lighthouse on Low Cay at.

See Lighthouse and Bajo Nuevo Bank

Bald Head Island, North Carolina

Bald Head Island, historically Smith Island, is a village located on the east side of the Cape Fear River in Brunswick County, North Carolina, United States.

See Lighthouse and Bald Head Island, North Carolina

Bald Head Light

Bald Head Lighthouse, known as Old Baldy, is the oldest lighthouse still standing in North Carolina.

See Lighthouse and Bald Head Light

Balta, Shetland

Balta (Old Norse: "Baltey") is an uninhabited island in Shetland, Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Balta, Shetland

Baltiysk

Baltiysk (Балти́йск), before 1946 known by its German name Pillau (Piława; Piliava; Yiddish: פּילאַווע, Pilave), is a seaport town and the administrative center of Baltiysky District in Kaliningrad Oblast, Russia, located on the northern part of the Vistula Spit, on the shore of the Strait of Baltiysk separating the Vistula Lagoon from the Gdańsk Bay.

See Lighthouse and Baltiysk

Bamburgh

Bamburgh is a village and civil parish on the coast of Northumberland, England.

See Lighthouse and Bamburgh

Barber's pole

A barber's pole is a type of sign used by barbers to signify the place or shop where they perform their craft.

See Lighthouse and Barber's pole

Barfleur

Barfleur is a commune in the Manche department in the Normandy region in northwestern France.

See Lighthouse and Barfleur

Barnegat Lighthouse

Barnegat Lighthouse or Barnegat Light, colloquially known as "Old Barney", is a historic lighthouse located in Barnegat Lighthouse State Park on the northern tip of Long Beach Island, in the borough of Barnegat Light, Ocean County, New Jersey, United States, on the south side of Barnegat Inlet.

See Lighthouse and Barnegat Lighthouse

Bass River, Nova Scotia

Bass River is an unincorporated rural community in western Colchester County, north-central Nova Scotia, in the Maritimes of Canada.

See Lighthouse and Bass River, Nova Scotia

Battle of Inchon

The Battle of Inchon was an amphibious invasion and battle of the Korean War that resulted in a decisive victory and strategic reversal in favor of the United Nations (UN).

See Lighthouse and Battle of Inchon

Beacon

A beacon is an intentionally conspicuous device designed to attract attention to a specific location.

See Lighthouse and Beacon

Beaver Island (Lake Michigan)

Beaver Island is the largest island in Lake Michigan and part of the Beaver Island archipelago in the state of Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Beaver Island (Lake Michigan)

Bed and breakfast

A bed and breakfast (typically shortened to B&B or BnB) is a small lodging establishment that offers overnight accommodation and breakfast.

See Lighthouse and Bed and breakfast

Belitung

Belitung (or in English, Billiton) is an island on the east coast of Sumatra, Indonesia in the Java Sea.

See Lighthouse and Belitung

Bell Rock Lighthouse

The Bell Rock Lighthouse, off the coast of Angus, Scotland, is the world's oldest surviving sea-washed lighthouse.

See Lighthouse and Bell Rock Lighthouse

Beluga whale

The beluga whale or white whale (Delphinapterus leucas) is an Arctic and sub-Arctic cetacean.

See Lighthouse and Beluga whale

Benjamin F. Isherwood

Benjamin Franklin Isherwood (October 6, 1822 &ndash; June 19, 1915) was an engineering officer in the United States Navy during the early days of steam-powered warships.

See Lighthouse and Benjamin F. Isherwood

Berwick-upon-Tweed

Berwick-upon-Tweed (Sooth Berwick, Bearaig a Deas) is a town in the county of Northumberland.

See Lighthouse and Berwick-upon-Tweed

Biddeford, Maine

Biddeford is a city in York County, Maine, United States.

See Lighthouse and Biddeford, Maine

Big Sur

Big Sur is a rugged section of California's Central Coast between Carmel Highlands and San Simeon, where the Santa Lucia Mountains rise abruptly from the Pacific Ocean, that is frequently praised for its dramatic views.

See Lighthouse and Big Sur

Birdhouse in Your Soul

"Birdhouse in Your Soul" is a song by American alternative rock band They Might Be Giants.

See Lighthouse and Birdhouse in Your Soul

Bishop Rock, Isles of Scilly

The Bishop Rock (Men Epskop) is a very small islet in the Atlantic Ocean known for its lighthouse.

See Lighthouse and Bishop Rock, Isles of Scilly

Black Sea Fleet

The Black Sea Fleet (Черноморский Флот, Chernomorsky Flot) is the fleet of the Russian Navy in the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Mediterranean Sea.

See Lighthouse and Black Sea Fleet

Blackpool Tower

Blackpool Tower is a tourist attraction in Blackpool, Lancashire, England, which was opened to the public on 14 May 1894.

See Lighthouse and Blackpool Tower

Blindleia

Blindleia is an long inland waterway in the municipality of Lillesand in Aust-Agder county, Norway.

See Lighthouse and Blindleia

Block Island Southeast Light

Block Island Southeast Light is a lighthouse located on Mohegan Bluffs at the southeastern corner of Block Island, Rhode Island.

See Lighthouse and Block Island Southeast Light

Blyth, Northumberland

Blyth is a town and civil parish in southeast Northumberland, England.

See Lighthouse and Blyth, Northumberland

Boards of Canada

Boards of Canada are a Scottish electronic music duo consisting of brothers Michael Sandison and Marcus Eoin.

See Lighthouse and Boards of Canada

Bodie Island Lighthouse

The current Bodie Island Lighthouse is the third that has stood in this vicinity of Bodie Island on the Outer Banks in North Carolina and was built in 1872.

See Lighthouse and Bodie Island Lighthouse

Boon Island

Boon Island is a barren piece of land located in the Gulf of Maine 6 miles (10 km) off the town of York on the Maine coast.

See Lighthouse and Boon Island

Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area

The Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area is a National Recreation Area situated among the islands of Boston Harbor of Boston, Massachusetts.

See Lighthouse and Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area

Bound Skerry

Bound Skerry is part of the Out Skerries group in the Shetland Islands.

See Lighthouse and Bound Skerry

Braunton Burrows

Braunton Burrows is a sand dune system on the North Devon coast.

See Lighthouse and Braunton Burrows

Breizh Cola

Breizh Cola (from the Breton word for Brittany), is a brand of cola bottled by Phare Ouest and sold in Brittany, France.

See Lighthouse and Breizh Cola

Breskens

Breskens is a harbour town on the Westerschelde in the municipality of Sluis in the province of Zeeland, in the south-western Netherlands.

See Lighthouse and Breskens

Bressay Lighthouse

Bressay Lighthouse is still an active lighthouse in the Shetland Islands, Scotland, south-east of Lerwick.

See Lighthouse and Bressay Lighthouse

Bride (parish)

Bride (Skeerey Vreeshey), named after St.

See Lighthouse and Bride (parish)

Brittany

Brittany (Bretagne; Breizh, pronounced or; Gallo: Bertaèyn, pronounced) is a cultural region in the northwest of France, covering the western part of what was known as Armorica during the period of Roman occupation.

See Lighthouse and Brittany

Brough of Birsay

The Brough of Birsay is an uninhabited tidal island off the north-west coast of The Mainland of Orkney, Scotland, in the parish of Birsay.

See Lighthouse and Brough of Birsay

Brown Station

Brown Station (Estación Científica Almirante Brown, or more often Base Brown or Estación Brown) is an Argentine Antarctic base and scientific research station named after Admiral William Brown, the father of the Argentine Navy.

See Lighthouse and Brown Station

Brunate

Brunate is a town and comune in the province of Como in northern Italy, some northeast of Milan.

See Lighthouse and Brunate

Buoy

A buoy is a floating device that can have many purposes.

See Lighthouse and Buoy

Burnham-on-Sea

Burnham-on-Sea is a large seaside town in Somerset, England, at the mouth of the River Parrett, upon Bridgwater Bay.

See Lighthouse and Burnham-on-Sea

Burning glass

A burning glass or burning lens is a large convex lens that can concentrate the sun's rays onto a small area, heating up the area and thus resulting in ignition of the exposed surface.

See Lighthouse and Burning glass

Byron Bay, New South Wales

Byron Bay is a beachside town located in the far-northeastern corner of the state of New South Wales, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Byron Bay, New South Wales

Cairn

A cairn is a human-made pile (or stack) of stones.

See Lighthouse and Cairn

Cairngaan

Cairngaan, Wigtownshire, is the southmost settlement in Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Cairngaan

Caja de Muertos

Caja de Muertos (English: Coffin Island or Dead Man's Chest) is an uninhabited island off the southern coast of Puerto Rico, in the municipality of Ponce.

See Lighthouse and Caja de Muertos

Calais

Calais (Calés; Kales) is a city and major ferry port in northern France in the department of Pas-de-Calais, of which it is a sub-prefecture.

See Lighthouse and Calais

Caldey Lighthouse

Caldey Lighthouse is located on the south end of Caldey Island, three miles (5 km) off the south Pembrokeshire, Wales coastline, a small island inhabited by a Cistercian monastery.

See Lighthouse and Caldey Lighthouse

Calf of Man

Calf of Man (Yn Cholloo) is a island, off the southwest coast of the Isle of Man.

See Lighthouse and Calf of Man

California Department of Parks and Recreation

The California Department of Parks and Recreation, also known as California State Parks, manages the California state parks system.

See Lighthouse and California Department of Parks and Recreation

Cana Island Light

The Cana Island lighthouse is a lighthouse located just north of Baileys Harbor in Door County, Wisconsin, United States.

See Lighthouse and Cana Island Light

Canadian Coast Guard

The Canadian Coast Guard (CCG; Garde côtière canadienne – GCC) is the coast guard of Canada.

See Lighthouse and Canadian Coast Guard

Canal Park, Duluth

Canal Park is a tourist and recreation-oriented district of Duluth, Minnesota, United States.

See Lighthouse and Canal Park, Duluth

Canary Islands oystercatcher

The Canary Islands oystercatcher, Canarian oystercatcher, or Canarian black oystercatcher (Haematopus meadewaldoi), was a shorebird endemic to Fuerteventura, Lanzarote, and their offshore islets (Islote de Lobos and the Chinijo Archipelago) in the Canary Islands, Spain.

See Lighthouse and Canary Islands oystercatcher

Cannon Rock

Cannon Rock is a skerry in the North Channel off the coast of the Ards Peninsula near Cloughey, County Down, Northern Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Cannon Rock

Cap de la Nau

The Cap de la Nau or Cabo de la Nao, literally Cape of the Ship, is a headland located central-eastern coastal Spain on the Gulf of Valencia, Mediterranean Sea.

See Lighthouse and Cap de la Nau

Cap Fréhel

Cap Fréhel is a peninsula in Côtes-d'Armor, in northern Brittany, France which extends off the Côte d'Émeraude into the Golfe de Saint-Malo.

See Lighthouse and Cap Fréhel

Cap-Chat, Quebec

Cap-Chat (English: Cape Cat) is a town in the Canadian province of Québec, in the Regional County Municipality of Haute-Gaspésie, and in the administrative region of Gaspésie-Îles-de-la-Madeleine.

See Lighthouse and Cap-Chat, Quebec

Cape Arkona

Cape Arkona is a 45-metre-high cape on the island of Rügen in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany.

See Lighthouse and Cape Arkona

Cape Baba

Cape Baba (Baba Burnu, Λεκτόν), is the westernmost point of the Anatolian part of Turkey, making it the westernmost point of whole Asia.

See Lighthouse and Cape Baba

Cape Beale Light

Cape Beale Lightstation is an active manned lighthouse on Vancouver Island in British Columbia., Canada.

See Lighthouse and Cape Beale Light

Cape Canaveral Light

The Cape Canaveral Light is a historic lighthouse on the east coast of the U.S. state of Florida.

See Lighthouse and Cape Canaveral Light

Cape Clear Island

Clear Island or Cape Clear Island (officially known by its Irish name: Cléire, and sometimes also called Oileán Chléire) lies south-west of County Cork in Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Cape Clear Island

Cape Coast

Cape Coast, or Cabo Corso, is a city, fishing port, and the capital of Cape Coast Metropolitan District and Central Region of south Ghana.

See Lighthouse and Cape Coast

Cape Cod

Cape Cod is a geographic cape extending into the Atlantic Ocean from the southeastern corner of mainland Massachusetts, in the northeastern United States.

See Lighthouse and Cape Cod

Cape Collinson

Cape Collinson, also Hak Kok Tau, is a cape located near Ngan Wan between Siu Sai Wan and Big Wave Bay at the eastmost point of Hong Kong Island.

See Lighthouse and Cape Collinson

Cape Elizabeth Lights

Cape Elizabeth Light also known as Two Lights is a lighthouse in Cape Elizabeth, at the southwestern entrance to Casco Bay in Maine.

See Lighthouse and Cape Elizabeth Lights

Cape Emine

Cape Emine (Нос Емине) is a headland located at the Bulgarian Black Sea Coast.

See Lighthouse and Cape Emine

Cape Enrage

Cape Enrage is the name given to the southern tip of Barn Marsh Island, an island located in Albert County, New Brunswick, Canada, roughly half way along the coastline between the villages of Riverside-Albert and Alma at the eastern entrance to Fundy National Park.

See Lighthouse and Cape Enrage

Cape Florida Light

The Cape Florida Light is a lighthouse on Cape Florida at the south end of Key Biscayne in Miami-Dade County, Florida.

See Lighthouse and Cape Florida Light

Cape Fourcroy

Cape Fourcroy is located at the western tip of Bathurst Island.

See Lighthouse and Cape Fourcroy

Cape Guardafui

Cape Guardafui (Gees Gardafuul), also known historically as Aromata promontorium, is a headland in the autonomous Puntland region in Somalia.

See Lighthouse and Cape Guardafui

Cape Hatteras

Cape Hatteras is a thin, broken strand of islands in North Carolina that arch out into the Atlantic Ocean away from the US mainland, then back toward the mainland, creating a series of sheltered islands between the Outer Banks and the mainland.

See Lighthouse and Cape Hatteras

Cape Hatteras Lighthouse

Cape Hatteras Light is a lighthouse located on Hatteras Island in the Outer Banks in the town of Buxton, North Carolina and is part of the Cape Hatteras National Seashore.

See Lighthouse and Cape Hatteras Lighthouse

Cape Hatteras National Seashore

Cape Hatteras National Seashore is a United States national seashore which preserves the portion of the Outer Banks of North Carolina from Bodie Island to Ocracoke Island, stretching over, and is managed by the National Park Service.

See Lighthouse and Cape Hatteras National Seashore

Cape Henlopen

Cape Henlopen is the southern cape of the Delaware Bay along the Atlantic coast of the United States.

See Lighthouse and Cape Henlopen

Cape Henlopen State Park

Cape Henlopen State Park is a Delaware state park on on Cape Henlopen in Sussex County, Delaware, in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Cape Henlopen State Park

Cape Henry Lighthouse

The Cape Henry Lighthouse is a lighthouse at Cape Henry, the landform marking the southern entrance to Chesapeake Bay in the U.S. state of Virginia.

See Lighthouse and Cape Henry Lighthouse

Cape Maleas

Cape Maleas (also Cape Malea; Ακρωτήριον Μαλέας, colloquially Καβομαλιάς, Cavomalias) is a peninsula and cape in the southeast of the Peloponnese in Greece.

See Lighthouse and Cape Maleas

Cape Matapan

Cape Matapan (Κάβο Ματαπάς, or Ματαπά in the Maniot dialect), also named as Cape Tainaron (Ακρωτήριον Ταίναρον), or Cape Tenaro, is situated at the end of the Mani Peninsula, Greece.

See Lighthouse and Cape Matapan

Cape May Lighthouse

The Cape May Lighthouse is a lighthouse located in the U.S. state of New Jersey at the tip of Cape May, in Lower Township's Cape May Point State Park.

See Lighthouse and Cape May Lighthouse

Cape May Point, New Jersey

Cape May Point is a borough located at the tip of the Cape May Peninsula in Cape May County, New Jersey.

See Lighthouse and Cape May Point, New Jersey

Cape Meares Light

The Cape Meares Light is an inactive lighthouse on the coast of Oregon.

See Lighthouse and Cape Meares Light

Cape Moreton

Cape Moreton is a rocky headland at the north eastern tip of Moreton Island in South East Queensland, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Cape Moreton

Cape Neddick Light

The Cape Neddick Light is a lighthouse in Cape Neddick, York, Maine.

See Lighthouse and Cape Neddick Light

Cape Norman

Cape Norman is a barren, limestone headland located at the northernmost point of insular Newfoundland in the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador.

See Lighthouse and Cape Norman

Cape Palmas

Cape Palmas is a headland on the extreme southeast end of the coast of Liberia, Africa, at the extreme southwest corner of the northern half of the continent.

See Lighthouse and Cape Palmas

Cape Point

Cape Point is a promontory at the southeast corner of the Cape Peninsula, which is a mountainous and scenic landform that runs north-south for about thirty kilometres at the extreme southwestern tip of the African continent in the Republic of South Africa.

See Lighthouse and Cape Point

Cape Reinga

Cape Reinga / Te Rerenga Wairua (Māori) is the northwesternmost tip of the Aupouri Peninsula, at the northern end of the North Island of New Zealand.

See Lighthouse and Cape Reinga

Cape Sable Island

Cape Sable Island, locally referred to as Cape Island, is a small Canadian island at the southernmost point of the Nova Scotia peninsula.

See Lighthouse and Cape Sable Island

Cape San Blas

Cape San Blas is part of a peninsula in Gulf County, Florida extending westward from the mainland of Florida, separating St. Joseph Bay to the north from the Gulf Of Mexico to the south.

See Lighthouse and Cape San Blas

Cape San Blas Light

The Cape San Blas Light is a lighthouse in the state of Florida in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Cape San Blas Light

Cape Santiago (Taiwan)

Cape Santiago is a cape located in Gongliao District, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

See Lighthouse and Cape Santiago (Taiwan)

Cape Sata

Cape Sata (佐多岬, Sata Misaki) is a cape at the southern tip of the Osumi Peninsula of Kyūshū island, Japan, and is the southernmost point of the island, just south of 31 degrees latitude.

See Lighthouse and Cape Sata

Cape Spear

Cape Spear, located on the Avalon Peninsula near St. John's, Newfoundland, is the easternmost point in Canada (52°37'W), and North America, excluding Danish-controlled Greenland.

See Lighthouse and Cape Spear

Cape St. George Island

Cape St.

See Lighthouse and Cape St. George Island

Cape St. George Light

The Cape St.

See Lighthouse and Cape St. George Light

Cape St. John

Cape St.

See Lighthouse and Cape St. John

Carbide lamp

Carbide lamps, or acetylene gas lamps, are simple lamps that produce and burn acetylene (C2H2) which is created by the reaction of calcium carbide (CaC2) with water (H2O).

See Lighthouse and Carbide lamp

Cargill Gilston Knott

Prof Cargill Gilston Knott FRS, FRSE LLD (30 June 1856 – 26 October 1922) was a Scottish physicist and mathematician who was a pioneer in seismological research.

See Lighthouse and Cargill Gilston Knott

Carlisle & Finch

Carlisle & Finch is a producer of nautical equipment and searchlights, and the inventor of the electric toy train.

See Lighthouse and Carlisle & Finch

Casco Bay

Casco Bay is an inlet of the Gulf of Maine on the southern coast of Maine, New England, United States.

See Lighthouse and Casco Bay

Castillo San Felipe del Morro

Castillo San Felipe del Morro also known as Fuerte San Felipe del Morro or Castillo del Morro, is a 16th-century citadel located in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

See Lighthouse and Castillo San Felipe del Morro

Catadioptric system

A catadioptric optical system is one where refraction and reflection are combined in an optical system, usually via lenses (dioptrics) and curved mirrors (catoptrics).

See Lighthouse and Catadioptric system

Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption, Port-au-Prince

The Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption (Cathédrale Notre-Dame de L'Assomption), often called Port-au-Prince Cathedral (Cathédrale de Port-au-Prince), was a cathedral in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.

See Lighthouse and Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption, Port-au-Prince

Cedar Point

Cedar Point is a amusement park located on a Lake Erie peninsula in Sandusky, Ohio.

See Lighthouse and Cedar Point

Celestún

Celestún is a town in Yucatán, Mexico.

See Lighthouse and Celestún

Centre Block

The Centre Block (in French: Édifice du Centre) is the main building of the Canadian parliamentary complex on Parliament Hill, in Ottawa, Ontario, containing the House of Commons and Senate chambers, as well as the offices of a number of members of parliament, senators, and senior administration for both legislative houses.

See Lighthouse and Centre Block

Cerro Azul, Peru

Cerro Azul ("Blue Hill") is a fishing village and formerly a commercial port in the Cañete Province, Lima Region, Peru.

See Lighthouse and Cerro Azul, Peru

Chacachacare

Chacachacare is an island in the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, located at 10° 41' north latitude and 61° 45' west longitude.

See Lighthouse and Chacachacare

Chaine Memorial

The Chaine Memorial Tower in Larne, County Antrim, Northern Ireland, is a memorial to James Chaine, a former Member of Parliament for Antrim, who died in 1885.

See Lighthouse and Chaine Memorial

Chambers Island

Chambers Island, named in honor of Col. Talbot Chambers, is a 2,834 acre (4.428 sq. mi.) island in Green Bay, about off the coast of the Door Peninsula, near Gibraltar, Wisconsin.

See Lighthouse and Chambers Island

Chambers Island Light

The Chambers Island lighthouse is a lighthouse located on Chambers Island in Door County, Wisconsin.

See Lighthouse and Chambers Island Light

Characters of the Cthulhu Mythos

The following characters appear in H.P. Lovecraft's story cycle — the Cthulhu Mythos.

See Lighthouse and Characters of the Cthulhu Mythos

Charles Alexander Stevenson

Charles Alexander Stevenson MICE MIEE FRSE (1855, Edinburgh – 1950) was a Scottish lighthouse engineer who built twenty three lighthouses in and around Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Charles Alexander Stevenson

Chennai Port

Chennai Port, formerly known as Madras Port, is the third largest container port of India, behind the Nhava Sheva and Mundra port.

See Lighthouse and Chennai Port

Chequamegon Point Light

The Chequamegon Point Lighthouse is a lighthouse located on Long Island, one of the Apostle Islands, in Lake Superior in Ashland County, Wisconsin, near the city of Bayfield.

See Lighthouse and Chequamegon Point Light

Chipiona

Chipiona is a town and municipality located on the Atlantic coast in the province of Cádiz, Spain.

See Lighthouse and Chipiona

Christian Island

Christian Island is a large island in Georgian Bay close to the communities of Penetanguishene and Midland, Ontario.

See Lighthouse and Christian Island

Clallam Bay, Washington

Clallam Bay is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Clallam County, Washington, United States, at the mouth of the Clallam River into Clallam Bay.

See Lighthouse and Clallam Bay, Washington

Clare Island

Clare Island (Oileán Chliara in Irish) is a mountainous island guarding the entrance to Clew Bay in County Mayo, Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Clare Island

Clarington

Clarington (2016 population 92,013) is a lower-tier municipality in the Regional Municipality of Durham in Ontario, Canada.

See Lighthouse and Clarington

Cleethorpes

Cleethorpes is a seaside resort on the estuary of the Humber in North East Lincolnshire with a population of nearly 40,000 in 2011.

See Lighthouse and Cleethorpes

Clipperton Island

Clipperton Island (Île de Clipperton or Île de la Passion; Isla de la Pasión) is an uninhabited coral atoll in the eastern Pacific Ocean off the coast of Central America.

See Lighthouse and Clipperton Island

Clockwork

Clockwork refers to the inner workings of either mechanical machines clocks (where it is also called a movement) or other mechanisms that works similarly, with a complex series of gears.

See Lighthouse and Clockwork

Coast Guard Air Station Elizabeth City

Coast Guard Air Station Elizabeth City is a United States Coast Guard Air Station co-located at Elizabeth City Regional Airport in Elizabeth City, North Carolina, along the Pasquotank River near the opening of the Albemarle Sound.

See Lighthouse and Coast Guard Air Station Elizabeth City

Cockspur Island Light

The Cockspur Island Light is the smallest lighthouse in Georgia located in Chatham County, Georgia.

See Lighthouse and Cockspur Island Light

Coelleira

Illa Coelleira, or Colleira (Spanish: Isla Conejera, literal translation: Rabbits' Island), is a small island located in the mouth of the Barqueiro river, off the town of Viveiro, in the Rias Altas coastal region of Galicia, Spain.

See Lighthouse and Coelleira

Coins of Lundy

The coins of Lundy are two unofficial issues of currency from the island of Lundy, in the Bristol Channel off the west coast of England.

See Lighthouse and Coins of Lundy

Columbretes Islands

The Columbretes Islands (Els Columbrets) are a group of small uninhabited islets of volcanic origin, in the Mediterranean Sea, off Oropesa del Mar.

See Lighthouse and Columbretes Islands

Colza oil

Colza oil or colza is a non-drying oil obtained from the seeds of rapeseed (Brassica napus subsp. napus. syn. Brassica napus var. oleifera Delile, Brassica campestris subsp. napus (L.) Hook.f. & T.Anderson.) Colza is extensively cultivated in France, Belgium, the United States, the Netherlands, Germany and Poland.

See Lighthouse and Colza oil

Commissioners of Irish Lights

The Commissioners of Irish Lights (Irish: Coimisinéirí Soilse na hÉireann) is the body that serves as the General Lighthouse Authority for the island of Ireland plus its adjacent seas and islands.

See Lighthouse and Commissioners of Irish Lights

Common beta emitters

Strontium-90 is a commonly used beta emitter used in industrial sources.

See Lighthouse and Common beta emitters

Communications in Japan

The nation of Japan currently possesses one of the most advanced communication networks in the world.

See Lighthouse and Communications in Japan

Conical pendulum

A conical pendulum consists of a weight (or bob) fixed on the end of a string or rod suspended from a pivot.

See Lighthouse and Conical pendulum

Connections (TV series)

Connections is a 10-episode documentary television series and 1978 book (Connections, based on the series) created, written, and presented by science historian James Burke.

See Lighthouse and Connections (TV series)

Constanța

Constanța (Κωνστάντζα or Κωνστάντια, Konstantia, Кюстенджа or Констанца, Köstence), historically known as Tomis (Τόμις), is the oldest continuously inhabited city in Romania.

See Lighthouse and Constanța

Contis

Contis is a village, part of the commune of Saint-Julien-en-Born, in the Landes département of southwest France, on the Atlantic Ocean, which has an extensive beach, Contis Plage.

See Lighthouse and Contis

Copinsay

Copinsay (Kolbeinsey) is one of the Orkney Islands in Scotland, lying off the east coast of the Orkney Mainland.

See Lighthouse and Copinsay

Coquet Island, England

Coquet Island is a small island of about, situated off Amble on the Northumberland coast, northeast England.

See Lighthouse and Coquet Island, England

Cordouan Lighthouse

Cordouan lighthouse is an active lighthouse located at sea, near the mouth of the Gironde estuary in France.

See Lighthouse and Cordouan Lighthouse

Corolla, North Carolina

Corolla is an unincorporated community located in Poplar Branch township, Currituck County, North Carolina along the northern Outer Banks.

See Lighthouse and Corolla, North Carolina

Corsewall Lighthouse

Corsewall Lighthouse is a lighthouse at Corsewall Point, Kirkcolm near Stranraer in the region of Dumfries and Galloway in Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Corsewall Lighthouse

Costa Brava

The Costa Brava ("Wild Coast" or "Rough Coast") is a coastal region of Catalonia in northeastern Spain, consisting of the comarques (counties) of Alt Empordà, Baix Empordà and Selva in the province of Girona.

See Lighthouse and Costa Brava

Cougar Annie

Ada Annie Rae-Arthur, later Ada Annie Lawson but better known as Cougar Annie, (June 19, 1888 – April 28, 1985) was a pioneer who settled near Hesquiat Harbour at Boat Basin in Clayoquot Sound on the west coast of Vancouver Island, Canada.

See Lighthouse and Cougar Annie

Craney Island (Virginia)

Craney Island is a point of land in the independent city of Portsmouth in the South Hampton Roads region of eastern Virginia in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Craney Island (Virginia)

Cranfield Point

Cranfield Point (Pointe Chreamhchoille) is the southernmost point of Northern Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Cranfield Point

Crisp Point Light

Crisp Point was one of five U.S. Life-Saving Service Stations along the coast of Lake Superior between Munising and Whitefish Point in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Crisp Point Light

Culebrita

Isla Culebrita (little Culebra, little snake) is a small, uninhabited island off the eastern coast of Culebra, Puerto Rico and is part of the Puerto Rico Archipelago.

See Lighthouse and Culebrita

Curitiba

Curitiba (Tupi: "Pine Nut Land") is the capital and largest city of the Brazilian state of Paraná.

See Lighthouse and Curitiba

Currituck Beach Light

The Currituck Beach Light, from the North Carolina Collection's website at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

See Lighthouse and Currituck Beach Light

Cuxhaven

Cuxhaven is an independent town and seat of the Cuxhaven district, in Lower Saxony, Germany.

See Lighthouse and Cuxhaven

Cyncoed

Cyncoed is a community in the north of the city of Cardiff, capital of Wales.

See Lighthouse and Cyncoed

Darß

The Darß or Darss is the middle part of the peninsula of Fischland-Darß-Zingst on the southern shore of the Baltic Sea in the German state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.

See Lighthouse and Darß

Dartmouth Castle

Dartmouth Castle is an artillery fort, built to protect Dartmouth harbour in Devon, England.

See Lighthouse and Dartmouth Castle

David Alan Stevenson

David Alan Stevenson FRSE MIME FRSSA MICE (21 July 1854 in Edinburgh – 11 April 1938) was a lighthouse engineer who built twenty six lighthouses in and around Scotland.

See Lighthouse and David Alan Stevenson

David Brewster

Sir David Brewster KH PRSE FRS FSA(Scot) FSSA MICE (11 December 178110 February 1868) was a British scientist, inventor, author, and academic administrator.

See Lighthouse and David Brewster

David Stevenson (engineer)

David Stevenson MICE FRSE FRSSA (11 January 1815 &ndash; 17 July 1886) was a Scottish lighthouse designer, who designed over thirty lighthouses in and around Scotland, and helped continue the great dynasty of lighthouse engineering founded by his father.

See Lighthouse and David Stevenson (engineer)

Day beacon

A day beacon is an unlighted nautical sea mark.

See Lighthouse and Day beacon

Dent Island (Queensland)

Dent Island is an island just off the coast of Queensland, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Dent Island (Queensland)

Derbyhaven

Derbyhaven (Camys y Ree) ("King's Harbour" or "King's Cove") is a hamlet near Castletown in the southern parish of Malew, Isle of Man.

See Lighthouse and Derbyhaven

Desroches Island

Desroches Island or Île Desroches is the main island of the Amirante Islands, part of the Outer Islands of the Seychelles.

See Lighthouse and Desroches Island

Devils Island Light

The Devils Island Lighthouse is a lighthouse located on Devils Island, one of the Apostle Islands, in Lake Superior in Ashland County, Wisconsin, near the city of Bayfield.

See Lighthouse and Devils Island Light

Diaphone

The diaphone is a noisemaking device best known for its use as a foghorn: It can produce deep, powerful tones, able to carry a long distance.

See Lighthouse and Diaphone

Djurö National Park

Djurö is an island, a surrounding archipelago of some 30 islands, and a national park situated in Sweden's biggest lake, Vänern.

See Lighthouse and Djurö National Park

Dolphin Lighthouse

Dolphin Lighthouse is one of the three lighthouses in the Mumbai harbour off the coast of Mumbai, India.

See Lighthouse and Dolphin Lighthouse

Donaghadee

Donaghadee is a small town in County Down, Northern Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Donaghadee

Dormant Commerce Clause

The Dormant Commerce Clause, or Negative Commerce Clause, in American constitutional law, is a legal doctrine that courts in the United States have inferred from the Commerce Clause in Article I of the US Constitution.

See Lighthouse and Dormant Commerce Clause

Dover Western Heights

The Western Heights of Dover are one of the most impressive fortifications in Britain.

See Lighthouse and Dover Western Heights

Dubh Artach

Dubh Artach is a remote skerry of basalt rock off the west coast of Scotland lying west of Colonsay and south-west of the Ross of Mull.

See Lighthouse and Dubh Artach

Dubris

Dubris, also known as Portus Dubris and Dubrae, was a port in Roman Britain on the site of present-day Dover, Kent, England.

See Lighthouse and Dubris

DUKW

The DUKW (colloquially known as Duck) is a six-wheel-drive amphibious modification of the 2½ ton CCKW trucks used by the U.S. military during World War II and the Korean War.

See Lighthouse and DUKW

Duluth, Minnesota

Duluth is a major port city in the U.S. state of Minnesota and the county seat of Saint Louis County.

See Lighthouse and Duluth, Minnesota

Dungeness (headland)

Dungeness is a headland on the coast of Kent, England, formed largely of a shingle beach in the form of a cuspate foreland.

See Lighthouse and Dungeness (headland)

Dutch guilder

The Dutch guilder (gulden) or fl. was the currency of the Netherlands from the 17th century until 2002, when it was replaced by the euro.

See Lighthouse and Dutch guilder

E. W. Scripps Company

The E. W. Scripps Company is an American broadcasting company founded in 1878 as a chain of daily newspapers by Edward Willis "E. W." Scripps.

See Lighthouse and E. W. Scripps Company

Eagle Bluff Light

The Eagle Bluff Light, also known as Eagle Bluff lighthouse, is a lighthouse located near Ephraim in Peninsula State Park in Door County, Wisconsin.

See Lighthouse and Eagle Bluff Light

Eagle River Light

The Eagle River Light is a decommissioned lighthouse at the mouth of the Eagle River in the community of Eagle River on the Keweenaw Peninsula in the U.S. state of Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Eagle River Light

East Brother Island Light

East Brother Island Lighthouse is a lighthouse located on East Brother Island in San Rafael Bay, near the tip of Point San Pablo in Richmond, California.

See Lighthouse and East Brother Island Light

Eddystone Lighthouse

The Eddystone Lighthouse is on the dangerous Eddystone Rocks, south of Rame Head, England, United Kingdom.

See Lighthouse and Eddystone Lighthouse

Eddystone Rocks

The Eddystone, or the Eddystone Rocks, are a seaswept and heavily eroded group of rocks some 9 statute miles (14 kilometres) southwest of Rame Head in Cornwall, England, United Kingdom.

See Lighthouse and Eddystone Rocks

Edward Trickett

Edward "Ned" Trickett (12 September 1851 – 27 November 1916) was an Australian rower.

See Lighthouse and Edward Trickett

Egg War

The Egg War is the name given to an 1863 conflict between rival egging companies on the Farallon Islands, 25 miles off San Francisco.

See Lighthouse and Egg War

Egmont Key Light

The current Egmont Key Light dates from 1858.

See Lighthouse and Egmont Key Light

Eiderstedt

Eiderstedt (Eiderstedt,; Ejdersted; North Frisian: Ääderstää) is a peninsula in the district of Nordfriesland in the German federal state of Schleswig-Holstein.

See Lighthouse and Eiderstedt

Eigg

Eigg (italic) is one of the Small Isles, in the Scottish Inner Hebrides.

See Lighthouse and Eigg

Eilean Glas, Scalpay

This particular Eilean Glas is a peninsula of Scalpay in the Outer Hebrides, Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Eilean Glas, Scalpay

El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)

"El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Homer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)", also known as The Mysterious Voyage of Our Homer, is the ninth episode in the eighth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons. It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 5, 1997. In the episode, Homer eats several hot chili peppers and hallucinates, causing him to go on a mysterious voyage. Following this, he questions his relationship with Marge and goes on a journey to find his soulmate. "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" was written by Ken Keeler and directed by Jim Reardon. The episode explores themes of marriage, community, and alcohol use. Homer's voyage features surreal animation to depict the elaborate hallucination. The episode guest stars Johnny Cash as the "Space Coyote".

See Lighthouse and El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)

Elaphiti Islands

The Elaphiti Islands or the Elaphites (Elafitski otoci or Elafiti) is a small archipelago consisting of several islands stretching northwest of Dubrovnik, in the Adriatic sea.

See Lighthouse and Elaphiti Islands

Engineering

Engineering is the creative application of science, mathematical methods, and empirical evidence to the innovation, design, construction, operation and maintenance of structures, machines, materials, devices, systems, processes, and organizations.

See Lighthouse and Engineering

Erraid

The Isle of Erraid ('Eilean Earraid') is a tidal island approximately one mile square located in the Inner Hebrides of Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Erraid

Excludability

In economics, a good or service is called excludable if it is possible to prevent people (consumers) who have not paid for it from having access to it.

See Lighthouse and Excludability

Execution Rocks Light

Execution Rocks Light is a lighthouse in the middle of Long Island Sound on the border between New Rochelle and Sands Point, New York.

See Lighthouse and Execution Rocks Light

Fair Haven, New York

Fair Haven is a village located on the southern shore of Lake Ontario in Cayuga County, New York, United States.

See Lighthouse and Fair Haven, New York

False Point

False Point is a low headland in the Bay of Bengal.

See Lighthouse and False Point

Fanuatapu

Fanuatapu is an uninhabited island which consists of a volcanic tuff ring, situated off the eastern tip of Upolu, Samoa.

See Lighthouse and Fanuatapu

Farallon Islands

The Farallon Islands, or Farallones (from the Spanish farallón meaning "pillar" or "sea cliff"), are a group of islands and sea stacks in the Gulf of the Farallones, off the coast of San Francisco, California, United States.

See Lighthouse and Farallon Islands

Farewell Spit

Farewell Spit is a narrow sand spit at the northern end of the Golden Bay, South Island of New Zealand.

See Lighthouse and Farewell Spit

Farne Islands

The Farne Islands are a group of islands off the coast of Northumberland, England.

See Lighthouse and Farne Islands

Faro Los Morrillos de Cabo Rojo

Faro Los Morrillos de Cabo Rojo, also known as Los Morrillos Light, is a historic lighthouse located in the municipality of Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico.

See Lighthouse and Faro Los Morrillos de Cabo Rojo

Fastnet Rock

Fastnet Rock, or simply Fastnet (possibly; called Carraig Aonair, meaning "lonely rock", in Irish) is a small islet in the Atlantic Ocean and the most southerly point of Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Fastnet Rock

Fathom Five National Marine Park

Fathom Five National Marine Park is a National Marine Conservation Area in the Georgian Bay part of Lake Huron, Ontario, Canada, that seeks to protect and display shipwrecks and lighthouses, and conserve freshwater ecosystems.

See Lighthouse and Fathom Five National Marine Park

Fenerbahçe S.K.

Fenerbahçe Spor Kulübü (Fenerbahçe Sports Club), commonly known as Fenerbahçe, are a major Turkish multi-sport club based in the Kadıköy district of Istanbul, Turkey.

See Lighthouse and Fenerbahçe S.K.

Fenit

Fenit is a small village in County Kerry, Ireland, located on north side of Tralee Bay about west of Tralee town, just south of the Shannon Estuary.

See Lighthouse and Fenit

Findochty

Findochty (pronounced, Finichty, Am Fionn Ochdamh) is a village in Moray, Scotland, on the shores of the Moray Firth; historically it was part of Banffshire.

See Lighthouse and Findochty

Fire Island Lighthouse

The Fire Island Lighthouse is a visible landmark on the Great South Bay, in southern Suffolk County, New York on the western end of Fire Island, a barrier island off the southern coast of Long Island.

See Lighthouse and Fire Island Lighthouse

Fisherman's Village

Fisherman's Village is a waterfront mall, commercial boat anchorage and tourist attraction located in the world's largest man-made small boat harbor in Marina del Rey, California.

See Lighthouse and Fisherman's Village

Fitzroy Island National Park

Fitzroy Island National Park is a gazetted protected area covering Fitzroy Island, in Far North Queensland, Queensland, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Fitzroy Island National Park

Five Islands, Nova Scotia

Five Islands is a rural community in Colchester County Nova Scotia with a population of 300 located on the north shore of Minas Basin, home of the highest tides in the world.

See Lighthouse and Five Islands, Nova Scotia

Fladda

Fladda is one of the Slate Islands, off the west coast of Argyll and Bute, Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Fladda

Flamborough Head

Flamborough Head is a promontory, long on the Yorkshire coast of England, between the Filey and Bridlington bays of the North Sea.

See Lighthouse and Flamborough Head

Flat Holm

Flat Holm (Ynys Echni) is a limestone island lying in the Bristol Channel approximately from Lavernock Point in the Vale of Glamorgan.

See Lighthouse and Flat Holm

Fleetwood

Fleetwood is a town and civil parish within the Wyre district of Lancashire, England, lying at the northwest corner of the Fylde.

See Lighthouse and Fleetwood

Flora and fauna of Chennai

The flora and fauna of Chennai are the plants and animals in Chennai, India.

See Lighthouse and Flora and fauna of Chennai

Flora, Norway

Flora is a municipality in Sogn og Fjordane county, Norway.

See Lighthouse and Flora, Norway

Flying buttress

The flying buttress (arc-boutant, arch buttress) is a specific form of buttress composed of an arched structure that extends from the upper portion of a wall to a pier of great mass, in order to convey to the ground the lateral forces that push a wall outwards, which are forces that arise from vaulted ceilings of stone and from wind-loading on roofs.

See Lighthouse and Flying buttress

Foghorn

A foghorn is a fog signal that uses sound to warn vehicles of navigational hazards like rocky coastlines, or boats of the presence of other vessels, in foggy conditions.

See Lighthouse and Foghorn

Foreign relations of imperial China

Imperial China had a long tradition of foreign relations.

See Lighthouse and Foreign relations of imperial China

Fort Denison

Fort Denison, part of Sydney Harbour National Park, is a protected national park that is a former penal site and defensive facility occupying a small island located north-east of the Royal Botanic Gardens and approximately east of the Opera House in Sydney Harbour, New South Wales, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Fort Denison

Fort Michilimackinac

Fort Michilimackinac was an 18th-century French, and later British, fort and trading post at the Straits of Mackinac; it was built on the northern tip of the lower peninsula of the present-day state of Michigan in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Fort Michilimackinac

Fort Pulaski National Monument

Fort Pulaski National Monument is located on Cockspur Island between Savannah and Tybee Island, Georgia.

See Lighthouse and Fort Pulaski National Monument

Foula

Foula (pronounced //) in the Shetland archipelago of Scotland, is one of the United Kingdom’s most remote permanently inhabited islands.

See Lighthouse and Foula

Fraggle Rock

Fraggle Rock (also known as Jim Henson's Fraggle Rock or Fraggle Rock with Jim Henson's Muppets) is a children's puppet television series about interconnected societies of Muppet creatures, created by Jim Henson.

See Lighthouse and Fraggle Rock

Frankfort Light

The Frankfort Light is a lighthouse located on the north breakwater in the harbor in Frankfort, Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Frankfort Light

Frøya, Trøndelag

Frøya is the westernmost municipality in Trøndelag county, Norway.

See Lighthouse and Frøya, Trøndelag

Fresnel lantern

A Fresnel lantern (pronounced frəˈnɛl or fruh-nel) is a common lantern used in theatre, which employs a Fresnel lens to wash light over an area of the stage.

See Lighthouse and Fresnel lantern

Fresnel lens

A Fresnel lens is a type of compact lens originally developed by French physicist Augustin-Jean Fresnel for lighthouses.

See Lighthouse and Fresnel lens

Frisian Islands

The Frisian Islands, also known as the Wadden Islands or the Wadden Sea Islands, form an archipelago at the eastern edge of the North Sea in northwestern Europe, stretching from the northwest of the Netherlands through Germany to the west of Denmark.

See Lighthouse and Frisian Islands

Fugloy

Fugloy (Danish Fuglø, Old Norse Fuglaey) is the eastern-most island in the Faroe Islands.

See Lighthouse and Fugloy

Gabès

Gabès (قابس), also spelled Cabès, Cabes, Kabes, Gabbs and Gaps, is the capital city of the Gabès Governorate in Tunisia.

See Lighthouse and Gabès

Gamvik

(Gáŋgaviika) is a municipality in Finnmark county, Norway.

See Lighthouse and Gamvik

George Meade

George Gordon Meade (December 31, 1815 – November 6, 1872) was a career United States Army officer and civil engineer best known for defeating Confederate General Robert E. Lee at the Battle of Gettysburg in the American Civil War.

See Lighthouse and George Meade

Gerald Keddy

Gerald Gordon Keddy (born February 15, 1953) is a Canadian politician.

See Lighthouse and Gerald Keddy

Gibraltar Point Lighthouse

The Gibraltar Point Lighthouse is a lighthouse located on the Toronto Islands in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

See Lighthouse and Gibraltar Point Lighthouse

Giovanni Aldini

Giovanni Aldini (April 10, 1762 – January 17, 1834), was an Italian physicist born in Bologna.

See Lighthouse and Giovanni Aldini

Glenelg, South Australia

Glenelg is a beach-side suburb of the South Australian capital of Adelaide.

See Lighthouse and Glenelg, South Australia

Gold Coast Coastal Cycle Route

The Gold Coast Oceanway was a policy on hard infrastructure foreshoreway along dunes Gold Coast, Queensland.

See Lighthouse and Gold Coast Coastal Cycle Route

Gold Coast, Queensland

The Gold Coast is a coastal city in the Australian state of Queensland, approximately south-southeast of the state capital Brisbane and immediately north of the border with New South Wales.

See Lighthouse and Gold Coast, Queensland

Golden Gate National Recreation Area

The Golden Gate National Recreation Area (GGNRA) is a U.S. National Recreation Area protecting of ecologically and historically significant landscapes surrounding the San Francisco Bay Area.

See Lighthouse and Golden Gate National Recreation Area

Goodwin Sands

Goodwin Sands is a long sandbank at the southern end of the North Sea lying off the Deal coast in Kent, England.

See Lighthouse and Goodwin Sands

Gotska Sandön

Gotska Sandön (literally translated as Gotlandic Sand Island) is an uninhabited Swedish island, since 1909 also a national park, situated north of Fårö in the Baltic Sea.

See Lighthouse and Gotska Sandön

Graemsay

Graemsay is an island in the western approaches to Scapa Flow, in the Orkney Islands of Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Graemsay

Grand Island National Recreation Area

The Grand Island National Recreation Area is a National Recreation Area within the jurisdiction of the U.S. Forest Service.

See Lighthouse and Grand Island National Recreation Area

Grand Manan

Grand Manan Island (also simply Grand Manan) is a Canadian island, and the largest of the Fundy Islands in the Bay of Fundy.

See Lighthouse and Grand Manan

Grand Mosque (Dubai)

The Grand Mosque is a mosque in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

See Lighthouse and Grand Mosque (Dubai)

Grand Traverse Light

Grand Traverse Light is a lighthouse in the U.S. state of Michigan, located at the tip of the Leelanau Peninsula, which separates Lake Michigan and Grand Traverse Bay.

See Lighthouse and Grand Traverse Light

Granite Island Lighthouse

Because it was positioned near the busy shipping lanes of the mid-19th century, a lighthouse was built on Granite Island in 1868 by the U.S. Lighthouse Board and commissioned in 1869.

See Lighthouse and Granite Island Lighthouse

Granville, Manche

Granville is a commune in the Manche department and region of Normandy in north-western France.

See Lighthouse and Granville, Manche

Graveyard of the Atlantic

Graveyard of the Atlantic is a nickname of treacherous waters and location of numerous shipwrecks off the Outer Banks of North Carolina.

See Lighthouse and Graveyard of the Atlantic

Great Duck Island, Maine

Great Duck Island is a small island (long by wide) in the Gulf of Maine, south of the entrance to Frenchman Bay, not far from Acadia National Park.

See Lighthouse and Great Duck Island, Maine

Great Fish River

The Great Fish River (called great to distinguish it from the Namibian Fish River) (Groot-Visrivier) is a river running through the South African province of the Eastern Cape.

See Lighthouse and Great Fish River

Great Isaac Cay, Bahamas

Great Isaac Cay is a small Bahamian island located about 20 miles (32 km) NNE of the Bimini Islands.

See Lighthouse and Great Isaac Cay, Bahamas

Great Nicobar Island

Great Nicobar is the southernmost and largest of the Nicobar Islands of India, north of Sumatra.

See Lighthouse and Great Nicobar Island

Great Orme

The Great Orme or Great Orme's Head (Y Gogarth or Pen y Gogarth) is a prominent limestone headland on the north coast of Wales, next to the town of Llandudno.

See Lighthouse and Great Orme

Great Otway National Park

The Great Otway National Park, located in the Barwon South West region of Victoria, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Great Otway National Park

Greenway (landscape)

A greenway is "a strip of undeveloped land near an urban area, set aside for recreational use or environmental protection".

See Lighthouse and Greenway (landscape)

Greifswalder Oie

Greifswalder Oie (literally "Greifswald's isle") is a small island in the Baltic Sea, located east of Rügen on the German coast.

See Lighthouse and Greifswalder Oie

Gruney

Gruney is a small, uninhabited island in Shetland, Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Gruney

Guia Fortress

The Guia Fortress (Fortaleza da Guia) is a 17th-century colonial military fort, chapel, and lighthouse complex in São Lázaro, Macau, China.

See Lighthouse and Guia Fortress

Guiding Light

Guiding Light (known as The Guiding Light before 1975) is an American television soap opera.

See Lighthouse and Guiding Light

Gustaf Dalén

Nils Gustaf Dalén (30 November 1869 – 9 December 1937) was a Swedish Nobel Laureate and industrialist, the founder of the AGA company and inventor of the AGA cooker and the Dalén light.

See Lighthouse and Gustaf Dalén

Halfway Rock Light

Halfway Rock Lighthouse is a lighthouse located on a barren ledge in Casco Bay, Maine.

See Lighthouse and Halfway Rock Light

Halifax Harbour

Halifax Harbour is a large natural harbour on the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia, Canada, located in the Halifax Regional Municipality.

See Lighthouse and Halifax Harbour

Hanko

Hanko (Hangö) is a bilingual port town and municipality on the south coast of Finland, west of Helsinki.

See Lighthouse and Hanko

Hartland, Devon

The village of Hartland, whose parish incorporates the hamlet of Stoke to the west and the village of Meddon in the south, is the most north-westerly settlement in the county of Devon, England.

See Lighthouse and Hartland, Devon

Haunted History (1998 TV series)

Haunted History is a 1998 UFA/Cafe Productions series exploring the supernatural.

See Lighthouse and Haunted History (1998 TV series)

Haunted Lighthouse

R.L. Stine's Haunted Lighthouse is a 2003 short 4-D film.

See Lighthouse and Haunted Lighthouse

Heat-Ray

The Heat-Ray is the primary offensive weapon used by the Martians in H. G. Wells' classic science fiction novel The War of the Worlds and its offshoots.

See Lighthouse and Heat-Ray

Heceta Head Light

Heceta Head Light is a lighthouse on the Oregon Coast 13 miles (21 km) north of Florence, and 13 miles (21 km) south of Yachats in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Heceta Head Light

Hellenic Coast Guard

The Hellenic Coast Guard (Greek Λιμενικό Σώμα-Ελληνική Ακτοφυλακή &ndash; Limeniko Soma-Elliniki Aktofylaki &ndash; lit. "Port Corps-Hellenic Coast Guard") is the national coast guard of Greece.

See Lighthouse and Hellenic Coast Guard

Henry Winstanley

Henry Winstanley (31 March 1644 – 27 November 1703) was an English painter and engineer who constructed the first Eddystone lighthouse after losing two ships on the Eddystone rocks.

See Lighthouse and Henry Winstanley

Hereford Inlet Light

The Hereford Inlet Light is a historic lighthouse located in North Wildwood in Cape May County, New Jersey, United States, situated on the southwestern shore of Hereford Inlet at the north end of Five Mile Beach.

See Lighthouse and Hereford Inlet Light

Hestur

Hestur (Hestø) is an island in the central Faroe Islands, to the west of Streymoy and the south of Koltur.

See Lighthouse and Hestur

Hiawatha National Forest

Hiawatha National Forest is a National Forest in the Upper Peninsula of the state of Michigan in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Hiawatha National Forest

Hillsboro Inlet Light

Hillsboro Inlet Lighthouse is a lighthouse located on the north side of Hillsboro Inlet, midway between Fort Lauderdale and Boca Raton, in Hillsboro Beach, Florida.

See Lighthouse and Hillsboro Inlet Light

Hirtshals

Hirtshals is a town and seaport on the coast of Skagerrak on the island of Vendsyssel-Thy at the top of the Jutland peninsula in northern Denmark, Europe.

See Lighthouse and Hirtshals

Historic Ships in Baltimore

Historic Ships in Baltimore, created as a result of the merger of the USS Constellation Museum and the Baltimore Maritime Museum, is a maritime museum located in the Inner Harbor of Baltimore, Maryland in the United States.

See Lighthouse and Historic Ships in Baltimore

History of geography

The history of geography includes many histories of geography which have differed over time and between different cultural and political groups.

See Lighthouse and History of geography

History of lighthouses

The history of lighthouses refers to the development of the use of towers, buildings, or other types of structure, as an aid to navigation for maritime pilots at sea or on inland waterways.

See Lighthouse and History of lighthouses

History of street lighting in the United States

It was introduced to the US by inventor Benjamin Franklin, who was the postmaster of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

See Lighthouse and History of street lighting in the United States

History of Tasmania

The history of Tasmania begins at the end of the most recent ice age (approximately 10,000 years ago) when it is believed that the island was joined to the Australian mainland.

See Lighthouse and History of Tasmania

History of technology

The history of technology is the history of the invention of tools and techniques and is similar to other sides of the history of humanity.

See Lighthouse and History of technology

HMS Birkenhead (1845)

HMS Birkenhead, also referred to as HM Troopship Birkenhead or Steam Frigate Birkenhead, was one of the first iron-hulled ships built for the Royal Navy.

See Lighthouse and HMS Birkenhead (1845)

HMS Lutine (1779)

Lutine was a frigate which served in both the French Navy and the Royal Navy.

See Lighthouse and HMS Lutine (1779)

Holderness

Holderness is an area of the East Riding of Yorkshire, on the east coast of England.

See Lighthouse and Holderness

Holyhead

Holyhead (Caergybi, "Cybi's fort") is a town in Wales and a major Irish Sea port serving Ireland.

See Lighthouse and Holyhead

Honolulu

Honolulu is the capital and largest city of the U.S. state of Hawaiokinai.

See Lighthouse and Honolulu

Hornby Lighthouse

Hornby Lighthouse, also known as South Head Lower Light or South Head Signal Station, is an active lighthouse located on the tip of South Head, New South Wales, Australia, a headland to the north of the suburb Watsons Bay.

See Lighthouse and Hornby Lighthouse

Horror of Fang Rock

Horror of Fang Rock is the first serial of the 15th season of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who, which was first broadcast in four weekly parts on BBC1 from 3 September to 24 September 1977.

See Lighthouse and Horror of Fang Rock

Howland Island

Howland Island is an uninhabited coral island located just north of the equator in the central Pacific Ocean, about southwest of Honolulu.

See Lighthouse and Howland Island

Hugh Palliser

Admiral Sir Hugh Palliser, 1st Baronet (26 February 1723 – 19 March 1796) was a Royal Navy officer.

See Lighthouse and Hugh Palliser

Hunting Island Light

The Hunting Island Light is located in Hunting Island State Park on Hunting Island near Beaufort, South Carolina.

See Lighthouse and Hunting Island Light

Huron Islands

The Huron Islands are a group of eight small, rocky islands in Lake Superior, located about three miles offshore from the mouth of the Huron River in northwestern Marquette County, Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Huron Islands

Hurst Castle

Hurst Castle is an artillery fort established by Henry VIII on the Hurst Spit in Hampshire, England, between 1541 and 1544.

See Lighthouse and Hurst Castle

Hyperradiant Fresnel lens

Hyper-radial or hyperradiant Fresnel lenses are Fresnel lenses used in lighthouses.

See Lighthouse and Hyperradiant Fresnel lens

Inchkeith

Inchkeith (from the Innis Cheith) is an island in the Firth of Forth, Scotland, administratively part of the Fife council area.

See Lighthouse and Inchkeith

Inchon (film)

Inchon (also called Inchon!) is a 1981 epic war film about the Battle of Inchon, considered to be the turning point of the Korean War.

See Lighthouse and Inchon (film)

Indira Point

Indira Point is a village in the Nicobar district at Great Nicobar Island of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, India.

See Lighthouse and Indira Point

Inis Cathaigh

Inis Cathaigh or Scattery Island is an island in the Shannon Estuary, Ireland, off the coast of Kilrush, County Clare.

See Lighthouse and Inis Cathaigh

Inisheer

Inis Oírr / Inisheer (Inis Oírr), the island's official name, Inis Oirthir, meaning "east island", and traditionally Inis Thiar, meaning "rear island".

See Lighthouse and Inisheer

Inner Hebrides

The Inner Hebrides (Scottish Gaelic: Na h-Eileanan a-staigh, "the inner isles") is an archipelago off the west coast of mainland Scotland, to the south east of the Outer Hebrides.

See Lighthouse and Inner Hebrides

Interactive whiteboard

An interactive whiteboard (IWB) is a large interactive display in the form factor of a whiteboard.

See Lighthouse and Interactive whiteboard

Invention of radio

Many people were involved in the invention of radio as we know it today.

See Lighthouse and Invention of radio

Islands of the Clyde

The Islands of the Firth of Clyde are the fifth largest of the major Scottish island groups after the Inner and Outer Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland.

See Lighthouse and Islands of the Clyde

Isle of May

The Isle of May is located in the north of the outer Firth of Forth, approximately off the coast of mainland Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Isle of May

Isle Royale National Park

Isle Royale National Park is a U.S. National Park on Isle Royale and adjacent islands in Lake Superior, in the state of Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Isle Royale National Park

Isles of Shoals

The Isles of Shoals are a group of small islands and tidal ledges situated approximately off the east coast of the United States, straddling the border of the states of Maine and New Hampshire.

See Lighthouse and Isles of Shoals

Italianate architecture

The Italianate style of architecture was a distinct 19th-century phase in the history of Classical architecture.

See Lighthouse and Italianate architecture

Itius Portus

Itius Portus or Portus Itius, an ancient Roman name for a port in Nord-Pas-de-Calais, of unknown location.

See Lighthouse and Itius Portus

James Barnet

James Johnstone Barnet, (1827 in Almericlose, Arbroath, Scotland – 16 December 1904 in Forest Lodge, Sydney, New South Wales) was the Colonial Architect for Colonial New South Wales, serving from 1862 to 1890.

See Lighthouse and James Barnet

James D. Johnston

James D. Johnston was an officer in the United States Navy, then served as a commander in the Confederate Navy during the American Civil War.

See Lighthouse and James D. Johnston

James Walker (engineer)

James Walker FRSE, FRS (14 September 1781 – 8 October 1862) was an influential Scottish civil engineer.

See Lighthouse and James Walker (engineer)

Jamie Wyeth

James Browning Wyeth (born July 6, 1946) is a contemporary American realist painter, son of Andrew Wyeth, and grandson of N.C. Wyeth.

See Lighthouse and Jamie Wyeth

Japanese submarine I-26

I-26 was a Japanese B1 type submarine which saw service in the Imperial Japanese Navy during World War II.

See Lighthouse and Japanese submarine I-26

Javier Mariscal

Javier Mariscal (born February 1950) is a Spanish artist and designer whose work has spanned a wide range of mediums, ranging from painting and sculpture to interior design and landscaping.

See Lighthouse and Javier Mariscal

Jean Guichard

Jean Guichard, born in Paris, on April 28, 1952, is a French photographer known for his images of lighthouses.

See Lighthouse and Jean Guichard

Jentilez

For the city in Quebec, see Sept-Îles, Quebec Sept-Îles (French for seven islands) or Jentilez (in Breton) is a small archipelago off the north coast of Brittany, in the Perros-Guirec commune of Côtes-d'Armor.

See Lighthouse and Jentilez

Jersey pound

The pound is the currency of Jersey.

See Lighthouse and Jersey pound

John Catsimatidis

John A. Catsimatidis (born September 7, 1948) is a Greek-American billionaire businessman and radio talk show host.

See Lighthouse and John Catsimatidis

John Hopkinson

John Hopkinson, FRS, (27 July 1849 – 27 August 1898) was a British physicist, electrical engineer, Fellow of the Royal Society and President of the IEE (now the IET) twice in 1890 and 1896.

See Lighthouse and John Hopkinson

John Shaw Jr.

John Shaw Jr. (1803&ndash;1870) was an English architect of the 19th century who was complimented as a designer in the "Manner of Wren".

See Lighthouse and John Shaw Jr.

John Smeaton

John Smeaton (8 June 1724 – 28 October 1792) was a British civil engineer responsible for the design of bridges, canals, harbours and lighthouses.

See Lighthouse and John Smeaton

Jones Point Light

The Jones Point Light is a small river lighthouse located on the Potomac River in Alexandria, Virginia.

See Lighthouse and Jones Point Light

Joshua Slocum

Joshua Slocum (February 20, 1844 – on or shortly after November 14, 1909) was the first man to sail single-handedly around the world.

See Lighthouse and Joshua Slocum

Jupiter, Florida

Jupiter is the northernmost town in Palm Beach County, Florida, United States.

See Lighthouse and Jupiter, Florida

Kaʻula

Kaula Island, also called Kaula Rock, is a small, crescent-shaped offshore islet in the Hawaiian Islands.

See Lighthouse and Kaʻula

Kaliakra

Kaliakra (Калиакра) is a long and narrow headland in the Southern Dobruja region of the northern Bulgarian Black Sea Coast, east of Kavarna, northeast of Varna and southwest of Mangalia.

See Lighthouse and Kaliakra

Kalpeni

Kalpeni is an inhabited Atoll in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep, India.

See Lighthouse and Kalpeni

Kalsoy

Kalsoy (Kalsø) is an island in the north-east of the Faroe Islands between Eysturoy and Kunoy.

See Lighthouse and Kalsoy

Kamay Botany Bay National Park

Kamay Botany Bay National Park is a protected national park that is located in the Sydney metropolitan region of New South Wales, in eastern Australia.

See Lighthouse and Kamay Botany Bay National Park

Kanhoji Angre

Kanhoji Angre (August 1669 – 4 July 1729) was a chief of the Maratha Navy in 18th century India.

See Lighthouse and Kanhoji Angre

Kattegat

The Kattegat (Kattegatt) is a sea area bounded by the Jutlandic peninsula in the west, the Danish straits islands of Denmark to the south and the provinces of Västergötland, Scania, Halland and Bohuslän in Sweden in the east.

See Lighthouse and Kattegat

Kenosha Light

Kenosha Light (also called Southport Light) is a lighthouse and keeper's house on Simmons Island north of the channel into Kenosha's harbor in Kenosha County, Wisconsin, USA.

See Lighthouse and Kenosha Light

Kenosha North Pier Light

The Kenosha North Pier lighthouse or Kenosha Light is a lighthouse located near Kenosha in Kenosha County, Wisconsin.

See Lighthouse and Kenosha North Pier Light

Kerosene lamp

A kerosene lamp (also known as a paraffin lamp in some countries) is a type of lighting device that uses kerosene (paraffin) as a fuel.

See Lighthouse and Kerosene lamp

Keta

Keta is a town in the Volta Region of Ghana.

See Lighthouse and Keta

Key Biscayne

Key Biscayne (Cayo Vizcaíno) is an island located in Miami-Dade County, Florida, United States, between the Atlantic Ocean and Biscayne Bay.

See Lighthouse and Key Biscayne

King George Island (South Shetland Islands)

King George Island (Argentina: Isla 25 de Mayo, Chile: Isla Rey Jorge, Russian: Ватерло́о Vaterloo) is the largest of the South Shetland Islands, lying off the coast of Antarctica in the Southern Ocean.

See Lighthouse and King George Island (South Shetland Islands)

Kings Cross, London

Kings Cross is an inner city district in north London, England, 2.5 miles (4.8 km) north west of Charing Cross.

See Lighthouse and Kings Cross, London

Kingston by Sea

Kingston by Sea, also known as Kingston Buci, Kingston Bucii or simply Kingston, is a small area in the Adur district of West Sussex, England.

See Lighthouse and Kingston by Sea

Kish Island

Kish (کیش (Kīsh)) is a resort island in the Persian Gulf off the southern coast of Iran.

See Lighthouse and Kish Island

Klein Curaçao

Klein Curaçao (English: Little Curaçao) is a uninhabited island south-east of Curaçao in the Caribbean Sea, and is part of the Dutch country of Curaçao.

See Lighthouse and Klein Curaçao

Knott family

The Knott family of lighthouse keepers is credited with the longest period of continuous service in the history of manned lighthouses, commencing in 1730 at South Foreland, Kent, with William Knott and ending in 1906 at Skerries (Anglesey, Wales) with Henry Thomas Knott (son of George Knott – see below) who died in 1910 having retired to Crewe.

See Lighthouse and Knott family

Kokkola

Kokkola (Karleby) is a town and municipality of Finland.

See Lighthouse and Kokkola

Kotlin Island

Kotlin (or Kettle, Retusaari, Reitskär) is a Russian island, located near the head of the Gulf of Finland, west of Saint Petersburg in the Baltic Sea.

See Lighthouse and Kotlin Island

Krakatoa, East of Java

Krakatoa, East of Java is a 1969 American disaster film starring Maximilian Schell and Brian Keith.

See Lighthouse and Krakatoa, East of Java

Kralendijk

Kralendijk is the capital city and main port of the island of Bonaire in the Caribbean Netherlands.

See Lighthouse and Kralendijk

Kuraman Island

Kuraman Island (Pulau Kuraman), alternative name Keraman Island, is an outlying island in the Federal Territory of Labuan, Malaysia located on the northern mouth of Brunei Bay.

See Lighthouse and Kuraman Island

Kylerhea

Kylerhea (Scottish Gaelic: Caol Reatha) is a village on the east coast of the Isle of Skye, in the Scottish Highlands, overlooking Kyle Rhea, a strait splitting Skye from the Scottish mainland.

See Lighthouse and Kylerhea

La Corbière

La Corbière (Jèrriais: La Corbiéthe) is the extreme south-western point of Jersey in St. Brelade.

See Lighthouse and La Corbière

La Pointe Light

The La Pointe Light is a lighthouse located on Long Island, one of the Apostle Islands, in Lake Superior in Ashland County, Wisconsin, near the city of Bayfield.

See Lighthouse and La Pointe Light

Labrador

Labrador is the continental-mainland part of the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador.

See Lighthouse and Labrador

Lady Elliot Island

Lady Elliot Island is the southernmost coral cay of the Great Barrier Reef, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Lady Elliot Island

Lady Isle

Lady Isle is a small, uninhabited island, in the Firth of Clyde, Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Lady Isle

Lake County, Minnesota

Lake County is a county located in the U.S. state of Minnesota.

See Lighthouse and Lake County, Minnesota

Lake freighter

Lake freighters, or lakers, are bulk carrier vessels that ply the Great Lakes of North America.

See Lighthouse and Lake freighter

Lake Memphremagog

Lake Memphremagog (Lac Memphrémagog) is a fresh water glacial lake located between Newport, Vermont, United States and Magog, Quebec, Canada.

See Lighthouse and Lake Memphremagog

Land lighthouse

A land lighthouse is simply a lighthouse constructed to aid navigation over land, rather than water.

See Lighthouse and Land lighthouse

Langesund

is the administrative centre of the municipality of Bamble, Norway.

See Lighthouse and Langesund

Lantern

Today, English-speakers use the term lantern to describe many types of portable lighting, but lanterns originated as a protective enclosure for a light source—usually a candle or a wick in oil—to make it easier to carry and hang up, and more reliable outdoors or in drafty interiors.

See Lighthouse and Lantern

Lantern (disambiguation)

A lantern is a portable lighting device used to illuminate broad areas.

See Lighthouse and Lantern (disambiguation)

Larry Miller (Canadian politician)

Larry Miller, (born 21 July 1956) is a Canadian politician.

See Lighthouse and Larry Miller (Canadian politician)

Latheronwheel

Latheronwheel is a small Scottish village, in Caithness.

See Lighthouse and Latheronwheel

Lavernock

Lavernock (Larnog) is a hamlet in the Vale of Glamorgan in Wales, lying on the coast south of Cardiff between Penarth and Sully, and overlooking the Bristol Channel.

See Lighthouse and Lavernock

Lawn ornament

. Lawn ornaments are decorative objects placed in the grassy area of a property.

See Lighthouse and Lawn ornament

Léonce Verny

François Léonce Verny, (2 December 1837 &ndash; 2 May 1908) was a French officer and naval engineerSims, Richard.

See Lighthouse and Léonce Verny

Løgstør

Løgstør is a town with a population of 4,284 (1 January 2014) It is located 47 km west of Aalborg and 64 km north of Viborg.

See Lighthouse and Løgstør

Le Portel

Le Portel is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in the Hauts-de-France region of France.

See Lighthouse and Le Portel

Le Tréport

Le Tréport is a commune in the Seine-Maritime department in Normandy, France.

See Lighthouse and Le Tréport

Lehua

Lehua Island is a small, crescent-shaped island in the Hawaiian islands, only north of Niokinaihau, due west of Kauai.

See Lighthouse and Lehua

Lei Yue Mun

Lei Yue Mun (also called Lyemun, Lymoon Pass, Lye Moon Passage or Ly-ee-moon Passage) is a short channel in Hong Kong, between Junk Bay and Victoria Harbour, separating Kowloon and Hong Kong Island.

See Lighthouse and Lei Yue Mun

Leslie Street Spit

The Leslie Street Spit, or officially the Outer Harbour East Headland, is a man-made headland in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, extending from the city's east end in a roughly southwesterly direction into Lake Ontario.

See Lighthouse and Leslie Street Spit

Light beam

A light beam or beam of light is a directional projection of light energy radiating from a light source.

See Lighthouse and Light beam

Light characteristic

A light characteristic is a graphic and text description of a navigational light sequence or colour displayed on a nautical chart or in a Light List with the chart symbol for a lighthouse, lightvessel, buoy or sea mark with a light on it.

See Lighthouse and Light characteristic

Lighthouse of Alexandria

The Lighthouse of Alexandria, sometimes called the Pharos of Alexandria (Ancient Greek: ὁ Φάρος τῆς Ἀλεξανδρείας, contemporary Koine), was a lighthouse built by the Ptolemaic Kingdom, during the reign Ptolemy II Philadelphus (280&ndash;247 BC) which has been estimated to be in overall height.

See Lighthouse and Lighthouse of Alexandria

Lighthouse tender

A lighthouse tender is a ship specifically designed to maintain, support, or tend to lighthouses or lightvessels, providing supplies, fuel, mail, and transportation.

See Lighthouse and Lighthouse tender

Lighthouses in Norway

The coast of Norway is 100,915 km long and there have been a total of 212 lighthouses along it, but no more than 154 have ever been operational at the same time.

See Lighthouse and Lighthouses in Norway

Lightvessel

A lightvessel, or lightship, is a ship which acts as a lighthouse.

See Lighthouse and Lightvessel

Lindisfarne

The Holy Island of Lindisfarne, also known simply as Holy Island, is a tidal island off the northeast coast of England, which constitutes the civil parish of Holy Island in Northumberland.

See Lighthouse and Lindisfarne

List of British postage stamps

This is a list of postage stamps issued by the United Kingdom, normally referred to as Great Britain in philatelic usage, even though standard British stamps are valid alongside their regional counterparts throughout the British Isles.

See Lighthouse and List of British postage stamps

List of building types

A list of structural structure types and forms of architecture.

See Lighthouse and List of building types

List of civil engineers

This list of civil engineers is a list of notable people who have been trained in or have practiced civil engineering.

See Lighthouse and List of civil engineers

List of English Heritage properties

English Heritage is a registered charity that manages the National Heritage Collection.

See Lighthouse and List of English Heritage properties

List of industrial archaeology topics

This is a list of topics typically studied by students of industrial archaeology.

See Lighthouse and List of industrial archaeology topics

List of island countries

This is a list of island countries.

See Lighthouse and List of island countries

List of islands of Scotland

This is a list of islands of Scotland, the mainland of which is part of the island of Great Britain.

See Lighthouse and List of islands of Scotland

List of Japanese map symbols

This is a list of symbols appearing on Japanese maps.

See Lighthouse and List of Japanese map symbols

List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Belgium

This is a list of lighthouses and lightvessels in Belgium.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Belgium

List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Denmark

This is a list of lighthouses and lightvessels in Denmark.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Denmark

List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Germany

This is a list of lighthouses and lightvessels in Germany.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Germany

List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Sweden

This is a list of lighthouses and lightvessels in Sweden.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses and lightvessels in Sweden

List of lighthouses in Canada

This is a list of lighthouses in Canada.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses in Canada

List of lighthouses in England

This is a list of lighthouses in England.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses in England

List of lighthouses in France

This is a list of lighthouses in France.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses in France

List of lighthouses in Ireland

This is a list of lighthouses in Ireland.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses in Ireland

List of lighthouses in Scotland

This is a list of lighthouses in Scotland.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses in Scotland

List of lighthouses in the United States

This is a list of lighthouses in the United States.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses in the United States

List of lighthouses in Wales

This is a list of lighthouses in Wales.

See Lighthouse and List of lighthouses in Wales

List of Malaysian stamps

Formerly called the Federation of Malaya until 1963, Malaysia became started to issue stamps under the current name starting in 1963.

See Lighthouse and List of Malaysian stamps

List of motifs on banknotes

This is a list of current motifs on the banknotes of different countries.

See Lighthouse and List of motifs on banknotes

List of northernmost items

This is a list of various northernmost things on earth.

See Lighthouse and List of northernmost items

List of people from Yorkshire

This is a list of people from Yorkshire. Yorkshire is the largest historic county in both England and the United Kingdom.

See Lighthouse and List of people from Yorkshire

List of Pokémon characters

This is a list of characters in the Pokémon franchise, including the games, anime series, and manga series.

See Lighthouse and List of Pokémon characters

List of Quakers

This is a list of notable people associated with the Religious Society of Friends, also known as Quakers, who have a Wikipedia article.

See Lighthouse and List of Quakers

List of Scots

List of Scots is an incomplete list of notable people from Scotland.

See Lighthouse and List of Scots

List of songs about Los Angeles

This is a list of songs about Los Angeles, California: either refer to, are set there, named after a location or feature of the city, named after a famous resident, or inspired by an event that occurred locally.

See Lighthouse and List of songs about Los Angeles

List of southernmost items

The most southerly geographical features of various types are listed here.

See Lighthouse and List of southernmost items

List of SpongeBob SquarePants characters

The characters in the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants were created by artist, animator, and former marine biologist Stephen Hillenburg.

See Lighthouse and List of SpongeBob SquarePants characters

List of tallest buildings and structures

The world's tallest artificial structure is the Burj Khalifa in Dubai (of the United Arab Emirates).

See Lighthouse and List of tallest buildings and structures

List of United States Military Academy alumni

The United States Military Academy (USMA) is an undergraduate college in West Point, New York with the mission of educating and commissioning officers for the United States Army.

See Lighthouse and List of United States Military Academy alumni

Lists of lighthouses

This page contains links to lists of lighthouses around the world.

See Lighthouse and Lists of lighthouses

Little Cumbrae

Little Cumbrae (Wee Cumbrae, Cumaradh Beag) is an island in the Firth of Clyde, in North Ayrshire, Scotland.

See Lighthouse and Little Cumbrae

Little Red Lighthouse

The Little Red Lighthouse, officially Jeffrey's Hook Light, is a small lighthouse located in Fort Washington Park on the Hudson River in New York City, under the George Washington Bridge.

See Lighthouse and Little Red Lighthouse

Liverpool, Nova Scotia

Liverpool is a Canadian community and former town located along the Atlantic Ocean of the Province of Nova Scotia's South Shore.

See Lighthouse and Liverpool, Nova Scotia

Lizard Lighthouse

The Lizard Lighthouse is a lighthouse at Lizard Point in Cornwall, England, built to guide vessels passing through the English Channel.

See Lighthouse and Lizard Lighthouse

Longplayer

Longplayer is a self-extending composition by Jem Finer which is designed to continue for one thousand years.

See Lighthouse and Longplayer

Longships Lighthouse

Longships Lighthouse is an active 19th century lighthouse about off the coast of Land’s End in Cornwall, England.

See Lighthouse and Longships Lighthouse

Los Angeles International Airport

Los Angeles International Airport is the primary international airport serving Los Angeles, California.

See Lighthouse and Los Angeles International Airport

Lower New York Bay

Lower New York Bay is a section of New York Bay south of the Narrows, the relatively narrow strait between the shores of Staten Island and Brooklyn.

See Lighthouse and Lower New York Bay

Lowestoft

Lowestoft is a town and civil parish in the English county of Suffolk.

See Lighthouse and Lowestoft

Lubec, Maine

Lubec is a town in Washington County, Maine, United States.

See Lighthouse and Lubec, Maine

Lucien Young

Lucien Young (31 March 1852 – 2 October 1912) was an admiral of the United States Navy.

See Lighthouse and Lucien Young

Ludington Light

The Ludington Light is a tall steel-plated lighthouse in Ludington, Michigan, which lies along the eastern shores of Lake Michigan, at the end of the breakwater on the Pere Marquette Harbor.

See Lighthouse and Ludington Light

Ludlam's Beach Light

Ludlam's Beach Light was a lighthouse formerly located in Sea Isle City, New Jersey.

See Lighthouse and Ludlam's Beach Light

Lundy

Lundy is the largest island in the Bristol Channel.

See Lighthouse and Lundy

Maatsuyker Islands

The Maatsuyker Islands are a group of islands and rocks located off the south coast of Tasmania, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Maatsuyker Islands

Machias Seal Island

Machias Seal Island is an island in the Gulf of Maine, about southeast from Cutler, Maine, and southwest of Southwest Head on Grand Manan Island.

See Lighthouse and Machias Seal Island

Mackinaw City, Michigan

Mackinaw City is a village in Emmet and Cheboygan counties in the U.S. state of Michigan.

See Lighthouse and Mackinaw City, Michigan

Macquarie Lighthouse

The Macquarie Lighthouse, also known as South Head Upper Light, was the first, and is the longest serving, lighthouse site in Australia.

See Lighthouse and Macquarie Lighthouse

Madisonville, Louisiana

Madisonville is a town in St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana, United States.

See Lighthouse and Madisonville, Louisiana

Magdalen Islands

The Magdalen Islands (les Îles de la Madeleine) are a small archipelago in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence with a land area of.

See Lighthouse and Magdalen Islands

Makapuʻu

Makapuu is the extreme eastern end of the Island of Ookinaahu in the Hawaiian Islands, comprising the remnant of a ridge that rises 647 feet (197 m) above the sea.

See Lighthouse and Makapuʻu

Malda district

Malda district, also spelt Maldah or Maldaha (often; মালদা, মালদহ) is a district in West Bengal, India.

See Lighthouse and Malda district

Mallacoota, Victoria

Mallacoota is a small town in the East Gippsland region of Victoria, Australia.

See Lighthouse and Mallacoota, Victoria

Mana Island (New Zealand)

Mana Island is the smaller of two islands that lie off the southwest coast of the North Island of New Zealand (the larger is Kapiti Island).

See Lighthouse and Mana Island (New Zealand)

Manchac, Louisiana

Manchac (also known as Akers) is an unincorporated community in Tangipahoa Parish, Louisiana, United States.

See Lighthouse and Manchac, Louisiana

Manistique, Michigan

Manistique, formerly Monistique, is the only incorporated city in and the county seat of Schoolcraft County of the U.S. state of Michigan's Upper Peninsula.

See Lighthouse and Manistique, Michigan

Marblehead Light (Ohio)

Marblehead Lighthouse in Marblehead, Ohio, United States, is the oldest lighthouse in continuous operation on the United States side of the Great Lakes.

See Lighthouse and Marblehead Light (Ohio)

Maritime history

Maritime history is the study of human interaction with and activity at sea.

See Lighthouse and Maritime history

Maritime history of California

In the California coast, the use of ships and the Pacific Ocean has historically included water craft (such as dugouts, canoes, sailing ships, and steamships), fisheries, shipbuilding, Gold Rush shipping, ports, shipwrecks, naval ships and installations, and lighthouses.

See Lighthouse and Maritime history of California

Maritime history of Europe

Maritime history of Europe includes past events relating to the northwestern region of Eurasia in areas concerning shipping and shipbuilding, shipwrecks, naval battles, and military installations and lighthouses constructed to protect or aid navigation and the development of Europe.

See Lighthouse and Maritime history of Europe

Maritime history of Flori