Several of my dreams are characterized by movement. I am enclosed by train compartments, boat cabins, or aircrafts. Often, I have forgotten something, the ticket has been lost, the luggage has disappeared, or I have ended up on the wrong train, plane or boat. When I wake up I sometimes do not know where I am. I look around. Am I inside a room, or a train compartment? A cabin or a cell? Am I in Rome, Stockholm, Santo Domingo, or Hässleholm? Am I alone, or is someone sleeping next to me?

I was born by a railway junction - Hässleholm, a small town that grew up around railroad tracks. Trains have from time to time been part of my life. During high school, I spent the evenings loading baggage cars with packages and later I went with my mates by train throughout Europe. While I studied at Lund University, I worked as waiter on trains bound for Stockholm. Since then I have flown back and forth over the Atlantic Ocean, across Latin America, Asia and Africa.

In my dreams, loudspeakers are echoing, announcing arrivals and departures. I am heeding towards adventure, or back home. Where it may be? Travel has become a mental state in which I find myself within a liminal existence, where I have time for reflection and may suffer from bad conscience for what I have done or neglected to do. What awaits me? What am I travelling from? What am I travelling towards? The allure and curse of voyages. The future? Where might it be? A journey to nowhere. An escape? A return?

End or beginning? Like so much else that swirls around in my brain thoughts about travel become illustrated by pictures I have seen and been influenced by. On the cover of one of my novels is a detail from a painting by William Turner: The Fighting Temeraire tugged to her last berth to be broken up. A picture of an era entering its tomb, created by an artist who at the same time was a forward-looking modernist and a traditional romantic. HMS Temeraire was a ship turned into a symbol of Britain's power over the seas. Its captain´s and crew's brave behaviour during the Battle of Trafalgar was of such a crucial importance that their vessel became legendary and almost regarded as a person. In Turner's painting the huge sailing ship is by a steamer towed across a darkening sea, while the sun rises below a romantic display of exuberant colours.

A new dawn is breaking into a romantic fairy-tale world, as when the German Biedermeier Meister Carl Spitzweg in a small painting depicts how a fairy tale dwarf from the mouth of his cave contemplates a locomotive chugging through a valley.

Another painting by William Turner, created five years after Temeraire, indicates the amazing power of a new means of transport. Rain, Steam and Speed ​​depicts how a steam locomotive of the model Firefly in a violent storm pushes forward over the newly built Maidenhead Bridge, just outside of London. The year is 1844, and the locomotives were already able to attain a speed of 100 kilometres per hour.

It is not strange that the mighty steam locomotive was becoming a common motif of artists who tried to capture not only their impressive power; how they with full force penetrated and altered the cityscape, as in Monet's smoke-filled, atmospheric depictions of the Gare Saint-Lazare, but they also tried to turn them into symbols of changes in human mentality, like the futurist painter Umberto Boccioni how used trains to represent different states of mind.

The fact that several of my character building years took place close to trains might have made me susceptible to all sorts of depictions of these remarkable machines. When I a few years ago used to visit Musée Marmottan in Paris, I became especially fascinated by Monet's painting Train in Snow. In it I recognized the heavy, dark sky, the bare, black trees, the white-greyish, wet snow, the train that is about to leave while its lanterns light up the gloom. Looking at it I remember the smell of smoke and night and imagine I can recall the sound of the locomotive steaming up and its whistle signalling departure.

Maybe it is because I have for many years in the evening darkness worked with collecting and delivering mail to and from train carriages, or since my work as a waiter in dining cars forced me to board trains early in the morning that I am captivated by paintings depicting nocturnal train yards.

And then there is of course the delightful feeling of adventure when trains bring us into the world, scampering through strange areas - forests, swamps, big cities and high mountains. Bringing to mind the monumental efforts required for putting down the tracks and construct tunnels and bridges in remote jungles and through almost inaccessible mountain ranges.

Travel means change, rhythm and movement, like blood orbiting through the body or the relentless aging of mind and body. The metallic wheels´ rhythmic thumping against the rails. The forceful inebriation by steam, locomotives and rails are present in Filippo Tommaso Marinetti´s famous celebration of speed and machines in his futuristic manifesto of 1909, a few years before the horrors created by machines of mass destruction were demonstrated in the hell of the First World War´s blood drenched trenches:

We shall sing of [...] the pulsating, nightly ardour of arsenals and shipyards, ablaze with their violent electric moons; of railway stations voraciously devouring smoke-belching serpents; of workshops hanging from the clouds by their twisted threads of smoke; of bridges which like giant gymnasts, bestride the rivers, flashing in the sunlight like gleaming knives; of intrepid steamships that sniff out the horizon; of broad-breasted locomotives, champing on the wheels like enormous steel horses, bridled with pipes, and of the lissom flight of the aeroplane whose propeller flatters like a flag in the wind, seeming to applaud, like a crowd excited.

It was not the stranglehold of modern life on imagination and openness that Marinetti focused on, but progress, power, light and openness. Certainly, he was capable of bursting out in distasteful tributes to violence, war and misogyny. However Marinetti was, like Mussolini, who he supported but often quarrelled with, a poseur who happily blurted out words and ideas with an avowed purpose to shock.

In fact, Marinetti supported women's suffrage and spoke warmly of women´s suppressed expressive powers. He hated and despised Hitler and Marinetti´s unpleasant tributes to war´s “invigorating powers” made him, unlike many other desktop revolutionaries, to take active part in it. He was wounded at the front in the First World War and in the other one he participated as a volunteer on the Eastern Front, where he, despite his sixty-seven years fought directly at the front line.

Marinetti was obsessed with his own virility, something that made him defining himself as "Europe's caffeine" and a powerful seducer of women, demonstrated by his self-biographical Como si seducono le donne, "How to seduce women". But, like his predecessor Giacomo Casanova, Marinetti assumed that no woman would be worthy of being seduced by a man of his calibre if she was not independent and intelligent. Accordingly, he pleaded for women's equality and the elimination of "male legal rights over women", proclaiming that women must have equal rights to divorce, child care and education and of course the right to vote, receive equal pay and a free choice to perform any kind work.

A similar passion made Marinetti to constantly declare that the thrill of warfare brought forth male vitality. When he during World War I took part in the fierce fighting in Gorizia, on the border of what is now Slovenia, he glorified battles as male self-assertion and resembled bomb explosions to “erect penises".

Marinetti´s approach to race issues, which came to a head in 1938 when Mussolini introduced anti-Semitic laws, was characterized by a similar militant virility. The futuristic group he headed was the only Italian organization that openly attacked officially sanctioned racism and declared that as independent artists they were unable accept that considerations about race could be allowed to limit cultural expression. Marinetti´s aversion to racism was partly a result of his anger over Nazi condemnation of the modern art he represented as a symptom of "Jewish decadence" and partly due to the fact that several of his closest friends were Jews. Not least his much admired Antonio Sant'Elia, a ground-breaking architect who twenty-eight years old had been killed at a front section where Marinetti had been severely wounded during the First World War. Below, the moustachioed Marinetti can be seen together with Sant'Elia and the genial futurist artist Umberto Boccioni, who thirty-four years was killed at the beginning of the war.

At a meeting in Rome where artists protested against the racial laws Marinetti entered the stage with a loaded machine gun, which he laid on the table in front of him while he pleaded for tolerance and the unconditional freedom of artistic expression. Unfortunately, such convictions did not hinder him from joining Mussolini's scandalous Nazi puppet regime in Salò. Although Marinetti remained largely faithful to Fascism almost to the bitter end, he died of a sudden heart attack in 1944, he was nevertheless a convinced democrat.

Already in the early 1920's he renounced his membership in the Fascist Party, which he considered to be far too conservative for his taste. Among Marinetti's political opinions were free, state-funded and compulsory education for all and guaranteed well-being for every citizen, which according to him ought to be funded through the sale of Italy's art treasures. When someone remarked that it would deplete Italian culture, he replied: "On the contrary, it would disseminate it around the world, while our nation would become richer and happier, meaning that we will be capable of producing better art and culture".

Fascism ended in disaster, slaughter and murder. The tributes paid to movement, change and modernization by so many totalitarian systems usually end up in total tragedy for everyone involved; perpetrators as well as victims. Such propaganda easily seizes individuals, but generally results in a fruitless search for something that is never reached or saturated.

Songs of sirens, immortalized through the tale about the role model for all adventurers - Ulysses, who adrift and cursed by the gods once listened to the sirens' song and thus became imprisoned by the allure of traveling. Dante met him in the Inferno where Ulysses was encased within a flame and eternally tormented by a search for something beyond his reach.

I am far from being a Ulysses. I generally adapt myself to where I happen to end up and tend to feel at ease there. Now I live in Rome, but I have other homes in Bjärnum and close to San Pedro Macoris. I have no fixed job and feel threatened by an uncertain future, but I have my family, good friends and my memories. In my dreams loudspeakers announce: "The train to Berlin will arrive on track four!", "Flight SK 204 to Bogota arrives at gate No. 4". I listen and obey, willingly I step aboard, anxious, with expectations, or relieved. What may be expected? The serenity behind everything? The meaning of life? A final togetherness - perfect love, attachment to loved ones, a harmonious family life?

When I almost fifty years ago sat in a mail truck on the station platform in Hässleholm, waiting for the arrival of the last train to Ånge, expected shortly after ten o'clock in the evening, the heart swelled in my chest when the Berlin Express made a brief stop, followed by thunderous, clanking freight rains, which carts carried attached notes informing where they came from, or where they were going - Paris, Berlin, Belgrade, Athens. I have since then often associated nights with the railway. The flurry of activity in the yellow glow of lamps, the smell of iron against iron, wood, metal and oil. But also - sometimes - a strange stillness in moonlight and electric lighting.

Hässleholm, a rather boring little town, has its existence to thank for the Swedish Main Line, which in 1855 began to be built in Malmö in the south, until it in early 1894 reached Boden in the far north, after which the hardy navvies spread around the globe. Some of them died from tropical fevers while they laid down rails in the jungles of the Amazon, or the Congo.

Despite its sleepy provincialism Hässleholm harboured two regiments, which lent an adventurous spirit to my childhood. Quite often heavy, battle tanks thundered over the cobblestones outside our windows. One time, a young recruit was beheaded by the railway bridge that ran across the street a few hundred meters further down from our apartment building. The soldier had served as lookout by the open door on the tank's gun turret, but had looked in the wrong direction and not seen the sharp concrete edge of the viaduct, which tore off his head, it was in any case what my neighbour Roland told me. His father was a non-commissioned officer at T4, where he worked as a physical health instructor.

I did not really trust Roland, who was good at dramatizing life and had an impressive collection of toy soldiers, which we used to play with in his room, or out in the yard´s sandbox. Among Roland´s soldiers from World War II was a figurine I would have liked to own, it was a soldier with a flame thrower spraying a dramatic blaze of multi-coloured fire. Roland told me that such hellish weapons were used to incinerate soldiers, who had been trapped inside concrete bunkers. However, I was most impressed by a Frenchman wearing a blue uniform and riding a camel.

Sometimes we took our bikes to the regiments´ training grounds. It was of course forbidden, but that only increased the feeling of adventure and after having crawled under barbed wire, swinging by the arms across water-filled ditches and with thick ropes trying to climb up impossibly steep plank walls, we rested in a sand pit where Roland told us how he had seen the beheaded soldier's head roll across the cobble stones, or how it was when a guy from a neighbouring apartment building had been severely burnt and taken by ambulance to the hospital after peeing on a high voltage line from a railway bridge in another part of town.

The railroad ran through my childhood. The impressive station building was the town's centre. The station clock regulated my time and trains rattled through my dreams. Twice a year the train brought me, or the entire family, to Stockholm where the king and my grandfather lived, his lush garden was a fairyland that has followed me through life. And from the station you could travel even further afield - to Berlin, Prague, Paris and Rome. Sitting by my school bench, I could through the dusty window, see how wagon lits moved down to the continent. At dusk, we could bike down to the train yard and sneak into unlocked compartments, soaking up lingering scents of cleaning agents, metal, dusty seats, as well as the aroma of perfume and tobacco and stench from unknown travellers, whiffs from distant, alluring worlds.

On hot summer days we wandered kilometre after kilometre along tracks taking us through forests and across fields, far beyond roads and highways. We ended up in the middle of nature, where plants and animals were closer to us than elsewhere, where the scents of trees and plants, mixed with the smell of tarred sleepers and the sun-baked stones of the embankment, the heat made the rails shimmer. Accompanying us was the constant threat of the sudden appearance of a train and like the Sioux we had seen on Sunday matinees, we pressed our ears to the hot rails to perceive the singing, swaying sound of approaching locomotives with their trail of thunderous, rattling passenger cars.

Behind passing windows we caught glimpses of elegant ladies we imagined were heading towards Berlin night clubs, fashionable Parisian restaurants or the casino in Monte Carlo, or young men with tickets to vibrant cities, or busy ports, where ships were waiting to take them across the seas to scorching deserts, soaring mountains and deep jungles. The trains disappeared and again we could hear birdsong, the mooing of cows, or a distant dog barking. All around us was summer, with drifting clouds over a clear blue sky.

In Vietnam I have seen mighty locomotives with red flags fluttering by their fronts, steaming through emerald green rice paddies, while white smoke billowed above them. In Latin America and Africa I have encountered overgrown railway tracks with rusting steam locomotives, covered with meandering vines, making them resemble the remains of dinosaurs. In Peru and Bolivia I have in overcrowded train compartments been sitting on wooden benches, while puffing locomotives laboriously pulled us forth between snow-capped peaks.

In New York we lived not far from Grand Central Station's gilded palace and in Rome not far from Stazione Termini´s elegant fascist structure. At stations in Hamburg, Berlin, Paris, Budapest and London I have been sitting on benches listening to bellowing loudspeakers and watched magnificent, grimy glass domes resting on slender iron columns. How different this is from all hours I have spent snoozing on uncomfortable vinyl seats, surrounded by tax-free shops within impersonal and almost identical airport hangars.

With money in our pockets from various odd jobs, I and Claes boarded a train in Hässleholm, the day after we had been demobbed after a year of obligatory military service. We went directly to Sicily, as far south we could come by train. Since then, I and my friends travelled south by train every summer. A lovely time, characterized by adventure and broadening horizons. Perhaps the reason for my life becoming what it became is that I was born in a small town by railroad tracks stretching into the world. With all it entailed of dreams about work and travelling. It cannot be denied that my memories of and experiences from travelling are numerous and constantly nourish my imagination.

Man is a migrant animal. Many of us have a desire, or compulsion, to move from place to place. Nevertheless, I cannot determine whether that is the case with me. I enjoy most places where I ended up and have rarely had the time or opportunity to think about why I constantly am moving around as I do. As I sit here and write my gaze falls on a bookshelf. Most books seem to be about travel; Canterbury Tales, The Divine Comedy, Don Quixote, Journey to the West, Pilgrim's Progress, Treasure Island, Moby Dick, Pinocchio, Lord Jim, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Journey to the Centre of the Earth, Nils Holgersson´s Wonderful Journey through Sweden - travels, travels.

However, not all trains bring us adventure, or are home bound. Trains can be intimidating and dangerous. While we are standing by a level-crossing barrier watching a mighty train rushing past, we understand that its power can kill, its progress is out of our reach and influence. Trains follow their regular routines, their timetables, their permanent track and they do it at a dizzying speed, with mechanical efficiency, and if they would derail the consequences are terrible.

The Swedish author Pär Lagerkvist has in a short story managed to describe how a childhood confrontation with a train unexpectedly revealed the relentlessness of life. In the company of his father, a confident and calm station master who knew his trains and their personnel, the ten year old Pär had been out on adventures in his father's childhood forests. As they walked along the embankment, the father had beforehand known when trains were expected and in good time he had stepped aside with his son and together they had waved to the people passing by, recognizing every driver of the mighty steam locomotives. Protected by his reassuring father little Pär felt confident and proud. Nevertheless, when night falls everything becomes different and threatening, but the trustworthy father declares that his son has nothing to fear from the darkness – he and God is with him. However:

When we found ourselves in a curve of the track, we suddenly heard a commotion behind us! Frightened we woke up from our thoughts. Father pulled me abruptly down from the embankment, into the abyss and kept me there. The train plunged by. A black train, with all its cars extinguished, it passed us at a breakneck speed. Where was it destined? There would be no train passing now! Alarmed we watched it pass. Fire blazed inside the oven of the huge locomotive, blackened men shovelled coal into it, embers flew wildly into the night. It was horrible. The driver stood pale, motionless, with petrified features, illuminated by the fire. Father did not know him, did not know who he was, he just stared straight forward, it was as if he for no reason headed into darkness, deep into the darkness, which had no end. Excited, panting with anxiety, I stood and looked after the wild sight. It was swallowed by the night. Father took me back up on the railway embankment, we hurried home. He said:

- Strange, what kind of train was that? And the driver, I did not recognize him.

Then he just went silent.

It was one of those terrible moments that may transpire in our childhood, when we like a slap in the face suddenly are confronted by a brutal reality and realize that our existence will change for ever. After a day of closeness with his admired father Pär realized with sudden fear that he would eventually live a life of his own, far from his father's safe, well-known and organized existence. He would be callously thrown into an unknown future. The violent onrushing train was a portentous omen:

I sensed what it meant. It was the anxiety that would come, everything unknown, which Father did not know anything about, from which he could not protect me. What would this world be like? What would my life become? Surely not like Father´s, where everything was safe and reliable. There was no real world, nobody really lives a true life. I felt like burning inside, heading into a darkness with no end.

There are trains with horrific final destinations - Auschwitz, Treblinka, Kolyma or Norilsk. The trains may take us home, or to the freedom, but sometimes they bring us to death and suffering. Taking soldiers to slaughter fields, prisoners to hunger, desperation and death.

One evening in Hässleholm, while I was in a yellow mail truck reading and waiting for the train to Ånge to arrive, I saw one of the large, orange RC-locomotives. People came running with rags and buckets, while two train drivers staggered out onto the platform. One of them immediately left the platform, while the other leaned against one of the pillars that supported the platform roof and lit a cigarette.

Men dressed in white, long coats and rubber gloves collected substance from the front of the locomotive and placed it in red, plastic buckets. Curious I stepped out of the mail truck, but before I reached the RC-locomotive the smoking engine driver called upon me:

- You, boy! Yes, you there, come over here for a while.

I walked up to the driver, who shook a cigarette out of the pack and passed it without a word it to me. I politely declined his offer:

- No, I do not smoke and I if smoke a cigarette there will surely be more of them.

The driver laughed:

- You are obviously a good kid, and because of that you should not go over there.

- Why not?

- They pick up the remains of two old grannies we hit just outside of Tyringe. A sharp turn and suddenly they were there, quite unexpectedly, right out of the woods. They came chatting as old ladies do. I blow the alarm, to no avail. There was blood all over the windshield, I could hardly see a thing.

Shaken, I wondered:

- Are not you shocked?

- When you run into something with full speed not much is left. Some bone chips and meat scraps, that's all.

- But, do you not think it was horrifying? Why did you not leave together with your friend?

- Sure, you become jittery when such a thing happens to you. It is nothing I wish for my worst enemy. But, for me it was not the first time. It was worse for Stig. He has not been through it before.

- Stig?

- My colleague, they took him to the hospital. To get him something soothing.

He nodded towards me:

- Sure, it's bloody awful. But, you get used to it. For example, it´s hell to drive through a herd of reindeer. Visibility goes to hell, it´s unrelenting slaughter, guts and blood all over.

He paused briefly as he took a deep inhale from the cigarette before putting it out on the ground. He continued:

- This time it was a couple of grannies, certainly I think more about them and their families than I think about some damn reindeer. It´s bad. Very bad. The only way to overcome such an event is driving on as soon as possible. Hope they have a new shift for me, then I will go home and sleep. I live in Alvesta.

Yes, life´s journey is long and remarkable. The train stops at a station. You do not get down and out, knowing you have not yet reached your final destination. I have lived in many places, traveling from place to place. Sometimes I have imagined that I have arrived - this place suits me fine, here I would like to stay. However, the train continues on its constant trek and I stay on board. There is always a destination. Or – I decide that this is the end station for me. I will not continue any longer. I am exhausted. However, the train whistle sounds, clutches twitch and gnash and I am back on the road again:

Then the beech trees´ leaves were bright,

then white crowfeet floated in the brook,

lightly the bird cherry´s crown swung,

there where I walked as a boy.

It rains quietly. The sky hangs low on

thin crowns. A whistle; the train begins to move.

Towards a slowly darkening evening I travel friendless.

Adkins, Roy (2005) Trafalgar: The Biography of a Battle. London: Abacus. Danchew, Alex (2011) 100 Artists´ Manifestos from the Futurists to the Stuckists. London: Penguin Classics. Daverio, Philippe (2012) Museo Immaginato: Il secolo lungo della modernitá. Milano: Rizzoli. Guerri, Girodano Bruno (2010) Filippo Tommaso Marinetti: Invenzioni, aventure e passioni di un revoluzionario. Milano: Oscar Mondadori. Rolt, Lionel Thomas Caswall. (1970) Isambard Kingdom Brunel: A Biography. London: Pelican.The poem by the end is my clumsy translation of an impressive Swedish poet Wilhelm Ekelund Då voro bokarna ljusa (1902).

A few weeks ago, some computer problems forced us to visit the Apple Store at Euroma2, a shopping mall just outside of Rome. A terrible place. It was a hot, sunny day in the middle of the Italian holiday season and I assumed most Italian families had gone to the beaches, the mountains, or to visit La Nonna, the grandmother, far out in the lush countryside. Nevertheless, it was almost impossible to find a parking spot down in the exhaust stinking, underground garage, large as several soccer fields merged together. When we came out of the underground we were hit by a compact, deafening murmur. Crowds thronging among the shop windows created a massive substance of sound, an invisible, bloated presence pressing against walls, ceilings and eardrums. A dull headache settled within the skull, worsened by an opaque, artificial light pressing against the eyeballs. An overwhelming mass of goods filled shop windows and cluttered stalls with sweets and fast food littered corridors with multicolored, marble-covered floors, stretching out in different directions from the staircase we had ended up in.

Above us towered a glass vault, behind which the summer sky could be glimpsed. From the center of the dome hung a chandelier with glass shades like spider cocoons. The base of the cupola rested on Doric columns and vulgar, gilded ornaments. In the middle of each corridor, radiating from one of several, immense stair halls, were tall obelisks of some kind of artificial material, imitating speckled marble, onyx, lapis lazuli and emerald. People jostled in the corridors - young couples with strollers, grandparents, children with ice creams and sweets – most of them seemed to be happy and elated. From shops and supermarkets, debouching into the corridors, came a hodgepodge of muzak.

Dizzy and slightly nauseous I wondered what kind of pleasure and satisfaction people could find in such an air-conditioned inferno, particularly during a beautiful summer day. Why were they not seized by desperation while being trapped in such a grotesque environment of tasteless extravagance? Or angered?

Sometime long ago, in San Juan at Puerto Rico´s University (UPR), I talked to a sociology professor. He was writing a survey about a riot in Miami, when poor people had smashed shop windows and looted the stores. What he researched was not the fact that poor people had looted stores out of desperation, but that several of them in a senseless rage had destroyed the goods, pouring down shelf after shelf with cans, meat and vegetables, or smashed TV sets and electrical appliances. Pleasure or insanity?

Are the huge department stores that now thrive throughout the world, many of them in desperately poor countries, one of today's most common social phenomena? A hallmark of our global world, where refugees and migrants are drowning, looted and beaten to death, while they try to escape from war and poverty? We are all whipped onwards by capitalism and consumerism. A source of desperation and anger, or joy and satisfaction? Are big, tacky shopping malls contemporary cathedrals? The answer to our hopes and aspirations? What are people worshipping in Euroma2?

Maybe the happy people who gather around the shared happiness of consumption are fulfilling a basic human instinct - hunting and gathering to satisfy a physical and spiritual hunger? Are shopping malls the final station for thousands of years of human evolution and endeavor? Is that where we finally are going to encounter happiness and satisfaction?

Consumption will never end, our hunger returns, again and again. Think of the song about money in Cabaret:

Money makes the world go around

... the world go around

... the world go around.

For many of us money is much more important than either love or religion, it is the solution to all of our problems. As Tevye the Milkman asks God in Fiddler on the Roof:

Dear God, you made many, many poor people.

I realize, of course, that it's no shame to be poor.

But it's no great honor either!

So, what would have been so terrible if I had a small fortune?

A friend of mine, who once had been rich, he had been in the art business and among other things sold Jim Dine´s paintings of bathrobes, declared: “They say that money is not everything, but I say they help. I once had quite a lot of them, as well as a house, a wife and a boat, when I lost my money I lost my wife, as well as the boat and the house”. We might say that the best things in life are free, but still, we need the money and we fear not being able to gain them, or of losing those we already have:

When you go to get a word of advice

From the fat little pastor,

He will tell you to love evermore.

But when hunger comes to rap,

rat-a-tat rat-a-tat at the window:

"Knock knock" (at the window)

"Who's there?"

"Hunger"

"Oh, hunger !!"

See how love flies out the door ...

Monetary joy is a passing pleasure, as most other things, not so long after we have had a good meal, or got hold of something we longed for - the latest electronic gadget, a villa, a vintage wine, a car, a piece of clothing – the urge comes back. To quench our desires, or dream about what we want, we are drawn to the Paradise of Consumption, like insects to the light. A constant search for the perfect product, the complete happiness. As religion - a hope for final bliss, for saturated desires: "And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you."

When I visited cathedrals in France, a mosque by Sinan, or a baroque church by Borromini, I realized that their aims were clear - they were built ad maiorem dei gloriam, for God's greater glory, and at the same time they served as a means for the faithful to come closer to God. The purpose of a shopping mall is to encourage potential customers´ desire to buy, revealed through the shop windows´ sumptuous array of attractive products - the deceptive “classic” framing Euroma2, its columns and glass cupolas, give a fake imprssion.

A lie is concealed behind the glittering facades; a combination of bluff and deceit. A picture book by the design guru Peter York, Dictator Style: Lifestyles of the World´s Most Colorful Despots, while offering a survey of dictators´ deplorable taste it conveys a similar unwholesome scent as the tasteless embellishment of Euroma2. Dictators seem to have comparable ambitions to dazzle, seduce and express a dubious message. Peter York describes “dictator taste” as comparable to that of teenage boys, who tend to decorate their rooms with symbols of virility and risk taking; images of guns, fast cars, and blood sports, risqué rock bands and science-fiction heroes rescuing willing babes from the clutch of threatening monsters. Likewise, does a dictator´s interior decoration aim at impressing their buddies, but he also needs to amaze the populace, intentions leading to an interesting collision between conflicting needs. It is as if the dictator wants to say: “Look, I´m your leader, but also a great guy. All I do, I do for you and you have to be pleased with the fact that I happen to be the galaxy´s most formidable role model, a stud and a sage, a man to be desired, a true gentleman of taste and refinement. Not a spendthrift, but someone who in a smart and tasteful manner is capable of manipulating symbolic imagery in a way fitting and proper for a person of my colossal stature. And for your own sake - ignore that Kim Jung-Il in North Korea, he gives dictators a bad reputation. Is not it time to ditch that beige jumpsuit and those tawdry spectacles?”

Peter York provides some fundamental suggestions for a fictional interior designer, entrusted with "fixing the style" of a dictator: 1) Blow up the scale of everything you do. 2) Dictators like "antique style", it gives a serious impression. But what is genuine is often stiff and uncomfortable. Consequently, you have to make sure that everything is shiny and brand new, though made in a "classic" style. 3) Choose a hotel as your paragon, as sparkly as possible. For an ambitious lad from a simple background his hometown Grand Hôtel symbolized the good life of shakers and movers. 4) Gold can never be wrong, start by gilding the faucets. 5) Much glass everywhere; sparkling illumination is alpha and omega for an interior designer embellishing a dictator´s abode and it should be reflected in mirrors and shiny surfaces. 6) Think best of brands, they give prestige and a monetary value everyone is aware of. 7) Use as much marble as possible. Obviously, it must be new and polished. Old marble can have a dirty feel to it. Remember that marble should be veined, with touches of color, not the kind favored by tedious architects. Such intentions might also have been be the recipe for Euroma 2 decorators.

Almost ninety years ago the Marxist mystic Walter Benjamin discerned a decline of taste in the service of capitalism. I have tried to read some of Walter Benjamin's writings, it has not been easy. Susan Sontag has characterized his writing:

His sentences do not seem to be generated in the usual way, they do not entail. Each sentence is written as if it were the first, or the last […] Mental and historical processes are rendered as conceptual tableaux: ideas are transcribed in extremis and the intellectual perspectives are vertiginous. His style of thinking and writing, incorrectly called aphoristic, might better be called freeze-frame baroque. This style was tortures to execute. It was as if each sentence had to say everything, before the inward gaze of total concentration dissolved the subject before his eyes.

I cannot claim that I understand all aspects of Walter Benjamin´s writing. However, while commenting on his translations of Proust and Baudelaire, Benjamin claimed that he had translated them "between the lines", i.e. by using his own language and thinking he had tried to reveal that he believed to be the author's authentic message, hiding behind the language. As when colours are liberated from constraints created by sharp lines. According to Benjamin a painting based more on colour than outlines, is more honest and freer than if restrained by the use of black, incisive contours.

Walter Benjamin was born 1892 in Berlin, to an affluent Jewish family. He studied philosophy and art. To keep away from World War I the newly wed Benjamin moved to Switzerland and returned to Germany after the peace agreement. Others acted differently. Several German intellectuals, both to the left and right, praised the war as a defense of culture and human dignity against the vulgar materialism of France and England. Others committed suicide, or died in the trenches. Some were ecstatic, in Mein Kampf, Hitler wrote:

To me those hours seemed like a release from the painful feelings of my youth. Even today I am not ashamed to say that, overpowered by stormy enthusiasm, I fell down on my knees and thanked Heaven from an overflowing heart for granting me the good fortune of being permitted to live at this time. A fight for freedom had begun, mightier than the earth had ever seen; for once Destiny had begun its course…

Like all Germans of his generation, Walter Benjamin was shaken by the war and its aftermath of humiliation, internal fighting and economic depression.

Benjamin inadequately supported his family by writing articles and giving lectures, including radio talks. He moved in intellectual circles, traveled a lot and made influential friends, but he had no academic success. The theme of Benjamin´s rejected PhD thesis was the now largely forgotten German Trauerspiele, mourning plays from the Baroque period, which he compared with classical Greek dramas. According to Benjamin, the characters of Greek drama were enclosed by a relentless destiny, which had the ultimate control over their lives. On the contrary, were individuals in the Trauerspiereile thrown into an incomprehensible existence, lacking basic principles, objectives or predetermined solutions, thereby foreshadowing our own time; modern man's confusion and anxiety.

However, both ancient Greeks and baroque Germans were enclosed by a language circumscribed by their time and context and could thus only provide a weak reflection of the “real” existence. Man's misfortune is that his reason cannot be expressed in other ways than through language. Our language has like the entire human society become reified. Our thinking and language have been perverted by commercialism and ceased to be a means to trace and understand the mysteries of existence. Benjamin had studied Marx and like him he stated that it was our current commodity fetishism that characterized all human relations. Everything has become goods and things, even the language. Life is now nothing more than a phantasmagoria, an illusion, a lie that alienates us from existence´s innermost core. Like the sociologist Max Weber Benjamin came to believe that language and thus life itself had become insipid, entzaubert, lost hope, the joy of making discoveries, imagination is gone and so are cheerful surprises – life´s spiritual dimension has been lost, a condition affecting all human expressions, including art.

Benjamin investigated the relationship between line and color. Like language is limiting the mind and our thoughts, lines limit colour, which is more important than contours. Colour is created by light, distance and relationship with other surrounding colors and shades. Benjamin speaks of the aura of a work of art, something which apparently is connected with "presence". Are we, for example, standing in front of a painting by van Gogh we will perceive its light and shades, its structure. We can appreciate the imprint of the artist's brushwork, the material he used and how space and time have affected the painting. Standing in front of a work of art we can appreciate it´s “physicality”, something which is completely lacking from mechanically produced reproductions/copies, like mass-produced postcards, which lack the unique aura of a work of art.

An aura is generated by our personal relationship to something, almost as if we were confronted with a sacred object. To capture our attention a work of art must convey a feeling, or as Benjamin puts it "reciprocate our gaze". A reasoning that leads him towards a critique of modernism. According to Benjamin, technological advances has trivialized, altered, and distorted art. The value of works of art is no longer determined by the craftsmanship behind them, their aura is nowadays created by financial worth. Commercialism and capitalism are alienating us from reality. They shield and circumscribe us, like lines surround and define colours. Everything has become a chimera, a lie.

We humans are separated from our own, true existence. If we live in a city everything surrounding us is artificially created, completely without our personal involvement. Not even trees and plants have been allowed to grow freely, without being fenced in and pruned by commercial interests. Existence has lost its aura and become a ruin of what it once was.

Tangible proofs of the reification created by commercialism are the large cities´ immense, commercial palaces. Shrines to Mammon, where we are invited to desire and worship things that only money can buy. A false openness, a fake freedom. Supermarkets are covered with glass, barring the presence of the sky, but at the same time it protects us from the elements, so we may concentrate on the dazzling variety of goods set out before our eyes. Glass, over and around us, convey a message of light and openness, at the same times as it excludes and protects. Glass allows us to peer into the treasure troves of uninhibited commercialism. We are constantly enticed, but we know we can only get what we want if we pay for it. All this transparency is a brazen lie, the only key to it all is money, lots of money. In our modern society, everything can be bought for money - respect, love and power. Everything has a monetary value, comes with a price, even art.

Within a society celebrating commerce and capitalism, which provide a much larger share of public interest than culture. Potentates and popularly elected representatives pay for shopping malls and facilitate our ability to reach them. All means of communication - social media, buses, trains and cars, are linked to commercialism. To get the System's blessing and approval art and culture has to be utilitarian and assessed in accordance with their market value.

Thinking about Euroma2 and its ugly chandeliers, gilded ornaments, columns, obelisks and glistening storefronts I feel that falsehood shines through it all, there is no aura, no authenticity. Obelisks, columns and glass domes are all out of place, made of fake materials, too gaudy, too fake and far too tasteless.

Poor, alienated and threatened by Nazism, often travelling back and forth and finally on the run, Benjamin went to Paris to find inspiration and material for his crowning life achievement, which he called the Arcade project, Passagen-Werk or Passagenarbeit. He struggles with it for thirteen years, until his death, and it is remains unfinished. What he left behind after his suicide in September 1940 at the Spanish border fleeing from the European madness, is a chaotic ruin of notes, newspaper clippings, records, sketches, tables of contents, aphorisms and fragmentary essays, which he left to his friend Georges Bataille at the National Library in Paris.

The vast material was screened and edited by Benjamin's friends Theodor Adorno and Gershom Scholem, and has since been hailed and revered by a growing crowd Benjamin fans, even if it in its fragmentary condition mainly consists of rather short paragraphs collected under various headings, constitutes a messy, excessive and sometimes rather boring reading. The vast amount of text discusses and investigates Parisian life in mid- and late 1800s; architecture, clothing, literature, urban planning, prostitution, stock market, interior design, fashion, markets, theater and much, much more. Some of it is interesting, some parts are amusing, but too much is written in a tangled style that Benjamin sometimes applied to his texts. To his friend Gershom Scholem he defined his long-winding preface to the failed dissertation as an “Epistemo-Critical Prologue” that could only be understood by those who had delved into the Kabbalah.

That the Arcade project ended up in its current state was probably partly the merit/fault of some of Benjamin's closest friends. Gershom Scholem, who was the world's foremost expert on and interpreter of the Kabbalah, regarded Benjamin as a deeply religious man who did not realize his inner depths, but gave the impression of being a "scribe cast out into another world, who has set off in search of his 'scripture'."

Theodor Adorno, one of the most influential philosophers of the Frankfurt School, did just like Walter Benjamin consider that “civilized man's” opinion of himself was fake, that few individuals were capable of living in accordance with reality. Adorno hoped that Benjamin would be the philosopher who finally would succeed in offering the world a definite aesthetic/ethical explanation of human existence and he convinced Benjamin to repeatedly rewrite and reorganize his work. As his editor, Adorno gave Benjamin confusing criticism and advice, like:

Let me express myself in as simple and Hegelian a manner as possible. Unless I am very much mistaken, your dialectic is lacking in one thing: mediation. You show a prevailing tendency to relate to the pragmatic contents of Baudelaire´s work directly and immediately to adjacent features in the social history and whenever possible, the economic features, of the times.

Then there was Bertolt Brecht, who Adorno characterized as a vulgar materialist, a poorly disguised petty-bourgeois and worse still – an apologist of Stalinism. Nevertheless, Benjamin admired Brecht's "elementary" views and took note of his recommendations to apply a "cinematic montage technique" to his texts, i.e. a junction of supplementary fragments. Brecht also tried to convince Benjamin that he as soon as possible ought to join the Communist Party.

The attraction which communism had for Benjamin was by Gershom Scholem explained that a mystic like Benjamin believed himself to have only two choices - either immerse himself in his inner life while searching for the truth in books, or to "accelerate the end" by neglecting his studies and turn himself into a man of action by "choosing sides", throwing himself into the deadly embrace of narrow-minded fervor. Benjamin had hoped for an apocalypse, a revolution that would lead to a purification of our crumbling social systems, but after a visit to the Soviet Union, he understood that such a transformation could not be expected from Stalinism, which would realize a reified, totalitarian state, where a corrupt Government cooperated with organized crime. Walter Benjamin's posthumous thesis on the Philosophy of History, reveals that he finally had realized that the Apocalypse was approaching, but it would not bring with it any Messiah, only satanic violence.

Part of the ever growing interest in Benjamin is probably due to his tragic death. High up in the Pyrenees, he and his entourage were prevented from entering Spain during their flight from Jew-hunting Nazis. However, they lacked the necessary French departure stamps in their passports and in his despair Benjamin committed suicide. The day after, his travel companions were allowed to cross Spanish border. With Benjamin's death, the manuscript he was carrying with him in his briefcase vanished. He had told his companions that it was his most important piece of writing. Two years after his suicide, Walter Benjamin´s brother Georg killed himself by running into the electric fence of the concentration camp Mathausen. Georg´s wife, Hilde eventually became Minister of Justice in East Germany. In the 1950s, she presided over a series of political show trials and her severe verdicts made her known as Blutige Hilde, Bloody Hilde.

Philosophers like Marx, Weber, Benjamin and Adorno perceived the world as some kind of blueprint, a pattern that could be described and explained, and to a certain extent they were right. The Nazis transformed German community into a giant theater with scenery and rites concealing a world view which turned people into things. Constructions like the unblemished der Führer and the righteous Nazi party, while Jews, homosexuals and gypsies were lumped together and branded as soulless scum to be disposed of as soon as possible. The same thing happened at the other end of the political spectrum, Communist propaganda depicting a flawless Stalin and an upright Communist Party of the Soviet Union, while kulaks and saboteurs had to be cleared away.

Undoubtedly, Euroma2 may be considered as a temple of commodity fetishism, a perfect symbol of a life circumscribed by a suffocating capitalist system, deprived of enchantment and mystery. Nevertheless, nature and art are still with us still and we are free to appreciate and enjoy them.

I recently read a book by Sarah Thornton Seven Days in the Art World, which in its seven chapters described one of Christie's "quality auctions" of contemporary art in New York; a nocturnal seminar at a prestigious course at the California Institute of the Arts; the world's most important elite art market in Basel; the hullabaloo surrounding Tate's Turner Price in London; the editorial office of Artforum International in New York, the glossy magazine which sets trends and is funded by major art gallery ads; Taskashi Murakami´s studios in Japan, where large teams of artists and craftsmen produce the artist´s work and also mass produce copies of selected items; and the Venice Biennale, the world's most prestigious art exhibition. Within these different contexts, Thornton frequently met the same art collectors, gallery owners, artists and trendsetters. An exclusive group of wealthy people, moving like fish in water, within a world where art is big business. In many respects, a Vanity Fair where more or less secret sales and buying tricks flourish within a limited, immensely wealthy circuit where millionaires encourage each other to participate in all kinds of prestige inflamed funny games and occasionally petty criminal behavior constantly swirling around over-prized artworks.

In reality, artworks could not, despite their sometimes intriguing or aesthetic merits, be valued in money. Now, art equals money, especially artwork that have been blessed by trend setters, sellers and buyers and thus equipped with price tags, often intended to increase profits for both buyers and sellers. Photographs and videos are made and sold in limited editions to ensure exclusivity and high prices. A market which is not at all free and independent, where supply and demand are constantly manipulated. A runaway world marked by illusions and trickery; fake art, false advertising, deceitful expertise, all soaked and garnished with pretentious flubdub.

Art has turned into a golden calf, an offspring of Baal and Moloch. A reflection of our capitalist domineered everyday life, where one percent of the world's adult population own 40 percent of the world's assets. Where the world's three richest people have financial assets equaling the GDP of the world's 48 poorest nations. Only in such a world is it conceivable to pay 100 million USD for a Warhol, a Bacon or a Richter. or 300 000 USD for a bottle of wine. Though wine is of course not art.

Accordingly, I cannot avoid a twinge of schadenfreude when the art market from time to time is collapsing. When a dork who one year has paid 100 million US dollars for some carcasses in formaldehyde, or paintings with dots of different colors, the following year finds that his coveted artworks have lost 90 percent of their original market value. Several artists have taken note of art as a commodity. Several pop artists turned their artwork into depictions of commodity fetishes - tin cans, advertising posters, hamburgers, some of which now have come to be worth millions of dollars.

Sarah Thornton seems to be genuinely fascinated by the art world and she admires many of the actors in her book. In a postscript she emphasizes that her book dealt with a time when the art market was characterized by a mind-boggling rise in market price. However, despite this observation it appears as if the phantasmagoria of the exaggerated value of contemporary art seems to linger. For example, in 2013 Southeby's in New York auctioned off Andy Warhol´s Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster) for 105 million USD. That it is not the craftsmanship behind a work of art that is valued is proved by the price tag on works by Cy Twombly, his painting Untitled, made with wax crayons on black canvas, was in September 2014 auctioned off for 69.6 million USD.

However, it is not only during auctions that artworks sell at exorbitant prices. The most expensive artworks so far, have been sold privately. For example, in 2006 the film and record producer David Giffen sold Willem de Kooning´s painting Woman III to the billionaire Steven Cohen for 137 million USD, the same year Giffin sold Jackson Pollock´s Painting No. 5 to a Mexican millionaire for $ 140 million.

Contemporary art is also sold at record prices by reputable gallery owners, like one of the art world's really great magicians, Asher Edelman. I do not know if he still has the same influence he was once had, when he in the 1980´s was the great guru of Wall Street and, according to rumors he constituted the model for the ruthless Gordon Gekko in Oliver Stone's movie Wall Street from 1987, in which Gekko utters the classic words: “Greed is good. It captures the essence of the evolutionary spirit.”

Edelman engaged in investment banking, money management and derivatives trading. It was due to Edelman that you at malls and airports across the world could find The Art of War written sometime around 500 BC by the Chinese general Sun Tzu. In Stone's movie Gekko states; "Public´s out there throwing darts as a board. I don´t throw darts at a board, I bet on sure things. Read Sun Tsu´s The Art of War, every battle is won before it is ever fought.” Edelman introduced The Art of War as a textbook when he in the late 1980s taught business administration at Columbia University. For Edelman, entrepreneurship was like war, battles were won or lost.

Soon enough Edelman had ended up in capitalism's Wonderland, a realm that was at least as absurd and fascinating as the place Alice ended up in - namely the art world. Asher Edelman moved to Switzerland and just outside of Lausanne he founded a museum of contemporary art, where the giants of the art world were invited to stage major retrospective exhibitions of artists whose works were valued in millions of dollars - Basquiat, Lichtenstein, Mapplethorpe, etc.

Edelman introduced a clever art sales ploy when he founded a finance company that loaned money to customers so they could buy contemporary art at a value guaranteed by the same firm. If customers within a certain period could not sell the artwork at a higher price than they paid for it, the lending firm could buy it back at the original price. Edelman stresses that art is good for business. Apart from increasing in value, art provides prestige and sophistication to a company´s image:

In the 1980´s, art conveyed power and influence. Today it´s a marketing tool used to convey a company´s mission and identity. Today art plays an integral role in a business´s image; impactful art implies prestige, refinement and wellbeing.

By sitting on their boards Edelman gave luster to several prestigious institutions such as the Brooklyn Academy of Music, American Ballet Theatre, Bard College, and I do not know what else. Money brings glamor and respect to culture. Something several artists were quick to discover. One of many such examples was a ground-breaking exhibition of the Swiss artist Sylvie Fleury, who in Berlin in 1999 exhibited a number of gilded shopping carts, spaciously placed on circular pedestals, and in a glass case a Formula 1 dress designed by Sylvie Fleury for racing driver Mika Häkkinen and made by Hugo Boss.

The exhibition catalogue stated:

Art and fashion have always gone hand in hand. Sometimes radical and shocking, sometimes traditional and conservative, both are judged according to subjective of taste. Each represents in its own way the moods and spirit of the times. They stimulate the senses and create objects of desire as fetishes of an affluent society and legacies of culture.

The statement was signed by “Hugo Boss” but the text was of course not written by Hugo Boss, who died in 1948, but by someone employed by the great fashion empire he had founded and at his death handed over to a son-in -law with the curious name of Eugen Holy.

Hugo Boss had become a millionaire when his fashion company received the exclusive rights for the production of the brown shirts worn by Nazi thugs while they were beating Jews and socialists to death. The company had been at the brink of bankruptcy when Boss in 1931 became member of the National Socialist Workers' Party and thereby sole supplier of party uniforms, most of which subsequently were made by unpaid Polish and French forced labourers. Hugo Boss´s income and prestige grew even further when Hitler and his cronies came to power, providing Boss with the exclusive right to produce SS Oberführer Karl Diebitsch´s aesthetically pleasing, pitch black SS uniform.

Perhaps it was not surprising that I became frightened by Euroma2's temple to commodity fetishism. I have throughout my conscious life loved and been fascinated by art. Not least contemporary art and I have not had any difficulties in finding qualities in super commercialized artists like Any Warhol, Takashi Murakami, Jeff Koons and Damien Hirst, though I am often amazed how swindlers have been praised by corrupt members of the art establishment. However, occasional appreciation of ridiculously over-priced artists has not hindered me from being appalled by a world where money is synonymous with power, honour and prestige. Where the dance around the Golden Calf is spinning in the brain of all of us making us forget compassion and marvel over the great mystery and adventure that life entails. An being amazed by the fact that people during a wonderful summer day can find joy in wandering around in Euroma2´s nauseating, artificial and air-conditioned inferno.

Benjamin, Walter (1999) The Arcades Project. Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University Press. Benjamin, Walter (2009) The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological Reproducibility, and Other Writings on Media. New York: Classic Books America. Caygill, Howard, Coles, Alex och Klimowski, Andrzej (2001) Walter Benjamin para principiantes. Buenos Aires: Era Naciente SRL. Hitler, Adolf (1992) Mein Kampf . London: Pimlico. Kander, John och Mesteroff, Joe (1999) Cabaret: the illustrated Book and Lyrics. New York: Newmarket Press. Lilla, Mark (2001) The Reckless Mind: Intellectuals in Politics. New York: New York Review Books. Sontag, Susan (2002) Under the Sign of Saturn. New York: Picador. Stallabras, Julian (2004) Contemporary Art: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Thornton, Sarah (2009) Seven Days in the Art World. London: Granta Books. Witte, Bernd (1997). Walter Benjamin: An Intellectual Biography. Detroit; Wayne State University Press. York, Peter (2005) Dictators' Homes: Lifestyles of the World's Most Colourful Despots. London: Atlantic Books.

Our first Roman apartment was haunted. Rose did not like to be alone in the living room. It had a fireplace and the lower half of the walls was paneled with oak, while the upper part was covered with beige, raw silk. It was quite dark in there, but that it was a quite beautiful room. I found it cozy, but Rose occasionally sensed what she termed as an “unpleasant presence". My youngest daughter complained at times that she got her sleep disturbed by "a lady who looked nasty."

The building had a portiere, janitor, a nice man named Mario. He was a Sardo, meaning that he came from Sardinia. Mario was born a small town in the district of Sassari, a place where they speak a Spanish-influenced Italian, which meant I found it easier to understand him than most other Italians. Mario had been a sailor and I sometimes chatted with him by the table in the entrance hall, where he used to hang out. One day he asked me if we had noticed her.

- Who? I wondered

- The boys' mother.

Mario wondered if I knew if the place we lived in had originally been part of a larger apartment, which had been divided in the middle. I knew that. Our residence had been cut from the one of the older brother of our landlord, which was the reason to why our kitchen was so unusually small. The apartment´s original kitchen now belonged to our neighbor, who worked at a company that dubbed movies.

- No, we have not met their mother, I replied, wondering silently what Mario meant by "noticed". Was the lady exceptionally noisy, or was she rude? Mario smiled mysteriously:

- She's dead.

- I don´t understand

Mario told me that "the boys" had lost their parents in a car accident and that after the catastrophe they had divided the apartment between them. Our young host had moved from his share of the home and now rented it out to us.

- Their mother was a very nervous lady, explained Mario. She was not so easy to be with. That´s why I asked if you had noticed her.

- What do you mean by noticed her?

- I've been told that she, or rather her ghost, is still in the house. I´ve never seen her, but she might be with you sometimes.

I cannot deny that I was slightly perturbed, but also fascinated. I remembered how I several years ago had participated in a voodoo séance in Santo Domingo. It took place in the residence of a well-known bruja, a voodoo priestess called Doña Blanca. It had been an impressive and overwhelming experience. In the midst of the ceremony, Doña Blanca and her white-robed assistants had swirled around the altar in their long dresses, suddenly Doña Blanca grabs hold of me and violently swirls me around several times. She was possessed by a male luase, a voodoo god, and her voice was dark and rough. After our fling, she grasps my face between her hands, staring me intently and threatening straight into the eyes and hisses:

- You like the spiritual. Don´t you?

She was right. I am fascinated by what the Italians call Aldilà, The Outside, that which is beyond everyday life. Contrary to my family, I am interested in ghosts, dark and strange things. But, unlike them, I lack what Haitians call connaissance, contact with and knowledge of "the other world", that which is all around us, but seldom can be seen, except in dreams and our imagination, where lwas, the voodoo spirits and the deceased live. A world more powerful than ours, since it is limitless. It was certainly my lack of connaissance that was the reason to why I had not felt the presence of the boys' mother. However, that limitation has not hindered me from experiencing strange things. But ghosts?

One or two years before I began school, I assume I must have been six years old. It was summer and we lived in a cottage on Öland, a nice place with an overgrown garden, behind which there was a dilapidated barn with a weathervane that creaked eerily. That I remember very well, since the outhouse was by the barn, and when I was seated in there in the balmy summer heat, with sunlight shredded by the door splints, I listened to the squeaking weathervane; it was frightening, but nevertheless exciting. We rode around the island on our bicycles and I remember what the windmills looked like in the twilight. A tame jackdaw, who could say a few words, flew into the garden while we ate breakfast, listening to my father's transistor radio, which told us how a pyromaniac ravaged the island of Öland.

I and my sister Annika slept in an outer room, my father and mother in an interior one. In the middle of the night I and Annika woke up at the same time, sensing how a cold draft passed through the room, soon after my mother turned up and anxiously wondered if we were asleep - a sudden chill had woken up her and my father. For more or less a minute it had engulfed the room and then disappeared. When the holidays were drawing to a close, we rode into Borgholm to return the cottage keys to the agency's offices. The clerk wondered if we had noticed something strange about the house:

- How so? asked my father.

- Well, the man answered. Actually, I may not say this to you, but the man who will rent the cottage after you told us that he wanted to rent it because he was studying paranormal phenomena.

- Paranormal phenomena?

- Yes, the clerk laughed heartily.

- He stated that he investigates haunted houses and the cottage you rented is known to host ghosts.

I assume that most of us have something similar to tell. Maybe the cottage had been placed above some underground stream, or a nightly breeze had made its way through the house, but – of course - it could also have been an unruly spirit who had visited us, or a night stalled wraith who had begun to move. In my part of Sweden, it is told that ghosts surprised by dawn freeze on the spot in the form of ice cold air, you could actually pass through them, but it made you sick and depressed, and the ghosts cannot move again until the darkest hour of the night.

Mario and his family lived in a service apartment on the ground floor. His wife, Vivi, was really quite good looking, but since she rarely left the gloomy apartment and smoked like a chimney, she gave an ashen impression and I felt sorry for her because she spent most of her time down in the tiny hovel. Their daughter, Noemi, who was around ten years old, however, was a lively girl, who was diligent in school. Her little brother, who was maybe three or four at the time, I do not remember so well. Some years later he was diagnosed with a brain tumor, but was operated on and recuperated without any after-effects.

Along with Mario and Vivi, we experienced a few years later a magical evening in Sardinia, a moment when the border line between present time and the Aldilà became blurred and we entered into the Twilight Zone.

There is a fifth dimension beyond that which is known to man. It is a dimension as vast as space and as timeless as infinity. It is the middle ground between light and shadow, between science and superstition, and it lies between the pit of man's fears and the summit of his knowledge. This is the dimension of imagination. It is an area which we call the Twilight Zone.

That was the intro to The Twilight Zone, a TV series that had its heyday between 1959 and1964, although two decent resuscitation attempts were made they could not beat the original. It´s success was probably linked to the mystique that in those bygone days existed around the TV. When daily routines had finished, the living room was darkened while the evening tea was laid out on a table in front of the sofa, the family gathered in around the TV. Its blue-gray light beamed at us, as from a laterna magica, and strange worlds opened up. The black and white universe inside the mysterious device was essentially different from everyday life; we were attracted thither, and stayed trapped for several hours - a Twilight Zone.

Memories also belong to a Twilight Zone and they often work like a camera, providing photos that keep a record of past events, but not in the form of an unblemished narrative, more like a series of snapshots of preserved moments. The historian and jazz scholar Eric Hobsbawm, has with books like Bandits, The Invention of Tradition and Nations and Nationalism sometimes been my cicerone within The Twilight Zone, indicating the dangerous myths that flourish in there. Not least the nasty form of nationalism that once again is trying to strangle Europe. He explained how patriotism is created from above, by social engineers, historians and unscrupulous politicians, and then spread among "ordinary people". Suck that sweet tooth - Sweden Democrats! Well, being a gifted historian Hobsbawm stated that his life had been "a protest against forgetting". To preserve memory and imagination and convey them to others is maybe at the heart of culture - music, literature, film and the arts, probably even computer games, though that is a closed world to me. Sometimes, I imagine that my blog is a tiny contribution to such a mighty endeavor - preserving and conveying imagination and memories. In any case, it means something to me. Unfortunately, my literary ability is not as great as it should be, and my memory could be much better

For example, I would like to recall the name of the town where Mario was born and where his generous parents treated us with a nice dinner and of course also the name of the strange chapel to which he later took us, bringing us into The Twilight Zone. As Dominican farmers have explained to me, The Twilight Zone is actually a tangible place:

Once Indians lived on this island, it was theirs. Here they had their fields, their villages and kingdoms, but then the conquistadores came. The whites killed the Indians, enslaved them and gave them diseases in exchange for their gold. The country belonged to the Indians, but to preserve it, they had no other choice but to move down under the earth. They still live down there, and theirs is the force that gives life to the soil. The Whites have built the cities, cut down the forests and poisoned the soil, but we peasants know that if you want to bring strength out of the ground, you have to go to the Indians and give them what they want - beautiful, sparkly things, rum and sweets. Go to the springs and rivers where the life force breaks forth, go down to the caves, they are closer to the underworld where the Indians live. Make friends with them, give the Indians your respect and what they like and they will help you.

There are two topographies, a mundane and a sacred, one covers the other, but that does not mean that the sacred sphere does not exist and that it cannot penetrate everyday life. The sacred manifests itself through dreams and art, but also through ideologies and fanaticism.

Mario's family moved back to Sardinia and one summer we visited them there. The change was startling. The previously gray and chain-smoking Vivi had blossomed and was found to be an ebullient, spiritual source to Sardinian culture. She knew her people's songs, stories and history and had read all that had been written by their Nobel Prize laureate, Grazia Delleda. Vivi told us about the local nuraghe, impressive monuments built by the island's fabled inhabitants between 1700 and 1400 BC. No one knows their purpose. Where they fortifications, princely abodes, temples, or perhaps all this? Nowadays, they are part of Sardinia's peculiar landscape, where they can easily be mistaken for the rock formations that unexpectedly rise from the big island's interior, mountainous landscape, an animated world where poor shepherds and bandits for centuries have lived close to their deities.

Vivi and Mario took us to churches and nuraghe, showed us their wedding album and served delicious, Sardinian food. After dinner with Mario's parents we went by car on winding roads through a wild, alien landscape, brightly lit by a full moon, which occasionally was obscured by drifting, white clouds. After a long, nighttime drive, we arrived at a dilapidated church on a mountain plateau. Around bonfires rested Sardos, sharing wine and food between them. It was a nightly celebration honoring the church's patron saints. The pilgrims talked, sang and one of them played a bagpipe. They offered us food and wine and we felt welcome. I asked a bearded, friendly man with a worn peaked cap, who had offered me some tasty, thick wine, what he did for a living. Laughingly, he replied:

- I don´t do anything and I'm proud of it. I`m a Sardo and live a healthy life. Like my father before me and his grandfather before him.

They took us into the church, it was dark inside, but from a hole in the wall next to the altar, came a mild, yellow light. To enter, we had to crawl on all fours through a narrow passage, which opened up to an unexpected sight - illuminated by a multitude of candles, placed directly on the floor, human skulls and bones were piled from floor to ceiling:

- Christian martyrs, Mario whispered beside me.

- Sardinian legionnaires who had converted to Christianity and were murdered by their Roman officers.

Surprised, I looked at the skulls, which seemed to move in the flickering candlelight. It was not a frightening experience, rather awe inspiring. I felt as if I had ended up in the Underworld, in one of the Indian caves I had visited in the Dominican Republic, where you as my Dominican friends said: “Encountered the Otherworldly”. The presence of something sacred and profound, as if I had crossed a threshold while crawling through the narrow corridor. I found myself in what the Romanian historian of religions, Mircia Eliade, called illud tempus, "that time", a "time out of time" in which everything remains unchanged, the time in which rituals take place and where the sacred is present.

There are people who live within illud tempus. I have met several of them along the border between Haiti and the Dominican Republic and I suspect that such people are to be found in Sardinia as well. In the southern part of the neighboring island, Corsica, a few Mazzeri may still be around. They might be both men and women, but the majority of them are women. The word mazzera comes from Latin - mactare, to kill, which eventually became the Italian ammazzare. Mazzeri seldom kill in real life, most of their killing is done in Aldilà, in The Twilight Zone, the kingdom of dreams and therefore the Mazzeri often are called Dream Hunters.

Their hunt can be both individual and collective. A Mazzera can hunt either in her everyday guise, or in the form of an animal; a dog, a cat or a crow. Her reputation is ambivalent; usually she lives a casual, social life and carefully conceals her true nature, though her neighbors are generally knowledgeable about her true nature. It is usually the intense gaze that reveals a Mazzera. Her eyes are unable to hide the depths within her. A Mazzera´s familiarity with the dream world may both assist and hurt her neighbors. Since Mazzeri know of no borders, no limits, they might with their thought s enter under the skin of other people and find out what they are hiding within their souls. Mazzari can also lure others into the "realm of darkness and death." It is said that the one who has stepped into that domain can never be free again. Inside you feel the intimacy of death and the strength of life. However, even if Mazzari may be called "murderers", they are nevertheless peaceful beings - that is, in their everyday life.

I read about Mazzari in a book written by Dorothy Carrington, who for most of her life lived in Corsica. She was daughter of General Frederik Carrington, known for in the late 1800s having crushed the Matabele uprising in today`s Zimbabwe, where Ndbele and Shona warriors fought a doomed war against English maxim guns. Dorothy's parents died when she still was a child and she eventually found a place in London's art world, where she for many years mounted exhibitions. In 1954 she moved to Corsica, which she came to explore inside and out, mostly in search of "the dark, menacing side of the Corsican psyche," it was how she came in contact with the Mazzari. She only met two of them in person, but she explored thoroughly all the folklore she could find about the Mazzari and their activities. She died in 2002.

Dorothy Carrington writes that it was not only in their dreams that Mazzari killed. They could gather in groups and during nocturnal hunts kill an animal, generally a boar. If they in the features of the dying animal, as in a sudden flash, could discern and recognize a human face, this meant that the one they saw would die within three days, or at least within a year and it would happen at an odd date. Rarely a Mazzara confessed that she belonged to the secret society. Nevertheless, anyone could point her out, or in some rare cases – him. Mazzari were neither shunned nor hated, though, since "they knew death" they were generally feared. Due to their unique position Mazzari did not engage themselves with in politics and they were protected from the blood feuds and violent vendettas, which during Carrington's time on the island continued to plague the Corsican countryside.

I do not know if there exist, or have existed, any Mazzari in Sardinia, but even there legends are told about women leaving their homes to participate in nightly hunts. La Femmina Accabbadòra, The Female Terminator, hunts either alone or in a pack of wild women. She does not kill animals, but people. A bitter widow, who has taken it as her task to kill hapless victims. Dressed in black, and sometimes in the company of other veiled widows, she seeks out the elderly, or the chronically ill, to kill them without mercy. What unites La Accabbadòra with the Mazzari is her killing method. She uses La Mazza, the thick root of a vine stock, which also happens to be the preferred weapon of the Mazzari.

Some believe in the stories of La Accabbadòra and describe her gruesome endeavor as a form of euthanasia, beneficial in a poor pastoral and peasant community where people cannot afford to feed the infirm, the elderly and others who do not contribute to the common welfare. It is hard to believe that such cruelty can be defended and an Accabbadòra has probably never existed. Nevertheless, Sardinian folklore and some of the island´s bizarre traditions may convey a harsh and primitive impression. The Sardinian carnival may strike as a fairly frightening event, with its Zias and Mauthones. The former are men dressed up as women, with grotesque masks and black dresses. They carry with them bloody dolls, which they hold out to young women, while asking them to suckle their babies. Mauthones are from head to foot, dressed in huge, hairy sheepskin coats and they also wear grotesque masks. Most impressive is the mighty So Bue, hiding behind a handsome masque representing a bullock´s head and atop of his huge sheepskin coat he has hung giant cowbells. The man who is dressed in this way must be strong and athletic; his outfit generally weighs more than thirty kilos. Inside his coat So Bue may in some villages carry blood-filled leather bags, since he on the last day of the Carnival is supposed to be "sacrificed" in the main square. Some ethnographers try to trace these strange rituals thousands of years back in time, before Sardinia was Christianized and even much earlier than that, though since the traditions are not recorded earlier than the 1800s it is a difficult task to prove the carnival's age.

Dorothy Carrington assumed that Mazzari belonged to an ancient tradition, with roots far back in Neolithic times, when nuraghe were erected on the neighboring island and maybe she could have been right. Elsewhere in Italy, anthropologists and historians have described groups of mainly women who embarked on nocturnal hunts, mostly in their dreams, but also in reality. Best known is Carlo Ginzburg's description of the Benandanti, who based on trial protocol dating from 1575 and 1675 tells about the persecution of groups of peasants who claimed that they during night would leave their bodies and fight against evil witches to safeguard their crops.

Inquisitorial interrogations of Benandanti, who operated in the region of Friuli in northern Italy, is like Mazzari stories telling about nocturnal gatherings and hunts when the Benandanti might adapt the shapes of various animals, generally, small and inoffensive creatures like cats, dogs and birds, even hares and rabbits.

As the case among the Mazzari it was generally women who asserted that they met others like them to dance, drink and party and at such occasions they could be informed about whom in the villages that "would die within a year." Such descriptions have led researchers like Norman Cohn to assume that the "reality" behind the Benandanti confessions were by the inquisitors who interrogated them, molded into the metanarrative that had been constructed around similar testimonies that appeared in contemporary witchcraft trials all over Europe.

Cohn doubted that, as Carlo Ginzburg claimed, as well as various believers in withes´ cults that have grown within New Age circles, that Benandanti and similar phenomena were vestiges of ancient fertility cults, something that Dorothy Carrington also claimed about the origins of the Mazzari. Norman Cohn did not doubt that Benandanti and Mazzari told the truth when they claimed that their experiences were real. They had certainly been in Aldilà:

The Benandanti absolutely believed that their experiences were real and that they were collective; but they never for a moment suggested that they were bodily – the witches too were said to fight only in spirit.

The "spiritual sphere" was for Benandanti and Mazzari an integrated part of life. What they experienced in trance and in their dreams were just as real as everyday life, something their judges could not understand:

What Ginzburg found in his sixteenth-century archives was in fact a local variant of what, for centuries before, had been the stock experience of followers of Diana, Herodias or Holda. It has nothing to do with the “old religion” of fertility postulated by Margaret Murray and her followers. What it illustrates is – once more - the fact that not only the waking thoughts, but the trance experiences of individuals can be deeply conditioned by the generally accepted beliefs of the society in which they live.

I assume Cohn is right. He was not talking about cults and rituals, but about people with connaissance. Those who believe they are familiar with a parallel reality, like the over one hundred years old Julian Ramos who once explained to me, far out in the Dominican countryside:

- Here are two worlds in one. One world that you can touch and another one that is invisible to men like you, people from countries up there, but that world is more powerful than the other one, the one you believe is the only one. It is the dream world where luases and the deceased live. I know both worlds and I walk between them, like a man walking through sunshine and shade.

His words are reflected by beliefs of mystics all around the world. Sweden´s great seer, Emanuel Swedenborg, could claim that he stepped into and out of the Spirit World, just as we common people move out of or into a room and that those who live within the "second sphere" can consider and assess "our" world much better than we can do.

I do not know for sure, but I think I have sensed the presence of that strange world in art I have seen, in books I have read and with some people I have met. But, since I have no connaissance I have never been able to step into that world and that is probably well enough, because chances are great that if I had been able to do that I would probably, as the Mazzari claim, be lost in a Twilight Zone and turned into a dreamer, someone who "loves the solitude".

Boselli, Mauro (2005) Dampyr: Le Terminatrici Milano: Sergio Bonelli Editore. Bucarelli, Sergio (2003) Eutanasia ante litteram in Sardegna. Sa femmina accabbadòra. Usi, costumi e tradizioni attorno morte in Sardegna. Calgari: Scuola Sarda. Carrington, Dorothy (1996) The Dream-Hunters of Corsica. London: Phoenix. Cohn, Norman (1976) Europe´s Inner Demons. Frogmore, St Albans: Paladin. Ginzburg, Carlo (1983).The Night Battles: Witchcraft and Agrarian Cults in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. Baltimore: John Hopkins Press. Hobsbawm, Eric (1983) The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge UK, Cambridge University Press. Hobsbawm, Eric (1991) Nations and Nationalism Since 1780: Programme, Myth, Reality. Cambridge UK, Cambridge University Press.

The sea moves steadily towards the beach. Wave follows wave. I cannot see if they are turning back again. After a rainy day the sand is cool and in the evening light it has the color of a shrew-mole. Stagnant water gleam like silver by the shore. The cloud cover has cracked and the sky is now deep blue, while fleecy cumulus clouds garland the horizon, colored by the sun's red orb slowly descending into the sea between Circe´s island and the rock by Terracina. If I turn my gaze to the right I can see how Sperlonga's white houses on their cliff also are colored by the setting sun; pale pink and beige intercepted by sharp, black shadows.

I am standing by the hotel's open French window, behind me the room glows with a warm yellow light. While listening to the Mediterranean´s incessant murmur I feel privileged. It is evening after my sixty-one-year birthday. Actually, I should be a slightly depressed since another year of my allotted life span now has elapsed. I should probably think about all those I have abandoned, about my own abandonment. Feel some anxiety about an uncertain future. But, tonight I am enveloped by a soothing feeling of happiness. Aging does not concern me, perhaps since I so far have been spared physical ailment. I feel forever young and wonder when I will be abandoned by that feeling.

I often get stuck to a melody or song. I listen to them over and over again, until they one day cease to occupy my mind and another tune takes their place. For the last few days it has been Leonard Cohen's latest CD - Can't Forget, on which he uses his old and some new songs to portray the shortcomings of aging, a translucent, soothing music. As I stood looking out over the darkening sea a phrase was churning in my head:

And I can't forget, I can't forget

I can't forget, but I don't remember what.

This feeling that there are certain things that have influenced my life, something important that I either want to preserve, or forget, though I cannot seize them, being unable to grasp Das Ding an sich, the mystery of existence. Like when I am looking at the landscape that spreads out in front of me; so big, so open and liberating - beautiful and incomprehensible.

In my attempts to grasp the unfathomable, things I have read come back to me. A Spanish short story that told how God sends an angel to Earth, trying to find a way to amend human egoism, mankind´s ever-increasing wickedness. After completing his mission, the angel was supposed to return to God and provide him with a report about his success or failure. However, the angel does not turn up again. For sure, God is indeed all-seeing and all-knowing, but it seems as if the angel had found a way to hide himself from his God and Master. Increasingly worried God sends another angel to seek out his runaway servant. After some effort the angel succeeds in locating the missing seraph and when catching sight of his colleague, the angel understands why God lost track of his messenger, he has namely ceased to be an angel and turned into a common man. The runaway envoy has placed himself on a rock and looks out over a lush landscape and the open sea. The wings have fallen off him and his cheeks are wet from tears.

- What are you doing here? What happened to your wings? Why did you not come back? asked the heavenly messenger.In my attempts to grasp the unfathomable, things I have read come back to me. A Spanish short story that told how God sends an angel to Earth, trying to find a way to amend human egoism, mankind´s ever-increasing wickedness. After completing his mission, the angel was supposed to return to God and provide him with a report about his success or failure. However, the angel does not turn up again. For sure, God is indeed all-seeing and all-knowing, but it seems as if the angel had found a way to hide himself from his God and Master. Increasingly worried God sends another angel to seek out his runaway servant. After some effort the angel succeeds in locating the missing seraph and when catching sight of his colleague, the angel understands why God lost track of his messenger, he has namely ceased to be an angel and turned into a common man. The runaway envoy has placed himself on a rock and looks out over a lush landscape and the open sea. The wings have fallen off him and his cheeks are wet from tears.

- What are you doing here? What happened to your wings? Why did you not come back? asked the heavenly messenger.

With a faint smile the fallen angel explained to his former colleague:

- I could not bring myself to return. This place is so incredibly beautiful. I ended up seated here taking in all this beauty, forgot my mission and the wings fell off me. Now I cannot return anymore, but it does not sadden me. I´m happy here.

I have forgotten the details and perhaps the novella would turn out to be completely different if I read it again. Like when I got this idea that I in Samuel Johnson's Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia read that the young prince stood on a hill and looked out over a gorgeous landscape, got gripped by despair and told his companion:

- It's so beautiful. I do not know what I should do with it. One cannot eat a landscape?

With a faint smile the fallen angel explained to his former colleague:

- I could not bring myself to return. This place is so incredibly beautiful. I ended up seated here taking in all this beauty, forgot my mission and the wings fell off me. Now I cannot return anymore, but it does not sadden me. I´m happy here.

I have forgotten the details and perhaps the novella would turn out to be completely different if I read it again. Like when I got this idea that I in Samuel Johnson's Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia read that the young prince stood on a hill and looked out over a gorgeous landscape, got gripped by despair and told his companion:

- It's so beautiful. I do not know what I should do with it. One cannot eat a landscape?

I have the book and have in vain searched for the text. I can' forget, but I don't remember what. But wait … while I am writing this I came to think that I must have mixed up the memory with something else and I suddenly remembered that my thoughts about the incomprehensibility of a beautiful landscape originates from something I had read in Colin Wilson´s fascinating The Occult. A book I have with me here in Rome:

In Samuel Johnson´sRasselas, Prince of Abyssinia there is a scene in which the hero looks at the peaceful pastoral scenery of the Happy Valley where he lives, and wonders why he cannot be happy like the sheep and cows. He reflects gloomily: ´I can discover within me no power of perception that is not glutted with its proper pleasure, yet I do not feel myself delighted.Man has surely some latent sense for which this place affords no gratification. Or he has some desires distinct from sense which must be satisfied before he can be happy.´

The italics are my own. The ´latent sense´ is man´s evolutionary appetite, the desire to make contact with reality. But that is not all. Who has not experienced this strange sensation that comes in moments of pleasure and fulfilment? As a child I had this feeling about water. If my parents took me on a bus excursion, I used to crane out the window every time we went over a bridge; something about large sheets of water excited a painful desire that I found incomprehensible. For if I actually approached the water, what could Ido to satisfy this feeling? Drink it? Swim in it? So when I first read the passage fromRasselas, I understood immediately what Johnson meant by ´some latent sense … or desiresdistinct from sense which must be satisfied before he can be happy´.

Many of us suspect that there is a meaning, a code, behind existence. If the mystery of existence is solved, we can maybe comprehend it and transform human being all together. A scary thought, which also has been described by Leonard Cohen. In his chilling song The Future, in which he claims to have seen the future and it is - MURDER! As in the movie The Shining, where the psychic little boy, Tony, is chased by gruesome visions of a frightening future. In his mind the word Redrum appears time after time. He tries in vain to interpret it and on one occasion writes it with lipstick on the bathroom door. When his mother comes in and sees the word reflected in the bathroom mirror, she gets a shock when it turns out that the word was reversed, in fact it spells out as - MURDER! Soon, she and her son are on the run from her insane husband, who pursues them with an ax.

In his song Cohen lists one disaster after another, alluding to man's vicious cynicism. Among other things, he mentions:

There´ll be the breaking of the ancient Western code

Your private life will suddenly explode

There´ll be phantoms, there´ll be fires on the road.

What kind of a code is Cohen singing about? When Rose more than a month ago traveled to Singapore, she asked me if she could bring something back to me. If she could find one of the great Chinese classics in a Penguin edition, I would be happy. I had only read Journey to the West, and two volumes of Outlaws from the Marshes. However, one of my best friends is very fond of Chinese classics and plows one after the other, and because he has a sure taste I also wanted to make an effort. Rose did not find any of the Chinese classics in English, but brought a novel that according to the bookseller was one of the most popular books in China; Decoded: A Novel by Mai Jia. The cover declared that the author was "China's response to John Le Carré", only one of the book's many mysteries. For the novel was far from being a spy thriller, it turned out to something entirely different.

When I began reading Decoded, I found that it initially gave the impression of being a Chinese classic; the meticulous, but lively language, in which characters who at first appear as shadow figures, gradually become sharper, though in all their originality they retain a remote strangeness. There was what I assume is a Chinese fascination with food and body functions; winding, enthusiastically narrated stories in which characters who at first do not seem to have much importance appear and disappear, only to unexpectedly reappear again. The common interest in history and genealogy and how mental and physical properties are inherited. A world where dreams and divination affect real and often cruel events.

The author directs us through a labyrinth, where every corner appears to reveal new truths, providing us with unexpected information. After a while we find that these "solutions" only lead to new bewilderment and questions. The author's voice is present, often he is all-seeing, though sometimes he hands over the tale to one of the book's characters, occasionally complemented with his own explanations and comments. A chorus of voices – interviews and events in different places. The reader is aware that he is involved in a tale, a construction, the scaffolding is visible and the story lacks essential details and information. It is continuously shifting perspectives and versions. Only far into the novel, we find that the narrator is a journalist who searches for the man behind the myth - Rong Jinzhen, a legendary code breaker, who mostly worked in obscurity, but who by informed individuals was worshiped like a saint; a genius, an incomprehensible champion. However, Rong Jinhzen became part of the myth spun around him. The novel turns into the code he is trying solve. We do not understand how and what the code actually is, how it was constructed and for what purpose. By solving it Jinhzen has saved his country and people. But, in what way? Mystery follows upon mystery. The journalist remains nameless; cities, places, and people are sometimes known by their names or nicknames, but usually with designations like A, B or X. Secrecy and confusing allusions are part of the novel's structure, just as it is a key ingredient in the development of the action.

Rong Jinzhen remains a mystery to himself and others. He is a genius, but naïve, helpless and impractical. No one understands him. Many feel intellectually reduced by him, but in his natural superiority Jinzhen is resilient and deeply attached to those how show him loving care, leading him through life and open new doors for him. He devours books, especially novels and poetry. He is an unbeatable chess player and an unimaginably superior mathematician. People who initially find Jinzhen repellent, even repulsive and arrogant, end up admiring him. At the same time, he remains alone and separated from the world. To make use of his genius a totalitarian state isolates and manipulates him. The novel is not the least a depiction of the curse of geniality and its close relationship to madness.

The reader finds himself entangled in the story, like a fly in a spider's web. I tried to look for clues in a fabric that had turned into a code. In order find stability and gain control over the story I grabbed hold of phrases and allusions that seemed to suggest things I knew something about, or I imagined carried some hidden meaning. But, mostly, they turned out to be false trails.

Director Zheng, called "The Gimp", claimed that the legendary cryptographist Klaus Johannes "came from the same place as Hitler, an island called Tars (famous for its gold deposits)". It looked like a clue, a piece of information with several hints. I searched on the web and in my books, but could not find any island named Tars, it was unknown to Google Maps and was not present in any of my dictionaries of imagined and mythical places found in legends and literature, like the delightful Dictionary of Imaginary Places by Alberto Manguel and Gianni Guadalupi. Klaus Johannes was also strangely absent, while Hitler had been born in Braunau am Inn, a border town between Germany and Austria. There were some small islands in the river Inn, but none was called Tars. The house where the future Führer was born still stands in Salzburger Vorstadt No. 15, but there are no gold deposits anywhere near the town.

The author mentions that Rong Jinzhen is deeply moved by Klaus Johannes “famous book” The Writing of the Gods, which he reads in an English translation by the "Eurasian writer Han Suyin ". I knew something about her. My father had in his bookcase kept a novel by her, A Many-Splendoured Thing. As a kid I had been fascinated by its cover, but I never read the novel and now I cannot find it. What I read was Han Suyin´s tributes to Mao Zedong, The Morning Deluge and Wind in the Tower. They were well written but did not come with much new information. I read them at a time when I had become annoyed by all tributes to the Great Helmsman. In the early seventies I had with InterRail traveled back and forth across Europe, often in the company of good friends, sometimes alone. One time I had ended up on the ferry between Dover and Calais and by the railing, while looking out over the nightly sea, I had a conversation with a Chinese girl from Hong Kong. We came to talk about the Chinese Cultural Revolution, and to my great surprise, it must have been in 1974 and I had started at t