Description

A companion to Newbery Honor winning author Rodman Philbrick's Freak the Mighty. This is the dramatic, heart-wrenching tale of Max and Worm, two outsiders who turn to each other for survival.

Meet Max Kane, the brooding giant-of-a-boy who escaped from his basement hiding place and faced the real world in Freak the Mighty. Still grieving over the loss of his best friend, Kevin, Max finds himself defending a young, solitary girl cruelly nicknamed "Worm" because she loves to read. And when Max gets blamed for a horrific crime, he and Worm flee across America--hunted by the police and pursued by the mysterious man known as the Undertaker. The only way the teens can survive is to confront Worm's darkest and most revealing secret. And that means facing something more frightening than death itself.

About the Author

Newbery Honor author Rodman Philbrick has written more than a dozen novels for young readers. In 1993, he published his first children's book, Freak the Mighty, which became an instant classic, and was made into a feature film. The Mostly True Adventures of Homer P. Figg was a 2010 Newbery Honor Book. Philbrick's other acclaimed novels include Max the Mighty, The Young Man and the Sea, The Last Book in the Universe, Zane and the Hurricane, and Wildfire. Philbrick divides his time between Maine and the Florida Keys. You can learn more about him on his website: rodmanphilbrick.com.

Praise for Max the Mighty

Praise for Rodman Philbrick

Wild River:

An Amazon Best Book of the Month

A Junior Library Guild Selection

"Newbery Honoree Philbrick twines a heartfelt message about teamwork and forgiveness with realistic dangers in this page-turning survival story." –Publishers Weekly

"Impossible to put down. Readers will need to strap on their helmets and prepare for a wild ride." –Kirkus Reviews

Wildfire:

* "An intense tale of survival and action. A must-have for all upper elementary/middle grade libraries." – School Library Journal, starred review

* "Short chapters, outstanding cover art, and a breathless pace make this a fine choice for reluctant readers. Outstanding suspense." – Kirkus Reviews, starred review

* "Action lovers will relish every word. With Wildfire – reminiscent of Hatchet and the real-life saga Lost on a Mountain in Maine –Philbrick transforms a raging inferno into an impressively plotted escape story full of heart and soul." – BookPage, starred review

The Mostly True Adventures of Homer P. Figg:

A Newbery Honor book

"A swashbuckling and humorous tale of adventure." – The Boston Globe

* "A rip-roaring adventure." – Publishers Weekly, starred review

"A captivating read." – The Horn Book

Freak the Mighty:

* "A wonderful story... memorable and luminous... somewhat different and very special." – School Library Journal, starred review