Author Rodman Philbrick visited Hampton Academy last week, providing students a wealth of information on how he began his writing career.

Philbrick grew up in Rye and went to Portsmouth High School. His Seacoast ancestry goes back hundreds of years and, yes, he says Philbricks are "all related."

"I'm as local as you can get," he told students in a packed gymnasium.

Philbrick said as a boy, there were no writers coming into the schools. He said he didn't think any of his teachers would have recognized him as a future writer.

"What gave me the notion that I could do this?" Philbrick said. He said living on the beach provided him and his brothers with a "big, wide-open sandy stage." "It was great fun to make up stories and act them out. And I loved to read."

Philbrick, 56, said even as a high school student, he still fantasized about being a writer. "I wasn't going to tell anybody I was a writer until I succeeded," he said.

After high school, he spent the next seven or eight years writing, he said, while working as a carpenter, boat builder, and cab driver. He wrote eight novels before one, a mystery, was published, when he was in his late 20s.

Philbrick's most notable work is "Freak the Mighty," which became a Golden Globe nominated movie, "The Mighty," starring Sharon Stone.

The novel is really set in Portsmouth, Philbrick said, even though filming occurred elsewhere.

Philbrick said for the many years before writing "Freak the Mighty," he had never considered writing books for children. Now, he says, "Freak the Mighty" is his favorite, because it introduced him to a "worldwide" audience.

Students had many questions including how he comes up with his creative ideas. "If you're a writer, you think about things," Philbrick said. "You start thinking about normal things in life that could be stories."

Philbrick said he likes to spend time writing and keeps busy with another favorite pastime, fishing.

"I wanted to have the ability to sit down to write every day and go fishing in the afternoon," he said. He likes to fish for striped bass and he admits being an amateur photographer.

Philbrick's favorite book when he was in junior high was "Huck Finn." "It (was) such a beautifully written story ...; that it made me want to be a writer," he said.

After the hour-long assembly, Philbrick met with about 20 students for a writing workshop. He shared what he considers a good rule to follow when deciding to be a writer. "You have to learn to pay attention," he said. "A good writer is a good listener, too."

Sixth-graders Tanner Quinn and Parker Westbrook were among students in line to have their books autographed. Tanner said he likes Philbrick's book because it's about Portsmouth, and Philbrick's a local author.

"It was nice meeting the author because it's nice knowing who wrote the book," Tanner said.

Philbrick and his wife, Lynn, spend their time in southern Maine and Florida. He said his most recent work was an adult thriller that he finished on Labor Day. He is working on another adult mystery for March, and an adult love story may be in his writing future as well.