HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO SHARE YOUR PARENT'S CHILDHOOD FOR A FEW DAYS

The city of Gaziantep, formerly known as Aintab, is a good example of cultural mosaics where castles, mounds, Turkish baths, covered markets below its citadel, churches, synagogues, mosques are next to ancient sites and settlements 600.000 years old.

In the world of archeological literature, the Gaziantep region is given the name of "The oldest living settlement on earth"

For centuries it has hosted many different civilizations and as a result of this, many archeologocial sites and artifacts are scattered around the region.

When the culture of many centuries is accompanied by traditional Turkish hospitality, Gaziantep tourism turns out to be unuque.

You will love Gaziantep for its human qualities and the warmth and kindness of its people. The cuisine is outstanding. Because of its location on the ancient silk road, the food here has become a blend of the best of Turkish, Armenian, Arabic, Jewish and Kurdish cooking.

We are inviting you to a place where you'll feel the ancient history under your feet. Come soon to Gaziantep to be a part of your parent's childhood for a few days and treasure every moment of this exciting experience.

PROGRAM ( Dazzling days in Aintab for Aintabzi Armenians)

Day:1

Arrival at the Gaziantep airport, meeting and assistance through passports and customs by the representative of Arsan Travel Center. Transfer to hotel . Dinner Turkish-Armenian cuisine and overnight.

Day:2

After a traditional breakfast, an introductory talk to explain what our guests would see during the day's events from the Armenian viewpoint. It is devoted to explain the role of religion, churches and schools in the lives of the Aintabzi Armenians. Tours to the area where once St. Mary's church, haiganoushian school, 2nd congregational church (Hayik Church), Vartanian School and Antanagen School were in. After lunch visit the area where once Halajian orphanage, Armenian Catholic Church (Kendirli Church), Pearson orphanage were. Visit the Zeugma Mosaic Museum, Castle and old town. Dinner. Turkish-Armenian cuisine and overnight.

Day:3

Role of American missionaries in Aintab. After a traditional breakfast, visit the American Hospital and get a brifing about the role of the missionaries in Aintab and how they helped establish schools and protestant churches in the Armenian community. Tour of hospital, central Turkey Collage (Aintab Collage) and search for parental homes. You will have plenty of time to see the homes of the prominent families that are known to you. Battle of Aintab sites. Dinner. Turkish-Armenian cuisine and overnight.

Day:4

After a traditional breakfast an introductory opening speech to explain how people lived and conducted business in Aintab, when the Armenians were here. A small speech to explain the current economy in Aintab and how the area has become a region with many modern industries. Tours of the bazaar and the old shops. Lunch at Kavaklýk, where the professors took their students once a week and had lunch and got to know each other better. Tour modern Aintab. Dinner. Turkish-Armenian cuisine and overnight.

Day:5

After breakfast transfer to the airport for departure, assistance through formalities and customs by Arsan Travel Center representative.

Price:

Individual Rates in Euro

4 Star Hotel

Single

760

Per guest in double

660

Per guest in Triple

590

Children 2-1 2 Years old

560 *

* Child reductions are valid only when child shares the room with two adults.

This price is based on minimum 4 guests. We are able to extend the tour duration upon demand. Please mail us: arsan@arsan.com.tr

Price Includes

• Private transportation • 4 nights of accomodation in 4 star or special type butique hotels • Breakfasts in the program • Professional guidance services

Price excludes

• All the entrance fees to the historical sites and museums mentioned in the itinerary • VAT 18 % • To/from Gaziantep domestic flights • Travel insuarance • Lunches and dinners • Tips

The expences which are not mentioned in the included items.