Arnold Schwarzenegger is recognized as one of the world’s top bodybuilders and has a worldwide famous face. He is recognized for his many accomplishments as the world-renowned muscle man, actor, and US governor.

Schwarzenegger has had a successful career path, beginning as a world-champion bodybuilder and morphing into a Hollywood action hero, with more than 50 incredibly successful years in blockbuster movies.

He’s also a successful businessman, environmentalist, philanthropist, and best-selling author.

After huge success with his acting career, Arnold began to explore the exciting field of politics, serving as the 38th Governor of California for eight consecutive years (from 2003 to 2011).

Since leaving his office, he returned to the big screen and discovered further success with The Expendables (2010) franchise and made a return to the famous Terminator series.

Arnold Schwarzenegger was born on July 30th, 1947 in the Austrian town of Thal. He began his weight training journey in 1960 and quickly began his career as a bodybuilder, dominating the sport of competitive bodybuilding. Eventually, Arnold became the youngest person ever to with the Mr. Universe title in 1967.

Arnold won five Mr. Universe titles and seven Mr. Olympia titles before changing career paths — he had his sights set on Hollywood and emigrated to the US in 1968.

Two years after his move, he landed his first film role as the title character in Hercules in New York (1969). He earned a college degree from the University of Wisconsin and proudly became a U.S. citizen.

Arnold was recognized with a Golden Globe in 1977 for the title New Male Star of the Year for his role in Stay Hungry (1976). Finally, his big break happened when Conan The Barbarian (1982) hit box office gold. Schwarzenegger then catapulted himself into cinematic history as the main character in Terminator (1984). To date, these films have grossed up to 3 billion dollars combined.

It’s well known that Schwarzenegger is a big fan of smoking cigars. Many of his famous characters enjoy a delightful stogie, but don’t be fooled! This love for cigars is not just on the big screen. He also enjoys a premium smoke in his own time.

The first time he indulged in a premium cigar was more than 40 years ago, and his chosen smoke was a Montecristo No. 2, an excellent choice for a first smoke. This delightful cigar provides a medium-full-bodied strength and carries exceptional notes of sweet spices, cinnamon, and nutmeg mixed with almonds, leather, and a hint of tangy cedar. The average smoking time of a Montecristo No2 is 60 minutes, which makes it the perfect smoke to kick back and enjoy when watching one of Arnie’s successful films.

When discussing his love for cigars in an interview with Cigar Aficionado, Arnie explained he was a massive fan of Davidoff Cigars but has since discovered other flavors. Davidoff cigars are exceptional smokes produced with the finest tobacco leaves from various regions worldwide. Each Davidoff cigar has a delightful flavor profile, and if you’re unsure where, to begin with this premium stogie, check out our top 5 Davidoff cigars article.

Throughout the interview, Arnie said his palette now prefers a tasty Cohiba or a Punch cigar — both brands are excellent choices. They are perfect for experiencing the authentic taste of premium Cuban smoke.

Cohiba cigars offer a unique luxurious smoking experience and the brand is known for boasting handcrafted premium styles with top-notch blending and exceptional flavors. Cohiba offers an extensive range of lines characterized by original flavors and has classic lines such as a Cohiba Red Dot, Cohiba Black, and many more that provided an unforgettable smoking experience.

Punch Signature cigars are a delicious blend of Dominican long-fillers with a sturdy Nicaraguan binder. When lighting up this tasty smoke, expect a full-bodied masterpiece burning smooth flavors of wood, chocolate, earth, and spice, followed by a sweet tobacco aroma to fill the air.

Throughout the years, Arnold launched Mondays on Main, a subtle gathering of cigar smokers on the first Monday of every month at Schwarzenegger’s restaurant in Santa Monica. This special event brings many cigar smokers together and is a great social event for connoisseurs to gather, share and discuss premium smokes. Arnie shows up as much as he can and sometimes even takes long weekends off filming to attend.

Throughout his many years of smoking cigars, Arnie has maintained an excellent taste for Cuban smokes and expressed his love for the famous Cuban brand Romeo y Julieta.

While Arnie smokes many cigars from each of these fantastic brands, we’d recommend something big like the Punch Signature Gigante if you want to smoke like the Governor.