Asya is an uplifting classic baby name for girls. Known for its widespread use in Europe, the name has an effortless femininity that makes it a prominent choice in popular culture. Asya is ring name of wrestler Christi Wolf, and Asya is also the stage name of Turkish singer Tülay Keçialan. Keep reading to learn more about this name.

Meaning of the name Asya:

Russian, Bulgarian, Greek: Resurrection

Turkish: Asian continent

Origin of the name Asya:

Asya is a classic name with two separate origins. In Russian and Bulgarian, Asya is a diminutive of the name Anastasiya. As the Slavic variation of Anastasia, this name ultimately derives from the Greek word Ἀναστάσιος and means “resurrection.” Asya is also the Turkish spelling for the continent of Asia. During the 21st century, the name Asya skyrocketed in popularity as a Turkish name for girls.

Symbolism of the name Asya:

Asya is the short form of the name Anastasiya (meaning “resurrection”). In Christian iconography, the symbol of resurrection is the fleur–de–lis.

Style of the name Asya:

Classic

Gender of the name Asya:

Asya is a girl's baby name.

Pronunciation of the name Asya:

AHS-yah

Number of syllables in the name Asya:

Two

Emotion evoked from the name Asya:

The name Asya evokes feelings of grace and grandeur.

Alternative spellings for the name Asya:

Asyah

Aja

Ajah

Asija

Asia

Asiya

Nicknames for the name Asya:

Asy

Yaya

Popularity of the name Asya:

According to the Social Security Administration index, Asya was the 4,720th most popular baby name for girls in 2020.

Related names for the name Asya:

Anya

Asha

Asa

Anaya

Anna

Ava

Agnes

Angela

Angelica

Angelina

Great middle names for Asya and their meanings:

Amalie (work, industry, ambition)

Bette (my God is an oath)

Cadence (rhythm, flow)

Dayan (heavenly, divine, judge)

Jacqueline (supplanter)

Kimberly (king's meadow, royal fortress)

Lucia (light)

Marguerite (pearl)

Noemie (pleasantness, delight)

Ruth (friend, companion)

Sage (wise person, spice)

Zuzana (lily)

Famous people with the name Asya:

Asya Abdullah (politician)

Asya Danielle Branch (pageant titleholder)

Asya Bussie (basketball player)

Asya Colombo (tennis player)

Asya Fateyeva (saxophonist)

Asya Meshberg (violinist)

Asya Miller (Olympic athlete)

Asya Pereltsvaig (linguist)

Asya Rolls (immunologist)

Asya “Asy” Saavedra (indie musician)

Asya in popular culture: