Kroonstad at a glance

Many might not know it, but Kroonstad is the Free State's third biggest urban area third to Bloemfontein (the largest) and Welkom (second largest). The town has become significant for the fact that it is conveniently located to both Bloemfontein and the economically significant Gauteng Province. It also serves as a railway junction for both railway lines to Cape Town and Johannesburg.

A brief history of the area

This Free State town was established in 1855 by none other than the Irish man by the name of Joseph Orpen. If one was to directly translate Kroon it means Crown in English. However, as history reads it was actually the name of a horse who drowned near the town. Orpen happened to witness this event and decided that the town would be named after this animal. Around the year 1900, the area also became the same location of a British concentration camp where, the British forces of the time held Boer, woman and children captive.

Infrastructure

Due to the fact that Kroonstad is one of the most developed cities in the whole of the Free State, infrastructure is generally well-kept and maintained. When getting around Kroonstad, one will rely on the bus or train services that connect the city. Alternatively, commuters can also use the minivan taxi service or make use of their own private transportation or metered taxis. Some of the roads that connect Kroonstad with the rest of the province and city include Du Toit Street, R76, Ben Mervis Street, Van Zyl Street, Werth Street, Penny Cresent, Campbell Street, Rautenbach Street, Castignani Street and Neubauer Street.

Schools in the area

Another reason why Kroonstad is becoming such a popular residential area is also that there are numerous worthwhile schooling facilities to choose from. Some of the more popular ones include St Peter Claver High School, Zenith High School, Voorwarts Get School, Kroonheuwel Primary School, Phephesto Secondary School, Calculus College, Zenith High School and the Sentrale Volksool Kroonstad.

Hospitals nearby

If one is looking for medical attention in or around Kroonstad, they can visit the Boitumelo Regional Hospital or the Netcare Kroon Hospital.

Distance from key points (Airport/CBD)

If one wishes to reach the Kroonstad Airport from the Kroonstad central business district it's said to be roughly 11 km away and will take roughly 15 minutes depending on travel time. The largest city within close proximity to Kroonstad is Bloemfontein. If one needs to travel to Bloemfontein from Kroonstad for any reason, it's deemed to take just over 2 hours and is just over 200 km to just under 250 km depending on which route is chosen.

Malls/Shopping

Kroonstad is littered with general stores for all your general needs, alternatively one can also visit the Maokeng Mall, Panorama Plaza, Plumago Lifestyle Center or the Family Cash Store.

Restaurants

Kroonstad is a town where there is a massive selection of some of South Africa's most regarded chain stores and takeaways. On top of this one can also eat at the Oudorp Restaurant and Craft Beer, Vuka Fast Food and Car Wash, Fat Cake City, Starlight Fast Food, Alta Se Kombuis and the Appointment Craft Beer Brewery.

Special Attractions

Just like many other South African towns in the Free State, Kroonstad is full of exciting things to do and see. This is why so many people have decided to make the town and province their home. Whether its history, culture, wildlife or watersides, Kroonstad has something for the whole of the family, regardless of age or taste.

Vegkop Battlefield Monument and Museum

Many wars have been fought in this part of South Africa and the Vegkop Battlefield Monument and Museum pays tribute to this harrowing region of Southern Africa. However, this isn't the only reason why individuals come to the area as there is also many breathtaking hiking trails, rivers and various locations to enjoy the outdoors. Go explore while you indulge in the harrowing yet fascinating history of the area.

Boskoppie Lion And Tiger Reserve, R34, Kroonstad

Sustainability is at the forefront of the Boskoppie Lion and Tiger Reserve. Besides for seeing lions one can also view a selection of Tigers, Jaguars and Leopards. This is both an exciting outing and a great educational excursion as well.

"Our goal is to provide generations of lions with strong genetics so that when the time comes for more lions to be introduced back into the wild- there is an adequate level of genetic diversity and fitness. We also aim to educate the public on the importance of such selective lion breeding and to change the way people think about lions- and all big cats!" -https://www.boskoppie.com/about-us

Kroonpark Holiday Resort and water park

The Kroonpark Holiday Resort is great for the whole family and there are chalets, camping and other facilities to enjoy. There is also a water park for the whole family to have fun on those hot summers days. The resort itself is situated on the banks of the Vals River. Additionally to all of this the facility also has a conference centre that can host up to 150 people. So whether you need to unwind, get some sun and water or need a tranquil surrounding for business purposes. The Kroonpark Holiday Resort and water park has you covered.

"Relax in an indoor heated swimming pool while the kids enjoy the cold water swimming pool, supertube, splash pool. For the more daring there is a freshwater lake with pedal and rowing boats, mini-golf, playpark, trampolines and indoor games". -http://www.kroonparkholidayresort.co.za/3.Family-Kids-Activities-Convention-Centre.htm

Time to Invest