Xero has recently launched a funding initiative to assist small businesses. The Xero Beautiful Business Fund will offer $20,000 to four Australian small businesses who are successful in their application.

Eligibility and how to apply:

To be eligible, your business must:

Be located in the 50 United States and the District of Columbia, Canada (excluding

Quebec), South Africa, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Singapore, or Australia.

Have between 0-50 employees.

Be a paying Xero subscriber (either directly or via a Xero accounting or bookkeeping partner) at the time of entry and at the time of announcement of the winners, which will take place in November 2023.

Be operating on a for-profit or not-for-profit basis.

To apply, please create a 90 second pitch video and complete the short online application form here.

There are four funding categories you can choose to apply for.

These include:

Innovating for sustainability

For small businesses who want to take the next step on their sustainability journey.

For example, it could be to move to sustainable packaging, implement energy-efficient equipment or carbon neutral transport. Xero wants to see how you plan to take the next step on your sustainability journey.

Trailblazing with technology

For small businesses seeking to innovate. This could include digitalising parts of your operations or integrating new emerging technologies. Xero wants to see how you are setting pace with technological advancements.

Strengthening community connection

For small businesses or non-profits who strive to give back to their communities. It could be to contribute to philanthropy, social good, or make an impact on the community in a meaningful way. Xero wants to see how you are bringing people together and giving back to your community.

Upskilling for the future

For small businesses seeking to support upskilling for themselves or their employees. This could include access to training and other professional development opportunities. Xero wants to see how you are thinking ahead and preparing for the future.