The SCO Group, Inc. Template:Nasdaq (TSG, informally SCO), a former Canopy Group company formerly called Caldera Systems and Caldera International, is a corporation that claims to own the rights to the Unix operating system and is opposed to the open source movement. After acquiring Santa Cruz Operation's Server Software and Services divisions, as well as UnixWare and OpenServer technologies, the company changed its focus to UNIX. Later on Caldera changed its name to The SCO Group to reflect that change in focus.

Contents

3.1 List of recent SCO lawsuits

5.1 Data

History

Caldera Systems, based in Utah, was founded in 1994 by Ransom Love, and received start-up funding from Ray Noorda. Its main product was Caldera Linux, a Linux distribution mainly targeted at business customers and containing some proprietary additions.

In 2000, Caldera acquired several UNIX properties from the Santa Cruz Operation, including OpenServer and UnixWare, proprietary operating systems for PCs that would be expected to compete directly with Linux.

In 2002, Caldera joined with SuSE Linux, Turbolinux and Conectiva to form United Linux in an attempt to standardize Linux distributions. Later that year, CEO Ransom Love left the company and was replaced by Darl McBride.

Caldera changed its name to The SCO Group that year.

In 2003, the company asserted some of its products had been accidentally released into Linux by IBM in a breach of contract. After announcing its legal claims against various Linux users and vendors, (see The Linux Wars below), the company suspended sales and development of its Linux related products. Attention was shifted to the Unixware and OpenServer UNIX products previously acquired from the Santa Cruz Operation. A new division called SCOsource was created to licence the company's intellectual property.

Products

SCO UnixWare, a modern UNIX operating system. UnixWare 2.x and below were direct descendants of Unix System V Release 4.2 and was originally developed by AT&T, Univel, Novell and later on Santa Cruz Operation. UnixWare 7 was sold as a "best of breed" UNIX OS combining UnixWare 2 and OpenServer 5 and was based on System V Release 5.

SCO OpenServer, another UNIX operating system, which was originally developed by Santa Cruz Operation. SCO OpenServer 5 was a descendant of SCO UNIX and based on System V Release 3.2. SCO had previously announced that they would deemphasize OpenServer and migrate existing users to their UnixWare platform, but later on they decided to reverse that decision.

Smallfoot, an operating system and GUI created specifically for point of sale applications. Smallfoot is the leader in this niche market.

SCOx Web Services Substrate, a web services-based framework for modernizing legacy applications.

WebFace, a development environment for rich-UI browser-based Internet applications.

SCOoffice Server, an e-mail and collaboration solution.

In late 2004, SCO decided to unite their two operating sytems (UnixWare and OpenServer) so that, while having differing operating environments, would share a common kernel, SVR5. This was done so that applications and certifications for one system would work on the other.

Also in late 2004, SCO announced the launch of the SCO Marketplace Initiative (http://www.sco.com/developers/marketplace/faq.html), in which it offers pay-per-project development opportunities.

The Linux Wars

Main article: SCO-Linux controversies

The SCO Group is currently involved in a dispute with various Linux vendors and users. In this campaign SCO asserts that Linux violates some of SCO's intellectual properties. Although many are skeptical about their claims, SCO initiated a series of lawsuits and claims that, if upheld by the courts, may impact the future of both Linux and Unix. While making numerous public assertions that Linux infringes upon their copyrights, the lawsuits themselves concern contractual issues which are tangential to the issue of whether or not Linux infringes any copyrights. Further complicating the issue is the legitimacy of SCO claims concerning the ownership of SVR4 Unix copyrights. The success or failure of the claims will also have a profound effect on the financial future of The SCO Group, itself. SCO has, to date, made little headway in this dispute.

List of recent SCO lawsuits

SCO v. IBM.

Red Hat v. SCO.

SCO v. Novell.

SCO v. AutoZone.

SCO v. DaimlerChrysler. (This lawsuit was not related to the various Linux copyright infringement lawsuits; rather, it dealt with a breach of contract.)

In the News

On February 17, 2005 the SCO Group issued a press release that stated their stock may soon be delisted from NASDAQ for failing to issue an annual 10-K report in a timely manner as required by SEC regulations. [1] (http://biz.yahoo.com/prnews/050217/lath062_1.html) In late April of 2005, after complying with the filing requirements, the NASDAQ switched trading of the SCO Group from "SCOXE" back to their original "SCOX" stock symbol.

External links

The SCO Group, Inc. (http://www.sco.com/)

SCO IP site (http://www.sco.com/scoip/)

GrokLaw | News and Commentary about SCO lawsuits (http://www.groklaw.net/)

Data

Financial information for The SCO Group (SCOX) (http://finance.yahoo.com/q?s=scox)

Yahoo! - The SCO Group, Inc. Company Profile (http://biz.yahoo.com/ic/99/99709.html)de:SCO Group