LINDON, Utah — The SCO Group Inc., a Utah-based technology company that sprung out of homegrown Santa Cruz Operations, intends to auction off its core UNIX products and continue pursuing controversial litigation over intellectual property rights.

In a Jan. 8 letter to shareholders, partners and customers, Darl McBride, SCO Group chief executive officer, announced the latest reorganization plan, calling it “an important step forward in emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy.”

The company has been embroiled in litigation for almost five years. It has sued IBM, AutoZone and Novell and been sued by Red Hat. In August, SCO lost its legal case against Novell and ended up facing a potential $40 million summary judgment. SCO has appealed the ruling and sought bankruptcy protection. SCO has considerably cut down on the amount owed to Novell since filing bankruptcy, and claims it will win on appeal.

“Many pundits believed that SCO would not last long enough to get to the appeals court and Novell did all it could to prevent that from happening,” McBride said. “With the protection of the Bankruptcy Court and support from customers and partners, we are now on our way to the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals, our UNIX business has remained relatively constant, and we have some exciting partnerships and prospects for our mobility business.”

Meanwhile, two prospective investors have scrapped plans to buy the company. The latest reorganization plan is scheduled to be reviewed by a U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Delaware on Feb. 25. The auction would include investment in its OpenServer product line as well as its mobile business. A successful auction would bring much needed revenue to pay off creditors, keep the company afloat and support ongoing product development.

Several investment groups have expressed interest to SCO in acquiring assets via the public auction, according to the company.

“One goal of this approach is to separate the legal defense of its intellectual property from its core product business, ” said Jeff Hunsaker, president and chief operating officer, SCO Operations. “This will ensure that the on-going revenue from its UNIX and mobile business stays with these core assets.”

If assets are not sold, SCO will have to cut costs to continue to support its UNIX and mobile products and services.

SCO also plans to ship several products this year in the mobile service and application market as well as UNIX.

Santa Cruz Operations was founded in Santa Cruz in 1979 by Larry and Doug Michels. In 2001, Caldera Systems acquired SCO”s Server Software and Professional Services divisions and changed its name a year later to The SCO Group. The company now claims to have more than 2 million UNIX servers in operation globally.

Monday, shares, trading under the ticker SCOXQ.PK, closed at 13 cents, down 2 cents. Stock has closed below 20 cents for most of the last year.

In the July quarter, the most recent fiscal report available, SCO reported a loss of more than $4.1 million on revenues of about $3.17 million.