Today, November 27, is the birthday of L. Sprague de Camp (1907-2000). I had the pleasure of meeting Sprague and his lovely wife Catherine on several occasions after they moved to Plano, Texas in the 1990s. They attended some of the local conventions.

I am more than well aware that de Camp isn’t exactly popular in Robert E. Howard fandom because of how he portrayed Howard in his biography Dark Valley Destiny.

But this is my science fiction blog, not my fantasy blog. L. Sprague de Camp wrote plenty of science fiction, especially early in his career. I think he was a better short story writer than novelist, but that’s just me. I’m going to look at one of de Camp’s early science fiction stories today.

That story is “Employment”, from the May 1939 issue of Astounding. It was originally published under the byline of Lyman R. Lyon because de Camp had an essay under his own name in that issue.

It’s a fun little story. I first read it in The Best of L. Sprague de Camp in a paperback without a cover that I bought a a flea market for a quarter when I was in the 7th grade. I think that may have been the second volume of the Ballantine Best of series I bought, the Jack Williamson volume being the first. That collection is available in electronic format; just click the above link.

It’s written as a letter from a geologist asking for employment. He’s currently working for a man who has figured out how to revive animals from their fossils. It’s a slow process and not always successful. But it can bring back some interesting critters.

There are some folks who don’t like the idea, such as an organization of big game hunters. One of the things de Camp was noted for was having a dry sense of humor. It shows here. “Employment” was the feel at times of a screwball comedy, such as those Caryt Grant was starring in at the time this story was written.

I hadn’t read “Employment” since I first read The Best of L. Sprague de Camp. I had no memory of it, which added to the pleasure of the reread. I’m going to try to read more of de Camps science fiction if I can work it in.