SOME of the most enduring images of the British Empire in the popular imagination have come from films. Some of these films are of average quality and imperfect in their historical accuracy, but many are excellent and effectively recreate the environment and compelling issues that people living in different parts of the empire faced at various points in their history. And since films are the media through which much of the general public gain their impressions of the British Empire, they are worthy of consideration by historians for that reason alone.

Below is a selection of films useful for complementing our study of the history of the British Empire. Most of these films are available on DVD or Blu-Ray at Watzek Library. You can also find many of them on streaming services. In addition to this list, Colonial Film: Moving Images of the British Empire holds detailed information on over 6000 films showing images of life in the British colonies. Over 150 films are available for viewing online.

Some information courtesy of Internet Movie Database. Used with permission

THE AMAZING GRACE

Director: Jeta Amata, 2006

The subject of this moving Nigerian film is the life and misdeeds of Captain John Newton, the infamous English slave trader who in later life repented, became an Anglican clergyman, and penned the lyrics of the popular hymn "Amazing Grace". The plots follows Newton while he was in West Africa and his interaction with one particular slave woman who forced him to see the humanity of his victims as well as his own.

© Nu Metro Productions

BARRY LYNDON

Director: Stanley Kubrick, 1975

In a small village in eighteenth-century Ireland, Redmond Barry is a young farm boy in love with his cousin Nora. When she becomes engaged to a British captain, Barry challenges him to a duel and wins. He then flees to Dublin and, with no other alternative, assumes a false name ("Barry Lyndon") and joins the army to fight in the Seven Years War. An excellent period film that brings to life the privileged world of the Anglo-Irish Protestant ascendancy. Based loosely on the 1844 picaresque romance by William Thackeray.

© Warner Home Video

TO THE ENDS OF THE EARTH

Director: David Attwood, 2005

A gripping tale of a group of British migrants on a six-month voyage to Australia in the early nineteenth century. Along the way, young Edmund Talbot, an aspiring civil servant traveling to take a post under the governor of New South Wales, keeps a journal recording his impressions of the crew and his fellow passengers. Filmed at sea aboard a replica period ship, this TV series captures well the rigors, discomfort, tedium and terror of an antipodean sea voyage in the Age of Sail. Based on the trilogy of novels by William Golding.

© BBC/Power

BLACK '47

Director: Lance Daly, 2018

Set in 1847, the worst year of the Great Famine in Ireland, this film follows Martin Feeney, a deserter from the Connaught Rangers, who returns from Afghanistan and India to his home in Connemara to rescue his destitute family. His vengeance against British constables and a local landlord make him a hunted man as he evades capture by the authorities. A graphic depiction of the devastation of the Irish Famine with some dialogue in the Irish language.

© IFC Films

GUNGA DIN

Director: George Stevens, 1939

This classic film, starring Cary Grant and Douglas Fairbanks jr, was one of the very first Hollywood depictions of India. Set in the nineteenth century, three British soldiers and a native waterbearer must stop a secret revival of the murderous "Thuggee" cult before it can spread across the land. The film is based very loosely on Rudyard Kipling's 1892 ballad of the same name (though it is more like The Three Musketeers) and is interesting for its stereotypes as much as for its story.

© RKO Pictures

SHATRANJ KE KHILARI | THE CHESS PLAYERS

Director: Satyajit Ray, 1977

In 1856, officials of the East India Company move to consolidate their hold over North India by annexing the wealthy kingdom of Awadh. The chief minister to the Nawab attempts to warn his ruler and local landlords of the impending danger but they ignore him and instead indulge their obsession with playing chess. The game becomes a metaphor for the larger game of politics played by the British as they maneuver to capture Awadh's king. Based on the 1924 short story by Premchand.

© Shemaroo

JHANSI KI RANI | THE QUEEN OF JHANSI

Director: Sohrab Modi, 1952

This epic film tells the true story of Lakshmi Bai, Rani of the small princely state of Jhansi in central India. The Rani of Jhansi struggled to save her state from British annexation and died in 1857 while personally leading her soldiers into battle. Her heroism, leadership, and sacrifice have been celebrated in folklore and repeatedly invoked by Indian nationalists. This was the first Indian film in Technicolor and one of the first to enjoy distribution in the US under the title The Tiger and the Flame.

© Geneon

THE RISING: THE BALLAD OF MANGAL PANDEY

Director: Ketan Mehta, 2005

This Bollywood epic is the first major film to focus on the 1857 Indian Rebellion—or "Mutiny" as it is usually referred to in British history. The story follows the rebel leader Mangal Pandey, an Indian sepoy in the service of the East India Company, and his friendship with a British officer. Pandey was a real figure but one about whom little is known. Filming began in 2003 and the opening scene was launched by Charles, Prince of Wales, during an official royal visit to India.

© Yash Raj Films

JUNOON | THE OBSESSION

Director: Shyam Benegal, 1979

Set during the Uprising of 1857, this film focuses on three women of an Anglo-Indian family who take refuge from the rebels with a local moneylender to whom they have a substantial debt and who, thus, has a vested interest in their survival. When they are discovered, their lives are spared as the rebel leader, Javed, wishes to make the youngest woman, Ruth, his second wife. The plot is further complicated when British forces return seeking vengeance for the mutiny.

© Shemaroo

BURKE & WILLS

Director: Graeme Clifford, 1986

This Australian film retells the story of the fateful expedition in 1860 by explorers Robert O'Hara Burke and William John Wills to cross the continent of Australia. Their journey began in Melbourne in the south and ended the Gulf of Carpentaria in the north, a distance of around 1,750 miles. At that time most of inland Australia had not been explored by non-indigenous people and was completely unknown to the European settlers along the coasts.

© Greater Union Organisation

RIVER QUEEN

Director: Vincent Ward, 2005

A lavishly filmed and intimate story set in New Zealand in the 1860s during the war between British settlers and the Maori tribes resisting the colonization of their lands. At the furthest outpost, a young Irish woman's life is torn apart when her son is taken from her and brought upriver by his Maori grandfather. Unsure whether or not her son is even alive she continues her search for seven years and is eventually forced to choose sides in this war of empire.

© Twentieth Century Fox

UTU

Director: Geoff Murphy, 1984

Loosely based on events from Te Kooti's War in New Zealand, this is the story of a Maori warrior, Te Wheke, and his desire for utu (vengeance: literally "blood for blood") against his former allies after the British army destroys his village and kills his uncle. The film is set in the 1870s and chronicles the Maori struggle to keep the land guaranteed to them by the Treaty of Waitangi from seizure by the Pahekas (white settlers).

© Kino Video

CONDUCT UNBECOMING

Director: Michael Anderson, 1975

The plot revolves arounds a scandal in a British regiment stationed in India in the 1870s. Lt. Drake is from a middle-class background and is eager to advance himself by making the right impression. Lt. Millington, the son of a general, is not keen on army life and desires to get out as soon as he possibly can. When the widow of the regiment's most honored hero is assaulted, Drake must defend Millington from the charges in an unusual court-martial. Based on the 1969 play by Barry England.

© Crown Films

ZULU DAWN

Director: Douglas Hickox, 1979

This epic recounts the Battle of Isandhlwana fought on 22 January 1879 in Natal, South Africa. In the course of the fighting about 1,200 British soldiers were massacred by a force of over 20,000 Zulu warriors and the regimental colors were lost. Isandhlwana was the first engagement of the Anglo-Zulu War and stands as one of the most shocking defeats in British military history. Zulu Dawn was written by Cy Enfield as a prequel to his more successful film Zulu released fifteen years earlier.

© Tango Entertainment

NED KELLY

Director: Gregor Jordan, 2004

Based on the true story of Edward "Ned" Kelly, at one time the most wanted man in the British Empire. In 1870s Australia, young Ned is a bushranger living in poverty with his family of first-generation descendants of transported Irish convicts. His frequent trouble with the law and his resentment of colonial class prejudice lead him to form a gang of outlaws who redistribute their loot among the poor farming communities. Ned Kelly has become an Australian icon and is the subject of many earlier films.

© Universal

VICTORIA & ABDUL

Director: Stephen Frears, 2017

In 1887, Abdul Karim, a young police clerk from Agra, is selected by the British colonial goverment to travel to London to present a gift to Queen Victoria on the occasion of her Golden Jubilee. Abdul strikes up an unlikely friendship with the "Empress of India" and stays on in Britain to become her servant and, at her request, her munshi (teacher) of Urdu and the Qur'an. When Victoria dies in 1901, Abdul returns to India. Based on the book by Shrabani Basu and Abdul's diary discovered in 2010.

© BBC Films

THE LAST PLACE ON EARTH

Director: Ferdinand Fairfax, 1985

This miniseries recounts the tragic story of the Scott expedition's failed attempt in 1911 to be the first to reach the South Pole. Their arrival at the pole five weeks after Roald Amundsen's Norwegian team was demoralizing enough, but the return journey proved even worse. After his death, Capt. Robert Scott was lionized as an Edwardian hero but in recent years his leadership and personality have been questioned. This series, beautifully filmed in Greenland, offers a much less flattering portrayal of Scott than the glorified image in the 1948 film Scott of the Antarctic.

© Renegade Productions

THE FLAME TREES OF THIKA

Director: Roy Ward Baker, 1982

Elspeth and her unconventional parents decide to settle down in British East Africa and begin a coffee plantation. This is a time of discovery for Elspeth, as she encounters the incredible beauty and cruelty of nature, and new friendships with both Africans and British expatriates. Eventually, however, the excitement of her life is disrupted by the onset of the First World War and the changes it brings. Based on the 1959 memoir by Elspeth Huxley.

© HBO Films

GALLIPOLI

Director: Peter Weir, 1981

In 1915, Archy and Frank meet at a sprinting competition in Western Australia and decide to join the Australia and New Zealand Army Corps (the "ANZACs"). A few months later they land at Gallipoli on the Turkish coast and participate in one of the most disastrous British campaigns of the First World War. This is one of the best film portrayals of the horrors of war and the waste of young lives. It also gives insight into a distinctly anti-British sense of Australian nationalism that arose after this war.

© Warner Home Video

LAWRENCE OF ARABIA

Director: David Lean, 1962

This is a classic film about T.E. Lawrence, a young officer assigned to the British Foreign Office in Cairo during the First World War. Lawrence is given the task of riding into the Arabian Desert to unite the various Bedouin tribes against the Turkish forces (which are allied with Germany). The film is a highly romanticized portrayal of Lawrence's campaign and has been the subject of much controversy among historians and cultural critics. Based loosely on Lawrence's 1922 memoir Seven Pillars of Wisdom.

© Columbia/TriStar

THE LAST SEPTEMBER

Director: Deborah Warner, 1999

Set in Co. Cork in 1920, this film revolves around the lives and romantic complications of an aristocratic Anglo-Irish family living on their estate in the midst of the Irish war for independence. A compelling look at the last days of the Protestant Ascendancy and of their own sense of Irishness being tested through the changing national climate of their country and an uncertain future. Based on the 1929 novel by Elizabeth Bowen.

© Lions Gate

THE WIND THAT SHAKES THE BARLEY

Director: Ken Loach, 2006

In 1919, Irish volunteers wage a guerrilla campaign against the ruthless "Black and Tan" paramilitary squads arriving from Britain to block Ireland's bid for independence. Driven by a deep sense of duty and love of country, Damien abandons a promising career as a doctor and joins his brother, Teddy, in this dangerous and violent struggle. Their victory is followed in 1922 by the Irish Civil War that pits these same comrades against each other. The title comes from a famous Irish ballad. This film won the Palme d'Or at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival.

© Sixteen Films

THE LONG DUEL

Director: Ken Annakin, 1967

Set in the 1920s, this film is based very loosely on the true exploits of the notorious Bhanta dacoit, Sultana, and the colonial police officer, Freddy Young, whose mission it was to capture him. Sultana (Yul Brynner) and Young (Trevor Howard) develop a strong respect for each other during their game of evasion and pursuit across the hills and plains of North India. However, the portrayal of Sultana as a nationalist rebel and Young as ambivalent toward British imperialism in India is historically inaccurate.

© Rank Organisation

MISTER JOHNSON

Director: Bruce Beresford, 1991

Set in colonial Nigeria in 1923, this film tells the story of Harry Rudbeck, an ambitious magistrate who wants to build a road connecting his backwater post to the outside world. Struggling to find ways around colonial bureaucracy, he relies on his resourceful African clerk, Mr. Johnson. Yet Johnson is an oddity: an educated black man who does not really fit in with either his fellow Africans or the British. Based on the 1952 novel by Anglo-Irish writer Joyce Cary.

© United American Video

SANDERS OF THE RIVER

Director: Zoltan Korda, 1935

A British district officer in 1930s Nigeria governs his area strictly but justly and, with the aid of a loyal native chief, takes on local gunrunners and slavers. The chief was played by African-American actor and activist Paul Robeson who later became so disillusioned with the editing that he publically disowned the film and attempted, unsuccessfully, to buy back all the prints to prevent it from ever being shown. The film is based on the stories of Edgar Wallace.

© Criterion

THE RIVER

Director: Jean Renoir, 1951

This coming of age story revolves around Harriet, the daughter of an English jute mill owner, who lives in a house on the banks of the Ganges. Harriet's family life and friendships immerse her in a world that blends Indian and western culture. Based on the 1946 novel by Margaret Rumer Godden, The River was the first Technicolor film made in India. Martin Scorsese saw this film as a child and it had a profound effect on his later development as a filmmaker. Satyajit Ray, the great Bengali director, also cited The River as a major influence on his style of filmmaking.

© Criterion

BLACK NARCISSUS

Directors: Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, 1947

This strange and haunting film focuses on a group of Anglican nuns who arrive in a remote location in the Himalayas to set up a school and clinic for the local residents. The fragmentation and collapse of their own community force them to abandon the mission. The film was released a few months before India’s independence and some critics speculate that the plot is an allegory about Britain’s retreat from India. Based on the 1939 novel by Margaret Rumer Godden.

© Criterion

NIRGENDWO IN AFRIKA | NOWHERE IN AFRICA

Director: Caroline Link, 2001

In the late 1930s, a Jewish family, the Redlichs, reluctantly emigrate from Germany to British East Africa to manage a farm. At first, not all members of the family come to accept their new life in such an "uncivilized" society. However, with a return to Germany impossible given the persecution of Jews, the Redlichs must make the adjustment. They soon find themselves treated more humanely by Africans than they ever were in the supposedly civilized Europe from which they fled. Based on the 1995 autobiographical novel by Stefanie Zweig.

© Sony Pictures

RABBIT-PROOF FENCE

Director: Phillip Noyce, 2002

In 1905 the Australian government authorized the forcible removal of aboriginal children from their mothers' care and sent them hundreds of miles away to schools designed to stamp out their culture and train them for domestic service. This film tells the true story of three girls who in 1931 escaped and found their way home over a thousand miles of outback. These children were part of what have come to be known as the "stolen generations" and remains a dark chapter in Australian and imperial history.

© Miramax

MALTA STORY

Director: Brian Desmond Hurst, 1953

This film focuses on the heroic defense of Malta, the British Empire's vital fortress colony in the Mediterranean, during the Second World War. While the plot focuses on the exploits of a British reconnaissance pilot stationed on the island and his romance with a young Maltese woman, much attention is given to the courage of the Maltese people themselves in successfully withstanding one of the longest and most destructive bombardment campaigns of the war.

© MGM/UA

BOSE, THE FORGOTTEN HERO

Director: Shyam Benegal, 2005

This film focuses on the final years in the life of Subhas Chandra Bose, one of the most controversial figures in Indian nationalism. A rising star in the freedom movement, Bose fell out with Gandhi and was pushed to the margins of Congress politics. At the outbreak of war in 1939, he fled to Germany and later conspired with Japanese forces to lead an army of Indian soldiers against the British during the Burma campaign. Bose remains a hero to many Indians, especially in his native Bengal.

© Sahara Media

MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART

Director: Vincent Ward, 1992

This haunting film follows the life of Avik, an Inuit boy from Nunavut in the Canadian Arctic. The plot begins with Avik’s friendship in the 1930s with a British surveyor who brings him south to be treated for tuberculosis, to his first love with a Métis girl in Montréal, to his wartime service in the RCAF and his participation in the infamous firebombing of Dresden, to his return home and descent into alcoholism and depression.

© Polygram

EARTH

Director: Deepa Mehta, 1998

The movie opens in the city of Lahore in Punjab in 1947 before India and Pakistan became independent. Lahore is a cosmopolitan city, depicted by a group of working class friends from different religions. The rest of the movie chronicles the fate of this group and the maddening religious conflict that sweeps across Punjab as the partition of the two countries is decided and Lahore is given to Pakistan. Based on the 1988 semi-autobiographical novel The Ice Candy Man by Bapsi Sidhwa.

© New Yorker Films

VICEROY'S HOUSE

Director: Director: Gurinder Chadha, 2017

The transfer of power and partition of India and Pakistan told largely through the experiences of the house staff at the stately New Delhi residence of the viceroy following the arrival of Lord and Lady Mountbatten in early 1947. As the clock ticks down to independence, the servants prepare for an uncertain future for themselves and their families. This film was lambasted by historians for the unsupported premise that partition was conceived as a conspiracy by Churchill's wartime government to contain postwar Soviet expansion into the oil-rich Middle East.

© Pathé

PINJAR

Director: Chandra Prakash Dwivedi, 2003

Lajjo is a recently married Hindu woman abducted by Muslims during the chaos of partition and taken to Pakistan. There she is forced to become the second wife of an abusive and controlling alcoholic. Her determined sister-in-law, Puro, sets out to search for her, encouraged by her brother, but cautioned by her parents who would prefer not to lose another child. A compelling story that deals with abduction, a widespread and largely overlooked aspect of partition violence.

© Lucky Star Entertainment

BHOWANI JUNCTION

Director: George Cukor, 1956

In the summer of 1947 the British are on the verge of finally leaving India. Among the few sorry to see them leave are the Anglo-Indians—half British and half Indian. They are going to miss the patronage of their white cousins, the job reservations, and the important status and positions they currently hold. This film revolves around Victoria, an Anglo-Indian woman and her relationships with British, Indian, and Anglo-Indian men. Based on the 1954 novel by John Masters.

© MGM

EXODUS

Director: Otto Preminger, 1960

This Hollywood epic portrays the last days of the British mandate of Palestine and the birth of the state of Israel. The plot revolves around a group of Jewish war survivors whose refugee ship, Exodus, is diverted from Cyprus to Haifa. There they join a kibbutz and must reconcile themselves to their Arab neighbors as well as more militant Jewish fighters. Meanwhile British authorities struggle to keep order and prepare to partition the country and withdraw. Based on the bestselling 1958 novel by Leon Uris.

© MGM/UA

O JERUSALEM

Director: Elie Chouraqui, 2006

This film revolves around the friendship between two men, an Arab and a Jew, during the final days of Britain's Palestine mandate and leading up to the birth of the state of Israel. As British authorities in the mandate lose the will to stay and keep order Jews and Arabs fight for control of the holy city and to determine the fate of the region. Based on the bestselling 1972 book by Larry Collins and Dominique Lapierre.

© Les Films de l'Instant

STAYING ON

Director: Silvio Narizzano, 1979

Based on Paul Scott's Booker Prize-winning novel from 1977, this film tells the story of retired colonel Tusker Smalley and his wife Lucy who made the decision to "stay on" in India after the British withdrew in 1947 and as most of their friends returned home. Now retired, Tusker and Lucy are the only remaining British residents in a once-busy hill station. Problems arise when the Indian owner of their bungalow plans to change the one corner of India in which they hoped to preserve their Anglo-Indian life.

© HBO Films

COTTON MARY

Directors: Ismail Merchant and Madhur Jaffrey, 1999

In 1954, seven years after India has gained independence from Britain, many Indians still feel like second-class citizens in their own country, as the nation's sovereignty has not immediately erased the perception that the British are superior to Indians. An example is Cotton Mary, an Anglo-Indian nurse in the employment of the wife of a BBC correspondent. Mary claims she is the daughter of a British army officer (although she has no firm evidence) and views herself as more British than Indian.

© Universal

SOMETHING OF VALUE

Director: Richard Brooks, 1957

Peter, a Kenya settler boy, and Kimani, a Kikuyu, are childhood friends. After his father is jailed for following tribal customs, Kimani joins the Mau Mau rebellion. Kimani believes in the cause, but does not agree with the indiscriminate killing of women, children, and those who will not join or support the rebels. Peter, even after the deaths of his little sister and brother by the Mau Mau, still believes that there is a chance for peaceful co-existence. Based on the 1955 novel by Robert C. Ruark.

© MGM

GUNS AT BATASI

Director: John Guillermin, 1964

Regimental Sergeant-Major Lauderdale is an old-school martinet assigned with other British NCOs and officers to a remote African outpost to train soldiers of a newly independent former colony (a thinly veiled Kenya). When a populist uprising overthrows the government, soldiers loyal to the new regime take over the barracks prompting a tense standoff with Lauderdale and his men. Released in 1964, at the height of decolonization, this film is a useful artifact of British feelings about the end of their empire.

© Twentieth Century Fox

THE LAST KING OF SCOTLAND

Director: Kevin Macdonald, 2006

Nine years after Uganda gained its independence from Britain in 1962, a former private in the King's African Rifles named Idi Amin seized power. This film is a fictionalized version of the reign of Amin as seen through the eyes of Nicholas Garrigan, a young Scottish doctor who quite accidentally becomes the dictator's personal physician. A chilling portrait of Amin's erratic and murderous regime as well as the trauma of postcolonial Africa in the wake of British rule. Based on the 1998 novel by Giles Foden.

© Fox Searchlight

HEAT AND DUST

Director: James Ivory, 1982

Anne, an Englishwoman, is investigating the life of her great-aunt Olivia whose destiny had always been shrouded with scandal. The search leads back to the early 1920s, when Olivia, recently married, came to live with her civil servant husband in an Indian princely state. Slowly, Anne discovers, upon getting pregnant by an Indian local in the early '80s, that she and Olivia have more than a little in common. Based on the 1975 novel by Ruth Prawar Jhabvala.

© Home Vision Entertainment

AN UNGENTLEMANLY ACT

Director: Stuart Urban, 1992

This film portrays the days and hours before and during Argentina's 1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands, a British dependency in the South Atlantic. As Argentine forces land on the eastern island and make their way towards the town of Stanley, a detachment of Royal Marines prepares to defend the governor, his family, and their fellow islanders from the invaders. Based on actual accounts (though with some inaccuracies) the film aired on British TV during the tenth anniversary of the Falklands War.

© BFS Entertainment

ILUMINADOS POR EL FUEGO | BLESSED BY FIRE

Director: Tristán Bauer, 2005

This Argentine film tells the story of the Falklands War through a series of flashbacks among veterans living with the scars of their country's "unwinnable" war. The plot takes the men back to their foxholes on the windswept and desolate Malvinas (Falklands) during the harrowing battles they fought with British forces sent to retake the islands. Victory in the Falklands revived Britain's pride in its former empire and was in some sense a redemption from the humiliation of the Suez crisis of 1956.

© Canal + España