The extensive research on ethnic and racial prejudice has paid scant attention to the variable of physical appearance despite the obvious fact that ethnic and racial groups tend to look different from one another. The lack of attention may reflect, in part, an ambivalence about appearance that researchers share. We are enjoined not to ‘judge a book by its cover’ and cautioned that ‘beauty is only skin deep.’ These warnings suggest both a natural proclivity to judge people by their appearance and the belief that to do so is wrong. Another factor contributing to the neglect of appearance has been the assumption that prejudice and stereotyping are category-driven (cf. Brewer, Feinstein, & Harasty, 1999; Fiske, Lin, & Neuberg, 1999). According to this view, the appearance of a particular person may help us to know the social category in which to place him or her – Black or White, old or young, male or female – but it is culturally learned associations to that category that account for prejudice and stereotyping, not appearance per se. Although learned associations certainly play a significant role, recent research discussed below reveals that appearance makes a contribution apart from its effect on categorization. A third factor that may contribute to the neglect of research on appearance is the belief that it cannot help us to ameliorate prejudice because targets' appearance is less mutable than the perceiver variables that have received greater attention. However, the research reported here demonstrates that considering the contribution of appearance provides useful information about how to reduce prejudice.

According to the familiar face overgeneralization hypothesis (FFO), racial prejudice derives in part from negative reactions to faces that deviate from the prototype of faces that one has experienced (Zebrowitz, 1997, 2001; Zebrowitz & Collins, 1997). This hypothesis is grounded in the assumption that the evolutionary and contemporary social importance of differentiating known individuals from strangers and being wary of the latter may produce a tendency for responses to strangers to vary as a function of their facial resemblance to known individuals. Such an effect has been demonstrated for ‘episodic’ familiarity (Peskin & Newell, 2004), whereby responses to a particular individual are influenced by that person's physical resemblance to someone with whom the perceiver has interacted even when the perceiver is unaware of the resemblance (Hill, Lewicki, Czyzewska, & Schuller, 1990; Lewicki, 1985). The effect also has been demonstrated for ‘general familiarity.’ In particular, reactions to strangers depend on the racial prototypicality of their facial appearance, with physical features more prototypical of another race contributing to prejudiced responses over and above those resulting from racial categorization (Blair, Judd, & Chapleau, 2004; Blair, Judd, Sadler, & Jenkins, 2002; Eberhardt, Davies, & Purdie-Vaughns, 2006; Livingston & Brewer, 2002). Also, the higher familiarity of own- than other-race faces partially accounts for the ingroup favoritism shown in the likeability of strangers' faces reported by Koreans, Black Americans, and White Americans (Zebrowitz, Bronstad, & Lee, 2007).

The FFO hypothesis has implications not only for understanding the contribution of appearance to prejudice, but also for ameliorative interventions. In particular, since the unfamiliarity of other-race faces contributes to outgroup prejudice, increasing the familiarity of other-race faces should decrease prejudiced responses to strangers of that race. Such an effect would be consistent with previous research showing that mere exposure to stimuli, including faces, increases their likeability, an effect that occurs even when the exposure is subliminal (Ball & Cantor, 1974; Bornstein, 1989; Cantor, 1972; Hamm, Baum, & Nikels, 1975; Kunst-Wilson & Zajonc, 1980; Perlman & Oskamp, 1971; Seamon, Williams, Crowley, et al., 1995; Zajonc, 1968; Zajonc, Markus, & Wilson, 1974). The precise mechanism underlying the mere exposure effect remains an active research question, and it is not the focus of the present research. However, some conceptually related candidate mechanisms are compatible with FFO. These include an uncertainty reduction mechanism (Bornstein, 1989; Lee, 1991), increased perceptual fluency (Reber, Winkielman, & Schwarz, 1998), and reduced negative affect, such as apprehension (Zajonc, 2001), all of which, like FFO, need not be explicit. Interestingly, a meta-analysis of research investigating mere exposure to faces revealed that the effects are more than 50% larger for other-race than own- race faces (Bornstein, 1993). These results are consistent with the uncertainty reduction, perceptual fluency, and affect mechanisms, which are likely to be engaged more by exposure to other-race than own-race faces.

Whereas the basic mere exposure effect can influence the likeability of previously seen other-race faces, research also has revealed a generalized mere exposure effect that has broader ramifications. For example, subliminal repeated exposures to Chinese idiographs, polygons, or complex visual patterns increased the judged likeability not only of previously seen stimuli but also novel ones, with liking for novel similar stimuli greater than liking for novel dissimilar stimuli (Gordon & Holyoak, 1983; Monahan, Murphy, & Zajonc, 2000). Research also has shown greater liking and incipient smiling when viewing prototypes of seen patterns or geometric stimuli even though those prototypes have never themselves been seen but are merely similar to the exposed stimuli (Winkielman, Halberstadt, Fazendeiro, & Catty, 2006). Similarly, in the domain of face perception, 6-month-old infants who were familiarized with a set of faces attended to an averaged composite of these faces as if it were familiar (Rubenstein, Kalkanis, & Langlois, 1999). Also, brief, supraliminal exposure to a series of faces of one's own race or another race increased likeability ratings for averaged composites of the seen faces compared with averaged composites of unseen faces even though neither composite had itself been seen (Rhodes, Halberstadt, & Brajkovich, 2001).

The present research builds on the findings that the lesser familiarity of other-race faces mediates ingroup favoritism in likeability judgments (Zebrowitz et al., 2007) and that exposure to a set of faces increases the likeability of a never-seen composite of those specific faces (Rhodes et al., 2001). In particular, we investigated whether exposure to other-race faces can increase the likeability of never-seen real faces from that racial category. Such a demonstration has both theoretical and practical significance, because composite faces differ from real faces in two significant ways. First, composite faces are higher in structural similarity to the exposed faces than a random set of real faces from the same racial category. Second, the computer generated composite faces are rated relatively high in attractiveness (e.g., Langlois & Roggman, 1990; Zebrowitz & Rhodes, 2002). Examining real faces will reveal whether these two qualities are necessary for the generalization of exposure effects. Demonstrating the effect with real faces will also have implications for interventions designed to reduce outgroup prejudice, since it is reactions to real faces that are socially significant.

Experiment 1 investigated the effects of supraliminal exposure to Korean or White faces on White perceivers' liking for Korean and White faces that had not been previously seen. Experiment 2 investigated the effects of subliminal exposure to Black or White faces on White perceivers' liking for Black and White faces that had not been previously seen. Whereas the supraliminal exposure manipulation has the advantage of generalizability to real world exposures, the subliminal exposure manipulation enabled us to determine whether a generalized mere exposure effect for faces is an implicit process, as has been demonstrated for other stimuli (Gordon & Holyoak, 1983; Monahan et al., 2000). We examined only generalized exposure effects both because they have greater implications for ameliorating other-race prejudice than do changes in the likeability of previously exposed faces, and also because the basic mere exposure effect is not shown within a generalized mere exposure paradigm. Rather, previously exposed stimuli and novel stimuli from the same category are liked equally well (Monahan, Murphy, & Zajonc, 2000; Smith, Dijksterhuis, & Chaiken, 2007).

We predicted that either supraliminal or subliminal exposure to other-race faces would increase the likeability of a different set of other-race faces as compared with either exposure to own-race faces or no exposure to faces of either race. We predicted that supraliminal exposure to other-race faces would also yield an increase in the judged familiarity of a different set of other-race faces, and that that the effects on familiarity would mediate likeability judgments. We also predicted a generalized effect on liking following the subliminal exposure manipulation without any increase in the explicit familiarity of unseen other-race faces, because previously documented basic and generalized exposure effects for subliminal stimuli indicate that the mechanism responsible does not require explicit recognition processes. Finally, based on Bornstein's (1993) meta-analysis of basic mere exposure effects for own- and other-race faces, we expected the foregoing exposure effects to be weaker for own-race faces.

General Discussion

Increasing White participants' familiarity with an other-race facial prototype through exposure to Korean or Black faces increased the likeability of a different set of Korean or Black faces. Moreover, this increase was sufficiently great that it led to higher likeability ratings of other-race than own-race faces in contrast to equal or greater preference for own-race faces following exposure to White faces or no exposure manipulation. Although the generalized mere exposure effect was mediated by increases in the explicit familiarity of other-race faces when exposure was supraliminal, a subliminal exposure manipulation was equally effective.

The stronger effect for other race faces and the generalization of the effect to subliminal exposure are both consistent with existing explanations for mere exposure effects, which have attributed them to uncertainty reduction, increased perceptual fluency, and reduced negative affect to a novel stimulus (cf. Bornstein, 1989; Lee, 2001; Reber et al.,1998; Zajonc, 2001). These reactions can be implicit, and they should be stronger for other-race faces. The present findings are also consistent with the FFO hypothesis. It should be emphasized that this hypothesis is not an alternative explanation for mere exposure effects. Rather, it has been offered as a partial explanation for other-race prejudice and stereotyping in situations that do not involve mere exposure manipulations (Zebrowitz et al., 2007), and it is compatible with the effects of mere exposure documented in the present research. More specifically, the assumption that racial prejudice derives in part from negative reactions to faces that deviate from the familiar own-race prototype is consistent with the finding that increasing that familiarity through mere exposure serves to reduce prejudice. The fact that the increased familiarity need not be explicit is also compatible with the FFO hypothesis. Effects of face familiarity on social judgments can be either explicit (Zebrowitz et al., 2007) or implicit (DeBruine, 2002; Hill et al.,1990; Lewicki, 1985).

Neural activation to other-race faces has provided some data pertinent to the FFO assumption that an adaptive wariness of unfamiliar-looking strangers contributes to negative evaluations of other races. In particular, there is greater amygdala activation when viewing novel other-race than own-race faces (Hart, Whalen, Shin, McInerney, Fischer, & Rauch, 2000; Phelps, O'Connor, Cunningham, Funayama, Gatenby, Gore, & Banaji, 2001). Insofar as amygdala activation is associated with threatening stimuli (LeDoux, 1998), these data are consistent with the FFO hypothesis. However, recent work shows that the amygdala is activated by emotionally salient stimuli whether they are positive or negative (Fitzgerald, Angstadt, Jelsone, Nathan, & Phan, 2006; Hamann, 2002; Sander, 2003; Winston et al., 2006), in which case greater amygdala activation to other race faces does not necessarily indicate wariness. Nevertheless, it would be instructive to investigate whether mere exposure to other-race faces not only increases liking for novel faces of that race, as shown in the present experiments, but also decreases amygdala activation to those faces.

Some similarities and differences between the present findings and those recently reported by Smith et al. (2007) are worthy of note. Those authors compared effects of exposure vs. no exposure to White faces on White raters' evaluations of Black and White faces that had not been previously seen. Like the present experiments, they found no generalized exposure effects on liking for White faces. However, unlike the present research, they found that exposure to White faces decreased liking for other-race Black faces as compared with the no exposure condition. The one exception to that effect was shown for White raters who had weak attitudes toward Whites, as assessed by measures of certainty and centrality of the attitude to their own identity. For those with weak attitudes, exposure to White faces did not decrease liking for Black faces, paralleling the results in our experiments. Thus, one might speculate that our participants had relatively weak attitudes toward Whites, such that viewing White faces did not elicit the ingroup identification that Smith et al. (2007) suggested might account for decreased liking for Black faces following exposure to White ones.

The present findings would seem to have significant applied value. First, the documentation of an effect using supraliminal faces demonstrates the generalizability of the results to real world exposures. Second, other research has shown that basic mere exposure effects are non-trivial, extending beyond marks on a rating scale. For example, mere exposure has been shown to increase incipient smiles toward previously exposed faces (Harmon-Jones & Allen, 2001), more willingness to help an individual to whom one was exposed (Burger, Soroka, Conzago, Murphy, & Somervell, 2001), and more agreement with the judgments of an individual whose face had been subliminally exposed (Bornstein, Leone, & Galley, 1987). Generalized mere exposure effects are likely to have similar consequences. If so, then simple interventions, such as showing more racial minority faces on television and public billboards, could enhance White people's initial evaluative reactions toward unknown members of racial outgroups as well as positive behavioral responses toward newly encountered individuals of that race. It could also temper the negative reactions that accrue to individuals who, regardless of race, have a more prototypical other-race appearance. Such effects are not trivial, including both longer prison sentences and more frequent death sentences for convicted criminals who have a more prototypical Black appearance (Blair et al., 2004; Eberhardt et al., 2006). Interventions designed to increase exposure to other-race faces would seem particularly important given the finding that repeated exposure to own-race faces can foster decreased liking for faces of another race (Smith et al. 2007). Ameliorative effects of other-race exposure would be consistent with recent evidence that inter-group contact can reduce prejudice even when the ideal conditions specified by Allport (1954) are not met (Pettigrew & Tropp, 2006).