Arizona Western College (AWC) is a public community college located in Yuma, Arizona, United States. AWC offers classes in San Luis, Somerton, Yuma, Wellton, Dateland, and La Paz.

The school's sports teams are called the Matadors and the school colors are cardinal and gold. They participate in the NJCAA, the ACCAC, and the WSFL.

Academics

Arizona Western College offers approximately 98 academic programs leading to the granting of an occupational certificate or the A.A., A.Bus., A.S., A.G.S., or A.A.S. degrees.

On-Campus Housing

Arizona Western College is one of few community colleges in the United States that offers on-campus housing. AWC has three Residence Halls on the Main Campus- Kino, Garces, and DeAnza. Each residence hall can house 116 residents for a total of 348 residents. Each building has a live-in professional (Hall Director) and 3 Resident Assistants (RAs). The Residence Halls consist of approximately 58% athletes and 42% international, non-affiliated, and CAMP (College Assistance Migrant Program) students.

Students interested in living on campus must first complete an application and submit a $100 refundable deposit to the Residential Life Office.

Student Leadership and Activities

AWC has over 50 clubs and organizations for students to get involved including Student Government Association (SGA). SGA consists of the President and 6 Vice Presidents - VP. of Records, Community Service, Sustainability, Marketing, Finance, Programming. A new position has also been recently added to incorporate one of AWC's sister campuses, in San Luis, AZ which is the San Luis Representative.

Students interested in getting involved or learning more about leadership opportunities are encouraged to visit the Campus Life Office or check out the list of clubs currently chartered or learn how to start a club.

Athletics

The Arizona Western College Matadors field 8 intercollegiate teams, four for men and three for women. Men's sports at Arizona Western include baseball, football, basketball, and soccer. The Matador women compete in basketball, soccer, softball, and volleyball.

The men's basketball team has produced multiple NBA players including number 8 overall draft pick for the Toronto Raptors Rafael Araujo. Jeff Livingston was a pitcher in 1981 and Bengie Molina played shortstop for the baseball team in 1991 and 1992. The football program has produced Chuck Muncie, former NFL player with the San Diego Chargers, Leonard Thompson, who played 12 seasons with the Detroit Lions, Crawford Ker, who was an All-American at the University of Florida and played in the NFL for six seasons, Ricky Siglar, who played with several NFL teams over seven seasons, and Chris Jennings, who began the 2011 season with the New York Jets.

The Matadors had a 9-2 season in 2009 and a 10-2 season in 2010 and those teams featured players considered among the top junior college players in the nation. Top players that moved on from the 2010 season: 4* DT Jesse Williams University of Alabama, 4* OL Aaron Douglas University of Alabama, 4* DB Isiah Wiley USC, 3* WR Ge'shun Harris University of Minnesota, 3* TE Andrew Power North Texas, 3* OL Korian Chambers University of New Mexico, 3* S Dreyquan Crawford University of Minnesota, 2* QB Brent Burnette University of Colorado, 2* OL James Williams (Arkansas State), DL William Hodgman (Simon Fraser University, Canada). RB Reggie Bullock, who was named national offensive player of the year in 2010 by the NJCAA Coaches Association after rushing for 1,830 yards and 20 touchdowns, currently leads East Carolina University in rushing yards.

The Matadors lost in the NJCAA football championship in 2011. They missed an opportunity to win their first championship since 1972. Top ranked AWC lost to 2nd ranked East Mississippi Community College 55-47 at Veteran's Memorial Stadium in Yuma, AZ.