The first time Rafael Araujo met the woman who later became his wife, she asked the Brazilian native what he was doing in the United States.

"I told her I wanted to come to the United States and play in the NBA," the 6-foot-11 former BYU center said. "She didn't believe me."

Everybody believes his resolve now.

After all, he got his first basketball at age 6 and in his early teens constructed a backboard and rim in his back yard in Sao Paulo.

At 280 pounds, Araujo (pronounced Ha-fay-el Ar-RU-jo) can run the floor and rebound and has a mean streak NBA teams love to see. He averaged 18.4 points and 10.1 rebounds last season as a senior, improving on his junior season averages of 12 points and 8.9 rebounds. But his outside shooting has surprised many teams.

Araujo, projected to be a late first-round pick, was a late addition to Brazil's 2002 world championship team when Denver forward Nene was injured. He was discovered by Arizona Western Community College when he was playing in a tournament in Brazil and decided to attend the school to pursue his NBA dream.

After two seasons, he established himself at the junior college level well enough to be pursued by schools such as Illinois and Kentucky. But he decided on BYU because it catered to a family atmosphere. Araujo married his wife, Cheyenne, a year earlier.

At BYU, he made an immediate name by becoming a top player in the Mountain West Conference. Last season, he was named the conference co-player of the year.

He had a 32-point, 17-rebound game against Oklahoma State during the regular season and a 24-point, 12-rebound game in a loss to Syracuse in the NCAA Tournament.

All in all, it has been a fast-moving four years for Araujo, who will be 24 on Aug. 12. He comes to the United States, meets a woman, attends junior college, gets married, attends BYU, has a daughter and now is poised to become a first-round pick.

"It's been a little weird," he said. "Half the kids that play ball in the U.S. want to play in the NBA."