Marketing Campaign Claims/Disclaimers

† Screen simulated, subject to change. Feature availability and rollout timing varies by market and device.

15. Dell has the industry’s most comprehensive portfolio of multi-cloud-capable storage from a single vendor. Based on Dell analysis. February 2024.

16. The world’s most comprehensive storage portfolio with robust security. Based on Dell analysis of Primary, Unstructured, PBBA, and HCI segments, February 2024.

17. For supported system and requirements, please refer to our user guide (SupportAssist for Home PCs version for personal use) or administrator guide (SupportAssist for Business PCs version for PC fleet management) and select supported PCs. Proactive and predictive capabilities depend upon your active service plan and Dell Technologies business rules. For ProSupport Suite for PCs capabilities view our administrator guide and select Connect and manage capabilities and Dell service plans. For Premium Suite for PCs capabilities view the user guide and select SupportAssist capabilities and Dell Services plans.

Pricing: The pricing available on this site is Dell’s pricing for online purchases only. No discounts apply to Dell’s online pricing other than the savings listed on this site. Any promotional savings listed on this site are referenced off of a previous online price for the same product. If you have contractual terms with Dell that refer to list pricing, please contact your Dell sales representative to obtain information about Dell’s list pricing.

“Best/Lowest Price of the Year” claims are based on calendar year-to-date price.

Offer details: Offers subject to change, not combinable with all other offers, while supplies last. Dell may impose a purchase quantity limit (for example, 5 units per order). Taxes, shipping, and other fees apply. Free shipping offer valid only in Continental U.S. (excludes Alaska and P.O. Box addresses). Offer not valid for Resellers. Dell reserves the right to cancel orders arising from pricing or other errors. Dell Promo eGift Card: Receive Dell Promo eGift Card sent via email within 20 days. Expires 90 days from issuance. Resellers excluded.

PayPal: Subscription products are not eligible for Pay in 4

Trademarks: Dell Technologies, Dell and other trademarks are trademarks of Dell Inc. or its subsidiaries. Microsoft and Windows are US registered of Microsoft Corporation. Ultrabook, Celeron, Celeron Inside, Core Inside, Intel, Intel Logo, Intel Atom, Intel Atom Inside, Intel Core, Intel Inside, Intel Inside Logo, Intel vPro, Itanium, Itanium Inside, Intel Evo, Intel Optane, Iris, Itanium, MAX, Pentium, Pentium Inside, vPro Inside, Xeon, Xeon Phi, Xeon Inside, Thunderbolt and the Thunderbolt logo are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries in the U.S. and/or other countries. AMD, and the AMD Arrow logo, and combinations thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.. The NVIDIA logo, GeForce, GeForce RTX, GeForce RTX Super, GeForce GTX, GeForce GTX Super, GRID, SHIELD, Battery Boost, Reflex, DLSS, CUDA, FXAA, GameStream, G-SYNC, G-SYNC Ultimate, NVLINK, ShadowPlay, SLI, TXAA, PhysX, GeForce Experience, GeForce NOW, Maxwell, Pascal and Turing are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of NVIDIA Corporation in the U.S. and other countries. USB Type-C® and USB-C® are registered trademarks of USB Implementers Forum. Other trademarks may be trademarks of their respective owners.

3% excludes taxes and shipping. Rewards expire on the 15th day of the fourth month following the month in which they were earned. The total amount of Rewards Points that can be earned each Dell fiscal quarter shall not exceed 200,000. (The Dell fiscal calendar begins in February.) Outlet purchases do not qualify for rewards. Expedited Delivery not available on certain monitors, batteries and adapters and is available in Continental (except Alaska) U.S. only. Other exceptions and restrictions apply. Not valid for resellers and/or online auctions. Offers and rewards subject to change without notice, not combinable with all other offers. See full program terms at dell.com/rewards.

Offered to business customers by WebBank, who determines qualifications for and terms of credit. Taxes, shipping and other charges are extra and vary. The Total Minimum Payment Due is the greater of either $20 or 3% of the New Balance shown on the statement rounded up to the next dollar, plus all past due amounts. Dell and the Dell logo are trademarks of Dell Inc. In addition, Dell Rewards Members who open a new Dell Business Credit (DBC) account on or after 7/1/2024 receive 10,000 Dell Rewards Points as a bonus. These 10,000 bonus rewards points are typically issued within 30 business days of the DBC open date. The bonus rewards offer is subject to change at any time without notice.

1. Returns The 30-day return period is calculated from invoice date. Exceptions to Dell's standard return policy still apply, and certain products are not eligible for return at any time. See dell.com/returnpolicy.

2. Expedited Delivery: Expedited Delivery not available on certain TVs, monitors, batteries and adapters, and is available in Continental (except Alaska) U.S. only. Other exceptions apply. Not valid for resellers and/or online auctions. Offers subject to change, not combinable with all other offers. See Dell.com/rewardsfaq.

3. Onsite Service After Remote Diagnosis and Other Important Information: *On-site Service or Advanced Exchange Service after remote diagnosis: (a) On-site Service after remote diagnosis is determined by the online or phone technician, and may involve customer access to the inside of the system and multiple extended sessions. If the issue is covered by the Limited Hardware Warranty and cannot be resolved remotely, the technician and/or replacement part will be dispatched, usually in 1 or 2 business days, following the completion of the remote diagnosis. The customer must return the original hardware to Dell according to the rules specified. On-site service is provided by Dell Marketing L.P; Availability varies. Other conditions apply. (b) Advanced Exchange Service replaces hardware after remote diagnosis. The customer must return the original hardware to Dell according to the rules specified. Advanced Exchange Service is subject to country availability. (c) For complete details about On-site Service or Advanced Exchange Service, see dell.com/servicecontracts

4. Accidental Damage-Additional Information: Accidental Damage Service excludes theft, loss, and damage due to fire, flood or other acts of nature, or intentional damage. Customer may be required to return damaged unit to Dell. Limit of 1 qualified incident per contract year. For more information, consumers visit Accidental Damage Service Contract (Consumer) or commercial customers visit Accidental Damage Service Contract (Commercial).

5. PowerScale optimizes your workloads with up to 186PB per cluster.5

Feel the flexibility of PowerScale. 9.5x more PB per cluster than Pure FlashBlade//S.5

5Based on Dell analysis, July 2023.

6. PowerStore intelligently automates with 5x better data density.6

PowerStore delivers 5x better data density than Pure FlashArray//X20.6

6Based on Dell internal analysis using publicly available specs in August 2023 comparing maximum effective capacity for PowerStore 1200 and FlashArray //X20. Assumes average 4:1 data reduction for PowerStore, 5:1 for Pure Storage. Actual results vary.

7. World’s broadest storage portfolio with comprehensive security features.7

7Based on Dell analysis of Primary, Unstructured, PBBA and HCI segments, April 2023. 10. An all-Dell IT environment is up to 22.4% cheaper with accessories versus a heterogenous Dell and Apple environment.10

10 Based on a Principled Technologies report commissioned by Dell Technologies, “Lower cost, more choice: The benefits of choosing all-Dell business laptops,” June 2023. Actual results may vary. Full Report

11. Dell offers more business laptop and mobile workstation models and form factors, more monitor models and more options to customize device configuration than Apple¹¹.

11Based on a Principled Technologies report commissioned by Dell Technologies, “Lower cost, more choice: The benefits of choosing all-Dell business laptops,” June 2023. Actual results may vary. Full Report

12. The CES Innovation Awards are based upon descriptive materials submitted to the judges. CTA did not verify the accuracy of any submission or of any claims made and did not test the item to which the award was given.

15. Based on Dell analysis, November 2022. Dell Optimizer is the AI-based optimization software for commercial PCs and MyDell is the AI-based optimization software for consumer and small business PCs. Dell Optimizer is not available in OptiPlex 3000 series, Latitude Chromebook Enterprise, and Linux-based devices.

16. Based on May 2024 Stratetgic Thermal Lab report commissioned by Dell Technologies using Cinebench 2024 Multi-Core, 10-minute-stress test - April 2024 comparing Internal Test Data with XPS 13, Qualcomm Snapdragon X Elite - X1E80100, Qualcomm Adreno graphics, 64GB memory, 2TB SSD vs. MacBook Air 13, M3 8-core CPU, 10-core GPU, 16GB memory, 512GB SSD.

Dell Pay Credit:

A soft inquiry is used to check your eligibility which will not affect your credit score.

Deferred Interest, Payment Required plan: Interest will be charged to your Account from the purchase date if the promotional plan balance is not paid in full within the promotional period. Minimum payments are required for each Credit Plan. Minimum payments are NOT guaranteed to pay the promotional plan balance within the promotional period. You may have to pay more than the minimum payment to avoid accrued interest charges. Valid for single transaction only. If the single transaction has multiple shipments, each shipment may result in a separate Credit Plan, subject to a separate minimum purchase requirement. Taxes and shipping are not included in the promotional plan minimum spend threshold. Refurbished and/or used purchases do not qualify for promotions. Qualifying purchases will automatically be placed on a promotional plan. If purchase qualifies for more than one plan, it will be placed on the qualified plan with the longest promotional period. As of June 2024, terms for new Accounts: Purchase APR of 30.99%. Minimum interest charge is $2 in any billing period in which interest is due. Existing Account holders: See your credit account agreement for Account terms.

Account must not be in default.

To join Dell Rewards, sign into your Dell Account (or create one) and select the box to join the Dell Rewards program. Your name and email is all you need to join. Offer will be received within 30 business days after Dell Pay Credit Account open date. This rewards program is provided by Dell and its terms may change at any time. For full Rewards Terms and Conditions, please see Dell.com/Rewards

Use coupon code: AWDP10. Coupon valid with select other offers. Limit of 5 units per order. Offer will not be re-issued if lost, stolen or destroyed or with return/refund of merchandise. The entire transaction amount after discount must be placed on the Dell Pay Credit Account. Offer limited to Alienware PCs $1,999+. Expires 08/05/2024 at 7AM CT.

Credit Account offers are subject to credit approval.

Dell Pay Credit Accounts are issued by Comenity Capital Bank.

Dell Pay Credit is for personal use only.

This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.