Dell Technologies — the largest, privately controlled, technology firm —helps organizations and individuals build their digital future and transform how they work, live and play. The company provides customers with the industry’s broadest and most innovative technology and services portfolio for the data era.

Infosys & Dell Technologies - Joint Mission Statement

We partner together to build respected best-of-breed business solutions, leveraging technology, delivered by best-in-class people.

Infosys is a Dell Technologies Cloud Services provider - Titanium Partner, one of the highest-level services partners of Dell Technologies. Infosys and Dell Technologies collaboration is led by strong ties between both the company’s CEOs and other top and regional executives.

You can count on Infosys and Dell Technologies to deliver the solutions you need for your business needs.

Partnering together to deliver - Values

Deliver smarter IT transformation from Edge to Core to Cloud

Powers Real Transformation with innovative storage technologies, Data Management and Data Protection Solutions.

Infosys Cobalt & Dell Technologies APEX integrated multi cloud solution to Accelerate Customers’ Multi-Cloud Journey

Brings Speed, Security and Smart Design to Mobile PCs for Business

Partner Program Accelerates Growth Opportunities Across Family of Businesses.

Infosys is investing heavily in Digital, Automation, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Big Data to solve complex customer problems. Infosys relies heavily on a cloud enabled strategy through a platform model called Cobalt for internal operations, as well as Go to market strategy.

Dell Technologies is aligned with the Infosys Cobalt mission, and we are working together to build cloud assets that can deliver innovative solutions to achieve maximum values in Multi-Cloud Data age.

Together we are investing time, resources, and funds the Centre of Excellence (COE) Labs to develop, test and demonstrate the collaborative value of these investments to our clients. The COE includes test platforms to develop Multi Cloud, Data Protection, Cyber Security solutions and Storage technologies.

The Go to Market Solution strategy includes

Data Resiliency Services

Multi Cloud data protection as a service

Cyber recovery as a Service

Cyber defense as a service for Unstructured Data

Cloud Transformation

Private / Hybrid Cloud to deliver consistency in operations, Management, consumption, Life cycle – Across Edge-Core-Cloud

SAP Solutions – Partnered between Infosys & Dell

Dell's SAP Technology and Infosys SAP Managed services capability to solve the challenges in public cloud SAP deployments.

Workplace Transformation

Accelerate your digital workplace for unstoppable productivity

Virtual Desktop as a Service

Storage Transformation

Modern storage, data management and data protection solutions give customers the performance, agility, and scalability they need to store, protect, and maximize their data capital

Collaborating to develop Joint solution across the industries vertical

OSDU – Oil & Gas

Smart factories / Manufacturing Vertical solutions

ADVANCING SUSTAINABILITY At the heart of everything we do:

We have a responsibility to protect and enrich our planet together with our customers, suppliers, and communities. It is a core part of our business, and we embed sustainability and ethical practices into all that we do, being accountable for our actions while driving improvements wherever and whenever possible. Both Dell and Infosys have identified Focus Areas such as the Environment, Diversity & Inclusion and Circular Economy and have aligned respective 2030 Goals for a better world for all its inhabitants.