7. MARK JOHNSON - 2002 Essendon Football Club W.S. Crichton Medallist

Above: "Mr Sunbury" Mark Johnson walking the streets of his favourite suburb

Mark Johnson was an inside midfielder for the Essendon Football Club & Fremantle Football Club, playing 194 of his 208 games with the Bombers. Mark's life has been one of very little individual success. Growing up Mark was known as "Mr Sunbury" due to winning a body building award as a teenager. Many medical professionals have stated that his overly muscular physique as a child contributed to stunting his growth, leaving him with a stumpy, gimp-like appearance. He is also credited with starting the 'Look like Tarzan play like Jane' movement down at Essendon, an elite group which included other names such as Adam McPhee and Nathan Lovett-Murray.

Mark was one half of the "Johnson Boys" along with his spud-partner-in-crime Jason Johnson. While they are not related, Mark is the Brother of Geelong's David Johnson, and is no doubt a distant relation to the many other Johnson’s in the AFL. This raises the question that perhaps poor genes are to blame for his inability to compete at AFL level. I decided to investigate the Johnson bloodline further, and with the consent of all the Johnson’s I took blood tests to take back to my lab for testing. After running my first test it was immediately clear that there were significant issues with the Johnson bloodline. After further DNA analysis it was clear that the bloodline had some serious flaws, and that each of the Johnson's tested were missing at least one chromosome. The results are as follows:

Mark Johnson’s AFL career was mostly uneventful, and after 9 years of service his club rewarded him for his efforts by delisting him, something which looked likely to end his career. But at the last moment the mighty Fremantle Dockers leapt from the shadows, defying all logic and reason, offering Mark a lifeline. Johnson was proud to be yet another member of the Fremantle ex-Essendon reject group, a group which includes formidable names such as Kepler Bradley, Dean Solomon, Mark Harvey and most recently Adam McPhee. 14 games later with the Dockers and it was all over. While Mark claimed he retired due to a shoulder injury, he was only 29 at the time. Had he actually been any good the Dockers surely would have given him another year, but at this stage it was pretty safe to say that both parties were just looking to save face and get out of this embarrassing situation as quickly as possible. At the end of the 2002 season Mark Johnson was awarded the W.S. Crichton Medal after averaging 16 disposals and not doing a whole lot else. In other award nights Mark was not so successful, not winning the AFL MVP award, All Australian Squad Selection, International Rules Selection or any Media/TV awards (Herald Sun/Lou Richards/The Age). On the AFL's night of nights Mark was also awarded just 4 Brownlow Results, and while the Brownlow is a bit of a joke of an award it still has far more credibility than an Essendon Best & Fairest. Mark’s teammates Jason Johnson, Damien Peverill, Adam Ramanaskus, James Hird, Scott Lucas, Matthew Lloyd and Mark McVeigh all polled far higher, had better seasons and are far better players than Mark Johnson. Yet somehow this little plodder still managed to win the award.

Congratulations Mark on your well-deserved entry at #7 in the Top 10 Worst Best & Fairest Players of the decade. I highly doubt there will be any disputing his inclusion in this list.