CLEVELAND, Ohio – Dan Duffy has a way with words. Which is interesting considering he is an artist, not a writer.

What Duffy does is create calligrams. The images are based on typography - that is, names - for his artwork. And among Duffy's collages of ballparks, musicians, entertainers and others is one marking Progressive Field's 25th anniversary.

The work commemorates the stadium that opened as Jacobs Field in 1994. Every player who has donned a Cleveland uniform from 1901 is listed. Red, white, blue, green and gold lettering spills out onto the field and across the bleachers, scoreboard and dugouts. In all, 1,875 players are represented, from Abbott to Zuvernink.

There is a method to his work: He moves chronologically with players from decades ago in the top left to modern ones in the bottom right.

"I wanted people to be able to find the players," Duffy said. "There are some happy accidents that happen sometimes."

That means if he needs a large letter, and Satchel Paige's name is next, that works out for a big S and great player. If a pitcher's name spills across the mound, he did it on purpose, he said.

He didn't want to "drive people crazy to find names. It's important to me that from a distance it looks like art first, and when you get closer the fun starts."

The idea actually started a decade ago when he went to a Philadelphia Phillies game with his girlfriend-now wife, Jess.

"To impress her I was going to write out every game (date, opponent, win or loss) and on and on. She said 'Wow this is cool, this would be a cool gift for my dad.' "

Thus began a creative career and business opportunity. He started selling his work to tailgaters in Philadelphia in 2009, he said, and started hearing suggestions. " 'Where's Reggie White? You need to do more, you need the skyline.' It wasn't anything I planned on doing for the rest of my life."

A pal told him 'This is a really cool idea, you should patent it,' he said.

" 'Uh no, this has been going on for thousands of years,' " Duffy told him.

He's right. Typography remains an integral part of artistic and marketing images. You can even see examples above some of the ticket counters at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, as landmarks are depicted with alphabet letters in Type City Cleveland.

Duffy's ideas take form with a sketch.

"I'll get a bunch of pictures, lay them all out, and do a light pencil drawing. Then I take a really light black pen, and I write a very, very thin initial layer of all the words. From a distance you can't even see the image.

"Once all the words are in black I color in pen. I have three, four hundred different utensils I'll use. Then I'll slowly start to shade in the darks and color in the areas. The image slowly starts to appear throughout time."

He uses first initial and last name ("If I did write the first and last name I would still be writing," he said.)

Duffy, 38, who lives in Flourtown, Pennsylvania, about 15 miles north of Philadelphia, studied at Hussian School of Art and was an art major at Indiana University of Pennsylvania. He started doing graphic designs for golf magazines, but it didn't hold his interest. The typographical artwork emerged at the right time.

"The Jake was so big when it came out," he said. "Really it was only Camden Yards (as a similar well-designed stadium). I think that was a huge resurgence for baseball; the circular (stadiums), the multipurpose ones were just terrible. I've always been a big fan, and fan of the underdog."

And underdog means Cleveland.

He is drawn to the Dawg Pound as well, he said. "Look at these guys - they are winless and relentless out there in the cold." Another piece shows LeBron James in mid-flight, his outstretched right hand ready to dunk, supported by the result of every game from the 2015-16 season when the Cavs won the title.

Over time, the images he created became more complicated.

"Imagine being able to look at something, your ballpark, and go through the history of the organization and your grandfather can find his favorite player."

Duffy spends 120 to 150 hours on each work. He has done close to 100 portraits commemorating a range of sports, moments, schools and stadiums: Alex Ovechkin of the Washington Capitals hoisting the Stanley Cup with every game from the 2018 season listed; Penn State's Nittany Lion glares back with words from the school's fight song; Bruce Springsteen belts out a tune supported by the lyrics from "Born to Run."

Early on Duffy did commissioned works before branching out. He even offered fans choices of which musician he should draw, resulting in Tom Petty being the crowd favorite.

For Progressive Field, he shows a '25' on the scoreboard, a bright blue sky and clouds in the background along with details of light poles, buildings and the American flag in center field.

"I love that it's in downtown," said Duffy, who is hoping to be in Cleveland for the All-Star Game in July. "It's a beautiful spring day. That's what I was going for - a packed ballpark."

More info