Timothy Duffy's photography is held in the permanent collections of the National Museum of African American History and Culture, the New Orleans Museum of Art, and the Morris Museum of Art, among other museums and institutions. With his wife, Denise, he is cofounder of the Music Maker Relief Foundation. He lives in Hillsborough, North Carolina.

For more information about Timothy Duffy, visit the Author Page.

Russell Lord is the Freeman Family Curator of Photographs at the New Orleans Museum of Art (NOMA). His deepest area of expertise is the origins of photography, but Lord has written and lectured widely on almost every moment in the history of photography. His recent publications include: Looking Again: Photography at the New Orleans Museum of Art (2018), and Gordon Parks: The Making of an Argument (2013). Much of his research focuses on the relationships between photography and other visual media

For more information about Russell Lord, visit the Author Page.

William Ferris is Joel R. Williamson Eminent Professor of History and senior associate director of the Center for the Study of the American South at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. A former chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, Ferris is coeditor of the award-winning Encyclopedia of Southern Culture and author of several other books, including the informal trilogy The South in Color: A Visual Journal, The Storied South: Voices of Writers and Artists, and Give My Poor Heart Ease: Voices of the Mississippi Blues.

For more information about William Ferris, visit the Author Page.

"A stunning collection of tintypes."—No Depression

"Timothy Duffy, like many of the musicians his photographs portray, has the ability to meld past and present into a joyful, singular moment of timelessness. His images movingly convey the soul of his subjects and of the places in which they live."—Sally Mann

"From my first encounter with Timothy Duffy’s photographs in the early 1990s, what has struck me to my core is how his subjects speak through their eyes to your senses, using a timeless human language. That feeling never stops once you’ve seen the images. This collection is the finest of the fine."—Taj Mahal

"Beautiful, powerful, and unique photograph work."—Eric Lutz, Saint Louis Art Museum

"With gut-wrenching honesty and compassion, Timothy Duffy transcends himself in work that reveals his deep relationship to his subjects and their worlds. The collection of tintypes in Blue Muse deserves to be heralded as one of the great contributions to the history of photography."—Steven Albahari, Publisher, 21st Editions