Daniel Duffy is an artist who lives a mile outside of the Philadelphia city limits. Of course, he’s a Phillies fan, and the Mets are one of his most hated teams in all of sports.

But recently he felt conflicted.

Duffy creates word art – he sketches drawings and brings them to life by writing hundreds of words all over the image. This fall, 10 years into his career, he finally did a Mets piece: The outside of Shea Stadium with fans walking in from the parking lot and the names of every Met to play there written in the picture.

This is my coolest piece, Duffy thought as he made it. It remains one of his favorites, “which bothers me.”

It’s a complicated matter with something that required around 200 hours to complete.

“The fact is, I kind of came to an epiphany that my enjoyment of baseball is greater because I don’t like the Mets,” Duffy said over the phone. “Clearly, I love the Mets — I love to root against and hate the Mets.”

The art served as a show of respect to the Mets. Duffy, a Penn State football fan, still doesn’t see himself creating any Ohio State football or Dallas Cowboys pieces anytime soon, if ever. Well actually, he told me he would only begin an Ohio State creation if the Nittany Lions make the College Football Playoff, which will not happen this season after a loss in Columbus two weeks ago.

Shea Stadium is ingrained in Duffy’s head, as it is for many baseball fans. Many of you made fond memories there, so Duffy wanted to take you back for one more afternoon at the ballpark.

“That’s the most important thing,” he said, “is to honor the game and be able to do more word art for everyone.”

Pause.

“Except Cowboys fans!”

The 39-year-old — whose work can be found at www.artofwords.com — does not take himself too seriously, but his story is one of perseverance and determination. In high school, he felt his only major goal was to play professional rugby. Years later, he started his own business doing word art. It came with challenges, but these days, he’s grateful to spend countless hours doing what he loves. And working in sweatpants doesn’t hurt, either.

A perfect day

With his Shea Stadium piece, Duffy aimed to convey a perfect day for baseball. The sky is blue and the sun is shining. He gives you a view of the stadium’s exterior with fans walking in because he believes nothing beats that stroll into the ballpark and to your seats.

“The hour or two before the game is always the best,” he said.

How the heck does someone even create word art, anyway?

For Duffy, it all happens in a split-level home he shares with his wife, Jess, and young daughter, Greta. The first level contains finished prints, the printer and everything else needed for customers’ orders. Duffy works in a small bedroom with a drafting table and a computer that sits on it. The desk has a drawer with all of his pens.

The process itself:

1. Duffy takes a few different photos and combines them to form a new scene. Then, he does a pencil drawing of the image.

2. After he finishes sketching, he begins to write the words very lightly with pen.

3. Once he’s written every word, he uses colored pens, markers and “a thousand different writing utensils” to color in the piece.

All of that takes at least 150 hours to complete. Duffy often turns off his phone notifications, then listens to Howard Stern, a small business podcast or Philly sports radio. If you’re not an artist, you may wonder how Duffy remains sane working on pieces for that long.

“To be honest with you, the alternative would be digging ditches,” he said. “I don’t have too many other skills.”

Behind the scenes

A few tidbits I found rather interesting with the Mets piece:

In regards to the first step of the process, Duffy used about five photos. He took one of the stadium’s exterior, but it featured an empty parking lot. He wanted a crowd walking in, so he pulled four photos of random crowds at sporting events. If you look at his finished piece, you’ll see a guy in the parking lot grabbing his blue-eyed son’s head. In real life, they were going to a soccer game.

Duffy has guys who gather the info for him. “I went to art school for a reason,” he said.

Once someone gives him the info to write down — every Met to ever play in Shea, in this case — his job is far from over. He has difficulty spelling. “It’s kind of a cool twist of fate that the guy that can’t spell has to write words all day,” he joked.

Mets fans will love this: Duffy once misspelled Joe Girardi’s name on an all-time Yankees piece. “It was hardly even legible,” he said.

Duffy, who is from the same town as Mike Piazza, wanted to get in the mind of a Mets fan. What features would they like to see in the art? Which jerseys needed to be on the backs of fans walking into the ballpark?

Before Duffy sketched Shea, he did not know the stadium featured murals of a pitcher and batter on both sides of the exterior. He also enjoyed the old-school ramps that could be seen from the outside, so capturing those was important.

We all receive different fulfillment from our respective jobs or crafts. After doing word art for a decade, Duffy admits it becomes a bit monotonous at times. But once he’s out selling finished products, a motivating scene always seems to develop.

“When you first see a kid that figures out that it’s made of words and then figures out what the words are, and just to see their face — first of confusion, then they get it and it’s like a light bulb in their eyes — that’s really what keeps you going,” said Duffy, who has re-created everything from stadium interiors and mascots to city skylines and musicians.

A difficult road

Duffy has a message for all artists:

“The key is to say (you want to be an artist). And mean it, meaning, well, I guess I’ll find out if my wife really loves me because I might not sell anything but I’m not going to go be a barista again,” he said. “The absolute commitment of, 'this is what I do.'”

After art school, Duffy had already quit his Starbucks barista job. He had no other option and not many skills, so he chose to do word art. It took him more than five years — with many hardships — to make a living off this, but he’s in a better spot now.

As a boy, Duffy loved to draw. He drew sneakers, more than anything. He loved sketching out the pattern on the bottoms of shoes, and his first design was an imaginary pair of Nike's. He originally thought he’d be an architect, but once he saw there was much more than drawing to that field, he searched elsewhere.

Duffy admits he was never a good student. He played rugby at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, and he emphasizes played because he didn’t attend class much. But when he did, he showed up to art courses. He left the university after two and a half years and went to art school elsewhere.

Duffy has combined art, words and sports. He was never a great painter, so he uses words to make an image pop. And he said there aren’t many artists who love to draw athletes and stadiums, which means his sports fandom has helped him carve out a niche.

“I knew that people would like the art,” he said. “It was: Could I get it out there? Could I survive January, February, March when you can’t be outside in the Northeast and you can’t sell in a town fair?”

In 2009, he started selling his pieces to tailgaters in parking lots. Soon, two “guys dressed in all black” commented: “Listen, we’re from MLB and you can’t be selling this stuff. Look at that hat, look at that logo. You need permission.”

The next year, Duffy called around and got Brooklyn-based Legendary Sports Prints to take on his art. He did about eight pieces for them. Finally, he was a licensed artist.

But the company went out of business shortly after.

“The next couple years,” Duffy said, “were just brutal.”

Duffy, who decided to go on his own, borrowed money from family and friends for his license and a printer. But he still had issues.

The first order he received was for a framed piece. The only problem: He didn’t have a framer, so he went to the local framer, who charged $80, while the customer only paid $60 in full for the piece. And for a few years, his printer would break come December because the holidays are his busiest time.

“That was the hard part is just basically to convince people, ‘Hey man, I need 500 bucks,’ and paying them back before they asked for it, knowing I’m going to need it again in a couple more months,” Duffy said. “Really, just being impressed with the fact that people have always come through. Right when I think it’s over, right when I owe $5,000 and I have $1,000, we’ll have a sunny weekend and sports fans will come out. They just continue to buy, so I just continue to write. It’s truly a miracle.”

A breakthrough

Five years in, Duffy decided to hire someone to help sell the product — the area in which he felt he did not excel. The idea came from a podcast in which the hosts talked about how having extra manpower would increase profits and workflow much more than you would think. Even though Duffy had no money, he relayed that vision to Mark Franzen and basically said, “Let’s find out.”

It’s working. Duffy can stay up in the bedroom creating the art — “which is where I belong,” he said — while Franzen promotes the work and fulfills orders.

Duffy’s work can be found online for $49.99, which includes shipping. But he often goes out to town squares and he realizes it’s important to be good at shaking hands, explaining what he does and selling his craft in person. He hasn’t always been comfortable with that part, but he is now. He has no choice.

“A piece of art that is not shown to any other person is the sound of one hand clapping,” Duffy said.

In January, Duffy will rest, put on his carpal tunnel glove and watch Netflix for a couple weeks. But for now, the holiday rush is upon him. In December, he’ll sell his art in Manhattan’s Union Square for the first time.

Daniel Duffy is word art. Even when he isn’t working, friends talk to him about it. “And I have zero problems with it,” he added. It’s his identity, and it all started because he wanted to show Jess he could do something valuable.

Duffy’s first piece was Phillies closer Brad Lidge on his knees looking up at the sky, the iconic image from the club’s 2008 World Series championship. The letters were big and nothing was in the background. Duffy can critique it in a billion ways.

But in a sense, each new piece feels like the first.

“I kind of have to top what I did the last time,” Duffy said, “or make it more realistic or try to push the issue.”

Justin Toscano is the Mets beat writer for NorthJersey.com. For unlimited access to all Mets analysis, news, trades and more, please subscribe today and download our app.