General information

Snake eels belong to the the Anguilliformes also are called Apodes ("limbless"), because of their lack of protruding fins, and true eels, because there are many other fishes (about 45 families) that do not belong to this group but have similar burrowing habits, and an eel-like shape as a result of convergent evolution. Anguilliformes are related to the Elopiformes (tarpons), the Albuliformes (spiny eels and halosaurs), and the Saccopharyngiformes (snipe and gulper eels) because they all have a leptocephalus, or ribbonlike, larval stage during development. This Order is divided into three suborders and 15 families (Anguillidae: 15 spp.; Heterenchelyidae: 8 spp.; Moringuidae: 6 spp.; Chlopsidae: 16 spp.; Myrocongridae: 2 spp.; Muraenidae: 200 spp.; Synaphobranchidae: 26 spp.; Ophichthidae: 250 spp.; Colocongridae: 5 spp.; Derichthydae: 3 spp.; Muraenesocidae: 8 spp.; Nemichthydae: 15 spp.; Congridae: 150 spp.; Nettastomatidae: 30 spp.; Serrivomeridae: 10 spp.). Much more work is needed in this area to determine the exact phylogenetic relationships within this group.

In addition to their eel-like bodies, anguilliform species have widely varying coloration that ranges from black or dark gray in deep-sea species to rich colors and complex patterns in tropical reef species. Adult sizes range from about 10 cm to 3.5 m, as in the moray species Thyrsoidea macrura. Systematists have emphasized numerous other morphological characteristics that have been found useful for phylogenetic purposes, including the lack of pelvic fins and the continuous dorsal, anal, and caudal fins that can have up to 650 soft rays, giving some individuals the appearance of having a pointed tail.

Anguilliformes are found in rivers draining into the North Atlantic, Baltic, and Mediterranean. They also have been introduced into Asia, South America, and Central America, but for the most part they have not reproduced in those areas. However, Anguillidae have a more restricted distribution, and do not inhabit the eastern Pacific and South Atlantic.

The order Anguilliformes can be found in a wide variety of marine, brackish, and freshwater habitats, including streams, lakes, deep-sea waters, and coral reefs. Most are found living in small openings in coral reefs and rocks or burrowing in soft substrates. In general, morays and congers inhabit coral reefs and rock crevices, whereas certain congrids of the subfamily Heterocongrinae form vast colonies of up to several hundred individuals in tropical reef areas.

Class: Actinopterygii

Order: Anguilliformes

Number of families: 15