Casa Patas Flamenco: Raiz de 4: part of The Ringling’s Art of Performance series, will be presented at 7:30 p.m. Wednesday and Thursday in the Historic Asolo Theater, The Ringling, 5401 Bay Shore Road, Sarasota. Tickets are $23-$35; 941-360-7399; ringling.org/events/casa-patas-flamenco-raiz-de-4

The ancient roots of that most distinctive of Spanish dances, the flamenco, form not just the foundation, but the solid central trunk of Casa Patas Flamenco, which will be in Sarasota this week as part of the Art of Performance series at The Ringling.

Rafael Peral and Marisa Adame, dancers and founders of Casa Patas Flamenco in Madrid, will arrive accompanied by a guitarist, a percussionist and two singers for two performances and a masterclass in flamenco rhythm and choreographic technique.

Peral and Adame, longtime partners and collaborators in dance, will perform romances, martinete, fandangos and soleares, among the foundational dances in the flamenco tradition.

Both have been dancing since they were children, and met at the dance conservatory in Barcelona in 1990. They’ve been dancing together ever since, and in 2000 established the Casa Patas Flamenco Foundation and Conservatory to bring together all the aspects of study, teaching and promotion of the dance form. In 2010, UNESCO included the foundation on its list of Intangible Heritage of Humanity.

“We are very fortunate to be able to host a performance by these artists, especially with the international reputation that Casa Patas enjoys,” said Elizabeth Doud, The Ringling’s Currie-Kohlmann Curator of Performance. “This performance will be a treat for lovers of all forms of dance and performance. Avid followers of the form will be delighted by the virtuosity of the artists, whose work is solidly rooted in the finest Flamenco traditions.”

Because neither of the dancers speaks English, Doud served as interpreter for the pair in a telephone interview from Madrid.

Although flamenco was born in Spain, its popularity has spread around the globe, as Spanish flamenco dancers moved to other parts of the world to develop their work, the pair told Doud.

“Then there’s also really, really dedicated students that travel to Spain to take classes, drinking from the fountain in Spain. There are really, really good dancers in Japan and throughout Latin America,” they said.

Japan? Really?

“They agree that it’s an extraordinary contrast,” Doud said. “One thing they’ve observed, about Japanese students in particular, is the aspect of dramaturgy, not only the physical expressions of the dancers, but the costuming, the hair, the very particular details of the expression of flamenco.”

The traditional Japanese dance and theater forms of butoh and noh rely on precise movement and exaggerated costumes much as flamenco does.

Its expression differs in that “part of the concept is the mask,” Doud translated. “Regular Japanese culture is more reserved. Theater allows more extreme expressions of emotion.”

Casa Patas’ elaborate flamenco costuming makes their world travel jaunts “complicated,” said Peral. Each performer brings three changes of costume in separate cases, with men in jacket, pants and vest and women in skirts or dresses, including the bata de cola, a specialized dancing skirt with an extended train that can be as long as 10 feet and weigh as much as 20 pounds. Their shoes, which are similar to tap shoes, have a blocky heel and nails driven into the heel and the tip of the toe to create the “very distinct and special rhythm that is not always accessible to students,” said Adame.

The two dance more frequently solo, which is the default mode for flamenco, than as a pair. The reason lies in the history of the dance, which was performed on small stages called tabla.

“It gives a more intimate representation of the dance,” said Adame.