Our

Story

Whyte and Mackay can trace its roots back to 1844 in Glasgow. And if time has taught us anything, it’s how to perfect our consistently smooth and rich tasting whisky. That’s partly thanks to our triple maturation process and partly down to the abiding genius of our third generation master blender and those who came before him.

We’d like to tell you more about our story. If you read on, we’ll take you on a journey from back in the day to right now, a journey from grain to glass. It’s the story of how we blend our smoother, richer tasting whisky. And if you want to hear about our many awards, well, we’ll tell you about those, too.

Our Triple

Maturation Process

The secret behind the award-winning taste of Whyte & Mackay is our triple maturation process and the way we blend to make sure no single whisky dominates another, creating a harmony of flavours that work together to produce our famous smoother, richer taste.

The story begins with choosing the finest aged single malts and aged grain whiskies from two of Scotland's most famous distilling regions, Highland and Speyside. Then we carefully age the malt whisky whilst separately aging the grain whisky. Most blended whiskies stop at this stage

but Whyte and Mackay add an additional step.

The final chapter of the maturation story sees the marrying of these two different whiskies in sherry casks. This triple maturation process produces a whisky rich in colour with golden highlights, round and full on the nose with smooth, rich flavours of honey and fruits. As in life, we believe the more dedication and effort we put in, the more you will be rewarded.

Our

History

The River Clyde is where our story started, an area better known for its shipbuilding. In fact, at that time, one in every five ships sailing the seas was built and launched here.

So when James Whyte and Charles Mackay saw an opportunity to provide the hard working residents of Glasgow with an alternative to Cognac, our superior blended whisky, Whyte & Mackay was launched.

And as the population of Glasgow grew with immigration from the Highlands, Ireland and Europe, so did the popularity of Whyte & Mackay.

That popularity lives on today, as does the pride and passion of our two founding fathers - James Whyte and Charles Mackay - in every glass of our whisky.