Just an excuse for a wee Friday night catch up over a beer or two.

Note the new venue for this event. The venue is unlicensed, but you can bring your own beer/wine. There will also be free tea/coffee and soft drinks available.

All welcome, from complete beginners to the more experienced users.

Come learn about what projects we've been working on or new technology we've been experimenting with.

We'll be doing this regularly on the first Friday of the month. We'll be there late, so even if you can't make it for 6pm, just drop in.

Remember, we have a Matrix chat room where you can get to know us before the meetings (and get help with any projects etc) - the room address is #opensource:glasgow.social - if you don't already use Matrix this is the invite link: https://glasgow.social/matrix

We're in The Gamer Club this month - if you haven't been before, it's a purpose built basement venue for tech meetups - there is a console lounge, arcade, kitchen/bar, PCs, projector, gigabit internet etc. It isn't licenced, but you are welcome (encouraged!) to bring your own beer/wine (or help yourself to the free teas/coffees). You can get directions here: https://www.thegamerclub.co.uk/gettinghere

Godot Game Engine is free and open source software released under the permissive MIT license:

You are free to use Godot Engine, for any purpose

You can study how Godot Engine works and change it

You can distribute unmodified and changed versions of Godot Engine, even commercially and under a different license (including proprietary)

This event will show you how to get started creating basic 3D games. It will be more of a workshop format - I'll demo on my screen and you'll be able to work alongside me as we show the ins and outs of the software and it's scripting language, GDScript, which is quite similar to Python.

We'll be trying to build a replica of Wolfenstein 3D from scratch.

As always, you can join our Game Dev room on Matrix (#gamedev:glasgow.social), the invite link is https://glasgow.social/matrix - do join if you get a chance, no matter what level of ability - I want to try and create a community of Glasgow based game developers established - the room currently has three developers who have games published on Steam, as well as a lot of beginners keen to learn.

The event is free (though there is a donation tin) and there is free tea and coffee - you are welcome to bring your own snacks and drinks too.

This is going to be a regular monthly event - we'll repeat the basics and people who have been before can resume where they left off or help the new people get started.

We'll be hosted by The Gamer Club which is in town, just off Bath Lane, see here for directions: https://www.thegamerclub.co.uk/gettinghere

Remember to bring a laptop to get the most out of this session.

A-Frame is a web framework for building virtual reality (VR) experiences. A-Frame is based on top of HTML, making it simple to get started. But A-Frame is not just a 3D scene graph or a markup language; the core is a powerful entity-component framework that provides a declarative, extensible, and composable structure to three.js.

Originally conceived within Mozilla and now maintained by the co-creators of A-Frame within Supermedium, A-Frame was developed to be an easy yet powerful way to develop VR content. As an independent open source project, A-Frame has grown to be one of the largest VR communities.

This event will show you how to get started creating basic 3D VR scenes/games. It will be more of a workshop format - I'll demo on my screen and you'll be able to work alongside me as we show the ins and outs of the software. It's easy to learn and experiment with as it's all based on Javascript and HTML.

We'll have some VR headsets so you can try out what you are creating in a proper virtual environment.

As always, you can join our Game Dev room on Matrix (#gamedev:glasgow.social), the invite link is https://glasgow.social/matrix - do join if you get a chance, no matter what level of ability - I want to try and create a community of Glasgow based game developers established - the room currently has three developers who have games published on Steam, as well as a lot of beginners keen to learn.

The event is free and there is free tea and coffee (though there is a donation tin) - you are welcome to bring your own snacks and drinks too.

This is going to be a regular monthly event - we'll repeat the basics and people who have been before can resume where they left off or help the new people get started.

We'll be hosted by The Gamer Club which is in town, just off Bath Lane, see here for directions: https://www.thegamerclub.co.uk/gettinghere

Remember to bring a laptop to get the most out of this session.