Real Madrid received their 36th La Liga trophy at their training ground in the club's Valdebebas training ground on May 12, and not after the emphatic 4-0 victory over Granada on the previous day at the Los Cármene stadium. The Royal Spanish Football Federation (RFEF) presented the Carlo Ancelotti-managed Los Balncos with their 2023-2024 La Liga title in a behind-closed-door ceremony. The RFEF initially wanted to conduct the presentation ceremony during Madrid's clash against Granada, but the Spanish giants refused out of respect for their relegation-bound opponents and their fans.

advertisement

Having already secured the La Liga title after Girona defeated FC Barcelona by 4-2, increasing the point gap between the two Spanish rivals to 13 points. However, Real Madrid did not go ahead with the ceremony back then due to their then impending UEFA Champions League semi-final against Bayern Munich. Real Madrid currently stand at 90 points in their 35 matches, which is already their second-highest points tally, only behind their 100-points finish under Jose Mourinho in 2011-12 season.

"We've had a spectacular season...We've had difficulties, a lot of injuries, but winning the league early, and with this lead, says a lot about this group. It's important to celebrate with the fans," Toni Kross told reporters.

After receiving the title in the presence of Real Madrid President, Florentino Perez, the squad celebrated the triumph with their massive fanbase with an open-top bus parade through the streets of Madrid. Following their usual title-winning routine, the full Real Madrid side travelled to the regional government headquarters at Puerta del Sol, and then to the Cibeles in front of a massive crowd of fans, popularly known as 'Madridistas'.

"Thank you for your support and your affection this season...One more big game at Wembley, and we're going to win. Come on, Madrid!" "Jude Bellingham told the crowd at Puerta del Sol

Real Madrid will be heading to Wembley for their highly anticipated UCL Final against Borussia Dortmund on June 2, where the Los Blancos will fight for a record-extending 15th title.