$65.00

$55.00

(You save $10.00 )

(No reviews yet) Write a Review

Write a Review

Real Madrid C.F. Version 2 Cornhole Wraps - Set of 2

Rating Required

Name Required

Email Required

Review Subject Required

Comments Required

Finish: (Required)

Squeegee: (Required)

I understand this is for just the wraps and boards are not included: (Required) Yes

Current Stock:

Adding to cart… The item has been added

Add to Wish List

Create New Wish List

Description

FAQs

If you are looking for a great way to customize your cornhole boards, there is nothing better than these wraps. They fit any regulation sized cornhole boards (24″x48″), are easy to apply, and make for a great way to upgrade your game.

Our wraps are printed on 3M Vinyl using the best Eco - Sol inks and are made of High Quality Vinyl that features Rapid Air technology. This feature helps eliminate the chances of getting any air bubbles when installing your wraps.

We use TrueVis printing technology which produces vivid and long-lasting colors that look amazing on any cornhole board.

The holes are not pre-cut on our cornhole wraps. This allows for easy installation of the wraps on your boards. The holes can easily be cut out with a knife once they are applied onto the boards. The picture of the wraps on our site shows where the holes would go if your boards are regulation size.

We can mix-and-match our cornhole wrap designs. If you're interested, please place an order for one of the sets as normal. Then, during checkout, just leave us a message letting us know what you would like the other wrap to be.

What is a Squeegee?

A squeegee is a small flat plastic tool that is used to help apply the wraps and get out air bubbles.

To Laminate or Not to Laminate?

These cornhole wraps come laminated or unlaminated. We highly recommend laminated cornhole wraps - they extend the life of the wrap and are easier to apply. They do not require a clear coat; however we do recommend a coat or two for extra protection and a great playing surface. Unlaminated wraps are a raw decal and will require a clear coat.

Price includes two wraps (cornhole skins), one for each board.

Cornhole wraps ship within 2-3 days of placing the order.

Cornhole boards and bags are not included.

1. What is Cornhole?

For more information about cornhole, please visit our What is Cornhole page.

2. What are the rules to play Cornhole?

For an entire breakdown of the cornhole rules, please visit our How To Play page.

3. Why should I purchase from Custom Cornhole, LLC?

If you're looking for great cornhole sets and accessories at affordable prices then you've come to the right place! All of our cornhole sets are hand-made and ship to your door in days.

Our goal is to produce a wide variety of premium grade cornhole boards at reasonable prices. All of our boards are built with quality material that meets the specifications of the American Cornhole Association (ACA).

On top of that, our prices can't be beaten. Most other companies charge well over $100 to ship their boards. We guarantee to ship your boards for no more than $40 anywhere in the country.

4. Where is Custom Cornhole, LLC located?

Custom Cornhole was founded and operates out of Bend, Oregon.

5. Can I return my bags or boards?

After 7 days, all sales are final.

Orders/Items can be returned for exchanges only within 7 days of purchase. If an exchange is made, the customer is responsible for both the return shipping of the original product and shipping charges for the new product to be shipped.

Damaged Packages

Occasionally packages are damaged in transit and must be replaced. We must be notified of a damaged package within 5 business days of receiving the package. We will handle the pickup of the damaged package and ship a replacement product.

Cornhole Bag Replacement Policy

All of our cornhole bags are guaranteed for 30 days after date of purchase. If you should have a bag break, just return the empty cornhole bag (without corn) that was defective and we will ship you a new one within 1 week of receiving it. This guarantee only covers the stitching not the fabric itself. For more information please visit our Terms and Conditions page.

6. How long will it take for my cornhole order to arrive?

It all depends on what you order. All of our stock bags, accessories and decals will ship in less than 48 hours after the order is made. Most of our boards sets also ship within 48 hours. It's the custom boards and bags that take a little longer. Once we get your approval of the mock-up, custom orders take roughly 5 business days to produce.

7. Can I get my cornhole order rush shipped?

Unfortunately, we cannot rush ship orders. We have selected a FedEx service that we felt offered our customers the best, least costly shipping for their product. Airfreight of packages with these dimensions and weight are very cost prohibitive.

8. What are the shipping costs for the cornhole board sets?

To make it easy for our customers to calculate their total price, we have a fixed-shipping cost of only $40 anywhere in the country (except for Hawaii and Alaska).

9. Do you ship internationally?

We can, but keep in mind that shipping a 2' by 4' box overseas can by quite costly. But we will work with you as much as possible to save you money. We have military deals to support the troops. Just contact us to get more information.

10. What are the dimensions of a cornhole board?

We manufacture only American Cornhole Association approved equipment. Boards are 4 feet in length, 2 feet in width and 1 foot high at the highest point. The hole is 6 inches in diameter.

11. What type of wood is used for the cornhole boards?

We use half inch cabinet grade plywood for the top and premium 2x4's for the sides.

12. Do the legs fold out?

Yes.

13. Are your cornhole boards slippery?

Yes. The ACA specifies a "high gloss" finish for regulation cornhole boards.

14. How much do boards weigh?

They are about 25 pounds per board, 50 for a pair. With the weight of the eight cornhole bags, the total set weighs around 58 pounds.

15. Can you put two different boards together?

Yes we can! Just let us know the specific board designs you would like to put together, and we will create a custom link for you to finalize your order.

16. Can I add any customization to designs you already have created?

Yes. We can make changes to our specialty designs; please note that additional fees may apply, depending on the level of detail.

17. I want to customize the boards with my company logo; can I see the design before I make payment?

Yes. Please just send your logo in an EPS, AI, or vector file to admin@customcornhole.com with the design details, we will send you a mockup shortly.

18. What are the specs on the carrying cases?

The carrying cases are made to fit our boards, so we cannot guarantee it will fit boards not purchased from Custom Cornhole, LLC. Our carrying cases are currently 48" x 25" which holds our standard boards and bags. If you have created a board set on your own make sure that it is within those dimensions as the material does not give much leeway. We can also create custom-sized bags for an additional fee.

19. Are your credit card transactions safe?

Yes. We will never ask for, see, or be able to store your credit card information. All online payments are encrypted to provide the utmost security. For more information, please read our Privacy Policy.

20. Do you offer any deals for bars/restaurants wanting your product?

We do. Just contact us to get more information.

Related Products