Real Madrid enjoyed a comfortable 4-0 win away to Granada in their first La Liga game since being crowned champions after the hosts had been relegated to the second division earlier in the day.

Carlo Ancelotti was able to rest his star players with a UEFA Champions League final on the horizon as he made 10 changes from the team that started against Bayern Munich on Wednesday.

Brahim Diaz’s excellent second-half brace, with a moment of individual quality before rounding off an excellent team move earned him the Player of the Match award.

Transfers

Fernandes wants bumper new contract amid Bayern and Barca interest - Paper Round

05/06/2024 at 07:59

Francisco Garcia had opened the scoring for the visitors in the first half before turning provider as he set up Turkish youngster Arda Guler to double their lead on the stroke of half-time.

Myrto Uzuni had the best of the half-chances that fell for the hosts, who were perhaps somewhat deflated after seeing their fate to La Liga 2 sealed by Mallorca’s win in an earlier kick-off.

Talking Point - Diaz stakes claim for final while Joselu loses momentum

With Girona's victory over Barcelona last weekend securing Los Blancos the title, there was little pressure on this fixture and that will be the case for their final three league games ahead of the Champions League final against Borussia Dortmund on June 1.

Therefore, it was unsurprising to see Ancelotti resting his key players and giving others a chance to impress, a pattern that is likely to continue ahead of the showdown at Wembley.

Diaz was one of those to snatch the opportunity and his two excellent goals that topped off a superb performance will have done him no harm in his efforts to start the final as Madrid look for their 15th Champions League title.

Conversely, Joselu will be disappointed with this evening's work after such a euphoric night on Wednesday as his two goals turned the tie with Bayern Munich on its head to send Madrid through.

The 34-year-old striker was wasteful when chances fell to him and looked more desperate as the game went on to find the back of the net. The Spaniard will hope he can find his 10th league goal over the coming weeks to get him back on track.

Player of the Match - Brahim Diaz (Real Madrid)

Despite assured and dominant performances from Eduardo Camavinga and Luka Modric in midfield, Diaz caused problems all afternoon for the hosts. His driving runs at the heart of the Granada defence saw him play a role in all four goals and brought two yellow cards for Granada.

A superb solo goal as he took the ball on the half turn before once again running at the Granada back line and firing home before he finished off an excellent passing move from the visitors exemplified his high-quality performance.

Player Ratings

Granada: Batalla 7, Mendez, 5, Piatkowski, 7, Miquel, 6, Neva, 7, Ruiz 5, Gumbau 5, Pellistri 4, Jozwiak 6, Boye 6, Uzuni 7. Subs: Callejon 6, Hongla 5, Melendo 4, Sanches 6, Villar 4.

Real Madrid: Courtois 8, Vazquez 7, Militao, 7, Rudiger 7, Garcia 9, Modric 8, Camavinga 8, Ceballos 7, Guler 7, Joselu 6, Diaz 9. Subs: Nacho 7, Kroos 7.

Match Highlights

38' - GOAL! Granada 0-1 Real Madrid (Garcia): Madrid work the ball excellently down their right-hand side. Diaz has the ball on the by-line and pulls it back across goal. It's behind Modric but the onrushing Garcia hits it back across goal with his left foot to give Madrid the lead.

45+2' - GOAL! Granada 0-2 Real Madrid (Guler): Garcia turns provider as he pulls it back and sets up Guler to take a touch and stroke home with his left foot into the bottom right corner for Madrid's second.

49' - GOAL! Granada 0-3 Real Madrid (Diaz): Diaz takes the ball beautifully on the half-turn before running at the Granada defence. He then fakes a shot to cut back on his right foot and sell the defence before striking past the 'keeper's right into the near post.

58' - GOAL! Granada 0-4 Real Madrid (Diaz): A delightful move from Madrid with each player taking one or touches results in Modric being slipped through in the right of the Granada box. The Croatian generously cuts it back to Diaz who takes a touch before converting for his second goal of the game.

Key Stats

- - -

TNT Sports presents the premium live sports rights previously carried by BT Sport including the Premier League, UEFA Champions League, UEFA Europa League, UEFA Conference League, Gallagher Premiership Rugby, Investec Champions Cup, EPCR Challenge Cup, MotoGP, Cricket, UFC, Boxing, NBA and WWE. The streaming home for TNT Sports in the UK is discovery+, where fans can enjoy a subscription that includes TNT Sports, Eurosport and entertainment in one destination. You can also watch TNT Sports through BT, EE, Sky, and Virgin Media.

Champions League

'He'd take us to another level' - Bellingham on Mbappe's rumoured Madrid move

02/06/2024 at 08:33

Champions League

'There is not a big ego' - Ancelotti stresses Real squad is 'not difficult to manage'

01/06/2024 at 23:21