The Sociology & Anthropology Colloquium Series presents Dr. Berkeley Franz on “Hospitals and Population Health: Community Expectations of Anchor Institutions” on Friday, Feb. 2 at 4 p.m. in Bentley Annex 102.

Franz is a medical sociologist whose research and teaching focus on hospital-community relationships, community-based philosophy, and health policy. In addition, she has interests in the sociology of religion and community organizing. She has worked both domestically and internationally on community-based research projects and has carried out extensive qualitative research. Franz has published peer-reviewed articles on the philosophy of health care organization and evaluation, the intersection of religious beliefs and health policy preferences, and the impact of the Affordable Care Act on hospital-community partnerships. Her co-authored book, Narrative Medicine and Community-based Health Care and Planning was published by Springer in 2017. She is currently co-authoring a book on hospital-community relations for the University of Chicago Press. Along with two colleagues, she is editing a volume of first person narratives on the opioid epidemic in Ohio (Ohio State University Press).

Franz will present preliminary findings from her forthcoming co-authored book, Medical Urbanism: Hospitals, City Neighborhoods, and Community Health (University of Chicago Press, 2019).

Abstract: This book provides case studies of hospitals that have begun to embrace the role of anchor institution and provide non-medical services in their local communities. This work may include providing support for affordable housing, crime reduction initiatives, healthy food access, among other programs aimed to improve population health. Increased involvement in the community, however, requires significant collaboration with local community members to address historic conflict and plan new partnerships. Drawing from in-depth qualitative interviews and archival research in three cities, Franz will report on the varied expectations that local residents, community leaders, and local government officials have for hospitals in their emerging role as anchor institutions.