OAKLAND, Calif., Jan. 30, 2019 /PRNewswire-PRWeb/ — Franz Inc. is an innovator in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and leading supplier of Semantic Graph Database technology with expert knowledge in developing and deploying Knowledge Graph solutions. Franz Knowledge Graph services combine broad experience, domain expertise, best practices, tools, methodologies, assets and proven delivery methods with a pragmatic approach to planning and design.

Gartner recently identified Knowledge Graphs as a key new technology in both their Hype Cycle for Artificial Intelligence and Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies. Gartner’s Hype Cycle for Artificial Intelligence, 2018 states, “The rising role of content and context for delivering insights with AI technologies, as well as recent knowledge graph offerings for AI applications have pulled knowledge graphs to the surface.”

“The ability to rapidly integrate new knowledge is the crux of a Knowledge Graph and depends entirely on semantic technologies,” said Jans Aasman, CEO of Franz. “A Knowledge Graph represents a knowledge domain and connects things of different types in a systematic way by encoding knowledge arranged in a network of nodes and links rather than tables of rows and columns. People and machines can benefit from Knowledge Graphs by dynamically growing semantic network of facts about things and can use it for data integration, knowledge discovery, and in-depth analyses.”

N3 utilized Franz’s Knowledge Graph Consulting Services to build an ‘Intelligent Sales Organization,’ which uses graph based technology for taxonomy driven entity extraction, speech recognition, machine learning and predictive analytics to improve quality of conversations, increase sales and improve business visibility.

“In a typical sales organization, the valuable content within the online chat or voice conversation between the agent and customer goes into a black hole,” said Shannon Copeland, COO of N3. “Franz helped us build a modern Intelligent Sales Organization (ISO) by creating a real-time Knowledge Graph that knows everything about customers and agents and provides the raw data for machine learning to improve doing the business of ISO. Now we use the rich information between agents and customers to improve the quality of the interaction in real time, which ultimately creates more sales and provides far better analytics for management.”

Gartner also recently featured AllegroGraph in a recent report that explains the importance of using semantic technology to drive business value out of data. In the report, Gartner Analyst Guido De Simoni says, “Unprecedented levels of data scale and distribution are making it almost impossible for organizations to effectively exploit their data assets. Data and analytics leaders must adopt a semantic approach to their enterprise data assets or face losing the battle for competitive advantage.” (Source: Gartner, How to Use Semantics to Drive the Business Value of Your Data, Guido De Simoni, November 27, 2018.)

To review the summary and purchase the Gartner report, “How to Use Semantics to Drive the Business Value of your Data,” visit the Gartner Report Order Page.

Franz’s Knowledge Graph Consulting Services include:

Solution Architectures and Implementation Roadmaps – Franz delivers comprehensive support for building industrial strength Knowledge Graph solutions based on best-of-class available tools, products, knowledge, skills and experience. This service includes:

Technology Selection

Customized Design and Development to support targeted uses

Project Support and Best Practices

Application Integrated Lifecycle Methods

Enterprise-scale development and deployment platform for business applications

Ontology and Taxonomy Development – Ontologies and Taxonomies are powering the next generation of knowledge management and semantic interoperability solutions. Franz provides the expertise for designing ontology and taxonomy based solutions by utilizing standards-based development processes and tools.

Master Data Management (MDM) – Franz offers processes for collecting, aggregating, matching, consolidating, quality-assuring, persisting and distributing such data throughout an organization to ensure consistency and control in the ongoing maintenance and application use of this information.

Data Integration and Retrieval – Franz provides data integration services from different relational databases using RDF semantics, which can then be continually integrated with information that comes from other data sources. Once data is published in a collective ‘web of data,’ queries can span different data sources and more powerful retrieval methods can be built.

Data Science and AI – Franz’s data science team delivers expertise in custom algorithms to maximize data analytics to uncover the true potential of your data. Our team has years of industry experience in designing and implementing Artificial Intelligence solutions in production settings to deliver innovate results.

To learn more about Franz’s Semantic Knowledge Graph Services, contact Franz at info(at)franz.com or visit: https://allegrograph.com/consulting/

About Franz Inc.

Franz Inc. is an early innovator in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and leading supplier of Semantic Graph Database technology with expert knowledge in developing and deploying Knowledge Graph solutions. The foundation for Knowledge Graphs and AI lies in the facets of semantic technology provided by AllegroGraph and Allegro CL. AllegroGraph is a Graph Database that enables organizations to gain sophisticated insights and predictive analysis from highly complex, distributed data – exceeding the possibilities of conventional databases and laying the foundation for Knowledge Graphs and Artificial Intelligence solutions. Unlike traditional relational databases or other NoSQL databases, AllegroGraph employs graph technologies that process data with contextual and conceptual intelligence. AllegroGraph is able run queries of unprecedented complexity to support predictive analytics that help organizations make more informed, real-time decisions. AllegroGraph is utilized by dozens of the top Fortune 500 companies worldwide.

All trademarks and registered trademarks in this document are the properties of their respective owners.

SOURCE Franz, Inc.