[2021] EWHC 1101 (TCC)

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS IN BIRMINGHAM

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

TECHNOLOGY AND CONSTRUCTION COURT

Birmingham Civil and Family Justice Centre

Priory Courts

33 Bull Street

Birmingham

B4 6DS

Before:

Her Honour Judge Sarah Watson

Case No: HT-2019-BHM-000024

Between:

Mrs Gurpreet Kang

Mr Avtar Singh

Claimants

and

Mr Kultarn Singh Pattar

Defendant

Mr Joshua Brown (instructed by Higgs & Sons) for the Claimants

Mr William Knapman (instructed by Aspect Law) for the Defendant

Hearing dates: 11 January 2021 to 14 January 2021 and 27 January 2021

Sarah Watson Her Honour Judge

Introduction and background

1

This is a claim for damages for breach of a contract for building work. The Claimants allege the Defendant's work was defective and delayed. The Defendant counterclaims for payment for work carried out and for lost profit resulting from the Claimants' repudiatory breach of contract.

2

The Claimants are the owners of 62 Weston Crescent, Aldridge, WS9 0HB (“the Property”). The Second Claimant is Mrs Gurpreet Kang, who is sometimes referred to by her maiden name, Gurpreet Hayre and occasionally as Gurpreet Kaur, (“Mrs Kang”). She is married to Mr Pavinder Kang (“Mr Kang”). The First Claimant, Mr Avtar Singh (“Mr Avtar Singh”), is Mr Kang's uncle. Mr Rajinder Singh (“Mr Singh”) is Mr Kang's father and Mr Avtar Singh's brother. The Defendant, Mr Kultarn Singh Pattar (“Mr Pattar”) is a builder who carried out building work at the Property.

3

The Claimants bought the Property in August 2017. It was intended to be the family home of Mr and Mrs Kang. The Claimants claim that was also intended to be the home of Mr Singh, Mr Avtar Singh and Mr Hardev Kang, who is Mr Kang's brother. The Property was a bungalow, which Mr and Mrs Kang intended to extend and improve. Mr Singh approached Mr Pattar to quote for the building work. The Claimants claim that Mr Singh acted as their agent. Mr Pattar claims he was unaware of any agency and understood Mr Singh owned the property and was the sole principal.

4

Mr Pattar provided a quotation by text message sent to Mr Singh on 7 September 2017. He quoted a price of £56,000 for the work that had been discussed, which was to take place between 21 September 2017 and 14 December 2017. The quotation was accepted by Mr Singh. The agreement was reduced to writing in the form of a brief summary of the work to be carried out. The parties agree that the written document accurately reflects what the parties had agreed. I shall refer to this contract as “the Initial Contract”.

5

In November 2017, the Claimants and their family decided to extend the works, to include constructing additional rooms and a dormer. Following further discussions, Mr Singh entered into an oral agreement with Mr Pattar to carry out further work for a price of £118,810 (“the Varied Contract”). Although the parties are largely agreed as to the terms of the Varied Contract, there are disputes as to when it was made, whether it was made by Mr Singh as sole principal or as agent for the Claimants and the precise scope of some of the work included in it.

6

In May or June of 2018, work on the project slowed down and interim payments ceased. There is a dispute between the parties as to why this happened. The Claimants allege that the Defendant failed to carry out the work and to remedy work that was defective and was working on other projects. The Defendant alleges that payments had slowed down and then stopped, as Mr Singh could not fund the project. He alleges that he agreed with Mr Singh that the project be suspended for a period while Mr Singh arranged further funds and that he was to return to site when funds were available to pay for the work to continue.

7

Both parties allege that the Varied Contract came to an end as a result of the other party's repudiatory breach of contract. The Claimants allege that the Defendant's failure to attend site and carry out work after 5 June 2018 was repudiation of the Varied Contract. However, their case does not depend on proving repudiatory breach, because they do not claim damages resulting from the termination of the contract. Their claim is for damages for remedial work required as a result of allegedly defective work, repayment of sums allegedly overpaid for the stage of the work reached and damages for delay.

8

The Defendant denies the Claimants were the contracting parties. However, he alleges that, if the Claimants were the contracting parties, they repudiated the contract by failing to make instalment payments as requested and by failing to invite him to return to complete the work. He alleges he had agreed with Mr Singh that he would return to site to complete the work after a few months, but instead received the Claimants' solicitors' letter before action. He claims lost profit on the remainder of the Varied Contract.

The issues

9

The issues that I must determine include:

9.1. whether Mr Singh acted as agent for the Claimants or as sole principal;

9.2. the terms of the Varied Contract and, in particular, whether the various items in dispute were contractual obligations;

9.3. whether either party was in repudiatory breach of the Varied Contract;

9.4. if the Claimants were in repudiatory breach of contract, whether the Defendant is entitled to lost profit and the amount of that profit;

9.5. if Mr Singh contracted as sole principal, whether the Claimants are liable to the Defendant for the value of works carried out, on the basis of unjust enrichment;

9.6. the value of the works carried out by the Defendant for which he is entitled to payment, after deduction of interim payments made;

9.7. whether the work carried out by the Defendant was defective, as alleged by the Claimants;

9.8. if so, the amount of damages that should be awarded to compensate the Claimants for the costs of remedying any defective work;

9.9. whether the Defendant was in breach of contract as a result of delay to the project;

9.10. if so, whether the Claimants are entitled to the damages they claim for delay, or whether any of the heads of damage claimed are too remote to be recoverable.

The evidence

10

I have read those parts of the bundle to which I have been referred.

11

For the Claimants, I heard evidence from both the Claimants, Mr Kang, Mr Singh and Mr Andrew Cronin, the Claimants' architectural technician. For the Defendant, I heard evidence from the Defendant, Mr Christopher Beebee, an electrician who worked for him, and Mr Jaspal Singh, a friend. I also heard evidence from the parties' expert surveyors, being Mr Andrew Bullock for the Claimants, and Mr Surinder Buray for the Defendant.

The contracting parties and agency

12

Mr Brown and Mr Knapman are agreed as to the law that I must apply. They referred me to the case of Siu Yin Kwan v Eastern Insurance [1994] 2 AC 199. An undisclosed principal may sue on a contract made by an agent for the principal acting within the scope of his actual authority, provided the agent intended to act on the principal's behalf. However, in the words of Lord Lloyd of Berwick in that case:

“(5) The terms of the contract may, expressly or by implication, exclude the principal's right to sue, and his liability to be sued. The contract itself, or the circumstances surrounding the contract, may show that the agent is the true and only principal.”

13

There is no doubt, on the evidence before me, that Mr Singh had actual authority from the Claimants to enter into the Initial Contract and the Varied Contract and to act generally as their agents in relation to the project. However, Mr Knapman argues that the circumstances surrounding the Initial Contract and the Varied Contract show that Mr Singh was the true and only principal, so that the Claimants cannot sue on the Initial Contract or the Varied Contract.

14

Mr Pattar's evidence is that Mr Singh told him that he had bought the Property, that he identified the master bedroom that would be his and that Mr Pattar was never told that the Claimants owned the Property. I accept Mr Pattar's evidence that he did not understand the Claimants to own the property, or Mr Singh to be acting as agent for them. However, that does not necessarily mean that the circumstances surrounding the contract indicate that Mr Singh was sole principal. The following facts are relevant to that issue.

14.1. Mr Kang was also involved in the project from the outset. He and Mr Singh met Mr Pattar before the Initial Contract was made. He remained involved throughout the project.

14.2. Mr Kang made all the payments on the Initial Contract before the Varied Contract was made.

14.3. Mr and Mrs Kang visited the property before the Varied Contract was made.

14.4. On 12 January 2018, the Defendant received a copy of the application for planning permission, which named Gurpreet Kaur as the owner of the Property.

14.5. On 16 January 2018, the Defendant received a copy of the appointment of Mr Nick Massey in respect of Building Regulation compliance (Mr Massey having been recommended by the Defendant). The appointment named Gurpreet Kaur as the owner of the property.

15

The position is complicated by the fact that, in August 2018, at a time after the Claimants allege the Defendant had abandoned the contract, the parties entered into discussions in which Mr Singh asked Mr Pattar to produce a written version of the Varied Contract. Shortly before that document was produced, Mr Singh provided the Claimants' names to be included in the document as the contracting parties, and the Defendant simply incorporated those names into the document he produced.

16

At the time that was done, unknown to the Defendant, the Claimants had already had a survey of the drains completed and were unhappy as to their condition. The Defendant argues that, when he was asked to produce the written document, the Claimants and/or Mr Singh and/or Mr Kang...