Summary

The Banks children—Jane, Michael, and the twins, John and Barbara—live at 17 Cherry-Tree Lane in London with their parents. When their nanny leaves, her replacement arrives one evening borne on the east wind. Mary Poppins is vain and often irritable, but within her stern exterior lurk all kinds of delightful wonder. She can slide up banisters, float in the air, step into pictures, stick stars on the sky, and talk to animals. Mary takes the Banks children on a series of magical adventures, such as using a magical compass to travel around the world.

Britannica Quiz

Famous Novels, First Lines Quiz

However, Mary also firmly believes in good behaviour, and disobedience is punished. The children nonetheless adore her. She is not distant and neglectful like their parents, and they find safety within the caring discipline that she brings to their lives. Perhaps most important, her ordered world still allows for exploration and excitement. Notably, when Mary’s birthday coincides with a full moon, the children visit the zoo, and the cages are full of people while the animals wander around looking at them.

Analysis and 1964 film

Travers first introduced Poppins in a 1926 short story and later expanded the character’s adventures into a novel. Travers claimed that she did not write specifically for children and was said to be unhappy with the decision to market the book to younger readers. However, children were enthralled by Poppins’s playful warping of reality and anarchic dismissal of unnecessary rules. The novel’s absurdity also appealed to adult readers, as did Travers’s sly mocking of the way the British middle classes raised their children. Travers wrote seven more books about Mary Poppins, the last one appearing in 1988.

While the 1934 work remains a children’s classic, it is perhaps partly overshadowed by Disney’s 1964 film adaptation, an immensely successful musical that featured Julie Andrews in her Academy Award-winning screen debut. Travers frequently expressed her dislike of the Disney version, especially its saccharine depiction of Poppins. The movie Saving Mr. Banks (2013) highlights Travers’s contentious relationship with Walt Disney during the making of the 1964 film.

Cathy Lowne The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica