Two men from Brooklyn wanted for a flurry of shoplifting incidents in Toms River, Manchester, Springfield as well as in Pennsylvania have been arrested in Ocean County.

Listen to Vin Ebenau mornings on Townsquare Media Jersey Shore Radio Stations, email him news tips here, and download our free app.

Manchester Police said Thursday that Lasha Dekanoidze, 35, and Giorgi Adeishvili, 38, both of Brooklyn, New York turned themselves in after Detective Joseph Fastige was able to communicate with them over the phone.

Investigations have been going on for a while now, as both Brooklyn men have left their calling card footprint in multiple locations and even states.

Their latest theft involved Dekanoidze and Adeishvili stealing over $500.00 worth of over-the-counter cough and cold medications from Rite Aid.

Police were able to obtain surveillance footage of the two men and Patrolman Michael Terranova in the early investigation found out that both suspects were also involved in pharmacy shoplifting incidents in Toms River and Springfield.

Detective Fastige continued the investigation and he found out that various towns in Pennsylvania and New York also had shoplifting incidents involving the same pair.

He worked with Detective Jeff McGee of the Plymouth Township Police Department in PA. to identify the suspects who were then charged by Manchester Police with Dekanoidze and Adeishvili with third degree Shoplifting.

After turning themselves in, Manchester Police said that Dekanoidze, in accordance with New Jersey Bail Reform, was subsequently released on a summons while Adeishvili was transported to the Ocean County Jail pending a detention hearing.

Manchester Police learned through the investigation that Dekanoidze and Adeishvilli have been linked to additional unsolved shoplifting incidents throughout New Jersey as well and the information Detective Fastige gathered has been shared with other law enforcement agencies and "will likely result in future criminal charges."

MTPD received assistance in their investigation from Plymouth Township Police Department (PA), the Lower Merion Township Police Department (PA), the Wright Township Police Department (PA), the Toms River Police Department, the Springfield Township Police Department, and the Rite Aid Organized Retail Crime Investigation section.

Have You Seen Them? Ocean County's Most Wanted