Family Office / Private Office Executive Search, Recruitment and Jobs in Belgium

Belgium isn’t simply the home of chocolate, chips and waffles, it’s also renowned for its incredible employment opportunities, outstanding work-life balance, and high levels of job satisfaction. Situated within close proximity to The Netherlands, France, Germany, Luxembourg and the UK, this is a strategically located country with a modern economy – and is one of the sixth richest countries in the world.

With numerous global companies and international institutions situated here, Belgium offers attractive opportunities for individuals seeking top family office jobs. It attracts many high-skilled staff, which family office businesses are in great need of in order for family office services to be successfully executed.

There are many family office companies located throughout Belgium, all of which offer various family office asset management and alternative investments solutions. If you’re seeking family office roles in Belgium, AP Executive remain on hand to support you with your search.

Our family office executive recruiters have filled numerous roles in Belgium, including, but not limited to:

Chief Operating Officer

Private Family Office Fund Manager

Family Office Private Equity Accountant

Family Office Private Banker

Family Office Finance Accountant

Family Office Wealth Management Specialist

Family Office Asset Management Director

Family Office Financial Services Associate

Family Office Investment Manager

Private Wealth Family Office Lawyer

​

Best Family Office Recruiters

At AP Executive, we understand that finding the right person for a particular role is absolutely essential to the success of your firm. Our top family office recruiters specifically target high-performing individuals that match our clients’ specific criteria.

The globally recognised reputation of our family office headhunters is what enables us to proactively approach and deeply engage with some of the industry’s highest achievers. We pride ourselves on our market knowledge, confidentiality and discretion, which remain of paramount importance throughout the entire recruitment process.

Contact AP Executive to learn about the latest family office vacancies in Belgium or to discuss your staffing needs with one of our consultants.

​