The Belgian Government is buying 23 office buildings from the European Commission to transform them into housing, public facilities, shops and sustainable offices. The aim is to double the number of people living in Brussels' European Quarter.

The buildings previously housed offices – with a total surface area of 300,000 m² – of the European Commission, but 21 of them will soon be converted into a "dynamic district," by Cityforward (SFPIM-Ethias) and Whitewood, into sustainable offices (70%), shops, equipment and housing (30%).

"These additional residential units will ultimately double the number of families in the heart of the European district," the authorities announced in a press release.

This is the starting point of a major redevelopment operation that should lead to sustainable offices by 2028, in which the European institutions can settle and anchor them in Brussels for the coming decades.

Strengthening the capital

It concerns the offices located on Rue Belliard, Rue de Trèves, Avenue Palmerston, Rue Van Maerlant, Rue de la Loi, Rue Joseph II, Rue de Spa, Rue du Luxembourg, Rue Montoyer, Rue Froissart, Place Madou, Rue Demot and Rue de la Science.

The two other buildings, located in Beaulieu (Auderghem), outside the European district, will be transformed solely into "sustainable and affordable" rental and purchase apartments.

The transaction is worth €880 million, to which the price of the transformations is added – bringing the total cost of the project to around €2 billion.

"Through this transformation, we are strengthening the position of our capital as the heart of Europe. We are also responding to the strong demand for diversification and additional housing in the European district," said Laurence Bovy, president of the SFPIM board of directors.

The offices could once again be occupied by the European institutions, while the apartments will number 750 to 800. The first occupants will be able to move in from 2028.

"This project is multifunctional: on the one hand, it will allow the Commission to settle permanently in sustainable buildings, on the other hand it will encourage the arrival of new residents," added Ethias CEO Philippe Lallemand.

Related News

'Alive after five': Brussels launches new 'European Quarter' to revive neighbourhood

Now that the transaction and financing have been completed, the project can really start; the aim is to maintain this programme and work closely with the competent authorities.

The first permits should be obtained in 2026, and the first apartments and offices should be delivered in 2028. Therefore, the first three architectural competitions (including the 'Ilot 130' project) are being launched in May this year, in collaboration with the Brussels Architect Maitre Architecte (BMA).