Bordered by the Netherlands, France and Germany, and close to the United Kingdom, Belgium lies at the intersection of some of the wealthiest territories in Europe and boasts a highly competitive market of its own. Establishing a business in close proximity to some of the world’s major economic powerhouses has its benefits, especially in Belgium, a small, affluent and multicultural gateway to over 500 million customers in Europe.

Access to modern infrastructure, a highly developed transport system and the second most extensive canal network in Europe gives businesses in Belgium the edge. It’s also one of the reasons it’s a prime location for exporting across the EMEA. In addition, the country is known for its simple administrative formalities for start-ups, which means companies are relatively quick and easy to set up.

The country’s workforce is educated and skilled, while its private-enterprise economy offers businesses close proximity to diverse cultures and markets. With an open and highly competitive market, Belgium provides opportunities across the majority of sectors.

Considering setting up a business in this important European hub? Establishing in the country’s capital is an obvious and attractive first choice. A major centre for international politics as the capital of the EU, Brussels is a large urban area with a thriving, service-orientated economy, making it an attractive city for global headquarters, administrative businesses and international non-government organisations.

A prime location with a wide range of local amenities, Brussels is served by 19 municipalities, two airports, three major train stations and an extensive metro, tram and bus network. Traveling to Paris, London and Amsterdam from Brussels is relatively simple, while the capital itself offers business owners everything they need to establish themselves in mainland Europe.

Two of the most popular areas to rent office space in Brussels include the European Quarter, which is home to many EU institutions, and Avenue Louise, which boasts international corporations and luxury retail stores. Co-working is popular in the city with space in a co-working office starting at €300 per person, per month on average. A private serviced office can be found from around €500 per person, per month, inclusive of various amenities.