Bhanubhakta Acharya (Nepali: भानुभक्त आचार्य; 1814 – 1868) was a Nepalese poet and writer who translated the great epic Ramayana from Sanskrit to Khas language. Born in 1814 in Chundi Ramgha, Tanahun District, he was educated at home with a strong leaning towards religion from his grandfather. He is a Bhramin and thus, besides having many contemporary great poets in the country, he is honoured with the title Adikavi (First poet) of Nepal.

Contents

Bhanubhakta acharya 200

Bholi lyrics by bhanubhakta acharya

Bhanu Jayanti

References

Bhanubhakta Acharya was born on 29 Ashar, 1814 in Tanahu district of Nepal. Acharya was born to a Very Brahmin family and received education with a strong leaning towards religion from his grandfather at home. He is honored with the title Adikabi for the contributions he has made in the field of poetry and Khasi literature and every year, his birthday is celebrated as a festival of Bhanujayanti (13 July) by conducting various programs, usually academics and poem recitation. Motiram Bhatta, first referred to him as Adikabi while writing Acharya’s biography in 1981. He clarifies that Acharya is not called Adikabi because he was the first poet in Nepal but he deserved the title as he was the first poet who wrote with an understanding of the marma (inner essence) of the poetry.

The Gorkhali language which termed into present day Nepali was considered bastardized and was limited to speech after the fall of the Khas Empire in the 15th century. Then, most of the written texts of South Asia were dominated by Sanskrit and it had strong influence in Nepal. As the Brahmins were the teachers, scholars and priests of the society because of their caste, their education was based on Sanskrit. Many poets had written poems that was Sanskritized while Acharya started to write in Nepali language which not only popularized the language but also gained him acceptance from the Rana Rulers. Acharya was highly impressed by Ram’s heroic exploitsand he wanted the deity to be more accessible to the people who spoke Nepali and since, most of the people did not understand Sanskrit language, he translated the epic into Nepali language. The translation was so lyrical that rather than sounding like a poem it sounded more like a song.