Full text of "The Whole fungus : the sexual-asexual synthesis"

See other formats

' A : ‘ A, J ' ’ : ‘ ‘ 1 Salata! f " ‘ eee . , rl .* a WN ' ' vase ; F eM " ', Noe : ‘ ees aes y a's Vo vole ges } : - y vent yy esta yyte ads ‘ ‘ ‘ viata tyt ats , *') Pee en hy sy ’ Y Wy slate ny bate eee ha) ay . e's ‘ , Said SEA 8 ory anc) yew ys " Ss aes s ea K ee pe usr gra ehtg , , va rg Me's ‘ Ay ’ i‘ ’ ‘ 4 . LA ’ Sete tate tae j AANA fod, . me vy ead oa Be Wy tetan ht ae a ee ’ ‘ ve Vyaly ey byes vey ee ys ei ar hl a : Cs hy : 'y vg ' ‘ ' ‘ shety'y' ateu's a We : ’ A ] . ‘ . ' bl wy vive walla 7 % . ars Mia A yaw st . P shale Pte kas ? + ed Be ae ‘ ‘ vals : ‘ : ' : : Pohed p A a R an ? ; Aa fahe’s ; ars : . : * ‘> . ¥. i . He . . . we My ; aie ‘ i , i } 17.0 Li 8, axe & a : F ys AMY GRA ; a, , st Y eo ihe ee ' , ‘ » Fi ; 4 Ara gee br nth bel uaa : He Ae 4 we Ge eee ei 4 8 wee te one Deas ene nt Lae 4 i ; : i; eke? Mik " a4 ’ , ‘ nets . é ‘ an ‘ “ es ‘ . ’ rib saat Fl § " teen ea et . ‘ . ‘ ae ae “ i eid i J 1 . A mhpere APTANA ‘ 1 i ; F Pat, erage ‘ . ' “Wp oh i ih . ‘ " ’ i 5 Gt > OA OES S " 3 wy cies . . f Vs me ’ i ‘ as i 95) ’ Gis Var . ‘ ‘ ? ’ . RAL Vin F , vu hath 5 “ ine i : f ‘ ve) ite : ‘ ae > eet . ‘ . . a *) ihe ee 7" Py ae hha Wwe nts y . a , i ' ard b ay Ye eateta rae ‘ PCy Ye Ee | ‘ on A NY ’ ca vey peo oa ° ' . 7 , as a ’ aid ‘ A ee : . briggs ' DUS ae UCN Fa ‘ LJ : , al . ae he A ; a ea rh 4" a ‘ ri SA ‘ sips f iki ng Boot Beak or ' . a 255 Pe tena Ie , ‘ eh ee} cr) ‘ ' is Ory EEE COLE NERY f SOU Ee a baa c ‘ SOA a Cas A} id . : bi ae . BR EH La en a) ‘ 145 F Anes Worries baa ’ ve ’ bree h ae ’ veh ed eee Me : a ‘ Pai i aU antity ites 4°04 ia ' belay Oa ‘ ree Ves ’ a , ’ 4 arr Mas Wy : ' ‘ § bet ita ee , ' he . 74) voy 8 Sia ‘ bat i ke Weve CE ‘s ned ' i . ‘ s eA Z ’ Us, . aia wi a5 ‘ ‘ t tae i ' . I f 4 is 4 i Se ne wise ‘Se eeN eT) gee 0 Ww oe 1 . , ! . afee vr ‘ + "4 of See , ay ia vas eet EOE ES tina i ; ‘ . ‘ L ‘ % i pyRshcay . ‘ ; ; ‘ : E is aed Uae ine f . ou H ' " fh ony ys . ry ‘ t ‘ } a x . ' ’ ‘ as ih “ . . ‘tay PY 7 ¥ hi ne ‘ . ; : ' ony wi ri) Sat t : i ato Fb uss eae canna ' 1 CS at ees CA Daa i ‘ \ i ' MSY ' . " ‘ ‘ ‘ ' : RAL VeVi ' a) ‘ ’ i‘ y en 16 ee ark Pa , we yee a iat While tah . pe ee ‘ ’ oy a ‘ ert oto ane Ar RAAT U eto 5 ey aS) an Lin Harbard Ahibersity | Volume 1 Edited by Bryce Kendrick 1979 National Museum of Natural Sciences National Museums of Canada, Ottawa, Canada and The Kananaskis Foundation Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2014 https://archive.org/details/wholeftungussexua01 kend The Whole Fungus Kananaskis II The Whole Fungus The Sexual-Asexual Synthesis Proceedings of the Second International Mycological Conference held at the Environmental Sciences Centre of the University of Calgary Kananaskis, Alberta, Canada Edited by Bryce Kendrick Co-published by National Museum of Natural Sciences, National Museums of Canada and the Kananaskis Foundation Volume 1 (c) National Museums of Canada 1979 Published by the National Museum of Natural Sciences National Museums of Canada Ottawa, Canada K1A OM8& Catalogue No. NM92-69/1979-1 Available by mail from W.B. Kendrick Department of Biology University of Waterloo Waterloo, Canada N2L 3G1 (c) Musées nationaux du Canada 1979 Publié par le Musée national des Sciences naturelles Musées nationaux du Canada Ottawa, Canada K1A OM8 N° de catalogue NM92-69/1979-1 L'editeur remplit les commandes postales adressées au W.B. Kendrick Faculté de Biologie Université de Waterloo Waterloo, Canada N2L 3G1l FARLOW REFERENCE LIBRARY AUG 16 9/9 Printed in Canada ISBN 0-660-00146-2 Published by the National Museums of Canada for the Kananaskis Foundation Imprimé au Canada ISBN 0-660-00146-2 Publié par les Musées nationaux pour le Kananaskis Foundation Contents 10 Er 12 13 Volume 1 PIERS G WME COME tao Meee det eet YeMeeee <edetelenenctalo oi hellc)-2) <1 2"01 «sic, cate. lle el'el'e, coe" ele rae oc) ee sliebeVovtls ‘aleleve-d-e ae Menberseof thes Conference and Contributing: Authorses.s so incon s cece ec ceees sence’ Introduction Bo ree EEN) ROL Os Kcoretetearronve notte forex ecre\ cols: atte oust voile teueloh shel ey a} evs) cuel ehereiler spt cells, 806) o)eFeud eS we Ew wis oe & O 8 eas ital Pleomorphism of fungi as treated in the history of mycology and nomenclature ERNE RE SUB mGmiKea At IUROZYNOKID, cobs toxopvelaraicre cover -ucverelejere, cue le./e) «.'elai'sS ys aoe, so o/s wale sJeapeaes 17 Terms for states and forms of fungi, their names and types Petree NE DE ResGas leks WE REO U Baretta ssarcvensvehsiacrsierol stele) efeke ye) olclie!s sileve\e versie sinieiietele/S aie brs, oneve oe 27 Cross-reference names for pleomorphic fungi PRAM VECOUL GEL Es Iyer anstc cre ofsle cee isis sueuck= ayrcajeieissarehels eve) cust aveyelo%e\s 6's. al\s aol SV 5's, ies wig ana eal do we wees SHINE Morphological terms in Fungi Imperfecti Drmmiener lO Ktsgw lies NAG RAI. oxcrs <iareratsic terereiel antsy cls idl aia.e 3 s4/e)ls!'e; ¢/ohsis eaevays ei sos ais ae 6.6 oe ars 43 An appraisal of the taxonomic significance of some different modes of producing blastic conidia bul WALLET 2 Gee Gd de cod S Ce DiC OG BD ERO loNe) ONEAGIS IG se NGI LORS OOM CCTM ICR ra 63 Dod oll. VEIN) ochoia euchtee orn trie. sree tie RS TRO ORS en Dn RR aa ee 81 A biogeographic view of the history of Ascomycetes and the development of their pleomorphism Ret are WO NS NO leaicy tl 7 Ke RE OL) Bimiay chsfstel ays atials| ebatisliayaiay'aalaterreh d alae) che}e\'e-alinkelenc aaiéfelaleletews oie ave 93 Phialidic Hyphomycetes and their teleomorphs -- an analysis PRA MECVIESIOU ANIL Nios MMW au AS Aci cuahat hops ovsaci uo. Ment lsne/ ejb b tiake) +ieTesife sia Sie “la! Se aneialele abate ere +o teas 125 Plectomycetes and their anamorphs Wiis OI Sa Sees Ot oo Memo oO: OD oe 0 De OED DPE DD CONIC CRuCICR Ree RCC I Sry Caan ae 153 Conidia and classification of the nectrioid fungi eee OLE eee T ae OSMAN ) 6.2 arta. ahi aya wiley OG oe so Bee S¥Gle See Pe ebedearesecwes 167 Somé coelomycetous anamorphs and their teleomorphs Sli Leena SUSE AR Reece sa astaye fet Patou sie 0) slate o1 ¢ sic ox4 v0! cFs. 30 0/2! 6 6lleipva) ole «|e S10 sie dua%sieie so die ees ee 183 Ascomycetes as Fungi Imperfecti J WOE ESC a aE Cn Gee Soe OI CIE U,e 0 Oe OD RODD OI ONDE OCR CARO nN crc co, Chol eae enCa 201 14 15 16 IMG Deductive classification -- worked examples using anamorph and teleomorph data in the Ascomycetes GiSis. DE (HOOG a: ssiis torsos: ai eheue elle oes seesers cieho sre vevote| sieis)casienqrehe ener she oncteneneerere (+) ele renee Tenens 215 Deuteromycetes and their relationships BisSig UTTRED IL) ose 5 xoereis105, 5: ove te seneater ov enotewelonets) o1 e/ keno) etal ucl setone te peien Towels coieee Ue iat scene taste 241 Factors inducing asexual and sexual sporulation in fungi (mainly Ascomycetes) Bee) IMU <2 a) oie: ce tee aie = ore <.01 ore, 0)1a).0) 1s) oa tel'ejetrelies} Sie botel elle) cone keys) ialroNeiiotalio( cheno omeR nk tet aie weme ne ts kata meee 265 Teleomorph-anamorph connections in Ascomycetes B. KENDRICK §& F. DICOSMO with the Unitunicate and Bitunicate Committees O£ HKananaskisa= LT eae yee ove: ww: aijesos: oss) sieirot shioete ia\feslos eMcirotecouenetolre olen em sW ch ucliote teliettetetrcte Metee nse seen teme 283 Acknowledgments I am enduringly grateful to all members of the Kananaskis-II Conference for their individual contributions, written and spoken, without which neither Conference nor book would have materialized. I also want to thank Drs. Descals, Rossman, Samuels, Savile and Wang who, though they were not at Kananaskis, yet wrote or co-authored invaluable supplementary chapters at my request. Dr. Dennis Parkinson of the Biology Department, University of Calgary, most generously and altruistically provided essential logistical and financial support, as he did for Kananaskis-I in 1969. A National Research Council of Canada Conference Grant also made it possible for some of our overseas participants to attend. Dr. Gordon Hodgson, Director of the Kananaskis Environmental Research Centre, kindly made its accommodations available to us. Two of my graduate students, Frank DiCosmo and John Michaelides, cheerfully and indefatigably drove forth and back, transporting conferees between Calgary and Kananaskis, and on our mid-Conference foray through the Rockies (which was again sponsored by Dr. Parkinson). The publication of this book has been undertaken by the National Museum of Natural Sciences (National Museums of Canada), with assistance from the Kananaskis Foundation. I applaud this enlightened investment in Mycology by our National Museum, and I trust that the mycological community will assure the Museums that their support is appreciated. I also thank the University of Waterloo Research Grant Subcommittee and the Department of Biology for invaluable support. The permission granted by many authors and journals for the reproduction of illustrations is acknowledged. Mss. Glenna Huth and Sheila Mackenzie valiantly began the typing of the gargantuan manuscript of this book, and Ms. Wilma Long expertly completed it. I am deeply appreciative of the long hours devoted by all three to this project. The reader will gain some idea of the quality of their work from the knowledge that the entire book has been printed by photo- offset directly from their typescript. Finally, I am grateful to my students and colleagues in the Mycology laboratory at Waterloo, and to my wife and two children, for their support and forbearance during the preparation of this book. For those mistakes and misinterpretations that have inevitably crept into this book, I accept sole responsibility. Members of the Conference and Contributing Authors Dr. Dr. Dr. Dies Mr. Mr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Dire Da. Mr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. J.A. von Arx, Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures, Postbus 273, Baarn, Netherlands. R.K. Benjamin, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden, Claremont, California, 91711, U.S.A. J.W. Carmichael, Mold Herbarium and Culture Collection, Department of Medical Bacteriology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2H7. Wm. B. Cooke, 1135 Wilshire Ct., Cincinnati, Ohio 45230, U.S.A. E. Descals, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4PS, England. F. DiCosmo, Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, N2L 3Gl. G.L. Hennebert, Laboratoire de Mycologie Systématique et Appliqué, Université de Louvain, B-1438 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. G.S. de Hoog, Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures, Postbus 273, Baarn, Netherlands. B. Kendrick, Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, N3L 3Gl. E.S. Luttrell, Department of Plant Pathology and Plant Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602, U.S.A. M.F. Madelin, Department of Botany, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1UG, England. D. Malloch, Department of Botany, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S lAl. J. Michaelides, Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, N2L 3Gl. E. Muller, Institut flr Spezielle Botanik, Eidg. Technische Hochschule, Universitdtstrasse 2, CH-8006, Zurich, Switzerland. T.R. Nag Raj, Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, N2L 3Gl. K.A. Pirozynski, Palaeontology Division, National Museums of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A OM8. A.Y. Rossman, Plant Pathology Herbarium, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, U.S.A. Dr. G. Samuels, Plant Diseases Division, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Private Bag, Auckland, New Zealand. Dr. D.B.O. Savile, Mycology Unit, Biosystematics Research Institute, Central Experimental Farm, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A OC6. Dr. C.V. Subramanian, Centre for Advanced Studies in Botany, University of Madras, Madras 600005, India. Mrs. C.J.K. Wang, College of Environmental Science and Forestry, State University of New York, Syracuse, New York 13210, U.S.A. Dr. R. Watling, Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, EH3 SLR, Scotland. Dr. J. Webster, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4PS, England. Dr. L.K. Weresub, Mycology Unit, Biosystematics Research Institute, Central Experimental Farm, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A OC6. ’ a ‘Ti av rset ie ao1ee : 1 84 ‘ — hen tank coll eae y ~~ ‘ Re bd ies 2tlee ee AL | Jini) cpio. ¥, af ; 1:10 > in a ae oy Fahors" > ae ure egret Ietecores esa? WW egel io? , & 2.0 Gittd teO cee pee hwo (tt .26eree leat Tnesati’ mai@ tbr; Mm i als , “weer ee 10° 1 Introduction Bryce Kendrick The fungi are at last coming into their own. Their unique biochemistry and lifestyle have now been recognized by the introduction, and widespread acceptance among biologists, of a separate kingdom -- Fungi. This must have come as something of a shock to many mycolo- gists who had become accustomed to being treated as peripheral, both to the main thrusts of biological thought and, perhaps even more important, its administrative subdivisions. Most of us who teach in Biology Departments have been thought of as appendages of the botanical fraternity. And we have usually accepted this role, probably for lack of any viable alter- native. Now it is up to us to assert our new-found independence. Since we are a small minority among the biological fraternity, this assertion must be both subtle and rational. It would be neither politic nor practical to secede unilaterally. That would simply be counter-productive. But I think there may some day be Subdepartments or even Departments of Mycology just as there are Departments of Bacteriology today. How can I base such a forecast on the simple accession of our discipline to a still largely theoretical throne? Would we not be likely to share the fate of 'The Man Who Would Be King'? Fortunately, our case is not built on theory alone. In recent years the practical importance of the fungi has become more and more obvious. We mycologists have always known of, and have doubtless spoken eloquently about, their vital role in the silent, all-pervading but largely invisible processes of biological recycling. But other biologists are becoming increasingly aware that fungi are important to their disciplines. Here are some examples. The ecology of streams and ponds has acquired a new dimension with the discovery that the fungi are vital intermediaries in energy flow, 'conditioning' the allochthonous organic mat- ter which is often the main energy base of these systems, and making it both palatable and nutritious to the detritivorous benthic invertebrates. While it was once assumed that the bacteria did most of the work in sewage treatment, we now know that there is an enormous fungal biomass at work, and there is even some suggestion that this may play a dominant role in the trickling filter and activated sludge processes. Medical mycology has undergone a resurgence in recent years because of the universal use of antibacterial antibiotics, and the consequent emergence and recognition of certain mycoses as an intractable, or at least troublesome, residuum. The advent of immunosuppressive ther- apy for certain serious medical problems has given some opportunistic fungal pathogens the 11 chance they needed to invade, and sometimes kill, the defenceless patient. The pathogenic activities of fungi on Man's crop plants has been important since the dawn of agriculture. But with increasing mechanization, and the concomitant spread of mono- cultures over huge areas, the harmful potential of fungal plant diseases has automatically been augmented. Growing concern with environmental toxicology, generated largely by the widespread use of pesticides and fungicides, has generated increased interest in biological control. The para- sitic activities of many fungi on plants (weeds), arthropods (pests) and other fungi (patho- gens) make them of actual or potential importance in this field. Toxicologists have recently become aware that the growth of some common moulds on food- stuffs leads to their contamination with dangerous -- even carcinogenic -- fungal metabolites such as Aflatoxin. This has invested those fungi that attack stored food with a new and more sinister significance. We now know that the vast majority of higher plants, with the exception of a few weedy families, are mycorrhizal, and that the fungi involved can materially assist the plant to obtain phosphorus from soils deficient in that element. Fungi are being increasingly exploited by industry for the enzymes, organic acids, vita- mins, antibiotics and other useful substances they produce. And I cannot leave out the cultivation of agarics and yeasts for food, since these are industries of some substance. But of course we shall know that our discipline has really arrived when the layman no longer asks ‘What's mycology?', and recognizes that the fungi comprise more than the familiar ‘mushrooms and toadstools'. As the Kingdom Fungi becomes an undoubted ‘eminence grise' (though not, on balance, a "béte noire'), more and more demands are being made on systematists. Identification, of species pathogenic to plants, animals and humans, of toxin-producers, and of many other ecologically important taxa, has become increasingly important. And, because science always seeks patterns amid diversity, so has the need for an over-all, unifying, predictive scheme of classification for these organisms. The charge is sometimes levelled that taxonomy is not science but stamp-collecting, that it is concerned mainly with the accumulation of superficial observations and their arrangement in patterns that please the arranger, and that it is largely irrelevant to the concerns of science with a capital S. Like many such outrageous statements, this one contains a grain of truth. At certain levels of the taxonomic hierarchy, the decisions of reputable individual taxonomists as to what constitutes, or delineates, taxa, can be intensely personal statements, whose nature depends on whether their author is a 'splitter' or a 'lumper' at the time (people can drift slowly between these extremes with the passage of time). But although such taxo- nomic decisions may be idiosyncratic, and though they may remain unchallenged for years, in the long run the self-pruning feature that so clearly differentiates science from most other human activities will come into play. Because it is my belief that biological systematics incorporates and reflects -- or must at least take into account -- the full range of bio- logical knowledge. As the scope of this knowledge increases, so the number of possible alter- native phylogenies (and thus the number of alternative phyletically based classifications) WZ shrinks. We are still far from agreement about the ultimate shape of our taxonomic scheme (and about the nomenclature with which to express it) -- any reader of this book will be made forcefully aware of those realities. But today when we argue, we often do it from a far more rational base than would have been possible even at the time of Kananaskis-I. And make no mistake, we are now accumulating the evidence we need at an unprecedented rate. When I began preparations for Kananaskis-II, no Coelomycetes with basidiomycetous affinities were known. Now we have three examples (not all published, as yet). New information on fungal biochemis- try, genetics, physiology, ecology, and anamorph-teleomorph relationships, is appearing almost weekly. And although we have not yet reconciled our various taxonomic systems (par- ticularly of Ascomycetes), the germs of such a reconciliation already exist. We may still have to cope with two, or a few, contending schemes, but we do not carry the burden of accumulated theories that weighs down, for example, the psychologists, who have obviously found it more difficult to test and prune their hypotheses than to generate them. This ad- vantage should not make us smug -- merely thankful that the data we need are apparently more accessible. But the facts still do not of themselves or by themselves create a system for us. That is one of Man's conceits (as they used to be called, with uncomfortable accuracy). We now prefer to call such things concepts -- a word with a more objective ring to it. There must still, however, be room for the intuition born of experience, and the often rather divergent ideas expressed in this book show that the boredom born of unanimity and uniformity has not yet set in among mycologists. Nonetheless, the message is that fungal taxonomy is becoming more scientific and, because science aims for predictive generalizations, more satisfying to its practitioners as well as more useful to its potential customers. But we have some unique problems. The idea of a single genotype with two or even more very different phenotypes is certainly wonderful, but it is hardly strange. Every child over the age of five is familiar with the caterpillar which will change into a butterfly, the tadpole which will become a frog. But those changes, and thousands like them, have the feeling of inevitability about them. We know that caterpillars can't choose to remain caterpillars just because they like eating and wish to continue this delightful activity. We know that there is an internal clock which determines when the metamorphosis will take place. And our children can await its onset with a pleasurable thrill of anticipation. But what of an organism that may metamorphose or may not? What of an organism that may stubbornly maintain two (and sometimes more) different, separate but absolutely contemporary phenotypes? The fungi are such creatures, and Kananaskis-II concerned itself with the problems raised by such intransigence and individual- ity. The title of this book says, in a nutshell, what our aim was and is -- to reunite the different phenotypes, at least conceptually, and to use all of the data thus made available in the elaboration and refinement of our classificatory schemes. What the title does not say is that we have only begun, and that our first attempts, as documented in this book, are still the uncertain and poorly directed steps of a child learning to walk. But just as the child persists, so shall we. Our feet are now resolutely set on the path to a unified scheme, and I hope mycologists at large will join us on our pilgrimage. The lists of sexual-asexual connections (Chapters 17 and 20) are the most comprehensive yet published, incomplete and ILS inaccurate as they may be. Here is a start, here are some ideas, some analyses, some syntheses. I dedicate them to the next generation -- the holomycologists -- who will be trained to look at things from both sides. As the progenitor of the first Kananaskis Conference in 1969, I found the meeting an auth- entic high -- almost a transcendental experience. I remember an ambience of excitement, a feeling of camaraderie, and a sustained intellectual intensity. I can only hope that some traces of that spirited interplay can be detected in the book 'Taxonomy of Fungi Imperfecti' that eventually arose from the Conference. Because once the curtain came down on those halcyon days and we exchanged that clear, rarefied atmosphere for the (relative) smog of our normal daily round, it grew increasingly difficult to recapture the authentic Kananaskis feeling. Tape transcription dragged on over weeks and then months. Authors wanted more time to re-cast their chapters. Editorial conferences proliferated. And when the book finally appeared (an event satisfying in itself) the Editor could have been forgiven for swearing off such activities for life. As I now look back on Kananaskis-II, and as its book slowly grinds toward publication, I find myself wondering why I had ‘let myself in for it' again. Why, after the drudgery of editing and proofreading a 300-page book am I now engaged in a lineal descendant ('Son of Kananaskis') that looks as if it will be about twice as long? Perhaps authors and editors should admit to some masochistic tendencies. Perhaps there is a need to expiate some name- less sin; perhaps there is an eremitic undercurrent in us. Certainly work on this book has cut me off at times from the several spheres of research being pursued by my students and colleagues in my laboratory. It has caused other worthy projects to be delayed or shelved for the duration. And yet I probably would not have had it otherwise. I believe that the efforts, of authors and editor, that went into the first book were not wasted. Despite an outrageously high price, that title is now almost out of print. And Kananaskis-II was just as exciting as I thought it would be. I am delighted to be able to bring you the thoughts of my colleagues at the Conference, and of those who have subsequently provided supplementary chapters. There seems to have been a certain inevitability about the whole thing. Almost before the ink was dry on the Kananaskis-I book, people began to ask me 'When is Kananaskis-II going to be?' and 'What will it be about?' Such questions, if repeated often enough, have a tendency to generate answers. Kananaskis-I had followed the Seattle Botanical Congress. Eight years later, Kananaskis-II convened after the Tampa Mycological Congress (IMC2), and ran from September 8th - 13th, 1977, at the Kananaskis Environmental Sciences Centre of the Univer- sity of Calgary. Once again Dr. Dennis Parkinson was instrumental, not merely in making local arrangements, but in supplying logistical support without which the Conference would have been much less enjoyable, and might not, in fact, have taken place at all. The venue was as breathtakingly beautiful as we remembered it; the weather was of truly ‘Indian Summer' opulence, an ideal combination of crisp, frosty nights and warm, expansive, sunny days; those gathered together were among the cream of systematic mycologists. Even the fungi collaborated, fruiting prodigally in the local forests after an unusually wet summer: before and during the Conference we ran many short but extremely productive impromptu forays. In short, all environmental factors combined to set the scene for a 14 fruitful meeting. Perhaps by posing a few questions I can give you some idea of what you may expect to find as you browse through the twenty-seven chapters that follow. Do you know what anamorphs, teleomorphs and holomorphs are? These terms are central to the theme of the book, and are defined in Chapter 3. Do you know for how long the phenomenon of pleomorphism has exercised the minds of myco- logists; and how ancient it is? These questions are answered in Chapters 2 and 26, respect- ively. Do you know how to differentiate scolecospores and helicospores from other Saccardoan spore types? You'll find what we hope are unequivocal delineations in Chapter 5. Do you know that one method of conidium development can be transmuted into another; and that the same fungus can use two techniques concurrently? These important 'aberrations' are discussed in Chapters 6 and 7, respectively. Incidentally, these chapters firmly establish that conidium ontogeny cannot, after all, form the base on which a stable classification of Fungi Imperfecti might be erected. Do you know how present-day distributions of fungi can be interpreted in terms of plate tectonics ('continental drift')? This is attempted in Chapter 8. Do you know how classifications of ascomycetous anamorphs and teleomorphs affect one another? Chapters 9 - 12, 15 and 17 address this question. Do you know that the basic Ascomycotan dichotomy between unitunicates and bitunicates can be challenged? Chapter 13 shows where. Do you know that certain physiological factors stimulate sporulation in some fungi, but suppress it in others? Chapter 16 presents incontrovertible evidence. Do you know that the 'aquatic' (or, preferably, '‘amphibious') Hyphomycetes include some of the best examples of convergent evolution in the whole of the fungi? The evidence is given in Chapter 18. Do you know that Agarics (and many other Basidiomycetes) also possess anamorphs? Chapters 19, 20 and 21 are concerned with these unjustifiably neglected life-forms. Do you know that some 'yeasts' are entirely mycelial? Chapter 22 should convince you. Do you know that a kind of 'dolipore' septum is found among the Zygomycetes? Chapter 23 discusses this phenomenon. Do you know why we should stop calling the 'pseudo-taxa' of Fungi Imperfecti, 'form- species' and 'form genera'? Chapters 26 and 27 will tell you. Has that string of questions whetted your appetite? I hope so. It has been with a sense of excitement that I have seen this book through its period of gestation, because I now believe that the future of taxonomy in the ‘higher fungi' lies in the integration of data streams which have long flowed parallel, widening and deepening with the years, but never really meeting. I think I see the first signs of a confluence. 15 ? “) Vee oi!) mcm ie, eli om ) eet eee 7 ie eek Oretw aif ss ia dye paw a? edt 51 ee cebs ion ibel ine gia - Srtitugly 1 = ae ee a wee ee ee cha Live > «= 064 coup ere anak, «eth» pyle is if. eee OR COT OF & 6 cat Son Betty 1 hat ven} ike eegtt pee : a och ots ere gah ‘8 cy. My ei LRT eS aA, WP <= “AY lata AS Riepessioereon ecm ; aes : we ate a id ‘ re: Cajon Rae. 4 . rai eer od yen Acocdbates ies weet ite an ee 1 Se oe bag 16 2 Pleomorphism of Fungi as Treated in the History of Mycology and Nomenclature L.K. Weresub & K.A. Pirozynski "A single well known and well developed species, correctly observed through all the stages of its growth, is of greater value than a new genus" Fries, Summa Veg. Scand. 1849, p. 427 The appropriate introduction to this meeting is the Tulasne brothers' (Tulasne §& Tulasne 1861) Selecta Fungorum Carpologia, the theme of which, you will remember, was the presenta- tion of ''those facts and illustrations which go to prove that various kinds of fruits and seeds are produced, either simultaneously or in succession, by the same fungus''. Regrettably, our age is such that few of us are familiar with this supreme classical work. Therefore, we will borrow liberally from it in this brief review, first, of the history of mycologists' awareness of the phenomenon of pleomorphism, and then, of the problems created by it in com- munication, in classification and nomenclature. ITS MYCOLOGICAL HISTORY The early mycologist could not fail to observe the diversity of propagules borne by the fungi he came to know. But his interpretation of this diversity was moulded by the Linnaean pre- cept (Tulasne §& Tulasne 1861:48) denying "'that one and the same race could have different fructifications,"' and asserting that "'the basis of fructification ... is also the basis of . the natural classes of plants''. In order to conform to this doctrine of "one (kind of) fructification/one (kind of) plant'', and to preserve the hegemony of the ''seed'' as the product of that fructification, early mycologists had to resort to everything from a dishonest disre- gard of facts to ingenious intellectual acrobatics. The foundation for establishing the precedence of one form as the significant propagule was laid in the first decade of the 19th century by Link and Willdenow, who were willing to equate "fungus spore" with "seed", provided that the spore, like the seed, was the result of fertilization. Thus arose the question of which of the fungus propagules was worthy of the rank of seed. This issue remained open for more than half-a-century; as late as 1858, Bail contended that the problem would be solved only when the answer was found to the question of whether fungi had sex. Long before that answer came, mycologists had decided what kind of propagule should rightfully represent the species. And by divine intervention or common fluke, they chose what turned out to be the sexually generated spore. 17 Fries's concept of pleomorphism was fuzzy and fluid, for he could not bring himself to com- mit the heresy of admitting that more than one kind of ''seed'' could occur in a single species. He advocated the concept of a gradual metamorphosis of propagules, culminating in true spores, and -- until 1849 -- maintained that fungi retaining "incompletely metamorphosed" propagules were merely ''degenerate states'' of the 'more perfect fungi’. Yet, he would not go so far as to unite these imperfectly developed forms with their completed counterparts: he named the former separately, though he classified them together. Corda (1842:35) found, among the approximately 3000 fungi that he studied, only two that -- as the Tulasnes (1861:46) put it -- 'besides true seeds had also seeds of inferior rank, i.e. conidia". In announcing the discovery of pleomorphism, Tulasne (1851) reserved the term "spores'' for ascus-borne propagules, and adopted several other terms (used by Fries and others) to describe "less noble" propagules, conidia or, as he called them later, "buds re- sembling spores''. Berkeley (1857:235, 268-269), on the other hand, to whom Ascomycetes were also the "more perfect fungi'', labelled their ascospores "'sporidia'’ in order to distinguish them from ordinary ''spores''. The Tulasnes (1861) concurred that the production of free ascospores inside asci constitu- ted a ''more perfect"' method of propagation and one characteristic of "the noblest Fungi''. These they compared with other "finished" or "perfect plants" such as trees, etc. And, on at least one occasion, they had no doubt about the identity of another kind of propagule: on discovering conidia of Cordyceps milttarts, they did not hesitate to describe the Isarta as "merely conidiiferous and imperfect". However, neither Fries nor the Tulasnes advocated taxonomic dismemberment of species accor- ding to different phases in their life cycle. Fries, it will be remembered, "never disting- uished genera, and scarcely ever species by the presence or absence of asci, when the latter [i.e., absence of asci] indicates an abnormal state" (Tulasnes 1861:55), and thought it super- fluous to cite "innumerable Sphaeropsidei" that "outwardly mimic exactly the true Sphaeriae" (Tulasnes 1861:59). The Tulasnes were even more emphatic about the need to keep together all phases of the same fungus, although -- unlike Fries -- they did not consider conidial states abnormal, but thought the fungus merely "not fully developed and not bearing [the] proper fruit" of ''autonomous, complete or perfect fungi''. They, therefore, strongly condemned the actions of Corda (1842), Léveillé (1846), Duby (1851) and Bonorden (1851), who separated con- idial and ascophorous forms according to what the Tulasnes called "a misconceived criterion". Thus, to the Tulasnes, this separate classification occurring at the same time that pleomor- phism was demonstrated, constituted a denial that the "naked-spored types have each at the proper time its own ascophorous associate". The taxonomic and nomeclatural separation ("against the laws of nature'’, said the Tulasnes) of sexual and asexual expressions -- a separation initiated by Corda -- is not without justi- fication. It was Berkeley (1857:247, 282, 330-331) who noted that some ''Sphaerias" existed in either ascigerous or conidial states, and he expressed doubt that all pycnidial forms could be linked with their respective ascophorous states. He would, therefore, consider such pycnidial fungi as "autonomous and perfect species", but others, correlated, simply as imperfect forms of their "Sphaeriae''. The Tulasnes (1861:77) apparently agreed: ''Let us grant that there are true Verticillia which never become changed into Hypomycetes or Hypocreae, may we then hold 18 that they are nothing else than imperfect Hypomycetes or Hypocreae? By no means, unless you speak from analogy; for every species, however lowly, was created perfect in itself ... and does not seem to us imperfect except in comparison with a nobler species". Commenting on a statement of Klotzsch about Selerotium durum as "unworthy of the name of fungus'', the Tulasnes (1861:105) disagreed, "unless what he means is a perfect fungus''. Thus, with a general recog- nition and acceptance of the phenomenon of pleomorphism, separate names for asexual forms were retained, but primary importance was accorded the name given to the ascophorous form, whose characteristics were the taxonomic basis for classification of pleomorphic fungi. The acceptance of Tulasne's doctrine "of the multiple nature of the seeds of Fungi" re- quired "not only the strongest lenses and the acutest eyes, but also a patient, acute, and skilful mind, long continued observations, and repeated experiments" (Tulasnes, 1861:188). It therefore worried them that some mycologists accepting the doctrine of pleomorphy might be tempted to postulate affiliation without adequate evidence, so that "the pleasant edifice" of the doctrine might "be added to day by day and weighted with absurd increments, so as at length to collapse under its own weight". But in addition, they, like Fries, also feared that some mycologists might choose to disregard the doctrine and be satisfied to trust "a safe criterion" for prematurely judging imperfect states to be autonomous. What the Tulasnes anticipated and dreaded came to pass. The fate of asexual elements as a separate group of fungi was sealed with Fuckel's (1870) recognition of ''Fungi Imperfecti" and "Fungi Perfecti'', and the adoption for the former of a separate class, Deuteromycetes, by Saccardo. Although the fungi classified as Fungi Imperfecti came to be considered parts, stages, states, phases or forms of sexual fungi, Saccardo classified them according to a sys- tem that replicated the one adopted for sexually reproducing species. It was a system that was intended by Saccardo to be no more than an artificial key. Nevertheless, those of his contemporaries who favoured a more natural arrangement must have been dissatisfied with such equality. This unease may have been the reason behind Schroeter's (1897:481) use of ''Formgat- tung" (apparently from earlier use of Formgenus in palaeontology) prefixed as ''FG'"' to the name of every genus of Fungi Imperfecti. When International Rules were enunciated for the nomenclature of fungi (Brussels Code 1912), they dealt with the problem of naming pleomorphic fungi by proclaiming "special arran- gements'' in accordance with the dominating philosophy of the time. The examples that fol- lowed Art. 49 bis revealed this philosophy most clearly, for Melampsora, Phyllachora and Dia- porthe were referred to as generic names for genera, whereas Aectdiun, Caeoma, Uredo, Poly- thrinetum and Phoma were merely names for [imperfect] states (see Rogers 1948:241, footnote). And the word "genus" is used only once with reference to these form-genera, and then in quota- tion marks. The distinction made is striking, almost as clear as if Schroeter's use of the prefix ''FG"' had been adopted. The prevailing taxonomic philosophy was entrenched in this Article. Fungi Imperfecti could be given names, but these were to be taken as only ''pseudo- specific" and "pseudo-generic" names (Donk 1960a). It was the legalization of an "anatomical system" for Fungi Imperfecti, paralleling the "botanical system" of nomenclature (Hennebert 1971) for Fungi Perfecti. Nevertheless, this legalization did mean that -- just at a time when facilities for study were expanding throughout the world -- the dispensation of international permission, if not recommendation, had been granted to mycologists to name imperfect states of fungi (in ''species"' 19 and "'genera'') separately from species and genera of sexually reproducing fungi. As mycology and plant pathology boomed, vast numbers of imperfect forms were discovered and named separ- ately. Although Uredinales received names of both kinds, it was primarily Ascomycetes that were involved in the drastic segregation of forms, and ever-widening gaps divided not only these fungi but also those who studied them, splitting specialists in Fungi Imperfecti from ascomycetologists. There was a growing tendency to ignore the original emphasis on the dis- tinction between the pseudo-taxa of Fungi Imperfecti and the taxa of Fungi Perfecti. Eventu- ally, as consideration of phyletic relationships regained popularity, many form-taxa become liberated from the admitted artificiality that had been their base, and they began to compete for a place in a more natural classification as if they were themselves botanical taxa. Only now are we slowly returning to Tulasne's aim of grouping together, under one name, the dis- junct phases of pleomorphic fungi. Indeed, it is not the special arrangements in the Brussels Code that should be blamed for the two nomenclatural series for pleomorphic fungi. The problem of dual nomenclature (and taxonomy) surfaced with Tulasne's demonstration of pleomorphism in 1851, and even then preven- ted mycologists from introducing change that would disrupt the existing nomenclatural stabili- ty. The paradox of the status quo was expressed by the Tulasnes in 1861: while maintaining that it was an error when "stages of the same fungus have often been indiscreetly placed apart in different classes under different names'', they admitted that "we have not yet found out what is the best view to take about the numerous fungi which so far appear to be merely conidiophorous, and what criterion is to be trusted, so that we may safely arrange them in the most suitable place in the system". Lind (1913:44) wrote of the attempts to resolve the problem: ''Rostrup often occupied himself in searching for the proper relation of the higher form of fructification and the fungi imperfecti; and several mycologists are still engaged in finding the hitherto unknown relations. I have made great effort to find as many reliable statements as possible concerning this matter, thinking that, through analogical forms, it might be easy to state to a certain probability whether other connected forms belong to each other or not, when, for instance, a whole series of 'species' of Fustcladium have been proved to be conidial forms of species of Venturta it might be rather probable that all 'species' of Fusteladtum would belong to Venturia". Perhaps the crux of our modern problem is that, unlike Lind, we now omit the quotation marks around ''taxa'' of Fungi Imperfecti, and have ceased to refer to them as ''forms"'. But in any case, the Brussels Code simply gave formal recognition to the customary way of handling the problem of naming pleomorphic fungi, and the adoption of the type method (in the Cambridge Rules, 1935, and on) reinforced the dichotomy of the separate nomenclatural systems, anatomical for Fungi Imperfecti and botanical for Fungi Perfecti. The dual system, or some form of it, will probably always be with us. But having reached a point where we have some- what more data about pleomorphism than was available to Tulasne, a reassessment of our termi- nology and nomenclature as a reflection of our taxonomic approach may be fruitful. ITS TERMINOLOGY AND NOMENCLATURE In mycological terminology, ''perfect'' originated at the time when only one kind of propagule could be accepted as a proper "'seed'', and the metamorphosis of one form into the final "noble" form was a necessary doctrine. The mature sexual product was therefore "perfect", complete by virtue of having reached its highest form -- "'arrivées 4 leur état parfait", wrote Léveillé (1846). However, increasing familiarity with the interrupted phenetic expressions of a single fun- gus led to an appreciation of the uniqueness of a phenomenon in which morphological phases are individually self-replicating and independently widespread. It became clear that this phenomenon, which we now call pleomorphism (Hennebert 1971, Savile 1969), does not involve the metamorphosis of one form into another in the life cycle of an individual, as in holomet- abolan insects, culminating in an adult form in which reproductive potential is achieved. Nor can the pleomorphism of fungi be equated with various other kinds of morphological dis- continuity unaccompanied by reproductive capability, such as the caste system of certain social insects, defined seasonal forms, and larva vs. adult, or even with the differences in sexual vs. parthenogenetic expressions in animals, for all of which "non-genetic discontinui- ties" Mayr (1963) coined the term "polyphenism". The discovery that, in fungi, self-replicating asexual phases can exist independently, separated in space and time from the sexual phase, called for prolonged observation and re- peated experiments designed to disclose the full complement of a complete organism. Only when the two expressions were correlated, the asexual and the perfecting sexual phases brought together, could the fungus be considered "perfect", "a finished or perfect plant". Therein lies the problem with the term "perfect"'. It bears a manifold connotation of wholeness, highest possible achievement, and flawlessness. Perfection is not only maturation and consummation but also a completeness comprising all parts; and perfecting is the process itself of arriving at this condition. Thus, it was a term adaptable to the range of ideas about pleomorphism; but having started in use to define one concept, it became ambiguous when the concept changed. At first, 'perfect'' referred to the point of completion of a life cycle through achievement of a sexual form of reproduction. Then it came to signify the complete life cycle: the whole fungus, passing through all forms of expression and reproduction, cul- minating in the sexual form. Almost certainly, when Fuckel (1870) wrcte of Fungi Perfecti as "volkommen'', he meant both complete in life cycle and perfected in development (ennobled?) through production of a sexual fruitbody. Those lacking this "perfect'' form were incomplete, imperfect. But there remained the problem of autonomous conidial fungi. Berkeley (1857) preferred to accept such fungi as ''autonomous and perfect species'' since, being autonomous, they were com- plete and therefore ''perfect''. The Tulasnes reluctantly concurred, but only because they could not admit that any of the "works of God" could be anything but flawless and thereby "perfect". Yet they could not bring themselves to acknowledging asexually propagating fungi as the equals of sexual species. To them, sexual reproduction was the "more perfect" (higher?) method of reproduction, and the fungi possessing it were automatically "more perfect" or "nobler'' than their autonomous asexual counterparts. The Tulasnes expressed this conviction as strongly as they dared. And considering their upbringing and the age in which they lived, when challenging the dogma of special creation constituted major heresy, they were very forth- Yight. Not long after, with the rise and wide acceptance of the Darwinian theory of organic evolution, those who followed the Tulasnes could accept and express the possibility of flaws 21 in nature. In the first formulation of the rule governing the naming of pleomorphic fungi (Brussels Code, 1912, Art. 49 bis), these were described as having a "pleomorphic life-cycle" with ''dif- ferent successive states ... (anamorphoses, status)'' which -- when they were "states of the same species" -- could "bear only one generic and specific name (binomial) that is the earli- est which has been given ... to the state containing the form which it has been agreed to call the perfect form''. This was followed by the explanation that ''the perfect state is that which ends in the ascus stage .. in the basidium .. etc."'. The care with which this Article was phrased is notable: the formulators were obviously aware of the problem with the word ''per- fect'', and used it judiciously, stating (in effect) that, however the term might otherwise be defined, they had agreed to apply it to the form which appears in the final stage of what (by transference) would be called ''the perfect state''. Then came the following statement: ‘''Gen- eric and specific names given to other states have only a temporary value. They cannot re- place a generic name already existing and applying to one or more species, any one of which contains the 'perfect' form’. The emphasis is added here, but the quotation marks around the word "'perfect'' are in the printed version of the Article, signifying that the term was being used in a specially qualified way, presumably as "'sexual". However, no matter how the Rules used the term "perfect'', it still held various meanings for scientist as well as layman. Most authors adopted the Rules' restricted meaning for ''per- fect", but without using the signal provided by the quotation marks; e.g., Melin § Nannfeldt (1934:403) wrote: "Ceratostomella penicillata Grosm. ... found to be the perfect stage of Leptographtum pentetllatun Grosm.", Bailey (1950:557): ''No perfect stage of Cladosportum ful- vum has been found'', Martin (1961:153): "If a perfect stage exists ...", and Ainsworth (1973: 61): "Fungi frequently have two sporulating states, the imperfect ... and the perfect state ..'', On the other hand, Bennett (1937:254-5) described an ''ascigerous strain" and a "perfect strain'', the latter producing conidia and sclerotia as well as ascomata. Authors such as Ben- nett obviously continued to use "perfect'’ as meaning ''complete'', "whole'', "entire'’. Arthur's (1934) discourse revealed another problem -- the interpretation of the term "state''.* It was his contention that, at least as far as the Uredinales and Ascomycetes were concerned, ''state'’ referred to cytological phase; "perfect state" to the sporophyte (diplo- or dikaryophase), "imperfect state'' to the gametophyte (haplophase). Rogers (1948) took issue with this interpretation and clearly demonstrated its unfeasibility, even in the Uredinales. He then went on to argue persuasively that a reading of the Article and the examples that fol- lowed it could lead to only one conclusion, viz. that "the 'states' referred to by the Rules are ... organs of fructification (or assimilation)". In the next substantial rephrasing of the Article (Stockholm Code, 1952, Art. 69), (i) all reference to "stage" had been eliminated, along with the word "successive", be- cause it was obviously false to imply that there was a necessary succession of these sporulat- ing forms in the life cycle of a pleomorphic fungus; (ii) the quotation marks around the word "perfect" were removed, the formulators apparent- ly under the impression that all mycologists were satisfied to adopt the restricted meaning * Altogether unfortunate in this context since the Code uses status for level or position in the taxonomic hierarchy, as in stat. nov. 22 implied by the use of the quotation marks, which were therefore no longer necessary; (iii) the term "form" disappeared, apparently because ''state" (without quotation marks) was to be taken as referring to the "form" or "organ" of fructification, sexual ("perfect") or asexual ("imperfect"); (iv) and the priority and broad applicability of the names of genera and species was ex- pressed by vesting "precedence" in "the first valid name or epithet applied to the perfect Stave... .chatewhich bears ascit:..ietc." Gone was the explicit distinction (emphasized in earlier versions of the Article) between giving a name to the ''state containing the form which it has been agreed to call the perfect form'' and applying it to the species, though this distinction is the continuing intent of the Rule. The present version of the Article, which came into being in the Edinburgh Code (1966, Art. 59), expresses the same intention by stating that ''the correct name of all states ... is the earliest legitimate name typified by the perfect state ... which is characterized by the presence of asci ... etc.'' Thus, in the phrasing of the Article since its beginning, there has been a clear attempt to restrict "perfect" to meaning ''sexual''. And, at least since the Stockholm Code (1952), "form" or "organ" or "fructification" could be substituted for ''state" in most passages. Yet there remains, even in the current version, reference to "the name for a perfect state'' when what is intended is not the name for a sexual organ but for the fungus as a whole. Some see no incongruity in accepting "perfect state'’ as meaning ''sexual organ" at the same time as ''the name for a perfect state'' is taken as meaning ''the name for a species''. To these mycologists, the latter pair of synonyms is merely the expression of the convention imposed by Art. 59: the name for the perfect state (i.e., typified by the sexual organ) is to be taken as the name for the species. To others, the only way to understand a statement such as "the name for a perfect state'' is to view ''perfect" as ''complete to the point of sexual achieve- ment'', the sexual fructification as the perfecting or completing form, while "'state'' is the condition of the fungus. D. Malloch (in litt. 1976), a proponent of this interpretation, has proposed the following definitions to the I.M.A, Subcommittee on Art, 59: PERFECT STATE: the complete mode of existence of a fungus, made complete through sexual maturity. IMPERFECT STATE: the incomplete mode of existence of a fungus, made incomplete through the absence of sexual reproduction. Hence, the name ''for a perfect state" is, to Malloch et al., the name for "'the species in its perfect or complete life cycle'’. And this is most certainly the intent of Art. 59. To us, it seems that some terms evolve through expansion and restriction to the point where their usefulness becomes questionable. Therefore, we welcome the terms coined by Hennebert (Hennebert § Weresub 1977, reprinted as Chap. 3 of this book) to replace "perfect state" in what has been shown to be its several meanings, and propose to adopt the new terms along with the term resurrected by Donk (1960b) for self-repeating forms. These terms, holomorphosis, teleomorphosis and anamorphosis, return us to the directness of the first Article (Brussels Code 1912) and enable us to express its operation within the type method in unequivocal terms, Since a holomorphosis is a fungus "'as a whole, in all its facets, forms and potentialities", it is the ultimate unit of a taxon of Fungi Perfecti. The name of such a taxon, according to 23 Art. 59, is typified by the sexual form or organ of reproduction; and this sexual form is termed the teleomorphosis. We are thus able to distinguish between the nomenclatural type that determines the application of the name and the ultimate unit of the taxon to which that name is applied, a fundamental distinction in the botanical system of nomenclature (wherein a name applies to a taxon of whole plants, although the type may be a mere fragment of the whole). It also becomes clear through our use of anamorphosis (for the asexual diasporic form) that, in the anatomical system of nomenclature, no distinction exists between the type and the ultimate unit of the taxon to which the name so typified is applied: a form-species is monomorphic, its name typified by an anamorph and applied in accordance with that anamorph to similar anamorphs, and to them alone. Now having achieved this clarity of expression, we must ask whether it actually reflects our present understanding of pleomorphism. Here we are, spending all this time attempting to link up anamorphoses with teleomorphoses in order to understand the holomorphic pleomorphic fungus, and at the same time we continue to tolerate a sharp nomenclatural distinction be- tween the fungi we classify as holomorphic taxa and those we place in form-taxa. Further- more, we have yet to solve one of the problems that disturbed the Tulasnes (and was discussed by Hennebert 1971), that of classifying and naming autonomous fungi that seem to be wholly anamorphic. Nevertheless, while recognizing the existence of these unresolved problems, we must not lose sight of what our present system does achieve. Undoubtedly, it is taxonomically unreasonable to classify, as Fungi Imperfecti, anamorphs of known ascomycetous or basidiomycetous affinity. But surely, as soon as affinities are clear -- as in the case of rust fungi -- a form-taxon can be accommodated among its relatives. A form-genus such as Uredo is accepted as a member of the Uredinales Imperfectae, even the Pucciniaceae Imperfectae, long before the form-species in Uredo is shown to be affiliated with a known teleomorph. Papulaspora s.l. is a form-genus too heterogeneous to be placed anywhere except in the Fungi Imperfecti; but Papulaspora s.s. is apparently (Weresub § LeClair 1971) classifiable in the Melanosporaceae Imperfectae. The problem of classifying the anamorphic fungi among teleomorphic relatives is one that Fries was able to solve in dealing with many pleomorphic fungi. Most of our current form-genera can even now be grouped at least as Asco- mycetes or Basidiomycetes Imperfectae. And classification at lower levels in the taxonomic hierarchy will become more practicable with every addition to our understanding of the fungi involved. We trust that the time will come when our grasp of the morphology, biochemistry and genetics of all fungi will enable us to classify all anamorphic fungi botanically, as we do uredinaceous anamorphs. Then we will be able to dispense with a pseudo-class such as Fungi Imperfecti (whose pseudonym, Deuteromycetes, attempts to disguise its status as a pseudo- class). Meanwhile, illogical as it may appear to be, the sharp distinction between names for ana- morphs and names for holomorphs does indeed reflect our present adherence to the Tulasne 'doc- trine' of pleomorphy. There may still be a few of us who remain as hesitant as the Tulasnes to admit that any fungus can be 'imperfect', because the term bears a connotation of blemish and deformity. All of us are plagued, as the Tulasnes were, by the difficulty of discovering the affiliation of all anamorphs with teleomorphs. Yet, our nomenclatural system demonstrates that, as the Tulasnes felt a century ago, and zoologists (Mayr 1963:28) feel now, most of us 24 agree that the appropriate way to treat asexual forms is as incomplete, potentially 'perfecta- ble', restricting the term and concept of 'species', and botanical nomenclature, to sexual organisms. It may be that some individual anamorphs, as well as some pleo-anamorphic fungi, have a- chieved full autonomy, independent of a teleomorph. But we cannot yet be sure that any par- ticular anamorphic fungus has indeed reached that kind of total independence. The time has not yet come, therefore, when any fungus known only in its anamorphic phase, whether mono- or pleo-anamorphic, should be treated as a species within the botanical system of nomenclature. For practical reasons, we maintain our historic right to provide separate binary names for individual anamorphs even when we know (or suspect) them to be merely portions of a single fungus. But at the same time, we continue to emphasize the anatomical character of the pseudo-species that carry these binary names. It is this emphasis that transforms the bio- logical incongruity of anatomical nomenclature into a tool of our botanical nomenclature. It serves as a strong incentive to prove the affiliation of anamorphs with a teleomorph, when Art. 59 keeps reminding us that, until we do, the names we use are not holomorphic names and do not cover complete fungi. In order that no fungus may be left dismembered, the nomenclature of pleomorphic non-lichenized Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes continues to abide by the teleo- morphic typification of holomorphic names. And that is as far as our present understanding of pleomorphism allows us to go. The utility of the terms anamorph, teleomorph and holomorph, introduced by Hennebert & Weresub (1977) was so self-evident that the Conference adopted them at the outset. Since they are accordingly liberally sprinkled through the remaining chapters of this book, usually without explanation, I felt tt would be wise to give the full text of the paper in whieh they were proposed, as an appropriate preliminary to their full scale adoption. The text ts reproduced from Mycotaxon 6:207-211, by kind permission of the authors and the pub- lishers, in the Chapter which follows..... 25 A d Sree {oon 4 ; i“ = px? ” ‘ 49 ry 5 te . A ‘a ‘ su & 4 . mi 9 k ‘iif Taare tn tnt t ewe 2 Lo! Seana ta > > a ies : i aa: >} Gey ' 7 ae rey =f a Ai ‘ 1 4 a « ‘ 4 yf Vyae! FA vor : “i a) ite: Ie a 2 t Doe y rahe Vara, , a, a ci = ® _ - -» — 2 = go a i: 3 Terms for States and Forms of Fungi, Their Names and Types G.L. Hennebert & L.K. Weresub In analyzing the nomenclature of pleomorphic imperfecti fungi, Hennebert (1971) proposed the term anatomical to contrast with botanical for denoting the different systems of naming taxa of different kinds. An attempt to extend his analysis to the nomenclature of all perfect and imperfect fungi has revealed the usefulness of certain other terms, as will be seen below. Obviously, what is called the botanical system of nomenclature is the primary system of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN), with botanical names applied to botanical taxa. In the context of this analysis, what is significant in the botanical system is that the ultimate unit of every botanical taxon is an "individual plant" (Art. 2, ICBN 1972). And an individual plant or organism is an organism as a whole, in all its facets, forms and po- tentialities, latent or expressed. For the purpose of this discussion, we shall refer to a whole organism as a holomorph (from Gk odos: holos -- entire). It is holomorphs that are grouped in botanical taxa, to which botanical names apply. These Names are required by the ICBN to be based on nomenclatural types, but the type of a botanical Name is not necessarily a holomorph. A nomenclatural type (Art. 7) is "any constituent ele- ment ... not necessarily the most typical or representative''. In the case of the name of a species, the type specimen is not necessarily a complete organism, not necessarily represent- ing all its forms or all phases of its life cycle, nor even its most typical or characteris- tic parts. It may be an organism in a state of reproduction or a phase of vegetative growth, a specimen complete or incomplete, fertile or sterile, sexual or asexual. Although ''the app- lication of names of taxonomic groups is determined by means of nomenclatural types" (Princi- ple II), there is no intention to restrict the application of a botanical name to whatever part, form, organ or state of an organism is represented on the type specimen. The name, how- ever typified, covers a taxon of complete organisms that make up the species, each of them similar to the individual organism that is represented, perhaps in the whole but probably only in part, by the type specimen. The system of nomenclature of plants is a botanical system to the extent that holomorphs are the ultimate units of botanical taxa, to which botanical names are given. It is, without qualification, the system of naming non-fossil Cormophytes and Algae, so-called 'lower' fungi (Myxomycota, Mastigomycotina and Zygomycotina: see Ainsworth et al. 1971), as well as lichen- forming Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes. * Reprinted, by permission of the authors and the publisher, from Mycotaxon 6: 207-211. 1977. 27 As an example, we may take Mucor mucedo Fres., a species described as sporangial and there- fore based on the sporangial state of the fungus. Its name is not thereby restricted in ap- plication to this state alone. The name covers the whole organism -- the holomorph -- and all organisms judged similar enough to be conspecific, even if their relationship is established on the basis of characters not seen in the type material. When Brefeld later discovered zygo- spores, a potentiality of the fungus originally unknown, the newly discovered form was automa- tically covered by the original name by virtue of its botanical application. Neither a new name or a new type was required, no more than an amplification of the known characters of the fungus species, under the botanical name typified by a sporangial state. This is the botani- cal system without qualification. The botanical system is also -- but with qualification -- the system for naming Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes that are not lichen-forming. That these fungi receive names of botanical application is clear in Art. 59 (ICBN 1972), where their names are described as covering "all states which are states of any one species,"' i.e., holomorphs. But this Article makes a spec- ification regarding the typification of these names. Unlike the type specimen of the botani- cal name of a holomorphic 'lower' fungus (which may bear any state or form of it), the type specimen of the name of a non-lichenized Ascomycete or Basidiomycete is required to bear evi- dence of sexuality if the name is to have botanical application to the holomorphic fungus. Art. 59 rules that ''the ... name of all states which are states of any one species is the . name typified by the perfect state ... which is characterized by the presence of asci basidia ..."" etc. This characterizing form that is involved in producing meiotic diaspores may be termed the teleomorph (from Gk tedeos: teleos -- having perfect achievement, being complete, adult): in Ascomycetes, an ascocarp or its equivalent, at maturity producing asci and ascospores, in Basidiomycetes, a basidiocarp or its equivalent, at maturity producing basidia and basidiospores. Hence, for an autonomous non-lichenized Ascomycete or Basidiomy- cete to qualify for a botanical name, teleomorphic material must be used to typify that name. But Art. 59 also provides for the separate naming of these fungi in their asexual state. The Article makes a distinction between the nomenclature of Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes which qualify for botanical names by virtue of their teleomorphic expression, and the naming of their asexual states and of autonomous Fungi Imperfecti, for which a non-botanical system of nomenclature is in use. This is the system referred to by Donk (1960a) as conventional and by Hennebert (1971) as anatomical. Donk (1960b), in discussing the conventional system further, reintroduced the useful term anamorphosis for the imperfect state, a term we shall proceed to use here for the asexual, mitotic, diasporic expression of a fungus, the form basic to the anatomical scheme. Anatomical names are applied to anatomical categories or pseudo-taxa (Donk 1960a) whose members are parts of the anatomy of organisms instead of holomorphic organisms; i.e., the ultimate unit of any anatomical taxon is a specified portion, form, or organ of an "individual plant'' rather than the individual plant itself. Thus, it is particular morphs, not holomorphs, that are grouped in anatomical taxa, to which anatomical names apply. These names, like botanical names, are required by the ICBN to be based on nomenclatural types. But in the case of the name of an anatomical species, applica- tion is not only determined by, but also restricted to, whatever part, form, state or organ is represented on the type specimen. In other words, typification and application of anatomical names coincide: the type is the unique morph that is also the ultimate unit of the anatomical taxon. In the anatomical system governing form- and organ-genera of fossil plants (Art. 3, Note 1), the basis of a taxon is a particular kind of form or organ found in a fossil fragment; and the name is to be applied only to similar forms or organs, not to the holomorphic plant that may eventually be reconstituted from various fragments. In the form-taxa of imperfect fungi (Art. 59), the ultimate unit is a particular kind of anamorph; and the name (referring "only to the state represented by its type") is to be applied only to similar anamorphs; it is not to be applied to the holomorph that is already known -- or eventually discovered -- to include this anamorph, nor is it to be applied to other kinds of anamorphs. As already understood by Hughes (1953), anatomical names -- by definition, typification and application -- are mono- morphic (Hennebert 1971). It is by long-standing convention that these morphs of fossils and of certain fungi are treated in an anatomical system of classification and nomenclature. But if anamorphs of non- lichenized Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes are conventionally assigned anatomical names, should not the anatomical system be extended to cover also the names based on their teleomorphs‘ Certainly, if application of a name based on a teleomorph were restricted to this one sexual anatomical part of a fungus, while names based on anamorphs were restricted to single asexual forms, the several names for the same pleomorphic fungus could exist side-by-side without com- peting for priority. But then, the holomorphic fungus would be denied a botanical name. Mycological legislators decided in favor of botanical names. In the Brussels Code of 1912, the first special rules for naming fungi established the principle that basing a name on a teleomorph makes it applicable in the botanical sense to a holomorphic fungus. Under Art. 59, the type need not be confined to the teleomorph alone, though it must include it; and the name is not restricted in application to that sexual segment of the fungus, though it undoubtedly covers it. On the contrary, although the teleomorph is a necessary component, the type may include any number of anamorphs as well; and although the name covers whatever morphs are rep- resented in the type, it applies automatically to the holomorph in all its forms, present or not on the type specimen, and including whatever is known or remains to be discovered about the whole organism. Such a name is botanical in its full sense, applied in the same way as a name for so-called 'lower' fungi and lichen-forming Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes. The fun- damental difference between their nomenclature and that of non-lichenized Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes is that the name of the fungi in the latter groups, when based only on ana- morphs, is excluded by convention from botanical status*. * In practical terms, it means that, if the type of a name for non-lichenized Ascomycetes or Basidiomycetes includes the teleomorph, the name is botanical and covers the whole fungus. If, on the other hand, the type does not include the teleomorph, the name is anatomical and restricted in application to the form represented by its type. The Code is concerned with taxa of two kinds and consequently names of two kinds, botan- ical and anatomical. For most plants and fungi, the system of nomenclature is botanical. Only in the case of autonomous Fungi Imperfecti (Deuteromycetes), the mitotic states of non- lichenized Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes, and the organ of fossil plants, is the system of 29 nomenclature anatomical. In the case of Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes that are not lichen-forming, one might say that the system is "botanico-anatomical,'' being jointly botanical (for the entire fungus) and anatomical (for the non-meiotic state of the fungus). This kind of botanico-anatomical system of nomenclature is not at all the same system as that formulated under the same name by Hennebert (1971: 215) for imperfect fungi pleomorphic in themselves. Behind that pro- posal was an attempt to provide the entire imperfect phase of a fungus with a binary name of botanical effect, while retaining an anatomical monomorphic restriction for names of form-genera, which could thus serve also as terms designating monomorphic states of botan- ical holomorphic taxa. The relative complexity of this approach to the nomenclature of pleomorphic imperfect fungi (both autonomous and correlated) seems to us now to provide little advantage over the simplicity of the monomorphic anatomical system for form-species as well as form genera. In summary: as ruled by Article 59, the system of nomenclature for non-lichenized Ascomy- cetes and Basidiomycetes consists in the co-existence of two distinct systems, the one for taxa of holomorphic fungi and therefore botanical, the other for form-taxa of anamorphs of fungi, treated as anatomical. All botanical names are nomitna holomorphostum, applying to organisms as whole beings in all their known or unknown expressions and potentialities. Nomina holomorphostum are normally typified by any constituent diagnosable element of the taxon (Art. 7), whether teleomorphic, anamorphic or combining all elements. This is the unqualified botanical system of nomencla- ture as it applies to plants, 'lower' fungi and lichen-forming 'higher' fungi. In non- lichenized Ascomycetes and Basidiomycetes, nomina holomorphostum (botanical names), applicable to holomorphs, are typified at the very least by their teleomorph, whereas names typified by anamorphs alone are nomina ananorphostun (anatomical names), and their application is restric- ted to the single anamorph represented by their type. Anatomical nomina teleomorphostum do not exist under our present Code, because a sexual form does not bear a name separate from the name of the holomorphic fungus. Finally, a word about the Code's ruling requiring the co-existence of a nomen holomorphosts and nomina anamorphosium for the same Ascomycete or Basidiomycete. As Donk (1960b: 172) pointed out, if a choice has to be made between them, nomina anamorphostun automatically be- come nomtna rejictenda, giving way to the priority of the nomen holomorphosis. Under Art. 59, holomorphic names, being botanical, are priorable; anamorphic names, being anatomical, are unpriorable except within the narrow limits of typification by similar anamorphs. It is our contention that the terms used above bring into sharper focus the nomenclature of fungi as regulated by ICBN and its Art. 59. Their adoption can turn discussion away from ar- guments about the meaning of long familiar and no longer uniformly understood terms to a con- centration on basic principles. Having established a terminology in which the nomenclatural problems of the whole fungus might more easily be discussed, tt seemed appropriate to broach some of those very nomenclatural problems..... 30 A Cross-Reference Names for Pleomorphic Fungi J. W. Carmichael Many of the higher fungi can propagate themselves indefinitely by mycelium and conidia. For many species, the conidial state or anamorph is the one usually encountered, and the sexual state or teleomorph is rarely seen. Thus, we are forced to have two different systems of classification in order to be able to identify these fungi in whatever state we find them. First, there is the traditional taxonomic classification, based mostly on the characters of the teleomorph, where the species are grouped into genera and families of the Ascomycotina and Basidiomycotina. Second, there is an additional classification based solely on the mor- phology of the conidial or other anamorphs. Species with similar conidia are placed in the same form-genus for ease of identification. However, these form-genera are not included in the families of the Ascomycotina and Basidiomycotina. They are kept separate in a group called the Deuteromycotina or Fungi Imperfecti. It is a basic principle of biological classification that each taxon is a member of only one taxon of the next higher rank. When we classify the anamorph and teleomorph of a single species in two different genera, we violate this principle. As a consequence, we have prob- lems with the nomenclatural principle that each species should have only one valid name. The history of these problems, and three different approaches to solving them, were presented in much detail at the first Kananaskis conference by Hennebert (1971). More recent discussions will be found in Kendrick §& Carmichael (1973), Weresub, Malloch §& Pirozynski (1974), Sigler §& Carmichael (1976), and Hennebert §& Weresub (1977 and Chap. 3). I will concentrate here on a single proposal for the use of cross-reference names. The easiest way to outline the pro- posal is as a set of four rules. Rule 1- There is only one valid Linnaean binomial for each species. Rule 2- The first validly published name after the starting point has priority. Exception- For the higher fungi only, the first validly published name for the teleomorph takes prece- dence over any names published for anamorphs. Rule 3- Anamorphs of species for which there is an existing valid binomial are referred to by cross-reference names with the format ''[form-genus name] state of [Linnaean binomial]."' For example: Monilta state of Neurospora sttophila. Since the name includes both the form- genus for the particular state referred to, and also the binomial for the whole species, it is called a cross-reference name. For indexing purposes, ''state of" (or its equivalent in other languages) is replaced by the abbreviation ''stat.'' (Latin - status). An anamorph may Sat then appear in alphabetic order both under its form-genus name and under the binomial for the species. For example: Montlia stat. Neurospora sttophila and Neurospora sitophtla stat. Montlia. Regardless of the order, the binomial is left in the nominative to avoid complexi- ty. Rule 4- Each form genus is based on only one type of anamorph. This anamorph must be pre- sent in the type specimen of the type species of the form-genus. It follows from rules 1 to 4 that where an imperfect species produces two or more types of conidia (or other anamorphs), the earliest valid name for any of the types has priority for that species. The other types of conidia may be indicated by cross-reference names. For example: the Echtnobotrywn state of Cephalotrichun stemonitis. This is so even if one ana- morph is a Hyphomycete and the other is a Coelomycete. For example: the Scytaltdium state of Hendersonula torulotdea. The rules seem logical and fairly simple. So why has it taken so long to arriye at them, and why do some people still not accept them? The delay is due partly to conseryatism on the part of mycologists, and partly to a number of problems not yet mentioned. The first problem concerns the specific identity of two different states. Does the cross- referenced anamorph really belong to the same species as the one referred to by the binomial? This is simply the problem of confirming a species identification, but it is obviously more difficult when two different states are involved. The second problem is that cross-reference names have no separate date, author, or type specimen. The cross-referenced state may or may not be present on the type specimen for the binomial. This means that, to establish a new form genus, it is always necessary to propose a binomial that is typified by a specimen showing the described state. Then, if the type species already has a binomial based on a different state, the newly proposed binomial may be cited as a synonym of the appropriate cross-reference name. Synonymy under cross-refer- ence names is always facultative rather than obligate, since cross-reference names do not have types of their own. A third problem concerns the definition of the terms ''state'’ and "'type'' (as used in rules 3 and 4). This seems to me to be a strictly practical problem. We can recognize as states or types whatever it seems useful to have names for. I see no good reason for rejecting form- genera based on spermatia, sclerotia or specialized hyphae, as long as the structures are distinctive enough to permit species identification. A fourth problem is that cross-reference names are cumbersome. However, they are undoubt- edly less cumbersome in the long run than having two or more independent binomials for each pleomorphic species. DIALOGUE FOLLOWING DR. CARMICHAEL'S PAPER HENNEBERT: The first point is that we can carry on our discussion using the new terms: Holomorph for the entire fungus, however constituted (in extant terminology, this might actually be either a 'perfect specics' or an ‘imperfect species'). Teleomorph for the 32 sexual fructification. Anamorph for the asexual or conidial fructification (we know that parasexuality can occur in anamorphs). The holomorph may include a teleomorph and one or several anamorphs, or anamorphs only. The second point concerns the reformulation of those parts of the Code referring to fungi and their pleomorphism. (1) The basic principle underlying Article 59 -- the exis- tence of parallel systems of nomenclature for teleomorphs and anamorphs -- is accepted. (2) The two systems are entirely separate, and no synonymy is possible between them, since the application of the names of anamorphs is based strictly on what is present on the type material. (3) The application of separate binomials to the different morphs of a pleo- morphic fungus is accepted as inevitable. These principles are incorporated in a proposal for the modification of Article 59 emerging from the deliberations of the Nomenclature Subcommittee at the Mycological Congress, Tampa. The third point concerns the nomenclature of holomorphs completing their life cycle in the anamorphic condition (what we have always called imperfect fungi). Three possible systems were outlined at Kananaskis-I, of which two have now been rejected, at least impli- citly, and the third accepted. The 'botanical' system has been rejected because its appli- cation would mean that form specific epithets and form generic names would automatically be regarded as the names of proper species and genera, and therefore applicable to all parts of the fungus. This would allow full synonymization between 'form' and 'proper' epithets, and would logically lead to the abandonment of Article 59. The 'botanico-anatomical' system has also been rejected because it, too, proposed a wider application of anamorphic names than is now permissible. The only system remaining is the ‘anatomical system'. This permits the provision of a binomial for each morph of a pleomorphic fungus, but gives no indication of the genetic connection between the different morphs. Dr. Carmichael's system might best be called a refined anatomical system. Why refined? In a purely anatomical system every anamorph of the same fungus receives a binomial based on a type in which that anamorph is represented. These names are used in parallel with no indication of the relationship between them. Dr. Carmichael has proposed that, where the connection is known, only one of those binomials be used -- the earliest applied to any one of them. When it is desired to refer to any anamorph other than that providing the binom- ial, the form generic name of the anamorph in question would be cited, in a combination with the accepted binomial. CARMICHAEL: Cross-reference names were first used systematically by M.B. Ellis and S.J. Hughes (beginning in 1958) for referring to anamorphs whose teleomorph is known. My pro- posal is that we continue this practice and extend the system to apply to the different anamorphs of species with no known teleomorphs. The Code at present allows as many binom- ials for a species as there are recognized anamorphic states. A system of cross-reference names would allow us to designate particular anamorphs without using more than one binomial for a single species. WERESUB: Do you intend that this be brought forth as a ruling or as a recommendation? CARMICHAEL: You can't force people to use names they don't want. I have simply developed 33 this as a logical extension of what many mycologists are currently doing, and provided it with a proper rationale. It is not at present contrary to the rules of botanical nomen- clature to use cross-reference names. Rules I leave to your discretion. PIROZYNSKI: If this became a rule, wouldn't Sclerotium have to replace Botrytis, since it is an earlier name? CARMICHAEL: No. Selerottwn is not an earlier name for the Botrytts state. Form generic names apply to a single state: Scelerotium to a sclerotial anamorph, Botrytis to a coni- dial anamorph. If the fungus we call Botrytis cinerea had earlier been named Selerottun durum, the proper name in Botrytts would be the Botrytts form of Selerotium durum. But that doesn't make Botrytis a synonym of Sclerotium: they are based on forms of different kinds. If the teleomorph is discovered to be a Botryotinta, then the anamorphic binomials are abandoned, and you have 'the Botrytis form of Botryotinta fuckeltana' and 'the Selerotium form of B. fuckeltana'. KENDRICK: What if, in pleomorphic anamorphs, connections are made in different directions; for example, in one case the Seytaltdium is described first and its Hendersonula state discovered later, while in another case the Hendersonula is described first, the Scytalt- dtum state later on. In one case the citation would be 'the Hendersonula state of Seytaltdtum x', in the other, the 'Scytaltdium state of Hendersonula y' -- one binomial would be in Scytaltdium, one in Hendersonula. Would that not create confusion and complicate or frustrate attempts at indexing? CARMICHAEL: No, because in any index each taxon is listed under both the form generic (cross-reference) name and also under the binomial, so they wouldn't become disconnected even in reversed pairings such as those you mentioned. That is the chief purpose in using cross-reference names, to prevent the disconnection that arises when one species has two or more binomials. WERESUB: Using a binomial as if it were a botanical name while at the same time retaining the un-botanical form-generic name seems to be a rather illogical way of linking the two systems. It seems to me that you must either have a botanical name -- a binomial -- or an anatomical name -- a form genus and an epithet for the form. But when you try to combine the botanical with the anatomical, the mis-match is troublesome. CARMICHAEL: If we do not know the teleomorph, the best botanical name we can propose has to be in a form-genus. It's all we've got: it's the best we can do. It's not as desirable as a name in a genus that is part of the over-all classification of fungi, but is a com- promise necessitated by the nature of the organism, and it doesn't seem unreasonable or improper to me. It seems to me to be what Dr. Hennebert (1971) called a 'Botanico-anatomical' system. WERESUB: I wonder if Dr. Hennebert, in his botanico-anatomical proposal, anticipated that closely related fungi could be placed in widely different genera, e.g. in Kendrick's example: the anamorphic species x placed in Scytaliditwn and the closely related ana- morphic species y placed in Hendersonula. That is a strange botanical treatment. CARMICHAEL: It's the best we can do, unless we abandon the idea of priority, and I'm not sure what could replace it. 34 WERESUB: But the principle of priority does not force me to use the earliest binomial no matter what my taxonomic views are. The principle of priority forces me to use the earliest legitimate epithet applicable to the species, and combine it with the earliest legitimate name of the genus that I consider appropriate...a genus whose name is typified by a species I consider to be congeneric with my species. In a purely anatomical scheme of Naming anamorphs, priority causes little difficulty. But as soon as the application of a nomen anamorphosis acquires a botanical circumscription, the principle of priority must surely take on its botanical sense as well as its chronological value. If I judge two species to be closely related, I must surely be allowed to put them together in one genus. It seems to me that you must either have a botanical name -- a binary name for a holo- morph -- and therefore a botanical sense for the genus; or you have an anatomical name -- a binary name for the anamorph -- and the genus is clearly anatomical. When you mix these concepts, the synthesis is confusing. HENNEBERT: The botanical system, as I proposed it in 1971 with reference to pleomorphic ana- morphic species, would apply the rule of priority in its full sense, botanical and chrono- logical, at both ranks of genera and species. In the botanico-anatomical system, conceived from my interpretation of Dr. S.J. Hughes's usage in 1958, the rule of priority applies only at the specific rank, all epithets given to any of the anamorphs being taken botanically and thus considered synonyms, the earliest available being retained. The generic name remains anatomical. In Dr. Carmichael's system, the rule of priority applies fully only among the epithets given to any one of the anamorphs. These then are synonyms among them- selves but not synonymous with epithets given to other anamorphs in the pleomorphic species. Then a sort of rule of anteriority selects the oldest epithet amongst the correct (but not synonymous) epithets of all the anamorphs, resulting -- as in my botanico-anatomical sys- tem -- in the retention of the oldest available epithet. The whole difference lies in how broadly the rule of priority is applied. In Dr. Carmichael's system, the specific epithet is not transferable from one genus to another representing a different anamorph. The epithet remains an anatomical one, tied to its monomorphic type. In the botanico-anatomical system, the epithet is a botanical one, and thus transferable to any one of the genera representing the different anamorphs of the fungus -- for instance, in the case referred to previously, from Sclerotium to Botrytts or vice versa. In an anatomical system, the epithet durwn, being based on a sclerotium, has to be tied to a generic named typified by sclerotia. But if we treat that epithet botan- ically, so that it is available, by way of priority, to the unique binomial given to an entire anamorphic species (comprising all its morphs), as in the botanico-anatomical system, then it can be transferred, for example, to Botrytis; and Botrytis dura would be the unique binomial for the whole anamorphic species. The same procedure with other ana- morphic species would bring all of them together within the same anamorph-genus. The generic name remaining anatomical, attached to its type, for the purpose of the cross- reference names designating the different anamorphs separately, we would have: Botrytts dura anam. Botrytts Botrytts dura anam. Sclerottum Botrytis dura anam. Myrtocontun. 35 WERESUB: Would you allow an arbitrary choice of the generic name? HENNEBERT: A choice of the generic name on taxonomic or biological grounds has been sug- gested by Hughes in 1958, and it works. It is also conceivable -- though perhaps not with- out difficulty -- that the oldest of the correct generic names for the different anamorphs is chosen according to a sort of rule of anteriority. But this would result in bringing together, in one genus such as Selerotiun, species having distinct conidial anamorphs, such as Botrytis, Amphobotrys, Streptobotrys, along with species that have no conidial anamorphs at all. To give you my suggested botanico-anatomical system in a nutshell: the generic name is anatomical and used as such in both the cross-reference name and the binomial, and the specific epithet is botanical. In Dr. Carmichael's proposal, the epithet is treated as anatomical, and so cannot be transferred out of genera whose names are typified by the same kind of morph Tihuispeeets Selerotium durum has priority over Botrytis ctnerea, Sclerotium durum would have to be used as the combination for the whole anamorphic species; durum could not be transferred to Botrytis. A related fungus, Botrytis globosa, which has no earlier name in Sclerottum, would remain in Botrytis. Ina third example of a related fungus -- I'll use mythical names -- Botrytis praetermissa is predated by the binomial for its Myrtocontum morph as Myrtocontum canditdum; the binomial would have to be M. candidum. Thus, in Dr. Carmichael's scheme, we could have Botrytts anamorphs listed under unique binomials in three different anamorph-genera. That is the kind of problem that can arise in pleo-anamorphic species. It would be minimized if epithets were transferable, as botanical, to any of the available generic names for the species: in the botanico-anatomical system as conceived by me, the three species would be called Botrytis dura, Botrytis globosa and Botrytis candtda. KENDRICK: Can I perhaps try to put this issue in perspective by outlining the six positions that have been adopted to date by various authorities in the naming of pleomorphic ana- morphic species. (1) the binomial is chosen arbitrarily by the author according to which anamorph (the lectomorph) is judged to be the more characteristic, common or conspicuous. Problems arise here because of conflicting interpretations of these concepts. Dr. Henne- bert (1967) regarded the chlamydosporic morph of Chalara (Chalaropsts) punctulata as more characteristic than the phialidic form. Dr. Nag Raj and I (1975) considered the phialidic morph to be the more taxonomically informative of the two. (2) To get around this parti- cular difficulty we could adopt Wakefield's (1929) proposal that the choice made by the first author to treat the connection be accepted, or (3) we could accept the earliest available binomial given to any of the morphs, as proposed by Carmichael. (4) We could assign both generic and specific epithets according to the rule of priority, as Hennebert suggests. (5) We could allow the application of a separate binomial to each morph: a practice that has been fairly common in the past, even when the connection was known. (6) In some cases, particularly where two different anamorphs are intimately associated, a single binomial, that by definition requires the presence of both anamorphs, has been applied (e.g., Thtelaviopsits, Chalaropsis, Diheterospora). This is widely regarded as undesirable, but such names persist, partly because we have not been able to arrive at a consensus on this problem. We may not be able to decide here and now which we want to adopt, but I think perhaps we can be made aware of all the possible choices, and of their relative advantages and disadvantages. LUTTRELL: If I might return to a discussion of species for which teleomorphs are known. There is a tendency among mycologists to describe the teleomorph, and then to add, as an afterthought almost, that it has a 'Fusariwn'-like anamorph. This simply avoids the issue. I would like to see it obligatory that authors assign anamorphs to a form-genus, and not leave them in limbo. If they can decide on a genus for the teleomorph, then they should make the effort to do likewise for the anamorph. This brings up another point. The nomenclature of holomorphs which have teleomorphs submits to the taxonomic decision that the teleomorph is the prime form of the species. This is acceptable. Surely, however, we must learn to make taxonomic decisions in the pleomorphic anamorphs, and not copy out by allowing a nomenclatural rule to pre-empt our taxonomic judgment. Is not nomenclature supposed to serve taxonomy? KENDRICK: I tend to agree with your basic premise, but what if taxonomic interpretations differ -- they can even be diametrically opposed, as I mentioned earlier? WERESUB: The rules of nomenclature exist simply to give you some direction on how to express your taxonomic opinion. But they must allow you to express whatever kind of taxonomic opinion you hold, no matter how idiotic that opinion may be. The rules govern nomencla- ture, not taxonomy. CARMICHAEL: The rules are meant to ensure that when you have made any particular taxonomic decision, there is then only one correct name for each taxonomic entity. You can only change the name if you change your taxonomic decision. And although the present system allows separate binomials for anamorph(s) and teleomorph, I would prefer that there should be only one valid binomial per holomorph. I have set forth a procedure for achieving this. We have a problem in that real species must be assigned to form genera. We can suggest that form genera are not real genera because one species (in its various ana- morphs) can belong to more than one form genus. The problem is to get around this without having more than one binomial. I think the way to do it is by using cross-reference names. HENNEBERT: The binomial may designate a pleomorphic organism. The cross-reference name must designate a monomorphic state. Stan Hughes based his nomenclature on this important point. Then, of course, there arises the problem of pleomorphic imperfects (anamorphs) . In Kananaskis-I, I ignored the existence of Article 59, since teleomorphic names were not involved, and also because Article 59 might remain as it was, be changed or be deleted altogether. So, considering only the anamorphs, I found that there were three ways of treating their nomenclature. If we treat anamorphic names in a fully botanical sense, we must logically dispose of Article 59. There is no longer any need for two systems of nomenclature, because the botanical anamorphic names must be applicable, where this is dictated by priority, to the holomorphs including teleomorphs. VON ARX: To me this is a very practical matter: I have Curvularia lunata -- a very common and well-known fungus. When it is submitted to our identification service we have to use this name, because no one has actually seen the ascigerous teleomorph -- the connection Sy was described only once. Many ascomycete names have been incorrectly put forward as being teleomorphs of particular conidial fungi -- when in fact one or other state has simply been a contaminant. There are many such examples, and we will be exposed to many inaccuracies if we insist on using only the name of the teleomorph. We also have a large culture collection, and we find it both convenient and necessary to give all species of Pentctlltwn their anamorphic name rather than the teleomorphic name in Talaromyces. I cannot use the name Cochlitobolus when I write a report -- I must use the name of the com- monly occurring state -- the conidial anamorph, by which the fungus is generally known. We are not always sure of the connections. For practical reasons I prefer to use a binom- ial for the conidial fungus, because phytopathologists and people working in biodegradation just do not know or recognize the other name. HENNEBERT: You have advanced some good practical reasons for choosing an anatomical system. This means that you would prefer to maintain the system sanctioned by Article 59 as has happened up to now. I was speaking from the theoretical basis for names. Perhaps if we approach this question from both theoretical and practical angles, we can meet somewhere. VON ARX: I know some anamorphs for which an entirely incorrect teleomorph has been proposed. So I prefer to name the fungus I see under the microscope rather than relying on someone else's previous decision, which may have been wrong. HENNEBERT: That is why I don't use Botryotinta fuckeltana much. Botrytts cinerea is a com- plex species -- it probably encompasses more than one genotype -- and we never know when we see Botrytis cinerea which Botryotinta we are dealing with. CARMICHAEL: You are coming out in favour of retaining form species. You wish to treat Curvularta lunata not as a biological species but as a form species. This is perhaps, like Botrytis cinerea, a group of biological species that you cannot at present separate, so you are lumping them under one name, one binomial, which suggests that you have one real species when you actually have more than one. Surely in this situation you should make it clear to your 'customers' that you are dealing with an '‘aggregate'? You also suggest that you can't teach plant pathologists to accept a new nomenclatural system, or even new names. I think this is incorrect: it simply takes time. In medical mycology we have succeeded in weaning the practitioners away from calling yeasts Monilta (a