See other formats

Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences (Plant Sciences) Volume 94, 1985 CONTENTS The structure of the pod in two species of Prosopis S Rangayya, I L Kothari and G L Shah \ Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX. Species novarum Cyperacearum in memoriam optimi Professoris Swamy E Govindarajalu 1 1 Factors controlling callus initiation, growth and plant regeneration in bread- wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) Susan Eapen and P S Rao 33 Accumulation of nitrite as influenced by fluchloralin and benthiocarb in two tropical weed species N V R Reddy and K R Rao 41 Effect of carbonate and bicarbonate on growth and sporulation in two blue- green algae T A Sarma and Raj Garg 45 Seedcoat micromorphology of Caryophyllales: Observations on some Molluginaceae V V Sivarajan and M C Gopinathan 51 Nitrogen fixation by Nostoc strains TV Jayasankari and S Shanmugasundaram 59 Pharmacognostic studies on 'Dravanti' part~I Jatropha curcas Linn R C Gupta 65 C. V. Subramanian 60th Birthday Felicitation Volume Dedication 83 Effect of soil texture on microbial abbreviation of saprophytic survival by the take-all fungus of wheat S D Garrett 85 Propagule behaviour of the take-all fungus (Gaeumannomyces graminis var. tritici) at a field site in Western Australia K Sivasithamparam and I Rowland 91 Specificity and penetration of tissues by micorrhizal fungi J L Harley 99 Factors affecting the occurrence of fruitbodies of fungi forming sheathing (ecto-) mycorrhizas with roots of trees F T Last and L V Fleming 1 1 1 Fungal endophytes of forage grasses Garry T Cole and James F White 129 Ambrosia beetles and their associated fungi: research trends and techniques LRBatra 137 Ecology of keratinophilic fungi A P Garg, Sudha Gandotra, K G Mukerji and G J F Pugh 149 ii Contents Polarizing processes for germ tube outgrowth from monilioid fungal spores (Neurospora conidial model) Gilbert Turian 1 Enzymes from thermophilic fungi: Proteases and lipases Bhavdish N Johri, Sanjay Jain and Satish Chouhan 1 Physiological studies of the Gyrnnoascaceae with an overview on their ecology Gouri Rani Ghosh 1 Conidia as modified hyphae E Descals 2 Notes on some deuteromycete genera with cheiroid or digitate brown conidia B C Sutton 2 On the anamorph genus Cirrenalia R D Goos 2 Porosubramaniana, a new genus of lignicolous hyphomycetes V£ra Holubova-Jechova 2 Basifimbria spinosa, a new pleoanamorphic coprophilous hyphomycete Nathalie Buffin and G L Hennebert 2 Two new hyphomycetes from Ethiopia D J Bhat 2 Pigment localization in Dematiaceous hyphomycetes and the segregation of Pseudogliomastix gen. nov. from Acremonium W Gams and T Boekhout 2 A re-appraisal of the relationships between Arthrinium and other hyphomycetes David William Minter 2 New and rare entomogenous fungi from Amazonia Robert A Samson and Harry C Evans 3 Problems and prospects in the systematics of the Ascomycotina D L Hawksworth 3 On Achaetomium and a new genus Subramaniula (Ascomycota) J A von Arx 3- Meliolina subramanianii sp. nov S J Hughes and K A Pirozynski 3- Caryosporella rhizophorae gen. et sp. nov. (Massariaceae), a marine Ascomycete from Rhizophora mangle Jan Kohlmeyer 3 Pseudascozonus, a new genus of Pezizales / van Brummelen 3< The species concept in Hymenochaetaceae (Fungi, Hymenomycetes) E Parmasto 3< The relevance of chemical characters for the taxonomy of Agaricales Meinhard Moser 3! Monitoring of wheat rusts in the Indian sub-continent L M Joshi, K D Srivastava and D V Singh 31 Identity of dactuliophora leaf spot of pearl millet p D Tyagi 4( Management of Khizoctonia solani diseases with chemicals Rajendra K Grover and Hans R Kataria 4] Contents iii Cylindrocarpon species associated with mycotic keratitis C Booth, Y M Clayton and M Usherwood 433 Conidial ontogenesis of pathogenic black yeasts and their pathogenicity for mice M Miyaji and K Nishimura 437 Drechslera longirostrata (Subramanian) and other Drechslera species pathogenic to humans and animals Edouard Drouhet, Claude de Bievre and Seema Wahah 453 India's changing agriculture: Its management, genetic vulnerability and diversification H K Jain 465 Photodynamically induced behavioural responses of the colourless flagellate Polytomella magna: Effects of methylene blue Wilhelm Nultsch and Maria Hddcr 475 Additional DNA sequences- Topography, property, role and evolutionary significance Arun Kumar Sharma 487 Strand plant communities of the Indian sub-continent T Ananda Rao and V M Meher-Homji 505 Floral differentiation and its modification I Usha Rao and H Y Mohan Ram 525 Interphase nuclear structure in plants: role of nuclear DNA content and highly repeated DNA sequences in chromatin condensation Shubhada Patankar, C P Joshi, S A Ranade, Mrinal Bhave and P K Ranjckar 539 Development of male and female gametophytes and integument initiation in Prenanthes brunoniana Wall. (Compositae) Sarvesh Kumar Sood and Tejinder Singh Thakur 553 Significance of seed coat pattern in Vigna radiata var. sublohata S Ignacimuthu and C R Babu 561 Survey of some Indian soils for laccase producing fungi and their lignin degrading ability D S Arora and D K Sandhu 567 Immunogenic analysis of extra-cellular polysaccharide of rhizobia collected •from South Indian soils R Kasturi Bai and P N Raju 575 Comparison of phytoplankton biomass in four water bodies of Dharwad, Karnataka State (India) G R Hegde 583 Pharmacognostic studies on "Dhava" (Anogeissus latifolia Bedd.}— I. Stem- bark and root R C Gupta 589 Cytology of woody species V K Singhal, B S Gill and S S Bir 607 Cytological studies on members of family Labiatae from Kodaikanal and adjoining areas (South India) S S Bir and MIS Saggoo 619 Seasonal growth, reproduction and spore shedding in Pterodadia heteroplatos N Kaliaperumal and M Umamaheswara Rao 627 iv Contents Seedling anatomy of Brassica campestris L. S Babber and A Filial 633 The veinlet syndrome in the tribe Andromedeae (Ericaceae) T Ananda Rao and Swapna Chakraborti 639 Typology and taxonomic value of foliar sclereids in the Proteaceae III. Petrophile R. Br. ex Knight T Ananda Rao, Swapna Chakraborti and Silpi Das 655 Abscission responses of petiolar explants of Capsicum varieties to treatments with growth substances and their combinations Karan Singh and Y S Murty 663 . Foliar application of potassium on the growth and yield components of pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan (L.) Mill sp.) N N V S Ravindranath, N V Satyanarayana, P Prasad and K V Madhava Rao 671 The pericarpic structure of Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal Y S Dave, N D Patel and A R S Menon 677 Effect of different growth substances on the foliar stomata of Tagetes erecta L. Vidhu, R K Sharma and Y S Murty 683 Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. ( Plant Sci.), Vol. 94, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 1-9. © Printed in India. The structure of the pod in two species of Prosopis S RANGAYYA, I L KOTHARI and G L SHAH Department of Biosciences, Sardar Patel University, Vallabh Vidyanagar 388 120, India MS received 23 March 1984 Abstract. The structure of the stipe and basal, middle and apical regions of the pod is described. The older stipe shows secondary growth as in a dicotyledonous stem. The stipe at its junction with the valves shows three vascular bundles, one large and two small, arranged in a triangular manner, with 3-5 lateral bundles in Prosopis juliflora. The mature pericarp of P. cineraria has one dorsal and two ventral vascular sutural bundles, but in P.juliflora there is a pair of vascular bundles in each suture. The valvular structure can be distinguished into one layered epicarp, multilayered mesocarp and few to many layered endocarp. The outer mesocarpic layers and all endocarpic layers are sclerenchymatous in P. juliflora but only the endocarpic layers are collenchymatous in P. cineraria. Within the circumscription of structural types of pod described by Fahn and Zohary (1955), the Trifolium type (form d) is found in P. cineraria and the Cyanophyllum type in P. juliflora. Taxonomic importance of anatomical characters is brought to light to separate the two taxa. Keywords. Prosopis; pod structure; taxonomic significance. 1. Introduction As far as the Mimosaceae is concerned our knowledge about the mature pod structure is limited to only about twelve species out of nearly a hundred leguminous taxa investigated by Fahn and Zohary (1955). Therefore, a detailed study of the pod structure at basal, middle and apical regions is undertaken in some members of the Mimosaceae during different stages of development to supplement the existing data. Our observations are recorded on Calliandra tweedii (Shah et al 1983), Leucaena leucaphloea (Shah and Rangayya 1983), Desmanthus virgatus (Shah and Rangayya 1 984) and Neptunia (Rangayya and Shah 1 984). In this paper, our observations on the pods of Prosopis cineraria Druce and P. juliflora (L.) Sw. are presented. 2. Material and methods P. cineraria (L.) Druce is indigenous in scrub forests, much used as a fodder, the wood as fuel and tender pods as vegetables or medicinally as an applicant in acute headache. P. juliflora (L.) Sw. is an introduction from Mexico or Central America primarily to check desert shifting and for soil reclamation. This too is a good fodder and fuel plant. Both the species locally grow wild. The stipe, middle region and apex of mature pods, in various stages of development, were fixed in FAA for 48 hr and, thereafter, stored in 70 % ethyl alcohol. The fixed material was dehydrated, embedded in paraffin and serial microtome sections (8-10 /^m thick) stained with safranin and fast green were made permanent following the usual procedures (Jensen 1962). 1 IT Kothari and GL Shah 2 S Rangayya, I L K.otnar 3. Observations 3.1 Morphology of pod ^ g tj cylindriC) ^^ 3 2 Internal structure . , • -s one layered cells squarish rectangular, 3 2a Stipe: In young ^.^^Sed, thin walled except for the moderately columnar or oblong, ^"J^Etod rounded or flat outer walls Cortex „ hick and rough or smooth ^J^^j with dense cytoplasm and nucleu, xvlem parenchyma (figures 1, 2). fomed in the stipe wrth a layered in the latter. • extra-stelar region in both A6.9^; There are no concoimtant changes in the ex junction of pencarpial valve einaiffl J two arranged tnangul Aowitova^^). A similar arrangemen each without sclerenchymatous f^^^J^^^^ra^^^^^^ 'f-^^n^li^a '^uter epidermis in the young ^^^^S^^^' cotannar, thralled cells ^"™™*£°^?V but unthickened and , moderately thickly ^*™*^^ £ theperiearp matures the_outer Pod structure in Prosopis w; v- ';• i.'.' (i\v A-fiK'^VsBtf" <! •.''.• ^'iV V^.:.^;,"- tf /-T yVTvVl^^'-.-^ft: Figures 1-9, Transections of basal region, 1, 3, 6, a. JP. cineraria, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9. P.juliflora. 1, Young pod, ( x 85). 2. Outer region of young pod ( x 366). 3. Mature pod. ( x 229), 4* Extreme base of mature pod ( x 37), 5, Vascular region of mature pod, ( x 229), <>, 7. Basal region (6 x 229; 7 x 37), 8, Eglandular trichome ( x 366). 9. Dorsal suture of maturing pod, ( x 229). P.s.a, S Rangayya, I L Kothari and G L Shah Figures 10-18. Transections of middle region. 10, 15-17. P. cineraria; 11-14, 18. P. juliflora. 10, 11. Epidermis showing cuticle (x 366). 12. Stoma in longisectional view (x 366). 13. Stoma in transectional view. Note periclinal divisions in neighbouring cells (x366). 14. Eglandular trichome. (x366). 15. Dorsal suture of maturing pericarp (x229). U. Ventral suture of mature pericarp (x85). 17, 18. Dorsal suture of mature pericarp (17 x 85; 18 x 37). Pod structure in Prosopis 5 P. cineraria (figures 8, 10), but the cells are thickened all round in P.juliflora (figure 1 1). Even then the cell contents are seen in both the species. Stomata are observed only in young and some early stages of maturing pericarp. They are situated at the level of other epidermal cells. Their orientation is irregular as can be judged by some stomata being cut transversely and others longitudinally (figures 12, 13). Guard cells are elliptic or oblong and slightly thick walled in P. cineraria but they are ovate or triangular and thickened on the inner walls supported by a cushion of 6-10 thick-walled compact cells in P.juliflora (figure 1 3). The inner and outer ledges are seen in both the species (figure 1 3). Trichomes are sparingly seen on the young pericarps. They are eglandular, unicellular, conical, thick-walled with smooth cuticle and broad lumen with vacuolated contents (figures 8, 14). Mesocarp in the sutural region between the outer epidermis and the vascular bundles is 8-15 layered parenchymatous, of thin- walled, spherical or oblong cells, those of 4-5 hypodermal layers are larger than those of the remaining layers, delimiting the sutural vascular bundles. In P. cineraria the hypodermal layers are richly tanniniferous (figures 15-17). The number of vascular bundles does not change in young and mature pericarps. In P. cineraria there is one bundle in the dorsal suture and two in the ventral one (figures 16, 17) but in P.juliflora there are a pair of bundles in each suture (figures 18, 19). Radial tracheary elements are separated by thick-walled lignified xylem parenchyma. Phloem is several layered with a few cells tanniniferous in P. cineraria. Cambium is 3-4 layered (figures 15-19). In P.juliflora, 3-4 layered broadly semilunar sclerenchymatous sheath is present above the dorsal and ventral sutural bundles (figures 18, 19), Valvular mesocarp in the mature pericarp of P. cineraria consists of a richly tanniniferous outer zone of 6-8 hypodermal layers of tangentially elongated cells separated from the rest of the non-tanniniferous zone. The 4-5 layers below the tanniniferous zone and in the vicinity of the vascular bundles are also tangentially elongated. The cells of the rest of the mesocarpic layers are rectangular, polygonal, oval or oblong, irregularly oriented, with a few small intercellular spaces or without them (figure 20). Some cells become thick-walled, pitted and are scattered or in groups of 2-3 (figure 21). Valvular vascular bundles differentiate in young pericarp. They are 10-12 in the mature pericarp, each with a 2-3 layered sclerenchymatous cap above it (figure 22). Tracheary elements are angular in radial rows, separated by thin-walled xylem parenchyma. Phloem is in 2-3 small groups. Cambium is not distinct. The valvular mesocarpic structure in P.juliflora is different from that in P. cineraria. In the young pericarp it is parenchymatous, thin-walled, outermost 2-3 layers consist of squarish or rectangular cells with vacuolated cytoplasm and nucleus. The cells of the next 8-10 layers constituting the middle region are smallest in size, with dense cytoplasm and nucleus. The cells of the innermost region of 4-5 layers are largest, squarish, rectangular or polygonal, sometimes spherical, all thin-walled, highly vacuolated, each with a nucleus. The cells of the outer and inner mesocarpic layers are arranged in almost regular files whereas those of the middle layers are irregularly oriented (figure 23). As the pericarp matures the cells of the outer mesocarpic layers become sclerenchymatous (figure 31) but those of the innermost layers become elongated radially, occupy the major portion of the pericarp and are filled with mucilage (figure 32). Valvular vascular bundles are 30 --40 in the middle mesocarpic layers in the mature S Rangayya, I L Kothari and G L Shah I r^' '£Vr v-- Figures 19-27. Transections of middle region. 20-22, 27. P. cineraria', 19, 23 26. P. julfflora. 19, 20. Ventral region of mature pericarp. (19 x 37; 20 x 85). 21. Inner mesocarpic cells showing pit fields ( x 366). 22, 25. Valvular vascular bundle of mature pericarp (22 x 366; 25 x 229). 23, 24. Valvular region of young pericarp. Inner epidermis at arrow in 24 ( x 229). 26, Endocarp of mature pericarp. Pseudoparenchyma at arrow ( x 85). 27. Endocarp of maturing pericarp ( x 229). Pod structure in Prosopis 1 valve. They are broadly wedge-shaped, conjoint, collateral, endarch with a 2 -3 layered hemispheric sclerenchymatous sheath above it. Tracheary elements are angular in radial rows separated by thin-walled xylem parenchyma (figure 25). The vascular zone together with the thick-walled outer mesocarpic layers and epicarp forms a tough and leathery skin of the pericarp. Endocarp in P. cineraria is 4-5 layered. The inner epidermis lines the seed cavity. It is a layer of thin-walled, columnar cells with dense cytoplasm and nucleus. The cells of the outer layers are compact and tangentially elongated (figure 26). In subsequent stages of development they become collenchymatous and the inner epidermal cells of the two valves variously divide to form a loose parenchymatous tissue in the inter-seed region (figure 27). In P. juliflora it is 3-4 layered in the young pericarp, the inner epidermis is one layered; cells of all layers are rectangular or squarish, densely cytoplasmic, each with a nucleus (figure 24). In subsequent changes of development numerical and structural changes take place in these layers. In the mature valve all the layers become sclerenchymatous, cells of the outer 3-4 layers are radially elongated and those of the inner 4-5 layers tangentially and obliquely oriented. The inner epidermis from the two valves produces inter-seed parenchymatous tissue (figure 26). 3.2c Apical region: In TS the ventral suture is slightly notched. In P. cineraria epidermis is one layered, thick-walled, tanniniferous. Hypodermal 4-5 layers are tanniniferous; the rest of the mesocarp is parenchymatous. Sutural vascular bundles are seen but not the endocarp (figure 31). The extreme apical region is parenchymatous with small intercellular spaces; tannin is present in some epidermal and hypodermal cells; lysiginous space is present in the central parenchyma (figure 30). In P. juliflora the epidermis consists of thick-wailed cells, heavily cuticularized on their outer walls. Hypodermal 2-3 layers are sclerenchymatous but without tannin cells. Vascular bundles are arranged in a ring, each with a sclerenchynaa cap above it. The central region is the part of the endocarp but seed cavity is not distinct. The loose parenchyma filled with mucilage is between the vascular bundles and central sclerenchyma (figure 29). The extreme tip is parenchymatous bounded by epidermis. It contains a secretory sac-like structure and a small vascular bundle above the notch (figures 28, 33). 4. Discussion Fahn and Zohary (1955) described 16 types and subtypes/forms of some types of the valvular structure in about 100 species of the Leguminosae and arranged them into 8 groups with reference to dehiscence emphasizing the structure of the sclerenchyma. These data clearly indicate the use of legumen structure as a taxonomic character to delimit taxa, but no types are specific for the subfamilies/families of the leguminosae. The legumen structure in Calliandra (Shah et al 1983) and Neptunia (Rangayya and Shah 1984 is Acacia, whereas it is Trigonella type in Leucaena (Shah and Rangayya 1983) and Desmanthus (Shah and Rangayya 1984). Prosopis cineraria shows Trifolium type of structure and P. juliflora, the Cyanophyllum type. The legumen structure thus can be used to separate the two species of Prosopis but there are some other differences of taxonomic significance and they are listed here. S Rangayya, I L Kothari and G L Shah C^. •/**:•, ;i~W'/i 31 ,33 Figures 2S-33. 28,29. Transection of middle region. 30-33. Transection of apical region 28, 30, 31. P. cineraria; 29, 32, 33. P.juliftora. 28. Secretory sac in mesocarp (x 229) 29. Valvular region of mature pericarp ( x 85). 30-33. Apical region at different levels. 30^ 31, 33. x 85; 32 (x 150). Pod structure in Prosopis P. cineraria Stipe Hypodermis tanniniferous Phloem fibres absent Lateral bundles not present at the junction of mature stipe with base of valves Mature pod Outer epidermal cells thickened on their outer walls Hypodermis tanniniferous In valvular mesocarp hypodermal cells parenchy- matous, tangentially elongated; other mesocarpic cells homogenous, except pitted cells scattered or in groups Valvular vascular bundles without sclerenchyma Valvular vascular bundle with sclerenchyma cap P. juliflora Hypodermis not tanniniferous Phloem fibres present Lateral bundles present Outer epidermal cells thickened all round Hypodermis not tanniniferous In valvular mesocarp hypodermal cells scleren- chymatous. Innermost mesocarpic layers of cells elongated radially, filled with mucilage. Endocarp collenchymatous of tangentially elon- gated cells Apex Hypodermis tanniniferous Vascular bundles in two groups without sclerenchyma Endocarp sclerenchymatous, outer 2-4 layers radially elongated, inner 4-5 layers obliquely tangential Hypodermis sclerenchymatous Vascular bundles in a ring below hypodermis References Fahn A and Zohary M 1955 On the pericarpial study of the legumen, its evolution and relation to dehiscence; Phytomorphology 5 99-1 1 1 Jensen W A 1962 Botanical histochemistry, (San Fransisco: Freeman) Rangayya S and Shah G L 1984 Pericarpial structure in Neptunia; Ada Bot. Indica 12 50-56 Shah G L, Rangayya S and Kothari I L 1983 Structure and development of pod of Calliandra tweedii Bth; Flora 173 469-477 Shah G L and Rangayya S 1983 Structure of the pericarp ofLeucaena leucocephala de Wit; Feddes Rep. 94 649-656 Shah G L and Rangayya S 1984 Studies on the pericarp structure in Desmanthus virgatus Willd; J. PL Anat. Morpholl 31-38 Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (Plant Sci.), Vol. 94, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 11-31. (C) Printed in India. Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX. Species novarum Cyperacearum in memoriam optimi Professoris Swamy E GOVINDARAJALU Department of Botany, Presidency College, Madras 6(X) 005, India MS received 2 June 1983; revised 6 September 1984 Abstract. Five new species belonging to Bulbostylis, Eleocharis, Fimhristylis, Fuirena an* Scleria respectively have been proposed to immortalize late Prof. Dr Swamy for his valuabl botanical and nonbotanical contributions. The vegetative anatomy of these new species ha also been studied which shows an overall agreement with the general anatomical characters o each one of the genera besides the occurrence of a few characters specific for each species Keywords. Bulbostylis; Eleocharis; Fimbristylis; Fuirena; Scleria", vegetative anatomy. 1. Bulbostylis swamyii Govind. sp. nov. (figure 1) Annuales. Culmi caespitosi, setacei, glabri, leves, 3- 10 cm x 0-3 -0-5 mm. Folia varij longitudine, capillaria, scabrida per totum, 0-3-0-4 mm lata; vaginae cum mem branaceus 3-5 distincte nerviatis lateribus et cum densis longis capillis in distal marginis. Inflorescentia capitata, hemispherica, (3-) 5-10 (-12) spicularum consistens 5-8 (-10) mm lata. Bracteae involucrales 2-5, foliis consimiles, 2-3 quam inflorescentii longiores cum dilata scariosa margine sicut in vaginis, 1-5-3 cm longae, sursum et vari< curvatae, scabridae ad marginem. Spiculae sessiles, urceolatae (ovatae), 6-8 florae, 3-i x 1-5-1 -8 (-2) mm, Glumae oblongae cum plus minusve laterales paralleliter, mem branaceae, valde bilobatae ad apicem, mucronatae, carinatae cum lateribus enervatis e dense scabrida per totum et cum longi capilli ad distalem marginem loborum cinnamomei fusci, 3-3-5 (inclusa mucrone) x 2-4-2-6 mm; carina latissima, valida uninervia, cinnamomea fusca, 0-8- 1mm lata; mucro recurvata, 0-5~-0-7mm longa Stamina 3; anthera oblonga linearia, aurantiaca vel porphyrea, minute calcarata ac basim et apiculata, 1 -4-1 -5 mm longa. Stylus tenuis, sparse ciliatus, 1 *5~~2 mm longus stigma 3, stylo multo breviora, papillata, 0-5-0-6 mm longa. Nux globosa, trigona dense granulata, albida vel straminea, minute stipitata, 0-7-0-8 x 0-5-0-6 mm. Annuals. Culms caespitose, setaceous, glabrous, smooth, 3-10 cm x 0-3 -0-5 mm Leaves variable in length, capillary, scabrid throughout, 0-3-0-4 mm broad; sheaths with membranous 3-5 prominently nerved sides and with long hairs densely in the distal half margins. Inflorescence capitate, hemispherical consisting of (3-) 5-10 (-12 spikelets, 5-8 (-10) mm across. Involucral bracts 2-5, leaf-like, 2-3 times longer thar inflorescence with dilated scarious hairy margin as in sheaths, 1-5-3 cm long, upwardl) and variously curved, scabrid on margin. Spikelets sessile, urceolate (ovate), 6~£ flowered, 3-5 x 1-5-1-8 (-2) mm. Glumes oblong with almost parallel sides, membran- ous, deeply bilobed at apex, mucronate, keeled with nerveless sides and densely scabrid throughout and with long hairs at distal margin of lobes, cinnamomeous brown, 3-3-f (inclmucro) x 2-4-2-6 mm; keel very broad, strong, 1 nerved, cinnamomeous brown E Govindarajalu Figures la-g. Bulbostyliss\vamyiiGQ\ind.sp.nov.*.'h.Mt x nat. size; b. stamen ( x 20), c. spikelet ( x 1 0), d. glume ( x 1 8) (lateral view); e. glume ( x 1 7) (spread out); f . style and stigma ( x 27); g. nut ( x 36) (all from Geetha 44, type). 0-8-1 mm broad; mucro recurved, 0-5-0-7 mm long. Stamens 3; anther oblong linear, orange yellow or reddish brown, minutely spurred at base and apiculate, 1-4-1 -5 mm long. Style slender, sparsely hairy, 1-5-2 mm long; stigma 3, much shorter than style, les in Cyperaccae: XIX 1 3 papillate, 0-5 -0-6 mm long. Nul globose, trigonous, densely granulate, whitish or stramineous, minutely stipitate, 0*7-0-8 x 0-5---0-6 mm. Related to Bulbostylis barbata (Rottb.) Clarke but differs in having leaves usually variable in length, urceolate few flowered spikelets, much longer involucral bracts, larger cinnarnomeous brown deeply bilobed oblong glumes with almost parallel sides and with long hairs at distal margin of the lobes, longer mucro, 3 stamens, longer anthers and style, globose nuts with granulate surface. Geetha 44, Idinthakarai, Tirunelveli Dt., Tamilnadu, occurring in sandy places (typ*>: CAL); paratype: Abdul Mallik, sji, Balasarasa 27, Chandra 31, Damodaran s.n., Geetha and Akila 42, Kalairani 29, Rajeswari 21 —all from the type locality (PCM). Note: Specimens in dried condition assumes cinnarnomeous brown color. The involucral bracts are usually recurved. 1. Eleocharis swamyii Govind. sp. nov. (figure 2) Herba perennLs cum rhizoma incrassatum, elongatum, oblique reptans. Culmi erecti, fasciculati, teretes per totum, laeves, non transverse septati, 30-60 cm x 2 rnm. Vaginae membranaceae, plerumque sordide nigrae, nitidae, arete amplectentes, oblique trun- catae, acutae ad apicem, 10-1 5 cm longae. Spiculae cylindricae (cylindricae lanceolatae), teres postea angulares propter squarrosas glumas, culmo latiores, obtusae (acutae), multiflorae, pallide fuscae, 10-25 x 3-0-3*5 mm. Glwnae firmae, cartilaginae, laxe imbricatae, adpressae, oblique erectae postea fiunt patescentes et convolutae ubi sicco, anguste ovatae vel ovato lanceolatae, subacutae vel acutae, multinerviae, sine manifesto medio nervo, late hyalinae in dimidio superiore, 3-5-4 x 2 mm; margine hyalinae, laceratae, tannin punctatae et striatae. Setae 7, inaequales, nux duple longiores, retrorse totaliter scabridae, flavidae vel pallide fuscae. Stamina 2-3; anthera linearia, breviter apiculata, 1-1-5 mm longa. Stylus 2-2-5 mm longus; stigmata ramorum linearia, duplo quam stylo longiora, spiraliter, sparse pubescentia. Nux turgida, symmetries biconvexa, distincte cancellata, ecostata ad marginem, late orbiculata vel suborbicutata cum brevi cello manifeste marginata super collum, nitida, iutea vel testacea, 1*7-2 x 1-5 mm; cellulae epicarpicae largae, transverse elongatae hexagonales, in 20-25 regularibus seriebus praesentes in uno quoque; stylopodium deltoideum, planum, profunde fuscum, 1 cm longum. Perennial herbs with thick obliquely creeping elongated rhizome. Culms erect, tufted, terete throughout, smooth, not transversely septate, 30-60 cm x 2 mm. Sheaths membranous, usually dirty black, shining, tightly clasping, obliquely truncate, acute at apex, 10-1 5 cm long. Spikelets cylindric (cylindric lanceolate), terete later becoming angular due to squarrose glumes, broader than culms, obtuse (acute), many flowered, pale brown, 10-25 x 3-3-5 mm. Glumes firm, cartilaginous, loosely imbricate, adpressed, obliquely erect, later becoming spreading and convolute when dry, narrowly ovate or ovate lanceolate, subacute or acute, many nerved without prominent mid nerve, broadly hyalined in upper half, 3-5-4 x 2 mm; hyaline margin lacerate, tannin punctate and striated. Bristles 7, unequal, 2 times longer than nut, retrorsely scabrous throughout, yellowish or light brown. Stamens 2-3; anther linear, shortly apiculate, 1-1-5 mm long. Style 2-2-5 mm long; stigmatic branches linear, 2 times longer than style, coiled, sparsely hairy. Nut turgid, symmetric, biconvex, distinctly cancellate, E Govindarajalu . Eleocharis ^amyii Govind. sp. no,, a. habit ( x *) b and c portion of culm Govindarajalu, 8016, type). ribless on margin, broadly orbicular or suborbicular with short neck, prominently stylopodium deltoid, flat, dark brown, 1 mm long. Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX 1 5 Related to Eleocharis variegata (Poir.) Presl but differs in having erect culms always terete behind inflorescence, usually dirty black, shining acute sheaths, cylindric slightly shorter pale brown angular spikelets, more or less 4-ranked cartilaginous subcute glumes without ferrugineous margin and distinct midnerve, coiled unequal stigmatic branches nearly two times longer than style, shorter symmetric prominently longitu- dinally ridged nuts without marginal ribs and with 20-25 rows of transversely elongated hexagonal cells on each face, 7 bristles being two times longer than nut and retrorsely scabrous up to base. Govindarajalu 8016, Kambakkam, Andhra Pradesh (type: CAL) isotype: 8016 A-I: 8016 A, MH; 8016 B, BLAT; 8016 C, DO; 8016 D, BSI; 8016 E-I, PCM; paratype: Ernest Thayasingh 9547, Vellachithode, Kodhaiyar, Kanyakumari Dt., Tamilnadu (PCM). Note: (i) Rather commonly found from mean sea level up to 500-600 m. (ii) The broad lacerate hyaline margin present in the distal half of glumes ultimately become deliquescent, (iii) The glumes become convolute at later stages, (iv) The whole plant becomes shiny after drying, (v) The individual glumes become separated and effuse in the mature spikelets. 23. Fimbristylis swamyii Govind. sp. nov. (figure 3) Annuales. Culmi tenui, setacei, dense caespitosi, 4-5 goni, glabri, laeves, costati, sulcati, 4-8 cm x 0-4-0-6 mm. Folia culmo breviora, capillacea, glabra, 3-5 nervia, omnino margine laevigata, ligulata, ca 0-5 (-1) mm lata; vaginae membranaceae, glabrae, retro rotundatae. Inflorescentia semper simplex, compacta, 3-5 spiculis consistens, 5-8 x 3-4 mm. Bracteae involucrales 2-3, multum inflorescentia breviora, 3-4 mm longae. Radii 4-5 goni, laeves, portantes 1 (-3) spiculas. Spiculae solitariae (-3), ellipticae ovatae, angulares, acutae, laxe pauciflorae, pallide cinnamomeae fuscae, 3-4 x 1-1*5 mm. Rhachilla alata, excavata. Glumae spiraliter, chartaceae, oblongae ovatae cum distincta hyaline margine, mucronulatae, carinatae, glabrae cum lateribus enervatis, 2-2-2 x 1-2-1 4 mm; carina cum 3 nervis; rtervi in mucronem excurrentes. Stamina 3; anthera linearis oblonga, minute apiculata, ca 0-5 mm longa. Stylus triquetrus cum basi pyramidali, glaber 0-6-0-8 mm longus; stigma 3, glabra, plus minusve stylo aequilonga. Nux late obovoidea, trigona, stipitata, umbonulata, pallide fusca, tuberculata cum pluricellulares auctus, 0-8-0-9 (incl. stipe) x 0-7 mm; cellulae epicarpicae isodiametricae in 10-12 (-15) regularibus seriebus in una quoque facie dispositae; stipe 0-1 mm longa. Annuals. Culms slender, setaceous, densely caespitose, 4-5 gonus, glabrous, smooth, ribbed, sulcate, 4-8 cm x 04-0-6 mm. Leaves shorter than culms, capillary, glabrous, 3-5 nerved, smooth margined throughout, ligulate, ca 0-5 (-1) mm broad; sheaths membranaceous, glabrous, rounded at back. Inflorescence always simple, compact, consisting of 3-5 spikelets, 5-8 x 3-4 mm long. Rays 4-5 gonus, smooth bearing 1 (-3) spikelets. Spikelets solitary (-3), elliptic ovate, angular, acute, loosely few flowered, pale cinnamomeous brown, 3-4 x 1-1-5 mm. Rhachilla winged, excavated. Glumes spiral, chartaceus, oblong ovate with distinct hyaline margin, mucronulate, keeled, glabrous with nerveless sides, 2-2-2 x 1-2-1-4 mm; keel 3 nerved; nerves excurrent into mucro. Stamens 3; anther linear oblong, minutely apiculate, ca 0-5 mm long. Style triquetrus with pyramidal base, glabrous, 0*6-0-8 mm long; stigma 3, glabrous, almost as long as 16 E Govindarqjalu v .9 Figures 3a-g. Fimbristylis swamyn Govind. sp. nov. a. habit ( x-J); b. spikelet ( x 15); c. nut ( x 33); d. epicarpic cells, diagrammatic; e. style and stigma ( x 36); f. anther ( x 45); g. glume (x 28); (all from Govindarajalu, 14816 C, type). style. Nut broadly obovoid, trigonus, stipitate, umbonulate, pale brown, tuberculate with pluricellular outgrowths, 0-8-0-9 (incLstipe) x 0-7 mm; epicarpic cells isodiametric arranged in 10-12 (-15) regular rows on each face; stipe 0-1 mm long. Related to Fimbristylis capilliculmis Ohwi but differs in having shorter 45 gonus culms, smooth margined shorter leaves, always simple compact smaller inflorescence containing lesser number of spikelets, involucral bracts much shorter than inflores- cence, 4-5 gonus rays, elliptic ovate smaller spikelets, chartaceus ovate glumes with distinct hyaline margin, always 3 stamens, shorter style, stigma as long as style, tuberculate -nuts with pluricellular outgrowths and quadrate epicarpic cells arranged in distinct rows, Govindarajalu 14816 C, Cliff View Forests, Nelliampathy, Pothundy, Kerala State (type: CAL); isotype: 14816 C, MH; BSI; BLAT; DD; paratype: Govindarajalu 14391, 14394, Thangaikal Mottai, Highwavys Mts., Madurai Dt, Tamilnadu, (PCM). Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX I' Note: (i) Common in grasslands at 1000-1500 m. (ii) Straw like texture coupled witl reddish brown color and much shorter bracts seem to be the characteristic features o this species. I. Fuirena swamyll Govind. sp. HOY. (figure 4) Herba perennis, rhizomata. Rhizoma brevis, oblique reptans, lignea cum luridis ve nigris, multinervis, ovatis, lanceoSatis squamis obtecta. Culmi triquetri, fasciculati, p!u minusve erecti, leviter gracili, glabri per totum, non incrassati ad basim, 20-45 en x 2-2-5 mm. Folia rigida, oblique erecta, lanceolata, acuminata, carinata, 10 1 3 nervia sulcata adaxiali cum incrassato recurvato margine, quoque internodis longiora, 6-3 (-9) cm x 3-4 mm; carina et adaxiales sulcus cum trichome seriebus; vaginae internodi breviorae, multinerviae cum ore truncato ciliato. Inflorescentia terminaiis et sub terminalis racemi portati pedunculis pubescentibus, 1-2 cm lati, 3-10 spicularun consistens; bracteae inferiorae foliis consimilis, plerumque inflorescentia longiorae oblique erectae, vaginans; bracteae superiores ovate lanceoSatae (setaceae), erectae hirsutae ad marginem et basim, inflorescentia aequilongae vel breviores, non vaginans Spiculae ovoidae, acutae, canae vel nigrae fuscae, 6- 9 x 2-3 mm. Glumae ovatae rotundatae ad apicem, dense hirsutae, carinatae, ca 3 indistinctae laterales nervia* quoque in dimidis, abundater tannin punctatae, aristatae, 3-3*2 (incl. arista x 1-4-1*5 mm; carina cum 3 nervis; nervi in aristarn excurrentes; arista erecta aliquantum glabra, 0*6-0-7 mm longa. Setae 6, bene exultae, biseriatae, fuscae, retrors< scabridae; sepaline setae nuci aequilongae, ,ca 1-5 mm longae; petaline setae nuc longiorae, ca 2 mm longae; squamae 0. Stamina 3; anthera linearis oblonga, Candida ve lutea, minute apiculata, 0-6-0-8 mm longa. Nux late elliptica vel plus minusve obovata triquetra, tricostulata, laevis, nitida, glandacea fusca, 1*5 (incl. stipes et rostrum x 0-6-0-7 mm; cellulae epicarpicae minutae, isodiametncae, indistinctae; rostrun pyranaidalis, laevis cum margine undulata, ca 0-3 mm longus; stipes 0-4 mm longus Perennial herbs, rhizomatous. Rhizome short, obliquely creeping, woody covered witl dirty brown or black multinerved ovate lanceolate scales. Culms triquetrus, tufted, mor< or less erect, rather slender, glabrous throughout, not swollen at base, 20 -45 en x 2-2-5 mm. Leaves rigid, obliquely erect, lanceolate, acuminate, keeled, 10-13 nerved adaxially grooved with thickened recurved margin, longer than each internode, 6-8 (-9 cm x 3-4 mm; keel and adaxial grooves with rows of hairs; sheaths shorter thai internodes, many nerved with truncate hairy mouth. Inflorescence terminal anc subterminal clusters borne by pubescent peduncles, 1-2 cm broad consisting of 3-l( spikelets; lower bracts similar to leaves usually longer than inflorescence, obliquel] erect, sheathing; upper bracts ovate lanceolate (setaceous), erect, hirsute at margin anc base, as long as or shorter than inflorescence, not sheathing. Spikelets ovoid, acute greyish or blackish brown, 6-9 x 2-3 mm. Glumes ovate, rounded at apex, densely hirsute, keeled with ca 3 indistinct lateral nerves in each half, abundantly tannir punctate, aristate, 3-0-3-2 (incl. arista) x 1-4-1 -5 mm; keel 3 nerved; nerves excurren into arista; arista erect, somewhat glabrous, 0-6-0-7 mm long. Bristles 6, well developed biseriate, brown, retrorsely scabrid; sepaline bristles as long as nut, ca 1-5 mm long petaline bristles longer than nut, ca 2 mm long; scales 0. Stamens 3; anther linear oblong pale white or yellpw, minutely apiculate, 0-6-0-8 mm long. Nut broadly elliptic or mon or less obovate, triquetrus, tricostulate, smooth, shining, yellowish-brown, 1-5 (incl 18 E Govindarajalu Fuirena f Wlf 3 nov. a. habit (x j), b and c. adaxial and abaxial 12252, type). stipe and beak) x 0-6-0-7 mm; epicarpic cells minute, isodiametric, Distinct; beak pyramidal, smooth with more or less undulate margin, ca 0-3 mm long; strpe 0-4 mm 10IRelated to Fuirena pubescens Kunth but differs in having glabrous culms, rows of hairs on the keel and adaxial grooves of leaves, 6 well-developed retrorsely scabnd Studies in Cyperaccae: XIX 1- brown hypogynous bristles, sepaline bristles as long as and the petaline ones longe than nut, distinctly stalked yellowish brown or brown nuts with stalk more or les quarter the length of the nuts and minute indistinct isodiametric epicarpic cell; arranged in rows. Govindarajalu 12252, Ervangalar 17th field, Highways Mts., Madurai Dt. Tamilnadu (type: CAL); isotype: 12252 A, MH; 12252 B, BSI; 12252 C, BLAT; 12252 D, DI 12252 E-I, (PCM). Note: (i) Common in marshy places in grass lands, (ii) Characterized by greyish blacl spikelets and the presence of hairs over the keel and the median adaxial grooves of th< leaves. 3. Selena swamyii Govind. sp. nov. (figure 5) Herba perennis, glabra, levis. Culmi leviter tenues, fasciculati, erecti, acute triquetri cun plana facie, retrorso scabridi, 40-70 cm x 2-2-5 mm. Folia gradatim contracta ii summa acuta, glabra cum margine serrulata in superiore 1/3 folii, 34 mm lata distributa in intervallis fere equis; vaginae angustae, non alatae, leves, aliquan,\ pubescentes vel pilosa in dimidio superiore; vaginae infimae purpureae fuscac puberulentae; contraligula multum breviora, lunata, crassa, latiore quam longiora ciliata cum margine scariosa. Inflorescentia leviter lata, elongata, plerumque consisten: unius paniculi (interdum 1 lateralis addita), 2-3 x 1-1 -5 cm, paniculis plus minusvi laxis; pedunculis solitari (binatis), plerumque breviores, pubescentes ad apicem bracteae primarie plus minusve foliis consimiles, inflorescentia quam longiora secondari setacei. Spiculae unisexuales, 2 (-3) in fasciculati, purpureis fuscis; sprculai masculae breviter pedunculatae, obliquae oblongae ovatae, 4-5 mm longae; stamina 3 antherae linearia, ca I mm longae, apiculatae, calcaratae ad basim; spiculae femineai ellipticae ovatae, 2-5-3 mm longae; glumae 3, late ovatae, acutae vel apiculatae, glabrae Discus distincte tenuiter trilobatus; lobi oblongi, rigidi, rotundati, plus minusve nuc adpressi, integris, pallidi, striolati, 0- 5-0-7 mm longi cum sinis latis. Nux alabastrina nitida, glumae aequilonga vel leviter subglobosa, glabra, manifeste rostrata, teretis rugulosa transverse undulata, ferruginea, tenaciora juga cum 3 depressionibus a< basim, 2-5-2-6 (inclrostro) x 2 mm; rostrum ca 0-2 mm longum. Perennial herbs, glabrous, smooth. Culms rather slender, fascicled, erect, acutely triquetrus with flat faces, retrorsely scabrid, 40-70 cm x 2-2*5 mm. Leaves gradually narrowed into acute tip, glabrous with serrulate margin in upper 1/3 of leaf, 3-4 mn broad, distributed almost at equal intervals; sheaths narrow, wingless, smooth sometimes puberulous or pilose in upper half; lowermost sheaths purplish brown puberulous; contraligule very short, lunate, thick, broader than long, ciliate wit! scarious margin. Inflorescence rather broad, elongate consisting of usually singl< panicle (sometimes 1 lateral added), 2-3 x 1-1-5 cm; panicle somewhat lax; peduncle: solitary (binate), usually short, hairy at top; primary bract more or less similar to leaves longer than inflorescence, secondary ones setaceous. Spikelets unisexual, in clusters of '* (-3), purplish brown; male spikelets shortly peduncled, oblique, oblong ovate, 4-5 mn long; stamens 3; anther linear, ca 1 mm long, apiculate, spurred at base; female spikeleti elliptic ovate, 2-5-3 mm long; glumes 3, broadly ovate, acute or apiculate, glabrous. Dis) distinctly shallowly 3 lobed; lobes oblong, rigid, rounded, more or less adpressed to nut entire, pale, striolate, 0-5-0-7 mm long with broad sinuses. Nut marble white, shining, ai 20 £ Govindarajalu Figures 5a-e. Selena swamyli Govind. sp. nov. a. habit ( x £); b. male spikelet ( x 9); c. nut ( x 1 5); d. female and lateral male spikelet ( x 1 5); e. base of nut showing disc ( x 10) (all from Govindarajalu, 12515, type). long as or shorter than glumes, subglobose, glabrous, prominently rostrate, rugulose by transverse undulate ferrugineous viscid ridges with 3 depressions at base, 2-5-2-6 (incl.rostrum) x 2-0 mm; rostrum ca 0-2 mm long. Related to Sderia oblata Blake but differs in the following respects: culms retrorsely scabrid; leaves narrower, distributed more or less at equal intervals; inflorescence Studies In Cyperaccae: XIX 21 shorter, narrower and lax; anthers shorter; female spikelets shorter with glabrous glumes; disk lobes oblong, shorter, rounded at apex with broad sinuses; nuts larger than glumes, subglobose, prominently rostrate, rugulosc by transverse undulate ferrugi- neous viscid ridges with 3 depressions at base. Govindarajalu 12515, on the way to Italiyar to Anamaliyar, Valparai, Coimbatore Dt., Tamilnadu (type: CAL); isotype: 12515 A, MH; 12515 B, BLAT; 12515 C, PCM. Note: (i) Rare in open wet grassy places occurring at 1 (XX) 1250m. (ii) Leaves distributed throughout the plant almost at equal intervals. Vegetative anatomy For methods and other information, see Govindarajalu (1966, 1968 a,b, 1975) and Metcaife (1971). The descriptive terms proposed by Metcalfe and Gregory (1964) are followed here. Bulhostylis swamyii Leaf- •• "Abaxial surface: Intercostal cells axially elongated; cell walls thin, almost smooth. Stomata (length 27-56 /an; width 2 1*6 -23-4 ^m), more or less circular or elliptic; subsidiary cells low dome-shaped; interstomatal cells moderately long with concave ends. Silica-cells elongated, narrow, each cell containing 2 3 silica-bodies without satellites. Prickle hair short (length 90- 102-5 /*m), excessively thick -walled, pointed with or without narrow lumen, bulbous based, curved or erect commonly present on surface and margin. Adaxial surface: Cells broad, hexagonal; cell walls thin, smooth; stomata and silica- cells absent, T. S. lamina: Thickly V-shaped as in figure 6a. Width of lamina examined ca 0-3 mm. Epidermis: abaxial epidermal cells inflated but ca 6 cells in adaxial concavity much larger than the remainder thus resembling bulliform cells. Cuticle thicker on the adaxial surface than on the abaxial. Sclerenchyma: abaxial (height 1 3-5 jum; width 22-5 fim) squarrish, subtending each vb; median vb with adaxial girder, see abaxial strand; adaxial marginal strand more or less triangular (height 18 /xm; width 22-5 jum). Air-cavities not distinct; substomatal cavities larger than the size of epidermal cells. Chlorenchyma radiating separated by translucent cells; vb's 5 forming an arc; median vb larger than the remainder; lateral vb's circular in outline while the median ones are oval shaped; median vb (type III A) and lateral vb's (type I; figure 6a); metaxylem vessel element of median vb (18 /mi in diameter); metaphloem of 'intermediate type'. Bundle sheath seemingly 2 layered, both complete; os fibrous; is parenchymatous not distinct. Silica-bodies smooth more or less spherical, present in the inner bordering cells of substomatal cavity (figure 6c). Secretory cells large, abundant. Culm: Epidermis, surface view: Cells elongated, variable in size and shape; cell walls moderately thick, smooth. Silica-cells short, rather broad, occurring in 2 rows, each cell containing 1 -2 (-3) nodulose bodies. For other details, see leaf. T. S. Culm: Outline irregular with 3 narrow deep furrows and ca 3 wider shallow furrows; portions between furrows representing 3-5 minor rounded ribs (figure 6d). Diameter of culm examined 0-5-0-6 mm. Central ground tissue consisting of thin- walled, large parenchyma cells without intercellular spaces. Cuticle rather thick. 22 E Govindarajalu B Figures 6a~e. Bulbostylis swamyii Govind. a. transaction of lamina ( x 1 33); b. transection of substomatal chamber in culm ( x 340); c. transection of stoma and substomatal chamber in lamina ( x 340); d. transection of culm ( x 1 35); e. transection of root ( x 133) (from Geetha, 44, type). Epidermal cells inflated, radially elongated and arranged in regular groups (figure 6d) and their continuity being interrupted by sclerenchyma. Air-cavities present as substomatal ones, see lamina; inner bordering cells of substomatal cavity containing silica particles (figure 6b). Assimilatory tissue: chlorenchyma radiating, completely so in small vb's and incompletely or crescentiform like in large vb's. Sclerenchyma strands ca 17 (-20) usually squarrish (height and width 22-5 /#n); few triangular (height 31-5 /^m; width 22-5 /#n). Vb's ca 20 occurring in more or less 2 rings, outer ring consisting ofca 13 vb's (type I), small, circular, inner ring of 4 vb's large, oval shaped (type III B), the latter containing protoxylem lacunae; metaxylem elements (13-5-18 /zm in diameter); Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX 23 metaphloem of "regular type7. Bundle sheath 2 layered, os fibrous, is parenchymatous, incomplete in large vb's; is indistinct in small vb's. Secretory cells as in lamina. T. S. Root: Diameter of root examined ca 0-3 mm. Exodermis of 1 2 layers of large variable cells. Cortex recognizable into 2 zones, outer lacunose but connected with exoderrnis at few places by short radiating rows of cells; inner of 2-3 layers of small rather thick-walled cells, compactly arranged (figure 6c). Endodermis very conspicuous made up of radially elongated cells having uniform thickening all around and reduced lumina. Pericycle distinct with rather thick-walled cells. Metaxylem elements ca 4, large, thin-walled, central (figure 6e), each somewhat oval-shaped (27 36 /^m in diameter). Metaphloem and protoxylem not distinct. Central ground tissue compact consisting of rather thick-walled cells (Govindarajalu 1966). Eleocharis swamyii Sheath-Abaxial surface: Cell walls smooth. Silica-cells not observed. For other details, see culm. T. S. Sheath: Epidermal cells moderately large, radially elongated, thick-walled. Cuticle thin. Abaxial surface slightly ribbed. Sclerenchyma strands (height 14-6/zm; width 14-6-21 -9 /mi), very minute consisting of 6-8 cells, inversely securiform. Air-cavities as many as vb's almost regularly alternating with them, each air-cavity containing stellate fairly thick-walled parenchyma cells enclosing usually trilobed interspaces; air-cavities delimited by a single row of large parenchyma cells. Vb's ca 27 in number being large and small, the former of type III A and the latter type I; mctaxylem vessel elements (22-2 um in diameter), circular in outline; metaphloem of 'regular type'. Bundle sheath single, complete, parenchymatous. Secretory cells common. Culm — Epidermis, surface view: Cells axially elongated, narrow; ceil walls thin, moderately sinuous. Stomata (length 40-5-43-4 //m; width 17-4 /on), axially elongated, oblong elliptic, narrow; subsidiary cells parallel sided (figure 7e); interstomatal cells elongated with concave ends. Silica-cells long, narrow, thin-walled each cell containing 4-5 silica-bodies with satellites occurring in a single discontinuous row (figure 7f ). T. S. Culm: Outline somewhat circular (figure 7a). Diameter of the culm examined ca 2-6 mm. Epidermal cells relatively small, thick-walled. Cuticle thin. Assimilatory tissue: 2-3 layers of radially elongated chlorenchyma cells situated next to epidermis. Air- cavities ca 30 in number, variable in size and shape (figure 7a), each traversed by diaphragms of thick-walled stellate parenchyma; see sheath for other details. Vb's ca 36 in number arranged in peripheral and central systems; large vb's (type: III A) with protoxylem lacunae and small vb's (type I) (figure 7b); peripheral system consisting of ca 30 vb's out of which few large vb's project little towards the centre; the central vb's ca 6 scattered in net tissue; metaxylem vessel elements (23-2 /zm in diameter), circular in outline, metaphloem of "regular type'. Bundle sheath single, complete with large parenchymatous cells in all vb's; crescentiform cap of 2-3 layered sclerenchyma present at xylem poles of all vb's. Sclerenchyma strands and secretory cells, see sheath. T. S. Root: Diameter of specimen examined ca 1 mm. Exodermis: cells isodiametric, thick-walled. Root hairs abundant. Cortex recognizable into outer and inner zones, the former narrow consisting of 3-4 layers of compactly arranged cells similar to those of exodermis and the latter broad, lacunose; air-cavities concentrically arranged and 24 E Gomndarujalu MX. Figures 7a f. /;Y<w/wriA Awww>v/<iovind. a. truuscclion of culm ( •* .V). b. fuMsetlioii peripheral vascular bundle ( v J80);c. transect ion of diaphragm cells I * .W»i; d. Manorial vk of sclerenchyma strands ( x 380); e. surface view of >f oma ( >• WO), f. surface view oi si!tcit-c.< ( x 590); (from Govindarajalu, 8016, separated from one another by radiating rows of parenchyma cells. Rmlodcrmts: eel radially elongated with uniform thickening all around and broad lumina, Pericyde n< distinct. Xylem represented b> () melaxylcm units, each oval-circular in outlin elements (22-5 27 ;jm in diameter). Melaphlocm rather dislinci consisting oi 2 3 Iai> sieve tube elements. Central ground tissue sclcrcnchymatous lGov3iidarajalu 1975 Fimbristylis swamyii Le3Lf-—Abaxial surface: Intercostal cells variable in size; cell walls thin, sinuou Stomata (length 27-31 -5 /zm; width 27 jwm), elliptic- -suborbtcularinoutline;subsidiai cells low dome-shaped; interstomatal cells short with concave ends, Silica-eel occurring in 2-3 discontinuous rows, each cell elongated, narrow containing 2 4 cor shaped silica-bodies surrounded by satellites. Adaxial surface: Cells axially elongated, broad; cell walls, see abaxial surface.^Stomai and silica-cells absent. T. S. lamina: Thinly crescentiform, abaxially many ribbed; keel indistinct (figure 8a Width of specimen examined (2-6 mm). Margins unequal. Adaxial epidermal cells vei inflated and much larger than those of the abaxial epidermis with the latter varying i size and those over sclerenchyma strands much smaller than the remainder. Stomat restricted to each abaxial rib. Hypodermis, see mesophyll. Sclerenchyma; abaxial an .v iff Cyperaceae: X!X 25 Figures 8& d. Fimbristylis swumyii Govind. a. transcction of lamina, diagrammatic; b. portion of sheath in tianscction ( x 1 33); c. transection of sheath margin ( x 380); d. transection of culm ( x 93) (from Govindarajalu, 14816 C, type}. adaxial strands of marginal vb's pulviniform (height 13-5- 31-5 /im; width 27-45 jum); keel vb with rectangular strand (figure 8a; height 27 jurn; width 36 /mi); few small vb's accompanied by rounded strands (height and width 13-5 /mi); however strands tending to become girders. Mesophyll not well differentiated; chlorenchyma radiate and confined to abaxial one third of lamina. Air-cavities present as small substomatal cavities. Bulliform cells of typical ones wanting (figure 8a). Vb's ca 22, large and small not regularly alternating with each other forming an abaxial arc out of which 3 are prominently larger (type III A); metaxylem vessel elements (13-5 /on in diameter). Bundle sheaths 3 layered, complete; osand is parenchymatous, MS fibrous. Secretory cells less common. Culm— Epidermis, surface view: Cells axially elongated; cell walls rather thick, sinuous. Stomata (length 31-5~36jum; width 22-5-27 /mi), elliptic oblong, see abaxial surface. 26 E Govtndarajalu Silica-cells occurring in 1-2 discontinuous rows, each cell elongated, narrow, containing (4-) 5-6 cone shaped silica-bodies with satellites. T. S. Culm: Outline as in figure 8d, trapezoidal with a few conspicuous furrows. Long diameter of culm examined ca 0-6 mm. Cuticle smooth, thick. Epidermal cells large, variable in size. Air-cavities narrow, represented by substomatal chambers. Assimilatory tissue 3-4 layered, not radiate. Sclerenchyma pulviniform (height 22-5-36 /#n; width 36-45 /im). Vb's ca 19 present more or less in a single circle and embedded in chlorenchyma; vb's of two sizes; 5 large (type III A); 14 small (type I) the large vb's slightly pe ^ting into the central ground tissue; metaxylem vessel elements (13-5-18 pxn in diamci^); large vb's containing protoxylem lacunae. Metaphloem of 'intermediate type'. Bundle sheaths 2 layered, complete in all vb's; os parenchymatous; is fibrous. Central ground tissue of very inflated polygonal cells. Secretory cells less common. T. S. sheath: Abaxial and adaxial epidermal cells more or less similar, slightly tangentially elongated, thin-walled. Cuticle thicker on the abaxial than on the adaxial epidermis. Shallowly many ribbed on the abaxial surface. Keel distinct, somewhat triangular, rounded (figure 8b). Air-cavities ca 11, regularly alternating with vb's but tending to disappear towards margin. Sclerenchyma strands variable: rounded (height and width 27-31 -5 /mi) opposite to vb's on abaxial side (figure 8b); crescentiform (height 22-5 /zm; width 45 /on); pentangular (height 13-5-3 1-5 //m; width 18-40-5 jum) opposite to. vb's on adaxial side but existing only as strands towards margin (figure 8c). Vb's ca 14, large and small not regularly alternating with each other. For other details, see lamina. Fuirena swamyii Leaf — Abaxial surface: Intercostal cells moderately elongated, more or less he>t«gonal; cell walls thin, conspicuously sinuous. Stomata (length 43-5-52-2 /urn; width 29-31-9 /mi), broadly elliptic with inner pore astroporous (figure 9i); subsidiary cells low dome-shaped; interstomatal cells short with concave ends. Silica-cells short, broad, each cell containing (1-) 2 (-3) silica-bodies without satellites (figure 9f ) and occurring in 1-2 more or less continuous rows; sometimes silica-bodies showing oblique arrangement; hemispherical silica deposits also present at the corners of interstomatal cells adjoining stomata (figure 9g). Adaxial surface: Cells short, hexagonal. Silica-cells as in abaxial surface. Silica deposits and stomata absent. For other details, see abaxial surface. T. S. lamina: Outline flanged V-shaped, symmetrical with adaxial short ribs and broad shallow median groove and thickening towards margin; keel prominent, rounded, urn shaped; margins rounded, sloping downwards (figures 9a,b). Specimen examined ca 4-6 mm wide. Cuticle very thin. Adaxial epidermal cells distinctly larger than those of the abaxial, the former rather thin-walled and the latter thick-walled. Hairs unicellular, unbranched, thick-walled, acute (length 69-6-1 1 6 /mi; figure 9e) present on the keel and adaxial median groove. Bulliform cells radially elongated, inflated more or less translucent occurring in median grooves in groups of 7-8 cells wide (figures 9a,b). Sclerenchyma: abaxial, keel, marginal and adaxial submarginal strands (height 3 1 -5-45 urn; width 45-90 /an), pulviniform (figures 9a,b); abaxial strands opposite to each vb (height 18-27 urn; width 27-35 /on) more or less rounded (figures 9a,b). Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX AD. AX Figures 9a-k. Fuirena swamyii Govind. a. transection of one half of lamina ( x 42)' b sectional view of entire lamina, diagrammatic; c. culm epidermal cells with silica-bodies ( x 380); d. epidermal cells of culm ( x 380); e. leaf epidermal hair ( x 272); f. silica-cells in sectional view ( x 380); g. abaxial epidermal cell with silica deposit ( x 380); h. transection of portion of root ( x 56); I surface view of stomata ( x 380); j. peripheral culm vascular bundle ( x 133); k. transection of culm ( x 28) (from Govindarajalu, 12252, type). Mesophyll made up of 2 layers of palisade cells subjacent to each epidermis the remainder usually polygonal. Air-cavities ca 14 in number, regularly alternating with vb's each occupied by hexagonal, thin-walled, translucent parenchyma cells. Vb's ca 17 28 E Govindarajalu in number for total width of lamina, major and minor vb's regularly alternating with each other both belonging to type III B and containing protoxylem lacunae; metaxylem vessel elements (ca 17 /4m in diameter). Metaphloem consisting of 5-6 large sieve tube elements and fewer companion cells. Bundle sheaths double, both complete; os parcnchymatous; is fibrous. Secretory cells rather common. Culm — Epidermis, surface view. Cells short (slightly elongated), thick-walled, con- spicuously sinuous (figure 9d). Silica-bodies wedge-shaped occurring in the sinuosities of all cells: silica-cells |hort, broad, isodiametric, thin-walled each containing usually 1 (2-3) silica-bodies without satellites occurring in 2-3 discontinuous rows; silica deposits of hemispherical shapes and in groups of minute bodies present on either side of anticlinal walls of cells overlying strands (figure 9c). 71 S. Culm: Outline triangular with slightly broad rounded corners (figure 9k). Sides in specimen examined ca 2-2-1 mm long. Epidermis consisting of thick- walled, iso- diametric or more or less rounded cells. Cuticle ca 1 1 .6 //m in thickness. Central ground tissue very spongy containing irregular air-spaces. Air-cavities peripheral forming a ring and regularly alternating with vb's (figure 9k) each containing thin-walled stellate parenchyma with elongated arms. Assimilatory tissue: chlorenchyma not radiate, composed of 3-4 layers of rounded cells. Vb's represented by an outer circle of ca 19 vb's and ca 9 additional ones embedded in spongy ground tissue; vb's oval to circular in outline, belonging to type III B with protoxylem lacunae; metaxylem vessel elements (23*2-34-8 /an in diameter). Metaphloem of 'regular type'. Bundle sheaths: double, both complete; os parenchymatous, is fibrous (figure 9j). Sclerenchyma: each vb in outer circle with more or less rounded strands (height and width 45-54 /mi); strands at the corners (height 18 /an; width 58-5-63-5 /on), pulviniform (figure 9k); ca 2 layers of sclerenchyma forming crescentiform caps also present at -xylem poles (figure 9j). Secretory cells common in the neighbourhood of vb's. % T. S. Root: Diameter of specimen examined 0- 5-0-6 mm. Exodermal cells thick- walled. Cortex very spongy consisting of irregular air-spaces in it (figure 9h). Endodermis distinct consisting of broad lumened, uniformly thickened more or less radially elongated cells (figure 9h). Pericycle single layer of thick-walled cells. Central ground tissue sclerenchymatous. Xylem represented by ca 9 metaxylem units alternating with as many metaphloem groups; metaxylem vessel elements (1 8-27 /an in diameter), oval or more or less angular. Metaphloem not distinct (Govindarajalu 1968a). Scleria swamyii Leaf — Abaxial surface: Intercostal cells axially elongated; cell walls thin, sinuous. Stomata (length 36 /an; width 31 -5-36 /*m), more or less rounded; subsidiary cells triangular or dome-shaped; interstomatal cells short with concave ends; guard cells extended. Silica-cells usually elongated, thin-walled, rather broad, occurring in more or less 3 continuous rows each cell containing 2-3 or 4-6 cone shaped silica-bodies with satellites. Wedge-shaped silica-bodies present on the sinuosities of anticlinal walls (figure lOc); silica-bodies of varying size and shape sometimes present in the stomata. Marginal barbed prickles (length 22-5-31-5 /on) very common and their cell walls excessively thick-walled, lamellated with broad bases. Adaxial surface: Cells axially elongated or shortly hexagonal. Stomata elliptic ovate occasionally present (length 31 -5-36-0 jum; width 22- 5-27 /un); subsidiary cells low Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX 29 AD. b Figures 10a-^. Scleria swamyii Govind. a. transection of lamina, semidiagrammatic; b. transection of culm ( x 37) c. surface view of leaf epidermal cells ( x 380) (from Govindarajalu, 12515, type). dome-shaped or parallel sided; guard cells much thickened. Wedge shaped silica-bodies absent. For other details, see abaxial surface. T. S. lamina: Inversely W-shaped, asymmetrical (figure lOa) with small but prominent triangular keel having a rounded apex. One margin incurved and rounded, the other more or less straight. Midrib with shallow, broad furrow. Lamina examined ca 1 mm wide. Cuticle rather thin. Adaxial epidermal cells larger than those of the abaxial except those over sclerenchyma. Bulliform cells well developed and present as 1 -layer of 6-7 cells in adaxial median groove; inflated cells also developed on either side of main adaxial ribs. Sclerenchyma: adaxial median girder crescentiform (height 46*4 ^m; width 127-6 /on); adaxial and abaxial strands (height 34-8-46-4 jum; width 46-4-58-0 ^m), usually pulviniform, sometimes rectangular present usually opposite to each vb. Mesophyll chlorenchymatous with a single adaxial layer of palisade cells the remainder made up of variously shaped cells. Air-cavities few, small, unevenly distributed, each containing lobed cells. Vb's ca 12-13 in each half of lamina aligned closer to abaxial than to adaxial surface. Median vb, those opposite to adaxial ribs and submarginal parts larger than the remainder; median adaxial rib and submarginal vb's (type III A), oval-shaped containing protoxylem lacunae and the remaining vb's (type I), circular in outline; metaxylem vessel elements (23-2 jon in diameter). Metaphloem of 'regular type'. Secretory cells common in mesophyll. 30 E Govindarajalu Culm — Epidermis, surface view: Cells axially elongated; cell walls thick, smooth. Stomata as in leaf but thick-walled. Barbed prickles (length 1 12-5-135 ^m), common. Silica-cells over sclerenchyma strands, see leaf. Wedge-shaped silica-bodies absent. T. S. Culm: Outline triangular with obtuse corners possessing variable number of furrows (deep and shallow) and ribs (figure lOb). Diameter of culm 2-4 mm broad along broadest region. Central region hollow. Cuticle very thin. Epidermal cells isodiametric, more or less variable in size. Air-cavities absent except small narrow substomatal chambers. Assimilatory tissue peripheral, 3-4 layers of chlorenchyma. Vb's 40-42 in number arranged more or less in two rings; outer ring consisting of 30-32 vb's variable in size and shape, small, circular (type I); medium sized vb's oval shaped (type III A); inner ring of large oval shaped vb's (type III B); medium and large vb's containing protoxylem lacunae; metaxylem vessel elements (D. 14-6-21 -9 /urn in diameter). Metaphloem of Intermediate type'; vb's of inner ring characterized by 3-4 layers of sclerenchyma forming a crescentiform cap at phloem pole. Sclerenchyma present mostly as crescentiform girders made up of 3-4 layers of cells; sclerenchyma strands for submarginal large vb's at corners dumbell-shaped, massive, separating it from small marginal ones (height 225-6 /^m; width 376-0 /im). Secretory cells occasional. T. S. Root: Diameter of the root examined ca 0-8 mm wide. Exodermis consisting of 1-2 layers of cells; cells rather thick- walled, radially elongated. Cortex recognizable into two zones; outer broad, lacunose containing concentrically arranged air chambers being separated by radiating rows of parenchyma cells; inner cortex narrow, possessing 2-3 layers of thick- walled compactly arranged cells. Endodermis very distinct, cells of which uniformly thickened all around with lumen. Pericycle with a single layer of narrow thick-walled cells, Metaxylem large, central, solitary, (63-0 jim in diameter); protoxylem units 6-7 alternating with as many metaphloem groups each one of them consisting of 1-2 large sieve tube elements and 3-4 companion cells. Central ground tissue made up of thick-walled parenchyma (Govindarajalu 1975). Dedication Late Prof. Dr B G L Swamy who was my mentor, philosopher and guide for over two decades continues to be a source of inspiration. His versatile scholarship and varied interests and areas of specialization earned for him an eternal name in the botanical world. To such a luminary this paper is respectfully dedicated. References Cheadle V I and Uhl N W 1 948a Types of vascular bundles in the monocotyledonae and their relations to the late metaxylem conducting elements; Am. J. Bot. 35 486-496 Cheadle V I and Uhl N W 1948b The relation of metaphloem to the types of vascular bundles in the monocotyledons; Am. J. Bot. 35 578-583 Govindarajalu E 1966 Systematic anatomy of South Indian Cyperaceae: Bulbostylis Kunth; J. Linn. Soc. (Bot.) 59 289-304 Govindarajalu E 1968a Systematic anatomy of South Indian Cyperaceae: Fuirena Rottb.; J. Linn. Soc. (Bot,) 62 27-40 Govindarajalu E 1968b Systematic anatomy of South Indian Cyperaceae: Cyperus L. subgen. Kyllinga (Rottb.) Suringar; J. Linn. Soc. 62 41-58 Govindarajalu E 1975 Systematic anatomy of South Indian Cyperaceae: Eleocharis R. Br., Rhynchospora Vahl, and Scleria Berg.; Adansonia 14 581-632 Studies in Cyperaceae: XIX 31 Metcalfe C R 1971 Anatomy of the monocotyledons V. Cyperaceae: (Oxford: Clarendon Press) pp. 597 Metcalfe C R and Gregory M 1964 Some new descriptive terms for Cyperaceae with a discussion of variations in leaf form noted in the family; Notes Jodrell Lab. 1 1-11 Key to figure letterings and abbreviations used in text AC -air-cavity AD-adaxial epidermis AT-assimilatory tissue BC - bulliform cell BS- bundle sheath CH -chlorenchyma co -cortex cu™ cuticle D~~ diaphragm; diaphragm cells E - epidermis EN - endodermis EX-exodermis H-hair 1C -inner cortex IP -inner pore is -inner sheath MP-metaphloem MS -middle sheath MX-metaxylem os - outer sheath P-pericycle PH - metaphloem PL-protoxylem lacuna RP -radiating parenchyma S - crescentiform sclerenchyma SB - silica-body sc- secretory cell SD~ silica deposit SP~ silica particle ss - sclerenchyma strand ST~ stoma STC~substomatal chamber vb- vascular bundle (plural vb's) Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (Plant Sci.), Vol. 94, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 33-40. © Printed in India. Factors controlling callus initiation, growth and plant regeneration in breadwheat (Triticum aestivum L) SUSAN EAPEN and P S RAO Plant Biotechnology Section, Bio-Organic Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay 400085, India MS received 30 April 1984; revised 1 October 1984 Abstract. Callus cultures were initiated from immature embryos and seeds of breadwheat. The frequency and intensity of callus development were found to be best when embryos were oriented with the scutellum facing up and the embryonal axis in contact with the medium. Callusing frequency was also enhanced when embryos were cut longitudinally into two halves and cultured. Agar-solidified medium produced a better frequency of embryo response compared to stationary liquid cultures. Increasing levels of glucose and sucrose caused a decrease in fresh weight and a sharp increase in dry weight. Addition of coconut water, yeast extract, malt extract, amino acids and triacontanol was either without effect or were inhibitory for growth of callus. Histology of regeneration from embryo-derived callus showed de novo differentiation of shoot buds and roots. No evidence for somatic embryogenesis was observed. Keywords. Callus cultures; plant regeneration; breadwheat; Triticum aestivum. 1. Introduction Tissue cultures of wheat capable of differentiation have been reported by many workers (Ahloowalia 1982; Ozias-Akins and Vasil 1982; Sears and Deckard 1982; Maddock et al 1983). However, little attention has been focussed on the factors controlling callus induction, growth and differentiation. In an earlier communication, callus induction and plant regeneration in tissue cultures of breadwheat were briefly reported (Eapen and Rao 1982), This communi- cation embodies the results of detailed investigations on factors regulating callus growth and differentiation in breadwheat, Triticum aestivum L. 2. Materials and methods Wheat (Triticum aestivum L. Thell Cvs Nl-4 and Kalyan Sona) was used as the source material. Callus cultures were initiated from immature embryos and mature seeds. For culture of immature embryos, developing caryopses (14-21 days after anthesis) were collected from plants grown in fields during January-February, and surface sterilised with 70% alcohol for 30 sec, followed by 0-1 % mercuric chloride for 4 min. The seeds were rinsed five times in sterile distilled water. Embryos were dissected under a stereo microscope in a laminar flow chamber and cultured. For callus initiation from seeds, surface sterilised seeds were imbibed in sterile water for 30 min before utilising for culture. The basal medium comprised of macro- and micro-elements of Murashige and Skoog's (1962) medium and vitamins of Lin and Staba's (1961) medium. It was supplemented with 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxy propionic acid (2,4,5-Q3POP) or 2,4,5- 34 Susan Eapen and P S Rao trichlorophenoxy acetic acid (2,4,5-T) or 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) (NBC) at 1,2 or 5mg/l. The embryos were cultured either on agar-solidified (Sisco agar— 0-7 %) or stationary liquid medium in 5 cm petridishes each containing 4 ml of the medium. An average of 9 embryos were cultured per dish and replicated 5 times. Observations were taken at the end of 3 weeks. Cultures were incubated at 25 ± 2°C under continuous light (950 lux). For studying the effect of different treatments on callus growth, fresh and dry weight increases were taken as parameters. About 100-500 mg of tissue from first passage was transferred to the test medium and increase in fresh and dry weight was calculated after a growth period of 40 days. Initial dry weights were computed, while the final dry weight was taken after drying the tissues at 65°C for 24 hr. Sucrose was generally used at 2% except in experiments on the effect of different carbon sources, where glucose and sucrose were tried at 2,4,6,8 and 10%. The MS medium containing 10 mg/1 of 2,4,5-Q3POP was variously supplemented with yeast extract (YE), malt extract (ME), lysine, asparagine, glutarnine and serine (Sigma Chemical Co.) to study the effect on callus growth. The effect of triacontanol, (0-1,1 and 10 mg/1) was also investigated. For differentiation, calli were transferred to media supplemented with auxins like indoleacetic acid (IAA) or a-naphthaleneacetic acid (NAA) (0-1, 0-2, 0-5 and 1 mg/1) in factorial combinations with various cytokinins like zeatin (z), (Sigma Chemical Co.), benzyladenine (BA), 6-y-y-dimethylallylamino purine (2,iP) or kinetin (Kn), (NBC) at a concentration of 1 and 5 mg/1. For histological studies, embryos after different periods of culture and callus cultures showing regeneration were fixed in FAA and processed in alcohoi-xylol series, Sections were cut at 10 /*m and stained with safranin-fast green. 3. Observations and discussion 3.1 Effect of orientation of embryos The effect of orientation of embryos on callus initiation was studied. For this purpose embryos were placed on agar-solidified medium in three different ways. (i) Plumule-radicle axis in contact with the medium, and scutellum facing up. (ii) Plumule-radicle axis facing upwards and scutellum in contact with the medium, (iii) One side of the scutellum and embryonal axis in contact with the medium. Both the frequency and the intensity of callus development were found to be best when embryos were placed in orientation (i) and the least in orientation (iii) (table 1). Green and Phillips (1975) have reported similar results in maize embryo cultures. In Oats (Cummings et al 1976), for very young embryos, callus development occurred from the entire surface and an optimal orientation was not observed. In contrast, older embryos of oats showed better callusing when the scutellum was in contact with the medium than in the reverse type of orientation. 3.2 Effect of surgical excision of embryos To study the effect of surgical excision on callusing, embryos were excised in two different ways. (i) embryos were cut longitudinally into two halves in such .a way that each half Callus cultures in T. aestivum 35 Table 1 . Callusing response of immature embryos of T. aestivum on MS+ 2,4,5-Cl3POP (5 mg/1, growth period: 3 weeks)*. Type of explant and its orientation Percentage of callusing Intensity of callusing Scutellum facing up 95 + + + Scutellum in contact with the medium 90 + + One side of the embryo touching the medium 83 4- + Embryo cut longitudinally into two 100 + + + Scutellum 33 •H + Embryo devoid of scutellum 47 + 4- * Average of 30 embryos. + -I- , good, + + + , excellent. contained the scutellum and embryonal axis, (ii) the embryonal axis and scutellum were cultured separately. Longitudinal halves showed excellent callussing in cent per cent of cultures (table 1). However, excised scutellum and embryonal axis performed poorly as compared with the intact embryo. Freeling et al (1976) have noted that slicing or chopping of embryos of maize which otherwise generate totipotent cultures, resulted in apparent loss of totipotency. Tilton (198 1) reported that in Z. mays, when the scutellum was excised and cultured, it did not develop into callus with sustained growth. In the present investigation, excision of embryos longitudinally into two halves enhanced the frequency and intensity of callus development. 3.3 Liquid vs semi solid media Embryos cultured on solid medium produced a higher frequency of callusing response compared with stationary liquid culture. 2,4,5-Cl3POP at 5 mg/1 and 2,4-D at 1,2 and 5 mg/1 induced cent per cent callusing on solid medium. 2,4, 5-T was slightly less effective than 2,4-D or 2,4,5-Q3POP in the induction of callus proliferation from wheat embryos. The growth curve of callus cultures of cv-Kalyan sona was of the sigmoid pattern (figure 1). The initial lag period occurred during the first three days of incubation followed by exponential phase which extended up to 25 days. After 25 days of culture, growth was stationary and no further increase in fresh and dry weight was recorded. Hendre et al (1975) have reported that in maize, wheat, rice and sorghum cultures, the initial lag period lasted for about 10-15 days and the stationary phase commenced at the .end of 30-40 days. Compared with this, callus cultures of breadwheat (present study) had a faster growth which probably may be due to the difference in genotype and media formulations used in the two studies. 3.4 Effect of different carbon sources For fresh weight increase glucose and sucrose proved best at 2 % level. Between the two 36 Susan Eapen and P S Rao -300 i 250 o 100 50 •— FRESH WEIGHT i— DRY WEIGHT 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 INCUBATION PERIOD IN DAYS Figure 1. Growth curve based on fresh and dry weights of callus cultures of 7'. acstivum cv, Kalyan Sona grown on MS + 2A5-C13POP (5 mg/1) at the end of 40 days of incubation. carbohydrate sources, glucose was better than sucrose. On dry weight basis the growth of the callus was better at higher concentrations of both types of sugars, sucrose being optimum at 4% and glucose at 8 and 10 % (figure 2). The increase in dry weight with increasing concentrations of sucrose may be due to deposition of heavy cell wall material. High sucrose concentration is known to favour the deposition of callose in sieve plates of callus cultures ofGlycine, Daucus and Syringa (Aloni 1980). 3.5 Effect of YE and ME Addition of YE or ME at 250, 500 and 1000 mg/1 to MS + 2A5-C13POP (10 mg/1) did . not produce any significant alteration in fresh and dry weights compared with the control. In maize addition of 800 mg/1 of YE stimulated callus growth by 40 % while ME at 100-1600 mg/1 was without any effect (Green 1978). Bhojwani et al (1977) have shown that YE inhibited callus growth of wheat. 3.6 Effect ofamino acids Experiments were conducted to assess the effect of various amino acids such as lysine, asparagine, glutamine and serine at 1 m M. Growth response of tissues on asparagine and glutamine containing media were comparable to those of the control whereas lysine and serine inhibited callus growth. These findings contrasts with that of maize where L-glutamine, L-serine, L-asparagine and L-lysine stimulated callus growth by 68,51,37 and 30% respectively (Green 1978). 3.7 Effect of triacontanol Triacontanol at 0-1, 1 and 10 mg/1 added to MS + 2,4,5-Cl3POP (10 mg/1) did not induce any significant alteration in growth as compared to the control. This is in Callus cultures in T. aestivum 37 [ 1 GLUCOSE FRESH WEIGHT E3 GLUCOSE DRY WEIGHT EZ3 SUCROSE FRESH WEIGHT BB SUCROSE DRY WEIGHT 2 V. 6% 8V. GLUCOSE AND SUCROSE CONCENTRATION Figure 2. Effect of different concentrations of glucose and sucrose on fresh and dry weights of callus cultures of T. aestivum cv. Kalyan Sona grown on MS + 2,4,5-Cl3POP (5 mg/1) at the end of 40 days of incubation. contrast with the previous reports where triacontanol was found to be promotory for growth of plants (Ries and Wert 1977) and callus cultures of tobacco, barley and bean (Hangarter et al 1978). However, in bread wheat (Bole and Dubetz 1978) and durum wheat plants (Charlton et al 1980) triacontanol had no effect. 3.8 Differentiation of shoot buds Seed callus on transfer to differentiation media produced localized green areas, which later developed into roots. The average number of roots ranged from 50 to 100 per culture. Occasionally 3-5 shoot buds were produced. However, examination of these shoot buds showed that these probably arose from pre-existing embryonal axillary shoot apices and were not induced de novo. Callus cultures derived from immature embryos of Nl-4 produced profuse shoot buds on transfer to basal media devoid of growth regulators. Supplementation of growth regulators to the basal medium did not enhance the frequency of differenti- ation. For cv-Kalyan Sona, z in combination with 1 AA was found to be essential for regeneration from immature embryo callus. 3.9 Histology of shoot bud differentiation Histological examination of immature embryos at the time of culture showed a well developed embryonic axis with plumule, radicle, mesocotyl and scutellum (figure 3A). The scutellum had a uniformly thick epidermal layer. Beneath the epidermis, the scutellum was composed of an array of irregularly shaped parenchymatous cells. In the embryonic axis cells were smaller in size. The cells of the apical meristem were thin- Availed, cytoplasmically dense and displayed a large nucleus relative to the cell size. Similar features were observed in the radicle also. Callusing was initiated from the region of coleorhiza and scutellar node (figures 3 B,C). The proliferation consisted primarily of undifferentiated parenchyma cells. In 7-day-old cultures, a callus mass 38 Susan Eapen and P S Rao jf , r * ; « i ' -. • '•%'?*!••• |f/: : ;' sc-4ia , ' "•;< fi • * 1 * > v * . '*» *5aBH**«'Vf - w J* * ., 1 « * • '• ;^'5^v;. f -.;: < ^^^A •"'^W^k^;.B 1 IR^lt Figure 3. Histology of callus initiation and shoot regeneration in cultured embryos of T. aestivum. A. An embryo at the time of culture showing scutellum, coleoptile and coleorhiza (Sc, scutellum, Cl, coleoptile, Cr, coleorhiza). B. Callus initiation from the region of radicle in cultured embryo. C. An embryo after 4 days of culture showing callus initiation from scutellar node. D. Organization of root from callus. E. Shoot buds with apical dome flanked by leaves arising from the surface of embryo callus. Also seen below are the tracheary elements. consisting of parenchymatous cells was prominent. There was no evidence for elongation of plumule or radicle in the majority of cases. Histological examination of 4 week old callus cultures showed de novo development of shoot buds scattered all over the surface of the calli. Meristematic areas were seen to originate on the surface of the calli. The cells within these areas appeared very similar to those found in the shoot apex of the embryonal axis. Mitotic activity was more apparent within these regions relative to the surrounding areas. The original shoot buds and lateral buds remained intact and were not involved in the initiation of fresh shoot buds. The fresh shoot buds initiated were further away from the coleoptile and originated mostly towards the scutellar side. There was a clear evidence that these were produced de novo and not from pre-existing buds. The shoot buds originated as protuberances on the tissue surfaces and were flanked by leaves (figure 3E). Sometimes Callus cultures in T. aestivum 39 regeneration of leaves unaccompanied by shoot buds was also observed. After furthei growth, vascular tissues developed below the shoot apices. Roof, meristcms were mostly initiated deep inside the callus which later extended outwards through the callus (figun 3D). The .origin of root was independent of shoot bud regeneration. No evidence foi somatic embryogenesis has been observed in any of the cultures so far. In the preseiv report, regeneration took, place by organization of shoot meristems which is ir agreement with previous reports in cereals (Rangan 1974; Shimada and Yamada 1979 Springer el al .1979). Recently, however, somatic embryogenesis has been documented in many species o: Gramineae. Typical ernbryoids are commonly found in Pcnnlsctwn amcricanwn (Vasi and Vasil 1982), Panicum maximum (Lu and Vasil 1982) and Zea mays (Lit ei al 1982) However, the formation of embryoids is not as evident in wheat as in other cereals Ozias-Akins and Vasil (1982) proposed that the predominant pathway to plan1 regeneration in wheat was through the formation of embryoids which were atypical ir organization as a result of precocious germination. In a recent report, Ozias-Akins anc Vasil (1983) have obtained normal somatic embryoids in callus cultures of wheat. Ir cereal tissue cultures, both embryogenic and non-embryogenic calli are present anc embryogenic calli is only a small fraction of individual calli (Nabors ct al 1 983). The absence of or failure to detect somatic embryogenesis in the tissue cultures of wheai (present study) may be due to the different cultural conditions or media which favourec the growth and division of non-embryogenic cell type over the other. References Ahloowalia B S 1982 Plant regeneration from callus culture of wheat; Crop Sci. 22 405 410 Aloni R 1980 Role of auxin and sucrose on differentiation of sieve and tracheary elements in plant tissue cultures; Planta 150 255-260 Bhojwani S S, Evans P K and Cocking E C 1977 Protoplast technology in relation to crop plants. Progress and problems; Euphytica 26 343-360 Bole J B and Dubetz S 1978 Effects of various soil supplements and water stress on the yield and yiek components of wheat; Can. J. Soil Sci. 58 321-323 Charlton J, Hunter N R, Greer N A, Fritz W, Addison B M and Woodbury W 1 980 The effects of triacontano and triacontanol derivatives on germination and seedling growth of leeds durum wheat; Can. J. Plant Sci 60 795-797 Cummings D P, Green C E and Stuthman D D 1976 Callus induction and plant regeneration in oats; Croi Sci. 16 465-470 Eapen S and Rao P S 1982 Organogenesis and plantlet formation from callus cultures of different cultivars ol breadwheat (Triticum aestivum); Proc. Indian Nati Sci. Acad. B48 371-377 Freeling M, Woodman J C and Cheng D S K 1976 Development potentials of maize tissue cultures; Maydica 2197-112 Green C E and Phillips R L 1975 Plant regeneration from tissue cultures of maize; Crop Sci. 15 417-421 Green C E 1978 Cell and tissue cultures of maize In Maize breeding and genetics (New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc.) (ed.) D B Walden p. 495-515 Hangarter R, Ries S K and Carlson P 1978 Effect of triacontanol on plant cell cultures in vitro; Plant Physiol 61 855-857 Hendre R R, Mascarenhas A F, Pathak M and Jagannathan V 1975 Tissue culture of maize* wheat, rice and sorghum. Part 11 Growth and nutrition of callus cultures; Indian J. Exp. Biol 13 108-111 Lin M and Staba E J 1961 Peppermint and spearmint tissue cultures. 1 Callus formation and submerged cultures; Lloydia 24 139-145 Lu C and Vasil I K 1982 Somatic embryogenesis and plant regeneration in tissue cultures of Panicun maximum Jacq; Am. J. Bot. 69 77-81 Lu C, Vasil I K and Ozias-Akins P 1982 Somatic embryogenesis in Zea mays L; Theoret. Appl Genet, 62 109-112 40 Susan Eapen and P S Rao Maddock S E, Lancaster V A, Rissott R and Franklin J 1983 Plant regeneration from cultured immature embryos and inflorescence of 25 cultivars of wheat (Triticum aestivum); J. Exp. Bot. 34 915-926 Murashige T and Skoog F 1962 A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays with tobacco tissue cultures; PhysioL Plant. 15 473-497 Nabors M W, Heyser J W, Dykes T A and Mott K J 1983 Long duration high frequency plant regeneration from cereal tissue cultures; Planta 157 385-391 Ozias-Akins P and Vasil I K 1982 Plant regeneration from cultured immature embryos and inflorescences of Triticum aestivum L (Wheat), Evidence for somatic embryogenesis; Protoplasma. 110 95-105 Ozias-Akins P and Vasil I K 1983 Improved efficiency and normalization of somatic embryogenesis in Triticum aestivum (wheat); Protoplasma 117 40-44 Rangan T S 1 974 Morphogenic investigations on tissue cultures ofPanicum miliaceum; Z. Pflanzenphysiol. 12 456-459 Ries S K and Wert V 1977 Growth response of rice seedlings to triacontanol in light and dark; Planta 135 77-82 Sears R G and Deckard E L 1982 Tissue culture variability in wheat. Callus induction and plant regeneration; Crop Set. 22 546-550 Shimada T and Yamada Y 1979 Wheat plant regeneration from embryo cell cultures; Jpn J. Genet. 54 379-385 Springer W D, Green C E and Kohn K H 1979 A histological examination of tissue culture initiation from immature embryos of maize; Protoplasma 101 269-284 Tilton 1981 The influence of individual embryonic tissues on the morphology and development of Zea mays (Poaceae) germlings; Am. J. Bot. 68 980-993 Vasil V and Vasil I K 1982 Characterization of an embryogenic cell suspension culture derived from inflorescence of Pennisetwn americanum (Pearl millet Gramineae); Am. J. Bot. 69 1441-1449 Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (Plant Sci.), Vol. 94, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 41-44. © Printed in India. Accumulation of nitrite as influenced by fluchloralin and benthiocarb in two tropical weed species N V R REDDY and K R RAO Department of Botany, Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati 517502, India MS received 27 January 1984; revised 25 November 1984 Abstract. Fluchloralin (N propyl-N (2 chioromethyl-2,6-dinitro-4-trifluromethylaniline)), a dinitro-aniline type of herbicide having an inhibitory effect on light reaction, results in accumulation of higher levels of nitrite in light than in dark. In contrast, benthiocarb (S-(4-chlorobenzyl)-N-N-diethyl thiocarbamate), a non-photosynthetic herbicide and un- couplar of oxidative phosphorylation causes higher accumulation of nitrite in dark than in light in both test species. Thus the latter is effective on nitrate metabolism than on' nitrite metabolism. The effect of herbicides on Acalypha is more pronounced than on Tridax. Keywords. Dinitroaniline; nitrite; thiocarbamate; selective herbicide. 1. Introduction Nitrite is a secondary phytotoxic substance responsible for the injury and death of plants after herbicide treatment (Klepper 1975). Herbicides showing reduction of nitrite accumulation in dark are considered to have inhibitory effects upon nitrate reduction and those causing an accumulation of nitrite in light are considered to inhibit nitrite reduction (Finke et al 1977). It has been postulated earlier that herbicides, especially those which inhibit photosynthesis, act by causing nitrite accumulation within the cell (Klepper 1975). Ferrari and Varner (1971) demonstrated that DNP inhibited nitrite reductase activity in photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic plant parts. The main objective of the present study was to gain greater understanding about both the non-photosynthetic as well as the photosynthetic inhibitors on nitrate metabolism in relation to two weed species which were dominantly associated in the cultivated fields of the semiarid tracts of Rayalaseema area of Andhra Pradesh. 2. Materials and methods Two week old seedlings of Acalypha indica Linn, and Tridax procumbens L. were transplanted to experimental plots and grown under natural photoperiod (30°C day/20°C night). The third and fourth fully expanded leaves from the apex were taken for experimental analysis. Nitrite reductase assay (E.C 1.6.6.1) was conducted by the method of Finke et al (1977), by placing sliced leaf tissue (0-3 g) in a 50 ml beaker with 10 ml of infiltration medium containing 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7-5); potassium nitrate and (100 mM) tergitol NPX (0-01 %) (non-ionic) surfactant and herbicide solutions of 10, 50, 100 and 500 ppm concentrations. Untreated controls were maintained with distilled water. Vacuum infiltration was accomplished by placing the beakers with incubation medium and the leaf sample in a vacuum dessicator, drawing a vacuum of 41 42 N V R Reddy and K R Rao 660 nm mercury for 30 sec rapidly releasing the vacuum. The process was repeated twice and one set of beakers were kept under illumination of 15 k lux and another set in dark for 30min. After the incubation period the total nitrite was extracted by macerating the leaf tissue at 4°C. Nitrite was determined by adding diazocoupling reagents and measuring absorbance spectrophotometrically at 540 nm (Bausch and Lamb spectronic 20 spectrophotometer). All experiments had five replicates. 3. Results In benthiocarb treated leaves nitrite accumulated rapidly in dark over the respective control (figures 1 and 2). Fluchloralin caused a greater accumulation of nitrite in light compared to dark (figures 1 and 2). Nitrite content in untreated leaves was very low when compared to treated ones. In untreated leaves ofAcalypha the nitrite content in both dark and light was 1*16 and 1-08 whereas in Tridax the same was 0-97 and 0-88 in dark and light respectively. The degree of inhibition of nitrite reduction was a function of herbicide concentration and the period of incubation. Accumulation of nitrite increases with both increasing concentrations and time (figures 1 and 2). Both chemicals inhibited nitrite reductase activity but fluchloralin showed an inhibition of both nitrate and nitrite reductase activities (figures 1 and 2). Significant amounts of nitrite was accumulated in both the weeds when ah uncoupler of photophosphorylation was used in light but in benthiocarb treated leaves nitrite was accumulated more in the dark than in light. E 2'5 cn CM i 2.1 O O U 1-7 1-3 O-9 O ___ Acalypha indica I J_ I 2-5 - 1O SO 1OO 5OO CONCENTRATION OF HERBICIDE (ppm) 1O SO 1OO 5OO CONCENTRATION OF HERBICIDE (ppm) Figure 1. Nitrite recovery after extraction of weed leaf tissues with various concentrations of herbicides. Dark-(«), fluchloralin, (A), benthocarb. Light-(o), fluchloralin, (A), benthiocarb. Accumulation of nitrite in two tropical weed species 3.3 , — 3.3 43 JI 2-9 \ B? 6 2-5 o» DL 2 2-1 g Acalypha indica J I 1 o z 1 2 3 HOURS AFTER INCUBATION 2-9 25 2-1 ^> 1-3 1 2 3 HOURS AFTER INCUBATION Figure 2. Accumulation of nitrite with increase in time. Dark-(«) fluchloralin, (A)- benthiocarb, Light-(o) fluchloralin, (A)-benthiocarb. 4. Discussion Since the nitrite reductase enzyme is located within the chloroplast, it is directly dependent upon reduced ferridoxin as electron donor for nitrite reduction, whereas nitrate reductase a cytoplasmic enzyme utilises a different (NADH) electron source (Klepper et al 1977). Ashton and Crafts (1973) reported an inhibition of nitrate reduction both in dark and light under the influence of dinoseb an uncoupler of oxidative phosphorylation which disrupts cell membranes. The increased oxidative phosphorylation will reduce the supply of NADH available for nitrate reduction (Ladonin 1966). Disruption of chloroplast membrane would result in a loss of electron flow to ferridoxin and the supply of reductant available for nitrite reduction, would decrease. Fluchloralin, a photosynthetic inhibitor (Moreland et al 1972a,b) caused the accumulation of nitrite in light, possibly due to the inhibition of the supply of reductant (ferridoxin) for the reduction of nitrite. Benthiocarb, an uncoupler of oxidative phosphorylation, appeared to permit nitrate reduction in dark as the generation of NADH has been linked to the glycolytic process, which in turn would provide higher levels of NADH for nitrate reduction (Klepper 1976; Reddy et al 1983). This results in the formation of higher levels of nitrite within herbicide treated plants. But in light the amount of nitrite decreases due to the activity of nitrite reductase which is dependent on photosynthetically derived reduced ferridoxin. The results presented in the text provide an evidence that certain herbicides allow nitrite to accumulate in dark. This can be explained as a continued reduction of nitrite in dark in the absence of photosynthetic nitrite reduction. But this is different in the case of fluchloralin which increases ATP consumption in dark and thus limits NADH availability for nitrate reduction. The effect of benthiocarb in dark is similar to that of photosynthetic inhibitors in light. 44 N V R Reddy and K R Rao Acknowledgements NVRR acknowledges the financial assistance from UGC, New Delhi. Thanks are due to Prof. VSR Das for encouragement. References Ashton F M and Crafts A S 1973 Mode of action of herbicides (New York: John Wiley) pp. 504 Ferrari T and Varner J 1971 Intact tissue assay for nitrite reductase assay in barley aleuron layers; Planl Physiol 47 709-794 Finke R L, Warner R L and Muzik J J 1977 Effect of herbicides on m vivo nitrate and nitrite reduction; Weed Sci. 25 18-23 Klepper LA 1975 Inhibition of nitrite reduction by photosynthetic inhibitors; Weed Sci. 23 188-190 Klepper L A 1976 Nitrite accumulation within herbicide treated leaves; Weed Sci. 24 533-536 Klepper L A, Flesher D and Hageman R H 1977 Generation of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide for nitrate reduction in green leaves; Plant Physiol. 48 580-591 Ladonin V F 1966 The effect of carbyne (Barbon) on oxidative phosphorylation of mitochondria from etiolated wild oat seedlings; Westn. S. Kr Namki (Moscow) 11 137-141 Moreland D E, Farmer F S and Hussey G G 1972a Inhibition of photosynthesis and respiration by substituted 2,6-dinitroaniline herbicides. I. Effect of chloroplast and mitochondrial activities; Pest, Biochem. Physiol 2 342-353 Moreland D E, Farmer F S and Hussey G G 1972b Inhibition of photosynthesis and respiration by substituted 2,6-dinitroaniline herbicides. II. Effect on responses in excised plant tissues and treated seedlings; Pest. Biochem. Physiol. 2 354-363 Reddy N V R, Ramaiah K R, Reddy K B and Rao K R 1983 Nitrate and nitrite reduction as influenced by S- (4-chlorobenzyl)-N,N-diethyl thiocarbamate in two tropical weed species; Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (Plant Sci.) 92 393-396 Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. (Plant Sci.), Vol. 94, No. 1, March 1985, pp. 45-50. © Printed in India. Effect of carbonate and bicarbonate on growth and spoliation in two blue-green algae T A SARMA and RAJ GARG Department of Botany, Punjabi University, Patiala 147002, India MS received 21 December 1983; revised 8 October 1984 Abstract. Growth and sporulation of two blue green algae i.e., Anabaena torulosa and Nostoc calcicola have been studied in carbonates and bicarbonates. A. torulosa did not show any preference for growth in either the carbonates or the bicarbonates. In contrast, N. calcicola exhibited faster growth rate in carbonates and bicarbonates as evidenced by the specific growth constants and generation time. Induction of sporulation was noted by 8th day in A. torulosa in carbonates and bicarbonates over the basal medium (20 days). Ammonium carbonate supported the formation of maximum number of spores. However, N. calcicola did not show any induction of sporulation. A comparison of glycogen levels between the two algae during sporulation revealed high glycogen content with concomitant spore induction in ammonium carbonate in A. torulosa. Although, N. calcicola showed a concentration dependent increase in glycogen content in carbonates and bicarbonates, no sporulation occurred. Keywords. Carbonates; bicarbonates; sporulation; glycogen; blue-green algae. 1. Introduction The utilization of bicarbonate by Anabaena sp was reported by Keenan (1975). The incorporation of radioactive carbonate and bicarbonate by Aphanocapsa 6308 was demonstrated by Weathers and Allen (1978). The possibility of bicarbonate utilization and transport in the blue-green alga Coccochloris peniocystis was investigated by Miller and Colman (1980). The accumulation of inorganic carbon and photosynthesis were further shown to be a function of external pH in the same organism (Coleman and Colman 1981). However, there are no reports in literature on the effects of carbonates on sporulation of blue-green algae. The present paper deals with the effects of carbonates and bicarbonates on growth and sporulation in two blue-green algae. 2. Materials and methods Clonal and axenic cultures of two heterocystous blue-green algae, Anabaena torulosa (our own isolate from the local rice fields; Sarma and Swarn Kanta 1979) and Nostoc calcicola (isolated from the 4Usar' soils of Varanasi) were grown in the nitrogen free medium of Allen and Arnon (1955). The cultures were maintained at 28 ± 1°C and illuminated with day light fluorescent tubes for 14 hr/day. Carbonates and bicarbonates of sodium and potassium and ammonium carbonate were employed with their respective chlorides as controls. The two algae were grown in various concentrations (0-1-2 mM) to determine optimum concentrations of carbon sources for growth and sporulation. Growth was measured in terms of optical density of the algal suspensions at 660 nm in a spectrocolorimeter. The initial and final pH of the cultures was noted using a digital pH meter. The pigment ratios were determined 46 T A Sarma and Raj Garg according to Ailen (1968). Samples of 10 ml cultures (with uniform optical density of 04) of the two algae from different nutrients were concentrated by centrifugation and the chlorophyll pigments were extracted by the addition of 10ml acetone. The mixture was stored in a refrigerator for 4 hr after which the sample was vigorously shaken and centrifuged. The absorbancy .of the chlorophyll pigments from the supernatant was measured at 660 nrn. The phycobiliproteins were extracted from the residue by resuspending it in distilled water (10ml) and subjecting it to repeated freezing and thawing. The mixture was centrifuged ' and the absorbancy of phyco- cyanins was measured at 6