A.J. Faas is an anthropologist who researches politics and cooperation in contexts of disasters, displacement, and resettlement in Latin America and the United States. He received his Ph.D. from the University of South Florida and is currently an associate professor of anthropology at San José State University. Faas is the author of In the Shadow of Tungurahua: Disaster Politics in Highland Ecuador. He is working on community science approaches to disaster vulnerability in the San Francisco Bay Area. Follow him on Twitter @ajfaas.

Abigail Chabitnoy is the author of In the Current Where Drowning Is Beautiful (forthcoming, Wesleyan 2022); How to Dress a Fish, shortlisted for the 2020 International Griffin Prize for Poetry and winner of the 2020 Colorado Book Award; and the linocut illustrated chapbook Converging Lines of Light. She currently teaches at the Institute of American Indian Arts low-residency MFA program and is an assistant professor at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Chabitnoy is a member of the Tangirnaq Native Village in Kodiak, Alaska. She has an MFA in poetry and a B.A. in English and anthropology.

Adam Fleischmann studies the people and processes working at the intersections of climate change politics, science, and technology. He is a Ph.D. candidate in anthropology at McGill University in Montreal, where he received his M.A. in 2015. Fleischmann is a section editor at the Society for Cultural Anthropology, where he has also been a contributing editor since 2018. Follow him on Twitter @afleisch_anthro.

Adam Netzer Zimmer is a biocultural anthropologist based in Reykjavík, Iceland. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst (UMass). Zimmer’s dissertation research focuses on the rise of race-based anatomical science in 19th- and early 20th-century Iceland and the U.S. His work has been supported by a Fulbright-National Science Foundation Arctic Research Grant, an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, the Armelagos-Swedlund Biocultural Anthropology Dissertation Award, and a Leifur Eiríksson Foundation Fellowship. Previously, Zimmer was the laboratory manager for the UMass Taphonomic Research Facility and is currently the co-primary director of the Rivulus Dominarum Transylvanian Bioarchaeology Project in Romania.

Adam T. Smith is the Distinguished Professor of Arts and Sciences in Anthropology at Cornell University. He is also the director of the Cornell Institute of Archaeology and Material Studies. In 1998, Smith co-founded Project ArAGATS, a long-term program of archaeological investigations in Armenia. In 2020, he co-founded Caucasus Heritage Watch with Lori Khatchadourian and Ian Lindsay to explore the potential of heritage forensics to deter cultural erasure. He is the author of The Political Landscape and The Political Machine, among other books and articles. His work has been supported by grants and fellowships from a range of institutions, including the National Science Foundation, the Wenner-Gren Foundation, and the Guggenheim Foundation.

Adrienne Strong is a Ph.D. candidate in anthropology at Washington University in St. Louis and the University of Amsterdam. Her research focuses on maternal mortality in health facilities in the Rukwa region of Tanzania and on the ways in which history, political economics, and the social environments of institutions come together to influence maternal health. She is also interested in respectful maternity care and health system financing. Her research has been supported by the Fulbright Program, the National Science Foundation, and the P.E.O. Sisterhood. Follow her on Twitter @AdrienneStrong.

Agustín Fuentes is a professor of anthropology at Princeton University. He focuses on the biosocial, delving into the entanglement of biological systems with the social and cultural lives of humans, our ancestors, and a few other animals with whom humanity shares close relations. Earning his B.A./B.S. in anthropology and zoology and his M.A. and Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of California, Berkeley, he has conducted research across four continents, multiple species, and 2 million years of human history. His current projects include exploring cooperation, creativity, and belief in human evolution, multispecies anthropologies, evolutionary theory and processes, sex/gender, and engaging race and racism. Fuentes’ books include Race, Monogamy, and Other Lies They Told You: Busting Myths About Human Nature, The Creative Spark: How Imagination Made Humans Exceptional, and Why We Believe: Evolution and the Human Way of Being.

AJ Kluck (they/them/čniłč) is an interdisciplinary artist living in Mohkínstsis, Treaty 7 in Alberta, Canada. Their mother is Irish, and their father is sqilxʷ. Kluck’s practice is rooted in building slow and gentle relationships with the land and community, healing intergenerational trauma, processing their identity as a sk̓ʷsk̓ʷtmsqiltk (half-blood) person, and celebrating and reconnecting with sylix ways of being and knowing. Kluck is currently studying sculpture at the Alberta University of the Arts.

Aja Lans is a postdoctoral researcher at Harvard University as part of the Inequality in America Initiative. She completed her Ph.D. in anthropology and cultural heritage preservation at Syracuse University with funding from the Ford Foundation and the Smithsonian Institution. Her research integrates Black feminist and critical race theory with bioarchaeological investigations. Lans is also interested in museum collections, the objectification of human remains, and the history of race. She is investigating the remains of Black people curated in Harvard University’s Peabody Museum with support from the Wenner-Gren Foundation. Outside of the academy, she consults as a bioarchaeologist on cultural resource management projects in New York City. Follow her on Twitter @aja_lans.

Alan Goodman, a professor of biological anthropology at Hampshire College in Amherst, Massachusetts, writes on the health consequences of poverty, inequality, and racism. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and was a postdoctoral fellow in international nutrition at the Salvador Zubirán National Institute of Health Sciences and Nutrition in Mexico, and a research fellow in stress physiology at the Karolinska Institute, Sweden. Goodman is the editor or author of eight books, including Race: Are We So Different? (with Yolanda Moses and Joseph Jones),Building a New Biocultural Synthesis (with Thomas Leatherman), and Nutritional Anthropology (with Darna Dufour and Gretel Pelto). He was the vice president for academic affairs and a past president of the American Anthropological Association, where he co-directs its public education project on race. (Author photo courtesy of Neil Stillings.) Follow him on Twitter @AHGoodman18.

Alan Sandstrom is a professor emeritus of anthropology at Purdue University, Fort Wayne. He is the author of Corn Is Our Blood: Culture and Ethnic Identity in a Contemporary Aztec Indian Village and a co-author of Pilgrimage to Broken Mountain: Nahua Sacred Journeys in Mexico’s Huasteca Veracruzana, Traditional Papermaking and Paper Cult Figures of Mexico (both with Pamela Effrein Sandstrom), and Ethnic Identity in Nahua Mesoamerica (with Frances Berdan and others). He is also a co-editor of three collected works on Mesoamerican healers, Indigenous peoples of the Gulf Coast of Mexico, and the anthropology of Protestantism in Mexico and Central America, and a past editor of the Nahua Newsletter. He researches cultural ecology, cultural materialism, economic anthropology, the history and theory of anthropology, and Mesoamerican religion and ritual.

Alex Hinton is a distinguished professor of anthropology, the director of the Center for the Study of Genocide and Human Rights, and the UNESCO chair in genocide prevention at Rutgers University. He is the award-winning author or editor of 17 books, including, most recently, It Can Happen Here: White Power and the Rising Threat of Genocide in the U.S., Anthropological Witness: Lessons From the Khmer Rouge Tribunal, and Perpetrators: Encountering Humanity’s Dark Side (with Antonius C.G.M. Robben). Hinton is the recipient of the American Anthropological Association’s 2009 Robert B. Textor and Family Prize for Excellence in Anticipatory Anthropology and 2022 Anthropology in Media Award. In 2016, he testified as an expert witness at the Khmer Rouge tribunal in Cambodia. Follow him on Twitter at @AlexLHinton.

Alex Nelson is a sociocultural anthropologist who studies transformations in gender and intimacy in South Korea and the ethnology of romantic love. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and is an adjunct assistant professor at Appalachian State University in North Carolina. Nelson is also engaged in collaborative interdisciplinary research on commercial sexual economies, including the Erotic Entrepreneurs Project, a study of the business and safety strategies of erotic escorts in the U.S., and the Virtual Sexual Economies Project, a study of ethno-erotic economies and racial inequalities in the webcam modeling industry. Follow him on Twitter @alexjnelson.

Alexander S. Dent is the chair of the anthropology department at George Washington University. He is a linguistic anthropologist who studies mediation, intellectual property, music, and authoritarianism in Brazil and the United States. His first book, River of Tears: Country Music, Memory, and Modernity in Brazil, analyzed rural public culture in Brazil from 1998–2009. His second book, Digital Pirates: Policing Intellectual Property in Brazil, analyzes digital media piracy and capitalism. Dent is currently working on a history of early punk rock in Brazil and is collaborating with Joshua A. Bell and Joel C. Kuipers on a study funded by the National Science Foundation on teenage cellphone use in Washington, D.C. He is also in a practicing band called Weird Babies.

Alexander Werth teaches biology, anthropology, and writing at Hampden-Sydney College in Virginia. He studied zoology, anthropology, and philosophy at Duke University, then earned a Ph.D. in organismic and evolutionary biology from Harvard University, with a focus on mammalian anatomy. Werth conducted research at the Duke Primate (now Lemur) Center and the New England Regional Primate Center. His research also focuses on marine mammal functional morphology (specifically feeding in toothed and baleen whales) and the evolution of complex structures. His scholarly work has been published in many peer-reviewed journals and highlighted in popular media. He is currently writing a book about the perils of teleological thinking.

Alexandra Brewis studies how stigma and other forms of social exclusion shape human biology, with a special focus on the health challenges of obesity and climate change. Her books include Obesity: Cultural and Biocultural Perspectives. She received her Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Arizona and now serves as the director of the School of Human Evolution and Social Change at Arizona State University (ASU), where she is also a president’s professor. To leverage social science research in advancing workable and sustainable solutions to local community-identified health challenges, Brewis co-leads the Mayo Clinic–ASU Obesity Solutions initiative. She blogs about stigma (with Amber Wutich) at lazycrazydisgusting.com.

Alexandra Jones, the founder and chief executive officer of Archaeology in the Community, focuses her educational work on community outreach and service. She is currently an assistant professor of archaeology at Goucher College in Maryland. Her B.A. and M.A. are from Howard University, and she earned her Ph.D. in historical archaeology from the University of California, Berkeley, in 2010. In 2013, Jones worked for PBS’ television show Time Team America as the archaeology field school director. She serves on the District of Columbia’s historic preservation review board, on the board of directors for the Society of Black Archaeologists, and on the board of directors for the St. Croix Archaeological Society. She is also an academic trustee for the Archaeological Institute of America.

Alexandra Mack is a senior fellow in Pitney Bowes’ Strategic Technology and Innovation Center. Her work is focused on developing ideas for new products, services, and technologies based on a deep understanding of work practice. She has worked on different projects across business units, bringing user-centered approaches to product development and innovation in health care, retail, software, and financial services industries as well as nonprofits. Prior to coming to Pitney Bowes, Mack worked for a small design consulting firm and also spent several years consulting in marketing and strategic research, combining qualitative and quantitative techniques. She earned a Ph.D. in anthropology from Arizona State University. Follow her on Twitter @lxmack.

Alicia Colson is an archaeologist and ethnohistorian who collaborates with Indigenous people to understand the ways in which they perceive their pasts. She received her Ph.D. from McGill University and is a research fellow at the University of Central Lancashire in the U.K. and an EC50 with The Explorers Club. Colson is also a co-founding editor of Exploration Revealed and a co-founder of the Institute of Science and Technology’s AI (Artificial Intelligence) Group. She is currently working with George Kenny, an Anishinaabe Knowledge Keeper from Lac Seul First Nation, his son Mike Auksi, and others in the Teaching Circle on a project partially funded by an Engaged Research Grant from the Wenner-Gren Foundation on Animism: An Insider’s View. Follow her on the social platform X @colson_alicia.

Alison Crowther is a senior lecturer in archaeology at The University of Queensland in Australia, where she received her doctoral degree in 2009. Her research interests include the archaeobotany of early agriculture in Africa and the Indo-Pacific, trans-regional maritime trade and crop transfers, and ancient food processing technologies. Crowther’s current research investigates the origins and development of Indian Ocean trade and interaction with a focus on coastal East Africa, where she has conducted extensive fieldwork since 2010 with the Sealinks Project. She has received research funding from the Australian Research Council.

Alison Heller is a medical anthropologist who studies reproductive health and humanitarianism in West Africa. She received her Ph.D. from Washington University in St. Louis and is currently a traveling faculty member for the International Honors Program (IHP)/Comparative Program run by World Learning. Before starting as an assistant professor at the University of Maryland, College Park, she will complete a fellowship at the School for Advanced Research in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Heller’s research has been funded by the Fulbright-Hays Program, the National Science Foundation, and the Wenner-Gren Foundation.

Alison Kyra Carter is an assistant professor of anthropology at the University of Oregon. She is an anthropological archaeologist with an interest in the political economy and evolution of complex societies in Southeast Asia. Carter has been undertaking archaeological research in Cambodia since 2005. Her current project is focused on the Angkorian civilization of Cambodia from the ninth to the 15th centuries. Specifically, she is trying to understand the daily lives of non-elite members of society by studying their households and occupation areas.

Allison Mickel is an assistant professor of anthropology at Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and the author of Why Those Who Shovel Are Silent: A History of Local Archaeological Knowledge and Labor. Her research focuses on conditions for locally hired laborers on archaeological excavations, especially in the Middle East. She has excavated in Jordan, Turkey, Kenya, and the U.S. As an activist, Mickel has served in leadership roles for POWER Lehigh Valley, Women’s March Pennsylvania, and Lehigh Valley Stands Up.

Alma Simba is a writer, historian, and experimental sound artist interested in both the potentials and failures of words in capturing the human experience. Her subject matter is ancestral heritage and how Indigenous Black Africans can communicate and explore this history through oral traditions, memory, and imagination. Simba was awarded a B.A. in international history from the London School of Economics and Political Science, and she completed her M.A. in history at the University of Dar es Salaam with a focus on Tanzanian heritage housed in Germany. She was a “Sensitive Provenances” Research Fellow at the University of Göttingen in 2022 and is part of the Ajabu Ajabu audio-visual collection in Dar es Salaam. Follow her on Instagram @aa_noun.

Alyshia Gálvez is a cultural and medical anthropologist and a professor of Latin American and Latino studies at Lehman College of the City University of New York. She is the author of the recent book Eating NAFTA: Trade, Food Policies, and the Destruction of Mexico, which is about changing food policies, systems, and practices in Mexico and Mexican communities in the United States. She was the founding director of the Jaime Lucero Mexican Studies Institute at CUNY and is the author of two previous books on Mexican migration, Patient Citizens, Immigrant Mothers: Mexican Women, Public Prenatal Care, and the Birth Weight Paradox (winner of the 2012 ALLA Book Award from the Association of Latino and Latin American Anthropologists) and Guadalupe in New York: Devotion and the Struggle for Citizenship Rights Among Mexican Immigrants.

Amaia Arranz-Otaegui is an archaeobotanist who specializes in the late Epipaleolithic and early Neolithic of southwest Asia. Her research focuses on topics such as plant domestication, plant subsistence, vegetation change, and human impact. She has worked extensively in several countries, including Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Iran. She completed her Ph.D. at the University of the Basque Country in Spain in 2015, and she is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Copenhagen in Denmark.

Amanda Grace Santos is an archaeologist working with the Continental Divide Trail Coalition in Santa Fe, New Mexico. She received her master’s in archaeology from Boston University. Her research interests include landscape archaeology, place-based pedagogy, public archaeology, and social resistance in ancient Roman provinces. Through her research, she hopes to understand the physical manifestations of community across cultures and time. Santos is also passionate about conservation education, climate justice, trains, and literature as a form of resistance to governments, social frameworks, and more.

Amanda J. Guzmán is a Ph.D. candidate in anthropology at the University of California, Berkeley. She graduated from Harvard University with a B.A. in archaeology and minors in Latin American history and the Spanish language. Her dissertation project focuses on a range of major museums to analyze the history of North American museum collecting in, and representations of, Puerto Rico. In the context of Puerto Rico’s current environmental and economic uncertainty, her dissertation critically traces understudied museum acquisition narratives documenting the island’s material relations with the U.S. mainland. Guzmán’s research has been supported by the Smithsonian Institution’s Summer Institute in Museum Anthropology, a Smithsonian Institution graduate student fellowship, a Smithsonian Institution predoctoral student fellowship, and the Mellon Mays graduate initiatives program. She is the author of the recently published Museum Anthropology article, “Collecting the Puerto Rican Colony: Spanish-American War Material Encounters Between Officer-Wives and Puerto Ricans.”

Prior to becoming the managing editor of SAPIENS in May 2015, Amanda Mascarelli spent more than a decade as a freelance science journalist. She has written about oil spills, autism, the neuroscience of magic, the biological complexity of sex and gender, and many other topics, and her reporting has taken her around the world. Her work appears in Audubon, Nature, Science, Science News for Students, The Los Angeles Times, The New York Times, The Washington Post, and elsewhere. Mascarelli earned an undergraduate degree in biology and a master’s in journalism, and spent several years doing biology research before becoming a writer and editor. She lives with her husband and three children in Denver, Colorado.

Amanda Votta is a Ph.D. candidate in anthropology at Brown University in Rhode Island. She received her M.A. from Brandeis University in 2019. Her work explores the effects of opioid prescribing changes on chronic pain sufferers and conceptions of drug use and dependence in the U.S. Votta aims to add nuance to understandings of dependence and to current perceptions of the medical and nonmedical use of opioids in North America.

Amber Wutich is the director of the Center for Global Health at Arizona State University and a faculty member in the university’s anthropology program. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Florida. Her research examines institutional injustice and health disparities, with a focus on water and food. Wutich directs the Global Ethnohydrology Study, a cross-cultural study of water knowledge and institutions in 10 countries. Her teaching has been recognized with the Arizona Professor of the Year Award, which is sponsored by the Council for Advancement and Support of Education and the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. She serves as the associate editor of Field Methods and teaches in the National Science Foundation’s programs in research methods in anthropology. She blogs (with Alexandra Brewis Slade) at lazycrazydisgusting.com. Follow her on Twitter @awutich.

Amira Mittermaier is an anthropologist who studies Islam in Egypt. She received her Ph.D. from Columbia University and is currently an associate professor in religious studies and anthropology at the University of Toronto. She is the author of the award-winning book Dreams That Matter: Egyptian Landscapes of the Imagination. Currently she is working on a project, funded by the Wenner-Gren Foundation and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, that examines Islamic practices of giving against the backdrop of the 2011 Egyptian uprising and its aftermath.

Amy Starecheski is a cultural anthropologist and oral historian whose research focuses on the use of oral history in social movements and the politics of urban property. She is the co-director of the oral history master of arts program at Columbia University. She received a Ph.D. in cultural anthropology from the City University of New York’s Graduate Center, where she was a public humanities fellow. She is the author of Ours to Lose: When Squatters Became Homeowners in New York City and is currently working on a public sound-art project about the Lower East Side using oral histories with squatters.

Anand Pandian is a professor of anthropology at Johns Hopkins University. His recent books include A Possible Anthropology: Methods for Uneasy Times and Crumpled Paper Boat: Experiments in Ethnographic Writing. Pandian is working on a new book about indifference in contemporary American life—the everyday arrangements that allow cruelty to harbor in the most banal of circumstances. Follow him on Twitter @anandspandian. Any views stated on this site are Pandian’s own and do not express the position or views of Johns Hopkins University.

Anastasia Riehl is a linguist with a Ph.D. from Cornell University. She is currently the director of the Strathy Language Unit at Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario, Canada. Her work with endangered languages has taken her to Indonesia and Vanuatu, as well as to the city of Toronto, where she directs a project to document the endangered heritage languages of immigrant communities.

Andrea Malaya M. Ragragio is an anthropologist and archaeologist who works with Manobo communities in the Pantaron mountain range, southern Mindanao, the Philippines. She is a faculty member of the department of social sciences at the University of the Philippines in Mindanao and is a Ph.D. candidate at the Institute of Cultural Anthropology and Development Sociology at Leiden University. In 2018, Ragragio received an Early Career Grant from the National Geographic Society to study Manobo tattooing. Follow her on Twitter @AMRagragio.

Andrew Curry is a journalist based in Berlin, Germany. He covers science, history, culture, and politics (pretty much in that order) for a wide variety of publications, including Archaeology, National Geographic, Science, and Wired. His work has been included in The Best American Science and Nature Writing anthologies and awarded prizes by the German Foreign Ministry. He recently lost his glasses while bodysurfing in the Pacific Ocean and was optimistic enough to look for them on the beach the next morning, just in case.

Andrew Flachs researches food and agriculture systems, exploring genetically modified crops, heirloom seeds, and our own microbiomes. An assistant professor of anthropology at Purdue University in Indiana, his work among farmers in the American Midwest, the Balkans, and South India investigates ecological knowledge and technological change in agricultural systems spanning Cleveland urban gardens and Indian genetically modified cotton fields. He is the author of Cultivating Knowledge: Biotechnology, Sustainability, and the Human Cost of Cotton Capitalism in India and is a co-editor of the journal Ethnobiology Letters. Follow him on Twitter @drflachsophone.

Andrew Roddick is an associate professor of anthropology at McMaster University. He has worked in the Bolivian highlands for 15 years, conducting archaeological research principally focused on the Tiwanaku civilization and its precursors. Roddick is currently working on the Challapata Project, among others, an effort that investigates ancient villages in the eastern Lake Titicaca basin. He is also directing an ethnoarchaeological project with highland Bolivian contemporary potters. Roddick recently co-edited two books, Knowledge in Motion: Making Communities and Constellations of Practice Across Time and Place (with Ann ‎ B. Stahl) and Constructions of Time and History in the Pre-Columbian Andes (with Edward Swenson).

Angela Garcia is a Ph.D. candidate and graduate researcher in biological anthropology at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). She holds a B.A. in sociology from Wayne State University in Detroit, Michigan, and an M.A. in biological anthropology from UCSB. Her research uses evolutionary and biocultural approaches to explain social disparities in health. Her dissertation looks at the interplay of social and biological factors on disease risk among immigrants on the island of Utila, Honduras. She is the author of a manuscript (in press) that focuses on the relationship between perceived socioeconomic status and diurnal cortisol levels in people who live on Utila.

Anita Hannig is an anthropologist who studies illness, death, and dying from a cultural perspective. She is an associate professor at Brandeis University, where she teaches classes on medicine, religion, and the end of life. Her most recent book, The Day I Die: The Untold Story of Assisted Dying in America, investigates how medical assistance in dying is transforming the ways people in the U.S. die. Her writing has appeared in Cognoscenti, The Conversation, and The Seattle Times, among other publications.

Ann McGrath is director of the Australian Centre for Indigenous History at the Australian National University. She researches gender and colonialism in the United States and Australia. She wrote How to Write History That People Want to Read (with Ann Curthoys) and the prize-winning ‘Born in the Cattle’: Aborigines in Cattle Country. She co-directed the film Message From Mungo (with Andrew Pike) and edited Long History, Deep Time: Deepening Histories of Place (with Mary Anne Jebb). Her latest book, published in 2015, is Illicit Love: Interracial Sex and Marriage in the United States and Australia. Follow her on Twitter @annmcgrath5.

Anna Antoniou is an anthropologist and archaeologist who draws on a mix of storytelling and four-field methods to help communities across the globe regain crucial parts of their cultural heritage. As a Cypriot American, she brought her academic interests home through a 400-mile ethnographic walk around Cyprus that explored the cultural and political dynamics of the division on the island. Her current research uses an archaeological understanding of past foodways to serve Indigenous communities in Washington state in their efforts to revitalize traditional foodways. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Michigan and is the 2021–2022 Andrew W. Mellon Foundation Native American Scholars Initiative postdoctoral fellow at the American Philosophical Society.

Anna Florin is a postdoctoral research fellow at St John’s College, Cambridge, and the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge. She is also an associate investigator at the ARC Centre of Excellence for Australian Biodiversity and Heritage, University of Wollongong. Florin studies charred food scraps from ancient fireplaces to understand the diets of people in the past. Her Ph.D. research focused on archaeobotanical analysis at Madjedbebe, a 65,000-year-old site on Mirarr Country in Northern Australia. She is researching the role of plant foods in early human migrations out of Africa and the complexity of long-term human-plant interactions within Indigenous communities in Australia, New Guinea, and Island Southeast Asia.

Anna L. Jordan is a psychological anthropologist whose areas of interest include subjectivity and identity, ethics and morality, and power and inequality. She is a program manager for Imoyase Community Support Services, a nonprofit organization committed to community-based participatory action research, where she evaluates alternatives to youth incarceration. While earning her Ph.D. from Washington State University, she studied psychocultural experiences of morality in the U.S. criminal legal system through ethnographic fieldwork with formerly incarcerated people and former gang members in Los Angeles. Jordan is a founding member of the nonprofit CURE California, which is dedicated to criminal justice reform.

Anna Luisa Daigneault is a linguistic anthropologist, a researcher, a writer, and an artist. She holds an M.Sc. in linguistic anthropology from Université de Montréal. She currently resides in the United States and serves as the program director for the Living Tongues Institute for Endangered Languages. Daigneault has conducted ethnolinguistic fieldwork throughout the Americas and in the Pacific Islands, and has contributed to the publication of more than 30 online Talking Dictionaries for endangered and minority languages around the world. She has been published by The Dominion, Global Voices, and SAPIENS. Follow her on Twitter @anna_daigneault and @livingtongues.

Annah Zhu is a political ecologist who studies conservation and development in Madagascar from an ethnographic perspective. Her work, informed by the fields of anthropology, geography, and environmental studies, focuses specifically on Madagascar’s trade in natural resources with China. She is currently a Ph.D. candidate at the University of California, Berkeley, and she holds an M.A. from Duke University. In May, American Ethnologist published her most recent article, “Hot Money, Cold Beer: Navigating the Vanilla and Rosewood Export Economies in Northeastern Madagascar.”

Annalisa Bolin is a postdoctoral fellow in the UNESCO Chair on Heritage Futures at Linnaeus University in Sweden. Her research focuses on the ethics and politics of cultural heritage, especially in Rwanda. Her most recent projects include a study of community relations to heritage resources in Nyanza District (with David Nkusi) and an investigation of how heritage mediates the postcolonial relationship between Rwanda and Germany. Bolin has a Ph.D. in anthropology from Stanford University. Follow her on Twitter @bolinresearch.

Annemieke Milks is an honorary research fellow at the Institute of Archaeology at University College London. Her research is centered on the archaeology of Pleistocene humans, and, in particular, subsistence behaviors and technologies. Milks’ expertise is in hunting technologies, with a specific focus on the use of wood. She has conducted experimental work on the ballistics of early weapons in collaboration with Cranfield Defence and Security, the Defense Academy of the U.K., and Loughborough University.

Annie Tucker received her Ph.D. from the University of California, Los Angeles, where she designed and taught new classes on autism and neurodiversity for the disability studies minor. She is a researcher and writer for Elemental Productions and is an award-winning translator of Indonesian literature. Her most recent co-authored book is Widening the Frame With Visual Psychological Anthropology: Perspectives on Trauma, Gendered Violence, and Stigma in Indonesia (with Robert Lemelson). Tucker and Lemelson are currently working on a book exploring autism in Indonesia through the lens of visual psychological anthropology.

Anthony Sinclair is a professor of archaeological theory and method in the archaeology, classics, and Egyptology department at the University of Liverpool in the U.K. He conducts research into the archaeological record of the first modern humans and their immediate ancestors, and has conducted field research in Western Europe, Southern Africa, and Arabia. Sinclair is currently working on a large-scale scientometric study of archaeology and its relationship to cognate disciplines between 1960 and 2020 using bibliometric data and science mapping.

Aoife Daly is the principal investigator of the project Northern Europe’s Timber Resource—Chronology, Origin, and Exploitation. This project builds a multidisciplinary team to analyze the material and written evidence for timber usage over six centuries (1100–1700). The region of origin of timber is being analyzed using several scientific methods, some of which are experimental. Identifying the timber source and the timber destination and using the high precision dating that dendrochronology provides, she studies the changes, through time, in the availability and exploitation of this essential resource.

Aparecida Vilaça is a professor of social anthropology at the National Museum, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil. She has come and gone among the Wari’ people in Amazonia since 1986. Among other books, she is the author of Strange Enemies: Indigenous Agency and Scenes of Encounters in Amazonia, Praying and Preying: Christianity in Indigenous Amazonia, and Paletó and Me: Memories of My Indigenous Father. Vilaça is also a co-editor of Science in the Forest, Science in the Past (with Geoffrey Lloyd). Like many Brazilian anthropologists, she is dedicated to the continual fight for the protection of Indigenous peoples’ rights in Amazonia.

April Nowell received her Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania. She is a Paleolithic archaeologist and a professor of anthropology at the University of Victoria in Canada. Currently, she directs an international team of researchers in the study of Lower and Middle Paleolithic sites in Jordan, and is known for her publications on cognitive archaeology, the archaeology of children, Paleolithic art, and the relationship between science, pop culture, and the media. She is a co-editor of Stone Tools and the Evolution of Human Cognition (with Iain Davidson) and Archaeology of the Night: Life After Dark in the Ancient World (with Nancy Gonlin). Watch her TEDx talk: “Paleo Porn.”

Astrid A. Noterman has been affiliated with Sweden’s Stockholm University as part of a project funded by the Swedish Research Council titled “Interacting With the Dead: Belief and Conflict in Early Medieval Europe,” led by Alison Klevnäs. Noterman’s ongoing research centers on early medieval grave reopening, Merovingian historiography, and 19th-century archaeology and its implications for the construction of French identity. She is also a collaborative member of the Center for Medieval Studies, a mixed research unit managed by the University of Poitiers and the Centre national de la recherche scientifique.

Ather Zia is a political anthropologist, poet, short fiction writer, and columnist. She is an associate professor in the department of anthropology and the gender studies program at the University of Northern Colorado, Greeley. Zia is the founder-editor of Kashmir Lit and the co-founder of Critical Kashmir Studies Collective. She is also a co-editor of Cultural Anthropology. She is the author of Resisting Disappearances: Military Occupation and Women’s Activism in Kashmir, which won the 2020 Gloria E. Anzaldúa Honorable Mention Award, 2021 Public Anthropologist Award, and Advocate of the Year Award 2021. And she is a co-editor of Can You Hear Kashmiri Women Speak? (with Nitasha Kaul), Resisting Occupation in Kashmir (with Haley Duschinski, Mona Bhan, and Cynthia Mahmood), and A Desolation Called Peace (with Javaid Iqbal Bhat). Zia has published a poetry collection titled The Frame, and her ethnographic poetry won an award from the Society for Humanistic Anthropology and was featured as a SAPIENS poetry contest winner in 2020.

Augusta X. Thomson is a Ph.D. candidate in anthropology at New York University, where she is currently working on a Fulbright-supported dissertation project along the Camino de Santiago in Spain. Her ethnographic fieldwork has been supported by The Council for European Studies, the SVA/Robert Lemelson Foundation Fellowship Program, Fulbright, and the Wenner-Gren Foundation. Thomson is the director of Nine-Story Mountain, a documentary/autoethnographic record of a pilgrimage to and around Mount Kailash in the far west of Tibet, and flotsam, a short film about the haunted Flatbush shoreline of Dead Horse Bay. She has written for Religion and Politics, The Daily Beast, Women in the World, HuffPost, Al Jazeera English, The New Internationalist, and Wellesley Magazine, among other publications.

Austin “Chad” Hill is an archaeologist whose research focuses on the Neolithic, Chalcolithic, and Early Bronze Age periods of the Near East, with specializations in remote sensing, GIS, advanced image processing, and faunal analysis. He is a postdoctoral fellow in the Penn Paleoecology Lab in the department of anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania and a visiting scholar in the Spatial Archaeometry Lab in the department of anthropology at Dartmouth College. He is a co-director of the National Science Foundation-funded Kites in Context project. Follow him on Twitter @Achiii.

Ayesha Fuentes is an objects conservator and material historian specializing in the care of archaeological and ethnographic collections. She is a graduate of the UCLA/Getty master’s program in the conservation of cultural heritage, and she earned a Ph.D. from SOAS University of London, where she wrote her dissertation on the use of human remains in Tibetan and Himalayan ritual objects. Fuentes is the Isaac Newton Trust Research Associate in Conservation at the University of Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.

Azuka Nzegwu holds a Ph.D. in philosophy, interpretation, and culture from Binghamton University. Her research focused on virtual whirlpools as new sites of knowledge that are reshaping the old politics of knowledge production. Nzegwu also explores how ancient spirituality can assist us in dealing with the ups and downs of our lives. She draws on the principles of African spirituality to inform her work. To that end, she guest edited two special issues on the African-based practices of Vodou and Santeria in the Americas for the peer-reviewed publications Journal on African Philosophy and JENdA: A Journal of Culture and African Women Studies. She interviewed practitioners about their personal journey, growth, and insights. The interviews add to a growing body of research that debunks assumptions and stereotypes about African spirituality. Nzegwu hopes to combine her training and spiritual insights to bring about positive change in the world.

Basil Farraj is a Palestinian anthropologist researching violence, torture, and resistance in Palestine and beyond. He is an assistant professor in the department of philosophy and cultural studies at Birzeit University, Palestine. Basil has published on topics related to carcerality and conducted research in several countries, including Chile, Colombia, and Palestine. He is working on a research project funded by the Arab Council for the Social Sciences that explores the global circulation of carceral policies and practices. Follow him on X, formerly Twitter, @basilafarraj.

Ben Belek is a social and medical anthropologist. He holds a Ph.D. in social anthropology from the University of Cambridge and an M.Sc. in medical sociology and anthropology from the University of Amsterdam. His research projects have focused on questions concerning subjectivity, activism, and the ontological status of neurological diversity among autistic adults in the U.K. In another project, he engaged with the shifting values of blood constituents in the Israeli blood economy. Belek is currently involved in sustainable policy design, acting as impact manager for the Israel Society of Ecology and Environmental Sciences.

Ben Leeming is chair of history at The Rivers School, a private high school outside of Boston, Massachusetts, where he has been a member of the faculty since 1996. Since completing his Ph.D. in anthropology, Leeming has also worked as a practicing ethnohistorian whose independent scholarship focuses on early colonial Mexico and the missionary Nahuatl writings of Franciscans and Nahuas who produced the earliest translations of Christianity in the Americas. In 2020, Leeming was awarded an NEH Fellowship to translate an early collection of Nahuatl sermons written in the 1540s by a team of Nahua scholars under the direction of eminent Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagún.

Benjamin Hollenbach is a sociocultural anthropologist whose research focuses on the intersections of queerness, inclusive practice, and Christian churches in the United States. He earned his Ph.D. from the department of anthropology at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, where he is now a lecturer. With funding from the Wenner-Gren Foundation, he conducted more than two years of ethnographic fieldwork in queer-affirming congregations in Michigan, exploring how LGBTQ+ Christians advocate for themselves in church settings.

Benjamin Schoville is a research fellow in the Centre for Heritage and Culture at the University of Southern Queensland, Australia, and previously was a lecturer in archaeology at the University of Queensland. He held a Centre of Excellence in Palaeosciences postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Cape Town, South Africa, after receiving his Ph.D. from Arizona State University. Through field excavations and rigorous experimental studies, his research has led to major discoveries of stone-tipped spears from 500,000 years ago and complex stone tool technologies from 72,000 years ago. Schoville’s current project explores the southern Kalahari Basin for early modern human archaeological and paleoanthropological remains and includes excavations at middle Stone Age sites at Ga-Mohana Hill and on the Tswalu Kalahari Reserve.

Bernard Wood is the University Professor of Human Origins at George Washington University. He is the author or a co-author of 20 books ranging from a 1991 door-stopper monograph on the hominid cranial remains from Koobi Fora to the nontechnical Human Evolution: A Very Short Introduction. Wood also authored more than 240 scientific articles and book chapters, and a slew of commentaries in Nature and other journals. His research interests are taxonomy, phylogeny reconstruction, and comparative morphology. He is an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England.

Beth L. Leech is a professor of political science at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey. Her research and teaching focus on interest groups and social movements and how those organizations form, cooperate, and compete in the public policy process. Leech received her Ph.D. from Texas A&M University. She is the author of Lobbyists at Work and a co-author of the books Basic Interests: The Importance of Groups in Politics and in Political Science (with Frank R. Baumgartner), Lobbying and Policy Change: Who Wins, Who Loses, and Why (with Frank R. Baumgartner, Jeffrey M. Berry, Marie Hojnacki, and David C. Kimball), and Meeting at Grand Central: Understanding the Social and Evolutionary Roots of Cooperation (with Lee Cronk). Her current project, funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, is a comparative study of the policy agendas of interest groups and the public in four Western democracies.

Bilinda Straight is a cultural anthropologist who works with northern Kenyan pastoralists on issues relating to warfare, emotion, gender, and health. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Michigan and is a professor of anthropology at Western Michigan University. She is currently working on a project, funded by the National Science Foundation, that examines potential DNA methylation changes associated with maternal exposure to extreme drought in a context of violence. Her work builds upon similar research with warfare combatants.

Bill Schindler is an internationally known archaeologist, primitive technologist, and chef. He founded and directs the Eastern Shore Food Lab with a mission to preserve and revive ancestral dietary approaches to create a nourishing, ethical, and sustainable food system, and is an adjunct associate professor of archaeology at University College Dublin. Schindler’s work is currently the focus of Wired magazine’s YouTube seriesBasic Instincts and Food Science, and he co-starred in the National Geographic Channel series The Great Human Race, which aired in 2016 in 171 countries. He has also been featured on CNN, Maryland Public Television, NPR’s Weekend Edition and Here and Now, and on such podcasts as Milk Street Radio, Peak Human, and The Academic Minute. Schindler’s work has appeared in The Washington Post, The Atlantic, and The London Times, among other publications. Follow him on Twitter @DrBillSchindler.

Blanca Begert is a writer and multimedia producer with a background in environmental anthropology. She covers forest management, environmental conflict, climate change, and environmental justice issues in the U.S. and Latin America. Begert holds a master of environmental science degree from the Yale School of the Environment and has conducted research on policies affecting Indigenous peoples’ land rights and livelihoods with the Center for International Forestry Research in Peru. She is currently an environment editor and video producer with KCET | PBS SoCal in Los Angeles.

Bree Kelly earned a master’s degree in Egyptology and digital humanities from Macquarie University in Australia. Her thesis explored how the Fabricius Workbench by Google Arts and Culture might improve aspects of Egyptological research and the teaching of hieroglyphic Egyptian. Her interests lie in how machine learning and AI can be harnessed to improve or enhance research practices and higher education. Kelly is also interested in studying prominent ancient Egyptian figures, such as Hatshepsut and Akhenaten, and analyzing how their lives have been interpreted by previous scholars.

Brendan H. O’Connor, a lifelong fan of the Kansas City Royals, is a linguistic anthropologist and anthropologist of education. He studies issues of language, identity, and education in the U.S.-Mexico borderlands, primarily in relation to Mexican American and other Latinx students and families. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Arizona and is currently an associate professor in the School of Transborder Studies at Arizona State University. O’Connor’s academic writing has appeared in many journals, including Anthropology & Education Quarterly, Journal of Latinos and Education, and Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology.

Brendane A. Tynes (she/her) is a Black queer feminist scholar and storyteller from Columbia, South Carolina. As a doctoral candidate in anthropology at Columbia University, she studies the affective responses of Black women and girls to multiple forms of violence within grassroots Black political movements. Her scholarship has received generous support from the CAETR, Ford Foundation, and Wenner-Gren Foundation. She works with the Say Her Name Coalition and In Our Names Network to address sexual violence against Black women, femmes, girls, and gender-expansive people. Tynes also co-hosts the Zora’s Daughters Podcast, a Black feminist anthropological intervention on popular culture and issues that concern Black women and queer and trans people. Follow her on Twitter @brendanetynes.

Brenna R. Hassett is a bioarchaeologist at University College London and a scientific associate at the Natural History Museum, London. She is the author of Growing Up Human: The Evolution of Childhood and Built on Bones: 15,000 Years of Urban Life and Death. Hassett is a member of Team TrowelBlazers, a collective that runs the grassroots and largely community-sourced TrowelBlazer project, which seeks to reset imaginations by presenting the stories of women in the “digging” sciences.

Brian Ballsun-Stanton is the solutions architect in digital humanities for the Macquarie University Faculty of Arts, with more than seven years’ experience designing and delivering technical solutions for academic and student research projects. He studies the philosophy of data and the trends of far-right extremism within social networks. Ballsun-Stanton is also the technical director for the FAIMS project, which builds electronic field notebooks for offline, geospatially enabled data collection with structured data and multimedia. Follow his newsletter at faims.substack.com.

Brian Fagan was born in England, was educated at the University of Cambridge, and worked in Central Africa before beginning his teaching career at the University of California, Santa Barbara, in 1967. He is now emeritus. One of the world’s leading archaeological lecturers and writers, Fagan is the author of numerous general books on archaeology. His most recent books are Elixir: A History of Water and Humankind, Beyond the Blue Horizon: How the Earliest Mariners Unlocked the Secrets of the Oceans, and The Attacking Ocean: The Past, Present, and Future of Rising Sea Levels, all published by Bloomsbury Press in New York.

Brian Howell is a cultural anthropologist who studies religion in Southeast Asia and North America. He received his Ph.D. from Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, and is currently a professor of anthropology at Wheaton College in Illinois. He is the author of two monographs, Christianity in the Local Context: Southern Baptists in the Philippines and Short Term Mission: An Ethnography of Christian Travel Narrative and Experience, an article on Billy Graham in American Anthropologist, and numerous chapters and articles on how a Christian standpoint and theology inform ethnographic work and, more generally, anthropology.

Briana Pobiner has been a paleoanthropologist at the Smithsonian’s Human Origins Program since 2005. Her research centers on the evolution of human diet (with a focus on meat eating) but has included topics as diverse as cannibalism in the Cook Islands and chimpanzee carnivory. In addition to her active field, laboratory, and experimental research programs (mainly in Africa), she leads the Human Origins Program’s education and outreach efforts, and manages its public programs, website content, social media, and exhibition volunteer training. She is also an associate research professor of anthropology at George Washington University. Follow the Human Origins Program on Twitter @HumanOrigins.

Brianna Muir is a master’s student in biological anthropology at the University of Central Florida. As an emerging bioarchaeologist, she is interested in how integrative approaches can be used to address questions of personhood, identity, and agency in the past. In particular, she investigates how these factors may have shaped and influenced a person’s lived experiences. Muir received her B.A. from the Australian National University in 2019 and has undertaken fieldwork and research in the Philippines, Vanuatu, and Australia.

Bridget Alex holds a Ph.D. in anthropology and human evolutionary biology. Her research focuses on understanding the processes by which Homo sapiens dispersed globally as all other human groups went extinct over the past 100,000 years. She is particularly interested in the timing and nature of Neanderthal–modern human interactions, and uses radiocarbon dating to reconstruct the biogeography of these populations. Her field projects are in the Balkans, Northeast Europe, and the Levant.

Bruce Hardy is a paleoanthropologist and archaeologist specializing in Neanderthals. His research focuses on understanding stone tool use through microscopic residue analysis. He is a professor of anthropology at Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio, where he teaches his students Neanderthal skills such as making fire and wooden spears. In 2020, he and his colleagues published evidence of the oldest-known surviving string, circa 50,000 years old, from the Neanderthal site of Abri du Maras in France. He also teaches a course on science and pseudoscience.

C.D. Green is a Ph.D. candidate in the department of anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania. His research is about understanding the power of the past in political ideologies and community identity formation. In particular, he focuses on how normalizing narratives of the past in museums also normalizes certain political realities and their goals. His dissertation research is on the independence movement and referenda in Kanaky/New Caledonia. His background is in archaeological heritage legal compliance work, especially the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, for museums, universities, and the U.S. military.

Cara Ocobock is the director of the Human Energetics Laboratory at Notre Dame. Her research program integrates human biology and anthropology, with a focus on the interaction between anatomy, physiology, evolution, and the environment. She explores the physiological and behavioral mechanisms necessary to cope with and adapt to extreme climate and physical activity. Ocobock works in northern Finland in collaboration with researchers from the University of Lapland and University of Oulu. This project focuses on reindeer herders, a highly active cold climate population. Her research assesses their lifeways, life history patterns, and cold climate adaptations, and addresses potential health disparities. This work was funded by the National Science Foundation and the American-Scandinavian Foundation. Follow her on X, formerly Twitter, @caraocobock.

Caree Banton is an associate professor of African diaspora history and the director of African and African American studies at the University of Arkansas. She completed her Ph.D. at Vanderbilt University in 2013. Her research has been supported by grants such as a Lapidus Center Fellowship at the Schomburg Center and a Nancy Weiss Malkiel Scholars Award, and funded by organizations such as Rotary International, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the American Association of University Women, and the National Endowment for the Humanities. Her book, More Auspicious Shores: Barbadian Migration to Liberia, Blackness, and the Making of the African Republic explores experiences of freedom, citizenship, nationhood, race, and belonging across the Atlantic world.

Carlos David Londoño Sulkin is a sociocultural anthropologist who contributes to international scholarship on Indigenous Amazonian societies and on morality. He teaches at the University of Regina in Canada and is the president of the Society for the Anthropology of Lowland South America. Londoño Sulkin received his B.A. from the Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, in Colombia, and his Ph.D. from the University of St. Andrews in Scotland. He is the author of People of Substance: An Ethnography of Morality in the Colombian Amazon.

Caroline Giles Banks is a medical anthropologist who studies the cultural dimensions of eating disorders. After receiving her Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota, Banks served on the faculties of the University of Wisconsin-River Falls and Luther College in Deborah, Iowa, among other colleges and universities. Written in several genres—poetic memoir, ekphrastic poetry, and haiku—her poetry is informed by her training and experience as a cultural anthropologist and often explores themes of marginalization, displacement, and loss. Banks is the author of six books of poetry, including The Weight of Whiteness: a Memoir in Poetry and Picture a Poem: Ekphrastic and Other Poems.

Catherine Bolten is a development anthropologist who has worked in Sierra Leone since 2003. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Michigan and is currently an associate professor of anthropology and peace studies at the University of Notre Dame. Bolten is the author of I Did It to Save My Life: Love and Survival in Sierra Leone. She is currently working on a project investigating the nexus of agriculture, wildlife, and zoonotic disease in rural villages.

Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias is a Ph.D. candidate in evolutionary anthropology at the University of Zürich. Her research aims to reconstruct the past of contemporary hunting and gathering people from different places in Africa to better understand the processes that shaped the enormous genetic and cultural human diversity on the continent today. Her work is interdisciplinary, combining genetic, ecological, and archaeological analyses with ethnographic fieldwork among hunter-gatherer populations in the Republic of Congo. Previously, she worked in the Yucatán Peninsula, studying the drivers of linguistic diversity. She has been funded by several organizations, including the Leakey Foundation and Fundación “la Caixa.”

Ceren Kabukcu is an archaeobotanical scientist with broad interests in Quaternary paleoecology and plant food and wood fuel use by hunter-gatherers and the earliest farmers in Southwest Asia and Europe. She specializes in the analysis of carbonized plant macro-remains, such as wood charcoal, seeds, and tubers, and has published on a variety of topics including the establishment of anthropogenic, managed woodlands in Neolithic Anatolia; the changing nature of pre-agricultural plant food; and woodland exploitation by late Pleistocene and early Holocene hunter-gatherers.

Chad Huddleston is a sociocultural anthropologist who is interested in how individuals and communities prepare for disasters. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand. Huddleston is currently an instructor at Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville, and an adjunct assistant professor at Saint Louis University in Missouri. His current research focus is on preppers and their perception of disasters and their own agency. He is also interested in how popular media constructs the “idea” of preppers and how preppers co-construct an image of themselves on platforms such as YouTube.

Chapurukha Kusimba is a distinguished professor of anthropology in the Institute for Advanced Studies in Culture and Environment at the University of South Florida. He holds his degrees from Bryn Mawr (Ph.D.) and Kenyatta University in Nairobi. His specialties include the archaeology of complex societies and the origins of inequality, ancient African chiefdoms and states, urbanism in Africa, Islam in Africa, and the African diaspora in Asia and the Americas. Kusimba directs multiple anthropological research projects in East Africa and Madagascar. His current project, based on the Kenyan coast, is investigating ancient trade networks between East Africa and South, Southeast, and East Asia.

Charles Keil is a musician, cultural anthropologist, and activist who has published a large number of books, including Urban Blues, Tiv Song: The Sociology of Art in a Classless Society, Polka Happiness, Music Grooves (with Steven Feld), and Bright Balkan Morning: Romani Lives and the Power of Music in Greek Macedonia (with Dick Blau, Angeliki Vellou Keil, and Steven Feld). Born to Groove, previously published online, is coming out as a book in 2021, along with Polka Theory: Perspectives on the Will to Party. Keil is a professor emeritus at the State University of New York at Buffalo. His biography can be summed up in books that have prepared him for versifying and improvised musicking in service to our true species—Humo ludens collaborans. His 2020 book Easily Pleased features “dear gretas,” published by 12/8 Publications.

Charles R. Riggs is a professor of anthropology and a curator of archaeological collections at Fort Lewis College in Durango, Colorado. Riggs earned his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Arizona in 1999. He is the author of The Architecture of Grasshopper Pueblo and many other publications on Indigenous architecture in the American Southwest. He is an organizer of the annual Pecos Conference, which is sponsored by Southwestern Archaeology Inc. Riggs has directed a number of field projects in the U.S. Southwest, including those associated with Fort Lewis College’s Archaeological Field School. Through these projects, he has trained numerous students in archaeological field methods and ethical practice.

Charlotte Williams is a Ben Franklin, Presidential Endowment, and Sundry Gifts graduate fellow pursuing a Ph.D. in anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania, with a focus on cultural heritage and the history of archaeology. Her dissertation investigates how American imperial projects ranging from the United Fruit Company to the Panama Canal used archaeology as a way to control Central American territory in the early 20th century. This research seeks to show how both harvests and heritage were extracted using the same labor and infrastructural systems. Williams’ research has been supported by the Wenner-Gren Foundation and the Smithsonian Institution. From 2021–2022, she served as a graduate student fellow for the Mellon-funded Just Futures initiative at the University of Pennsylvania.

Chelsea Fisher is an assistant professor of anthropological archaeology at the University of South Carolina. She studies the deep histories of environmental justice conflicts through community-engaged archaeology. Since 2013, she has been conducting research in and with the community of Yaxunah, Yucatán, Mexico. Fisher’s research investigates the historical-ecological dynamics of colonial and modern cattle farming in Yucatán and the history of gold mining in the Carolinas in the U.S. Her research interests also include the entangled histories of global food systems, interactions among Indigenous and colonial ecological knowledges, and the application of archaeological approaches to environmental justice conflicts.

Chelsey Kivland, a political and urban anthropologist, studies street politics, insecurity, and social performance in contemporary urban Haiti. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Chicago and is an assistant professor in the department of anthropology at Dartmouth College. She is the author of the recently published book Street Sovereigns: Young Men and the Makeshift State in Urban Haiti and several articles in edited volumes and journals. Kivland is currently working on a project, funded by the National Science Foundation and Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, to analyze the resettlement experiences of deportees in Haiti.

Cherry Jackson is a recent graduate of Oxford University, where she earned a B.A. in archaeology and anthropology. For her undergraduate dissertation, she focused on the performance of gender and respectability among pole dancers. She is interested in issues of representation (from the body, gender, and landscapes to death and burial), Indigenous issues, and the power of the written word. Jackson will begin a master’s in material and visual culture at University College London in the fall of 2016. Follow her on Twitter @CherryJackson19.

Chip Colwell is an anthropologist and the founding editor-in-chief of SAPIENS. He was the senior curator of anthropology at the Denver Museum of Nature & Science from 2007 to 2020. He received his Ph.D. from Indiana University and has received grants and fellowships with the American Academy of Arts & Sciences, Rockefeller Foundation, U.S. Fulbright Program, National Endowment for the Humanities, and National Science Foundation. His research has been highlighted by the BBC, C-SPAN, and The Wall Street Journal, and his writing has appeared in The New York Times, The Guardian, Salon, Aeon, Foreign Affairs, and elsewhere. He has published 12 books, including Plundered Skulls and Stolen Spirits: Inside the Fight to Reclaim Native America’s Culture, which has received six national awards. Follow him on Twitter @drchipcolwell.

Chloe Ahmann is an environmental anthropologist who studies how people politicize “impure” environments in the long afterlife of American industry. Much of her work is based in Baltimore, Maryland, where she follows industrialism’s enduring traces in toxified landscapes, patchy regulation, quotidian expressions of white supremacy, and particular orientations toward time. She is the author of Futures after Progress: Hope and Doubt in Late Industrial Baltimore and an assistant professor of anthropology at Cornell University. Follow her on the social platform X @chloeahmann.

Chris Begley is an archaeologist who works on issues of identity and popular images of societal collapse. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago, focusing on the archaeology of the Mosquitia region of Honduras. He is the author of The Next Apocalypse: The Art and Science of Survival (Basic Books, 2021). He currently focuses on underwater archaeology, working and training students in Albania, Montenegro, and Croatia. His active projects center on shipwrecks in El Salvador, where he was a Fulbright scholar. Follow him on Twitter @ctbegley.

Chris Fisher is an archaeologist, professor of anthropology at Colorado State University (CSU), a National Geographic explorer, and the founder of the Earth Archive. He also directs CSU’s Center for Archeology & Remote Sensing. Fisher’s work explores the connection between human societies and environments through a variety of archaeological and earth science methodologies. He has performed fieldwork throughout Latin America, Europe, and North America. Fisher’s articles and book chapters have appeared in numerous publications, including the American Anthropologist and the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. His most recent edited volume is The Archaeology of Environmental Change: Socionatural Legacies of Degradation and Resilience (with J. Brett Hill and Gary M. Feinman). He has received funding from the National Science Foundation, the National Geographic Society, and private sources.

Chris Urwin conducts archaeological research in partnership with Indigenous communities in Australia and Papua New Guinea. He is a postdoctoral research fellow at Monash University and the Australian Research Council’s Centre of Excellence for Australian Biodiversity and Heritage. Urwin was previously curator for the First Peoples archaeology collection at the Melbourne Museum. His research has been published in the Journal of Social Archaeology, Australian Archaeology, and The Conversation. Urwin investigates contemporary Indigenous understandings of colonial-era collecting practices and how people build places through time and remember that process. He has received research funding from the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, and he will soon commence a Smithsonian Institution fellowship to investigate the social histories of Pacific canoe collections. Follow him on Twitter @c_urwin.

Christian Laheij received his Ph.D. from the London School of Economics and Political Science, and is currently a research fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology in Halle/Saale, Germany. His research interests include topics of religious change, dispute resolution, inequality, and uncertainty. Laheij has done anthropological research on the impact of Salafi-inspired Islamic reformism in Mozambique, where he is currently studying the emergence of new religious movements in the context of natural resource extraction and the increasing precariousness of the country’s workforce.

Christian Tryon is a Paleolithic archaeologist who studies the archaeology of the origin and dispersal of Homo sapiens. Most of his work focuses on the Mediterranean region and eastern Africa, and he is particularly interested in stone tools, geological approaches to the human past, biogeography, and the use of museums and archives. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Connecticut, where he is a professor of anthropology and the department head. Tryon is also a research associate in the Human Origins Program at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of Natural History and in the anthropology department at Harvard University. His current field project investigates early human occupation of what is today Sicily, Italy, and his archival research centers around rockshelters in Tanzania and Uganda.

Christina Cheung is a bioarchaeologist specializing in the use of stable isotope analysis to reconstruct past lifeways. She received her Ph.D. from the University of British Columbia in 2015 and is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle in Paris. Cheung’s research interests include reconstructing past subsistence strategies, looking at the impact of climate change on ancient societies, and exploring themes such as social stratification and the construction of power through studying reconstructed diets. Follow her on Twitter @chris_tt_cheung.

Christine Finnan is a cultural anthropologist who focuses on education and childhood. She received her Ph.D. from Stanford University and is currently a professor at the College of Charleston in South Carolina. She holds a joint appointment in the department of sociology and anthropology, and the department of teacher education. Her research focuses on school cultures and the effect of schools on students’ sense of self. With the support of a Fulbright-Nehru research grant, she recently completed fieldwork in Odisha, India, examining the school culture and effects on students of a residential school for 25,000 tribal children.

Christine Jeske is a cultural anthropologist who studies work-related racism and narratives of the good life. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin–Madison and is currently an associate professor at Wheaton College in Illinois. Jeske is the author of The Laziness Myth: Narratives of Work and the Good Life in South Africa. Her current research focuses on Whiteness in the narratives of hope among White South Africans and in sustainable farming communities in the United States.

Christine Weeber is the copy editor, sub-editor, and poetry editor at SAPIENS. She has an M.A. in cultural anthropology and a graduate certificate in women’s studies from Colorado State University. She has published two poetry chapbooks, In the Understory of Her Being (in English and Spanish) and Sastrugi. Her work also appears in the Wild Roof Journal, the Kyoto Journal, Wild Gods: The Ecstatic in Contemporary American Poetry and Prose, and other publications. Follow her on Mastodon @christineweeber@mastodon.world.

Christopher Aris is a biological anthropologist who studies the variation and microevolution of human dentition. He holds a B.Sc. in biological anthropology and an M.Sc. in human osteology and funerary archaeology, and he is awaiting examination for his Ph.D. in anthropology. Currently, he works as a teaching associate in anatomy and osteology, and university teacher in anatomy at the University of Sheffield in the U.K. Aris’ research interests include dental development and enamel growth variation between historic populations, and the ethics of destructive analysis of human remains. He is a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute and a certified forensic anthropologist. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisJDAris.

Christopher D. Lynn is a biocultural medical anthropologist who studies cultural impacts on health and human cognitive evolution. He received his Ph.D. from the University at Albany, SUNY, and is currently an associate professor of anthropology at the University of Alabama. He is a co-editor of the volume Evolution Education in the American South: Culture, Politics, and Resources In and Around Alabama and is working on a book about dissociation and consciousness. He is currently conducting research on tattooing and immune response among Pacific Islanders, developing an anthropology outreach program for elementary students, and co-hosting the Sausage of Science podcast. Follow him on Twitter @Chris_Ly.

Christopher Manoharan is a Ph.D. candidate in anthropology at the University of Connecticut. His research focuses on religion, musical performance, and mystical experience. His publications and conference presentations include works on Sufism, romantic love, morality, and anthropological methodology. Manoharan studied music and history at the State University of New York, New Paltz, and anthropology at Queen’s University Belfast in Northern Ireland. He is currently a graduate researcher affiliated with the Department of Islamic Arts and Music at Istanbul University in Turkey. His field research in Istanbul is supported by a Fulbright scholarship. Follow him on Instagram @chriskulivan.

Cindy Hsin-yee Huang (she/her) is a Paleolithic archaeologist with a focus on stone tools and cultural evolution. She is a Ph.D. candidate at the School of Human Evolution and Social Change, and affiliated with the Institute of Human Origins at Arizona State University. Her dissertation, supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, studies the emergence and dispersal of microliths, or small stone tools, across Eurasia during the late Pleistocene. This research attempts to understand large-scale patterns of innovation and cultural diffusion during the ancient past and how those impacted, facilitated, and reflected human evolution, migration, and social interactions. Follow her on X, formerly Twitter, at @CHYHuang.

Craig Childs is the author of Apocalyptic Planet. He has been a regular commentator for NPR’s Morning Edition, and his work has appeared in The New York Times, the Los Angeles Times, Men’s Journal, Outside, The Sun, and Orion Magazine. Awards he has received include the Ellen Meloy Desert Writers Award, the Rowell Award for the Art of Adventure, the Sigurd F. Olson Nature Writing Award, and, for his body of work, the 2003 Spirit of the West Award.

Craig M. Lee is a scientist at the Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research, an instructor at Montana State University, and a principal investigator at Metcalf Archaeological Consultants. His research interests include the human ecology and landscape archaeology of alpine and high-latitude environments. Lee frequently collaborates with Native Americans to develop culturally respectful methods for ice patch archaeology, and he delights in sharing his results with Native American communities, the general public, and other professionals. He lives in Bozeman, Montana, with his wife and daughter, and their much-loved dog. For more information about his research, see the Ice Patch Archaeology and Paleoecology Project.

Cristina Rocha is a professor of anthropology and the director of the Religion and Society Research Cluster at Western Sydney University in Australia. She is the former president of the Australian Association for the Study of Religion (2018–2019), and she co-edits the Journal of Global Buddhism and the Religion in the Americas series. Rocha’s research focuses on the intersections of globalization, migration, and religion. Her books include Australian Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements: Arguments From the Margins (with Mark Hutchinson and Kathleen Openshaw); John of God: The Globalization of Brazilian Faith Healing, one of the winners of the 2019 Clifford Geertz Prize; The Diaspora of Brazilian Religions (with Manuel Vásquez); Buddhism in Australia (with Michelle Barker); and Zen in Brazil: The Quest for Cosmopolitan Modernity. Follow her on Twitter at @crocha2.

Cyler Conrad is an anthropologist and archaeologist who studies human-animal and human-environmental relationships in mainland Southeast Asia, California, New Mexico, and the Galapagos. He received his Ph.D. from the University of New Mexico (UNM) and is currently an adjunct assistant professor of archaeology at UNM. Conrad is the author of several articles, book chapters, opinion essays, and blogs that focus on aspects of animals, subsistence, and environments in the archaeological record. He has received funding from the National Science Foundation, the National Geographic Society, and the project of Empowering Network for International Thai Studies, among others. Follow him on Twitter @cylerconrad.

Damian Evans is a research fellow with the École française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO) who specializes in using geospatial and computational methods to explore and understand landscapes across monsoon Asia, from the deep past to the present. An anthropological archaeologist by training, his work lies at the intersection of the geosciences, data science, tropical ecology, and landscape history. Evans was the founding director of the University of Sydney’s overseas research center at Angkor, in Cambodia, before joining the EFEO in 2015. Since then, he has been leading an interdisciplinary team that pursues questions of social complexity, urbanism, cultural exchange, and technological innovation in Southeast Asia from a geospatial laboratory at the EFEO. Evans has active field projects and collaborations in numerous countries in South and Southeast Asia, funded primarily by the European Research Council.

Dana J. Graef is an environmental anthropologist who studies environmentalism and globalization in Latin America. She received her Ph.D. from Yale University and is currently a visiting scholar in anthropology at Brown University. She has taught courses on the anthropology of climate change and what it means to be “green.” Graef has published essays and articles on topics such as mining, wildness, and cultural diversity. Follow her on Twitter @danagraef.

Dána-Ain Davis is a professor of urban studies and anthropology, and the director of the Center for the Study of Women and Society at the City University of New York Graduate Center. Davis’ work covers two broad domains: Black feminist ethnography and the dynamics of race and racism. She is the author or co-editor of five books; her most recent book is the award-winning Reproductive Injustice: Racism, Pregnancy, and Premature Birth, which examines how Black women experience racism in medical encounters during preconception, conception, pregnancy, labor, delivery, and postpartum. Davis also trained at Ancient Song Doula Services and currently supports birthing people as a doula. Follow her on Twitter @drdanaaindavis.

Daniel Ginsberg is the director of education and professional practice at the American Anthropological Association (AAA). They conduct research on anthropologists’ careers in academic, business, government, and nonprofit settings, as well as anthropology education at the graduate, undergraduate, and pre-university levels. Ginsberg also manages education and outreach activities, including Anthropology Day, the AAA’s webinar series, and the public education initiative World on the Move: 250,000 Years of Human Migration. Trained as a linguistic anthropologist of education, Ginsberg’s other interests include experiential and critical pedagogy, such as undergraduate research opportunities, nonformal education, and un-grading.

Danny Pinedo is a cultural anthropologist who studies the relationship between state formation and Indigenous people in the Peruvian Amazonia. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Florida and is currently an associate professor and the head of the anthropology department at the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos in Lima, Peru. He is the author of several articles and book chapters on community-based conservation, Indigenous mobilization, territory, and ethnicity.

Darcie DeAngelo is an anthropologist who studies postwar ecologies in Cambodia. She received her Ph.D. from McGill University and is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the Institute for Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention at Binghamton University in New York. She is working on her book Beloved Technologies: On Bombs and Rats in a Cambodian Minefield as part of the University of California Press’s Atelier workshop series. DeAngelo also produces short ethnographic film and experimental ethnographic exhibits.

David E. Shi sacrificed simplicity to serve as president of South Carolina’s Furman University from 1994 to 2010. He is an American intellectual historian who has published two books about simplicity in the American experience: The Simple Life: Plain Living and High Thinking in American Culture and In Search of the Simple Life: American Voices, Past and Present. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Virginia in 1976. Shi is also a co-author (with George Brown Tindall) of the best-selling book America: A Narrative History, now in its 10th edition, and is at work on a cultural history of loneliness.

David Flood is a cultural anthropologist who studies race, capitalism, and activism in the U.S. His current project is a critical exploration of Whiteness and class in the rural U.S. South based on ethnographic work in amateur music scenes where leftist activists and White working-class communities interact. Flood’s work has been supported by the National Science Foundation and the Wenner-Gren Foundation, and published in Ethos and Anthropology News. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Virginia, where he is a postdoctoral fellow, and he currently serves as co-editor-in-chief of the Journal for the Anthropology of North America.

David K. Wright is a professor of anthropology at the University of Oslo in Norway. His research interests primarily revolve around understanding interactions between humans and the environments they inhabit. Over the last several years, he has pursued archaeological research in three primary geographic regions: the U.S. Southwest and in different parts of Africa. Wright’s objective is to understand where sediments originate from and where they end up being deposited within a chronometric framework (source-to-sink analysis). This informs archaeological site preservation/taphonomy and understandings of human behavior and adaptations to landscape change.

David Leins is a video journalist, filmmaker, and aspiring anthropologist. He is currently a web producer at American Ethnologist and plans to pursue a Ph.D. in anthropology focusing on youth media production and the dynamics of grassroots activist networks in Palestine and Detroit, Michigan. Leins’ pieces have appeared in such publications as the Middle East Eye, Cultural Anthropology’s AnthroPod: The SCA Podcast, and The Arab American News. To learn more about his work, visit CultureRealm. Follow him on Twitter @davidleins.

David Lewis-Williams is an emeritus professor of archaeology at the University of the Witwatersrand in South Africa. His research has primarily concerned San peoples’ rock art. He has also published books on the Upper Paleolithic cave art of Western Europe and the megalithic tombs of the Near East and Europe. Lewis-Williams founded the Rock Art Research Institute at the University of the Witwatersrand and has been awarded honorary doctorates by the University of the Witwatersrand and the University of Cape Town. He is an elected member of the Royal Society of South Africa and a past president of the South African Archaeological Society. In 2015, he was awarded the South African Order of the Baobab (Gold Class) for his contributions to archaeology. His most recent book is Image-Makers: The Social Context of a Hunter-Gatherer Ritual.

David Witelson is a doctoral candidate in archaeology at the Rock Art Research Institute at the University of the Witwatersrand. His thesis concentrates on the rock art in and around the Stormberg and uses performance theory to investigate the practice of image-making. His other research interests include the late Holocene archaeology of Southern Africa’s Later Stone Age. Witelson is currently conducting research on the archaeology and rock art in the eastern foothills of the Maloti-Drakensberg mountains with archaeologist Paloma de la Peña at the Evolutionary Studies Institute at the University of the Witwatersrand and the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research at Cambridge University. He has also published research about Southern African stone tools

David Nkusi is a heritage management and heritage studies expert. He received his master’s degree in heritage management from the University of Kent and Athens University of Economics and Business, and is a heritage sites protection specialist at Rwanda Cultural Heritage Academy. Nkusi is working on a project supported by Linnaeus University in Sweden to study the relationship between heritage, communities, and the decolonization process in Rwanda, with a particular focus on Nyanza District. Follow him on Twitter @daudinkusi.

David Reich is a professor of genetics and of human evolutionary biology at Harvard University. His work focuses on studying population mixture, with application to both medicine and human history. In medical genetics, he has developed and applied methods to use the history of mixture of populations in the history of African Americans to find genetic risk factors that contribute to health disparities. His methods have also led to the discovery of ancient population mixtures in South Asians, Europeans, and remote Oceanians as well as interbreeding between archaic and modern humans. In 2013, Reich built the first state-of-the-art laboratory in the U.S. for studying genome-wide ancient DNA, and much of his work focuses on using the power of ancient DNA to gain new insights into medical and evolutionary genetics. His book Who We Are and How We Got Here: Ancient DNA and the New Science of the Human Past summarizes the state of this field.

Dean Falk is an evolutionary anthropologist who studies the brain, cognition, and culture. She is a distinguished research professor and the Hale G. Smith professor of anthropology at Florida State University. Falk is also a senior scholar at the School for Advanced Research in Santa Fe, New Mexico. She has written about wide-ranging topics that include the origins of language and music, Albert Einstein’s brain, and the discoveries of pathbreaking early hominins, such as Australopithecus africanus and Homo floresiensis (“hobbit”). Her most recent book, Geeks, Genes, and the Evolution of Asperger Syndrome (2018), is co-authored with her granddaughter Eve Penelope Schofield.

Deborah A. Thomas is the R. Jean Brownlee professor of anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania and the director of the Center for Experimental Ethnography at the University of Pennsylvania. She is the author of ​Modern Blackness, Exceptional Violence, and Political Life in the Wake of the Plantation, and a co-editor of the volume Globalization and Race: Transformations in the Cultural Production of Blackness (with Kamari Maxine Clarke). Thomas also co-produced and co-directed the experimental documentary Four Days in May, co-curated the Bearing Witness Exhibit and co-directed the documentary Bad Friday: Rastafari After Coral Gardens. Prior to her life as an academic, she was a professional dancer with the New York–based Urban Bush Women.

Deidre H. Crumbley is a sociocultural anthropologist and emerita professor of Africana studies at North Carolina State University. Her books, Spirit, Structure, and Flesh: Gendered Experiences in African Instituted Churches Among the Yoruba of Nigeria, and Saved and Sanctified: The Rise of a Storefront Church in Great Migration Philadelphia, are examples of her fascination with how people negotiate inequalities while building community. Crumbley is delving into these dynamics closer to home in her current writing project. In it, she relates incidents from her mother’s life in Jim/Jane Crow America, experienced north and south of the Mason-Dixon Line, during the Great Migration of 6 million Black Americans between the 1910s and 1970s.

Delande Justinvil is a third-year doctoral student at American University whose interests lie at the intersections of biocultural anthropology, cultural history, race and science, critical geography, and Black studies. His research brings together biological, archaeological, and archival methods to interrogate the afterlives of slavery, with a particular focus on the 19th- and 20th-century mid-Atlantic region of the U.S. Delande has participated in excavations in the Mediterranean, the Caribbean, and the Eastern Seaboard of the U.S. In 2019, he was the lead curator of Plans to Prosper You: Reflections of Black Resistance and Resilience in Montgomery County’s Potomac River Valley, presented by the American University Museum.

Delmar Ulises Méndez-Gómez is an essayist, documentary filmmaker, and Tseltal academic from Chiapas, México. He is a doctoral student in anthropological sciences at the Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana Unidad Iztapalapa. His field of study is affective anthropology, Native peoples, and communication. Méndez-Gómez is the author of the bilingual book of essays El giro de la Pelota. Te sututet ixtabil. He is conducting a study on the semantics of emotions and sexuality in young Tseltals in Chiapas. Follow him on Twitter @S0fes and Instagram @Delmar_penka.

Demetrio Gómez Ávila is a leading Rroma human rights activist who has worked for more than three decades advocating for social justice and Rromani rights through decolonial and intersectional perspectives. During his activist career, he became a founding member of the Forum of European Roma Young People, the first international Romani youth organization in Europe, and president of Ververipen: Rroma for Diversity, a pioneering Spanish Rromani LGBTQ+ organization. He has served as an expert and trainer for the Council of Europe, the European Commission, and other organizations connected to racial justice, anti-fascism, and the fight against xenophobia and discrimination.

Denise Su is an associate professor in the School of Human Evolution and Social Change and a research scientist in the Institute of Human Origins. Her research explores the environments in which our early ancestors lived to provide insight into how environmental factors shaped the trajectory of human evolution. She previously was the curator of paleobotany and paleoecology and the chief academic engagement officer at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, integrating research with public outreach and education, and leading initiatives to increase access to and diversify participation in science.

Dennis Sandgathe is a paleoanthropologist and Paleolithic archaeologist who studies Neanderthal adaptations. He is particularly interested in the development of fire use and the evidence for intentional burial among Neanderthals. He received his Ph.D. from Simon Fraser University (SFU) in British Columbia and is currently a lecturer in the department of archaeology at SFU. He is also a consulting scholar at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. He is the lead author of “Timing of the Appearance of Habitual Fire Use” and “The Roc de Marsal Neandertal Child: A Reassessment of Its Status as a Deliberate Burial.”

The authors would like to acknowledge the other members of their research team: a third Paleolithic archaeologist, Shannon McPherron (at Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany) and two geoarchaeologists: Paul Goldberg (a professor emeritus at Boston University) and Vera Aldeias (a researcher at Max Planck Institute).

Di Hu is an archaeologist whose work focuses on the Andes. In 2016, she received her Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of California, Berkeley. She is currently working on a book titled Social Landscapes of Rebellion in the Late Colonial Andes, 1760–1840. Another of her projects is the analysis and experimental re-creation and use of Tiwanaku projectile points to shed light on state formation among the Tiwanaku, who lived in parts of present-day Bolivia, southern Peru, and northern Chile around 400–1000. She is also working to understand the social landscape of Vilcashuamán province just before it was conquered by the Incas, and she is attempting to figure out Native Andean migration patterns by analyzing colonial censuses. She is an avid flint knapper. Follow her on Twitter @dihuarchaeology.

Diana Marre is a social anthropologist who studies assisted conception and reproductive technologies, parenthood, and childhood in Spain. She received her Ph.D. from the University of Barcelona. Marre is currently an associate professor at the Autonomous University of Barcelona and the director of the AFIN Research Group and Outreach Centre. She co-edited, with Laura Briggs, International Adoption: Global Inequalities and the Circulation of Children. She is currently working on a project, funded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, studying reproductive politics, rights, and desires in Spain. Follow her on Twitter @DianaMarre and Facebook @Diana Marre.

Diego Garate is an archaeologist who studies the world’s earliest cave art. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Cantabria in Spain, where he is currently working as a researcher. Garate is the author of several books and papers about the symbolism of artwork made by the first modern humans in Europe, and he leads various survey projects in Spain and France. He has discovered 10 unknown decorated caves. Follow him on Twitter @GarateDiego.

Dimitris Xygalatas is an anthropologist at the University of Connecticut, where he directs the Experimental Anthropology Lab. He has previously held positions at Princeton University, Aarhus University in Denmark, and Masaryk University in the Czech Republic, where he served as the director of the Laboratory for the Experimental Research of Religion. His research focuses on some of the things that make us human, such as ritual, sports, music, and group membership, which he studies through a combination of ethnographic and experimental methods. Xygalatas has conducted several years of ethnographic fieldwork in Southern Europe and Mauritius. He is the author of Ritual: How Seemingly Senseless Acts Make Life Worth Living and over 100 articles published in journals and volumes across several disciplines. Follow him on Twitter @xygalatas, Facebook @xygalatas, and Instagram @xygalatas.

Dina Rivera is a bioarchaeologist whose work focuses on the ethical responsibility of scientific engagement in virtual spaces, as well as the healing closure offered by human remains repatriation. She received her master’s degree from the University of South Florida and is currently the administrative and communications coordinator of the Register of Professional Archaeologists. Rivera is currently collaborating with a global set of professional archaeologists to decolonize and diversify archaeology. Follow her on Twitter @dangergrrlie.

Djuke Veldhuis is an anthropologist and science writer based at Monash University in Australia, where she is a course director in the B.Sc. advanced–global challenges degree program. Her Ph.D. research examined the effects of rapid socioeconomic change on the health and well-being of people in Papua New Guinea. Veldhuis is passionate about science communication, public engagement with science, and citizen science initiatives. She has written for a series of popular science outlets, including SciDev.Net, Asia Research News, and New Scientist. Follow her on Twitter @DjukeVeldhuis.

Donald C. Wood is a cultural anthropologist and an associate professor in the medical school of Akita University, Akita City, Japan, where he has been based since completing a doctoral degree in cultural anthropology at the University of Tokyo in 2004. He has been researching social conditions in northeastern Japan since 1995. He is the author of Ogata-Mura: Sowing Dissent and Reclaiming Identity in a Japanese Farming Village and was a contributor to the volume Japan’s Shrinking Regions in the 21st Century: Contemporary Responses to Depopulation and Socioeconomic Decline. Wood is also the editor of Research in Economic Anthropology, a member of the editorial board of the Japanese Review of Cultural Anthropology, and a frequent contributor to the Kyoto Journal (2011, 2014, 2018).

Douglas K. Smit is an anthropological archaeologist who studies the historical relationships between local communities, colonial states, and globalization. He received his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Illinois, Chicago, in 2018. Smit is currently a senior fellow in anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania, where he teaches classes on archaeology, economic anthropology, and popular culture. He co-directs Proyecto de Investigación Histórico Arqueológico-Santa Bárbara, a joint Peruvian-North American research program that examines the mercury mines of Santa Barbára, Peru. Using archaeology, archival research, and oral histories, this project investigates the everyday lives of past miners and works with the contemporary descendent community to illuminate how the mine’s legacy continues into the 21st century. When not teaching anthropology, Smit is most likely playing with his two rescue dogs, Charlie Darwin and Nuna. Follow him on Twitter @AnthroArch.

Eduardo García is an activist and photojournalist from Mexico City. His work has focused primarily on the struggles of Indigenous peoples in Mexico, Central American migration, forced disappearance, and social movements. He now forms part of the Michigan Solidarity Network, the Militarization in the Americas Research Collective, and the School of the Americas Watch. García studied political science, but he has learned more from Central American migrants demanding their rights to safe transit and from families looking for their disappeared loved ones. As a researcher and photographer, he is currently involved with the Undocumented Migration Project. Follow him on Twitter @garo87.

Eleanor Scerri is an archaeological scientist interested in exploring the articulation between genetics, biogeography, and material culture phylogeny to further theoretical, methodological, and scientific advances in the field of human evolution. She is the head of the Pan-African Evolution Research Group