From Burnout to Balance: Redefining Leadership and Strategy

Emma Newell Emma Newell is a Strategy and Culture Consultant. She helps CEO’s and business owners who feel frustrated and unfocused to finally achieve a clear strategy aligned to their people. As a leadership coach she helps committed leaders who want more success, to finally discover a leadership with meaning and purpose. What were your […]

A Journey About Geospatial Leadership and Resilience

Dr. Nadine Alameh Dr. Nadine Alameh tells us that, “I am currently the inaugural Executive Director of a brand new research institute focused on geospatial technology and impact. My goal is to build the most powerful consortium of researchers who can use geospatial and location data to address some of the pressing issues of our […]

Transforming Workplaces: A Journey of Empowerment

Judy Ryan Judy Ryan is a CEO, Consultant, System Developer, Author/Columnist. She tells us that, “I have owned LifeWork Systems for 22 years and provide a comprehensive, responsibility-based workplace culture transformation process as well as leadership development and personal and professional development services to individuals and organizations.” What were your initial years of growing up […]

Navigating Life’s Turns: From Legal Expert to Wellness Mentor

Eric Mahleb Eric Mahleb is a behaviour and mental health practitioner and life and health coach with 25 years of experience working as a consultant, coach and trainer. He specializes in stress, burnout, resilience, in developing a positive flexible mindset and in improving emotional intelligence. He tells us that, “I am a certified life and […]

Navigating Change: Empowering Senior Executives Through Coaching

Guy Ellis Guy Ellis is an executive coach who works with senior executives that are going through significant change in their business and personal lives. He tells us that, “I draw on over 30 years of experience working in large and small organisations, much of it at senior levels, and for the last twenty years […]

Redefining Success: Empowering Women in the Professional World

Rawan Aldobai Rawan Aldobai holds a Bachelor’s degree in Business Administration and Finance from California State University – Fullerton, and is a certified coach with over 5 years of experience in personal and professional coaching. She tells us that, “I am a corporate professional turned entrepreneur, strategist, and coach. After spending over seven years building […]

Overcoming Adversity: A Journey to Living Without Limits

Karina Seda Karina Seda, a transformative coach, speaker, and founder of Living Without Limits. Karina is dedicated to helping individuals break free from limitations and create a life of purpose, fulfillment, and limitless possibilities. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up to your venture? At 15, Karina faced a life-altering hemorrhagic stroke. […]

Empowering Women: Building Self-Esteem and Body Image Confidence

Jasmine Garner Jasmine Garner is a 30 years old Dual-Certified Body Image and Self-Esteem Coach. Currently, she lives in Texas with her 2 year old son and is a fan of iced mocha coffee. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. I come […]

Championing Coaching: Empowering Leaders and Breaking Barriers Worldwide

Dr. Marcia Reynolds Dr. Marcia Reynolds, Master Certified Coach, has delivered programs in 45 countries. She is faculty for 5 coaching schools in the Americas, Asia and Europe and teaches leaders to use coaching skills in organizations and government agencies. As a pioneer in the coaching profession, she was the 5th global president of the […]

From Passion to Profit: Empowering Entrepreneurs to Thrive

Debbie Z. Lattuga Debbie Z. Lattuga is a Profit and Joy Accelerator. She helps business owners streamline client acquisition and achieve more profit while reclaiming joy. With a background as a CEO and elite sales coach, Debbie expertly navigates the business scaling landscape. For Debbie, it’s about building a thriving community of entrepreneurs and making […]

Transforming Lives: Empowering Entrepreneurs with Holistic Wellness and Authenticity

Jamie Allen Bishop Jamie Allen Bishop is a #1 International Bestselling Author based in Studio City, California, US, has written for “Women Living in Alignment” (2022) and “Transformation Triumphs” (2023). As an international speaker and certified Master Life Transformation Coach, Jamie champions a growth mindset. She empowers film industry entrepreneurs to embrace authenticity and confidence, […]

Navigating Success: A Life Coach’s Journey in Empowering Young Women

Brenna Potter Brenna Potter, CLC is a Certified Life Coach. She tells us that, “I think every business owner has to go on a journey to figure out what works for them best. What I’ve learned for myself so far is to intentionally make time for the people and the activities that are important to […]

Designing Happiness: Balancing Life and Business in Interior Design

Raluca Racasan Raluca Racasan is an Interior Designer. She tells us that, “It’s not easy to manage work and personal life when running your own business. I think it’s important not to put pressure on yourself to be perfect, and accept that while you strive for balance, there will often be times when either work […]

Empowerment Through Balance: Natasha Middleton’s Journey as an Empowerment Coach

Natasha Middleton Natasha Middleton is an Empowerment Coach. She tells us that, “Balance for me is key, as is my family and my clients. Listening to my body is my go to as well as knowing myself on a deep level. Using my Strategy and Authority in my Human Design guides me to make the […]

The Woman Empowering Youth Through Well-being Coaching

Mary Parrish Mary Parrish is a Well-being coach, facilitator and author. She tells us that, “Setting clear times when I am working for my business and clear family time. I work for myself so that I have the flexibility to be around for my children and make sure they are always supported. Most of the […]

Connecting for Change: Transformative Leadership Through Collaboration

Gill Tiney Gill Tiney tells us that, “As a community catalyst I look after the Collaboration Global community. Together we are instrumental in creating collaborations that in some large or small part can and do change our world. We Connect, Collaborate and Grow! This community works to build and develop strategies that help collaborations to […]

The Woman Championing the Fight Against Domestic Violence

Ruby Raja Ruby Raja is the Founder of Inshiraa. She tells us that, “I’m an Author / Writer and Trainer in Domestic Violence and Trauma. I worked as a Probation Officer in the UK where I worked with men, women and young people who had committed offenses in the UK. I’ve written a book: […]

The Woman Guiding Career Migrants to Fulfillment

Lucy Todd Lucy Todd, CPC, is a Career Discovery Coach and Owner of Lucy Todd Coaching LLC If your business could have a mascot, what would it be and why? If my business had a mascot, it would be a migratory bird. If you think about it, their transcontinental journeys aren’t that different from changing […]

The Woman Empowering Leaders to Thrive

Victoria Lynne Hannu Victoria Lynne Hannu is a Founder/CEO – a Business Coach/Consultant. If your business could have a mascot, what would it be and why? Black Panther, for their strength, perseverance and the care they show for their cubs. They are strong, powerful and beautiful. What strategies do you employ to maintain a healthy […]

Blossoming Leadership: Cultivating Growth and Fulfillment in the Workplace

Shawna Martin Shawna Martin is a CEO, Founder and Leadership Coach. She tells us that, “If my business could have a mascot, it would be a beautiful flower. While I know that is not a typical mascot, much of my business focuses on the growth of individuals and teams. The image of a beautiful, in-bloom, […]

Carolyn Ann Ayers: Empowering Women and Sharing Their Stories

Carolyn Ann Ayers Carolyn Ann Ayers, a Chief Executive Officer/Executive Producer, is a force to be reckoned with. As CEO of Women Distinction Outreach Nonprofit, she dedicates herself to uplifting and empowering women. She is also an Executive Producer of the impactful film ‘Black Girl Struggles Triumph,’ showcasing the resilience and strength of Black women. […]

Leaping Beyond Limits: Transformative Leadership and Empathy in Action

Sinja Hallam Sinja Hallam is a globally recognized executive coach, facilitator and speaker. She tells us that, “I hold a Master of Business Administration, am a member of the International Coaching Federation (ICF) and have a rich background in organizational change management and transformation across various industries—including banking, oil and gas, mining, and utilities— I […]

Championing Women Leaders in Tech and Customer Experience

Natalia Cerezo Martin Natalia is a Spanish born with a heart that beats in sync with London’s dynamic rhythm for over two decades. She founded Empower & Lead, an executive & leadership coaching business dedicated to empowering visionary women in the tech and customer experience sectors to unlock their leadership potential and redefine success on […]

The Man Guiding Founders through Startup Challenges

Evgeny Shadchnev Evgeny Shadchnev is a Founder Coach and an Author. My background as a Founder and ex-CEO of Makers, a tech training provider in London, helps me coach founders navigating the inevitable challenges of building a startup. I have recently written a book Startup CEO Succession, which helps startup CEOs decide if, when and […]

The Woman Transforming Lives through Leadership Coaching

Rachel Stone Rachel Stone is a Leadership Coach and Trainer. She tells us that, “Using the wide range of experience, skills and knowledge gained working in management in a variety of sectors including manufacturing, retail, commercial and education (in both small limited companies to massive PLCs) I set up my own business training and coaching […]

Empowering Career Growth: A Journey as a Communication and Career Coach

Kristine Knutter Kristine Knutter is a communication and career coach and founder of Express to Impress. She tells us that, “Since 2016, I have been helping people land and thrive in jobs and medical residencies and fellowships in the USA. TEFL-certified, I specialize in ESL job seekers and physicians and have a vast wealth of […]

Championing Authenticity and Individual Design for Life

Kellie Lucas Kellie Lucas is an Author, Consultant, Coach, and Thought Leader. She tells us that, “I’m most passionate about supporting individuals, teams, businesses and society to create a unique design for their life. We are all unique beings with our own motivators and aspirations and yet we are most often taught and encouraged to […]

Empowering Growth: A Journey as a Talent Acquisition Partner and Professional Coach

Shreya Mehta Shreya Mehta is a Talent Acquisition Partner AND Professional Growth Coach. Shreya is a recruiter and a coach helping professionals incorporate branding. She is a keynote speaker passionate about public speaking, leadership and career transformation. With years of experience in recruiting and coaching in global markets like India US, Shreya has worked with […]

Empowering Women: A Journey as a Certified Professional Coach

Parita Kuttappan Parita Kuttappan is a certified professional coach. She tells us that, “I work with working women, working moms, and the organizations that employ them. My coachees experience everything from burnout, guilt, and overwhelm to feeling stuck in their current personal and/or professional life. I help them go from where they are today to […]

Empowering Women through Mindset Coaching and Business Skills Training

Desi Christou Desi Christou is a Mindset Coach and a Business Skills Trainer striving to empower women to overcome limitations and succeed in life and work, building confidence and resilience for career progression and developing a peace of mind and life satisfaction. Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the […]

The Woman Empowering Through Advocacy and Support

Kiana Wooten Kiana Wooten shares with us that, “I am 39 years old. I am a wife, mother, author, chef, and breast cancer model. I also serve as a breast cancer advocate for the Tigerlily Foundation, American Cancer Society, and NCCS (National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship). I just became a brand ambassador for Stand Tall […]

Championing Growth Through Leadership Development and Coaching

Neena Kamal Neena Kamal tells us that, “For over two decades, I’ve immersed myself in the dynamic domains of human resources, leadership development, and executive coaching. My professional journey has been enriched while working with esteemed organisations such as Veritas, Oracle, Aquapharm Chemicals, and more where I’ve delivered diverse projects of Organisational and Employee Development. […]

From Broken Bones to Breakthroughs: A Journey to Transformative Coaching

Laura Weiner-Kiser Laura Weiner-Kiser founded Change By Challenge where she works as a speaker, behavior change specialist and certified stress & mindset coach. Her mission is to help people transform their health, stress and life by reclaiming authority of their mind to thrive through life’s daily challenges. She empowers her people to open their mind […]

Healing Through Happiness: A Journey from Cancer Survivor to Motivational Speaker

Alexi Bracey Alexi Bracey is a Happiness Motivational speaker focusing on mental and emotional well-being through self-empowerment, self-confidence and worthiness to minimize the rates of anxiety, depression and suicide especially among our youth so we can all live fulfilling, rewarding and successful lives. Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about […]

The Woman Empowering Authentic Style and Wellbeing

Natacha Diskin Natacha Diskin is a Style & Wellbeing Coach, the Founder of Savvy Style and an Accredited Cognitive Behavioural Therapist. She helps women dress authentically without the fear of judgement using evidence based Cognitive Behavioural Therapy approach and extensive knowledge on Style. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up to your […]

Transforming Leadership: A Journey from Near-Death Experience to Executive Coach

Sherri McManus As Chief Operating Officer and Co-Owner of The Lou Everett Group, Sherri McManus plays a pivotal role in aligning the organization’s services with your personal and professional needs. A certified Executive Leadership Development and Corporate Trainer, she brings extensive expertise in leadership training. Additionally, she is a Certified Trainer in the DISC Method […]

Empowering Women Entrepreneurs: A Journey from Chiropractic to Abundance Coach

Dr. Kelly Schuh Dr. Kelly Schuh is a Doctor Of Chiropractic, BS In Psychology. She tells us that, “I am a 2x Amazon Bestselling Author, International Keynote Speaker, and Business Growth Coach for female entrepreneurs.” Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up to your venture? Inspiring Women Entrepreneurs: My Journey to Founding […]

From Athlete to Empowering Coach: A Personal and Professional Odyssey in Health and Fitness

Frank “Bart” Boodell Frank “Bart” Boodell is a Health & Fitness Coach. He further tells us that, “Long time athlete, played football, baseball, basketball, rugby and track n field. I was a sports nut. And fortunately, I have had some incredible coaches/mentors that till this day I use their combined wisdom to help me coach […]

Jan Saulnier – An Artpreneur

Jan Saulnier Jan Saulnier is an ARTpreneur. She tells us that, “Four years ago, I made the bold decision to leave my successful career as a National Sales Manager and Corporate Trainer, to lead women’s retreats in Nova Scotia. However, the pandemic brought those plans to a sudden halt, forcing me to pivot quickly. While […]

From Corporate Nomad to Master Coach: A Journey of Personal and Professional Transformation

Mark Langford Mark Langford is a Master Career & Relationship Coach. He tells us that, “I was raised in a lower middle-class household, the only child of a dedicated single mother. Witnessing her relentless effort to support us through multiple jobs deeply impacted me, instilling an early sense of independence. As a young entrepreneur, I […]

Inspiring Holistic Health: The Journey and Impact of a Dedicated Wellness Coach

Thaís Naveda Luy Thaís Naveda Luy is a bilingual, Venezuelan Canadian Journalist specializing in Marketing and Public Relations, and a National Board Certified Health and Wellness Coach, living in North Carolina with her family of 4. She tells us that, “I am passionate about holistic health and graduated from the IIN Gut Health, Hormonal Health, […]

Radiant Transformation: The Woman on a Mission to Empower Moms

Mary Dibble Mary Dibble tells us that, “I am a wife, mother of 3 amazing kids (2 boys and a girl), a Life & Success Coach & host of Radiant Mom Rising Podcast. I am on a mission to help moms all around the world to believe in their worth, chase their dreams, & live […]

The Woman Empowering Careers with Expertise and Passion

Amelia Brooke Amelia Brooke is a globally recognised CV writer and career strategist with over a decade of experience in career coaching, job searching strategies, interview preparation, and workshop facilitation. Known for her energetic and inspirational approach, she turns CVs into powerful tools by focusing on personal branding and crafting engaging narratives. Amelia’s action-orientated, strengths-based […]

Empowering Transformation: A Somatic Emotional Healer and Intuitive Life Coach

Tiffany Leigh Tiffany Leigh is a Somatic Emotional Healer and Intuitive Life Coach. She weaves together somatic emotional healing, subconscious reprogramming, and intuitive life coaching to empower women on their journeys of personal and professional transformation. Utilizing a body-centered approach that incorporates breath, movement, touch, and voice, she helps clients reprogram limiting beliefs and cultivate […]

Empowering Leaders: A Journey as Founder and CEO of Your Choice Coach

Simone As Founder and CEO of Your Choice Coach, Simone is an accomplished business strategist, executive coach, and DEI consultant. She has held senior roles at Fortune 500 companies across marketing, communications, medical affairs, sales, and global business strategy. Her tenure includes successfully launching and leading products and services, implementing programs for key stakeholders across […]

Empowering Women to Thrive: A Journey from Army Officer to Career Coach

Dr. Twanna Carter Dr. Twanna Carter is a CEO and Founder. She is an ICF professional certified coach, career coach and NGH certified hypnotherapist specializing in empowering professional Black women to achieve their career goals and live fulfilling lives. Based in Bowie, MD, she focuses on helping mid to senior career women manage stress, build […]

Empowering Working Parents: A Journey from Sweden to Leadership Coach

Alex Nabavian Alex Nabavian is a Leadership Coach on a mission to transform working parenthood. I’m a mom of 4, coffee-lover, and resilient ex-golfer from Sweden. She tells us that, “My professional journey, grounded in a Master’s in I/O Psychology and extensive coaching experiences, spans diverse contexts from start-ups to corporate HR. At every stage, […]

Empowering Women Through Emotional Intelligence: Anais Malaval’s Journey

Anais Malaval Anais Malaval is an Emotional Intelligence Consultant specialised in Anxiety. As an emotional intelligence profiler Consultant and Coach, she specializes in empowering women aged 25 to 55 to overcome relationship anxiety, rediscover their true voice, and embrace their brilliance. With a unique approach rooted in self-love and authenticity, achieving a profound, lasting growth. […]

Utilizing Leadership Potential: A Journey to Empower Corporate Leaders

Szilvia Vitos Szilvia Vitos is a Leadership Wellbeing Coach & Consultant. She tells us that, “I walk the talk as this is exactly part of what I help people achieve through my coaching services. I don’t believe in work-life balance, rather work-life harmony. It’s not a matter of what day it is (weekend vs weekday) […]

Empowering Transformation: A Journey to Utilizing Potential

Bukie Adebola-Ezeh Bukie Adebola-Ezeh tells us that, “I believe that life is more like a flowing river than a perfectly balanced scale. It’s important to embrace the idea that life is happening for us, not to us, as Tony Robbins said. Every experience that comes our way has a purpose, and when we truly understand […]

Empowering Entrepreneurial Minds: A Journey to Idea Development

Katja Fjellström Katja Fjellström tells us that, “It’s always a struggle of course but with age and experience you learn what is important, how you can set boundaries for yourself to find the balance, which is really about time management, habits and structure in your calendar. You decide what hours you have for certain tasks […]

Empowering Women: A Journey to Spiritual Coaching

Blanca Vergara Blanca Vergara is a Spiritual Coach for High Achieving Women. She tells us that, “I have curated a set of devotional practices that help me expand time and energy. For as long as I’ve been using them life flows with ease and joy in all areas of my life. Of course there are […]

Leadership Alchemy: A Journey as a Catalyst for Change

Kate Waterfall Hill Kate Waterfall Hill is a Leadership Coach. She tells us that, “My working cocker spaniel, Pepper – energetic, loving, non-judgmental, always hungry, supportive, sometimes challenging, loyal, ready to listen.” What strategies do you employ to maintain a healthy work-life balance while running your own business? Walking Pepper! Being outside in nature, whatever […]

Empowered Voices: A Journey as an Empowered-Voice Coach

Sharon Wright Sharon Wright is an Empowered-Voice Coach. She tells us that, “I’m a wife and mum to two daughters and a dog called Nubi. My particular purpose and angle in life is supporting others to feel empowered by knowing their authentic voice and feeling super confident to use it wisely. From teaching music to […]

Evolutionary Journey: A Path as a Design Thinking & Mindset Coach

Elayna Spratley Elayna Spratley is a Design Thinking & Mindset Coach. She tells us that, “I’m based in Austin, TX. My company, INFOLD Studios, is an agency where I help individuals and teams get unstuck, move forward with deep understanding through data and experimentation, and create innovative solutions. I’m a hippie nerd 🦄🤓 with a […]

Empowering Career Transitions: The Inspirational Journey and Vision of a Dedicated Career Coach

Zena Contreras Zena Contreras is an experienced career coach specializing in professional branding and personal development to guide individuals through career transitions. With over 25 years as a Corporate Recruitment Leader, she has driven organizational success across diverse industries. She tells us that, “I excel in building high-performing teams, implementing strategic HR practices, and recruiting […]

Balancing Dual Roles: The Story of a Business Analyst and Entrepreneur

Lauryn Chen Lauryn Chen is a Business Analyst Apprentice for a Financial Services Firm during the day, but a business owner and multi-income stream earner throughout the evening and weekends! She tells us that, “As a Business Analyst Apprentice I am primarily focused with business change and implementing new processes to make the business better […]

Transforming Trauma into Triumph: The Inspirational Journey and Vision of an Emotional Resilience Coach

Kay McCready Kay McCready is an Emotional Resilience Coach, Trauma Practitioner, 9D Breathwork Facilitator, Founder of Kay McCready Coaching and Co Founder of BEAT Global Academy Ltd. She tells us that, “I am an accomplished Emotional Resilience Expert, Trauma Practitioner, 9D Breathwork Facilitator, holistic therapist and an award-winning Speaker. I am the innovative founder of […]

From Corporate Leader to Entrepreneurial Mentor: Navigating the Journey of Empowering Future Leaders

Neville Gaunt Neville Gaunt is a CEO. He tells us that, “There’s no secret to success but you do need a can-do attitude to be the best you can be. With over 40 years in international business, focused on sustainability and growth I will help you improve as an entrepreneur and leader. As a coach, […]

From Guardian to Business Guide: A Journey of Nurturing and Empowering Entrepreneurs

Isi Oteze Isi Oteze is a Business and Executive Coach. She tells us that, “Many business owners struggle alone, craving support, encouragement, and accountability. I work with clients to gain clarity and focus, helping them reach their business’s true potential. Using innovative frameworks like design thinking, I provide leadership coaching, masterminds, and group coaching […]

Launching a Mental Fitness Coaching Business: Empowering Dreams and Overcoming Obstacles

AJ Riedel AJ Riedel tells us that, “I am in the process of launching my mental fitness coaching business. I lead an emotional sobriety book study. I love to hike, do yoga and Pilates, journal and meditate. I am a mom to a 28 year old son, and a cat and dog. I am grandmother […]

Empowering Excellence: The Journey and Impact of Reid Ready® Life Coaching

Dr. “Coach Dawn” Reid Dr. “Coach Dawn” Reid is the founder of Reid Ready® Life Coaching, LLC, a premier provider of accredited coach training, qualified coach assessment, and coaching services. She is a credentialed coach with expertise in mental health and wellbeing coaching, DEI coaching, leadership coaching, and spiritual coaching and practices. She previously served […]

A Phoenix of Psychotherapy and Spiritual Coaching: Rising and Rebuilding in the World of Solopreneurship

Dr. DeeAnna Merz Nagel Dr. DeeAnna Merz Nagel is a Psychotherapist/Coach/Spiritual Teacher. She is a Phoenix- rising from the ashes as being a solopreneur takes patience and a constant rebuilding of one’s self and image to stay relevant. What strategies do you employ to maintain a healthy work-life balance while running your own business? I […]

Transforming Challenges into Opportunities

Chris Salem Chris Salem is a CEO and Business Acceleration Strategist who helps leaders and organizations establish a commanding market presence to drive sales success. With expertise in sales acceleration, he focuses on developing compelling value propositions, public speaking skills, and influential messaging that resonates with audiences’ challenges and desired outcomes. Chris shares communication strategies […]

Leading with Enthusiasm: The Story of a Customer Service Professional

Siju Awosile Siju Awosile is a Customer Service Lead. She tells us that, “I am a go-getter and I like to proffer solutions. I regard myself as proactive because I anticipate problems and craft creative answers. I am also not just about results; I strive to make whatever I do enjoyable and fun. I am […]

Transforming Challenges into Opportunities: A Journey of Empowerment

Bilal Kola Bilal Kola is a Business Coach. He tells us that, “I hold a Bachelor Degree in Law and Master’s Degree in International Business Law from London University. Among other academic achievements, I hold a PhD Degree in Strategic Leadership. I’ve held various leadership positions over the last 20 years, including the CEO of […]

Empowering Transformation: A Rebel Soul Igniter and Transformational Leadership Coach

Shari Lueck Shari Lueck is a Transformational Leadership Coach and Mentor. She tells us that, “I’m not your typical life coach or business strategist. I’m a rebel soul igniter, a transformational leader, and a master of turning pain into power. My journey has been a wild ride of shattering glass ceilings, surviving rock bottom, and […]

Empowering Voices: The Inspiring Journey of a Career Confidence Coach for Marginalized Women

Roxanne Botman Roxanne Botman (she/her) a Career Confidence Coach for Black and Brown women around the world and a People & Culture Consultant for a global tech company. She holds an Honours degree in Human Resource Management from Stellenbosch University and MBA from the University of East London. She works closely with her mother as […]

From Triumph Over Adversity to Empowering Leaders: The Inspirational Journey of a Transformational Coach

Gina Gardiner Gina Gardiner is a multiple #1 International Best-Selling Author, Motivational and Radical Change Catalyst Speaker, Syndicated Radio Host, Empowerment, award winning Spiritual Mentor, Transformation Leadership and Media Trainer and Coach with 30+ years’ experience. Gina is a master strategist helping individuals achieve happiness, success and fulfilment and Business Leaders achieve sustained high levels […]

Finding Lasting Love: The Journey of a Renowned Psychologist and Relationship Coach

Dr. Wendy Lyon Dr. Wendy Lyon is a Psychologist and Master Certified Relationship Coach. She is an internationally recognized relationship expert with 25 years of experience helping singles and couples create lives they love with the love of their lives. As a psychologist, master certified relationship coach and best-selling author, she provides proven programs that […]

Empowering Survivors: Breaking the Silence on Sexual Abuse and Assault

Jessica Green Brown Jessica Green Brown is a licensed social worker with a pre apprenticeship certification in manufacturing and apprenticeship certifications in energy auditing. Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the thrilling adventures of your pre-business life. I am an extreme adversity and abuse survivor and overcomer with a […]

From Cancer Survivor to Advocate: Transforming Pain into Purpose

Amanda R. Ferraro Amanda R. Ferraro is a 2x AML Leukemia survivor, stem cell transplant recipient, and 7x brain surgery survivor. She tells us that, “I am a dedicated cancer patient advocate and I volunteer to help cancer patients. I am the founder of Cancer Is An A LLC, and run cancerisanasshole.com. I freelance for […]

Beyond Ordinary: Charting Paths to Purposeful Retirement

Moraima Caceres-Centeno Moraima Caceres-Centeno tells us that, “ I’m a constant seeker of what lies beyond the ordinary. Married for 32 years, I cherish my loving husband and our three amazing adult children dearly. My vision is to serve as a guide and companion to at least 10,000 women who are designing their retirement on […]

Empowering Women’s Wellness: From Adventure to Advocacy

Mariah Emond Mariah Emond tells us that, “I am a passionate health educator focused on women’s wellbeing, especially during the time of perimenopause. I have been in counseling since 2005 and have enjoyed the work of supporting people to lead their best lives. I enjoy a wide range of wellness work that includes somatic movement, […]

Rising from Adversity: A Journey of Transformation and Empowerment

Dr. Sandra D. Smith Dr. Sandra D. Smith is a strategist, formerly incarcerated, speaker and Vice President Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the thrilling adventures of your pre-business life. I am embarking on the journey of becoming a business titan for myself. I have helped organizations in the […]

Crafting Clarity, Inspiring Leadership: A Journey from Education to Empowerment

Anise Frost Anise Frost tells us that, “I believe that connection and clarity can allow us to be the best version of ourselves. I have studied human behaviour for 3 decades now and the only way to become aware of ourselves is to have access to a source of reflection, be that a person or […]

From Job Loss to Digital Philanthropy and Artful Adventures

Julie Metzger Julie Metzger tells us that, “With over 30 years in the information technology sector, my career has been dedicated to empowering businesses and individuals through cutting-edge website design, email marketing, and workflow automation solutions. My passion lies not just in leveraging technology,but in crafting digital experiences that truly resonate with users and drive […]

Empowering Entrepreneurial Journey: From Corporate Roots to Online Triumphs

Tammy Durden Tammy Durden is a Business Coach, helping Women Online Service Business Owners to Create and grow a business that fits their lifestyle. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. I grew up in a home with serial entrepreneurs. I think perhaps […]

Soulful Entrepreneurial Odyssey: From Single Motherhood to Global Empowerment

Myra Kotze Myra Kotze is a Certified Master Coach, serial entrepreneur, and the visionary force behind transformation for soul-inspired female entrepreneurs worldwide. With over 25 years of global experience, she has founded and scaled five 7-figure companies, generating a whopping $15.63 million in revenue per year alongside her husband, Andre. She has empowered women across […]

Awakening Self-Compassion: From Corporate Success to Soulful Entrepreneurship

Kaulen Taylor Pickell Kaulen Taylor Pickell is the CEO, founder, and coach at Selfcareavan. Selfcareavan is a coaching and consulting firm that she founded in October 2023. At its heart, Selfcareavan is about helping people tap into their inner wisdom and creative, life-, career-and reality-shaping power by cultivating a more caring and compassionate relationship with […]

From Redundancy to Resilience: A Story of Entrepreneurial Triumph

Annabelle Beckwith Annabelle Beckwith has been a business trainer, coach and consultant for over 20 years now, and has worked with businesses in all sectors, all over the world. Her main focus is on 3 key areas: leadership, personal presence and impact, and working with businesses on gender equality and women’s empowerment as business optimisation. […]

The Woman Navigating Leadership, Authenticity, and Transformation

Shereen Shaaban Shereen Shaaban is a Leadership Coach (ACC), Organization and Relationship Systems Coach (ORSCC), and Rapid Transformational Therapist (RTT), having transformed from a software engineer to a Leadership Coach. She tells us that, “My journey has always been fueled by a passion for making a meaningful impact—shifting from enhancing products and processes to empowering […]

Nurturing Growth: Empowering Lives with Purpose and Resilience

Christina Noble Christina Noble is the CEO & Founder ACC, CFP®,CSSGB, RYT®. The symbol for Your Inside Counsel Executive Coaching would be the Tree of Life. This embodies the essence of my Purpose, empowering others to reach their aspirations with the empowering light of faith and encouragement. As a mascot, the Tree of Life also […]

A Journey from Corporate HR to Brain-Based Coaching

Sarah Scott Sarah Scott is a certified Brain-Based Coach with a passion for unlocking human potential. With over a decade of experience in various Human Resources roles for international corporations,she has always believed in the power of coaching to make a significant impact. In 2022, she launched Sarah Scott Coaching to empower individuals, leaders, and […]

Empowering Resilience: Nurturing Courage and Inner Strength

Shazy Nicholls Shazy Nicholls is a Professional Coach and Speaker. A lioness warrior, she represents courage, inner strength, spirituality, to protect, connect and nurture with kindness. What strategies do you employ to maintain a healthy work-life balance while running your own business? Making time for my spirituality by meditating and connecting. Physical movement, yoga, the […]

Nurturing Relationships: The Path to Self-Discovery and Fulfillment

Anna Thellmann Anna Thellmann is an Intimacy Expert/Relationship Advisor. She tells us that, “Dogs – if we translate their behaviour into human behaviour, they don’t take things personally, accept themselves as who they are, love without expecting anything back, leave when they need time to themselves, happy without expectations -> self-love as it’s best.” What […]

Empowering Women: A Journey from Burnout to Self-Care Advocacy

Leslie Gaudet Leslie Gaudet is a Self-Care Strategist for female CEOs. Her mission is to empower female CEOs and their Teams with self-care strategies to prevent burnout and enhance quality of life in business and beyond. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up to your venture? Before embarking on the journey that […]

Cultivating Growth and Transformation: The Journey of a Corporate Executive Turned Entrepreneur

Linda Johannesson Linda Johannesson is a reformed corporate marketing executive and transplanted Canadian living in Australia and most recently, the CEO and Founder of The Growth Garden. The Growth Garden is a strategic branding, marketing, messaging, and growth agency that helps ambitious service businesses to become the biggest and best version of themselves. She tells […]

The Woman Illuminating Paths to Empowerment and Resilience

Bleu Lashell Bleu Lashell, a resilient entrepreneur and CEO of Empowered Radiance, overcame personal challenges including Alopecia, divorce, and depression, emerging as a global inspiration. With a background in acting, modeling, and speaking engagements, Bleu empowers women through her community to healing, health, entrepreneurs and fashion. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up […]

Transformative Journeys: Navigating Life’s Twists and Turns with Strength and Resilience

Anne Fatima Jackson Anne Fatima Jackson is a Psychotherapist, Life, Career, Relationship Coach, Founder & CEO of One Life Coaching ME. She tells us that, ““You Gotta Be”-Des’ree:a motivating song telling us to be confident in ourselves and gain the strength to face life’s different situations, which was very valid for my life and now […]

Elevating Leadership: Empowering Growth and Impact Through Coaching

Mariam Moussa Mariam Moussa tells us that, “It’s always a tough job but I try to always be in check of my wellbeing; challenging myself to focus on what’s important and delegate! I try to ask myself what’s the 20% effort that would get me the 80% results and have self-boundaries to ensure planning in […]

Empowering Careers: Navigating Success through Mentorship and Growth

Nina Scurtu Nina Scurtu is a Career Coach. She tells us that, “Because the school I work for is also the co-founder of my company, it is so much easier to balance everything, as half of my time I spend on the business and half of it I spend working. Last year I wasn’t so […]

Empowering Women to Live Their Best Lives: Transforming Mindsets and Money Management

Tabitha Moore Tabitha Moore is a Life, Mindset & Money Coach. She tells us that, “I find balance to work like this, I will spend more time on my business than my personal life and then I will take some time off from my business for my personal life. There are times when it’s pretty […]

Career Success Catalyst: Empowering Professionals to Reach New Heights

Valerie Martinelli Valerie Martinelli tells us that, “I utilize strict time and calendar management strategies. I time block my calendar according to what I am doing- work or personal- and keep that time strictly as such. It helps me maintain the balance that I need and prioritize clients and my personal life.” When faced with […]

Radiant Evolution: Illuminating Paths to Purposeful Living

Kate Griffiths Kate Griffiths is a Coach, Author & Speaker. She tells us that, “Life is about flow. When you work for yourself it’s about learning that you don’t work 24/7 rather I work in intense bursts and arrange work around my life as a mother and wife who has other interests and a dog.” […]

Empowering Impact: Transforming Lives Through Purposeful Innovation

Fiona Surrey Fiona Surrey tells us that, “This was hard as I absolutely love what I do and switching off was very hard to implement, I now schedule this into my working week I find pockets of time to switch off that can be a 20 mins break to a Sunday Funday which is spent […]

Empowering Careers: Redefining Success Through Confidence and Growth

Sue E Wilburn Sue E Wilburn, SPHR, (Senior Professional in Human Resources), is certified by HRCI. She tells us that, “The benefit of being an entrepreneur is you can balance priorities that work specifically for you. Instead of being controlled by an employer’s regular schedule, an entrepreneur is in control of their schedule. And since […]

The Journey: From Teacher to Transformational Guide

Liz Stewart Liz Stewart, with over 22 years in the field of personal development, finds herself on the search for a new title. She is a qualified PCC coach. That is part of who she is. She also works utilising Emotional Freedom Technique and her Shamanic Practitioner experiences. She tells us that, “I love working […]

Journey of Empowerment: From Corporate Leader to Leadership Coach

Emily Walton Emily Walton, the Founder and Coach of Alo Coaching is a former corporate leader who has started her own leadership coaching company to support ambitious leaders who are facing challenges in their careers. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your professional journey and […]

Embracing Growth: A Journey of Empowerment

Shama Akram Shama Akram is a Life Coach specialising in ADHD, accountability and confidence. She also does wedding choreography on the side. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your professional journey and what inspired you to choose this career. I had a very good childhood, […]

The Woman on a Transformation Journey through Culinary Coaching

Hulya Erdal Hulya Erdal is a culinary educator and self-discovery coach, merging the power of cooking and transformational coaching to guide midlife women on a journey of self-discovery. She believes in the quote, “Rewrite Your Story ….because the old one no longer fits.” What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about […]

The Woman Empowering Leadership: Cultivating Growth and Impact

Laura MacDonald Laura MacDonald is a Leadership Coach and Mentor from Leicestershire, England. She tells us that, “I have been coaching and mentoring for 18 years, and have been running my business for the last 3 years. My vision is to empower leaders with the power and confidence they need to be the change they […]

Empowering Tomorrow’s Leaders: Redefining Leadership in a Changing World

Tiffany Prince Tiffany Prince, founder of Prince Performance LLC, is an internationally renowned speaker with extensive experience in leading, developing, and empowering others. Serving a wide array of academia, corporate, and government clients, she develops and delivers customized coaching, training, and workshops that help organizations fill employees’ skill gaps, neutralize the negative effects of globalization, […]

Breaking Barriers: From Technician to Trailblazer

Joia Jefferson Nuri Joia Jefferson Nuri tells us that, “At heart, I am profoundly linked to my ethnicity, gender, and family. As a servant leader, I am committed to guiding individuals towards their greatest potential.” Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the thrilling adventures of your pre-business life. I […]

Empowering Women: Redefining Success Through Authenticity and Purpose

Kate Duck Kate Duck helps courageous professional women to redesign their life so they can step into the woman they’ve always wanted to be. By using her tools as an intuitive counsellor, spiritual life coach, EFT practitioner and reiki master, she guides and supports her clients to reignite their passion for life and reclaim their […]

Empowering Leadership: Transforming Lives Through Connection and Authenticity

Carrie Prince Carrie Prince is currently the COO for Carnaby & Vine, a luxury gifting company based in Los Angeles, CA, and is also a certified executive coach who works with professionals and singles on improving their work lives and relationships. Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the thrilling […]

Empowering Healing: Unveiling the Path to Self-Discovery and Wellness

Sarah Dawkins Sarah Dawkins is a Holistic Health and Healing Coach, Keynote Speaker, the Author of HEAL YOURSELF, a Multi-Award winning Entrepreneur and previously, she was a Registered Nurse for twenty years. She has extensive experience in health and healing from naturally self-healing a multitude of health issues and through her work as a Registered […]

Empowering Expression: Embracing French Language and Identity

Alice Mansaud Alice Mansaud tells us that, “I am a French language coach and a podcaster, living in Valencia, Spain. I coach non-French speakers to help them be (come) themselves in French, express who they are and do what they want even if it’s not their mother tongue. My podcast “Moi-même en français” aims the […]

Harmonizing Wellness: Nurturing Holistic Living and Creative Expression

Stephanie Anderson Stephanie Anderson is the visionary behind Hyacinth Moon, a natural products and wellness company crafting organic skincare. Alongside, she curates Strawberry Moon Arts, indulging her passion for artistry. Stephanie’s dedication extends to fostering community through the Natural Lifestyle Lounge, offering holistic life coaching and personal development. With over 20 years in the natural […]

Empowering Mothers to Embrace Wellness: Navigating Life’s Journey with Purpose and Health

Lisa Engle Lisa Engle tells us that, “I am a wife, mother of 5, grandmother, author, speaker, and certified health and well-being coach.” Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the thrilling adventures of your pre-business life. I have served in the chiropractic “world” supporting people in making choices congruent […]

From Cancer Survivor to Empowering Coach: Transforming Lives with Compassion and Devotion

Zoraida Morales Zoraida Morales tells us that, “I never thought healing myself mentally, physically, and spiritually after a cancer diagnosis would lead me to become a Certified Transformational Nutrition Coach and Certified Holistic Cancer Specialist to empower and support cancer survivors and caregivers, but it did. WHY do I feel pulled to help 1.8+ million […]

Synchronizing Success: Empowering Business Owners on the Path of Balance and Fulfillment

Elizabeth Elizabeth tells us that, “I am a homeschooling mother of three out of my four children and have run multiple businesses for almost three decades. Balancing your career and spirituality can be a daunting task. But with our expertise and guidance, we can help you unlock the secret to success and fulfillment in both […]

Unveiling Life’s Script: A Journey of Transformation and Empowerment

Lesley King Lesley King is originally from Cleveland, OH. She tells us that, “I am the second of five kids. My role in the family was the caretaker. After college, I moved to Atlanta, GA, and started a career in film production. I had a lot to learn about life and myself. My journey included […]

Empowering Women to Rise: The Journey of a CEO and Accountability Expert

Heidi Meckley Heidi Meckley is the CEO and creator of The Meckley Method. Heidi Meckley is your secret weapon for business success. This powerhouse coach and entrepreneur isn’t just another partner; she’s a cheerleader, author, and accountability expert on a mission to empower women. Through her signature Meckley Accountability Method, Heidi keeps you laser-focused and […]

Empowering Working Moms: A Journey of Self-Discovery and Balance

Jacqueline Robertson Jacqueline Robertson is an International accredited life coach, NLP Master Practitioner, and certified Self-love coach. She tells us that, “I help working mums achieve less guilt, stress and overwhelm whilst increasing energy, confidence and balance by examining those limiting/negative beliefs, self-care routines and time management. It’s about empowering and educating mums so that […]

Empowering Women Entrepreneurs: Embracing Change and Creating Impact

Helena Reis Helena Reis is a Life & Empowerment Coach, Facilitator, HR Business Advisor, Founder & CEO of Rising Numbers based in Lisbon, originally from Madeira Island. She further tells us that, “With a strong business background, I have always been driven to pursue my entrepreneurial dreams. I am passionate about learning and constantly seek […]

A Creative Odyssey: The Journey of a Multifaceted Artist and Entrepreneur

Flloyd Kennedy Flloyd Kennedy is a freelance actress, director, singer-songwriter, poet and podcast creator. She tells us that, “I participated in the British folk revival in the late 1960s, ran a restaurant in the Hebrides in the 70s, a touring theatre company in Scotland the 80’s and 90s, taught voice, accents and acting skills in […]

Empowering Entrepreneurship: Unveiling the Journey of a Business Coach

Lorraine Lane Lorraine Lane tells us that, “As a business coach, I teach my clients to pull away from the cookie-cutter crowd of small business owners, find their uniqueness, and make an extraordinary and unique impact to attract their ideal clients and expand their business reach.” What were your initial years of growing up like? […]

From Adversity to Empowerment: A Holistic Wellness Journey

Nikki Hillhouse Nikki Hillhouse is a Mindset and Holistic Well-being Coach. She is a fun loving Scottish woman living in beautiful Turkey with her partner and 9 street cats. P.S. (they live in their own house outside, that her partner built). She further tells us that, “I am a mother of one son and one […]

From Corporate Struggles to Empowering Others: The Journey of a Mindset Coach

Malaun Rice Malaun Rice is a Mindset Coach, Speaker and a Life Coach. She tells us that, “I was born and raised in Chicago, Illinois and have been a resident of Phoenix, Arizona for the last 8.5 years. My educational background is in Marketing and I have had the pleasure to work in this industry […]

The Journey of a Mindset Coach and Advocate for Empowerment

Rita Parmar Rita Parmar is an accredited Mindset Coach and Organisational Development Consultant. She tells us that, “My absolute passion is to empower others: I help professionals to overcome stagnation, grasp hold of their unique strengths & propel them to the next level in their career and life! With this, also comes over 20 years […]

Unveiling Purpose Through Curiosity and Connection

Dr Gary Crotaz Dr Gary Crotaz, PhD is a Speaker, Executive Coach, Author and Host of The Unlock Moment podcast. He is an executive coach and host of The Unlock Moment podcast. He further tells us that, “I’m someone who’s deeply curious about people – who we are, why we choose to do what we […]

Empowering Journeys: A Path to Holistic Healing and Women’s Empowerment

Diane Sassano Diane Sassano is an accomplished professional coach, Board Certified Master NLP, and spiritual healer, deeply committed to guiding personal and professional development. With holistic practices and innate spiritual gifts, she offers transformative coaching tailored to individual needs. Diane prioritizes collaboration and solution-focused methods to overcome obstacles and achieve aspirations. Her diverse client experience […]

Turning Trauma into Triumph: The Inspirational Journey of a Creative Visionary

Carolyn Renee Sealy Carolyn Renee Sealy is the Founder and CEO of CR The Brand Enterprises. She tells us that, “It’s all about hooking up creative folks with the resources they need to stick together and make their dreams happen. Right now, we’re focusing a lot on Deal 2 Heal coaching. It’s where we help […]

Unveiling the Power Within: A Journey from Teaching to Transformation

Typhanie Winfield-Alexander Typhanie Winfield-Alexander is a Holistic Life Coach, Trainer & Facilitator. She is the Founder & CEO of Momentum Life Mastery Coaching, LLC. As a Certified Life Coach and Personal Development Specialist, she employs a customized, holistic approach to help her clients achieve their goals with clarity and confidence. She tells us that, “My […]

Empowering Careers: A Journey from Project Manager to Career Coach

Kayla Quijas Kayla Quijas is a project manager by day and a career coach for aspiring project managers by night. She tells us that, “Project management is part of who I am. I’ve always been the person to plan the event, make the checklist, and look for improvements in the most minute of daily tasks. […]

Empowering Women: Unleashing Potential, Redefining Leadership

Josi Dumont Josi Dumont is a certified Leadership & Mindset Coach and Author. She specializes in helping female business leaders overcome Imposter Syndrome and self-doubt so they can take bold action to build the business that enables their dream life confidently and authentically. She tells us that, “Before taking the leap as an entrepreneur myself […]

Empowering Potential and Building Legacies: A Journey of Coaching and Leadership

Mike Ungar Mike Ungar is a Certified FocalPoint Business Coach and Executive Coach with over 40 years of experience in a variety of continuous improvement, operations, finance, human resource, and leadership roles. He believes strongly that one’s legacy lies with one’s family. He makes a difference by helping others achieve their full potential. What were […]

Empowering Artisans and Cultivating Creativity: A Journey of Entrepreneurial Vision

Raksha Rathore Raksha Rathore is an artist and has recently moved to the UK. She is also an international trade advisor and runs her own Art gallery. She is also involved in her other things and engaged in other businesses. She tells us that “We are dealing in all kinds of Art and crafts, paintings, […]

Elevating Workplace Well-being: A Journey of Impact and Empowerment

Michael D. Levitt Michael D. Levitt is a global thought leader on HR, burnout, and workplace culture, a CBT and NLP therapist, a Top 50 Global Thought Leader and Influencer on Health and Wellness 2023, a sought-after keynote speaker and executive coach, a published author of several books, and the host of the Breakfast Leadership […]

Empowering Fashion Entrepreneurs: Navigating Success and Sustainability

Vicki Wallis Vicki Wallis is a multi-passionate entrepreneur and founder of The Fashion Business Coach which helps small fashion brands to launch and scale, Vicki Wallis Consulting, which supports established brands to grow their profits and Freelancing Simplified, which helps freelance creatives to achieve life-work balance. She loves helping people to reach their potential and […]

Empowering Leadership and Personal Growth: Nurturing Authenticity and Wellbeing

Mary Polanco Mary Polanco is a Leadership and Personal Growth Consultant and Trainer. She has two great passions in life; leadership and wellbeing. She tells us that, “I first found a passion for leadership during my 23-year career in the U.S. Air Force. As an instructor for the service’s leadership school, I became enamored with […]

Empowering Global Change: Pioneering Solutions for Environmental Challenges

Ryan Lavelle Ryan Lavelle is a passionate and dedicated social/technology entrepreneur on a mission to solve some of the most pressing environmental social challenges of our time, with particular focus on the global south. Following a 20 year career in investment banking technology I pivoted to found my own startup Mpowa in 2019 and since […]

The Women Cultivating Financial Confidence and Freedom

Julia Shteynberg Julia Shteynberg is a money coach. She believes that having (saved) money is the ultimate freedom. It gives you peace of mind and the power to decide what is best for your life. Her dream is to help as many women as possible get “good” with money. What were your initial years of […]

The Woman Transforming Lives and Empowering High Achievers to Thrive Alcohol-Free

Anna Charles Anna Charles is an ex-corporate girl who loves cross-country road trips, minted tea and, after years of struggling to drink less, freedom around alcohol. She tells us that, “Changing my relationship with alcohol felt like such a miracle I ditched the corporate world and began coaching brilliant, high achievers who struggle with overdrinking.” […]

Empowering Workforce Leaders: Transforming Strategies through Creative Solutions

Jesse Sieff Jesse Sieff is the CEO and Founder of Sieff Studios. His role as a Video Strategist is to empower workforce development leaders to better invest time, attention, and talent through creative video solutions. He is an ICF Dual-Certified Coach, a Marine Corps Veteran, Milspouse, and father of twins. What were your initial years […]

Empowering Futures: From Homemaker to Financial Luminary

Shante Epps-Copeland Shante Epps-Copeland is a life, financial and credit education coach, who owns a consulting company. Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the thrilling adventures of your pre-business life. I was a Stay at home wife and mother of 4 amazing children for over 25 yrs. While raising […]

From Corporate Maven to Catalyst for Success: The Journey of a High Achievement Coach

Jaclyn Strominger Jaclyn Strominger is a High Achievement Coach. She helps her clients go to the next level. She lives in Reno with my 2 teens, husband and dog. She loves the outdoors. She tells us that, “If I am not working, you will find me hiking, skiing or cycling. Or you may find me […]

Empowering Leadership: A Journey from Corporate World to Global Impact

Torrey Peace Torrey is a Leadership Coach and Trainer. She became passionate about leadership after beginning to oversee a team of 20 as Head of Office in rural Timor-Leste. She tells us that, “I wanted to know how to inspire and motivate others to become their best. Sadly, I never learned that in school – […]

Empowering Moms: The Journey towards Holistic Wellbeing and Balance

Anu Morgan Anu Morgan is a mother of two teenagers, a certified life coach and certified personal trainer. She is passionate about helping moms and women thrive mentally and physically. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your professional journey/venture/initiative and what inspired you to choose […]

Awakening Potential: A Journey to Empowerment and Healing

Jennifer Smith Jennifer Smith is the Co-Founder, Meet The Light; Owner, Natural Energy Healer; Quantum Healer, Reiki Master, Mindset & Spiritual Coach. How do you balance your work responsibilities with your personal life while managing your own business? My work and personal life is integrated, hence it’s very easy to manage. There is nothing more […]

Navigating Success: A Journey in Entrepreneurship and Impact

Zena Hamdan Zena Hamdan is the Founder & CEO of AAO Marketing Consultancy. How do you balance your work responsibilities with your personal life while managing your own business? Finding balance is key; I prioritize and schedule to ensure both work and personal life get the attention they deserve. Trusting my team with responsibilities also […]

Empowering Transformation: The Journey of ReAmbition Coaching

Rob Rob is a Personal Development Coach and Hypnotherapist. How do you balance your work responsibilities with your personal life while managing your own business? Work-Life Balance is an important factor when running your own business. I manage this through planning the tasks that I need to complete each week. I prefer to not work […]

Rising to Rockstar: A Path to Leadership Brilliance

Joyan Chan Joyan Chan is an outstanding leadership award-winning coach, international speaker, and podcaster. The heart of her work is centered on helping leaders and entrepreneurs become a confident, visible, and impactful leader in today’s world. Joyan has been featured in numerous magazines, publications, shows and has spoken at many industry events. She has created […]

From Educator to Empowerer: A Journey of Self-Discovery and Impactful Coaching

Cindy Minnis Cindy Minnis describes herself with adjectives like myself, are, caring, generous, thoughtful, adventurous, always willing to learn, enjoy working for a cause, curious, passionate about enabling others. Before you became the business titan you are today, enlighten us about the thrilling adventures of your pre-business life. Prior to coaching I worked as a […]

Rising Beyond: A Journey from Adversity to Empowerment

Madelaine Gomes Madelaine Gomes is the founder of the “I AM” POSSIBLE Foundation NPO, – leads young adults towards a better future through self-healing, finding purpose, and discovering their gifts to develop a successful business. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. I […]

Elevating Leaders: A Journey from Service to Success

Charity S. McDonald Charity S. McDonald, MBA, is a career and leadership strategist that has helped 300+ high achievers become big receivers without burnout. In 2023, she was recognized as a LinkedIn Top Community Voice and Top 50 POC Content Creator. As a keynote speaker to colleges and corporations, she presents a proprietary framework to […]

From Passion to Purpose: Jenna Dillon’s Journey of Empowering Leadership

Jenna Dillon Jenna Dillon is an Executive Coach, Keynote Speaker, and CEO/Founder of Executive Performance Institute for Coaching (E.P.I.C.) She works with high-performing individuals and top-tier organizations, helping accomplished and aspiring leaders achieve greater levels of fulfillment and success in their lives, careers, within their organizational cultures, and as industry influencers. Jenna’s skills as an […]

Illuminate: A Journey from Corporate to Coaching

Mary ‘Medley’ Maina Mary ‘Medley’ Maina is a lightworker, a mother and a coach. She helps people in careers who feel stuck, to get healed of mindset BLOCKS and emotional stress so they can advance their careers and/or start post career businesses. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your […]

Navigating Life’s Obstacles: The Journey of INsightful Coaching

Lebo Mollo Lebo Mollo is a dedicated life coach at INsightful Coaching. Her mission is to empower clients battling mental health challenges, guiding them to overcome obstacles and thrive both personally and professionally. With a year of experience running her coaching business, her goal is to bring positive change and uplift countless lives. Tell us […]

From Burnout to Best Life, an Inspiring Journey

Lisa Hammett Lisa Hammett is a Certified Positive Intelligence PQ Coach, a Transformational Speaker, and the best-selling author of From Burnout to Best Life. She is also a mental fitness and wellness expert. She also helps leaders create work/life balance to increase productivity, profitability, and wellbeing. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading […]

Empowering Change: The Journey towards Personal and Professional Transformation

Moira Devlin Moira Devlin is the Founder of LIfexpression and Little Fish Big Impact. She is also an author, artist, and specialist in change and transformation. She brings a unique blend of creativity and expertise to the realm of personal and professional development. Her mission is to empower individuals and organisations with the crucial skills […]

From Darkness to Light: The Journey towards Holistic Wellbeing and Empowerment

Fiora Touliatou Fiora Touliatou is a holistic wellbeing coach and founder of BNS Wellbeing. For her, wellbeing is not just a trendy profession but part of a healthy lifestyle that she has been following since she was a teenager. Having suffered from anxiety and depression from an early age, she discovered holistic practices and therapies […]

Connecting People with Nature, Nurturing Wellbeing, and Leading the Change in Green Wellbeing Initiatives

Gina Geremia Gina Geremia is a Certified Forest Therapy Practitioner, Accredited NLP Practitioner and Personal Performance Coach. Having a keen understanding of human and wild behaviour allows her to design and execute a myriad of wellbeing programmes that facilitate healing and personal growth. Her expertise extends to crafting and implementing programmes tailored to diverse populations, […]

Redefining Roles, Navigating Challenges, and Inspiring Change in Venture Capital and Coaching

Tatyana Slavova Tatyana Slavova tells us that, “I am proud of my Ukrainian heritage. I relocated on my own from Ukraine to the USA at the end of 2022, facing the challenges of war. I wear multiple hats, work as both a Venture Capitalist and Life & Business Coach. I am hungry to keep redefining […]

Empowering Lives and Creating Positive Change: A Journey as a Life Coach and Entrepreneur

Simon Tomkins Simon Tomkins is a life coach on a mission to empower millions of people to live more healthy, balanced and fulfilling lives. He runs a coaching company, including a team of talented and passionate coaches. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your professional […]

Elevating Voices and Bridging Cultures: A Journey as a Communication Coach and Cross-Cultural Trainer

Victoria Rennoldson Victoria Rennoldson is a Communication Coach & Cross-Cultural Trainer. She provides coaching to global leaders to elevate & amplify their communication. She also trains cross-cultural teams in cultural intelligence. She is a CEO & Founder, Keynote speaker, Podcast host, and a Certified Cultural Intelligence Coach. What were your initial years of growing up […]

Nurturing Self-awareness, Inspiring Change, and Empowering Others

Felicie Escoffier Felicie Escoffier is a French woman living in London since 2010. She is the mother of 2 wonderful kids. After 15 years in the corporate world, she became an entrepreneur and launched her coaching business. Before diving into your current endeavors, what childhood dreams did you harbor, and how do they manifest in […]

Coaching for Ethical Leadership and Positive Change in the World

Victoria Ramsden Victoria is an Executive Coach working with ethical change-makers, values-led professionals and sustainability innovators to achieve greater impact. First trained in NLP and coaching techniques 18 years ago, Victoria’s philosophy to leadership has always been grounded in ethical principles. Holding leadership roles in publicly funded services, social housing, operational performance and renewable energy […]

Healing and Empowering Lives Through Rapid Transformation Therapy

Neha Arora Neha Arora is a Rapid Transformation Therapy Practitioner and a Clinical Hypnotherapist. She believes that our past doesn’t have to dictate our future, and no matter what we have been through, we deserve healing. She tells us that, “I work with clients to find, break, and eliminate subconscious limiting belief patterns that are […]

The Woman Navigating Crossroads with Clarity and Connection

Anna Prinz Anna Prinz is a Transformational Life Coach. She tells us that, “I am a treasure seeker. I love to wonder at the beauty in the world. I am a connector. I love to connect with others to dig deep into life, meaning and purpose. I am a noticeman. I enjoy details and seek […]

Harmony in Healing: A Journey from Corporate Struggles to Empowering the Miracle Magnet Movement

Elvira V. Hopper Elvira V. Hopper is a multi-award winning Life & Biz Coach, International Speaker, Healer (of many modalities), Artist (jewelry artisan), & award-winning jazz musician. She also leads 2 incredible international teams as the founder of The Love Your Vibe Transformation (Personal Evolution SOULution for heart-centred humans) & founder of Retreat To You […]

Empowering Transformation: A Journey from Overcoming Fear to Inspiring Women in Their 50s

Pauline George Pauline George is a married woman and a proud mother of three, with two children from her marriage and four beautiful grandchildren. She further tells us that, “I reside in London with my husband. Balancing family life, I also work part-time as a work coach. Additionally, I’m embarking on a new venture, starting […]

Empowering Transformation: A Journey from Adversity to Holistic Self-Development

Julie-Ann Blackmore Julie-Ann Blackmore is a passionate 54 year old woman who has always lived her life to the best of her abilities, as true to her core values of integrity, trust, truth, and respect as she can and supports others to do the same. She tells us that, “I believe that anything is possible […]

Speaking UP: A Journey from Mental Health Struggles to Global Advocacy

Pamela O’Neill Pamela O’Neill is a bestselling author and mental health coach from Ontario, Canada. She tells us that, “Writing is my art, and working in mental health is my purpose. I recently combined the two with the release of my first book called “Speaking UP About a Mental Health Crisis”. My mission is to […]

The Woman Nurturing Culture and Creativity Through ŠumArt

Jelena Simic Jelena Simic is a PhD candidate in Art history, Founder of ŠumArt, merriad, and mother of one son. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. I have had a career spanning over 25 years in various sectors. However, since the outbreak […]

Nurturing Essential Life Skills and Empowering Lives through Emergent Life Skills and Education Consulting

Dr. Leithea Williams Dr. Leithea Williams is the owner and principal of Emergent Life Skills and Education Consulting. She was born in St. Andrew, Jamaica, moved to the United States, joined the United States Air Force, and served as an Airman for 16 years before retiring and starting Emergent Life Skills and Education Consulting. Tell […]

Constructing Solid, Happy, and Successful Futures and Pursuing the Abundant Life

Erica Yanney Erica Yanney is a Christian Life Coach and Career Coach focused on constructing solid, happy, and successful futures through coaching. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up to your venture? I oversee two distinct brands. Altitude Career Coaching specializes in comprehensive career coaching services, aiding individuals in career planning, effective […]

The Woman Decluttering Lives, One Space at a Time

Shelina Shelina is a Professional Organiser and Declutterer. She is the owner of Decluttr Me, the first decluttering and organising business in the region which was started over 10 years ago. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up to your venture? Originally from the UK, I have lived in Dubai for 18 […]

The Woman Empowering Leadership, One Step at a Time

Maria Kelly Maria Kelly is a Leadership Growth Strategist. She is an Irish-Swiss, living the dream in Barcelona with her husband and their adorable dog Cookie, who keeps them active. She tells us that, “Before moving to Barcelona during the pandemic, we lived in Geneva, New York and London. I speak fluent English and French, […]

Cultivating Authentic Connections: An Evolution from Financial Analyst to Founder of Dreamore

Annemarie Penny Annemarie Penny is the Founder of Dreamore, a recruiting/advisory firm for startups & growing companies. She tells us that, “We were previously called Apex Direct Search, #53 on Forbes’ America’s Best Professional Recruiting Firms. Founded in 1997 at the beginning of the dot-com boom. I started my career as a financial analyst at […]

Creating Magic: A Journey from Corporate Leadership to Illuminating Experiences

Dr. Supriya Sharma Dr. Supriya Sharma is an Executive Director and is fondly known to be a business alchemist credited with constructively contributing to the quadruple bottom line of organisations of varied sizes and sectors for a decade. She is a trusted partner in the success of management teams. She is also a keynote speaker, […]

Empowering Minds: A Journey from Academics to Authorship and Entrepreneurship

Dr. Shikha Gupta Dr. Shikha Gupta is an accomplished Author & Associate Professor, Programme Coordinator in the Management Department having expertise in Finance and accounting. Dr.Gupta is also SPOC for Swayam Local Chapter. Dr.Gupta has authored a book titled “Capital Market” and Chief editor of “Marketing Quest” magazine. She has an enriched experience of 15 […]

Reshaping Industries with AI: A Vision for Ethical and Impactful Transformation

Salvia Mirza Salvia Mirza, Managing Director, is a strategist and a futurist in the AI space. Her role involves bridging the gap between complex AI technologies and practical, impactful applications in various industries. With a foundation in management consulting, she has honed her skills in understanding business processes, identifying areas ripe for innovation, and devising […]

Nurturing Souls, Riding Waves, and Inspiring Female Leaders in the Spirit of Growth

Heather Young Heather Young is an Intuitive Energy Healer, Hypnotherapist, Online High Ticket Sales Mentor, Author, Business and Spiritual Life Coach. Heather Young is an independent mother to a 6 year old boy living full-time in Hawaii on the North Shore of Oahu. She tells us that, “I am a competitive surfer, entrepreneur, and business […]

Coaching Women Through Transition and Leadership Development

Amy K Harbison Amy K Harbison is currently a certified coach (openwindowcoaching.com) working in private practice with women in professional transition and development, as well as leadership development. Prior to that, she was a communications and marketing professional working with nonprofits, associations, and in philanthropy, healthcare and higher ed. She also creates and facilitates leadership […]

The Woman Guiding Transformation through Holistic Coaching

Monika Matuszewska Monika Matuszewska is the founder of the coaching practice LaMatu, based in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Her company offers a variety of individual coaching services including both online sessions as well as live consultations, in-company training, workshops, and keynotes. During the conversations with her clients, she tackles dilemmas from both personal and professional domains. […]

The Woman Nurturing Authenticity, Balancing Roles, and Redefining Leadership

Chiara Ghinolfi Chiara Ghinolfi is a ICF-certified Executive Coach driven by transforming potential into peak performance. Her holistic approach blends Social Emotional Intelligence, Neuro Linguistic Programming expertise, and a deep grasp of cross-cultural dynamics. Her career spans pivotal roles in various sectors, from Fashion to Logistics, enriched by leadership in her firms. She has made […]

The Woman Cultivating Self Leadership for a Fulfilling Life

Alison Sinclair Alison Sinclair is a Self Leadership Coach. She tells us that, “10 years ago I started a development journey, trying out all sorts of approaches to move myself forward. It was in coaching in 2003 that I truly experienced transformation. This led to me doubling my income, improving my health and being equipped […]

Elevating Leadership: A Journey from Navy Brat to Empowering Women in Business

Marilyn Dollar Marilyn Dollar is a certified High Performance Business coach who left the corporate 9-5 to support women in leadership. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. I was a Navy brat, so I travelled to several countries and most of the […]

Unveiling Human Value: A Journey from Foundations to Leadership, Advocacy, and Legacy

Susan Popoola Susan Popoola is a Human Value Optimisation Specialist. She tells us that, “This stems from my belief that everyone has value to offer to the benefit of themselves as individuals and the different environments they find themselves in from Education, the Workplace, to Wider Society. Against this backdrop my work is focused on […]

Empowering Entrepreneurial Spirits: From Overcoming Mindsets to Inspiring Conscious Business Ventures

Miranda Arnold Miranda Arnold is a spiritual cheerleader, copywriter and mentor for female entrepreneurs and brands that raise consciousness! What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. I have no complaints, supportive parents, and a relatively healthy upbringing. Both of my parents have a […]

Reclaiming Feminine Power: Evolution from Corporate Burnout to Embodied Leadership

Ariane Lalakea Ariane Lalakea is an Embodied Leadership and Erotic Empowerment Coach In her own words, “My passions that have become my profession are healing and feminine empowerment.I am dedicated to empowering women to redefine leadership by harmonizing intellect, emotion, and inner power. My goal is to shift the business paradigm from one of relentless […]

Limitless Potential: From Self-Doubt to Empowering Women through Mindset and Manifestation

Lorina Owen Lorina Owen is a Mindset and Manifestation Coach for ambitious, high achieving women who are ready to break through mental blockages, build incredible confidence, step into their worth and live a life wilder than their vision boards. She is from Canada, loves to travel and has a wild spirit at heart. She says […]

Empowering Minds, Elevating Lives: A Transformation from Corporate Operations to Coaching Excellence

Laura Sanzo Laura Sanzo is a (C)Executive Coach, Hypnotherapist, Neuro-Linguistic Programming, Emotional Freedom Techniques, Neural Energetic Encoding, Time Techniques Practitioner, & Reiki Master She is an entrepreneur, servant leader, mentor, coach, and her number one role is mother. Her purpose and passion is to wake up everyday and show others what they are capable of […]

Guiding Women Entrepreneurs to Design Success and Freedom

Esra Doyuk Esra Doyuk is a Future Design Specialist. She tells us that, “I help women in designing themselves and their businesses through my programs. I teach marketing and sales techniques, aiming for their success and freedom. Together with my husband, I co-own DYK Limited. Additionally, I offer coaching and mentoring services specifically tailored for […]

Empowering Careers: A Journey from Corporate Psychology to Transformative Coaching

Kate Fonseca Williams Kate Fonseca Williams is a Career Coach and Occupational Psychologist. She is also the Founder of Karibu Coaching Limited. She tells us that, “With a background in Occupational Psychology and extensive experience as a management consultant in London, I now run a career coaching and business psychology practice. My work focuses on […]

The Woman with a Mission to Fully Fund Nonprofits and Transform Lives

Sandy Rees Sandy Rees is the CEO of Get Fully Funded, a company she started to help small nonprofits raise money. She tells us that, “I can’t stand to see anyone struggle with fundraising and my personal mission is to help as many people as possible learn how to raise the money they need to […]

A Journey from Corporate Life to Empowering Women through Intuition and Healing

Paula Adams Paula Adams is an intuitive coach and healer, transformational leader and teacher to women who want to wake up to their power and live through their intuition and intention. She tells us that, “As a Brennan Healing Science Practitioner, I have supported hundreds of women around the world over the past 15 years […]

Empowering Paths: A Journey from Microbiology to Leadership Coaching and Advocacy

Tabitha Ngozi Tabitha Ngozi, a distinguished microbiology graduate, is currently pursuing her Master’s in Business Management. With 7 years of experience as an executive and leadership coach, she excels in communication, monitoring and evaluation, and project management. Additionally, Tabitha is a dedicated social entrepreneur and a fervent advocate for human rights, particularly for women and […]

The Woman Breaking Barriers, One Change at a Time

Queen Mercy Ndubuisi Queen Mercy Ndubuisi has been a young girl child born and brought up in Nigeria. In her own words, “I love to network with a like mind and I’m passionate about learning new things. Passionate about bringing a change to my world, to my community and to everyone around me. It is […]

Embracing the Extraordinary: A Journey from Self-Discovery to Empowering Others

Avalaura Gaither Avalaura Gaither, the internationally acclaimed Intuitive Consultant and Transformational Life Coach, beckons you to embrace your true self and embark on your extraordinary life journey today. With an unwavering passion for empowering leaders and high achievers to manifest their boldest dreams, Avalaura guides those ready to live a life of freedom, shedding limiting […]

Unapologetic Leadership: A Journey from Adversity to Empowering Women

Lasha Murray Lasha Murray is an Unapologetic Leadership Coach. She is a retired corporate leader with over 20 years of experience leading, mentoring, and training diverse teams across multiple Fortune 100 companies. As a Leadership Development & Career Coach, she helps leaders and organizations identify and overcome toxic environments or work traits that can hinder […]

From Struggle to Strength: An Inspiring Journey of Triumph and Leadership

Laura Lohk is a lawyer, consultant and business woman. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. Pretty tough. I came from a very poor and unstable background. I only had one parent who struggled to look after me properly and had severe mental […]

Empowering Underrepresented Voices: A Journey of Resilient Leadership and Impact

Tamara M. Allen Tamara M. Allen, MSML is a passionate motivational speaker and Certified Life Coach known as T. Allen Speaks™. As the Founder of Speaking Out! Media, LLC, she empowers individuals, organizations, and communities with creative tools for success in various aspects of life. In her own words, “My mantra, “I can, I will, […]

Breaking Glass Ceilings and Shaping Perspectives: A Journey of Empowered Leadership

Stephanie Kunkel Stephanie Kunkel is a Founder, Author, and Speaker She is a perspective shifter dedicated to empowering and inspiring change makers to lead with love and intention. With a mission to equip everyone with the necessary tools to embrace understanding, Stephanie’s journey into inspired entrepreneurship began when she discovered the disconnect between corporations and […]

The Woman Breaking Barriers and Leading with Purpose

Akua Opong Akua Opong is a Chartered IT Professional within the Group Technology Team as a Senior Associate within financial services. As part of her role, she mentors new starters in the team, including interns and graduates, and provides technology guidance to colleagues across the Group. Outside her primary role, Akua is a keen diversity […]

Strategic Swings: Elevating Professional Skills through Business Golf Coaching

Patrina King Patrina King tells us that, “As a Business Golf Coach, I help entrepreneurs and professionals use golf as a tool to enhance their professional and personal skills. I focus on golf fundamentals, business networking, golf strategy, mental toughness, and more. Being a lifelong golfer and current business owner, I have developed a solid […]

Empowering Leaders to Increase Impact and Achieve Work Sustainability

Ana Melikian Ana Melikian is a Speaker, Coach, and Consultant. Ana Melikian, Ph.D., is a speaker, author, and host of the MINDSET ZONE, one of the top 1% most popular podcasts globally. Ana is on a mission to support purpose-driven leaders and organizations to increase their impact and results while avoiding burnout and being over-extended! […]

From Life’s Roller Coaster to NLP Empowerment for Women

Sandra van Wanrooij Sandra van Wanrooij is 51 years old and the proud mother of Beau & Renee. She was born and raised in Amsterdam. She tells us that, “Humor runs like a common thread through my life. In 2017 I rediscovered my energy, strength and inner child during a seminar by Joseph McClendon III. […]

Empowering Women through Financial Mentorship and Entrepreneurship

Claudia Ardila O Claudia Ardila O is a Professional in Finance and International Trade, Personal Finance Mentor, International Speaker, Author of the book “365 Personal Finance Tips, G-100, Colombia Country Chair in the Venture Capital & Innovative Finance wing, CFO of Mujeres Violeta, member of the WEF in Colombia and Content Creator on various digital […]

Crafting Timeless Elegance in Slow Fashion for Women

Yan Economides Yan Economides is a designer and brand Founder for womenswear brand Yan Neo London. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. Studied a lot! Wasn’t sure what I wanted to do when I left school, so I did A-levels in Business […]

Empowering Neurospicy Female Entrepreneurs to Unleash Their Sales Confidence

Diana Grace Diana Grace tells us that, “I am a sales confidence coach for neurospicy female entrepreneurs. I’ve worked in sales for 6 years, with SoMe for 6-7 years, & been in healthcare and service for about 3-4 years. Have a BSc in Marketing Management, and have had my coaching business for 2 years. I […]

Empowering Brilliance: The Woman Navigating Leadership and Career Paths

Katie B. Smith Katie B. Smith is an Executive & Career Coach. She tells us that, “I am a thought partner with senior executives, managers, professionals and business owners looking to strengthen their ability to lead and navigate their own careers or business. My mission is to support my clients in living into more of […]

Empowering Lives: The Inspiring Journey of a Certified Life, Relationship & Mental Health Coach

Emilymai Esther Dunbar Emilymai Esther Dunbar is a Certified Life, Relationship & Mental Health Coach, background in Social work(BSW), Master’s in Leadership. She is the founder and executive director of Mending Hearts Life Coaching and the host of Dear Emili show produced by KeGG Media. She tells us that, “I am a firm believer […]

Illuminating Journeys: Empowering Lives through Holistic Life Coaching and Healing

Ireland Garay Ireland Garay is the Founder of Rise in Purpose, LLC and is a certified Holistic Life Coach through Radiant Coaches Academy. She supports her clients through their journey of self-discovery and empowered living. Ireland uses a potent blend of astrology, reiki, and coaching to help you understand your hidden talents and life […]

Empowering Visions: Catalyst for Change in Personal Development & Leadership

Debbi Sluys Debbi Sluys is a Personal Development & Empowerment Coach. She empowers people to live their best lives and be the best professional they can be, by discovering their vision, balancing their lives, and realizing their inner power. Debbi is founder of the Dare to Declare™ Academy, which certifies coaches and entrepreneurs to […]

Empowering Transformation: From Corporate Success to Resilience Coaching

Tracey Chapman Tracey Chapman is a Resilience & Transformation Coaching. She is a sought-after resilience and transformation coach, a 2-times bestselling author, who empowers executive men and women to uncover their inner strength and transform their new ways of Being so that they Thrive After Grief. What were your initial years of growing up like? […]

From Corporate Climber to Entrepreneurial Trailblazer: Empowering Businesses and Lives

Vered Lerner Vered Lerner is the Founder & CEO of Bizstance Services Inc., Vered Lerner Coaching, VLC Success Academy and the VLC Youth Academy. She is an International Multi-Award Winning Entrepreneur, Influential Thought-Leader, Consultant, Coach, Mentor, Speaker, Writer and Author. Tell us about your life before the venture/ leading up to your venture? I was […]

Unmasking Resilience: From Corporate Burnout to Wellness Advocate

Andree Funnell Andree Funnell is a multi-award winning coaching, learning & development consultant, author, speaker and founder of the successful Aspiring Future Competence (AFC). Her debut self-help book, ‘Behind the Mask’ was published in 2019. Her impending new book is launching on 30th January 2024 called ‘My Path to Hope and Wellness – Self-care and […]

Transforming Trauma into Triumph: A Holistic Vision for Global Well-being

Dr. Deilen Michelle Villegas Dr. Deilen Michelle Villegas, Ph.D., BCHHP, BCETS— is a globally recognized triple board-certified holistic health practitioner and the visionary Founder/CEO of The Shamanic Goddess, LLC. With a double doctorate and a steadfast commitment to holistic healing, she specializes in Trauma Recovery, Behavioral Health, Mindset Transformation, and Somatic Healing. In her own […]

Empowering Hormonal Wellness: Transforming Lives and Building a Healthier World

Serena Sabala Serena Sabala is a certified nutrition consultant specialising in how to rebalance your hormones with nutrition and lifestyle. She tells us that, “I run Whole Shift Wellness with my husband Eugene and we have over 20 years of combined experience in the industry transforming the wellbeing of over 500 professionals across 5 countries. […]

Embracing Neurodiversity: A Path to Empowering Turbo Thinkers

Adela Baker Adela Baker tells us that, “In 2016, I founded Mind Coach, LLC, a global coaching service, based in New Orleans. I’m an ADHD coach and a devoted mom, specializing in helping innovative Turbo Thinkers©—adults with executive function skill deficits and remarkable strengths. My Tufts University education granted me fluency in five languages. Years […]

Blossoming from Adversity: A Journey to Empowerment through The Lotus Effect

Kat Polsinelli Kat Polsinelli is a resilient entrepreneur, coach, speaker, and podcaster. She tells us that, “From performing on stage at 10 to navigating teenage pregnancy and enduring an abusive relationship, I have emerged courageous and empowered. I even have an inspiring love story which led me to marry my soulmate in a symbolic cave […]

Empowering Lives: Holistic Well-being, Nurturing Minds, and Breaking the Poverty Cycle

Melissa Deally Melissa, an Integrative Mind-Body Health Practitioner, NLP and Hypnotherapy Trainer, and Master Practitioner in Time Line Therapy®, is dedicated to guiding individuals toward their best lives. As an international speaker and five-time best-selling author, she’s honored on the 2022 CREA Global Award list and a two-time recipient of the 2022 & 2021 Quality […]

Empowering Leadership: A Global Journey to Transform Performance and Inspire Freedom

Regina Huber Regina Huber tells us that, “As the CEO of TRANSFORM YOUR PERFORMANCE, I drive bold, value-driven, and heart-centered leadership of self and others. My eclectic experience on five continents started in Germany and includes leadership positions at BCG as well as ownership of businesses in Argentina, Brazil, and the U.S. This experience shaped […]

Empowering Dreams: From Diplomat to Entrepreneur, Inspiring Connections and Transformations

Alicia Y.H. Wang As a thought leader of woman empowerment, Alicia is a former Diplomat of Taiwan and global entrepreneur with private sector experience in international trade and foreign policy. Based in Toronto, she counsels private high school education and consults non-profit organizations for multicultural integration in Canada. Alicia focuses on empowering young leaders and […]

Nurturing Health, Home, and Happiness Through Self-Care Retreats and Holistic Guidance

Kimberly Trefilek Kimberly Trefilek tells us that, “I am passionate about connecting with others, traveling and helping others live well. I have this unique ability to understand others in depth and see broader perspectives, which helps me be able to effectively guide others in their journey. I love all things wellness, real estate, being in […]

Biba Pedron: Inspiring the Global Entrepreneurial Dream

Biba Pedron Meet Biba Pedron, a true titan in the world of entrepreneurship, business, and mindset. She’s not just an author and international speaker; she’s a beacon of inspiration for aspiring entrepreneurs and those ready to take their ventures to a global stage. 🌟 The Early Years: From Dreamer to Achiever 🌟 Born and raised […]

Empowering Lives: A Journey from Instructional Designer to Holistic Coach and Wellness Advocate

Jenny Wang Jenny Wang tells us that, “I wear a few hats in the coaching world—I’m an executive, life, and wellness coach by partnering with multiple coaching companies. My specialty lies in guiding people towards outcomes that might seem elusive on their own. I’ve got this unique coaching approach that intertwines the physical, mental, lifestyle, […]

Navigating the Code of Success: An Odyssey from Fine Arts to Software Development and Entrepreneurship

Josh Bruce Josh Bruce tells us that, “I’ve been working in software development in various forms since 1998. Academically trained in fine arts. A consultant, coach, and mentor since 2007.” What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your corporate journey/venture/initiative. I grew up in a military […]

Nurturing Transformation and Impact in Small Organizations through Coaching and Leadership

Flóra Raffai Flóra Raffai tells us that, “I am a small organisation’s coach, mentor, and trainer. Since 2015, I have been a CEO and trustee of small organisations in the health, educational, and community development sectors. I hold a Diploma in Transformational Coaching from Catalyst 14 and a Masters in Social Innovation from the University […]

Empowering Women in Business Through Resilience, Leadership, and Entrepreneurial Vision

Paulina Paulina tells us that, “As a CEO of Hiraya Branding, coach and mentor, I lead with a clear vision and a deep commitment to elevating women’s presence in business. With over 16 years of diverse experience, I bring a wealth of knowledge and insights to the table. My journey, marked by resilience and determination, […]

A Trailblazing Force for Empowerment, Wellness, and Success

Rochel Marie Lawson Rochel Marie Lawson is a dynamic and successful entrepreneur, a beacon of inspiration for women, and a force in the telecom installation industry. As the CEO of All Day Cable, Inc. the first woman-owned, minority-owned telecommunications installation company in the United States and the visionary President & Founder of Blissful Living 4 […]

Transforming from Trauma to Triumph – A Journey of Resilience in Entrepreneurship

Maggie Jurajda Maggie Jurajda, is a published author with a diverse background, who transitioned from architectural technician to a recognized figure in the realms of marketing and online business mechanics. With a decade-long journey through network marketing, property development management, and affiliate marketing. In 2020, Maggie Jurajda achieved a milestone by earning her master’s degree […]

The Woman Transforming Workplace Dynamics and Breaking Barriers

Alexandra White Alexandra White tells us that, “When I was younger, I’d often hear the phrase “life isn’t fair”, so I set out on a journey to try and change that. I believe everyone deserves to feel seen, heard and represented in this society that we all contribute to. My company, UNVAELD, empowers professionals through […]

Asexuality Unveiled: A Journey from Self-Loathing to Empowering a Global Community

Sandra Bellamy Sandra Bellamy is The Asexual Entrepreneur. She is the best-selling author of Asexual Perspectives 47 Asexual Stories book, under her own book publishing imprint of Quirky Books. She helps asexuals with love, life, confidence, dating and relationships, predominately through her Asexualise My Asexual Life YouTube channel chat show and vlog, which has had […]

Empowering Entrepreneurs: A Journey from Corporate Shift to Creating a Community for Women in Business

Sharon Ringier Meet Sharon Ringier, a seasoned Small Business Alignment Strategist with over two decades of expertise. Inspired by a Harvard study on goal-setting, Sharon is dedicated to empowering women entrepreneurs, guiding them to six-figure success through clarity and business alignment. As a wife of 38 years and soon-to-be grandmother, family is central to her […]

Crafting Narratives of Healing, Empowering Communities, and Pioneering Authenticity in Coaching and Advocacy

Nadine Robinson Nadine Robinson is a Founder, Journal Therapist & Life Coach of NPNarratives Ltd. With a profound commitment to making accessible and impactful therapeutic services a reality, Nadine’s mission is noble and transformative. Her dedication extends to empowering individuals within vulnerable communities while actively working to dismantle discrimination within institutions and organisations. Nadine’s expertise […]

Navigating Leadership, Learning, and Entrepreneurial Triumphs in Coaching and HR

Maddie Fox Maddie Fox started her own business in 2015, providing coaching, leadership development and HR consultancy. This came after a career in management, organizational development, and HR. What were your initial years of growing up like? Tell us about your life before starting your professional journey/venture/initiative and what inspired you to choose this career. […]

Unveiling the Healing Journey: An Odyssey from Fear to Alignment

Einav Avni Einav Avni is an alignment coach and energy healer, using the Emotion Code and Body Code healing modalities. In her own words, “I work mainly with people suffering from chronic pain, chronic illnesses or unexplained medical conditions to heal or reduce their symptoms. I also work with people feeling stuck and unhappy, to […]

The Woman Helping People in Addiction and Recovery Discover Who They Really Are

Brenda Davis Pastor Brenda Davis is the Founder of SOULutions of Recovery. In her own words, “I have found my purpose and passion in this life through God. Helping others in addiction and recovery discover who they really are, past the addiction and past the past. I believe anyone can heal and it’s my purpose […]

“The Woman With a Philosophical and Global Impact”

Zana Goic Petricevic Zana Goic Petricevic is an international leadership coach and keynote speaker with over 20 years of rich experience in corporate management, entrepreneurship, and executive coaching. In her own words, “My journey began in the bustling world of corporate communications and marketing in the oil & gas and pharmaceutical sectors. However, my true […]

From Philosophy Books to Publishing Empowerment: A Journey of Literary Impact and Female Entrepreneurship

Ameesha Green Ameesha Green is the Founder and CEO of The Book Shelf® Ltd, where she helps everyday people to write and publish life-changing books through idea-to-bookshelf services. She also offers free guidance via her podcast “Better Shelves” and Quora (where she has 1.8 million answer views) as she believes that anyone anywhere should be […]

From Midwest Roots to Entrepreneurial Heights: A Journey of Resilience and Empowerment

Jennie Bellinger Jennie Bellinger grew up all over the Midwest of the USA. She tells us that, “My dad was in the US Air Force. We ended up in the St. Louis area in the mid 90’s and I’ve been here ever since (except for annual travels).” Every industry that is now a large-scale, top-notch […]

Healing Hearts and Breaking Barriers: From Cardiologist to Healthcare Entrepreneur

Teresa Castiello Teresa tells us that, “In a ‘chronological order’ I am a woman, a cardiologist, a mother, and now, quite surprisingly, an entrepreneur. My journey as an entrepreneur had its seeds planted at least 10 years ago and it patiently waited to find a favourable field. I have always felt a strong urge to […]

Empowering Minds and Shaping Futures: A Journey fr