Ten seniors set to graduate from the University of Wisconsin Oshkosh on Saturday, Dec. 14, recently presented projects at the fall 2019 Honors Thesis Symposia at Reeve Memorial Union.

The symposia offered a large breath of topics, demonstrating the wide range of scholarly activities that take place at UW Oshkosh.

Micaela Arellano, of Oshkosh, biology major, with faculty adviser Brant Kedrowski, “Extraction and Analysis Protocol of Archaeological Hearth Soil Samples.”

Samuel Arendt, of Neenah, biology major, with faculty adviser Shelly Michalski, “Using in vitro Fecundity to Predict in vitro Fecundity with Brugia pahangi.”

Katie Benson, of Elk Mound, nursing major, with faculty adviser Jacqueline Karlin, “Addressing Students’ Knowledge of LGBTQ+ Health History Assessments.”

Noelle Fenwick, of Spring Grove, Illinois, with faculty adviser Jim Koch, “Student Knowledge and Perceived Value of Sexual Assault Resources.”

Ashton Keene, of Pewaukee, Spanish education major, with faculty adviser Kyle Steele, “Social Justice Education for Affluent High School Students.”

Merry Norby, of Neenah, psychology major, with faculty adviser Adam Ochonicky, “From Absence to Acknowledgement to Advocacy: An Integrative Literature Review of Counselor Competence with Gender and Sexual Minority Clients.”

Jonathan Robinson, of Seymour, music education major, with faculty adviser Julia Chybowski, “Past the Facade: The Legacy of Blackface Minstrelsy in the Classroom.”

Rachel Ryan, of Oconomowoc, communication major, with faculty adviser Jennifer Considine, “‘Nothing can take the place of that kind of thing’: Why Face-to-Face Communication Surpasses Technology in Building a Choral Community.”

Elijah Schmidt, of Fond du Lac, German major, with faculty adviser Elizabeth Wade-Sirabian, “‘Forsaken by the Whole World’?: A Comparative Analysis of Sébastien Laudenbach’s Film Adaptation of ‘The Girl Without Hands’ With Its Grimm Source Material.”

Matthew Semrad, of Plainfield, nursing major, with faculty adviser Jacqeline Karlin, “The Gap in Knowledge of Nursing’s Role with LGBTQ+ Aging Clients.”

The symposia presenters will graduate during the UW Oshkosh Midyear Commencement Ceremony at 9:30 a.m. on Saturday, Dec. 14, at Kolf Sports Center.

Learn more: