The music industry has always been at the forefront of innovation. Technology has disrupted the entire value chain throughout the past three decades — from creation with electronic instruments, to production with digital workstations, to distribution with the mobile and gaming revolution, to monetization with streaming platforms and to the consolidation in the touring with dynamic ticketing businesses. The industry has undergone massive waves of transformation. Quebec has not been passive spectator of these changes, Quebec has been actively contributing to the collision, resulting to a new category: music tech.

1) The 90s: the exploration of a new creative expression

The 1990s were a decade of change and transition, as new technologies, cultural movements, and globalization reshaped society in profound ways. The decade saw the widespread adoption of personal computers and the internet, which had an important impact on the emergence of new technologies — transforming the way people communicate, do business and consume entertainment. This digitalization of our daily lives increased trade and cultural exchange between countries around the world, including the pop culture, entertainment & obviously, music.

Revolutionizing the music industry in the 1980s, CDs were the dominant format for music at the time, it replaced vinyl records and cassette tapes (remember the Sony Walkman?). However, the invention of the MP3 format in the mid-1990s paved the way for the digital music revolution. Made it possible by compressing digital audio files, this intangible asset makes it easier to discover, to stock, the classify and ultimately to share music online. This dematerialization dramatically changed how people were “consuming” music — computers and then portable audio players allowing them to carry and to listen to their favorite music on-the-go, whether they were traveling, exercising, or just walking around town. But mostly, it also allowed people to share their music like (free) commodities (yep, Napster!).

This new reality brought amazing possibilities but many structural challenges, including illegally copied songs which made it easy for individuals to distribute and share copyrighted material without permission. It rapidly shook the entire music industry. The U.S Congress rapidly interfered and introduced the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), the first set of laws that would define the rules & ultimately criminalize any use of technology that trespasses copyrighted work[1]. Most of other jurisdictions around the world followed, including Canada.

Like the disruption in the audio format, the visual format of music started to shift with the mass adoption of the internet. Being the hallmark of music videos, MTV and their Canadian equivalents, MuchMusic & Musique Plus, began to suffer from a decrease in popularity from the increase in popularity of online video sharing websites such as Youtube.

However, some existing TV technologies were able to find an unexpected longer lasting life. Galaxie, product launched under the ownership of the CBC / Radio-Canada, offered 30 fully licensed music TV channels, both in English and French. This service was revolutionary at the time since it was a distrusted pay audio service using digital compression technology [2], offering superior sound quality compared to traditional radio stations. This new platform was the foundation of what would become an inevitable audio service and streaming music made in Quebec : Stingray.

Distribution of music was rapidly evolving, such as the creation. Digital power did give producers and musicians more creative possibilities. Digital audio workstations (DAW), such as Logic & Pro Tools, interfaced with and eventually hosted musical instrument digital interface (MIDI), music samples and effect plugins that were both simulations of extent hardware and innovative powerful new tools [3]. Electronic music as a genre grew exponentially in Quebec following the adoption of these new tools, artists like Amon Tobin, Kid Koala, and Plastikman (Richie Hawtin) pushed the boundaries of what was possible with digital technology. Music creation and production then became more accessible and mainstream, opening new sonic possibilities, but it became a major threat for traditional recording method and studios like Abbey Road and our local jewel, Morin Heights Studio.

Robert Lepage, a renowned theater director, playwright, and actor from Quebec, played a significant role in the music technology and creative transition of British musician Peter Gabriel. Lepage’s extensive background in incorporating innovative technology into theater productions and his visionary approach to visual storytelling influenced Gabriel’s live performances and multimedia.

As video games gained in popularity, the demand for a good soundtrack could determine the success of a game. While some studios would reuse well known songs, iD Software mandated the notorious group Nine Inch Nails to produce a soundtrack of 10 songs for Quake, an apocalyptic first-person shooter, the studio changed the industry forever and this creative partnership became legendary.

2) The Millenium: crossing the chasm of dematerialization

In a wave of dematerialization with the introduction of the iPod series and the mass adoption of mobile phone, it made it easier for the consumers to buy, listen and store their music. With a simple click on their hand-held device, the consumers could play one of his thousands of songs instantly. Music became intangible and technology development was leading its distribution. At that time, approximately 2,680 record stores closed in the U.S. [4] and Quebec flagship record stores (Sam The Record Man, Archambault) started to struggle.

The frenzy of the new millennium had a name: Napster. This was the first free peer-to-peer file-sharing service where users could search and download any MP3 music files, and then share with their friends (for free again, and again, and again!)[5]. Labels and artists would not get a single penny from these downloads which posed a great threat to their survival, already shook and unstable from the digitalization of music. Then started the legal fights. Napster was sued for encouraging and assisting the infringement of the music owners’ copyrights. It also meant that the consumers using Napster were committing illegal activities (many people have been arrested and received enormous fines). Although after the shutdown of Napster by court order, the market was a multiplication of peer-to-peer file sharing platforms such as Kazaa, Morpheus and Limewire.

In response to the rise of digital piracy, the music industry implemented a variety of anti-piracy measures including digital rights management (DRM). DRM worked by encrypting the music file and adding a digital signature that could only be decoded with a specific software key. This software key was typically only available to authorized users who have purchased the music legally. À-la-carte service (individual download), typically priced at $0.99, known by consumers as “Download Stores”, then became the legal alternative. These services made music become a (digital) commodity. Some artists tried to find a new business model that would increase their revenue split. Well known international group Radiohead and Quebec’s band Mister Valaire both self-released album on their website in exchange for a voluntary donation and the buyer’s e-mail.

With commodity comes commercial use of music. Navigating within this reactive legislation & unlimited music inventory was challenging for brands and corporations. An incredible opportunity for innovation. PremiumBeat, a Montreal’s based company, launched a e-commerce platform offering high-quality royalty-free music and sound effects that were available to use in various creative projects, including films and commercials [6]. The company was eventually acquired by Shutterstock.

As digital technology continued to evolve, most computers could support Digital Audio Workstations (DAW), enabling musicians to produce music at home[7]. It became even more challenging for traditional studios to stay alive — the famous Morin Heights Studio officially closed it doors. But this democratization of at-creation and production raised a need for polishing DIY recording method. Auto-tune was the landmark tech solution coming from this era. This software was correcting vocal pitch issues in live recordings, on top of being used creatively to generate distinctive vocal effects (remember Cher — Believe) [8]. It was then possible to play with music.

Gaming became a monster industry. The popularity of music video games like Guitar Hero and Rock Band created a new way for audiences to interact with music. Players could simulate playing instruments and singing along to their favorite songs, making the music itself a central element of the gameplay. The rise of karaoke in the 2000s also reflected the growing interest in music and singing as a form of casual entertainment, as well as the increasing availability and accessibility of technology and digital media. Seeing the rise in demand for karaoke, Stingray offered Stingray Karaoke, a licensed karaoke supplier with thousands of songs available. Not a surprise that music crossed gaming in a fructified manner.

Many entrepreneurs took advantage of the crossroad of these art forms. Designed by Montreal’ Audio Kinetic, the product Wwise offers high degree of control over every aspect of game’s audio, from creating and mixing sound effects to implementing dynamic music that responds to player actions and in-game events [9]. Now a standard in the industry, Audio Kinetic is now part of the Sony family [10].

3) 2010s: The shift of (super) power

Music distribution is now mainly digital. Streaming services like Spotify, Apple Music, and SoundCloud are dominating the distribution of music. Users would pay a monthly fee ($10+) in exchange for unlimited listening of any song on the market. In 2018, there were 255 million users of paid subscription accounts which accounted for nearly half of the global recorded music industry revenue of $19.1 billion[11]. While these streaming services would retain most of the revenue generated, artists would only earn cents on the dollar ($0.01 per 1000 listeners)[12]. Streaming was becoming the norm, Spotify the leader.

Simultaneously, the rise in YouTube’s popularity for music fans was due in part to its accessibility and ease of use, as well as its ability to showcase a wide variety of content from both established and up-and-coming artists. As more and more viewers turned to YouTube for their music needs, MTV’s relevance and influence began to wane. It was the end of an era and the birth of the creator economy.

Meanwhile, production kept changing as cloud-based music production became a requirement in the industry since producers could now work on a common project without having to meet or send fraction of samples via third-party services (Dropbox, email, etc.). DAWs adapted to this new reality by permitting its usage to different devices, Band Lab was the solution for mobile phone [13]. Splice’s online sample library provided access to a vast collection of royalty-free audio samples, loops, and pre-sets available on computers and cellphones [14]. Making music was possible everywhere, anytime, on most of devices.

In gaming consoles, motion sensor games entered the market (Xbox Kinect & Wii) attracting not only music hobbyists but also the average music listener that was eager to learn different instrument and rhythm. The rise of Just Dance can be attributed to its wide appeal, strong social aspect, extensive library of songs, and accessibility. With each new release, the game continued to evolve and improve, ensuring that it remained a popular and enjoyable experience for players around the world.

New forms of immersive technologies emerged: virtual reality & blockchain. Felix & Paul Studios, based in Montreal, is a creator of immersive VR entertainment. From Cirque du Soleil events to the Eminem documentary, this grammy-award winning studio allows fans on their VR headset or cellphone to live a new 360-degree experience. Imogen Heap announced her vision for a blockchain-based platform called Mycelia, which aimed to create a fairer and more transparent ecosystem for musicians and other creators[15]. Still experimental, these technologies offered potential to the music community.

Quebec’s Scientific Research and Experimental Development (SRED) tax incentive program, along with other research and development (R&D) & multimedia initiatives, have played a crucial role in fostering innovation and growth in the music technology space in the province during the 2000s, and in the upcoming 2010s, and 2020s. These programs have provided financial support and incentives for businesses to invest in the development of cutting-edge technologies and solutions, contributing to a thriving ecosystem of music tech companies and startups.

4) Roaring Twenties: an era of rapid pace of change and innovation

Social media platforms like TikTok, Instagram and YouTube have become important channels for promoting and sharing music with many artists using these platforms to build their fanbase and connect with their audience. Although, with the proliferation of user-generated content on these platforms, copyright law has become more complex and contentious. As the current laws do not protect (completely) this type of content, many artists and labels have called for reforms to ensure they are fairly compensated for their work.

Local giant Quebecor tries to take back its market share (now owned by streaming services) by launching QUB Musique; a unique streaming platform showcasing mainly French and local music content. Too little too late, the platform was then merged with French Qobuz nearly 18 months after its inception.

As consumers continue to ask for more immersive experiences, virtual and augmented reality technologies are being used to create virtual concerts and interactive music videos on a much larger scale. The VR experience produced by Montreal’s based Moment Factory, titled “Billie Eilish: The World’s a Little Blurry,” is based on Eilish’s documentary film of the same name. It allows users to step into Eilish’s world and experience her music and visuals in a unique and immersive way.

The pandemic brought new ways to distribute music by making concert on video games. For example, Fortnite has become well known for hosting large-scale virtual music events, with notable performances from artists such as Travis Scott, Marshmello, and Ariana Grande. These events are typically free for players to attend and are often accompanied by interactive elements, such as in-game challenges or special cosmetic items that players can earn or purchase[16]. In early 2022, Epic Games acquired BandCamp. Epic said that Bandcamp will play an important role in Epic’s vision to build out a creator marketplace ecosystem for content, technology, games, art, music and more[17].

5) And now what? What is the future of the music industry?

Let’s go back where we start: music industry has always been at the forefront of innovation. And technology will keep evolving, accelerating innovation & bringing new trends in the upcoming years.

The comeback of music videos

With the rise of mixed reality technology, it is now easier than ever to create high-quality visuals & immersive musical experiences. Many experiments have been done, adoption will accelerate with the deployment of XR hardware and 5G network. The advent of these new technologies will also increase the demand for surround audio technology.

New formats, enhanced live concerts, disruptive business models will arise. With the unparalleled talent pool in VFX, gaming, live entertainment and XR, the province of Quebec could benefit from this context. Easy to say, but to make it happen, these sub-sectors of the industry have to gather together, share knowledge and experiment.

The rights to (re)distribution

The backbone technology of the web3 revolution could allow the usage of smart contracts, which are self-executing legal agreements that can automatically enforce the copyright terms. Smart contract promises would then ensure that musicians are paid fairly, proportionally, and transparently for their work. Canadian DJ superstar Deadmau5 is actively engaged in the web3 community (MODA DAO, Audius).

Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are obviously another application of web3. Remember these clones, apes, penguins & punks? In music, NFT has been used for digital merch & collectibles, with mixed results. Too transactional. NFT could/should become more than a digital asset, it could be an exclusive access to a community, a new way to engage fans (remember the fan club, it could now be called DAO!). But more than that, by applying the web3 philosophy of decentralization and ownership, web3 could unlock many opportunities addressing real problems in the music industry; piracy and privacy.

In harmony with (art)ificial creativity