With its sustained growth, the national leader in furniture and appliance home delivery creates a new position and continues to strengthen its leadership.

SHERBROOKE, QC, May 16, 2017 /PRNewswire/ - Ovation Logistics announces that Stéphane Gagné will join its team as Chief Executive Officer. Stéphane's primary role will be to coordinate the company's initiatives in support of its on-going national expansion strategy.

Stéphane Gagné was, until recently, Chief Operating Officer for Audiokinetic, a world leader in technology for audio interactive production, where he managed a multidisciplinary team in product development, sales, marketing and administration located in Montreal, Beijing and Tokyo. He previously acted as Head of Industry at Google for the province of Quebec. He also held management positions for TC Transcontinental and the Metro International group. With an MBA from the London Business School, an engineering degree, and a specialization in project management, Stéphane possesses all the assets that will further strengthen Ovation's foundations and help put in place the necessary elements to support future growth.

"With an increasing number of clients and service points, and with the ever-increasing role that technology plays in our operations, we were looking for a dynamic leader who brings people together, with expertise on both management and technology levels, and Stéphane was the right person to take on this role" according to Claude Boilard, president and co-founder of Ovation Logistics.

Mr. Gagné declared: "It is an honor for me to join such a great team within a company that is ideally positioned to consolidate its leading position on a national level. The solid foundation upon which Ovation's growth strategy is built on and the many new development opportunities make this challenge a very exciting project."

Guy Bessette, chairman of the board of Ovation and managing partner of Entrepreneur Capital adds: "After many years of sustained growth and most promising future prospects, it was time to create a CEO position. Stéphane is a seasoned leader who will be supported by the best experts in home delivery in Canada, and we are confident that this combination will be beneficial for our company, our partners and our clients."

About Ovation Logistics

As the national leader in last mile home delivery, Ovation achieves more than 850 000 deliveries annually across Canada. The company operates more than 60 service centers in eight provinces. Specializing in home delivery of furniture, household appliances and large electronics, Ovation services distinguished national and international retailers and manufacturers. Incorporating the latest and most reliable technologies, Ovation provides optimized logistics support and personalized brand-focused customer experience solutions to both brick and mortar and e-commerce retailers. Ovation was established in Sherbrooke (Quebec) in 1935 and counts today more than 500 collaborators and employees.

http://www.ovationlogistics.com

SOURCE Ovation Logistics Inc.