Chem Rev. 2021 Sep 22; 121(18): 11385–11457.

PMCID: PMC8461619

PMID: 33938724

Translational Applications of Hydrogels

,† ,‡ ,† ,§ ,† ,∥ and *†∥⊥#∇

Santiago Correa

†Materials Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Find articles by Santiago Correa

Abigail K. Grosskopf

‡Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Find articles by Abigail K. Grosskopf

Hector Lopez Hernandez

†Materials Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Find articles by Hector Lopez Hernandez

Doreen Chan

§Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Find articles by Doreen Chan

Anthony C. Yu

†Materials Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Find articles by Anthony C. Yu

Lyndsay M. Stapleton

∥Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Find articles by Lyndsay M. Stapleton

Eric A. Appel

†Materials Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

∥Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

⊥Pediatric Endocrinology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, United States

#ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

∇Woods Institute for the Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Find articles by Eric A. Appel

†Materials Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

‡Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

§Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

∥Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

⊥Pediatric Endocrinology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, United States

#ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

∇Woods Institute for the Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society

Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Abstract

Advances in hydrogel technology have unlocked unique and valuable capabilities that are being applied to a diverse set of translational applications. Hydrogels perform functions relevant to a range of biomedical purposes—they can deliver drugs or cells, regenerate hard and soft tissues, adhere to wet tissues, prevent bleeding, provide contrast during imaging, protect tissues or organs during radiotherapy, and improve the biocompatibility of medical implants. These capabilities make hydrogels useful for many distinct and pressing diseases and medical conditions and even for less conventional areas such as environmental engineering. In this review, we cover the major capabilities of hydrogels, with a focus on the novel benefits of injectable hydrogels, and how they relate to translational applications in medicine and the environment. We pay close attention to how the development of contemporary hydrogels requires extensive interdisciplinary collaboration to accomplish highly specific and complex biological tasks that range from cancer immunotherapy to tissue engineering to vaccination. We complement our discussion of preclinical and clinical development of hydrogels with mechanical design considerations needed for scaling injectable hydrogel technologies for clinical application. We anticipate that readers will gain a more complete picture of the expansive possibilities for hydrogels to make practical and impactful differences across numerous fields and biomedical applications.

1. Introduction

Since their discovery in the 1960s,1 synthetic hydrogels have become increasingly useful for engineering biological systems. The enthusiasm over this technology is evident in the explosion of research publications over the past 60 years ( ): from just 1,000 total publications by 1982 to more than 100,000 total publications by 2020! The past three years alone have seen >10,000 publications per year, and with only a few months into 2021 there were already more than 600 new articles indexed in the Web of Science by the time of this publication. Here, we seek to provide a resource for researchers both new and familiar with this technology, delving into many of the fundamentals and open questions of the field and shining a spotlight on both developed and developing applications for these exciting materials.

The explosion of hydrogel technologies has made significant contributions in biomedical applications that impact the day-to-day lives of millions of people. For example, hydrogels made one of the most visible (or perhaps we should say invisible?) contributions to modern life in the form of soft contact lenses, creating a new class of optically tunable soft materials and establishing what is today a multibillion dollar industry.2 Early studies also revealed the usefulness of engineered hydrogels for delivering diverse drugs,3−5 establishing a field for local controlled release of bioactive compounds.6−10 In the 1970s, surgeons recognized the utility of hydrogels for reconstructive surgeries,11,12 and by the 1990s, hydrogels were becoming a foundational technology for tissue regeneration.13−16 The history of hydrogel materials is well reviewed,17−19 and the consistent theme has been that hydrogels continue to find new and exciting applications as the underlying technology improves ( ). Emerging applications for hydrogels today include device coatings,20 environmental engineering,21 soft robotics,22 and adoptive cell therapy.23

Hydrogels come in many flavors, with diverse capabilities and limitations, but in general these systems can all be described as cross-linked macromolecular networks that retain a significant amount of water. As much as 99% of the weight of a hydrogel can be water, which makes these materials quite friendly to water-enriched biological environments such as the human body. In earlier technologies, harsh mechanisms for macromolecular cross-linking (e.g., toxic agents, radiation, etc.)24−28 meant that gelation needed to occur prior to introducing gels to biological systems. Unsurprisingly, this limited the bioengineering applications of hydrogels to superficial environments such as the surface of the eye, an open wound, or an exposed surgical bed.

Subsequent work developed safer cross-linking mechanisms, which began a trend toward triggering gelation in situ after injection, providing a minimally invasive way of administering hydrogels to practically any organ or tissue.29,30 The most biocompatible iterations of these injectable in situ gelling platforms use specific cues from the body to trigger gelation: physiological temperature,31 pH,32 or ionic strength.33 Unlike earlier hydrogels that relied on covalent cross-links, some of these hydrogels have self-healing properties and possess mechanical properties akin to native tissue, capable of countering natural forces and stresses of a body in motion.

More recently, shear-thinning hydrogels were developed that are formed through dynamic and reversible cross-linking.34 For example, physical hydrogels use noncovalent interactions (e.g., supramolecular chemistries) between soluble building blocks in order to self-assemble into a dynamic, reversibly cross-linked network.35,36 Likewise, reversible covalent cross-linking strategies can yield dynamic networks with similar properties.37,38 These “dynamic hydrogels” assembled through reversible cross-links afford the unique property of being injectable even after having formed a gel, due to their shear-thinning and self-healing behaviors. Current research on dynamic hydrogels has revealed novel and useful capabilities that have opened new frontiers for this technology. For example, they can stabilize delicate protein and cellular cargoes to combat pharmaceutical cold-chain limitations,39 they can adhere strongly to tissues to form protective barriers and bandages,40 and they can be delivered through spray applications to coat complex biological geometries.41

While dynamic hydrogels are opening up new translational possibilities, significant progress is also being made to introduce unprecedented levels of functionality into biomaterials. This includes features such as nanoscale patterning of bioactive molecules,42,43 programmable drug release,44,45 and stimuli-responsive behaviors.46,47 As a consequence, much of the research in this space is trending toward increasingly interdisciplinary projects that recruit the expertise of nanotechnologists, chemists, protein engineers, and synthetic biologists to develop sophisticated multifunctional hydrogels. These novel systems include the rise of programmable behavior in hydrogels reminiscent to the behaviors we now associate with digital technology.48 For example, significant advancements have been made to transform simple PEG-based hydrogels into responsive systems based on Boolean-logic gating decisions (e.g., YES, AND, OR operations) by incorporating functional peptides and proteins into the hydrogel network.45,49,50 Programmable biotechnologies are already leading to smart injectable materials with the potential to degrade or release drugs based on either endogenous or exogenous triggers.51,52 As these capabilities continue to mature, multifunctional and programmable hydrogels may provide the technological foundation for platforms that can engage more effectively with the complex, multistage biological events that govern processes such as tissue regeneration and immunity.

As the capabilities of hydrogels have dramatically increased over time, they have unsurprisingly become useful tools for a wide range of fields and disciplines. Here, we primarily focus on the contributions of injectable hydrogel systems to a range of biomedical applications, with an emphasis on dynamic hydrogels. We begin with a discussion of mechanical considerations for injectable hydrogels and specifically how rheological characterization of these systems is critical for developing technologies with translational potential. From there, we provide a general discussion on strategies for delivering diverse therapeutic cargo, such as small molecule drugs, nucleic acids, and proteins. We focus subsequent discussion of drug delivery toward an emerging area of intense research—that of cancer immunotherapy—which presents highly complex and novel challenges for controlled multidrug delivery and engagement of immune cells. In the following section, we summarize key considerations for designing hydrogels meant to engage with and manipulate cells. We then review the extensive work on hydrogels for cellular therapies, spanning their use as both tissue scaffolds and cellular carriers for applications ranging from tissue regeneration to adoptive cell therapy. We then turn our attention toward emergent and promising biomedical frontiers outside of drug delivery and cellular therapies. We review how the capabilities of dynamic, shear-thinning hydrogels are now giving rise to a class of tools that prevent or mitigate complications that can arise from surgery. We also discuss new developments for hydrogels as coatings for implantable devices to improve biocompatibility and introduce novel functionalities. We round out our discussion of biomedical applications with a review of the current clinical landscape for injectable hydrogels, with a particular focus on hydrogels in active clinical trials and current limitations relating to manufacturing and scalability. We also highlight how the lessons learned from biomedical hydrogels are informing advances in new application areas in agriculture, water preservation, and cosmetics. Overall, we anticipate that readers will gain a greater perspective on the range of possibilities available for hydrogel technologies to make substantive contributions to society, as well as the need for vibrant interdisciplinary collaboration to fully translate this potential into real world change.

2. Mechanical Consideration for Designing Injectable Hydrogels

Hydrogels are a broad class of materials that exhibit mechanical and chemical properties that are especially useful for a variety of medical interventions. Noninjectable hydrogels represent the bulk of the literature as they were the first to be discovered and developed, and their usefulness for both drug and cell delivery led to broad enthusiasm for developing hydrogels for biomedical applications.53−56 However, static covalent cross-links ultimately introduced translational challenges for clinical implementation, since traditional covalent gels require invasive surgical implantation to access nonsuperficial tissues. Additionally, new manufacturing processes, such as 3D printing, require dynamic rheological properties during processing, disqualifying the use of traditional covalent hydrogels.57 Interest in further developing the translational potential of hydrogels led to innovative methods to implant them through minimally invasive means, of which the most clinically relevant is injection through a needle or catheter ( ).

Initial success for injectable systems came about with systems that could gel in situ, which allowed liquid polymer solutions to be injected into tissues where they subsequently solidify. For example, dual-syringe devices can coinject two solutions that react to form a hydrogel when mixed.58−60 Similarly, microencapsulation of gel-inducing molecules could slow down gelation to provide an injection “window” after combining the components of the gel.61 Alternatively, stimuli-responsive polymers have been developed that undergo sol–gel transitions based on environmental factors such as temperature, pH, and ionic strength. These systems are engineered to remain liquid under nonphysiological conditions (e.g., room-temperature, acidic pH, salt-free) but solidify when introduced into the body (e.g., 37 °C, neutral pH, millimolar salt concentration).62−64 While these systems are injectable, many experience problems with gelation kinetics. For example, they may gel too quickly and solidify within the syringe or gel too slowly and prematurely release cargo in vivo, and poor mixing may further cause heterogeneous gelation.62,65−67

To overcome these limitations, significant attention has been devoted to dynamic hydrogels, which can seamlessly transition back and forth from solid-like to liquid-like during injection thanks to their shear-thinning and self-healing capabilities. These materials, which are gelled within the syringe before injection, additionally have the ability to stabilize drugs over broad temperature ranges and maintain homogeneously mixed cell solutions.68−70 Here, we define dynamic hydrogels as any hydrated polymer network cross-linked via reversible chemistries, which can include both covalent and noncovalent chemistries. Early reports of the unique rheology of dynamic networks emerged in the late 1980s with polysaccharide-based networks covalently cross-linked through boric esters, which identified intriguing self-healing capabilities.71−73 However, it was only in the early 2000s that noncovalent chemistries began to be leveraged to make shear-thinning supramolecular hydrogels based on cyclodextrins,74 engineered peptides,75 and the physical interactions resulting from biopolymer blends.76 Although they can be prepared through diverse chemistries, dynamic hydrogels share unique rheological properties that are directly related to their translational potential as injectable systems. In this section, we will review the principle rheological considerations that ought to be taken into account when designing an injectable dynamic hydrogel, as well as a range of techniques to properly characterize these complex systems.

2.1. Rheological Considerations for Injectable Dynamic Hydrogels

Injectable hydrogels have enabled minimally invasive strategies to deliver therapeutic drug and cellular cargo without surgical implantation. The applicability of hydrogels in clinical settings is seemingly limitless, from applications that require localization in different regions of the body to the delivery of a wide range of cargo. Importantly, the rheological properties of these hydrogels are constrained by the need for administration by direct injection or catheter delivery. Here, we focus on and discuss the rheological properties of existing injectable hydrogels and emphasize the need for determining property–function relationships to facilitate their design for clinical translation.

Injectable therapeutic hydrogels must be compatible with a three-stage administration process ( ). First, their formulation must be compatible with the incorporation of drug, cellular, or other therapeutic cargo (e.g., the hydrogel must not react with or otherwise compromise the bioactivity of cargo). Second, they must be injectable. Third, they should provide the desired terminal function within the body, which ranges broadly from cell expansion to controlled release of molecular cargo of diverse types. Typically, the terminal function within the body is the key target in the design process, yet the performance of the hydrogel during formulation and administration must not be neglected. From a translational perspective, the injectability of a particular formulation may change as the relevant dimensions and geometries of the injection process changes when moving from the lab to the clinic. Going forward, it is helpful to provide an explicit definition of “injectability”. Here, we define injectability as the capability of a formulation to flow at a clinically relevant flow rate through an administration needle, catheter, or autoinjector using clinically relevant applied pressures. According to this definition, injectability is necessarily dependent on the intended application and will vary depending on the needle gauge and length (i.e., subcutaneous vs catheter injections) and other processing constraints (e.g., administration volumes, syringe geometries, and desired flow rates).

The application-specific requirements imposed by each stage of the administration process can impose paradoxical constraints on the rheological properties of injectable materials, simultaneously requiring flowability for injection and solid-like retention at the injection site (e.g., sustained localized delivery). There have been several hydrogel compositions with varying chemistries and cross-linking modalities developed that address this paradoxical constraint and are capable of both injectability and solid-like retention after injection.

For a material to flow, it must demonstrate liquid-like behavior, whereby the constituent molecules are able to move past each other, under relevant processing conditions. Most covalent materials cannot flow because their covalent bonds prevent relative movement of their constituent molecules. Consequently, “static” covalent hydrogels require the injection of prepolymer systems that gel upon injection or stimuli-responsive polymers that cross-link in response to temperature, UV, pH, or other external stimuli. More recently, there has been an increased interest in the use of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels as injectable materials.77−80 The specific cross-linking strategies vary and include both dynamic covalent and noncovalent supramolecular cross-linking, but generally these approaches imbue hydrogels with dynamic, yielding, and self-healing rheological responses. The various cross-linking strategies and description of the hydrogels for the delivery of therapeutics have been outlined in several reviews.36,81−83 We highlight that although dynamic hydrogel compositions vary, they demonstrate similar rheological functions. In general, the physical cross-links create a hydrogel network with solid-like material properties under static conditions. Yet, when deformed, the dynamic cross-links can be disrupted, dissipating stress and resulting in liquid-like behavior. Since the cross-links are reversible, they can reassociate after deformation to restore the network structure and its solid-like behavior.

The rapid development of dynamic hydrogels for injectable material platforms has enabled new therapeutic strategies without the need for in situ chemical reaction strategies. However, our understanding of structure–property-function relationships (which relate a hydrogel’s rheological properties to their functional performance) for dynamically cross-linked hydrogels is still rather poorly developed.84−86 Dynamically cross-linked hydrogels are complex fluids, where their reversible cross-links result in bulk material behaviors that include yielding, shear-thinning, thixotropy, and viscoelasticity. To date, designing injectable hydrogels from dynamically cross-linked networks with the desired combination of properties for new applications remains challenging. Indeed, researchers in the rheological community have focused on creating engineering design strategies for dynamically cross-linked hydrogels.87−91 For injectable therapeutic applications, there is a desire to design hydrogel materials with tunable viscoelasticity to deliver stem cells and control their differentiation,92−98 a need for strategies to control the release of small molecular cargo,36,77,81,83,99−101 and a push toward materials that provide stabilization of pharmaceuticals.102

With structure–property–function relationships in place, it becomes easier to answer important design questions before heading to the bench. Questions such as how does one design a hydrogel’s terminal function (i.e., local depot formation for sustained release of molecular cargo) without compromising performance in formulation or during administration by injection? How can one identify if an existing hydrogel formulation would meet the demands of a new application, eliminating the need for starting anew with laborious and costly trial-and-error efforts? Unveiling property–function relationships facilitates the design process of injectable hydrogels. Knowledge of these relationships allows for rapidly identifying and satisfying the functional constraints across a broad variety of administration conditions while optimizing the performance of the injectable hydrogel in vivo. The following sections provide a concise review of key property-function relationships of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels for injectable therapeutic applications. We briefly discuss structure–property relationships in the context of the rheological properties that are introduced but leave a detailed discussion to other excellent reviews.90,98,103,104 Since cross-linking strategies and network structure result in similar rheological behaviors (i.e., shear thinning, yield stress), the property–function relationships shown here are useful across many hydrogel compositions. Next, we discuss rheological characterization strategies for complex fluids, such as physically cross-linked hydrogels, and provide information about best practices during the characterization process. We intend these sections to help scientists and engineers design future biomaterials and also highlight key areas where more investigations are needed.

2.2. Pre- and Postinjection Constraints of Injectable Hydrogels

The applications of injectable hydrogels dictate the requisite properties for the hydrogel during formulation and after injection. The details of the requirements for these applications are left to the other sections of this review. From a rheological perspective, the rheological modifications required by each application must be considered alongside the constraints of injectability. A common requirement is the localization of a hydrogel after injection, which depends strongly on the rate at which the hydrogel self-heals after injection. During injection, the high shear destroys the structure of the dynamic hydrogel. After injection, most dynamic hydrogels do not return to their initial viscosity immediately but rather demonstrate a recovery of viscosity over time.92,96,104−110 The transient recovery of viscosity after the cessation of flow (i.e., once in the implantation site after injection) is called thixotropy. Thixotropic behavior in dynamic hydrogels depends heavily on the cross-linking motif, whereby some motifs result in hydrogels that require a significant amount of time to recover (strongly thixotropic), while some show only mild thixotropy and recover their properties rapidly (weakly thixotropic). For injectable drug delivery applications, the thixotropy of a hydrogel provides valuable insight for the time scales over which a hydrogel will be susceptible to burst release or flowing away from the site of injection before establishing a depot.

2.3. Relevant Rheological Properties for Injectability

The viscosity of a hydrogel is related to its injectability, elucidating the constraints that injectability places on the viscosity of injectable biomaterials. For clinical applications, injectable hydrogels must be delivered through a needle or catheter to the site of injection. The injectability of a fluid depends on how much pressure is required to drive this process of injection over relevant time frames. This pressure is a function of the fluid viscosity, injection geometry, and desired flow rate. Here, we review how injectability constrains the allowable rheological properties of injectable hydrogels. To elucidate these constraints on rheological properties, it is important to understand the physical process of injection. Injection, in its simplest form, is the flow of a fluid through a circular tube of constant diameter and length. Often, there is a maximum pressure that can be applied and a minimum flow rate that is desired. A syringe injection, for example, would be limited to the amount of force the average healthcare personnel could comfortably apply to a syringe plunger.111 An autoinjector on the other hand would be limited by the maximum pressure the mechanism could generate. Intuitively, there is a limit to the viscosity (i.e., resistance to flow) of the materials which can be injected under a prescribed set of injection conditions and geometries. Therefore, it is critical to understand how viscosity—and its dependence on shear rate—affects injectability, enabling researchers to use simple rheological measurements to design their materials for injectability.

Steady state flow models are used to model the relationship between a hydrogel’s viscosity and the pressure required to inject it ( a).112−114 In the case of polymer solutions and physically associated hydrogel materials, the viscosity often obeys a power law (eq 1) that is described by the consistency index, K, and shear-thinning parameter, n.115,116 A shear-thinning parameter of n = 1 describes a Newtonian fluid with constant viscosity as the shear rate is increased. A value of n < 1 represents a shear-thinning fluid with a viscosity that decreases as the shear rate is increased. Assuming power law shear-thinning behavior, the constitutive relationship shown in eq 2 can be used to describe the relationship between the shear stress and shear rate on the fluid. The governing equation for steady state flow through a pipe (eq 3) is derived using this constitutive relationship to model the injection pressure (P) as a function of flow rate (Q), radius (R), length (l), and viscosity.117−119 This model has been used by Paxton et al. to predict the bioprinting window for a variety of 3D printing materials.113 Almendinger et al. validated the model for shear-thinning antibody solutions and used it to predict the extrusion pressure in a variety of injection scenarios.112,120−122 Our group validated the model for physically cross-linked hydrogels, demonstrating its applicability for two physical hydrogels with distinct cross-linking mechanisms (polymer–nanoparticle interactions and ionic cross-linking).123

1

2

3

In addition to validating the model, our work also demonstrated the utility of using the model inversely for materials design to elucidate the consistency indexes and shear-thinning parameters that correspond to hydrogel injectability across applications with varying geometries or flow rate constraints. Ashby style plots of the consistency index vs shear-thinning parameter were used in combination with the model developed in eq 3 to reveal a parameter space for readily injectable hydrogels under typical process constraints for syringe injection ( b).85,87−89

It is therefore critical that in the development of injectable biomaterials, researchers employ flow models accompanied by rheological characterization to avoid developing material platforms with properties that could never scale to the clinic. This is perhaps most notable for deep-tissue delivery of dynamic hydrogels, which can impose significantly different constraints in a preclinical model versus clinical practice. For example, the primary model for oncological research is mice, where delivery to any organ is possible through a short 0.5–1.0 in. syringe. In contrast, the equivalent in a human patient could require injection through a long catheter and necessitate injection forces that are impractical. To avoid these types of pitfalls on the road to translation, it is imperative that the flow properties of dynamic hydrogels be measured within application relevant shear rate/shear stress regimes to determine the appropriate constitutive relationship for each hydrogel. It is important to note that injections through small diameter needles can result in shear rates which are dramatically higher than the typical shear rates range used for characterization on a rheometer ( ). For example, oncological treatments have improved patient comfort and are delivered at flow rates between 1 and 2.3 mL/min.124,125

4

Using eq 4—which describes the maximum shear rate for a Newtonian fluid in a pipe—a flow rate of 2.3 mL/min in a 27-gauge needle (standard for subcutaneous injections) results in shear rates up to 42 × 103 s–1. Researchers should be cautious of extrapolating constitutive relationships beyond the range of characterization, as this can lead to significant errors and often poor approximations for fluids as complex as dynamically cross-linked hydrogels.123

There are limitations to the model presented in eq 3, which simplifies the flow of these hydrogels by assuming a simple power law shear-thinning response (eq 2), steady state conditions, no slip, a negligible yield stress under the flow conditions, and negligible effects of fluid extensibility.123 While these assumptions help make the problem simpler to analyze, there may indeed be cases where these simplifications fail to capture the relevant phenomena necessary to describe the flow of more complex fluids. Good practice is to validate the flow model within the target flow regimes and with the appropriate rheological data measured within the correct shear-rates. In the rare cases where the simple model in eq 3 fails to adequately describe the flow behavior, there is extensive literature on the flow of non-Newtonian fluids that should be explored.114,117−119,126−128 Alternative models have been developed to account for slip, significant yield stresses, and nonconstant geometries, though these models should be validated with the target materials and desired flow regimes prior to broad utilization by the community.

2.4. Rheological Characterization of Injectable Hydrogels

As we have shown, the rheological properties of injectable hydrogels dictate the function and ultimately a significant fraction of the performance as injectable therapeutic strategies. Here, we provide a brief review of characterization methods for measuring the rheological behavior of injectable hydrogels. For an in-depth discussion of these methods, we point the reader to reports by Ewoldt,129 Larson,115 and Macosko.116 Dynamic hydrogels demonstrate rheological behavior that may comprise a combination of yielding, shear-thinning, thixotropic, viscoelastic, and extensible behaviors.130−135 Consequently, their characterization is nontrivial and requires a combination of rheological tests to characterize comprehensively. Here, we present the state-of-the-art rheological methods for measuring the viscoelastic and flow behaviors of injectable hydrogels.

2.4.1. Viscoelasticity

The viscoelasticity of a hydrogel is most often measured using dynamic mechanical analysis to measure the bulk elastic and viscous responses of a hydrogel to an imposed oscillatory shear strain or stress.116 Methods also exist to measure the viscoelasticity of hydrogels at various length scales, which may be important in cell-based applications where they interact with the hydrogel at different length scales than the bulk.136,137 In bulk oscillatory measurements, the amplitude and frequency of the imposed oscillations are varied, and the oscillatory response of the hydrogel is measured. Small amplitude oscillatory shear (SAOS) is the most common experimental method for measuring a hydrogel’s viscoelastic response. The oscillatory response measured in response to the oscillatory input is analyzed and typically represented through dynamic storage and loss moduli ( a), which describe the elastic and viscous responses of the hydrogel, respectively. When the storage modulus is greater than the loss modulus, the material is said to be solid-like. When the loss modulus is greater than the storage modulus, the material is said to be liquid-like. The storage and loss moduli are only well-defined when experiments are performed within the linear viscoelastic regime ( ), where the hydrogel network responds linearly to the imposed strain or stress amplitude.

Frequency sweeps are performed at a constant strain or stress amplitude, and the frequency of the oscillation is varied to probe the material’s time-dependent viscoelasticity. For irreversible covalent hydrogels, solid-like behavior is observed for all frequencies without any significant frequency dependence due to the permanent cross-links in the network. For dynamic hydrogels, the response to oscillatory shear can be more complex, showing both solid and liquid like responses that depend on the frequency of oscillation. The point at which the storage modulus is equal to the loss modulus is the crossover frequency and denotes the transition between solid and liquid like states. In general, the viscoelastic response is a function of the thermodynamics and kinetics of the physical cross-link and network topology.133,135,138−143 Craig et al. have demonstrated for nonentangled physically cross-linked networks that the relaxation time (τ) of the hydrogel is equal to the dissociation rate of the physical cross-link.142 In a simple system, where the only cross-links originate from physical cross-links, the equilibrium constant (Keq) of the interaction describes the equilibrium concentration of cross-links and therefore the magnitude of the rubbery plateau. Though not discussed in detail here, stress relaxation experiments—where a constant deformation is applied and the temporal decrease in stress is monitored—are also a valuable experimental tool for measuring the relaxation time (τ) of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels.115 Stress relaxation experiments are especially useful when the relaxation time is longer than the measurable relaxation times in SAOS experiments.

Time sweep SAOS measurements—where the amplitude and frequency of oscillation are kept constant—are useful when measuring the transition of a hydrogel or its components from liquid to solid or vice versa, such as in the gelation of covalent and physically cross-linked materials. The oscillatory response is measured at a constant frequency and amplitude over an extended period of time. For irreversible covalent materials, mixing of two components can be performed immediately before measuring the materials viscoelastic response. The temporal evolution of the dynamic moduli reveals the kinetics of gelation, where the gelation point is assigned to the time at which the storage modulus surpasses the loss modulus at a crossover time. For dynamically cross-linked hydrogels, time sweep SAOS measurements are used to probe their self-healing behavior. The amplitude of the applied shear strain or stress is transitioned from low-to-high or high-to-low to probe the response of the dynamic cross-links. The temporal viscoelastic response of a dynamic hydrogel is measured to quantify the kinetics of recovery and degree of self-healing. This process is often alternated and repeated several times to demonstrate reversible self-healing of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels.

For injectable applications, dynamic hydrogels typically undergo transitions from a static equilibrium state to a nonlinear flow state and then return to a static equilibrium state. The properties of the hydrogels during and after these transitions influence their performance as injectable therapeutics. Measuring these properties, however, is challenging due to the transition from the linear to nonlinear regime. Nonlinear oscillatory shear measurements that go beyond the linear viscoelastic regime, such as large amplitude oscillatory shear (LAOS), have been a recent area of research focus.86,144−150 The storage and loss moduli become ill-defined in the nonlinear regime, and methods for quantifying a hydrogels’ response are more challenging. There have been recent advances in the analysis of nonlinear rheological data using Fourier transform analysis methods and a sequence of physical process methods, which provide more insight into the nonlinear properties of injectable biomaterials.

2.4.2. Flow Rheology

The flow properties of a hydrogel are measured using a rheometer or capillary viscometer. In these instruments, a simple shear flow is applied to measure the relationship between the shear rate and shear stress of a fluid. This relationship is shown in a flow curve (and is extracted through an analysis of the imposed viscometric flows).116 A typical flow curve for a yielding, physically cross-linked hydrogel is shown in ( a). The viscosity is the ratio of the stress and shear rate and can be constant across shear rates (Newtonian) or be shear rate dependent (non-Newtonian). This section will discuss the acquisition of a steady state flow curve, introduce the important features of a flow curve for injectable hydrogels, and discuss the measurement transient thixotropic behaviors (time-dependent change in properties). Typical flow curves for physically cross-linked hydrogels show three distinct regimes: (1) preyield, (2) yielding, and (3) flow. We highlight that although discussion about a true yield stress has been a long contentious area of discourse in the scientific literature, the engineering reality of its effects is readily evident for injectable hydrogels.130,151−153

In a rheometer, an angular velocity is applied to a rotating geometry, and the resulting torque on the geometry is measured—or vice versa. With a known geometry, such as parallel plates or a cone-and-plate, the angular velocity is converted to shear rate and the torque is converted to stress. In a capillary viscometer, a constant flow rate is applied, and the pressure required to drive the flow is measured. The shear stress is determined from the geometry and pressure, and the shear rate is calculated from the geometry, flow rate, and pressure using the Weissenberg–Rabinowitsch–Mooney analysis.116,154 For Newtonian fluids, the shear rate is a function of the flow rate and channel geometry. For non-Newtonian fluids, the shear rate is also a function of the fluid’s viscosity in addition to the flow rate and channel geometry. Deciding between a rheometer and viscometer depends on the viscosity of the fluids being measured and on the shear rates that are of interest—outlined by Pipe et al.154 Generally, it is simpler to measure high-shear-rate flow curves using a capillary viscometer. In rheometers, there are significant challenges at high shear rates. The shear rate in rheometers is proportional to (gap size)−1 and is increased by decreasing the gap size between the two shearing surfaces. As the gap size is decreased to increase the shear rate, significant errors arise due to geometrical imperfections. Rheometers also suffer from radial migration of the sample and subsequent ejection of a sample at high shear rates. Capillary viscometers provide an alternative strategy for measuring the viscosity of fluids at high shear rates and use a closed capillary that is not prone to technical issues such as sample ejection. Regardless of the measurement technique used, the outcome is a measurement of the stress–shear rate relationship of a fluid.

The yield stress demarcates the minimum required stress necessary to induce flow for the fluid, and several strategies for measuring it have been developed.153,155,156 Here, we review the use of flow data to measure the yield stress. Using a stress vs shear rate curve ( a), the yield stress manifests as a nonzero intercept with the stress axis. The yield stress is then calculated using a Herschel–Bulkley model (eq 5) that is fit to the stress-shear rate data. Here, σy is the yield stress with units in Pascals, n is the shear-thinning parameter (unitless), and K is the consistency index with units in Pascal-secondsn. The modified Herschel–Bulkley model is often preferred because it yields fitting parameters with constant units and more intuitive meaning. The consistency index is replaced with γ̇critical, which is the critical shear rate with units in s–1 at which the flow stress is double that of the yield stress. Alternatively, some authors suggest plotting viscosity vs stress ( b), where a dramatic decrease of several orders of magnitude in the viscosity is observed for a small increase in the stress.130,131,152,156−158 Here, the stress at which the viscosity decreases is assigned as the yield stress. In plots of viscosity vs shear rate ( c), the preyield regime appears as shear-thinning. Before the yielding event, the stress is constant at increasing shear rates, resulting in a viscosity which appears to decrease.115 On a log–log plot of viscosity vs shear rate, this phenomenon is observed as a slope of −1. In practice, the visualization of rheological data showing flow data with plots of viscosity vs shear rate alone makes it challenging to understand important details about the rheological response of a dynamic hydrogel. For this reason, it is recommended that—at a minimum—both stress vs shear rate and viscosity vs shear rate data be shown when characterizing yield stress fluids. The flow curve (stress vs shear rate) shows yielding, while the viscosity versus shear rate plot of the flow regime more clearly shows the degree of shear-thinning for the hydrogel.

5

Postyield, physical hydrogels flow with shear-thinning behavior, where viscosity decreases as the shear rate is increased. Seen as a series of progressively decreasing slopes on a stress vs shear rate plot and as a negative, linear decline (slope = n – 1, where n is between 0 and 1) in a log-base plot of viscosity vs shear rate ( c).115 In a yielding hydrogel, the Hershel–Bulkley model provides information about the non-Newtonian viscosity of a hydrogel, where the consistency index and shear-thinning parameter describe the power law shear thinning of the hydrogel in flow. Alternatively, the flow portion of the viscosity versus shear rate curve can be fit to a power law (eq 1) to find the consistency index and shear-thinning parameter fits. It is critical that only the flow portion of the viscosity versus shear rate plot is used when fitting a power law to the rheological data of a dynamic hydrogel. In general, because it is difficult to distinguish between the preyield and flow regime, it is important to be cautious when demarcating the flow regime in viscosity vs shear rate plots before measuring the degree of shear thinning with a model fit ( c).

When measuring a flow curve, it is critical to consider the effects of thixotropy and take appropriate precautions with test protocols. Intuitively, materials that are strongly thixotropic have a significant delay in restructuring, resulting in a transient response until equilibrium is reached during a deformation ( a). For dynamically cross-linked systems—which possess both solid-like and liquid-like behaviors—the dynamics of the cross-links and network often result in transient material response when changing the shear rate, especially before or near the yield point. It is common to observe an overshoot in the viscosity ( b) on the startup of shear as the network structure yields and breaks down to the new equilibrium state.109,157 At faster shear rates, the viscosity overshoot is more pronounced and depends on the yielding and relaxation behavior of the material. c, shows the viscosity of a thixotropic material when the applied stress is instantly decreased (flow cessation). Instead of the viscosity increasing instantly, the viscosity slowly increases as the structure within the material rebuilds. The recovery of the viscosity can be fit to an exponential to determine the characteristic thixotropic time scales.109 The phenomena observed upon the sudden application or removal of shear shown in b and c probe similar phenomena as described in self-healing SAOS experiments discussed above. Authors will often choose between either self-healing SAOS experiments or flow cessation experiments to demonstrate reversible self-healing.

Experimentally, thixotropy can significantly affect the acquisition of a flow curve, making it challenging to determine the equilibrium viscosities, shear-thinning, and yielding behavior of materials.156,157 Flow experiments that do not account for thixotropy are often irreproducible and can demonstrate significant hysteresis ( d). A simple strategy for measuring the equilibrium flow curve is to perform flow experiments using stepwise changes in the stress or shear rate and not ramped protocols.109 Stepwise experiments can be designed to apply a deformation until equilibrium is reached before taking a measurement.115

2.5. Outlook for Rheological Characterization of Injectable Hydrogels

In this section, we’ve highlighted the importance of functional constraints on the rheological behavior of dynamically cross-linked hydrogels. The constraints are often paradoxical, requiring higher yield stresses or viscosities for localization upon injection, yet also demand low viscosities to allow for facile injection. Here, we’ve reviewed the property–function relationship between the rheological properties of power-law shear-thinning fluids and the pressure required for injection. These relationships elucidate materials design targets for future injectable material platforms, specifically target viscosities which allow for facile injection at the shear rates relevant to the clinic. Designing these materials requires careful and rigorous characterization of viscoelastic and flow properties, which include viscoelasticity, shear-thinning, yielding, and thixotropy. We’ve briefly provided a survey of the more standard characterization techniques and point the reader to some reliable resources that provide a more rigorous description of the techniques. Most notably, stress relaxation and creep experiments are critical for understanding the long-time relaxation behaviors of materials and are not suitably characterized using SAOS. Together, this section provides the reader with a foundation to understand how the rheological behavior of existing hydrogels may translate to a desired function within their application. As more hydrogels are developed in the field of therapeutic delivery and new challenges arise, the property–function relationships shown here will enable more effective materials selection strategies to down-select materials and create rheological targets for new applications.

3. Hydrogels for Drug Delivery

Shortly after Wichterle and Lim described the first synthetic hydrogel,1 researchers began engineering hydrogels to deliver drugs locally and for extended periods of time.159−161 Hydrogel platforms for drug delivery have steadily evolved in their sophistication, expanding beyond synthetic, covalently cross-linked systems toward a hugely diverse set of biomaterials platforms. Alongside these exciting materials developments, the rise of mathematical models that describe the release of drugs from hydrogels and other biomaterials has become an important aspect for designing these systems and has been reviewed in depth.162−164 In particular, these models can guide the design of drug carriers so that they can meet the requirements of a particular application or they can help researchers elucidate the transport mechanisms that govern release kinetics from novel formulations. Many empirical, semiempirical, and numerical methods have been developed to describe transport from biomaterials. In particular, power law approaches, such as the Ritger–Peppas and Korsmeyer–Peppas models,165,166 have proven to be very useful for modeling controlled release of drug cargo from hydrogels.

By locally drugging target tissues, hydrogel drug carriers provide compelling safety benefits by reducing drug exposure in off-target tissue. Cancer therapies in particular stand to benefit considerably from this type of highly focused drug exposure.167 While hydrogels can locally focus drug exposure, they can also sustain a steady release rate of drugs over a prolonged period of time (e.g., hours, days, weeks, or months depending on the formulation). This sustained release of drugs is especially beneficial for reducing the number of doses required to treat a patient over time, which is promising for treating chronic diseases requiring lifelong medication, such as diabetes. Sustained release kinetics also appear to provide specific opportunities to enhance the efficacy of certain therapies, such as vaccines for infectious disease.168 Finally, the mechanical properties and overall biocompatibility of hydrogels allows them to integrate well into soft tissues and serve as the eventual scaffolding for endogenous cells as they degrade—traits that enhance their utility for a range of regenerative applications.

Overall, the value of carefully designed hydrogel drug carriers in biomedical applications is expansive and likely to be quite impactful. In particular, we focus on injectable hydrogel systems in this section, which for our purposes includes hydrogels that gel in situ as well as shear-thinning hydrogels. There are several recent reviews that cover this area in depth from either the materials or clinical perspective,78,167,169−171 and here we provide a hybrid view with an emphasis on the interdisciplinary nature of this type of research, in particular, the need for thoughtful materials design to be coupled with robust biological rationales and preclinical evaluation.

3.1. Foundations of Hydrogel Drug Delivery

The process of mass transport through hydrogels is essential for understanding how drug (and even cellular) cargo will move through these materials. Various properties influence mass transport, with some of the most salient being whether the hydrogel exhibits macroscopic architecture, such as porosity, and how tightly cross-linked the polymer network is, which gives rise to the hydrogel mesh size ( ). Critically, the movement of cargo inside of a hydrogel depends strongly on the relationship between the cargo’s hydrodynamic diameter and the hydrogel mesh size ( ). Depending on the ratio between these two features, cargo release from hydrogels may be diffusion-dependent, erosion-dependent, or dependent on both mechanisms. In general, diffusion-dependent release occurs over shorter timeframes, ranging from hours to days, while erosion-based approaches can extend release out to weeks or months.172 Prior to delving into cargo-specific considerations, we will briefly review the behavior of cargo in hydrogels as a function of hydrogel mesh size and erosion kinetics.

In many hydrogel systems, the mesh size can be tuned to regulate the release of cargo, with reported sizes ranging from single-digit to hundreds of nanometers.172 Intuitively, if the mesh size is much larger than a drug’s hydrodynamic diameter, then the drug can freely diffuse through the network with minimal steric hindrance. Under these conditions, diffusion is the dominant mechanism for release, and the diffusivity of the cargo inside the gel may be similar to its diffusivity in bulk solution. When this is the case, drug release can be quite rapid, with the cargo releasing completely from the hydrogel in hours or days. However, the diffusion of molecules can be strongly affected by nearby surfaces and substrates, which has led to active research on modeling and understanding the concept of hindered diffusion.173,174 As a result, even if a drug is smaller than the effective mesh size of a hydrogel, it may very well diffuse more slowly than it would if it were simply in free solution. If the hydrogel mesh size is comparable to the hydrodynamic diameter of the drug, then diffusion can be slowed down considerably, but it still remains an important contributor to release, alongside erosion kinetics ( b).

In contrast, if the mesh size is smaller than the hydrodynamic diameter of the cargo, then the cargo is sterically hindered and cannot move through the hydrogel—leaving it essentially trapped ( c). In these cases, drug release is dominated by mechanical disruption, gel erosion, or swelling behaviors.175,176 Only when the surrounding gel has sufficiently broken down, effectively increasing the mesh size in the vicinity of the cargo, can the drug diffuse away from the carrier. In these cases, erosion kinetics become a critical determinant of drug release kinetics, and there are several ways that erosion mechanisms can be engineered to control drug release.172

Biomedical hydrogels are generally designed to erode or degrade under physiological conditions, through mechanisms such as hydrolysis or enzymatic digestion, to break down the polymer network into resorbable, metabolizable, or excretable base components. If a hydrophilic hydrogel is susceptible to hydrolytic degradation (e.g., polyesters), then it generally undergoes bulk erosion—that is that the network throughout the gel is simultaneously degrading at a similar rate.177,178 Bulk erosion could also occur through other mechanisms, such as with an enzymatically degraded gel, provided the mesh size of the hydrogel permits rapid penetration of the enzyme from the exterior. Alternatively, hydrogels can also undergo surface erosion when the exterior of the gel breaks down more quickly than the interior bulk.177,178 This can occur when the molecular agents that degrade the gel (e.g., water, enzymes) diffuse into the bulk slowly relative to the rate of surface erosion. This can occur with hydrogels bearing hydrophobic components that slow down the rate of water penetration into the bulk or when the mesh size is much smaller than the size of the enzymes that are responsible for breaking down the network. Regardless of the mechanism of erosion, these behaviors can be readily modeled to predict erosion-dependent release kinetics.179 Overall, the mechanisms of hydrogel erosion are important considerations when designing a drug carrier, in particular when delivering large cargoes such as nano- or microparticles.

In many instances, the cargoes that are delivered for biomedical applications are drugs smaller than 15 nm—small molecules or compact proteins.180 We will delve into the specific considerations for the different types of cargoes in the following sections, but in many cases hydrogel delivery of biomedical drugs through passive means (e.g., physical encapsulation and subsequent release) will be strongly diffusion-dependent. Therefore, there is considerable benefit to being able to predict or model the diffusion of cargoes within different types of hydrogels. There are numerous models that capture important aspects of this behavior, such as hydrodynamic theory,181 free volume theory,182 and obstruction theory.183 The literature on these models is extensive,162−164,184 and here we provide basic summaries of their underlying assumptions. In general, these theories assume the drug (or solute) is a perfect hard sphere in the aqueous bulk phase of the hydrogel. Most general models assume negligible hydrophobic, electrostatic, or van der Waals forces. However, it should be noted that in certain drug/hydrogel combinations these interactions can strongly impact mass diffusion ( ).185 Hydrodynamic theory is focused on the effects of friction between cargoes and the hydrogel, which is considered to be a fluid (instead of a solid) in this particular model. The free volume theory looks to model diffusion by assuming cargo is transported through the dynamic open spaces between the molecules that form the hydrogel.186 Obstruction theory models the polymer mesh as a physical barrier that hinders the diffusion of the drug through the bulk phase.187 More recently, our group developed a model that combines these three approaches, which we call the Multiscale Diffusion Model (MSDM).188 The MSDM notably reconciles both theoretical and experimental inconsistencies between the prior three models,184 providing a more accurate prediction of cargo transport in a variety of PEG and alginate hydrogels.188 Overall, theoretical models provide researchers with a critical tool for designing hydrogels before coming to the bench, helping to minimize costly trial-and-error optimization. Nevertheless, there is an outstanding need for models that fully capture the complexities of drug delivery, including drug–hydrogel interactions and drugs of complex shape (e.g., elongated biopolymers such as DNA). For readers interested in further details, we refer them to several excellent and comprehensive reviews on the physics and modeling of drug diffusion through hydrogels.162−164,184

So far, we have seen that the relationship between drug size and mesh size can help predict a great deal about drug release kinetics. If taken into account during the design stage, hydrogels can be formulated to feature a mesh size that is more likely to yield desirable release kinetics. To this end, hydrogel mesh size can usually be made smaller by increasing the polymer content and/or cross-linking density and vice versa. However, while tuning the mesh size can be relatively straightforward in more traditional, covalently cross-linked systems, certain precautions must be taken when looking to leverage these concepts in dynamic hydrogels. This is due to the reversible nature of the cross-links in dynamic hydrogels, which can essentially lead to the reversible opening and closing of paths for entrapped macromolecules diffusing through the hydrogel. In these instances, the time scales for the formation and dissociation of these cross-links may play an important role in governing diffusion. In addition, noninjectable systems can increase or decrease polymer concentration and/or cross-link density to tune the mesh size, generally without jeopardizing the downstream applications of the hydrogel (unless those applications depend on mechanical properties, which can be altered by these changes). In contrast, changes to cross-link density may have a detrimental impact on the injectability of dynamic hydrogels, particularly when scaled to clinically relevant geometries, as discussed previously. As a result, novel strategies for regulating drug release, and in particular small molecule drugs, have been important for designing injectable hydrogels for sustained release applications.

3.2. Considerations for Small Molecule Delivery

Drug carriers aim to improve the efficacy of their cargo by delivering more of the active drug to its site of action within target tissues. Simultaneously, these carriers should reduce the exposure to the drug in off-target tissues, where it can cause toxic side effects. Nanoparticle carriers, another exciting materials approach to solving biomedical challenges, are designed to accomplish this by encapsulating small molecules through various passive and chemical strategies.189 Nanoparticles then must protect their cargo while navigating the body to reach a target tissue. This is a considerably complex task, and for now nanoparticle drug delivery still leads to extensive accumulation of drug in filtration organs such as the liver and spleen and has had limited success in specific tissue targeting.190 In contrast, hydrogels sidestep the challenge of navigating through the body by being administered directly at the target site. This is now easily achievable with injectable hydrogels, which can be administered to diseased tissues using a minimally invasive approach. While this local drug delivery has limited utility for the treatment of a disseminated disease, such as metastatic cancer, it has a great deal of potential in treating localized disease or injured tissues. As we will detail in later sections, hydrogels offer some unique advantages for locally interfacing with the immune system to orchestrate systemic immune responses.

All this is to say that the design of contemporary hydrogel drug carriers is heavily focused on two properties: (i) injectability, either through shear-thinning or shape-memory properties or triggered in situ sol–gel transitions, and (ii) tuning parameters that govern the release of cargo. Obtaining a high degree of control over drug release is particularly challenging with small molecule drugs, the focus of this section. Due to their small size, small molecule drugs present a challenge for sustained release strategies, many of which are based on passive diffusion approaches that involve tuning hydrogel mesh sizes. As a result, a rapid burst-release of drug is a common problem when delivering this class of drug.191 Large bursts introduce safety concerns by potentially increasing drug exposure to dangerous levels in the target tissue. Burst release can also saturate local tissues with drug, allowing excess drug to escape into systemic circulation where it can affect off-target organs. The subsequent steady state release of the remaining drug after a burst may also be too little to maintain the target tissue within the drug’s therapeutic window.

Overall, the field has worked diligently to exert greater control over the release of small molecule drugs. Because mesh sizes cannot generally restrict the diffusion of small molecules through hydrogels, the effect of polymer–drug interactions with the matrix can make a significant impact on release kinetics. These interactions can consist of electrostatic, hydrophobic, hydrogen-bond, van der Waals, or other specific and nonspecific interactions. Nonspecific interactions, for example, may explain why increasing the polymer content of certain hydrogels can attenuate the burst release of hydrophilic small molecules,192 despite the fact that the mesh sizes remain much larger than the size of the cargo. Incorporating polyelectrolytes into hydrogels can similarly slow down the release of oppositely charged small molecules, greatly reducing burst release of the cargo.193 Although hydrophobic small molecules exhibit very slow steady state release kinetics from hydrogels, they still exhibit a burst release (albeit smaller than their hydrophobic counterparts).192 Hydrogels that feature hydrophobic pockets enabling host–guest interactions within the polymer network can reduce the extent of this burst release, as has been demonstrated by cyclodextrin-functionalized polymer networks.194,195 In a similar vein, hydrophobic nanoparticles can be used to encapsulate these drugs and entrap them within a hydrophilic hydrogel network.196

These technologies have important implications for the clinic, as hydrogels that locally deliver small molecule drugs and avoid systemic exposure have been shown to maintain efficacy while reducing toxicity. Along these lines, Yang and co-workers demonstrated that a pH/temperature-sensitive hydrogel could reduce the toxicity of a common chemotherapy regimen that combines hydrophilic doxorubicin and hydrophobic paclitaxel ( ).197 This study highlights how the solubility of small molecule cargo directly influences its release profile, with the water-soluble doxorubicin following a typical burst-release followed by a slower sustained release. In contrast, the hydrophobic paclitaxel was released quite slowly, possibly on the time scale of gel degradation. An important consideration from this study is that the cargo influenced the gelation time and the mechanical properties of the resulting gels, and the effect was also cargo specific. Doxorubicin drove quicker gelation and resulted in higher modulus gels while paclitaxel slowed gelation and decreased the modulus of the resulting gels. In the end, the effects tended to cancel each other out when the drugs were combined, but the impact of cargo on the mechanical properties of the hydrogel can nonetheless affect critical factors such as in vivo erosion and release kinetics.

While the release of drugs from this hydrogel was primarily driven by simple passive diffusion, the effect was sufficient to provide a considerable improvement in off-target side effects. Mice treated with doxorubicin-gels had ca. 40-fold lower peak drug concentrations in the blood when compared to mice receiving bolus treatments. Potentially due to the lower systemic exposure, gel-treated mice were protected from treatment associated acute weight loss and cardiotoxicity. In addition to the improved safety profile, gel-delivery made this treatment regimen even more effective in a murine model of melanoma, compared to bolus treatments. This outcome may be partially due to schedule-dependent synergy between doxorubicin and paclitaxel, where optimal efficacy requires doxorubicin release to precede paclitaxel.198,199 Due to the intrinsic differences in solubility between these cargo, doxorubicin naturally released much more quickly from the hydrogel than hydrophobic paclitaxel, creating a rudimentary but effective staged-release effect. The capacity for hydrogels to confer this kind of improvement in safety and efficacy is likely to continue growing as materials scientists develop platforms with increasingly sophisticated controlled release mechanisms.

Not all small molecule drugs will possess useful physicochemical properties that can be taken advantage of by strategies seeking to increase drug–polymer interactions. In these cases, there are limited options for designing a hydrogel carrier, but one powerful technique has been to use molecular imprinting to fabricate hydrogels that are tailor-made to bind to a specific molecule.200,201 With this approach, hydrogels are synthesized in the presence of a “template molecule” that can later be removed. The cavity left behind from the template exhibits a high degree of affinity for the actual cargo molecule, in a sense creating an artificial binding pocket. Unfortunately, the need to retain this specific shape has precluded this technique from being implemented in injectable hydrogels so far.202 However, the ability to molecularly imprint nanoparticles might provide an avenue for incorporating this technology into injectable hydrogels in the future.203

Leveraging intrinsic drug–-polymer interactions can be a powerful tool in developing hydrogel carriers for a variety of small molecules, reducing burst release and at times extending the period release to achieve particular biomedical goals. Nevertheless, the release kinetics of these systems is often diffusion-dominated and can lead to faster release than what is desired, which has led to alternative strategies that go beyond passive release mechanisms. One technique is to tether drugs directly to the hydrogel network, either through irreversible covalent attachment or a labile linkage.204−207 This type of approach can significantly extend drug release and minimize burst effects, with release kinetics governed primarily by the degradation kinetics of the hydrogel. In some instances, it can also introduce stimuli-responsive release of drugs, if, for example, the linkages are cleavable by specific environmental factors such as pH or expression of a specific enzyme.45 Alternatively, light and heat-cleavable linkages open the door to exogenously triggered drug release.207,208 Overall, these strategies provide significantly more control over the release rate of small molecules, but they do introduce their own complexities. For example, chemical modification of small molecule drugs may affect their biological properties in ways that are challenging to predict. The kinetics of stimuli-responsive labile linkages may also be difficult to predict, especially if it is based on the endogenous expression of a particular enzyme or protein. For exogenously triggered cleavage of linkers, stimuli such as light and heat may be difficult to apply in a translational setting (e.g., penetration depth limitations of light). These are issues that highlight the interdisciplinary nature of this endeavor, which would benefit from collaboration between clinicians, biologists, medicinal chemists, and materials scientists.

An alternative approach to governing small molecule drug release has been to engineer the molecules into a form that interacts with the hydrogel either physically, chemically, or supramolecularly ( ). For example, Ding and co-workers took advantage of methods for conjugating poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) to camptothecin, a chemotherapy drug, which considerably increased the size of the cargo.209 This process, commonly referred to as PEGylation, is a well-documented approach for improving the solubility of small molecule drugs and proteins and increasing their size.205,210 It provides significant benefits for a variety of drugs, particularly in extending the circulatory half-life of systemically administered drugs and altering their biodistribution.211 In this study, mixing a PEGylated form of camptothecin with a triblock copolymer comprising poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid) and PEG (PLGA-PEG-PLGA) generated an injectable solution that gelled at physiological temperatures. The resulting hydrogel provided a depot for release of PEGylated camptothecin, which could be tuned by changing the relative size of the polymer blocks and their relative concentrations. When injected subcutaneously in S-180 sarcoma-bearing mice, the hydrogels slowed tumor growth despite being distant from the actual tumor, likely by maintaining the therapeutic levels of PEGylated camptothecin in the blood. Assuming that maintaining these levels of camptothecin is tolerable, this and similar hydrogels could replace the long infusions characteristic of chemotherapy and have efficacy against widely disseminated cancers. Future studies should evaluate the efficacy of peri or intratumoral hydrogel injection, which may achieve therapeutic effects at lower doses and mitigate toxic side effects.212

In this system, the long bulky PEG arm of the camptothecin was entangled with the polymer mesh of the hydrogel, slowing its diffusion out of the gel. Interestingly, the inclusion of PEGylated camptothecin had a considerable impact on the mechanical properties of the PEG-PLGA-PEG hydrogels. Namely, the drug lowered the sol–gel transition temperature and increased the viscosity of the sol. This finding introduces an important consideration for how the cargo itself may interfere (potentially beneficially or detrimentally) with the dynamic self-assembly behaviors that drive gelation. For example, Shim et al. reported how the chemotherapy drug paclitaxel decreased the sol–gel transition temperature of another temperature-sensitive hydrogel formulation in a dose-dependent manner,213 possibly due to a salting-out effect.214,215

The impact of cargo on the mechanical properties of a gel is especially critical in supramolecular hydrogel systems that incorporate their cargo into their building blocks, a strategy which Ding and co-workers used to develop a sustained release system for a derivative of cisplatin, another common chemotherapy drug ( ).216 The Pt(IV) derivative of cisplatin was conjugated to two PEG-b-poly(d,l-lactide) (PEG-PLA) block copolymers to form a triblock macromolecule. This amphiphilic polymer self-assembled into micelles with the platinum prodrug contained within the hydrophobic core. At physiological temperatures, the micelle solution undergoes a sol–gel transition, yielding a long-lasting depot of platinum–drug loaded micelles. As the gel degrades, intact micelles are released which can be broken down into the active Pt(II) drug by intracellular reducing agents. By incorporating the platinum prodrug into the building blocks of this hydrogel, this hydrogel significantly slowed the release of a very small molecule drug (∼75% released in vitro in 40 days), which would otherwise rapidly diffuse out of a passive-release system (75% released in vitro in <5 h). However, inclusion of the drug into the building blocks of this supramolecular system had significant effects on hydrogel formation. In this case, the effect was quite beneficial—the inclusion of the Pt(IV) into the hydrophobic region of the triblock decreased the sol–gel transition sufficiently to form gels under physiological conditions. In contrast, drug-free triblock PEG-PLA-PEG systems gelled at ∼50 °C, which would hardly be useful for biomedical applications. While this approach is promising for extending the release of a fundamental chemotherapy drug, in vivo studies on release rates and efficacy still need to be carried out. In particular, it will be important to determine if such a drug delivery system might mitigate the traumatic side effects that accompany platinum-based chemotherapies.217

While the prior approaches focus on delivery of encapsulated small molecules, one innovative approach by Kibbe and co-workers uses a hydrogel system to generate therapeutic small molecules in situ.218 By incorporating nitric oxide (NO) donors into a peptide nanofiber hydrogel platform, this group produced an injectable depot of NO to locally inhibit neointimal hyperplasia, a condition which complicates treatment of cardiovascular disease. Notably, in developing this hydrogel, four unique NO-donor candidates were tested, two of which prevented gelation. Again, we see that the properties of cargo can exert potent and difficult-to-predict effects on the forces driving gelation, which led to the discontinuation of two donors. And while the remaining two NO donors yielded hydrogels, only one of the donors (PROLI/NO) could inhibit neointimal hyperplasia in a rat model. Importantly, the PROLI/NO formulation was successful in vivo despite underperforming in earlier in vitro assays, highlighting the need to carry forward these studies into relevant preclinical models.

3.3. Considerations for Nucleic Acid Delivery

Nucleic acid-based therapies include DNA and RNA that encode beneficial proteins,219 as well as microRNA and siRNA, which can silence expression of specific genes.220 Synthetic biologists have further advanced the capabilities of nucleic acid cargoes with stimuli-responsive and self-replicating constructs known as replicons.221 More recently, gene therapies have grown to include CRISPR-based systems which can precisely edit the host genome.222,223 Short DNA and RNA oligomers known as aptamers have also been developed, with the capability to bind to and regulate specific targets with specificity and affinity comparable to antibodies.224 Additionally, several immunogenic nucleic acids that are agoinsts for toll-like receptors (TLR), including CpG (TLR9 agonist), poly(I:C) (TLR3 and RIG1 agonist), and ssRNA (TLR7/8 agonists), have become important adjuvants for a variety of immunotherapies.225 In general, all of these biopolymers share similar physicochemical traits due to the conserved phosphatidyl backbone of nucleic acids, so in general these cargo are relatively stiff (particularly in the double-stranded form) and negatively charged species,226−228 which complicates their delivery through cell membranes. They are also susceptible to numerous endogenous enzymes that quickly degrade extracellular or otherwise “out of place” nucleic acids. Because the information stored in nucleic acids is variable and length-dependent, the overall size of therapeutic cargo can vary from the tens of kilodaltons (e.g., siRNAs) to the megadalton range (plasmid DNA or poly(I:C)). As a result, nucleic acid therapeutics are sensitive and difficult to deliver to their site of action, major obstacles for their clinical translation.

Fortunately, electrostatic interactions with polycations have proven to be a useful and effective way to condense nucleic acid cargo into nano- and microsized particles that protect cargo from premature degradation ( ).229,230 Electrostatic complexation with supramolecular building blocks (e.g, peptide amphiphiles and phospholipids) can also yield self-assembled particle carriers.231,232 In addition to protecting nucleic acids from premature degradation, particle carriers also have cell-penetrating capabilities that can help to deliver cargo to the cytoplasm or nucleus, where they can carry out their therapeutic function. While electrostatically assembled polyplexes can be effective, without further modification they have overall poor pharmacokinetic properties and poor tissue-targeting, as well as issues with toxicity and safety.189,233 But by formulating hydrogel carriers of nucleic acid polyplexes, these therapeutic particles can be delivered locally to target tissues to resolve both of these issues.

Chen and co-workers used this approach with a PLGA-PEG-PLGA thermosensitive hydrogel that safely delivered shRNA against the tumor oncogene PLK1.234 PLK1 shRNA was complexed with a polylysine-modified polyethylenimine, producing a roughly 100 nm particle,235 which is sufficiently large to tune the release rate based on the porosity of the hydrogel carrier. The local release of shRNA led to a decrease in tumoral PLK1 expression. The authors also explored simultaneous delivery of the chemotherapy drug doxorubicin and found that the combination therapy led to synergistic antitumor effects via activation of a G2/M cell cycle checkpoint. Importantly, hydrogel combination therapy avoided off-target cardiotoxicity typically associated with doxorubicin and saw no toxic effects from the shRNA polyplexes. As these results suggest, hydrogels can be developed to deliver combination therapies composed of diverse cargoes without provoking systemic toxicity. And these types of multidrug systems have become an intense area of research in the biomaterials community. These studies considerably amplify the complexity of preclinical studies, but it is essential that future studies directly compare hydrogel delivery against bolus administrations to determine to what extent benefits in safety and efficacy can be attributed to the inclusion of the hydrogel carrier.

Hydrogel delivery of electrostatically assembled nucleic acid particles locally alters gene expression,236,237 presenting opportunities for healing highly localized injuries or tissue damage. Khademhosseini and co-workers used this approach with an injectable methacrylated hydrogel to deliver DNA encoding the pro-angiogenic growth factor VEGF.238 The DNA cargo was first electrostatically adsorbed onto PEI-functionalized graphene oxide, which was released slowly from the gel depot to promote cardiac tissue repair after myocardial infarction. This group directly compared the effect of using precomplexed DNA particles versus naked DNA in their hydrogel system and determined that hydrogels delivering particles achieved superior tissue regeneration, namely smaller myocardial scar area and improved heart function, as measured by changes in ejection fraction. The hydrogels used in this study did not provoke an immune response or changes in systemic inflammatory markers, which bodes well for future studies aimed at hydrogel-mediated gene therapy for tissue regeneration. In particular, it will be important to see how future iterations of this technology fare with the delivery of mRNA, which has become the preferred approach for expressing exogenous genes.239

A promising alternative to delivering nucleic acid-loaded particles is to use chemically modified nucleic acids ( ).240,241 Several phosphatidyl backbone modifications have been identified to improve the stability of delicate RNA and DNA therapeutics, for example.242,243 There are also interesting opportunities presented by nucleic acids conjugated to polymers or other biomacromolecules.244,245 Burdick and co-workers recently leveraged the capabilities of a cholesterol-conjugated miRNA in an injectable supramolecular hydrogel to locally alter gene expression in heart tissues over the course of several weeks.246 By combining two hyaluronic acid derivatives, one modified with pendant cyclodextrins and the other with pendant adamantanes, the authors form a gel from the resulting host–guest network. In addition, the ability for cyclodextrins to form host–guest complexes with cholesterol allows the gel to form high affinity interactions with cholesterol-modified miRNA, which considerably slowed its release rate from the gel. In vitro, the release was sustained out to 20 days, and in vivo, elevated miR302 could be detected out to 14 days. Remarkably, this approach led to a robust clonal expansion of terminally differentiated cardiomyocytes in a mouse model of myocardial infarction, which corresponded to improved heart function (decreased end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes as well as increased ejection fraction and fractional shortening). One especially exciting aspect of this study is that the use of a confetti mouse model allowed the researchers to provide answers to an open question in cardiac tissue regeneration—whether new cardiomyocytes arise from a progenitor cell type or from pre-existing cardiomyocytes—highlighting how carefully planned biomaterials studies can be used to simultaneously probe unanswered biological questions while advancing clinically relevant technologies.

Incorporating nucleic acids as cargo is not the only strategy to deliver or use nucleic acids in hydrogels. Extensive work has established a field of DNA-based hydrogels, where the macromolecular network is either partially or entirely formed from nucleic acids ( ).247,248 Initial reports of these systems used enzymatic processes to ligate complementary strands of DNA, creating systems similar to the covalently cross-linked synthetic polymer hydrogels.249 More recently, supramolecular approaches have taken center stage with these materials, leading to thixotropic hydrogels suitable for creating injectable drug depots in vivo.250,251 Many DNA hydrogels have been used to deliver immunogenic nucleic acids for applications in immunotherapy, which will be discussed in greater detail in later sections. Hybrid synthetic polymer–DNA hydrogels are recruiting the considerable functionality of engineering nucleic acids into a versatile biomaterials platform. For example, Collins and co-workers demonstrated the coupling of CRISPR-responsive elements into hydrogels provided novel functionalities that included triggered drug release, cell release, and biosensing.252 It is particularly interesting that these hydrogels could be used to develop highly sensitive detectors of viral ssRNA, in this case for the Ebola virus. Thanks to the catalytic nature of the Cas12a system used in this study, the virus-sensing hydrogels were able to detect RNA concentrations as low as 11 aM. Considering the capabilities of nucleic acid-based nanotechnologies, we expect that DNA- or RNA-based hydrogels will continue to provide exciting new functionalities to this space. Future work will need to evaluate how stable functional nucleic acid elements are under physiological conditions, as the delicate nature and short half-lives of many of these constructs may be at odds with the prolonged time frames targeted with biomedical hydrogels. Additionally, the extent to which hydrogels can target transfection to a particular cell type is an open question.

3.4. Considerations for Protein Delivery

Therapeutic proteins and peptides comprise a major portion of the biopharmaceuticals industry255 and have demonstrated extensive value for treating a number of conditions ranging from diabetes, cancer, infectious disease, and arthritis. In general, the stability of protein drugs has been an obstacle, particularly for storing and transporting these drugs, leading to the highly expensive cold-chain transport system that makes these drugs difficult to supply to the rest of the world.102,256,257 Often, protein drugs need to be administered repeatedly to maintain their benefit, with treatment frequencies ranging from monthly dosing for certain antibodies to daily dosing for peptide hormones such as insulin.

Hydrogel carriers may provide useful innovations for stabilizing protein drugs during shipment and storage,258 as well as minimizing treatment frequency by providing long-lasting sustained release of proteins after they are administered. Typically, proteins larger than 100 kDa are large enough to design hydrogels to regulate their release primarily though gel degradation and diffusion and are reasonably successful in providing a sustained release of the cargo.259,260 This approach is promising for important classes of therapeutic proteins, such as antibodies, bulky enzymes, and engineered proteins. For example, Yang and co-workers observed that a physically cross-linked injectable hydrogel was able to deliver a high dose of Avastin, a clinically approved antibody that antagonizes the aberrant angiogenesis in tumors.261 Compared to a control treatment regimen, which followed a weekly bolus administration out to 4 weeks, the single hydrogel injection achieved similar efficacy in the HCT116 murine model of metastatic colon cancer. Notably, the hydrogels had a strong impact on the pharmacokinetics of Avastin, reducing the Cmax in circulation ca. 4-fold.

Passive release strategies to focus drug exposure in target tissues could have benefits for a variety of protein therapies with problematic off-target effects. However, for smaller protein drugs (e.g., hormones, peptides, growth factors, or cytokines), passive release runs into many of the same issues facing small molecules, such as burst release and short release windows. So, for smaller cargo and for applications looking at very prolonged release windows, alternative approaches are required to adequately control protein release. Increasing the effective size of the protein cargo can be complicated due to their highly diverse structures and compositions, and proteins are generally not as easy to complex or load into larger particulate systems as, say, nucleic acids. Nevertheless, clever strategies have emerged to generate slow-release systems from injectable hydrogels.

As in prior sections, one approach to slow the release of proteins is to increase their effective size through direct modification (e.g., PEGylation) or through encapsulation into a particle system. Liposomal encapsulation of proteins and subsequent loading into a hydrogel can significantly slow down cargo release. This also creates an opportunity to tune release kinetics and program multidrug release from hydrogels. For example, Hartgerink and co-workers developed a peptide nanofiber hydrogel that encapsulated liposomes within the matrix.262 Growth factors could be loaded in the bulk aqueous phase as well as in the liposomal compartment, and in general the protein in the bulk phase was released before the proteins entrapped within the liposomes. Similar particle encapsulation approaches include loading proteins into PLGA,263 mesoporous silica,264 and calcium carbonate (CaCO3) particle systems.265 Leveraging nanoencapsulation techniques for protein delivery in this way has clear advantages, but the translational potential of these technologies remains limited by the difficulty of developing scalable and generalizable encapsulation techniques. This is further complicated by the relatively low encapsulation efficiency of proteins compared to other classes of drug.266

An alternative approach to increasing the effective size of protein cargo is to introduce interactions between cargo and the hydrogel matrix. This could be done chemically through covalent attachment of proteins to the hydrogel matrix as described in prior sections,204−207 but this runs the risk of impacting the bioactivity of the cargo. In contrast, engineering in noncovalent interactions (e.g., hydrophobic, hydrogen-bond, and electrostatic) between proteins and the hydrogel matrix has the potential to greatly slow protein release kinetics without modifying the cargo. Electrostatic interactions have been especially useful to tune the release rates of proteins that carry sufficient net charge under physiological conditions.267 For example, this approach appears to be helpful for regulating the release of smaller cationic enzymes, such as lysozyme (Mw ∼ 15 kDa), from injectable hyaluronic acid hydrogels.267,268

Electrostatics-mediated affinity seems to be useful for delivering smaller peptide hormones as well, as Lee and co-workers demonstrated with a cationic hydrogel to prolong the release of insulin (Mw ∼ 5.8 kDa), which is net anionic ( ).269 As with other hydrogel platforms that directly engage their cargo, these systems also observed that inclusion of the protein drug could alter certain mechanical properties, including gelation behavior. Electrostatic affinity was sufficient to extend the release of insulin out to ca. 35 days in vitro, compared to a 5-day delivery window for an analogous, but charge-neutral, hydrogel. In vivo, the cationic hydrogel eliminated burst release and maintained steady insulin levels in the blood of rats for ca. 20 days. In contrast, the neutral hydrogel showed a considerable burst release characterized by a spike in blood insulin, which disappeared by 24 h. Yet, even the neutral hydrogel was beneficial compared to bolus administration of insulin, which led to a short-lived (<5 h) spike of insulin in the blood.

While leveraging electrostatic interactions is promising, it does require accessible, charged residues on the protein cargo, and it is unclear just how many charged residues are needed to sufficiently slow down cargo diffusion. For proteins that are insufficiently charged, there are options to attach charged motifs through protein chemistry or protein engineering, but this poses a risk of altering the bioactivity of the protein. At the very least, it introduces additional manufacturing steps that will eventually introduce logistical challenges during scale up of production. Nevertheless, cleverly taking advantage of electrostatic interactions between proteins and the hydrogel offers a straightforward approach to extending release for a select class of cargoes that are small and intrinsically charged under physiological conditions.

The extracellular matrix intrinsically regulates the diffusion of a host of signaling proteins through noncovalent interactions between those proteins and the ECM.270 Taking this cue from nature, extensive research into ECM-mimetic hydrogels has led advances in controlled protein delivery.271,272 Hydrogels made with biopolymers derived from the ECM have the innate capability to bind to a variety of proteins including soluble growth factors and cell surface receptors. This intrinsic affinity can be leveraged to extend the release of a number of naturally occurring proteins (e.g., fibroblast growth factors, neurotrophins, and bone morphogenic proteins) that are useful for tissue regeneration applications.

Some of the best studied biopolymers for ECM-mimicry have been heparin and heparan sulfate, which are anionic linear polysaccharides that are natural constituents of the ECM.273 Heparin exists in diverse states in the body and carries out similarly diverse roles that include growth-factor signaling, chemokine signaling, cellular adhesion, and coagulation.274 While ionic interactions are a major contributor to heparin–protein interactions, there are also important contributions from hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions, leading to Kd values as low as 10–9 M.273,274 Heparin’s interaction with growth factors, such as bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2),275 fibroblast growth factor,276 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),277 among others,202 has been the basis for several sustained release platforms for tissue regeneration.

There have been several strategies to incorporate heparin into synthetic hydrogel platforms, with the development of modified heparin derivatives providing a good deal of design flexibility. Heparin can be readily modified through its carboxylic acid groups without compromising the prominent anionic characteristics from its abundant sulfate groups. Heparin derivatives include cross-linkable heparin and cross-linkable hybrid polymers with useful properties that include in situ gelation and injectability.278,279 One especially innovative approach for an injectable and stimuli-responsive heparin hydrogel was developed by Kiick and co-workers, which functionalized a star PEG polymer with low-molecular weight heparin molecules ( ).280 The resulting multiarmed building block could be cross-linked into a hydrogel by the addition of free VEGF, thereby directly incorporating the therapeutic cargo as a structural component of the hydrogel itself. Erosion of the gel could then be triggered by a ligand-exchange mechanism; that is, when cells expressing the receptor for VEGF (VEGFR) came in contact with the gel, they could harvest the VEGF cross-links to slowly degrade the hydrogel.51 In addition to heparin/heparan sulfate, other constituents of the ECM have demonstrated specific interactions with growth factors and other soluble signaling proteins, including collagen,281 fibronectin,282 and vitronectin,283 among others. These biopolymers provide a broad armamentarium for developing ECM-mimetic hydrogels capable of delivering specific growth factors.284 Nevertheless, it is worth pointing out that these materials are highly multifunctional, with many promiscuous binding sites capable of engaging diverse binding partners. As a result, it may be difficult to fully anticipate how the release behaviors of these systems will respond to the presence of endogenous factors after implementation or if these biopolymers will mediate unanticipated functions beyond regulating cargo release.

More sophisticated methods to govern the release of proteins from hydrogels are being developed that introduce affinity interactions between the hydrogel and cargo. These approaches rely on highly specific supramolecular interactions between the cargo and the hydrogel matrix that can include host–guest and ligand–receptor interactions.285 This often takes the form of engineering cargo (via protein engineering or chemical modification) to exhibit a binding domain that can be specifically recognized by another molecular motif attached to the hydrogel matrix. For example, Shoichet and co-workers developed an injectable, peptide-modified, polysaccharide-based hydrogel to control the release kinetics of fibroblast growth factor (FGF).286 In this work, FGF was fused to a Src homology 3 (SH3) domain which introduced a “handle” for a supramolecular interaction with SH3-binding peptides conjugated along the hydrogel network ( ). By using low-affinity or high-affinity SH3-binding peptides, the authors were able to tune FGF release kinetics, and in subsequent work they have developed a mathematical model to elucidate key parameters in programming a specific drug release profile in these systems.287

In a similar approach, Huynh and Wylie used poorly soluble biotin derivatives to tune the release rate of desthiobiotin-modified antibodies from a neutravidin-modified injectable hydrogel ( ).288 Without the slow-dissolving biotin derivative, these hydrogels release antibodies extremely slowly (∼5 ng per day) due to the high-affinity interaction between desthiobiotinylated antibodies and neutravidin. To disrupt that interaction, a poorly soluble derivative of biotin could be coencapsulated into the hydrogels. As this biotin derivative slowly dissolves over time, it introduces free biotin to compete for the neutravidin binding sites within the gel. This strategy leads to a ligand-exchange-based release mechanism that can be tuned by the amount of biotin derivative coencapsulated within the gel.

These types of approaches provide impressive control over protein release, but they also require modification of the protein cargo with molecular “handles” that can interact with binding motifs tethered to the hydrogel. This can be challenging for certain proteins or have unintended consequences on bioactivity, and from a translational point of view, it introduces additional processing steps that complicate fabrication. An alternative to this is to use binding motifs that recognize the native protein cargo. Apart from antibodies, this type of specific interaction has been hard to incorporate into biomaterials until somewhat recently. And while high-quality antibodies exist for numerous therapeutic proteins, their high target affinity (which is not easily tuned) can lead to extremely slow release. In these systems, release is generally strongly erosion-dependent and can limit certain applications. That being said, Zhao et al. reported that anti-BMP-2 antibody-modified collagen gels could improve bone regeneration in vivo, potentially due to extended release of coencapsulated BMP-2.289 Nevertheless, alternative mechanisms, such as antibody-gel mediating a locally elevated concentration of endogenous BMP-2, cannot be discounted based on this study, especially in light of reports that other growth-factor binding hydrogels can mediate tissue regeneration in the absence of exogenous growth factor.290 Delivery applications aside, antibody-based hydrogels are also interesting from a stimuli-responsive perspective, such as antigen-induced swelling materials.291

More recently, directed evolution techniques have unlocked the ability to generate novel binding motifs such as aptamers and peptides toward diverse targets.202 These new ligands are especially promising for hydrogel carriers thanks to their rapid development (relative to antibodies), small size, ease of synthesis, and options for site-specific bioconjugation. As a brief summary, directed evolution uses the principle of natural selection to develop novel proteins, peptides, or nucleic acids able to carry out user-defined catalytic or binding functions. This process generally involves the introduction of random mutations in a precursor biomolecule to generate a library that can be screened for improved functionality. In terms of screening techniques, numerous options are available for assessing binding capabilities, including displaying candidates on phage, bacteria, and yeast. The highest performing mutants are then selected for amplification to use as the template for subsequent rounds of mutations and sel