Economy

At first, Molina de Segura grew by expanding the irrigated land, and later by the proliferation of many industries dedicated to the canning industry, which produced fruits in syrup, jams, juices and a long list of products. In turn, an auxiliary industry fabric was created, and other very important sectors such as the transport of goods by road. This city has a great industrial tradition since the nineteenth century with commercial and export activity in the agricultural, plastic, ceramic, wood, textile and olive industries. Since the 1920s, the area is also famous for canning industries.

Molina de Segura aims to boost a more livable, safe, digital and sustainable city. We have designed a master plan to become a Smart City; which was evolved towards the current Policy Programme executed under the ERDF programme “EDUSI Molina Avanza Contigo”. The city have different public services, such as local hospital and police station, and is the largest logistics centre in southern Europe, moreover. Moreover, Molina de Segura is integrated into CRIsol, a Cloud Data Center, and has a Smart City platform based on FIWARE, and a metropolitan IoT network for air quality and noise monitoring.

Interests & Future Goals

The city have different public services, such as local hospital and police station, and is the largest logistics centre in southern Europe, moreover. Moreover, Molina de Segura is integrated into CRIsol, a Cloud Data Center, and has a Smart City platform based on FIWARE, and a metropolitan IoT network for air quality and noise monitoring.

Molina de Segura is a city that is experiencing a great process of change and modernisation in recent years. In large part thanks to the different European projects that are being implemented. We sincerely believe that we have great potential by having a great industry, a City Council with satisfactory experience in implementing transformational projects, and a citizenry that welcomes these changes.

In addition, we have the Smart City platform, with the European Fiware standard, and electronic administration, recently implemented, which enables us to have a very good reception capacity for new technological solutions. All of this should allow us to address in the best possible way the main objectives of the city: improvement of air quality, better management of road traffic in the urban area, and correctly apply a circular economy policy in the industrial field.