1. SIEMPRE: A GIS aided multi-criteria decision analysis application for setting priorities Bernardo Creamer, Jesús Rodríguez, Glenn Hyman, Ernesto Giron, Marcos Nobre Glenn Hyman ESRI International User Conference 16 July 2014

2. Complex problems that require multidisciplinary teams Involve diversity of stakeholders (e.g. lower income population, small farmers, entrepreneurs, local governments, etc.) Various scales: Local, regional, continental, global Multiple parameters of assessment: economic returns, Environmental impact, impact on health, nutrition quality, etc. Uncertainty and incomplete information Complexity of Policy and Decision Analysis

3. Example: Environmental impactEconomicImpact Environmental impact (more is bad) Project 1 High cost Project 2 Medium cost Project 3 Low cost Which project do we execute? Depends: 1. High economic Impact: choose Pr. 1 2. Low environmental Impact: Pr. 2 3. Limited resources: Project 3

4. Analytical Hierarchy Process AHP Scoring methodology for multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) Categorizes empirical data and qualitative information Summarizes the importance of all parts in a coherent and simple hierarchical frame -> Helps organize the decision analysis in different levels GIS aided AHP -> GAHP In the information process for making the decision, GIS tools and maps are utilized

5. AHP levels Goal, Priority Criterion 1 Criterion 2 Criterion n… Indicator a Indicator b Indicator c Indicator d Indicator x … Final Objective Evaluation Criteria Indicators or atributes The indicators are represented by maps or figures

6. GAHP steps 1. Setting up the process: definition of goals, priorities, criteria and indicators. 2. Quantitative prioritization. From indicators to criteria. 3. Qualitative hierarchization. From criteria to goals and priorities

7. 1. Setting up the process: definition of goals, priorities, criteria and indicators. • Goal: • What is the final objective of our project? • Why are we doing all this for? • Examples: • For this workshop: Areas where RTB technologies are going to be most beneficial. • For the RTB PS: Increase the welfare of lower income populations in RTB growing regions GAHP steps

8. GAHP steps 2. Quantitative prioritization. From indicators to criteria Weighted Overlay Spatial Analysis a) Collection of relevant spatial information data to use as indicators b) Categorization of indicators: a) Conformation of indicator baskets that relate to each criterion. Indicators can be seen as proxy variables that can explain part of the criterion. b) Attaching weights to indicators c) Overlaying weighted indicator layers to visualize each criterion in terms of their proxies.

9. GAHP steps 3. Qualitative hierarchization. From criteria to goals and priorities. Prioritizing criteria (by region) a) Survey experts to give weighted values to the qualitative criteria considered in the project b) Multi-criteria matrix formation by region. Calculation of coefficients for each criterion, weighted by region.

10. SIEMPRE: Integrated System for Multicriteria Evaluation of Policies and Strategies Beta version: http://siempre.ciat.cgiar.org/ ArcGis server Information flow GAHP server

11. Use of maps Harvested Area Children underweight Weighted overlay =

12. This exercise is a simulated survey by which we intend to assess strategies or priorities for the beans production sector that can help to improve the socio economic conditions of the population living in crops producer areas. Example survey: Strategic agricultural areas in Colombia

13. Goal: • Contribute to the improvement of the socio- economic conditions of the population living in rural areas in Colombia Evaluation criteria 1. Contribution to poverty reduction 2. Increase in food security 1. Setting up the process

14. Indicators (presented in maps) 1. Stunting among children 2. Harvested area (beans) 3. Yield (beans) 4. Yield gap (Best reported yield – yield) 5. Poverty (we use as proxy Colombia’s Index of Insufficient Provision of Basic Needs- NBI 2010) 6. Protein intake 1. Setting up the process (cont.)

15. AHP representation of the survey Goal, Priority Criterion 1 Criterion 2 Criterion n… Indicator a Indicator b Indicator c Indicator d Indicator x… Final Objective Evaluation Criteria Indicators Improvement of socio- economic conditions in rural Colombia 1. Contribution to poverty reduction 2. Increase in food security Stunting Area Yield Y Gap Poverty Protein

16. 1. Evaluation Criteria weights Respondents assign to each evaluation criteria a percentage weight according to their importance to achieve the proposed goal. The sum of percentages should be 100%. 2. Indicators weights Respondents assess the importance of each strategy (represented by the indicators) in a 1-5 scale, where 1 least important, and 5 most important. Criteria Percentage Poverty reduction Food security Multicriteria survey Strategies Criteria Poverty reduction Food security Stunting Harvested area Yield Yield gap Poverty Protein intake

17.  We simulated 200 responses to the multicriteria survey.  For criteria assessment responses following a normal distribution with average equal to 60% and 40% , for Poverty Reduction and Food Security, respectively, and a standard deviation equal to 10% were generated.  The answers of each hypothetical respondent were normalized so that their sum equal 100%.  For strategies assessment, a sequence of numbers between 1 and 6 is created, and a sample with replacement of 200 is taken. The responses are then truncated at 5.  We set the limit of the sampling to 6 in order to get average valuations close to 5 for strategies with very high importance. Methodology for data generation

18. Poverty reduction Food security Min 18 3 Mean. 40 36 Max. 70 61 Summary statistics of the Criteria Assessment Source: Own calculations with simulated data. Criteria Stunting among children Harvest ed area Yield Poverty Protein intake Poverty reduction Min 0 3 0 4 0 Mean 0 4 0 5 0 Max. 0 5 0 5 0 Food security Min 2 0 2 0 4 Mean 3 0 3 0 5 Max. 4 0 4 0 5

19. Harvested area Normalized data for common bean

20. Poverty reduction: resulting map

21. Deficiency in protein intake

22. Food security: Resulting map

23. Aggregated Map for survey Goal The strategic Geographic areas Where bean production Impacts the achievement Of the Goal of the survey Are:

24. The AHP method allows for an structured discussion of complex problems, by dissagregating them into different levels of importance or scale. The Siempre package, by utilizing an AHP methodology aided by GIS tools, allows decision makers to utilize extensive amounts of informationin the form of maps to help the decision making process. The priority setting of options of different nature or measurement parametrs is simplified by this package Conclusions

25. Siempre can be used in an iterive way to do sensitivity analysis for different conditions or values for options or strategies, as the geographic impacts can be displayed inmediately on maps. Conclusions (cont.)