Group by: Year | Item Type

Number of items: 2625.

2024

Anker, M.S. in 't (2024) The dark side of emergent leadership: A qualitative investigation of the processes and consequences in team settings.

Arends, Stan (2024) Developing Customer Value Propositions in an Online B2B Setting.

Balickis, Kristians (2024) Navigating New Norms: An Empirical Analysis of the Predictors of Hybrid Work in the Post-Pandemic Aviation Industry.

Bertling, Jannis (2024) Does Green Exclusivity Pay Off? : The Moderating Role of the Platform Choice in Reward-Based Crowdfunding for Sustainability-Oriented Projects.

Blom, Jaron (2024) Post-LOI Deal Value Adjustments in Dutch SME M&A Transactions.

Boeijink, Jeremy Darnell (2024) Enhancing Valuation for Telcos : A Strategic Approach to Business Valuation.

Boeringa, E.G. (2024) The Impact of Physical Screening Methods on Microfinancing Approval and Default Risk: A Case Study of Qredits.

Bokhove, M. (2024) Creating a market segment selection tool for tech-based businesses : A design-based approach.

Bos, J.C.L. (2024) Future-proofing technical B2B firms : examining the impact of market orientation and marketing function integration on strategic foresight.

Bosman, Roy (2024) Preformation Stage of Strategic Alliances: An Examination through the Lens of Resource-Based View and Dynamic Capabilities Theory.

Breedveld, Stella (2024) Emotional and coping responses to threats to professional identity in sustainability transitions.

Broek, S.J. van den (2024) Robotic Process Automation in the External Audit Function: Defining and Validating an Evaluation Framework.

Brok, E.S.M. (2024) Reducing the Dropout Rate of the Inreda AP through innovative Design Thinking and meanwhile standing in the Spotlight.

Buker, Noël (2024) Peer-to-peer Invoice Financing : Can it be an attainable financing option for start-up companies to address their financing needs?

Burgazzi Rodríguez, Gabriel (2024) Decentralized, Iterative, and Adaptive : Adoption of AR technologies in crisis within the pharmaceutical manufacturing industry.

Derksen, M.P.J. (2024) A Qualitative Study on the Improvement of the Know-Your-Client Procedure Using a Centralized Database.

Doeschotte, Nickey (2024) Unraveling the positive relationship between employee engagement and turnover intentions: An exploration within two call centre departments of a Dutch telecom organisation.

Ebbinge, J. (2024) Exploring the impact of potential Business Angels’ Characteristics on Financial Risk-Taking and Early Stage Investments.

Eganovic, Anna (2024) Cultural differences between the Dutch and Greeks at work.

Farbod, Shiva (2024) Exploring the Dark Side of AI-enabled Services: Impacts on Customer Experience and Well-being.

Feddema, J.B. (2024) The Role of Professional Service Networks in Ensuring Compliance with the CSRD in the Netherlands.

Fleiter, G. (2024) Addressing Vision Challenges within the Lean Startup Approach : A Qualitative Study of Startups.

Franch Sabaidini, Brian (2024) The macroeconomic determinants of small-cap stock performance in the USA.

Gilbers, M.A. (2024) Causation versus Effectuation: Exploring the Impact of Educational Background on Entrepreneurial Decision-Making Strategies.

Glaser, H.C. (2024) The Content Equation : A Mixed Methods Study on Exploring Platform Swinging, Consumer Motives, and Content Preferences on Social Media Among Higher Educated Young Adults.

Greven, Liz (2024) Handling inflation within the sourcing strategy of HP Valves Oldenzaal B.V.

Güngör, Belin (2024) The success factors of cobotics implementation in facilities management.

Hamhuis, Judith (2024) An Exploratory Analysis of Physiological Arousal and Verbal Behaviours during Conflicts within Mono- and Multicultural Agile Teams and Their Impact on Job Performance.

Hasper, J.H. (2024) Human Resource Management In Cybercriminal Organizations: An Exploratory Analysis.

Hassink, H.W. (2024) Understanding the evolution of customer trust in sustainable products : A customer journey perspective.

Hazewindus, T. (2024) Public-private partnerships as a means to improve the sustainability performance of business parks : A case study of the Netherlands.

Hengstman, N. (2024) Influencing factors within SBIR-based innovation research in public institutions.

Herst, Serena (2024) How to make value with digital marketing tools in a luxury brick-and-mortar store.

Horn, Jasper (2024) Investigating Cross-Border Activities in the EUREGIO: A Company-Level Cluster Theory Approach.

Hufen, N.D. (2024) Understanding consumer contesting strategies : The impact of Cialdini’s principles of scarcity and social proof with brand credibility on persuasion knowledge and contesting strategies.

Hulshof, Q. (2024) Navigating Europe's Digital Services Act : Challenges for Online Platforms.

Jamin, M.C. (2024) The Role of Business Incubation in Shaping Decision-Making Styles of Novice Entrepreneurs : A Study on Effectuation and Causation.

Kampkuiper, Thijs (2024) Utilizing Machine Data for Enhancing Service-Dominant Logic.

Kara, M.N. (2024) Big Data-Driven Personalized and Preventive Diabetes Care.

Kazaferi, Atis (2024) Predicting Job Flourishing through Algorithmic Management: a study of Machine Learning techniques.

Kooiker, J.A.M. (2024) Experience of venture capitalists influence the decision-making criteria.

Korbee, J.A. (2024) The development of ecosystem strategies : The case of the emerging green hydrogen ecosystem in the Netherlands.

Kousheshi, Ershad (2024) Ownership structure and risk-taking behaviour in Iranian companies.

Kremer, Joost (2024) The effect of R&D investments on firm performance.

Kusters, Niels (2024) The Role of Networking during the Internationalisation of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises in the Healthcare Sector.

Lems, Merte Tiny (2024) Tone and image harmony: The effect of message tone and image choice in CSR communication on Instagram on consumers’ purchase intention and the moderating effect of CSR interest.

Libbertz, Michael A. (2024) Duality Explored: The Algorithmic Management - Autonomy Interplay.

Limmen, Tim (2024) ERP utilization in the lifting industry : Alise Group - a case study.

Liu, MSc Qiwen (2024) Improve the team quality of Dutch medtech startups in the eyes of venture capitalists.

Manole, Theodor-Mihail (2024) Lifestyle Apps: Can Gamification Simultaneously Engage Users and Enhance Business Value?

Marini, Francesca (2024) Team members' agile values and behaviours : A cross-cultural study in Italian and Dutch organisations.

Meuleman, A.A. (2024) Prioritising Critical Success Factors of supply chain management in panelised construction : a case study.

Middelburg, Mandy (2024) Navigating RGS risks : seamless transition solutions.

Mitolo, Alexander (2024) Unveiling Company Culture Dynamics Through M&A Processes: A Case Study of Family Firms Acquired by Non-Family Firms.

Mulder, S. (2024) The effects of leadership, emotional intelligence, and computer playfulness on employees’ intention to use industry 4.0 technologies.

Mulder, Vera (2024) Sensemaking and sensegiving in times of merger: How do line managers from different hierarchical levels make and give sense during a merger process?

Nijhof, Len (2024) Pleasure or expertise : The interaction effect of scent and staff appearance on the store experience in footwear retail.

Nijhuis, M.J.H. (2024) The impact of COVID-19 on the Dutch stock market.

Noortman, A.J. (2024) Information systems with intelligent applications, user-friendly design, and digital ecosystem integration enhance performance in complex engineering projects.

Oonk, H.B. (2024) Human Resource Information Systems on Technology-enhanced High Performance Work Practices in Human Resource Management : The influence of value-fit and climate-fit on the implementation by managers.

Oosterholt, S.S. (2024) Mapping dimensions of customer experience using big data analytics to enhance customer relationship management strategies : a case study in the B2B context.

Perluka, B.Y. (2024) Reliable procurement cost estimation methodologies: A case study in complex environments.

Peters, J.G. (2024) A life cycle perspective on business models in the smart home device industry.

Pisciotta, E. (2024) How can managers and employees use the potential benefits of AI-driven decision-making to ensure and support sustainability through corporate digital responsibility?

Plasman, Niek (2024) The cloudy reality of game streaming : An analysis into the consumers’ willingness to pay for cloud gaming services.

Pluim, E. (2024) Digitalization at a Family Business in the Financial-Services Industry : A Case Study.

Raad, Benjamin Carlos de (2024) Developing a Focus Area Maturity Model for Data-driven Decision-making.

Rempe, Konrad (2024) A New Reality for Customers? Understanding the Impact of Aspects of Alternate Reality Games on the Valence of Customer Experience.

Riele, J.G.H. te (2024) The key e-service factors that influence customer satisfaction during online grocery shopping.

Rittinghaus, A.J.C. (2024) Differences and Similarities in company specific determinants for payout policies in the consumer staples and the consumer discretionary sectors in Europe and the US.

Rorink, Giulia (2024) Creating Capabilities to Leverage External Data to Match Supply and Demand: a multiple case study.

Sandberg, A. (2024) Discovering technologies in the automotive industry.

Scheffer, J.M.M. (2024) Assessing the maturity of innovation platforms : A conceptual maturity model and a case study of TIP.

Schippers, D. (2024) Understanding the Value and Adoption of the International Patient Summary : Exploring Clinical Value, Facilitators, and Barriers.

Schloms, P. (2024) Indirect purchasing and supplier satisfaction : How can operative excellence be a facilitator to improve the buyer-supplier relationship?

Schuhmann dos Santos, A.J. (2024) Green Startup's Eco-Innovation Strategy: A Lean Startup Approach.

Sikosek, R.L. (2024) The support of Regional Entrepreneurial Actors (REAs) for Innovative Knowledge-Intensive Enterprises (KIEs).

Smit, Koen (2024) Designing a Funding Platform for Startup and Investor Evolving Needs in the Entrepreneurial Ecosystem : The Orange Mill - A Case Study.

Snoeijink, M.H.J. (2024) Unveiling managerial perceptions of the customer’s lived experience in digital B2B service innovations : An ethnographic case study.

Spekle, A.L. (2024) Observing Emotional Intelligence : An exploratory investigation into its (non)verbal behaviours.

Stokman, B.A. (2024) Signposting Customer Experiences : Exploring the Influence of Nudging in B2B Engagements.

Stradmeijer, Mark (2024) The effect of Derivative Usage on Firm Value During COVID-19, Evidence from The Netherlands.

Straver, H.E. (2024) Navigating the CSDD directive proposal : Implications and strategic planning for procurement in financial organisations.

Treep, F.C. (2024) E-participation in the digital future : an exploration of e-participation in the Metaverse.

Uitslag, Cheryl (2024) Beyond the Statement: Assessing the Impact of Brand Credibility, Environmental Concern, and Greenwashing Perception On Consumers’ Purchasing Intentions in Fashion.

Veldhuis, M.E. (2024) From Structure to Barriers : A Comprehensive Case Study of a Regional High-Tech, Chip-Related Cluster in Eastern Netherlands.

Voorhuis, M.H. (2024) The effect of R&D on IPO pricing.

Wagenaar, Leon (2024) Sustainable investment preferences among the clients of a fund manager in the Netherlands.

Westerveld, Frank (2024) Navigating the Shadows: Analyzing Negotiation Strategies in Ransomware Incidents and their Impact on Outcome.

Wielens, M.A.X. (2024) How can AI tool(s) support the scenario planning process? A systematic guide.

Wojtun, M.N. (2024) Bringing Nature’s Touch to the Digital Context: Exploring the Impact of Biophilic Design on Sustainability Perceptions in Social Media Advertisements.

Zerrou, Anass (2024) Sustainability and Customer Experience: Allies or Rivals in Business?

Zwaans, L.E.J. (2024) The first step towards supply chain collaboration : sharing information between the manufacturer and wholesaler.

d'Artagnan, Charles-David (2024) Agile values across two different national cultures : A Comparative Research between France and the Netherlands.

2023

Ahrens, Justin (2023) Culture-Caused Critical Incidents Between German and Dutch : How to Cope with Them.

Alikouzay, Z. (2023) Firm Characteristics and Capital Structure : Exploring the Determinants of Financing Choices in European Markets.

Althoff, S. (2023) The relationship between inclusive leadership and employee creativity: A quantitative study on the potential paradoxical effect of inclusive leadership on employee creativity moderated by perceived organisational support.

Asbroek, Maud (2023) Customer experience in digitalized touchpoints along the customer journey of a B2B wholesaler of semi-finished goods.

Aveskamp, Maarten (2023) Designing a Sales and Operations Planning Process in a Make-to-Order Environment.

Axelsson, S. (2023) The impact of sustainability communication on consumers' brand associations in the food and beverage industry.

Bartelink, J.H.K. (2023) The influence of leadership and the role of emotions on the employee's adoption of a connected worker program in the workplace : A multiple case-study within a global manufacturing company.

Beekman, L. (2023) Strategic allocation of resources to increase ambidexterity in large firms : a single case study.

Beerkens, Max (2023) Paradoxical Tensions in Platform Co-ops : An Explorative Study of Perceptions and Responses.

Bektas, Hakan (2023) Revealing relevant factors impacting the viability of the metaverse by replacing online collaboration tools for business meetings.

Benedict, C. (2023) How to sustain the sustainable? : A mixed-methods study of digital pro-environmental behavior change interventions in organizational contexts.

Berns, S.W.M. (2023) Successful market entries for e-commerce SMEs using dynamic capabilities : Qualitative case study.

Bos, Dennis (2023) Servitization by SMEs in a B2B context: Entering a sector unfamiliar with the concept.

Botter, Marnix (2023) Beyond the Odds : The Celebrity Factor and Warning Messages in Gambling Advertisements.

Brauel, Katharina (2023) The effect of operational excellence paradigms on organizational resilience building.

Breckau, Nadja (2023) Student Entrepreneurship and the Venture Creation Process: A Competency Perspective.

Breda, L. van (2023) Blockchain and banking efficiency : global evidence from Ripple network adoption.

Broers, Noah (2023) How Organizations Institutionalize Corporate Digital Responsibility in their Culture and the Influence on Employees’ Digital Responsible Behavior.

Bruijn, N.B. de (2023) Exploring new procedures to deal with time-varying relationships in forecasting: A study in the context of forecasting youth unemployment with Google searches.

Bruins, R. (2023) Value of innovation in the financial market.

Burghouts, K.T.J. (2023) Level of Vertical Integration in tight Buyer-Supplier Relationships for Concept Development in the Conceptual Housebuilding Industry.

Buuren, Ilco van (2023) A roadmap design for implementing digital production technology.

Carelse, T.C. (2023) Multiple Valuation For SMEs In The Netherlands: A Case Study On The Brookz Overname Barometer Multiple.

Chamoun, Simon (2023) Unleashing the potential of Business Intelligence & Analytics for SMEs in the Netherlands : A Comprehensive Analysis.

Codreanu, S.S. (2023) From Theory to Practice: Developing an Assessment Instrument to Measure Circularity Performance in Organizations.

Collet, M.J. (2023) Social capital and its dimensions and their influence on supplier resource allocation, a multi-group analysis.

Contarino, Matteo (2023) What are the key factors influencing the adoption of the Metaverse in the consulting industry?

Cuba, Ruwigène de (2023) R&D investments and stock return volatility : A study on the biotechnological and pharmaceutical industry in Europe.

Cuijpers, Jort (2023) Cultural differences between Dutch and Austrians on the work floor.

Damen, Lucas Ignacio (2023) The influencing factors on students' interest towards visiting the theatre.

Deira, Donyell (2023) Money isn't power anymore, but people are! A humanistic shift in organizations : the People-First approach. What constitutes employees' perceptions of this approach at the workplace.

Dellink, Rick (2023) Barriers to the adoption of artificial intelligence in medical diagnosis: procurement perspective.

Deniz, Ö. (2023) The effect of modest fashion influencers on consumer purchase intentions: a comparative study in a multireligious context.

Diermen, M. van (2023) User technique innovation in the innovation model : a case study analysis.

Dieteren, S.H.P. (2023) How purchasing structures can contribute to firm performance.

Dijk, Lotte van (2023) Unintended outcomes of artificial intelligence in online advertising.

Domselaar, Max van (2023) Leveraging the Usage of Procure-to-Pay (P2P) Software to Enhance Purchasing Tactics.

Dooren, Kayleigh van (2023) Predictors of Football Player Performance at sub-top Eredivisie clubs.

Drenth, Thomas (2023) A Circular Business Model for Aluminium Suppliers: Drivers, Barriers and Enablers.

Ecker, Sam Luke (2023) Flat Tax Reform in the Netherlands.

Eekhout, Koen (2023) The effect of partnership logic and its internal misalignment on the dimensions of supplier commitment.

Egberink, S. (2023) Cultural gap : how Dutch expatriates perceive the Australian culture.

El-Issa, O.M.T. (2023) Cultural differences between Jordan and the Netherlands: Cultural influence on international business for Dutch expats in Jordan.

Escolano Balkema, Maximiliano (2023) Using RFID-Technology For Improved Traceability And Information Sharing : Creating An Integrated Food Supply Chain From Farm To Fork.

Evertzen, Wouter (2023) Designing a Value Proposition for the Home Energy Management System: Aiming to Enhance Residential Consumer Adoption.

Feiweier, Benjamin (2023) Examining to what extent internal and external information asymmetries affect the supplier performance under influence of buyer dependence.

Freij, F. (2023) Cognitive compatibility and supplier performance, in alignment or not?

Fricke, Hannah-Frances (2023) The Legitimacy of Greenwashing of Privately Family-owned Companies vs Publicly Traded Companies.

Fuhrken, Kevin (2023) The Financial Performance of Cluster Firms in Germany.

Fusco, M. (2023) Moving towards virtual identity : enabling accessible motion capture for Metaverse users and their avatars.

Gattari, Andrea (2023) Thriving Across Borders: a Qualitative Analysis on the Relationship between Entrepreneurial Traits, Organizational Characteristics, and the External Environment in Born Global Success.

Geurds, Lex Rainier (2023) Mapping the dissemination and application process of lessons learned in a project-based organisation.

Gretzschel, Joscha (2023) All ambition, no leverage? Exploring the effect of customer attractiveness and personal relationships on buyer-supplier relationships in start-ups.

Grob, K.B. (2023) Product owner emotional intelligence related to agile team processes and effectiveness: A qualitative case study.

Groeneveld, L.C.M. (2023) Challenges faced by European finance departments during the implementation of an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system.

Heemskerk, Teska (2023) Beyond the controllable : understanding and facilitating customer experience in non-owned touchpoints on social media platforms.

Heesink, Daan (2023) Research of the impact of covid-19 on CSR activities of Dutch companies.

Hefti, A.E. (2023) Understanding health decision-making during early omnichannel service encounters : A single case study.

Heilersig, Roy (2023) Servitization strategies of suppliers: Exploring the impact of customer market micro segmentation criteria.

Hoff, A.R. ten (2023) Emotional Intelligence in Successful Self-Managing Agile Teams: A Mixed-Method Approach on the Influence of Trust, Psychological Safety & Shared Leadership on Team Performance & Job Flourishing.

Holt, Ties ten (2023) Predictors for effective communication between managers and employees during CSR activity implementation.

Hovestad, Pim (2023) Hospital buyer's responses to anti-competitive behaviour.

Hu, Louis (2023) Towards a Critical Participatory Design Approach for the Neurodivergent : A Case Study for Students with ADHD.

Huiskes, N.B.J. (2023) Drivers of Individual Entrepreneurial Orientation: Comparing Intrapreneurs and Entrepreneurs : A Case Study Analysis of Locally Operating SME Insurance Intermediaries that have Undergone M&A.

Höök, Noora (2023) Assessing and developing analytics capabilities in purchasing and supply management: A case study.

Ibrahim, Marwan (2023) How does consumers' perception of service quality impact their overall satisfaction with a business or organization?

Ikink, Sam (2023) The impact of CEO-characteristics on firm performance : Evidence from Dutch listed firms.

Jansen Holleboom, S.P.G. (2023) Maturity of business analytics utilization in SMEs.

Jansink, Fabian (2023) Engineering Efficiency: Leveraging Data for Optimized Man Hour Estimation.

Janssen, V. (2023) Organisational Communication, Organisational Identification and Job Satisfaction : A Case Study of Home and Foreign Employees and Leaders in an International SME.

Jongejan, M.R. (2023) The impact of corporate social responsibility on firm risk during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Jonkman, T. (2023) What field forces are at play in the sustainable transition of clothing retailers in the eastern part of the Netherlands?

Julkunen, Suvi (2023) Motivating factors for insourcing decision in a logistics company.

Kamman, Ruben (2023) Strategic Choices in Asymmetrical Buyer-Supplier Relationships: The Influence of Relationship Characteristics on Small Shipping Companies' Decision-Making.

Karreman, Vince (2023) How does the boundary spanner’s use of power and trust influence its legitimacy by external suppliers and internal stakeholders?

Kempers, J. (2023) Are employees ready for digital transformation? Employees’ change readiness for and acceptance of base technologies for digital transformation in service SMEs.

Kempers, R.T. (2023) All-seeing eye in Western Europe? : The context, challenges and advantages of AI camera surveillance in Western Europe.

Kienhuis, W.J.A. (2023) Using User Adoption Platforms at IT training providers can alter the learning effectiveness of their services.

Klaassen, M.N. (2023) Stacked effects: is more indeed more in online persuasion? : Effects of simultaneously combining multiple persuasion principles in a single persuasion attempt in the context of online accommodation service websites.

Kluit, D.R. (2023) Idea Quality Classification in Ideation Contests : Leveraging Textual and Non-Textual Features with Machine Learning.

Knizia, Jan F. (2023) A platform-based design perspective on pyrolysis technology selection considering green energy, biochar production and carbon removal.

Korf, M.S. (2023) Designing a Framework for Sustainable Supplier Selection for Different Purchasing Product Groups.

Kozian, Luca (2023) Commodity price co-movement: Comparing models and correlation measures.

Krakers, Daphne (2023) Moving towards multisensory embodied experiences in retail brandscapes : an (n)ethnographic case study.

Kurzhals, H.D. (2023) Exploring the influence of Artificial Intelligence on Consultant´s professional identity : A Qualitative Study.

Lagerburg, R.A. (2023) Overcoming Challenges in Software Development Projects: An Integrated Approach for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).

Lappas, R. (2023) The Effect of Gender Diversity on the Financial Performance of Swedish Listed Firms.

Latka, R. (2023) Identity Threat in Early Career Professionals: A qualitative investigation on their coping mechanism repertoire in the workplace.

Lazareanu, R. (2023) Innovation activities and their influence on the innovation capabilities of knowledge-intensive entrepreneurship firms within North Brabant.

Le, P.X.N. (2023) How team-level Lean Startup facilitates firm-level Transforming Capability in SMEs.

Leeraar, Maarten (2023) Corporate Governance In ICOs: Evidence From Anti-Flipping Mechanism.

Leuverink, Jaap (2023) Personality Type Diversity Management : The effect of personality type diversity management on team performance.

Liberale, Tommaso (2023) Digital procurement in buyer-supplier relationships: the impact on operative excellence and supplier satisfaction.

Macaj, Denisa (2023) International innovative collaborations in the public sector.

Madonna, Riccardo (2023) What matters most for requesters’ trust in platform cooperatives? : Validation of a vignette study.

Manko, Jerome (2023) The role of leadership and emotional intelligence in times of adopting new Industry 4.0 technologies.

Mannes, L.T. (2023) Blinded by passion? The effect of entrepreneurial passion on the effectual approach of uncertainty by entrepreneurs.

Marton, Fruzsina (2023) Future purchasing roles and skills influenced by Industry 4.0 in the automotive industry: A case study.

Meijer, H.J. (2023) How is observed psychological safety related to job satisfaction in self-managing Agile team members? A mixed methods study using video observations and surveys.

Meulenbeld, M.M. (2023) How private equity outperformed public equity in western markets over the last two decades.

Moeradji, S. (2023) Sustainable Economic Recovery through Public Procurement : Municipality Interventions in Times of Crisis.

Muittari, Manta (2023) How do Dutch hospitals purchase high-tech medical devices?

Mulder, Hans (2023) Conflict on the Agile work floor: Can it be good? Investigating the role of cultural diversity and emotional intelligence in relation to observed conflict and job satisfaction.

Mulder, J. (2023) Practical social network analysis for understanding the sense of community in SMEs.

Nguyen Minh Dieu, Cam (2023) The impact of Hedging strategies and Equity Multiples on stock returns surrounding COVID-19.

Noortman, G.R. (2023) The effect of an entrepreneur’s level of extroversion and educational background on effectuation.

Nuijts, D. (2023) What is the impact of self-serviced supportchannels in SAAS business?

Nuijts, T. (2023) Which determinants affect the choice on dividend payment in the Netherlands.

Okkerman, M.E.C. (2023) Holding up a black mirror: exploring ethical issues of the Metaverse from a user perspective.

Olde Klieverik, R.H. (2023) Measuring customer satisfaction at a SaaS provider : a B2B perspective.

Ordelman, J.H. (2023) IPO Underpricing: The Role of Media Coverage During the COVID-19 era.

Oude Meijers, M.J.M. (2023) How AI can affect work design of HR professionals for better or worse.

Pagliari, Pietro (2023) Reduction In Working Hours : A Team-Level Perspective.

Pagée, Nicolette van (2023) The Power of Message Framing: Gaining insights into the interplay between message framing, product types, and regulatory focus on the willingness to buy.

Pasman, Danny (2023) Tender characteristics influencing tender attractiveness in Public Procurement.

Pedersen, E.C. (2023) Navigating Paradoxical Tensions in Online Labour Platforms: Insights from Explorative Research on Experiences and Responses.

Pleijzier, N. (2023) The identification of antecedents of employee satisfaction experienced by members of the self-managing neighbourhood care teams of Buurtzorg; a mixed methods study.

Pot, W.M. van der (2023) Exploring the relationship between social responsibility and firm performance within SMEs.

Ree, Ilse van (2023) Access versus ownership : A study into the factors that influence the intention to rent or purchase frequently and infrequently used consumer products.

Reesink, B.F.H. (2023) Improving variance control system for metal-parts manufacturers A Case -Study of 247TailorSteel.

Reitsma, T.S. (2023) The COVID-19 Outbreak and Investor Herding : An Empirical Study of the VWRL All-World Exchange-Traded Fund.

Riikonen, S.A. (2023) Towards More Sustainable Small Purchases: Enhancing Sustainability in the Operational Procurement Process.

Rolink, A.T. (2023) Forecasting cash flows at an independent treatment centre.

Rothfuß, Manuel (2023) Sustainability Reporting Practices and their Impact on Organizational Dynamic Capabilities : An Empirical Examination of Professionals´ Perception.

Rotmensen, J.G. (2023) From Portfolio to Lever: Evolution of Category Management.

Rouw, B. de (2023) Developing a framework for evaluating customer value creation out of digital transformation for firms providing financial services.

Scheeringa, D. (2023) The influence of rivalry on sustainable decision-making in the supply chain : exploring the role of psychological factors.

Schepens, L.H.P. (2023) The Collection of Organic Waste in City Logistics – A Case Study in the City of Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Schmeitz, A.H.L. (2023) Exploring the constraints and enablers for value-in-use creation during the adoption of SaaS solutions : a case study of controlled environment growers.

Scholte Lubberink, D. (2023) Overcoming the gender gap in entrepreneurship : the impact of CEO gender on IPO performance.

Schouten, K. (2023) Negotiation competency in a synchronous virtual computer mediated negotiation environment.

Schut, L.G. (2023) Investigating the impact of technological advancements on the job of a management accountant : identifying capabilities required for the future.

Sigger, J.B. (2023) Assessing Radicality Using Patent Content Text-Mining : A Tesla Case Study.

Sikkema, T. (2023) Evaluation of efficiency of infrastructure management at the provincial level.

Slager, Esmée (2023) Unravelling the adoption of neuromarketing techniques in marketing organisations : insight from (neuro)marketing professionals.

Slaghekke, B.I. (2023) Make, buy, or ally (MBA) decisions in Central Sterilisation Department in Dutch hospitals : influential factor analysis.

Smedema, J.J. (2023) The perceived value of the B Corp certification in B2B relations : A mixed method research approach.

Smits, Jeroen (2023) Assessment of Robotic Process Automation technology in Dutch hospitals.

Soeten, Emma (2023) Innovator Roles within and between public organisations.

Spirova, T. (2023) ESG scores and stock price returns: How do ESG scores impact stock price returns in the Netherlands.

Storteler, Thom (2023) Customer’s Perceptions of an Online Service Failure with Application of the CIA Model.

Suijkerbuijk, Natasha Gabriëlle (2023) Intercultural Collaboration in European Business: Cultural Differences between the Dutch and Swiss on the Work Floor.

Tang, Kim Hua (2023) Important variables to calculate the Small firm premium for Dutch SMEs.

Tavenier, N.M. (2023) The practices of purchasing involvement in radical innovation projects.

Tempert, Eline (2023) Driving factors for sustainable investments by Dutch pension funds.

Teune, L.G. (2023) Is AI a Diamond in the Rough for HR? Identifying the Attributions Towards AI-enabled HR practices. A Grounded Theory Approach.

Theeuwen, Thorsten (2023) Cultural Context and Innovation: A Case Study Exploring the Influence of Hofstede's Dimensions on Team Psychological Safety and Innovation.

Tijink, K.E. (2023) Improving the contract arrangement model of Coppa.

Toivakka, Eveliina (2023) Supplier Performance Measurement System Design in Manufacturing Industry.

Tuitert, M.G.A. (2023) Establishing a Value Network-based Business Model as a Start-up: a Case Study in the Dutch Installation Industry.

Velde, T.W.H. van der (2023) Improving the Environmental Sustainability Performance of Key Suppliers : A Mixed-method Case Study in the Semiconductor Industry.

Veldscholten, Bram B.H. (2023) Supply chain Resilience and its most suited elements to decrease energy price spike risks.

Veneberg, B. (2023) The Effectiveness of Geriatric Rehabilitation : An exploration of effectiveness outcome measures and characteristics of treatment environment.

Verdier, Marnix (2023) Understanding the psychological contract: an intricate mind-game.

Verheijen, B.J. (2023) A Maturity Model for Improved Enterprise Asset Management.

Vilkuna, Valtteri (2023) Improving customer attractiveness and supplier satisfaction in public procurement : A case study.

Voß, Nadine (2023) Navigating the intersection of developers, domain experts and AI : An identity work perspective.

Vries, S.J. de (2023) The relationship between influencer marketing and purchasing intention.

Walhof, M.J.H. (2023) Sustainable Procurement: Reducing CO2 Emissions with Suppliers in a Cost-Efficient Way.

Wilms, G.T. (2023) An evaluation of Lean start-up method approached from the service dominant logic.

Wingerden, Louis van (2023) Internal Alignment in Supplier Relationship Management: Examining the Role of Partnership Logics in Building Supplier Trust.

Wolters, Britt M. (2023) Price determinants of airline tickets : flying with KLM and Transavia.

Yanagawa, Yuka (2023) How can businesses reframe insects as food? : A case study of a restaurant in Berlin.

Zaltbommel, Anthony van (2023) Understanding Loyalty in B2B E-commerce SaaS Relationships via the Influence of Satisfaction and Trust Empirical insights from 33 SaaS-using firms.

Zon, A.P. van (2023) Value co-creation through leveraging drivers and tackling barriers for Circular Business Models: A direct stakeholder perspective from the lithium-ion battery industry.

2022

Acar, Gabriël (2022) Cultural differences experienced by Dutch employees working in Belgium.

Afzali, Sahar (2022) Challenge Based Learning: Measuring CBL and the potential for change at higher educational institutions A survey from the perspective of course and module coordinators at the UTwente.

Albers, Etiënne H.M. (2022) Environmental considerations in supply chain decisions: Proposing a new methodology for locating cross-docking terminals considering CO2e emissions.

Arkema, B.F. (2022) Brand activism and the role of authenticity and identity signalling.

Avest, L. ter (2022) Mental availability : to what extent is it relevant and measurable for B2B companies.

Bardsen, K. T. (2022) Conversion Rate Optimization in E-Commerce Webshops.

Bayram, Leile (2022) Hybrid Identities: The progressive Nature of Entrepreneurial Identities in the Aviation Industry.

Beldman, S. (2022) Hybrid work configurations and short-term international assignments : does willingness to accept international assignments increase?

Bentvelsen, Christian C.N. (2022) The process of finding an acquirer for ventures from venture builders: a networking game Proposing a step-by-step process for finding a suitable buyer for acquisition of scale-up ventures coming out of venture builders within the Dutch venture building environment.

Berg, Selina van den (2022) Intercultural Collaboration in European Business : Cultural differences between the Dutch and the Italians on the work floor.

Berg, T.G. (2022) Go big or go home: An inductive study on the decision process of making residential houses more energy efficient among Private Banking clients of Van Lanschot.

Beukert, M. (2022) Utilizing benchmarking for compliance to the ESG : an exploratory study.

Bezoen, J.M. (2022) Fairness as a new antecedent for acquiring and preserving supplier satisfaction through the handling of conflict.

Bladt, D. (2022) The impact of greenwashing on consumers brand attitude.

Bojoga, D. (2022) Data-Driven Decision Making (DDD) by SME online retailers : exploring critical determinants influencing the adoption of DDD by SME online retailers.

Bolte, PJ (2022) Kadaster Ethical Data Instrument (KEDI): An instrument for assessing external data requests.

Borau, Lennart (2022) Lean and Green Management adoption in an Indonesian transportation company: Transformational leadership in an emerging economy context.

Bordewijk, S.C. (2022) Online Hotel Reviews : The Impact of Polarity of Opinions on the Perception of Trust.

Borggreve, L.A. (2022) Effects of Annual Report Sentiment on Stock Returns.

Bosboom, E.S. (2022) The digital servitization framework for the transition to modular software as a standardized product.

Bouma, Simone (2022) On the Role of Procurement in Inter-Organisational Staff Pooling in Healthcare.

Brandt, Tabea (2022) The development of leader identities in female leaders.

Brinkhof, R.R. (2022) Pre-assessment of project performance : a Dutch construction case.

Bruggink, T. (2022) Data & AI policies united: Picked to pieces.

Böcker, N. (2022) Entrepreneurial decision-making : assessing the influence of creativity and imagination on effectuation and causation processes of German entrepreneurs.

Chaki, M. (2022) The impact of mindfulness on individual and team performance.

Chaush, A. (2022) Aspects of eCRM and firmographics that influence customer acquisition probability.

Chen, K.L. (2022) The impact of board characteristics on financial performance : evidence from Dutch hospitals.

Clemente, Giuliano (2022) Conditions of successful SMTs transformation in SMEs.

Coskun, M. (2022) Research on why Dutch Public Organizations fail to grow to sufficient maturity levels in information security.

Dassen, Thory (2022) How can a learning organization best be developed in a project-based, decentralized construction company?

Dhawan, A. (2022) Institutional complexity across borders : what are the HRM activities that give rise to institutional complexity in an online labour platform operating in India?

Dijkhuis, D.S. (2022) Working in Spain as a Dutchman : Cultural differences between the Dutch and the Spanish in the working environment.

Dunhoft, Marie-Claire (2022) “This is a Paradigm Shift for the entire Industry” : Employee Resistance to Technological Innovation in the German AEC Industry.

Ekelhof, T.J.G. (2022) Corporate Social Responsibility, Sustainability & Social Innovation: a study on Dutch small and medium-sized construction enterprises.

Eliya, Y. (2022) Implementing Agile teams : a qualitative study on the adoption of Scrum teams in SMEs.

Emmerich, T.L. (2022) VMI 2.0 : implementing VMI in the industry 4.0 era.

Ganzeboom, Sergio (2022) Strengthening brand loyalty with brand ambassadors in commoditized markets.

Gelink, S.J.G. (2022) Get the most out of a process mining project : conceptual model of the added value of process mining and how to advance the added value of process mining projects in practice.

Gerlach, J. (2022) Why do negotiators use deceptive behaviour? A qualitative study.

Gerritsen, J. (2022) The effect of sample & email marketing on (re)purchase behavior in online retailing.

Gersmann, Y (2022) A trade-off between Centralized and Decentralized Purchasing : How can a corporation maintain flexibility in supplier- and product-choices and benefit from the advantages of centralized purchasing at the same time?

Gils, P.M. van (2022) Upper echelons : the reflection of the CEO characteristics on the R&D spending at SMEs.

Graaff, M.R. de (2022) The influence of internal integration and supplier value on supplier resource allocation.

Grobben, Emma (2022) Effective line manager behaviours that stimulate innovative work behaviour of employees in the three different phases of IWB : idea generation, idea promotion and idea realization at knowledge intensive service-oriented organizations.

Groeneveld, J. (2022) Intercultural Collaboration in European Business : Cultural Differences Between the Dutch and the French on the Work Floor.

Groot Zwaaftink, J.M. (2022) The effect of leaders' behaviors on virtual project team effectiveness : a qualitative study throughout the team's lifecycle.

Groote Stroek, Casper (2022) Working as a Dutchman in Poland: Understanding Polish cultural standards.

Guijs, Remco I. (2022) An Investigation on Supporting the Energy Transition Education through Blended Learning.

Haarhuis, L.M. (2022) Exploring business opportunities of sentiment analysis : a guideline for businesses, from implementation to business value generation.

Haarman, Wies L. (2022) The impact of sustainable practices on consumer behaviour in the fashion industry : a case study at a Dutch fashion company.

Haas, M.V. (2022) Strategic Adaptability in Negotiations, Linked to Negotiation Result, Gender, Negotiation Environment, and Culture.

Haas, Sven (2022) Beyond the obvious resilience factors : How do beverage collectives achieve resilience during Covid-19 Crisis?

Hammink, I.A.M. (2022) Transformational Leadership: Effects on Relations-Oriented Behaviour of Followers and Job Performance.

Harten, F.M. (2022) Risk vulnerability mapping while innovating a business model : a case study exploring the risks while innovating a business model from product selling to a consignment stock agreement with a subscription model in the metal processing industry.

Heinink, S. (2022) The impact of disintermediation on the customer experienced value proposition.

Hendrikx, S.H.E. (2022) Dutch consumers' perspective on information privacy in the post-GDPR era : an exploratory study.

Hoogenraad, W.D. (2022) Impact of changes in purchasing practices in the municipal procurement of youth healthcare services in the Netherlands.

Hulleman, Dion (2022) An overview of essential subjects for inclusivity for organizations in the western world and how to apply those subjects in the organization to implement more inclusivity in the organization.

Hulshof, M.B. (2022) Cultural mental models within agribusiness : a qualitative study in an international operating tech-company.

Hulshof, S.F.H. (2022) Healthcare transformation : a grounded systematic literature review into the conceptual explanation of healthcare transformation.

Hübers, Nick (2022) The firm-specific determinants of dividend payout policy for German listed firms.

Jacke, Marc Alexander (2022) Due Diligence of Copper at Siemens Energy.

Janssen, Vincent (2022) Circular Business Model in an R&D service business: A Roadmap From Initiation To Implementation.

Jazbek, F.T. (2022) Private equity and family firm post-buyout performance: a European perspective.

Jimmink, Bart Johan (2022) Cultural Differences on the Work Floor between the Dutch and the German.

Jimmink, M.G. (2022) Disentangling the microfoundations of resource integration in service ecosystems: a case study in health care.

Johannink, M.G. (2022) The impact of IT outsourcing on IT effectiveness.

Jongsma, K. (2022) The effect of technological determinants on university spin-off funding : examples from the Netherlands.

Kampherbeek, L. (2022) When work turns into play : how ideas conceived during leisure time make their way into businesses.

Kardatzki Angulo, Alexandra (2022) Barriers and Drivers Influencing Commitment to Social Responsibility and Social Innovation – A Multi-Case Study of German Small and Medium-sized Enterprises.

Kassies, H.R.W. (2022) A Framework for Artificial Intelligence Capabilities for Challenges in the Supply Chain for Business-to-Business Companies.

Kazan, E. (2022) The impact of board characteristics on firm performance in Germany.

Keemers, J. (2022) Reaching optimal levels of inventory by using the ABC inventory method classification and setting service levels.

Kip, C.H. (2022) Intercultural collaboration in European business : cultural differences between the Dutch and the Spanish on the work floor.

Klaas, Lasse (2022) Selecting automation opportunities for robotic and intelligent process automation.

Klausmeyer, Andre (2022) Idea development on the shop floor : A case study on a digital employee suggestion system.

Klooster, Noa van der (2022) The Success Formula for University Spin-Off Founders : how entrepreneurial characteristics can influence university spin-off success throughout different stages of the process.

Koeleman, M.J. (2022) The implementation process of the extended scope physiotherapist : a stakeholder analysis.

Kole, S.M. (2022) Methods of studying strategizing practices as determinants to effective organizational outcomes : A critical study.

Kolkman, T.F.C. (2022) The Business Model of Gas Stations in the future: What are the effects on the business development of gas stations in the changing fuel market?

Kosse, N.J.A. (2022) Cultural differences experienced by the Dutch working in the United Kingdom.

Kroeze, Gijs (2022) Entrepreneurial Coaching : how processes vary to reach entrepreneur’s and investors’ goals in SMEs.

Kuijvenhoven, V.J. (2022) Information asymmetry and dividend pay-out policy for Dutch listed non-financial firms.

Lammers, Y. (2022) Identifying the impact of team composition on SWOT analysis : an fsQCA study at a Dutch purchasing firm.

Leijdekkers, D.P. (2022) Case study on make or buy analysis in building-related installations.

Loohuis, D.S. (2022) The impact of carbon emissions on corporate financial performance.

Maximova, A. (2022) Pre-negotiation expectations in individualistic and collectivistic cultures : a study of Dutch and Chinese.

Meeners, Michelle (2022) Human-Robot collaboration in creative innovation processes : the influence of functional, relational and social-emotional elements on the intention to collaborate with a creative social robot in the work environment.

Mengelkamp, H. (2022) Effects of objective knowledge about synced advertising on purchase intention : on the example of a convenience and a shopping product.

Methorst, P. (2022) Inclusive and Collaborative Business Modelling in Western Context.

Meyer, A. (2022) Service design as facilitator for IoT development.

Middendorp, T.J. van (2022) Understanding value co-creation between service providers and customers in B-to-B context: a micro-level case study.

Mooijaart, J.B. (2022) The impact of SRI policy on the performance of Dutch pension funds.

Morsink, L.I.M. (2022) The influence of a female entrepreneur's background on their funding process : evidence from the Netherlands.

Munster, M.M.B. (2022) An analysis on firm valuation, CSR performance and investment cash flow sensitivity: Evidence from the S&P500.

Nijhof, L. (2022) How structural and process characteristics influence the digitalization in buyer-supplier relationships : an AAR2 perspective.

Oddo, Renzo (2022) To what extent do ESG scores affect firm valuation? : Evidence based on large Dutch enterprises.

Olthof, L.S. (2022) Towards ecosystem value: sustainable data driven business models in the context of Europe.

Oltwater, Bart (2022) The impact of self-service technology on sustainable consumption of supermarket customers.

Oosterhout, Thomas van (2022) The development of learning in a supply network during an upstream lean integration : a comparative case study.

Oosterik, Rens (2022) The determinants of the dividend puzzle : evidence from the S&P500.

Orriens, M.J. (2022) Business model transformation of start-ups towards a B2B/B2C hybrid. Developing a value proposition for low-interest goods for the B2B market.

Overdreef, D.E. (2022) The Influence of Boundary Spanner’s Coordination Activities on Multiteam System Effectiveness.

Paasman, T. (2022) Defining and categorizing tail spend for a better management thereof.

Pas, G.J. (2022) The impact of internal integration: do suppliers have a soft spot for internally integrated buyers?

Pelle, S.H. (2022) Contracting model for long-term care.

Petersen, T.G. (2022) Strategic workforce planning model in business intelligence.

Picus, C. (2022) The effect of social media marketing activities on consumer-based brand equity and consumer response in the fast fashion industry.

Pierik, Bianca ten (2022) Increasing the Legitimacy of Tenders in Dutch Municipalities.

Pol, Axel (2022) The added value of Steward Ownership for companies and their owners.

Pos, Danique (2022) Motivations of young people in The Netherlands to invest in cryptocurrencies.

Ramaker, Frederiek (2022) Case study about industry 4.0 in the internal supply chain of a defense company: are we ready for industry 4.0?

Rengers, M.E. (2022) Employees' commitment to change in the transition from start-up to scale-up : A single case study of enabling factors in a high-tech energy company.

Rettagliata, G. (2022) The concept of dignity within algorithmic management literature : the evolution from an economistic to a humanistic perspective.

Roes, J.M. (2022) Beyond data : people. Lessons from a data-driven decision making adoption process.

Rossum, Mycha van (2022) Capital structure and firm performance across the corporate life cycle of German listed firms.

Rutten, Leslie (2022) The influence of certified eco-labels on clothing on consumer behaviour.

Rutten, M. (2022) Factors influencing multi-tier supply chain information sharing : a multi-tier supply chain case study.

Saghir, Nassim (2022) Improving Conflict Management and Team Effectiveness through Emotional Intelligence: An Exploratory study in Agile Teams.

Salkovic, D. (2022) Corporate governance mechanisms and their effect on financial performance in Islamic banks.

Sauce, Aline de la (2022) Blockchain Adoption for Circular Business Development - A German Technology-Organization-Environment Framework on Influencing Factors.

Schwepkes, L. (2022) To what extent does temporal focus in idea formulation affect crowdfunding project success?

Siemerink, J.H.A. (2022) The influence of COVID-19 on investment strategies and external financing sources of start-ups in The Netherlands.

Sleeking, E.L.R. (2022) Middle managers and the M&A process : multiple case studies.

Solmaz, S.A. (2022) Investigating the relationship between the multidimensional composition of founding teams in USO and their funding ability : A study on university spin-off founder composition on start-up funding ability in the Netherlands.

Spekker, W. K. (2022) Living to work or working to live? : The effects of shift work schedules on work-life balance in the public healthcare.

Sprakel, M.T. (2022) Circular procurement in a construction sector company.

Ster, V.T. van der (2022) Improving the internal and external communication for Thales' Customer Contact Centre.

Stroet, H.P.J. (2022) Design of an innovation ecosystem within the Netherlands Fire Service.

Stürtz, Gijs (2022) Increasing circularity in organisations : a combination of modularity and the circular economy.

Topp, A. (2022) Purchasing More Than Just Food : What requirements should German public procurement institutions require of bidders in their food tenders to encourage fair and ethical trade?

Uelsen, A.C.A. van (2022) Exploring the unknown : anomalies in the customer journey.

Veen, K.C. van (2022) Understanding the Strategic Marketing Needs of Technical B2B Organisations and How They Cohere With the Upcoming Strategic Marketing Trends.

Vrieze, L.G.J. de (2022) Motivators and barriers for SME suppliers in demand information sharing for forecasting.

Vukelic, M. (2022) Different but alike? How client firms compare online labour platforms and temp agencies as outsourcing options.

Weenink, Alicia (2022) The use of digital technologies in purchasing and contract management of public organisations.

Weg, D.T. van de (2022) Change Management Communication : The Concealment of Information and its Effects.

Weide, J.J.W. (2022) Increase the efficiency and speed at the fuzzy front end of innovation: Investigating Design Thinking and Stage-Gate as methods.

Wengel, ir. X.J. ter (2022) Imagine Tomorrow, Challenge Today: Constructing A Technological Roadmap For Sports Innovation Through Automated Patent Analysis.

Westerbeek, Adrian (2022) “No plan B because there is no planet B” : Exploring the drivers of employees’ lean and pro-environmental behaviours in Dutch municipalities.

Westerhof, S. (2022) Shifting attitudes towards team collaboration and the role of the marketing message.

Wiegers, M.G.M. (2022) The influence of ownership structure and board of directors on the capital structure of Dutch listed firms.

Wieggers, J.R. (2022) How can Dutch small and medium enterprises in the ICT service sector pursue radical innovation?

Wijlens, T.M. (2022) Step-by-step approach to implement corporate sustainability.

Willems, D.C.H. (2022) Evaluating a fee-based product for ABN AMRO Bank based on tokenized securities: a perspective taken from the issuing and investing parties in The Netherlands.

Winter, F. (2022) Persuasion in sustainable entrepreneurship: The role of electronic word-of-mouth and the elaboration likelihood of signals in reward-based crowdfunding for sustainable technology products.

Wolbert, J.R. (2022) Leading the creation of a data-driven culture for employee thriving.

Wolters, Mitchell (2022) The effect of social proof on customer purchases : an experiment with client testimonials and online reviews on website conversions.

Zijlstra, Hidde (2022) Exploring Digital Suriname: The current state of digitalisation and the challenges that lie ahead.

Zwijnenberg, A.J. (2022) When does it pay to be good? Screening criteria and intensity of socially responsible investment funds and their financial performance.

Çitgez, Sara (2022) Examining the impact of luxury value perceptions, extended-self and hedonism, and the role of luxury brands' online marketing campaigns on customer engagement.

2021

Achterhof, Peter (2021) A closer look at the value anticipations in dyadic business relationships within a servitization context - Evidence from the construction sector in the Netherlands.

Albert, H. (2021) Nudging for the circular economy? Overcoming barriers of mobile phone users in the post-consumption phase.

Alimonti, M. (2021) Fighting for social change while doing marketing : hybrid influencers under the institutional logics perspective.

Ankersmit, BSc D.K. (2021) Wlz tariff determination: Determining a reasonable price.

Avci, Ömer (2021) The road to become a preferred customer in the circular supply chain : The impact of buyer’s adoption of circular economy principles and corporate prestige on supplier satisfaction with OEMs as key suppliers: a quantitative case study with a metal recycling company.

Bala, A. (2021) Design Science Research throughout the years : an in-depth analysis of papers published in the Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management and Journal of Supply Chain Management supported by Artificial Intelligence.

Bayram, D. (2021) A hybrid business model solution : multi-sided business platforms as drivers of change.

Beek, P.G. ter (2021) A case study on how change towards sustainability is produced in organizational narratives.

Beene, Sjoerd (2021) The relationship between family-ownership and firm performance.

Bejta, Michel (2021) Surviving digital disruption : identifying the key digital transformation barriers of multi-channel retailers.

Beqiraj, Blerina (2021) The impact of CSR on financial performance of global fashion brands with the moderating role of brand luxury.

Berg, Bas van den (2021) Firm-specific determinants of capital structure : evidence on UK listed and unlisted firms.

Berghuis, Lars (2021) Using the Wisdom of the Crowd to Digitalize : Designing a workshop-based process selection method for the identification of suitable RPA processes.

Berkel, M. J. (2021) The effect of the working capital level on firm profitability : evidence from Dutch private small- to medium sized enterprises.

Bevers, T. (2021) The paradox of academic entrepreneurship : a study to understand context and motivations of academics that decide to become an entrepreneur for knowledge commercialization.

Bijker, M. (2021) The influence of being active in an uncertain industry, such as the hospitality industry, on entrepreneurial passion and the moderating role of gender.

Boerrigter, J.J. (2021) Does corporate social responsibility affect firm risk? Evidence from the Netherlands.

Bokkens, A. (2021) Financial inclusion and digitalisation : a qualitative research into organisational solutions for financial and digital literacy.

Boom, Wout van den (2021) The influence of interest rates, oil and carbon prices on stock returns of clean technology companies – the European case.

Boonman, A.G.M. (2021) The impact of innovation intensity on the underpricing of initial public offerings : evidence from Euronext Stock Exchange.

Bosch, Nina (2021) Western Incubators: Their Impact on the Entrepreneurial Process of African Ventures.

Brand, Daphne Karoline (2021) Professional, Liminal and Entrepreneurial Identities.

Broers, D.J. (2021) The impact of disclosure format and type of influencer on advertising recognition and consumer responses in the context of influencer marketing on social media.

Chiarizia, Stefano (2021) Chatbots and the employee selection process: what lies ahead?

Ciuffetelli, A. (2021) The new side of innovative work behaviour during the Covid-19 crisis : in which way can human resources management practices facilitate employees to engage in innovative work behaviours in the virtual work situation and working from home?

Cooiman, G.M. (2021) Development of a Project Portfolio Selection Method that includes Enterprise Architecture Complexity as a Criteria.

Cortjens, Jaap (2021) Task Characteristics and HRM Activities on Online Labour Platforms.

Dao, G. (2021) How cultural dimensions affects purchase intention on social commerce : a comparative study between the Netherlands and Vietnam.

Dapperen, R.L. van (2021) The effect of COVID-19 on the behavioural profiles of university website visitors.

Demirci, Harun (2021) Resilient Dutch food supply chains before, during and after COVID-19 : a case study of an entire supply chain.

Derin, Ediz (2021) Increasing Customer Loyalty: The Role of Social Media within the SVOD Industry.

Diekmeijer, J.J. (2021) The relation between a platform worker’s reputation and their perceived usefulness of reputation transfer : mediated by affective - and continuance commitment.

Dijk, M.N. (2021) Preferences of Business Angel Investors with regards to the Assessment Criteria Size, Timing, Industry, and Geography: Evidence from the Netherlands.

Dijkstra, R.W. (2021) Investigating the relation between multi team membership & individual performance and the possible moderating effect of personality traits.

Dimitrova, V. (2021) The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on Digital Transformation in retailing.

Disselhorst, W.M (2021) Conflict between business angels and venture capitalists, An exploratory study on the relationship between business angels and venture capitalists.

Doest, Gijs ter (2021) Making Sense and Giving Sense: an exploratory case study of line managers' and employees' sensemaking, sensegiving and attributions of a digital assessment tool.

Dreierink, B. H. (2021) Utilizing digitization within pre-purchase business customer experience management: an exploratory study.

Drion, Wouter R.B. (2021) Boundary spanning roles and related intellectual capital factors accomplishing innovations within and between public sector organizations: A boundary spanned explorative case study.

Elshof, E.W. (2021) Economic policy uncertainty and mergers and acquisitions : an empirical study on European firms.

Engbers, B.C. (2021) The impact of COVID-19 on share prices across different sectors within the US stock market.

Engelse, Lieke. W. A (2021) The cost and complexity of recruitment.

Exterkate, Marijn Fleur Elisabeth (2021) Working in times of the COVID-19 pandemic: The influence of transformational leadership on job performance and extra-role behaviour through employees’ positive affect, negative affect, thriving and coworkers’ support.

Foss, M.M. (2021) The current status of Service Design for Servitization in Industry 4.0.

Freiin von Rennenberg, Theresa Simone (2021) Towards a circular economy of critical raw materials : the case of niobium.

Gelici, A.A. (2021) Change in digital business : online platforms and their next evolution.

Gerritsen, G.W. (2021) Estimating the equity premium for non-listed firms using the acquisition multiple approach.

Gerritsen, Thijs (2021) Electronic Data Interchange implementation: a case study at a Dutch company in the steel industry.

Goede, F. de (2021) Improving the supplier risk management process during COVID-19.

Gosen, N.K. (2021) The influence of experienced intermediaries on the performance of SPACs.

Güther, Alicia (2021) Lean startup for international market entry strategy making : an exploratory study on a lean startup approach and its patterns on the internationalization of new high-tech ventures.

Haak, Lisa van der (2021) "Keep your Customers on the Radar": Exploring the facilitation of IT for service quality in a B2B and B2G context.

Haas, A.N.J.P.M. (2021) Cybercrime and Cybersecurity in the Dutch Retail Sector: A Nationwide Analysis.

Habermann, J. (2021) Sustainable customer contribution in the fashion industry : a country comparison between Germany, Italy and the United States Of America.

Haghuis, Damon (2021) System dynamics tool to increase the awareness of Smart Industry adoption urgency.

Hakkers, Steffan (2021) Creating a holistic change management method for Artificial Intelligence implementation in business processes.

Hamzasb, Addis (2021) Bridge the cultural gap: How Dutch expatriates perceive the emirati culture.

Hanus, A. (2021) Various employee-based factors associated with job performance: Exploring the ABC-model of work floor employee functioning.

Haren, B.H.S.P. van (2021) The implementation of blockchain within business supply chain management : an empirical exploration into the constructs that influence organisational intention to adopt blockchain against the background of trust and opportunism within supply chain networks.

Havekes, Koen (2021) The impact of the Financial Fair Play regulations on financial distress of Dutch professional football clubs.

Hegedus, Peter (2021) Direct and Indirect Impact of Covid-19 on the Video Gaming Market Stock Prices.

Heide, R. van der (2021) Algorithms changing jobs: the role of the HR professional.

Helle, Tim (2021) Video conferencing in SMEs - Composing a decision support model to advice IT consultants for organisational meetings.

Hernandez Perez, Robert. A (2021) Exploring the effect of sustainable practices on competitive advantage in Fintech firms: A comparative analysis.

Hesselman, Jeroen G.J. (2021) Revisiting the Reliability of Initial Coin Offering Intermediaries' ratings : Assessing the Current State of Affairs of ICO Ratings, Social Media and Regulation in the Highly Dynamic World of Cryptocurrencies.

Hessels, Rian (2021) The New Normal, But What Will Happen Next? : A shadowing study into sustaining eudaimonic well-being at work in post-crisis working from home.

Hohdorf, Pia (2021) The influence of uncertainty intolerance and gender on decision making in new venture creation; effectuation and causation : the case of German entrepreneurs.

Hohmann, M. (2021) Ownership structure and tax avoidance : an empirical analysis of listed Indonesian mining companies.

Holst, G.M. (2021) Transactional, Instrumental and transformational leadership: what is more effective for an Industry 4.0 transformation?

Holst, T.G.M. van der (2021) Turning data into value : determining which intelligent process automation technologies can be used to automate the process of ordering packaging at Company X.

Hommels, N.M.C. (2021) The influence of gender stereotyping in advertising on brand equity.

Hoonhorst, R.H. (2021) The effect of R&D investment intensity on stock return volatility : evidence from tech firms in the Netherlands.

Hovenier, R.G. (2021) Dynamic capabilities and business model innovation in the Dutch hospitality industry : a multiple case study in times of strategic disruption following COVID measures in 2020.

Jansen, R.A.M (2021) The new normal: The impact of COVID-19 on the future work environment.

Kahraman, M. (2021) Determinants of dividend policy in the Netherlands.

Kamphuis, M.J.M. (2021) Platforms in healthcare : a qualitative multiple case study to explore how to achieve successful platforms for information, integration and innovation.

Kamphuis, Michiel (2021) Designing Maritime CSR for Sustainability: Considerations on Energy.

Kamphuis, T.R.C. (2021) How do negotiation practitioners prepare B2B negotiations, and is this according to the academic literature?

Karstens, H.A.C. (2021) The effect of share repurchase announcements on share price for Dutch firms.

Kartal, I. (2021) Influencing factors of data-driven decision-making adoption in the Netherlands.

Kill, Philipp (2021) How do personality traits affect the relationship between emotional intelligence (EI) and the preferred conflict mode of a negotiator?

Kolpinski, Charleen von (2021) Impact of internal company dynamics on circular sustainable business development.

Koning, Cas C. de (2021) The effect of firm-specific characteristics on the stock market returns during the COVID-19 pandemic: An event study.

Kooistra, Maxime (2021) Rapid Prototyping-as-a-Service : Pricing Strategies in Industrial Markets.

Koopmans, C.S. (2021) Validating internal barriers towards radical and disruptive innovation in the Dutch Financial Services and Banking sector.

Krottje, Pien (2021) Developing a UTeaching case: challenges in the implementation of Industry 4.0 at HYDRO.

Laan, Jip (2021) The impact of the Corona-pandemic on the business model of cybercrime.

Lage Venterink, S. (2021) The impact of leverage and the maturity of debt on firm growth: Evidence from West-European high-technology firms.

Lasschuijt, M. (2021) First-tier antecedents of supplier satisfaction: The impact of culture and expectations.

Layik, D. (2021) Agile vs. Lean : a systematic literature review comparing underlying principles, work-floor practices, and team-level behaviours.

Layik, Denny (2021) Agile vs. Lean : a systematic literature review comparing underlying principles, work-floor practices, and team-level behaviours.

Leeuwerden, Menno van (2021) Green Talk : The Effect of Environmental CSR Communication on the Purchase Intention of Green Products.

Lin, Jia Zheng (2021) Workload analysis based on event logs.

Lochan, N.K. (2021) COVID19 and its impact on procurement processes of organisations in the private and public sector within the Twente region.

Lok, Edwin (2021) The Role of the European Sovereign Debt Crisis on the Impact of Leverage on Investment Efficiency.

Lubbers, Koen (2021) Debt level and Firm Performance: Empirical evidence based on Dutch firms.

Luimes, Tom (2021) The value effect of big data in the financial services field.

Lukkien, J. (2021) From improvising to strategising : student start-up decision-making processes during new venture creation.

Mahmud, Max (2021) Lean Internationalization of High-Tech Startups.

Malakeh, C. (2021) Board of Directors and cost of debt : the moderating effect of ownership structure - evidence from European SMEs.

Margos, Mardiek (2021) Cognitive style influence on entrepreneurial intent in tight and loose cultures.

Marinelli, Giorgia (2021) Implementation of chatbots for the job selection : advantages and disadvantages.

Masselink, J.G.M. (2021) The financial performance of companies active in the Dutch liquor industry: a case study.

Meijer, K.P. (2021) Customer Acceptance of Neobanks: What Role Does National Culture Play?

Meijer, M.E.W. (2021) Exploring business model innovation for Dutch energy suppliers : an overview of drivers, barriers and conditions.

Melis, A.G. (2021) The influence of scent on the selection of products in a binary choice task.

Mensen, S.J. (2021) Factors facilitating the strategic alignment between the purchasing strategy and business strategy: a SME context.

Mensink, Dennis (2021) Combining Mass Customization and Augmented Reality and its effect on customer purchase intention : an online experiment.

Merkel, Linda (2021) The Influence of a Robot's Level of Humanness on People's Acceptance Towards Interacting with Robots in Job Interviews.

Merzaie, Arian (2021) Augmented Reality Enriched Business Modelling : A qualitative study into the implementation of a VR serious game in the rehabilitation care.

Moekotte, Kay (2021) Master thesis on the effects of entrepreneurial decision-making on ventures’ performance.

Moekotte, M. (2021) The moderating effect of board size on the relationship of CEO power and financial firm performance in the United Kingdom.

Molendijk, L. (2021) A socio-material perspective on challenges in bakery food innovation : how to overcome barriers of new product acceptance in work context.

Mombarg, Jeroen (2021) Usability and user experience design analysis on a University website : A usability and user experience of an internationally oriented university website; explaining the different click through rates of different studies.

Moonen, D.J.T. (2021) Factors influencing the level of purchase-to-pay and contract management maturity of Dutch hospitals.

Musters, D.W.L (2021) The effect of percieved stress (COVID-19) and uncertainty intolerance on the entrepreneurial decision-making process: causation and effectuation.

Müller, R. (2021) The influence of local governments on scaling hybrid organizations in a BoP context.

Neal, Jonas (2021) Effectual orientation: the influence of entrepreneurial passion and expertise.

Nelissen, Leo Martinus (2021) Beating COVID-19 : assessing best practices for supply chain risk mitigation efforts among US companies.

Nijkamp, J.B. (2021) Big data in small companies : a survey in the retail sector in the Netherlands.

Nijkamp, MSc Jelle J.B. (2021) Big data in small companies : a survey in the retail sector in the Netherlands.

Nolting, J. (2021) The dual role of line managers in the implementation of a semi-digital HR tool : how does a line manager’s personal sensemaking process influence his/her sensegiving procedure in the implementation of a semi-digital HR tool?

Noordam, R.P. (2021) The resilience of small companies, in the professional services industry, during COVID-19.

Nypels, M (2021) Factors influencing the volatility of bitcoin returns: An empirical study.

Olde, R.D. de (2021) Bitcoin : safe haven for currencies in times of economic uncertainty.

Ozturk, D. (2021) Comparison between the predefined process and the actual process model.

Palmisano, Daria (2021) The Job Demands-Resources model in the context of social media platforms : SMIs’perspective.

Piccolo, Martina (2021) Job selection with a chatbot? : Ethnographic study into chatbots requirements.

Potters, Paul (2021) Towards 2040 : Scenario-based roadmapping in a Dutch construction company.

Raa, J. te (2021) Improvement of human resources in purchasing by creating job profiles, in small- and medium enterprises.

Raalte, F.W. van (2021) The impact of firm-specific determinants on the capital structure of Dutch listed and non-listed companies.

Raben, H.H. (2021) Assessing societal relevance from a regional development agency perspective : using a design research method.

Reuvers, S. (2021) Discovering customer clusters using unsupervised machine learning to aid the marketing strategy: a case study with an online retail webshop SME.

Reysoo, Gijs (2021) The impact of R&D investments on firm performance for European listed firms.

Ritter, A.I. (2021) Design in business : a framework for the use of participatory tools in the digital transofrmation of SMEs.

Romijn, F. A. (2021) Workflow design for research projects at Alliander’s research center.

Roorda, S.A.H. (2021) “Facial Recognition for Public Safety” : a supportive tool for the municipal decision-making process on using facial recognition for public safety, the FRPS risk governance method.

Roosendaal, X.W.G. (2021) Employees’ perspective on the impact of agile implementation on knowledge sharing: A qualitative study in a large multi-national company.

Rosemann, Juliane (2021) Working as a German in The Netherlands : cultural standards and the impact of demographic characteristics.

Ruiter, K.J. (2021) The influence of uncertainty (in)tolerance on decision-making behaviour of entrepreneurs.

Said, Mirna (2021) Understanding the entrepreneurial decision-making behind the choice to join a start-up accelerator.

Sambeek, W.F.J.H. van (2021) Supply chain supporting build-to-print products in a small manufacturing company.

Sander, BSc. L.A. (2021) The Influence of Covid-19 on Physician Well-being Through Sudden Changes in Organizational Routines.

Schabbink, L.J.S. (2021) Supporting the development of brand-aligned offerings and marketing interactions.

Scheckelhoff, Stefanie (2021) The Role of Studying Qualitative Research Methods in Enabling Career-Oriented Skills of University Graduates.

Schiereck, Philipp (2021) Purchasing Complex Services – Possibilities and Chances through Industry 4.0.

Seckanovic, E. (2021) The impact of capital structure on firm performance : evidence from British high-tech firms.

Siemerink, E.V. (2021) Achieving extraordinary fit : adopting simple rules to the target selection process in M&A.

Sleurink, Chris (2021) The simultaneous application of effectual and causal modes of action in my own company: an insider action research.

Smit, J.J.H. (2021) “This is not an era of change, it’s a change of era”: Exploring motivations for green and inclusive leadership within Dutch SMEs.

Soeteman, Sam I. (2021) What is the most sustainable measurement method of #SustainableHousing?

Somi, T. (2021) Scaling social business models : a lean startup perspective.

Soosapillai, A.R (2021) Digital crowdfunding strategy : effect of Non-skippable advertisement of charitable organizations on the monetary donation of YouTube users.

Stal, W.G. ter (2021) The initial stock market reaction to announced M&As : the case of European and UK acquirers.

Stegehuis, F.J. (2021) Digital Immigrants and Digital Natives: An explorative study into the adaptivity of technology.

Sterken, G.T. (2021) Innovation processes in times of a crisis : a research during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Stock, Robin (2021) Curse or blessing? : The significance of loyalty programs in pandemic times.

Takian, Sadir (2021) The optimization of planning parameters.

Taşdoğan, Mehmet E. (2021) Implementation of Robotic Process Automation (RPA): a qualitative case study into the way organizational actors give and make sense of the implementation process.

Toebes, I.W. (2021) Aligning purchasing with the organizational strategy : a study into the differences of presence and effectiveness from vertical strategy alignment between multiple types of healthcare organizations.

Torres Adelsberger, Rodrigo (2021) "Get it done and create impact" : Exploring early-stage academic spin-off success criteria: a set-theoretic approach.

Uum, E. M. van (2021) Behaving entrepreneurially in a digital transformation : A focus group study on entrepreneurial qualities and professional identity of employees in a digital transformation.

Velthof, L.B. (2021) The role of HRM in participation of work-floor employees in employee-driven innovation through an online suggestion system.

Verweijmeren, R.W. (2021) The effect of COVID-19 on the purchase channels and order transaction value for a printing specialized organization.

Veuger, B.J. (2021) Exploring nurses’ work preferences in a nursing home context : a qualitative study.

Visch, M.D. (2021) Operations Strategy : Orange Climate Waterloo.

Volk, J. (2021) Achieving a resilient supply chain within an opportunity-driven market environment.

Vos, D.E. de (2021) Tender attractiveness in the public procurement of strategic goods: understanding the factors that influence suppliers’ willingness to bid. A case study of the fire department in the Netherlands.

Wallisser, J.M. (2021) Identification and processing of quality ideas: A case of idea management in the front-end of project management in Projektron BCS.

Wegdam, Casey (2021) The Effect of Reputation on the Four Stages of Buyer-Supplier Relationships and the Extent to which Buyers and Suppliers Preserve their Reputation in B2B Relationships in the Food Industry.

Weghorst, E.E. (2021) EDI through an online suggestion system: The influence of HRM activities on the implementation of innovative ideas.

Weidemann, J.M. (2021) Personality as a Potential Determinant of Strategic Adaptability in Negotiations.

Wiefferink, B.B. (2021) Leadership in times of COVID-19 : What is required by leaders to effectively manage employees in a virtual work context?

Wilmer, R. (2021) The impact of collaboration with a purchasing organisation and its affiliated organisations on purchasing performance : an empirical case study based on an installation company in The Netherlands.

Wilmink, Ruud (2021) The Impact of CEO Compensation on Firm Risk: Evidence from Indian Firms.

Wolters, J.J. (2021) A blueprint for successful innovation of a maintenance companies' business model using digitalization.

Wolters, Kim (2021) A problematizing review on the assumptions underlying research on organizational commitment regarding employees in alternative work arrangements.

Wolters, N. (2021) Institutional complexity in talent management practices : employee staffing, development, and retention.

Wolters, R. (2021) The effect of ambidextrous leadership on self-reported innovative performance in manufacturing.

Wonders, A.N. (2021) Reducing absence behaviour among truck drivers.

Woning, L.E. van der (2021) Behavioral change interventions in the military : the academic background, the cultural matches, and the bottlenecks with the integration.

Woolderink, A.H.C. (2021) The interrelationship of supplier satisfaction and supplier relation specific interorganisational systems investments : a case study at VDL ETG Almelo.

Woudstra, S (2021) The handling of in- and outflow of information between different departments of small and medium-sized enterprises.

Érdi-Krausz, T.V. (2021) The impact of perceived depression, anxiety, loneliness and worry on consumer behavior and buying patterns during the COVID-19 pandemic - An exploratory study.

2020

Akcora, mr Caner (2020) The effect of chatbots tone of voice on trust and customer satisfaction.

Angelucci, Samuel (2020) Exploring different types of Multiple Job Holding through the Gig Economy : their Push and Pull factors.

Apostolov, Nikola (2020) Reducing churn in data management SaaS companies: a case study.

Arink, R.B. (2020) How data-driven decision making can help managers and employees with creating business value.

Asma, S. (2020) Challenges and opportunities that green entrepreneurs face when building their network compared to traditional network formation, a triple bottom line perspective.

Azevedo Amaral, A.M. (2020) The effective integration of big data in the decision-making process.

Bahadur, F.K. (2020) Fake it till you break it?! Impact of fake news on implicit brand attitudes of social media users.

Barbonetti, Cristian (2020) HRM practices permit value creation and capture of online Platform firms : how they change in time and space.

Beltman, N. (2020) Does market orientation in the early startup phase pay off?

Benerink, T. (2020) Exploring the integration of automated text classification solutions in roadmapping.

Benkert, C.L. (2020) Ownership concentration & agency theory : Investigating the effect of large shareholders on corporate payout policy in Danish publicly listed companies.

Bierhold, Tom (2020) KSA gap of university taught digital marketers.

Bijl, T. (2020) Gender differences in purchasing and supply management : a mixed method research into purchasing professionals' competencies and professional focus.

Boksebeld, J.J.C (2020) Using workarounds for better process compliance.

Bolier, R.A. (2020) The influence of entrepreneurial passion and cognition on entrepreneurial decision-making.

Boriglione, V. (2020) Post-acquisition inclusive business identity & sustainable growth.

Bosgra, S.A. (2020) Investigating the coherence between the material and social dimensions during the implementation of e-HRM while looking at the effects of user’s HR attributions.

Bosman, Laura (2020) Optimisation of the purchasing process of support needs in municipalities.

Bouwmeester, A. (2020) Prediction power of accounting-based bankruptcy prediction models : evidence from Dutch and Belgian public and large private firms.

Brunnekreeft, N.M. (2020) Putting strategy into practice : exploring the role of middle managers’ leadership behavior.

Buis, G. (2020) Reasons for investment holdback in robot arm solutions at medium-sized organizations in the food industry.

Burg, Sascha (2020) Designing an app prototype for employee business travel using value-based requirements engineering.

Buuren, N. ten (2020) Presence and origin of perceptual distance in buyer-supplier relationships.

Büter, J.B. (2020) The role of HRM in creating an Inclusive Work Environment to foster Employee-driven Innovation.

Capannolo, G. (2020) Self-managing employees’ Emotional Intelligence to engage in Innovative Work Behavior.

Caschera, Miriana (2020) Collaborating to innovate: a systematic literature review towards a framework on digital innovator roles.

Cvetkovski, A. (2020) Country-of-origin effects in entrepreneurial context : a quantitative study in Serbia and the Netherlands. An empirical evaluation of the effect of communicating a company’s liabilities of newness on the consumers’ purchase intention, product quality perception, and design quality perception.

Dekker, L. (2020) Why do fees paid to M&A advisory firms differ per deal? : A multiple case study into perceived value in an M&A advisory firm context.

Dieckmann, J. (2020) Decision making in the business model development of an established firm : the perspective of mid-level employees in SMEs.

Doan, M.H (2020) Impact of CEO career horizon on firm’s R&D investment : examining the CEO-TMT interface.

Doek, A.J. (2020) Listen to your customers! : a study about content creation on social media to enhance customer engagement.

Dogan, A. (2020) The effect of board diversity on firm performance in the Netherlands.

Elezović, K. (2020) The effect of emotional intelligence on B2B negotiations in terms of preparations, behaviours and outcomes.

Ensink, M.A.G. (2020) Does preserving family values help to sustain stability and growth in family businesses?

Findik, S.S. (2020) The impact of trust, tactics and process on the perceived relationship between buyers and suppliers in B2B negotiations.

Foss, L.M. (2020) Predicting teacher turnover in Dutch primary schools.

Frank, Laura (2020) The impact of organisational culture on the involvement of indirect procurement by their internal stakeholders: A case study from the FMCG industry.

Gankema, W. (2020) Exploring the added value of observational methods in survey-based team psychological safety research.

Gehrmann, L.C. (2020) Data-driven decision-making in the innovation process of SMEs.

Gend, J.E. van (2020) It's all in your head: Prevent negative effects of biases in ICT project management decision-making.

Gezel, Pim (2020) Exploring organizational factors causing Teacher Attrition in Primary schools in the Netherlands : a multiple regression study.

Groen, J (2020) Exploiting Information From Analyst Target Prices Using Portfolio Optimization.

Gänsler, T. K. J. (2020) The impact of CEO gender on environmental sustainability strategies in businesses.

Hammer, B.A. (2020) The effect of online labour platforms on the role of line managers in managing human capital.

Haren, Quinten van (2020) The Covid-19 outbreak and Business Continuity : an empirical assessment amongst SME’s located in Twente.

Haverkate, Youri (2020) The impact of CEO characteristics on CEO remuneration: Evidence from the Netherlands.

Heiligenberg, F.S. van den (2020) Implementing digitalization for public managers : A study to which leadership behaviours are best suited for implementing digitalization at public organizations.

Henstra, C.T. (2020) Meaningful work in the digital age.

Hillmer, S. (2020) Fear the unknown or embrace the uncertainty? A German study on the entrepreneurial approaches of effectuation and causation.

Hofman, S.C. (2020) Cost price calculation for Zuivelhoeve – Finding the most appropriate method.

Hogeslag, M. A. (2020) The impact of green innovation on firm financial performance.

Hogt, K. ter (2020) Turnover behaviour of IT professionals in The Netherlands : the role of HR practices and organizational job embeddedness.

Holst, M. A. van der (2020) The dynamics of organisational culture in the managerial spin-off : centralising the perspective of the organisational members.

Holterman, M.C. (2020) The role of HR in stimulating supervisors and their employees to engage in innovative work behavior : a case study at an insurance company.

Hormann, Tina Marie (2020) Web design for different user generations : the impact of aesthetics on emotions and quality perceptions.

Houwers, Nick (2020) The important determinants for serious games to increase physical activity levels among youth.

Humby, K. (2020) Scaling in Africa : motives, modes and challenges of internationalisation within the inclusive fintech industry.

Hülscher, Lena (2020) A mixed methods approach to individual resilience and innovative work behavior in adversity.

Ilkay, Berat (2020) Big Data and the Innovation Process : A Systematic Review.

Ince, MSc. M. (2020) Exploring the role of inter-organizational fit in preference between buyer and supplier in a new product development context.

Jonitz, Philip (2020) Leveraging the power of CSR: the impact of food waste treatment claims on packaged foods on consumer attitudes and behavioural intentions.

Kamp, Jan-Willem Bernardus (2020) The involvement of entrepreneurial network ties as advisory entities within the strategic decision-making process of small firms : a process perspective.

Kamphuis, Stijn S (2020) Recursive and adaptive tendencies in fast-growth SMEs.

Kamps, L.H.W. (2020) Exploring combinations of increasing autonomy and support that contribute to work-life balance, improved absenteeism and roster satisfaction Using fuzzy set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA).

Kappert, Ruben (2020) The development of a maturity model to support the assessment and evaluation of the purchasing department in the field of innovation.

Kara, A. (2020) The effects of negotiation behaviours on the decision-making process of suppliers while providing firms the preferred customer status in B2B settings.

Kattenpoel Oude Heerink, W.F. (2020) Explorative study into valuation methods for Dutch privately held enterprises : a survey.

Kemink, P.H. (2020) Servitization and ecosystem strategy formulation.

Khreiche, André (2020) Responding to Customer Reviews: Do Managerial Responses Enhance Review Quality?

Klasens, M.D. (2020) Factors influencing the customer satisfaction rate in Dutch SME fitness centers.

Kok, R.W.M. (2020) The moderating effects of national culture on the relation between social capital and supplier satisfaction.

Kolff, M.O. (2020) Solving the platform puzzle : a qualitative multiple case study.

Kolfoort, M. (2020) The home care clients' values for satisfaction: Assessing the values of frail older adults with home care services.

Kroeze, D.R. (2020) Why do start-up entrepreneurs use certain strategy practices?

Kroon, J. (2020) The configurations of inhibiting and stimulating factors in servitization.

Köpcke, Jannes (2020) From waste to premium: Consumers perception of value-added surplus products and their willingness to pay.

Laan, Ruben van der (2020) The determinants of cash holding: Evidence from Dutch listed firms.

Lammers, P.F. (2020) Becoming the preferred customer : Operative best practices for buyer organisations.

Lammers, R. (2020) Feeling targeted in a digital era : a study about the influence of online behavioral targeting on consumer attitudes.

Lansink, M.J. (2020) The effect of servitization on the product-oriented strategic net of SMEs.

Lehmann, E. (2020) Moped sharing building sustainable cities : defining critical success factors that enable operators to develop efficient business strategies.

Lenferink, J.M.E. (2020) Determining the competitiveness of the Dutch agribusiness using the Generalized Double Diamond - a case study.

Leus, M.Y. (2020) An evaluation of value-oriented care purchasing.

Li, Yan (2020) The effects of external debt financing and internal financing on firm performance: empirical evidence from automobile listed firms.

Lintelo, N. te (2020) The effect of gender-diverse boards on firms financial performance : Evidence from France and the United States.

Livaniou, Niki (2020) Honest behavior and perceived anonymity in online environment.

Lorenz, T. (2020) The strategic use of HRM-practices in the grand café restaurant industry.

Luttikhuis, D.A.C. (2020) Barriers faced and dynamic capabilities needed for a circular transition : evidence from the manufacturing industry in the Netherlands.

Manten, D.J.F. (2020) From start-up to scale-up : in search of the relationship between the founder’s decision-making autonomy, leadership style, and the organisational growth.

Martinovic, Mario (2020) Consumer perceptions on targeted marketing : a study on Facebook personalization practices.

Medori, R. (2020) Internal and external attributions for innovative work behavior.

Molitor, M.M. (2020) Effective human-robot collaboration in the industry 4.0 context : implications for human resource management.

Mosca, Maria (2020) Digitalization of HRM : a study of success factors and consequences in the last decade.

Mourik, J.B. (2020) Between Dutch & Polish culinary cultures: A comparative study of online platform usage and perception.

Munting, M. (2020) An explorative study towards the feasibility of uplift modeling within a direct marketing setting and a web-based setting.

Mutlu, Galaf (2020) The effect of board gender diversity on firm performance in the Netherlands.

Nijenhuis, Dion (2020) The University Business Incubators' value-creating activities on enhancing new product development : a systematic literature review.

Nijenhuis, L.G.W. te (2020) The impact of institutional investors on cross-border mergers and acquisitions in Europe.

Nijhuis, S.T. (2020) Business takeovers : is strong entrepreneurial orientation beneficial for SMEs?

Nolten, Niek (2020) How do employees of StrengthCo stay engaged during organizational changes?

Nooitgedagt, H.P. (2020) The effect of corporate governance mechanisms on capital structure of Dutch listed firms.

Oddo, Milas Salvatore (2020) The challenges of teamwork in Geographically Distributed Teams (GDTs).

Oldeniel, R.N. van (2020) The impact of industry-specific determinants on the capital structure of Dutch SMEs.

Oosterveld, Rick (2020) The effects of (dynamic) capabilities on the level of servitization, moderated by market dynamics.

Ophof, T.T.J. (2020) Does marketing function pay of in moderating the relationship between market orientation and business performance.

Oremus, L.P.A. (2020) The Impact of Gender-diverse Boards on the Financial Performance of U.K. Listed Firms.

Oude Hampsink, J. (2020) The relationship between CEO compensation and firm performance of Dutch listed firms.

Pannekoek, G. (2020) To what extent is there a market for car sharing in the region of Twente?

Pondes, M.A.J. (2020) Managing cyber risks in smart cities.

Prinsen, L. (2020) Organizational structure : how to offer a product-service system? A multiple case study.

Putkivaara, L. V. (2020) Inventory Optimisation by Means of Multivariate Analysis.

Quak, Remi (2020) Process Mining in Healthcare: Gaps between protocol and clinical practice of critical side findings in radiology.

Reimert, Stijn (2020) “Analyzing and testing a newly introduced innovation measurement method by comparing it to key performance indicators and performing a case study at a technical driven company.”.

Reuvers, Frank (2020) Team performance and innovative work behavior through self-managing work teams in the health care sector.

Richter, Lucas (2020) Participation on internal crowdsourcing platforms.

Rietveld, W.B. (2020) Crossing the chasm between exploration and exploitation : achieving ambidexterity through intrapreneurship.

Rosink, N.J.F. (2020) The impact of capital structure on firm performance in Western Europe.

Salomons, T. (2020) Collaboration between social entrepreneurs and local governments : a causation and effectuation view.

Santone, R. (2020) The constant research on adoption and consequences of e-HRM : a comparison between past and present.

Schafeld, E. (2020) Team AMO : which abilities, motivation and opportunities do teams require to perform well?

Schnater, V.A.G. (2020) The influence of technology on low-skilled employees in the grocery retail sector.

Schrotenboer, D.W. (2020) The nature of the brand experience.

Schulte, T. (2020) Social media marketing in B2B oriented SMEs.

Seccia, A. (2020) The impact of TM strategies on performance of organizations : a research on the relationship between TM strategies and performance in the world of football.

Simioli, Michele (2020) How international students can manage studies and work together : under which conditions online labour platforms may improve or hinder students’ life.

Slot, Robin Dion (2020) How can the alignment between service provider service quality and customer usage process be studied from a value in use perspective?

Snaterse, Maxime (2020) Entrepreneurial strategies of young classical musicians.

Snijders, M. (2020) The maturity of the purchasing process of municipalities.

Snijders, Marlou (2020) The maturity of the purchasing process of municipalities.

Somon, K.E (2020) Understanding the variables influencing the adoption of the blockchain technology.

Somon, Kélian (2020) Understanding the Variables Influencing the Adoption of the Blockchain Technology.

Spoor, T.I.J. (2020) To what extent does the compensation of CEOs of Dutch listed firms depend on firm performance?

Stankovic, Nikola (2020) Enhancing enterprise agility with Bizdevops method for Business-It Alignment.

Stokman, B.A. (2020) How to manage the effect of outsourcing from original equipment manufacturers to contract manufacturers on innovation capacity.

Strack, J.S. (2020) Under which condition does platform work enable or restrain work identity construction of platform workers?

Tip, B.C.M. (2020) The development of a purchasing portfolio model for purchasing departments in hospitals during a crisis.

Tran, Thanh Truc (2020) The moderating impact of corporate governance reform on the relationship between board independence and earnings management : evidence from Vietnamese listed firms.

Tran, Thuy (2020) Intolerance of uncertainty and culturaltTightness-looseness - two antecedents of effectuation-causation: evidence from South Africa.

Veen, Kirsten van (2020) Yes, we want to forecast! But how? : forecasting the demand for truck drivers to optimize the business and its supply chain.

Veklenko, K. (2020) Effectiveness of online advertising : a bibliometric analysis.

Velichkova, Grigoria (2020) Effectiveness of price and nonprice promotions, App and communication on sales uplift for dairy shoppers in Twente.

Venema, Mark (2020) Exploring the alteration of the business model logic to engage in business model innovation.

Vergert, T.J.M. ten (2020) Leadership behaviour in agile squads.

Vincent, E.J.A. (2020) Business case: Process improvement of the material planning process at Company X.

Voortman, Daan (2020) Measuring the effects of supplier satisfaction and its relational antecedents on communication quality and the willingness of information sharing, a case study at SES Creative.

Vreugdenhil, H.G. (2020) To predict, or to control that is the question : the influence of intolerance of uncertainty on entrepreneurial decision-making behaviour.

Wal, N.A. van der (2020) CEO power and firm performance : the moderating role of board independence.

Weghorst, M.S.H. (2020) The impact of waiting times, physical therapy and length of hospital stay on the quality outcomes after total knee arthroplasty and total hip arthroplasty.

Wetting, T. (2020) The effect of Ownership Concentration on Financial Recovery Time of Western European non-financial firms in Financial Distress.

Wiegard, S.W. (2020) Make, buy or ally? Comparing practical software sourcing decision factors with transaction cost economics, resource-based and knowledge-based view: a case study in the automobile industry.

Wierik, T.M. te (2020) Social media utilization of startups over their life cycle.

Wiggers, K. (2020) Assessment of supplier evaluation tools followed by a supplier selection process.

Wiggers, Martijn (2020) The relative importance of commitment dimensions in securing customer loyalty in the Dutch pig feed industry.

Willemsen, C.J. (2020) Electronic Salary Negotiations : the Influence of Gender and Emotional Intelligence on Negotiation Behaviour and Social Preservation Behaviour.

Winkelhorst, S.B. (2020) Dynamic ambidexterity : implications of balancing exploration and exploitation over time.

Wittich, M. (2020) Towards a more inclusive university-based entrepreneurial ecosystem.

Wolbers, Sander A.H.J.M. (2020) Servitization: a design research towards service-oriented mindset.

Yu, X (2020) Brand crisis: what influences customers' motivation to defend a brand.

Zak, Marlene (2020) Augmented Reality try-on adoption in the Online Clothing Industry : understanding key challenges and critical success Factors.

Özgören, A. (2020) The credibility of recommender systems : Identifying biases and overspecialisation.

2019

Ambalavanar, Nirojan (2019) The impact of corporate life cycle on the capital structure of German listed companies.

Appelman, L.A. (2019) Board gender diversity and corporate risk-taking.

Arnoldus, Tanno (2019) Ex-ante uncertainty as a determinant of Initial Coin Offering underpricing.

Asch, G.C.A. van (2019) Does the performance of pension plans affect firm investment of Dutch sponsoring firms?

Bacino Ignjatovich, Stefan (2019) The influence of professorial leadership, interfirm collaboration and market research depth on university spin-off funding acquisition and survival.

Bakhuis, J.J. (2019) Challenges of stakeholder communication for developing organizational resilience : the case of Dutch pharmacies.

Barghout, Sona (2019) Framework for Revising or Finding Subsidiary Strategic Orientation.

Bartelds, J. (2019) What type of Loyalty programs is most effective in a FMCG online business environment? A Case studies.

Bartelink, J.A.M. (2019) Operational antecedents and achieving preferred customership for improved information sharing and supplier involvement in new product introduction at Benchmark Electronics.

Bauer, Nadja (2019) The Role of Sensory Processing Sensitivity in the Formation of Entrepreneurial Intention: A Theory of Planned Behavior Approach.

Beer, E.W. (2019) The relationship between Customer Servitisation and Customer Revenue: A Customer-driven Segmentation of SaaS.

Beernink, D.H.T.M. (2019) The limiting effects of path dependence towards organizational change in the vehicle body building industry.

Boertien, J.K. (2019) Improving innovation performance through employee-driven innovation routes.

Bosch, R.C. (2019) An assessment of the current state of risk-sharing arrangements and its stakeholder’s perspectives in the Dutch healthcare sector.

Brake, B.D.B te (2019) Perception differences and similarities regarding supplier satisfaction : a case study.

Breukink, M.J. (2019) Do the Announcements of Cross-border Mergers and Acquisitions Increase Short-term Stock-prices for Acquiring Firms? An Analysis of Western European Firms.

Brune, Henriette (2019) Same, same but different? : A strategic f