In a city near you is a park with a pond with an island in the middle. On it lives a small girl called Teal. Her only possessions are an umbrella and a blanket and she sleeps in a tree. She is friends with a turnip.

In any normal world this would herald a call to the police and the immediate descent of a dozen safeguarding specialists. Especially when you consider there's an adult male in a corduroy cat suit sleeping in a BED in a HOUSE at the bottom of the tree and her parents are probably frantic with worry.

But not on CBeebies. Oh no. In this strange, drug-inspired reality the twisted individual in a cat suit is just giving the little girl a welcome chance to float around on bubbles made by an elephant seal who, inexplicably considering our weather, lives in the lake.

The Adventures of Abney and Teal could be renamed The Corduroy Catnapper and it would make more sense. But this is CBeebies, where television programmes aimed at the under-6s seem intent on teaching them to run away with odd men, fear adolescence and do terrible things to music.

Elsewhere on children's TV resides Peppa Pig, leader of a porcine cult not unlike how the world would be if Napoleon, the tyrannical oinker from George Orwell's Animal Farm, had succeeded in building his totalitarian pig-state.

Pigs wear clothes and ride bikes. Pigs of one status are not friends with pigs of a different status. Some animals are more equal than others and granted the right to language, emotions and windows in their homes, but tortoises, parrots and ducks are at the bottom of the caste system and able only to quack, squawk or mope.

Not only does the sight of Peppa render children mute and still, but they are encouraged to dress in cult-badged clothes, play with cult-badged toys, and force their parents to hand over all their income in return for peace of mind. They are conned into doing so by occasional in-jokes that go over children's heads and which the adults believe are "just for them", like a wolf asking casually what building materials an animal has chosen for their new house.

This is a ploy. You are in a cult. It should be called Peppantology. Thank heavens Tom Cruise hasn't seen it yet, that's all I can say.

Then we have Bing, an intensely-annoying rabbit in dungarees who is four times the size of Flop, a walking beanbag who appears to have taken him hostage and spirited him to a town filled with exotic animals kidnapped from all over the world. Flop is voiced with sinister calm by Thomas Cromwell himself, Mark Rylance, a man who is no stranger to Shakespearean malice and always sounds One More Incident With The Toothpaste away from a stabbing.

Bing is rarely allowed outside. When he does, he is under the strict control of Flop or watched carefully by other beanbags. He is forced to repeat whatever he's learned that day at the end of every episode, and seems not to have noticed that there are no grown-ups. This is presumably because all the animals are ritually slaughtered by the beanbags when they reach adolescence, and you can just tell this is the blood-spattered Act III that Flop is building up to.

I could go on, and I will. The fact the Teletubbies have eaten living children and will show you them in their stomachs. The fact they have their own time-space feedback loop which means they have to relive the entire episode the moment the episode has ended.

The fact Lucy stays up all night at a zoo which inexplicably is open all night long and will be wrecked for school the next day, the fact Peter Rabbit is a career criminal whose recidivist woodland gang must be making Beatrix Potter do 78rpm in her grave, the fact Dipdap is being terrorised by a pencil with a mind of its own, the fact the Timmy Time theme tune is the most pernicious ear worm known to man and the eponymous young sheep of the title is blissfully unaware of the inevitability of the slaughterhouse.

I only watch it in hope of catching the longed-for episode where his cat, owl and dog friends reveal the harsh realities of farming life to Timmy, in much the same way as older children can always be relied upon to tell younger ones there is no Father Christmas.

Then there's Charlie and Lola. Two children in need of a social worker if ever there were.

Presiding over this horrorshow like an evil clown is, well, an evil clown. Mr Tumble has made a multi-million pound fortune with his ever-growing franchise of awfulness, centred on a lightly-handicapped man in pyjamas with a spotty bag and obsession with sign language. I don't know if I'll ever need the hand movement for "gerbil", but it's stuck in my mind for ever.

He has more programmes on the BBC than Chris Evans and Jeremy Vine put together. There's Something Special where his alter ego Justin Fletcher gallivants around the countryside with two child companions doing things like narrowboat journeys or a trip to the beach, like a dull Doctor Who. There's Gigglebiz where he mostly dresses in women's clothing to not be funny. There's voice parts in half a dozen other programmes and, top of the grim heap, is Justin's House - a house in the Match of the Day studio where he lives with a gay robot and a leftover from The Muppets.

The slapstick and storylines are bad enough, but he saves the worst for last with an audience-participation singalong. On the stage whatever jobbing, desperate, bit-part actors have sunk this low help him through a few verses in a particular musical genre, with the watching children singing their own part.

The last two I have been subjected to were Bryan Adams-style rock complete with air guitar, and rapping. The only reason my eyeballs are still in place was because there was no sewage-covered spoon within reach of the sofa.

The problem is this man is like crack cocaine for toddlers. Mr Tumble's Big Book of Counting is flung at me twice a day for a read, despite the fact its pages have been ripped to shreds. His Hide and Seek literary effort is so well-known that my cub can find everything before I've read the bit about looking for them, and then wants to do it AGAIN. And the Mr Tumble doll, with light-up bow tie and a chuckle like someone really proud of doing a poo, is regularly hidden at the bottom of the toy box in the hope that the household addict won't sniff it out.

Even that's not why I loathe him. I hate him most because every female character he portrays is fat, a liar, a thief, or a lipsticked sociopath. His men are bumbling idiots, but in his world women seem plain evil.

In the addiction's early days I dreamed he'd got into my house and was hiding in the shadows behind the door, wearing gloves with knives on each finger and waiting to murder us at his own, chuckling pleasure. And if you picture Pennywise, the clown from Stephen King's IT, taking children on narrowboats, murdering music itself or dressing up as a greedy aunt in cow horns it all seems to FIT, doesn't it?

The world has changed since I watched reruns of Captain Scarlet and the Dukes of Hazzard. And all right, Count Duckula was odd, Thundercats the result of post-nuclear feline evolution and Penfold was never really explained. But children's TV was mostly rooted in reality - Scooby Doo might have been a chatty Great Dane, but camper vans existed and so did goody two-shoes like Fred and Daphne. The weirdest things got was a squeaky gopher bothering to acknowledge the existence of Philip Schofield, but perhaps Holly Willoughby performs the same task now.

But we never had something as hallucinogenic and worrying as In The Night Garden, with Iggle Piggle plainly representing the consciousness of a child in a morphine-induced dream state on the operating table as his life slips away, taking his blanket through a garden of Hoo Hahs on a Ninky Nonk before sailing over the horizon in a boat which, if it's not on the River Styx on its way to the underworld, certainly ain't coming back.

Watching children's TV - or just listening with one ear while I'm doing something else, in the same way a parent is always listening for a scream or a thump or a suspicious silence - makes me actively yearn for Bing to be skinned, or at the very least given a good slap. I worry Teal's parents left her there, want Peekaboo to shout his own name at the Twirlywoos JUST ONCE, and can't hear the Peppa Pig theme without thinking of sausages.

The psychotic world of CBeebies is undeniably teaching our children to never grow up. If you don't become a dead-eyed CBeebies presenter who's one alphabet song away from a rampage, you'll be like your own crazed-looking parent who keeps insisting we have to watch Hey Duggee again because it's the only offering of that benighted TV channel that can keep a grown-up sane.

All right, it's a dancing dog in a Scout uniform leading a group of Beavers called Squirrels who are really a hippo, a rhino, a mouse, an alligator and an octopus, but it makes more sense than everything else.

Duggee hug make it all better.