Is Abney & Teal aimed at the same age-group as In The Night Garden? My 19 month old adores ITNG and we love it too, it constitutes a large part of her bedtime routine - but she finds the new programme quite disturbing! In the porridge episode, we haven't got past the bit where they all fall into the lake with the bubbles and the strange big creature which comes out of the water; both times it's been on she has burst into tears and said "off! off!".

Maybe it is a bit unsettling for very little ones? Its style is very different from the gentle, calming surreality of ITNG. Not a hit in our house anyway...

What a wonderful program! Mummy, Daddy and our 2 year old just love it! Its so soothing and enchanting and I espeically love the colours and animation, so beautiful! Makes a lovely change from over-computer generated things for children these days full of bright bold colours. I think it would be better suited in the bedtime hour due to its ability to calm our son down, very much like a good bedtime story! Another suggestion is to repeat the bedtime hour from 7-8 maybe with different shows for those children that go to bed later? Just a thought.

Abney and Teal are great! Cant wait for for DVDs and toys/plushies to come out later in the year!!

It took a little bit of time to appreciate just how good Abney and Teal is. At first it seemed a bit dull and subdued compared to other programmes. But there are a few hooks into it such as Neep, the music and the physical comedy that get young and old watching enough of this to want more. It grew on me and my 21 mth old daughter at the same time in a way that few other shows have. I think it is the only cbeebies programme I have actually laughed at (the hole in the tree made by the fat Neep).

The visuals of this are incredible. Having the city out of focus but alive in the background works so well. Many other technical aspects of the show are spot on. I only ever notice the technical aspects of shows when I'm picking holes in it (like seeing in which scale the shooting is done on ITNG) but with this show I'm doing it in a "wow, what just happened there" kind of way.

Usually I prefer brighter and primary based colours but the pastels are the best fit for this show, how on earth did you manage to make a part-submerged and abandoned shopping trolley look beautiful?

The visuals and the music work very harmoniously together and "harmonious" is probably the single word I'd use to describe this show. It has grabs the attention and feeds the imagination in a very subtle way. Most shows can only accomplish this with noise, speed or intensity of colour and action.

When I look back at many of the TV shows of my childhood I get saddened by how empty they now seem, I'm sure in the years to come my daughter will see this show again and it will have lost nothing of its charm.

Thanks for producing such a high quality programme, please make many more.