Emeka Okafor came home from school one day, fourth or fifth grade, in tears. He handed his report card over to his father. Amid all the A’s was the first B of Okafor’s young academic career.

“I told him to stop crying,” Pius Okafor recalled yesterday to The Post. “But he’s someone who tries to be perfect.”

Fast-forward to last week, with Emeka seated in Spokane and asked about his uncanny shot-blocking prowess. Okafor began to provide a serious response but before long, he offered up little more than an ear-to-ear grin.

“I laugh because I know what I do and how I do it,” Okafor said via phone. “But it’s hard to explain. I start to give an answer, it sounds too technical, feeds into the whole academic, science this and that. Sounds too brainy, and it’s not that serious, you know?”

It is understandable why so many gush so emotionally when in the company of Okafor, UConn’s sensational sophomore center, who yesterday, along with the Huskies, traveled to San Antonio for Friday night’s game against Texas in the South Region semifinals. Okafor grew up in Bellaire, a Houston suburb about 170 miles east of San Antonio.

Okafor at 20 years old is just about the finest representative the NCAA can find when advertising the good in the game. That the 6-9, 252-pound dominator leads the nation in blocked shots (4.8 per game) while also averaging 15.7 points and 11 rebounds makes Okafor a desirable player. What makes him special is everything else.

“He is like the epitome of the perfect kid, in my opinion,” said Paula Fendley, a guidance counselor at Bellaire High School.

Okafor has already achieved junior status; he’s set to graduate in May of 2004. His grade-point-average is 3.73 and he has turned up on the Dean’s List every semester as a Finance major. Not only was he named to the All-Big East first team, but he also made the Academic All-American first team.

“You see a kid like Emeka come along once every 20 years,” said Dr. Ted Taigen, a professor of biology at UConn and also the basketball team’s faculty advisor.

“I know I am a role model now,” Okafor said. “People say I’m a great student-athlete. I’m comfortable with it because it’s just me. I’m not playing a role. I’m comfortable in my own skin.”

There are shrugs from Okafor when he’s lauded for his excellence in the classroom. He merely is doing what he’s been taught. His parents, Nigerians who came to this country before Okafor was born, instilled a thirst for education that flourished in their son. Pius is living proof. He’s a man of letters and none spell NBA. He’s earned his MBA, he’s a CPA and is seeking his doctorate in Pharmacy at the University of Missouri-Kansas City.

Upon sending Emeka to kindergarten, the Okafors placed their son in a bilingual class, fearing that using their native language of Ibo at home stunted Emeka’s skills in English. Two days later, they received a call.

“The teacher said Emeka didn’t belong there,” Pius said. “She said he’s a special child and needs to be in a gifted class.”

He was not a prodigy at basketball, but he’s coming fast. It is hard to believe Okafor would not be a lottery pick if he opted to enter this year’s NBA Draft. But his goal is to get his degree and his return to UConn is assured.

Taigen says Okafor’s humble nature is remarkable, but Okafor doesn’t see it that way. “I’m just as regular as any other guy,” he said, proving he is not always on the mark.

—-

TALE OF THE TAPE

TEXAS — UCONN

Record 24-6 — 23-0

Avg. Pts. 78.9 — 79.5

Opp. Avg. Pts. 68.4 — 70.9

Margin 10.5 — 8.6

FG Pct. .449 — .470

Opp. FG Pct. .409 — .380

3-Pt. FG Pct. .352 — .388

Opp. 3-Pt. FG Pct. .341 — .315

3-Pt. FG-Game 5.8 — 6.0

Opp. 3-Pt. FG-Game 6.0 — 6.3

FT Pct. .719 — .681

Rebound Margin 7.7 — 5.8

TO Diff. 0.6 — -2.3

Avg Steals 6.3 — 5.8

Avg Blocks 3.7 — 7.5