Putting Bill Simmons' name in a headline is sure to elicit (mostly) one of two responses: Simmons is a complete hack, terrible writer and full of himself or Simmons is the most hilarious man who ever made four Michael Buffer jokes and compared Kobe Bryant to

Teen Wolf

in the same book.

I'm familiar with the annoyances of Simmons' writing. I really am. (Note: The fact that he constantly follows declarative statements with sentences like "I really am" is perhaps my biggest beef). But the reason I continuously read him is the fact that, unlike most big-time sports columnists, he loves the NBA. Most great, passionate NBA writers are mercenaries, scattered at places like

,

,

, et. al., away from the vitriol towards their league present in the mainstream.

Prominent writers at places like ESPN.com or SI.com and especially newspapers have been more prone to write about the NBA in wistful terms, like they miss the good old days when everyone played team basketball, or rant about how college basketball is superior (ridiculous) or reminisce about when players didn't have tattoos. Frankly, it's very annoying, and I put up with Simmons because he writes about the league as-is, not with some faux-moralistic, "this is what it

should

be" tact. He's wrong and just plain stupid sometimes (he would've drafted Emeka Okafor over Dwight Howard, for example), but he's also a talented writer and entertaining and passionate when talking about the league.

Still, even though I like him as a writer, plowing through

is daunting, and if I didn't get the book free, I probably would've been less inclined to do it. But at the same time, Simmons came of age as an adult basketball fan watching the 1980s Celtics, who just so happened to have some epic battles with the Bad Boys-era Pistons, the team that made me a huge NBA fan. I was fairly interested in how he'd portray such a bitter rival of his favorite team.

I'm not a book reviewer and have no idea if people actually read book reviews anymore, but I'll break this up into some bullet points, both reasons why you should and shouldn't read it, in case you're on the fence about picking it up. If you hate Simmons, it's cool. You can move along now as I'm sure I'm not going to have anything that will convince you differently. If you've never heard of him, hopefully this will give you a little overview of ESPN's most popular writer. If you're a fan, I'll avoid giving away too much of the premise of the book in case you are still meandering through it. If you are none of those things, it'll just be some semi-interesting bullet points about hoops.

- The Secret

: I'm not going to say what 'The Secret' is, but just know this: it is stupid. 'The Secret' was told to Simmons poolside in Vegas by Isiah Thomas, and Simmons eats it up. Thinks it's the smartest thing he's ever heard and constantly comes back to it throughout the book. Seriously, if anyone watches basketball closely, or any sport for that matter, and doesn't have an inkling of 'The Secret,' well ... you're kind of a moron. That's rude, but I have no better way to explain how amateurish this concept is.

- He's very fair to the Pistons

: A big part of the book is spent evaluating how teams and players from different eras can be compared and basically ranked as far as impact on basketball. Although he doesn't have particularly nice things to say about Bill Laimbeer as a person (surprise), Simmons pretty accurately and fairly evaluates the careers of several Bad Boy-era guys, including Laimbeer, Thomas, Vinnie Johnson, Joe Dumars and Dennis Rodman. He also ranks the first title team as one of the top 10 teams in NBA history. Honestly, considering his knack for getting in digs at the Pistons on occasion in his ESPN columns, I was expecting his obvious bias to show through in the book. He hid it pretty well.

- Ben Wallace is not rated properly

: I don't like that Ben Wallace is labeled a role player in his book. I've

, but while Wallace was definitely a one-dimensional player, that dimension was so great at it's apex that it made his relatively weak offense not a big issue. He was the most important player on a championship team. That, by definition, is not a 'role player.' Simmons hates looking at statistics, particularly advanced statistics like PER and rebound rate, but I will always argue those are fair evaluators. Robert Horry and Steve Kerr were role players. Wallace is better than lesser defense-first glue guys like Charles Oakley. He may not be a Hall of Famer, but he's better than Simmons gave him credit for in this book.

- Simmons does not write from the perspective of the fan

: That's been his schtick since he was hired by ESPN. Sorry Bill, but you have way too much access to ever write from the fan's perspective. While playing up his "average Joe-ness" throughout the book, he's also recounting stories about having lunch with Elgin Baylor, shooting contests with Mike Dunleavy, running into Charles Oakley and Michael Jordan in cigar rooms in Vegas that no normal person would be allowed in, exchanging e-mails with Steve Kerr, not to mention the fact that the dude's book hit No. 1 on the New York Times best-seller list, so I'm sure there's quite the income disparity between Simmons and the average fan.

That's not necessarily a bad thing though. He gets access to people and can talk more freely than a typical journalist, who has to rely on people as sources and nurture those professional relationships for fear of getting access cut off. Simmons' discussions with Thomas and Baylor are particularly interesting parts of the book, and they are conversations that never would've happened if he didn't write for ESPN.

- Yeah, the pop culture stuff is really lame

: It's a common complaint. Simmons has basically not watched a movie since 1987. His favorite references include:

Teen Wolf, Karate Kid,

the

Rocky

Movies

and

Hoosiers

. Somehow, though, his TV watching habits are similar to those of a 16-year-old girl, because he also packs in the references to

Road Rules/Real World Challenge

and

The Hills

. And perhaps most disturbing, he has more than a passing fascination with male porn stars.

It would be funny if it were not so lame. I wish I could tell you how to avoid them in the book, but I can't. Some are in footnotes, but you can't skip all the footnotes because some have relevant info. Some are just digressions thrown right into the middle of blocks of text about, like, Paul Arizin or something. They come out of nowhere. They are super lame. But that's part of Simmons, and the references aren't going anywhere.

- He did his research

: My guess is the majority of Simmons' audience is 35 or younger, meaning names like Reed, Russell, Frazier, West, Baylor, Chamberlain, Robertson, Havlicek, Cousy, Mikan, Arizin and others are not familiar. Simmons goes into decent depth about the careers of many, many old-time greats, a great service to NBA fans only familiar with the last 20-30 years or so, when Jordan/Bird/Magic made the league the popular force it is today. Sure, his opinion is mixed in throughout, but the fact that he dug through all kinds of old NBA books, news clips and Sports Illustrated stories to glean interesting info was pretty impressive for a guy not normally known for his research.

- His thoughts on race were ... awkward

: Writing about race is always complex, but Simmons handles it uncomfortably throughout the book. Let's face it: racism was rampant and blatant in this country in the historical eras he spends a great deal of time writing about. Stars like Russell, Baylor, Jabbar, Robertson and other guys who are today looked at as grand ambassadors of the game went through unfathomable experiences in their playing days. It's OK to call them that. Simmons didn't gloss over these issues by any means, but the constant foot-noting and over-explanation was unnecessary. Just call it what it was: ugly, ugly racism.

He did a better job with race than

, but there were still some passages where I felt Simmons was soft-peddling some thing things he should have been more forceful about.

- The All-Lefty Team

: This was in a footnote, so I have to believe it was a mistake, but Simmons named a team of the best lefty players of all time and included Chris Bosh but not David Robinson. This is beyond insanity.

Looking back over these notes, I don't know if it gives the impression that I didn't like the book. I don't necessarily want to do that. There were times when I had to put it down and walk away for a bit. There were times when Simmons makes the annoying, "BUT I SAW IT WITH MY OWN EYES AND THAT'S ENOUGH EVIDENCE!," arguments that are so infuriating.

His takes on the Pistons are solid, although he's a bit harsh on Joe Dumars as a general manager. He also blames Chad Ford for the Darko pick, claiming Ford's Darko hype convinced NBA GMs he was the second best player in a loaded draft.

Overall though, it's worth reading if you love the NBA. Simmons' NBA conspiracy theories are always fun, he's allowed to say swear words in the book (and boy does he take advantage of that) since it's not on ESPN.com and his love and passion for the game are definitely conveyed.