Emeka Esogbue, popularly called 'Pen Master' Is Always The First In The Documentation of The Ibusa People History

1. Pen Master was the first to document Omuship of the Anioma people in books

2. Pen Master was the first to document the Ikwele Institution of Ibusa in history book

3. Pen Master was the first to document the Igbuzo Singles Meet, Ibusa Sports Club and Ibusa Youth Council in history book

4. Pen Master was the first to document Ibusa group musicians such as Mbosionyewu Obulunjoa, Otu Ife Onye Lolu Nwandu, Otu Ifechukwude, Otu Ofu Obi etc in history book.

5. Pen Master was the first to put Ibusa soloist musicians such as Ogbogu Okonji, Isioma Nwalama, Iweanya Nwalama, Bright Osadebe, St. Michael Obanya, Peter Nwa Onye Isu, Etiti Okonji etc in history book.

6. Pen Master was the first to list Ibusa Olinzele and all traditional title holders in the community with their names and ogbes and documented them in a book

7. Pen Master was the fist to do a compendium of Ibusa rivers, important and other sacred places and documented them

8. Pen Master was the first to document the Ohene institution in a book

9. Pen Master was the first to document Dagbua, the patriarch of Idumuohene and Idumuohene history in book

10. Pen Master was the first to do a historical collection of the emergence of Christianity in Ibusa, with the Ibusa resistance and consequences

11. Pen Master was the first to list all the branches of ICDU and put them in a book

12. Pen Master was the first to establish Ibusa-Ojoto relationship

All in one book, "A History of Ibusa".

It is the hottest selling Anioma book.

DIAMOND JUBILEE AGE: 20 THINGS THE WORLD DOES NOT KNOW ABOUT FRED AJUDUA On January 21 2020, Pen Master paid Chief Fred Ajudua a scheduled visit at his Lagos-VGC Marble Dome Home, a large and imposing house sitting on a hill from where it vigorously engages public views and attention. On entering the house, Pen Master freely walked in and around, in the spirit of the love that always binds the people of Igbuzo. The man, Chief Fred Ajudua often described as the “Architect of Modern Ibusa” is unarguably one of the biggest fish in history to have come out of Ibusa even as it is said that nearly every Ibusa family has benefited from him one way or the other. Beyond what you know about him, there seems many sides you do not know. As the Igbuzo Chief celebrates his 60 th Year birthday, your Pen Master brings you the things you do not know about the highly influential Igbuzo Chief. Pen Master also dug into the Ajudua family photo depository all for your knowledge. Happy reading!

A SHORT HISTORY OF OBOLLO CLAN IN ENUGU STATE, NIGERIA By Emeka Esogbue Introduction Not many historical literatures on the Obollo people exist for the usual reasons associated with our people who prefer to write the history of mighty and populous peoples already enriched with volumes of historical accounts and records. Thus while there are historical documents on other peoples of Igbo, for Obollo, it is the story of dearth of documents. However, it is within my historical concern that the rich history of this part of Igboland be adequately researched into, documented and preserved for the future generation. I do not hail from this part of Igboland but my historical background, interest and curiosity propelled me towards the acquisition of both oral and written information to put this material together. Geography The various Obollo communities comprising of Obollo Afor, Obollo Etiti, Obollo Eke, Obollo Orie and Obollo Nkwo are strategically situated at the regional bou

SEE HOW ANIOMA PEOPLE DRESS ON THEIR TRADITIONAL MARRIAGE THE ERA OF USING OUR TRADITIONAL MARRIAGE TO PROMOTE ATTIRES OF OTHER GROUPS IN NIGERIA IS GONE Today is Saturday, conventionally set aside for marriage ceremonies. Awareness on how our Anioma brides and grooms attire themselves during their traditional marriage has fast spread and entrenched. We no longer promote other group's cultural attires because we want them to promote our own instead. I say many thanks to our Anioma cultural advocates on this day because our labours to preserve as well as promote the good cultures of our Anioma society have never been in vain. Noticeable now is that in time of our traditional marriages, we costume ourselves in Akwa-Ocha which brings out our god-given beauty. A few moments after her traditional marriage in Umuodafe, Ibusa on December 28, inside the Agokei palatial home, I visited former Miss Amaka Thelma Agokei, the bride. I was rather late; but I met this beautiful bride t