When Emeka Okafor bowed out of the NBA in 2013 after medical staff discovered a herniated disc in his neck, it seemed like the curtains had come down on what had been a rock solid career.

After four years of rest and recovery, Okafor returned to the big leagues in the form of a 10-day contract with the Philadelphia 76ers. When he only appeared in five preseason games before being waived, the swansong had finally begun to ring out — again.

Once more however, the 35-year-old managed to fetch himself one last job after an impressive G-League stretch for the Delaware 87ers, another 10-day contract with New Orleans. With DeMarcus Cousins down, Okafor’s 6-foot-10 frame and nine seasons of NBA experience were a perfect fit for a Pelicans squad desperate for reinforcements.

This time, the 2004–05 Rookie Of The Year has grabbed his opportunity with both hands, earning a contract that will keep him in the Big Easy for the rest of the 2017–18 season.

In his first 10 games — including eight starts — the big man has averaged 5 points, 5.6 rebounds and 1.6 blocks per game, stats that seem inconspicuous on the surface but shine brighter when you factor in Okafor has had just 15.7 minutes per night to produce.

Oh yeah, the Pels have gone 8–2 in that stretch too.

When you expand Okafor’s numbers out to the the per 36 minute variety — a statistic widely used for predicting what low-minute guys could do given maximum game time — his numbers start to look more like the impact he is having on the court.

Per 36 minutes, the veteran is putting up 11.5 points, 12.8 rebounds and a whopping 3.7 blocks per night, all while converting his field goals at a solid 50% clip. According to NBA stats.

Okafor plays within his skill set on the offensive end of the floor, sticking mainly to shots inside the paint. Although he has shown a knack for hitting a mid range jumper or two along the way:

“Certain styles are cyclical. Eventually post play will make its way back in at some point. I just think at this particular time, bigs are shooting outside and everybody’s spacing the floor. But if you can do the basics — rebound, finish, run, play defense — you have a spot.” Okafor told the official Pelicans website when asked about the fast-paced, deep-shooting nature of an NBA landscape that has undertaken a revolution since the last time he played meaningful minutes.

The final few words of that quote are the most relevant to the 35-year-old’s current situation. Any offense the Pellies get from him is a bonus, because Okafor has made his living on the defensive end.

The 3.7 blocks per 36 is otherworldly. Top shot swatters in the league like Rudy Gobert (2.6), Myles Turner (2.5) and Hassan Whiteside (2.3) aren’t even in the same ballpark as the grizzled vet, as he forms a formidable partnership with MVP candidate and defensive master Anthony Davis. Although even Davis’ 2.2 blocks per 36 minutes can’t compare to Okafor’s.

Look how quick he gets back up for his second jump to stuff this one back down Brook Lopez’s throat. Just unreal athleticism for a player in his mid-30’s:

Just in case you thought you were seeing things, he does it again here by staying with bouncy Clippers wing Wesley Johnson in transition and rising with him to deny any chance Johnson had of getting two easy points:

It’s not just the highlight reel shot blocking however, as Okafor’s energy, defensive IQ and the versatility to easily switch with Anthony Davis seems to have helped the entire Pelicans defense whenever he is out there.

Before February 2nd (Okafor’s first game) New Orleans had posted a 107.3 defensive rating, good (bad?) for 23rd in the league. In the 10 games since the man who has donned number 50 on his jersey his entire career returned, that rating has plummeted to 105.6 — the 11th best mark in that stretch.

After fighting through the herniated disc that threatened to derail his career once and for all, Emeka Okafor has become a vital cog in a New Orleans Pelicans unit that is surging toward a top four seed in the brutal Western Conference.

Firmly cementing himself as one of the best feel good stories in all of sports.