Hi all!

I’m a fairly recent addition to these parts. Normally I waste my energy on MUDs or being sad I can’t pull together enough people for my Drow elf 5th edition D&D campaign. I’ve been playing Choice and Hosted games for the past two years before deciding to take a stab at learning the code or writing.

Right now I’ve been working on a project that is inspired by several of my favorite novels. Of course I’m taking pains to make the story my own but I was wondering if anyone else does the same when considering their games subject matter.

Right now I’m drawing inspiration from:

Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny 1967 (highly recommend this sci-fi/fantasy hybrid)

1984 by George Orwell. It should have been retitled 2016 but who knew?

A Matter for Men by David Gerrold - one of the best alien/terraforming sci-fi series never finished.

The Sword and

Citadel by Gene Wolf

(Second half of The New Sun series by my fav)

All of these books right now are collectively influencing my work and writing!

What are you using for inspiration now?

Inspiration strikes me daily in every work I watch or read.

With that being said, here are common sources of my inspiration:

CoG Inspiration (Randomly Listed):

JimD - The Zombie Exodus series

Cataphrak - The Infinity series

Havenstone - Choice of Rebels

Fiogan - Both of her WiP

jasonstevanhill - Choice of Vampire (my favorite Vampire IP of all time)

Shawn_Patrick_Reed - Both WiP

Gower - Midsummer’s Dream

malinryden - Fallen Hero WiP

Eric_Moser - CCH series.

Snowpanther - Prison Story

FairyGodfeather - A whimsical WiP that is put on hold - don’t remember name.

Wraith - Both WiP

Then there is @poison_mara - one of the best testers in this community. Her feedback helps me write much better then I would without her help. She also gave me the “most memorable” feedback I ever received. I will never forget that.

Traditional Authors:

Glenn Cook - The Black Company series - especially those titles with “Lady” in them

Harry Turtledove - Earlier Works

Tolkien - Can’t escape his influence.

David Eddings - Earlier “pre-cynic” books.

Mercedes Lackey - Her Paladin stories.

Ann MacCaffery - Pern books.

Jerry Pournelle

Gordon R Dickson

Piers Anthony

and so many more then I can list.

Each of the above listed has provided me inspiration on my current projects.

Excellent list!

I’m into a lot that’s on your list. I’d say I think the only thing fantasy wise that I ever enjoyed from David Eddings was The Belgarid Series and The Mallorean. Beyond that I feel like his writing got lazy and he went for easy cliches.

For Choice/Hosted game authors -

JimD is one of my favorites thus far as he narrates like I run my table top games.

I forget who wrote Choice of Robots/Alexandria but I love those.

There are more and I’m starting to delve into people’s WIPs.

I love anything suspenseful or a thriller. Learning that you or your world is not what it seems and all the plot twists translate to a choice game better than horror which depends on the character feeling weak and overpowered. Although, the plot twist part kills the fun of replays (unless the twist isn’t revealed in every play through).

I love well done romance, but so much romance in games is unappealing. Like in Our Personal Space, I thought the guy was nice;he was just too traditional and jealous, and I felt bad and distrustful of dating others because what kind of person has an affair with a married woman? I don’t like the jerk abusive characters in games either. But I found myself drawn to the other aspects of otomes like the deep unrushed relationships, and different routes. Frozen Essense, and the Dreaming were good.

Twilight Zone

Night Gallery

Hitchcock

Urban legends (in general, not the show)

Stephen King (I always wanted that baby chicken from It)

Goosebumps

Slasher (nick game where there are slashers, reporter, cop,psychic, and campers. No one except other slashers knew who anyone was. The slashers chose one person each night from the camp to kill and had to pretend to be innocent in the morning. The reporter could see the slashers talking to one another, but didn’t know their names. The cop could protect one person a night from getting killed but not themselves. The psychic could reveal one person’s profession a night. )

White Wolf Games

Tell Tale Games

Open World Sim games

Many others

It wildly varies on what I’m working on, since I have about four different projects that are all inspired by different things. I have a Deconstruction Detective novel series, A co-op series with a friend and my two WiPs. I should probably just use my WiPs cause they are my most active ones ahaha~

Of Beasts and Humans has a bunch of inspiration, each one differently for each route I’m outlining. Most of it is anime, games and classic lit.

Lovecraft and Poe are the biggest cases, mostly regarding the Horror of Dunwhich and Ligeia

Hello Charlotte (Espeically for Selias’ s Route)

I’m not gonna lie but Dramatical Murder and the rest of Gen Urobuchi’s works like Saya No Uta

Dangan Ronpa (Boy I wonder who’s based off Kyoko???)

Hatoful Boyfriend (probably the biggest one)

Pocket Mirror

Puella Magi Madoka Magica

Monster Musume

Generally old ghost stories I read on my free time

Touhou

Drakengard

Empire of Corpses (Definitely for Lomew’s Route)

SoulsBorne

That’s just hitting the surface. I am also using a lot of old ideas I had from my dead WiP Apocolyptia and other dead stories that I wrote. I need a life cause oh my lord too much animu

My biggest problem is that after a creative writing binge, (and only after) I then realize that my writing may seem to be influenced by such and such, sometimes it is, but it’s still annoying.

The only inspirations I can think of at the moment, (and for whatever I am currently writing) would be the Lost Heir series, the WIP Totem Force aaaaand that’s all I can think of right this minute, my brain feels funny… crawls back into a hole in the ground, and soon you hear the sounds of typing

I don’t take any subject matter from the novels I love (at least, not that I’m aware of) but I do look at the parts that were the most emotionally charged and try to figure out how and why it worked.

If I’m ever stuck I’ll go read something with a similar mood/atmosphere and usually it’s enough to send me running back to the keyboard. It’s the same with music.

Stories I love with similar themes/emotions;

Neil Gaiman’s Graveyard Book

Leigh Bardugo’s Six of Crows

Paul Gallico’s The Man Who Was Magic

V.E. Schwab’s A Darker Shade of Magic series

Benedict Jacka’s Alex Verus series

Legend of Korra

Any and all myths, legends, fairytales, folktales, urban legends…

You all have such great sources of inspiration, it makes mine seem kind of lame. The first novel I ever finished was inspired by a conglomerate of children’s books including a Goosebumps title which is hardly high literature. The novel I’m currently writing is based on that original novel, so I’m being indirectly inspired by Welcome to Camp Nightmare. Though I stripped all of the horror elements out to make it a story about writing a story. Most of my other stuff is inspired by film or television though rather than literary works. Out of my two most recently finished novels, one was inspired by One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest and the other by Community. What I write tends to be dependent on whatever I’m watching when I finish my old novel. That’ll be what’s stuck in my head and I’ll try something similar.

To be honest I’ve never been much of a big writer even though I’ve always been making up characters and stories even since I was a little kid. I’ve always struggled with reading and writing but never enough for anyone (including me) to notice until I started seeing a therapist for help dealing with school related stress, so most of my inspirations are visual ones. The biggest ones have been Hayao Miyazaki’s films (Kiki’s Delivery Service specifically inspired the story I’m currently working on and will hopefully post of WIP of soon), Mushishi, Natsume Yuujinchou, and various webcomics (I follow a lot)

And even though I wasn’t a strong reader I really loved Brian Jaques’s Redwall series (really want to revisit it) as a kid and recently I started reading Max Gladstone’s Craft Sequence series (and his two games). I really love how descriptive they are and how seamlessly Gladstone incorporates supernatural elements into his writing. Showing and not telling has alway been a huge challenge for me and being able to one day be able to make my writing that immersive is a major goal of mine

CoG/Hosted Games are also a really big inspiration for me, though I think the WIPs I’ve read here on the forum are even more so because they’ve made me want to write so bad that I actually sat down and actually do it. I’d like to maybe enter CoG’s contest, but if I don’t make the deadline or something, I want to submit the story I’m working on as a Hosted Game. The format of the games are also way more accessible for me than books probably because they’re broken down in smaller pieces or something. I’ve powered through well over 20 games in maybe two months when most books might take me twice that unless I have to read it for a class. Of the games that have been published, I think my favorites have been Choice of the Deathless, Creatures Such As We, and Zombie Exodus, and as for WIPs, I really like RenaB’s two WIPs