The IMDB has more info

The Caves of Steel (1964) (TV)

Haven't seen the film yet though

Man it is obscure - its not actually a movie, but part of a series running in the UK in the early 60's. Not even Roger Fultons book on British Science Fiction series mentions it

Anyway if this is to be believed - none of us will ever be seeing it - Seems the BBC wiped the tapes years ago

6.2.1 Have any of Isaac Asimov's books or stories been made into atelevision series?

Seems the BBC wiped the tapes years ago

Along with over 100 episodes of Dr Who. One of the great BBC scandals.

Very true, however it is my understanding that a lot of those tapes where recovered in other countries such as Australia - and the list of episodes is now virtually complete.

With Caves Of Steel, it is a shame, because Terry Nation wrote the screen play - so it would have been interesting to say the least

I wonder if the scripts are knocking around somewhere

it would be fantastic if they were recovered and a new version with modern special effects could be made

there is a very good chance that I saw the follow up based on the Naked Sun. I started reading Asimov because my father had a large and varied collection of SF books including CoS and tNS and no doubt he would have watched both when they aired on TV.

I would only have been 4 when tNS was screened but I was quite often allowed to watch similar programs (Quatermass etc)

Has anyone watched movie The Caves of Steel (1964)? I have read the novel and would like to watch the movie but it doesn't seem to be available. So I was just wandering is it any good. Anyone seen it?

edit to add I should have read the rest of the thread before replying

I know there was a BBC dramatisation of Caves Of Steel in the 1960s with (I think) Peter Cushing playing Lije Bailey (or was it R.Daneel Olivaw?) Is that what you are referring to?

I doubt that it is available anywhere - knowing the BBC they probably wiped the tapes in the 1970s.

If you really are Sai Baba, couldn't you just 'apport' a copy of the programme from the mystic realm?

Oh Man!!! This would have been brilliant! Peter Cushing no less! I had no idea it had ever ben made for television. I'm pretty sure the BBC no longer have it - though someone might know - David J Howe and Andrew Pixley have loads of old BBC documentation on telefantasy - They frequent the Outpost Galifrey message board.

This would be great to see.

I have the BBC Radio version and play it in the car a lot!