How old is Ozzy Osbourne and what does he do?

John Michael "Ozzy" Osbourne was born on December 3, 1948. He celebrated his 73rd birthday in 2021.

The singer was brought up in Aston, Birmingham with his three older sisters Jean, Iris, and Gillian, and he two younger brothers Paul and Tony.

Ozzy, who credits The Beatles' song 'She Loves You' with him wanting to become a musician, was the lead singer of Sabbath from 1969.

Ozzy Osbourne and Elton John's new duet is fantastic and very poignant

The performer, who gained the nickname 'The Prince Of Darkness' during his time in the band, had increasingly erratic problems with drugs an alcohol and was fired from Black Sabbath in 1979.

Ozzy went on to pursue a highly successful solo career, releasing 12 studio albums - 7 of which went multi-platinum - and became a household name through MTV reality show The Osbournes, a no-holds-barred look at the eccentric life of the Osbourne family, filmed from 2002 to 2005.

Ozzy has reunited a number of times with Black Sabbath since going solo. He helped the group record their final album 13 in 2013 and joined them on their 2017 farewell tour, which culminated in their home city of Birmingham.

What health problems has Ozzy Osbourne had?

Ozzy Osbourne has had a well-publicised battle with alcohol and drugs and told Rolling Stone in 2017 that he realised he needed to clean up his act: "When I started waking up covered in my own urine in a gutter."

Ozzy is now clean and sober and says he relaxes by painting and listening to music, but sadly his health problems don't stop there.

In 2003, Ozzy fell off a quad bike at the family's Buckinghamshire home and broke six ribs and vertebrae in his neck.

In January 2019 Ozzy had a fall in his home, resulting in three operations, two months in hospital and 15 screws in his spine.

Ozzy Osbourne cancels tour after suffering a fall at home

The singer had also just recovered from being in hospital with bronchitis and pneumonia when the fall occurred.

The Nine Lives of Ozzy Osbourne | A&E

Ozzy told The Sun in September 2019: “I’m like a superhero, held together by screws, but I ain’t felt like a superhero for months. I’ve felt dreadful."

In 2020, there was even more bad news for the Prince Of Darkness' health.

Ozzy announced in January that he has been diagnosed with a type of Parkinson's disease called Parkin, and gave details of the diagnosis in an emotional TV interview with Good Morning America.

Ozzy Osbourne announces Parkinson's diagnosis in moving interview

"It's PRKN 2," said his wife, Sharon. "There's so many different types of Parkinson's; it's not a death sentence by any stretch of the imagination, but it does affect certain nerves in your body. And it's -- it's like you have a good day, a good day, and then a really bad day."

Who are Ozzy Osbourne's wife and children?

Ozzy Osbourne has been married to Sharon Osbourne since July 1982.

The couple met when Sharon's father, Don Arden, was the manager for Black Sabbath and was instrumental in having Ozzy fired.

Sharon become his girlfriend and took over as his manager in 1979, she is widely regarded as the driving force behind his hugely successful solo career.

Sharon and Ozzy have three children, Aimee, Kelly and Jack and the family became famous overnight with the airing of their MTV reality TV show The Osbournes in 2002.

Read more: Michael Bolton actually auditioned for Black Sabbath, reveals Tony Lommi

The show aired until 2005 and did not include eldest daughter Aimee who decided early on that she didn't want to be famous and has stayed out of the public eye.

Since The Osbournes aired, the family have all found individual TV success.

Kelly has been a presenter on the E! channel, Jack has presented his own TV shows including the BBC's Saving Planet Earth in 2007 and Sharon has been a judge on both America's Got Talent and The X Factor.