Ozzy Osbourne’s Birmingham home may help local tourism

Black Sabbath. Judas Priest. The Moody Blues. The English Beat. The Spencer Davis Group. ELO.

Birmingham has a rich musical heritage…the city just hasn’t done much of anything to promote it.

But that’s likely to change given the success and attention the current “Home Of Metal” exhibition at the Birmingham Museum & Art Gallery is bringing to the city.

The exhibition showcases 40 years of hard rock and the birthplace of musical legends from the city; it’s on now until September 25 – for details, click here.

Birmingham City Council has taken notice of the attention and is planning to try and turn the city’s history into some lucrative tourist dollars.

Birminghammail.net reports Councillor Philip Parkin, who is leading the council’s drive, said: “Home of Metal has been featured in the national and international media. All those features said they did not realize that Birmingham and its industry inspired and influenced heavy metal music. We need to take a look at our music heritage and work out how to make the most of it.”

Coun Parkin has already met musician Feargal Sharkey, now chief executive of industry body UK Music. The body published a report into the nation’s music tourism earlier this year, which recommended the implementation of a national live music tourism strategy to increase the number of overseas visitors.

Ideas already being considered in Birmingham are blue heritage plaques, a musical map or trail, a permanent location for the Home of Metal and the launch of a strategic forum for the local music industry, made up of performers, promoters, venues and studio representatives.

Locations on the star map may include the Aston street where Ozzy Osbourne grew up, the Broad Street site of the old Rum Runner club, where Duran Duran made their name, and the Hare & Hounds in Kings Heath, where UB40 first performed.

The city council’s inquiry into increasing music visitor numbers will take evidence from Birmingham music historian John Hemming, musicians and promoters.

Black Sabbath

Black Sabbath – Fairies Wear Boots

Olympia Theater – Paris, FR – December 20, 1970

See also:

Ozzy Osbourne film coming to US theatres for 2 nights in August

OzTV: Ozzy Osbourne hits Spain

OzTV: Ozzy Osbourne hits London

OzTV: Ozzy Osbourne hits France’s Hellfest

OzTV: Ozzy Osbourne hits Luxembourg

Ozzy Osbourne: Trust Me, I’m Dr. Ozzy book due in October

OzTV: Ozzy Osbourne hits Munich

VIDEO: Randy Rhoads rocks with Ozzy Osbourne

VIDEO: Ozzy Osbourne reissues legendary first two solo albums

Ozzy Osbourne: Classic album reissues due in May

Ozzy reissues update

Ozzy to rerelease classic albums