As the lead singer of Black Sabbath, Ozzy Osbourne helped establish a style of rock music which came to be known as 'heavy metal'.

The band's music - and later Ozzy's solo work - would be influenced by the industrial sights and sounds of Aston, in north Birmingham.

Osbourne, Iommi, Butler and Ward grew up just a few roads apart in the area.

Fans often leave messages on the frontdoor of Ozzy's childhood home at number 14 Lodge Road.

But BirminghamLive can now reveal the well-visited terraced home was not Ozzy's first.

The future 'Ozzy' was born on December 3, 1948, to parents John Osbourne and Lilian Osbourne (née Unitt). His real name is John Michael Osbourne.

And the singer's birth certificate - obtained by this website - reveals Osbourne junior's first home.

It lists Ozzy's toolmaker father as living at number 5, Swains Grove, off Anerley Road, in Kingstanding.

It's unclear whether Ozzy, now aged 69, was born in the house or not - although his birth was registered seven days after his birth at Marston Green Maternity Hospital in Coleshill.

But the singer will forever be known for his Aston roots where he and his fellow Sabbath members grew up.

The working-class suburb hadn't benefited from post-war regeneration in the way Birmingham city centre had, just a couple of miles away.

Iommi and Butler worked in factories after leaving school, Ward delivered coal and Osbourne, after stints in a slaughterhouse and car plant, turned his hand to burglary. Music was an escape for the teenagers.

In an interview with the BBC last year, Butler recalled: "It wasn't a great place to be at that time.

"We were listening to songs about San Francisco, the hippies were all love and peace and everything.

"There we were, in Aston, Ozzy was in prison from burgling houses, me and Tony were always in fights with somebody, and Bill, so we had quite a rough upbringing.

"Our music reflected the way we felt."

BirminghamLive contacted a number of people purporting to be Ozzy's agent in the US. None were able to get us in touch with the legendary singer.

Wherever Ozzy's from - every Brummie's proud to call him 'one of our own'.