Ozzy Osbourne Biography

Ozzy Osbourne is an English singer, songwriter, and television personality named John Michael “Ozzy” Osbourne. He rose to notoriety in the 1970s as the lead vocalist of the heavy metal band Black Sabbath, earning the moniker “Prince of Darkness” during that time.

Osbourne was born on December 3, 1948, in Marston Green Maternity Hospital near Coleshill, but grew up in Birmingham’s Aston neighborhood. Geezer Butler started his first band, Rare Breed, in late 1967 and quickly enlisted Ozzy Osbourne as a frontman. After two gigs, the band disbanded. In Polka Tulk Blues, Osbourne and Butler reunited with guitarist Tony Iommi and drummer Bill Ward, whose band Mythology had recently disbanded. They changed their name to Earth, but after being mistakenly booked for a gig by another band with the same name, they decided to change it back. In August 1969, they decided on the name Black Sabbath.

Osbourne left Black Sabbath in 1979 owing to alcohol and drug problems, but went on to have a successful solo career, releasing 12 studio albums, the first seven of which were certified multi-platinum in the United States. Ozzy Osbourne has rejoined with Black Sabbath multiple times since then. He returned in 1997 and assisted in the recording of the group’s final studio album, 13 (2013), before embarking on a farewell tour that culminated in a February 2017 performance in Birmingham, Alabama. His longevity and success have earned him the informal title “Godfather of Metal”.

Ozzy Osbourne has sold over 100 million albums worldwide as a result of his time with Black Sabbath and his solo efforts. Osbourne has been recognized for his contributions to the music industry with a number of honors. He won a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1994 for the song “I Don’t Want to Change the World” from Live &amp; Loud. Osbourne won the award for Godlike Genius at the 2004 NME Awards in London. Both as a solo performer and as a member of Black Sabbath, Osbourne was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005. With Black Sabbath comrades Tony Iommi, Bill Ward, and Geezer Butler, he was inducted into the US Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame in 2006.

Osbourne, along with Genesis, Heart, and ZZ Top, were recognised at the second annual VH1 Rock Honors in 2007. In addition, when Osbourne was present, a bronze star honouring Osbourne was installed on Broad Street in Birmingham, England. On May 18, Osbourne learned that he would be the first person inducted into the Birmingham Walk of Fame.

Osbourne was honoured with the Living Legend title at the Classic Rock Roll of Honor Awards in 2008. Alice Cooper, Lemmy, and Jimmy Page are among the previous recipients. The award was delivered by Slash, the former guitarist of Guns N’ Roses. At the Guys Choice Awards in Culver City, California, in 2010, Osbourne earned the “Literary Achievement” award for his memoir, I Am Ozzy. Sir Ben Kingsley presented Osbourne with the award. The book opened at No. 2 on the New York Times best-seller list for hardcover nonfiction. Osbourne also served as a judge at the 6th, 10th, and 11th annual Independent Music Awards, which encouraged the careers of independent musicians. At a ceremony held at the Grosvenor House Hotel in London in May 2015, Osbourne received the Ivor Novello Award for Lifetime Achievement from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers, and Authors. In his hometown of Birmingham, Osbourne had a tram named after him in 2016. Osbourne was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame’s celebrity wing on April 6, 2021, for his multiple appearances, including his participation at WrestleMania 2 in 1986.

In the early 2000s, Osbourne rose to fame as a reality television star, starring alongside his wife and manager Sharon and two of their three children, Kelly and Jack, in the MTV reality show The Osbournes. In the television series Ozzy &amp; Jack’s World Detour, he co-stars alongside Jack and Kelly. The third season of the show premiered in June 2018.

Ozzy Osbourne Discography

Top Videos

Frequently Asked Questions

What Is Considered The Best Ozzy Osbourne Album?

There is no single “best” Ozzy Osbourne album, as many fans have different favorites. Some of the most popular choices include the albums ” Blizzard of Ozz” and “Diary of a Madman”, which feature some of Ozzy’s most well-known songs. Other fan-favorite albums include “Bark at the Moon” and “No More Tears”. Ultimately, it comes down to personal preference as to which Ozzy Osbourne album is considered the best.

What Is Ozzy OsbourneS Most Famous Song?

Ozzy Osbourne’s most famous song is probably “Crazy Train.” It was released as a single in 1980 and quickly became a hit, helped in part by its accompanying music video. The song has been covered by many artists over the years, and was ranked number 38 on VH1’s list of the “100 Greatest Hard Rock Songs.

What Was Ozzy’S First Hit Song?

Ozzy’s first hit song was “Crazy Train.” The song was released in 1980 and peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. “Crazy Train” is also one of Ozzy’s most well-known songs and is often considered to be one of his signature tracks.

What Is Genre Of Ozzy Osbourne?

The genre of Ozzy Osbourne is metal. He was one of the pioneers of the genre and helped to define it with his work in Black Sabbath. He has continued to make metal music throughout his solo career, and remains one of the most popular and influential metal artists today.

Most Searched For Ozzy Osbourne Songs