Les trois couronnes du matelot begins in some port town with a murder and a theft. The fair killer-student steals three Danish crowns. A dark, middle-aged sailor waylays the younger man and, over drinks at an opulent nightclub, like Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner unloads a tale of woe. Upshot: he needs three Danish crowns. (In one shot, the hoped-for coins have replaced eyes and mouth.) The sailor perpetually finds himself indebted.

Râúl Ruiz, an Allende supporter who fled his native Chile because of the 1973 military coup, based this long, serpentine French film on a Chilean legend. Ruiz Chinese-boxes his storytelling: inside his story to the student, the sailor recounts encounters of his where others told him their stories. At the last, however, comes a delightful shock: the outermost story is not whose we thought it was! On the other hand, the “ship of the dead” where we discover this suggests the depth to which Ruiz is haunted by his country’s recent political history.

The flashbacking sailor recounts traveling from one port to another. Every curious bit includes a funny component and a sad one. Someone he meets has rented a mother because “everyone needs a mother.” No mere lark, this, given the political disappearances in Chile under Pinochet.

A woman promises to render the sailor’s desires “transcendent.” He wants to see her naked. Woman: “Tangible nudity is the skin that clothes the being.” Sailor: “I want to make love.” Woman: “Love cannot be made. It is.” She strips seemingly completely, but then takes off even more, leaving her mouth her one orifice. The sailor finds his memory of this creature reflected in shipboard comrades, his own image in the mirror, his dreams. “Transcendence,” it seems, requires the death that the sailor dreads.

Ruiz draws upon Orson Welles (especially The Trial, 1962, and The Immortal Story, 1968), and makes a recurrent feature of his mise-en-scène something huge at the forefront of a shot—for instance, someone’s head, hand or foot—in contrast to the seemingly small figures and things in the background. There is a lot of dream-stuff, like this, throughout the film, but it isn’t necessarily pleasant dream-stuff. Such optical distortions of the human body suggest torture—and therefore, again, Pinochet’s Chile.

B(U)Y THE BOOK

MY BOOK, A Short Chronology of World Cinema, IS CURRENTLY AVAILABLE FROM THE SANDS FILMS CINEMA CLUB IN LONDON. USING EITHER OF THE LINKS BELOW, ACCESS THE ADVERTISEMENT FOR THIS BOOK, FROM WHICH YOU CAN ORDER ONE OR MORE COPIES OF IT. THANKS.

http://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Dstripbooks&field-keywords=Dennis+Grunes&x=14&y=16