Corixa is a developer of immunotherapeutics with a commitment to treating and preventing autoimmune diseases, cancer and infectious diseases by understanding and directing the immune system. Having founded in 1994, the company conducted various preclinical development programs, including the BEXXAR® therapy and the MELACINE® vaccine. Corixa is focused on immunotherapeutic products and has a broad technology platform enabling both fully integrated vaccine design and the use of its separate, proprietary product components on a standalone basis. The company partners with numerous developers and marketers of pharmaceuticals, targeting products that are powered by Corixa™ technology with the goal of making its potential products available to patients around the world. Corixa was acquired by GlaxoSmithKline on 12 July 2005, and GSK had formerly made use of the Corixa's MPL adjuvant in some of their vaccines. The company ceased operations in March 2006.

Regeneron Pharmaceuticals is a biopharmaceutical company that discovers, develops, and commercializes pharmaceutical products for the treatment of serious medical conditions. The Company has therapeutic candidates in clinical trials for the potential treatment of cancer, eye diseases, and inflammatory diseases, and has preclinical programs in other diseases and disorders. The company’s product portfolio includes EYLEA, an aflibercept injection; ARCALYST, a rilonacept Injection for subcutaneous use; ZALTRAP for metastatic colorectal cancer; trap fusion proteins; and fully human monoclonal antibodies. On March 26, 2012, it was announced that Sanofi and Regeneron are in development with a new cholesterol drug which will help reduce cholesterol up to 72%. Regeneron Pharmaceuticals was founded in 1988 and is currently headquartered in New York, USA.

Merck (d.b.a. EMD Millipore in the U.S. and Canada) is a German chemical and pharmaceutical company. Merck, also known as “German Merck” and “Merck Darmstadt”, was founded in Darmstadt, Germany, in 1668, making it the world's oldest operating chemical and pharmaceutical company. The company was privately owned until going public in 1995. However, the Merck family still controls a majority (≈70%) of the company's shares. Following World War I, Merck lost possession of its foreign sites, including the Merck & Co. subsidiary in the United States. Merck & Co., which operates as Merck Sharp and Dohme (MSD) outside the U.S. and Canada, is now an independent company. Merck KGaA operates mainly in Europe, Africa, Asia, Oceania and Latin America. Since Merck & Co. holds the rights to the Merck name in the U.S. and Canada, the company operated under the umbrella brand EMD Chemicals in North America, and since 2010 as EMD Millipore (after the acquisition of Millipore Corporation), formed from the initials of Emanuel Merck, Darmstadt. Founded in 1668 in Darmstadt, Merck KGaA of Darmstadt, Germany, is the world's oldest pharmaceutical and chemical company. The success of the export business to the United States led in 1887 to the establishment of an office in New York, which gave rise to their subsidiary [Merck & Co.](http://www.crunchbase.com/organization/merck-co-inc) four years later. Owing to World War I, Merck & Co. was expropriated in 1917. The two companies have been separate every since. Merck KGaA Subsidiaries: - [Merck Consumer Healthcare](http://www.crunchbase.com/organization/merck-consumer-healthcare) - [Merck Performance Materials](http://www.crunchbase.com/organization/merck-performance-materials)

ALK is a global research-driven pharmaceutical company that focuses on prevention, diagnosis and treatment of allergies. Since 1923 ALK has been working to improve the quality of life for allergy patients by developing drugs that target the cause of allergy. ALK is the world leader in allergy immunotherapy - a unique treatment of the cause of allergies. The treatment induces a protective immune response that provides a sustained reduction of allergy symptoms and reduces the risk of developing asthma. ALK provides allergy immunotherapy products as injections, sublingual drops and sublingual tablets, which is the newest, best documented and most convenient treatment for patients. The portfolio of products also includes an adrenaline used to treat severe allergic reactions (anaphylactic shock). ALK invests annually approx. 20% of revenue in research that aims to develop new, evidence-based allergy immunotherapy. Research and development pipeline includes sublingual allergy immunoterapy tablets against ragweed, house dust mite and tree pollen allergy. ALK has signed partnership agreements with Merck and Torii Pharmaceutical, concerning the development, registration and commercialisation of tablets in Northern America and Japan. ALK has approx. 1,800 employees with subsidiaries, production facilities and distributors worldwide. The company headquarters is in Denmark and is listed on NASDAQ OMX Copenhagen (OMX: ALK B). In 2013 the turnover was more than DKK 2.2 billion (EURm 300).

Lentigen Corporation, a biotechnology company, engages in the development and commercialization of gene delivery technologies for human disease. It provides lentiviral vector technology for a range of therapeutic, vaccine, and research applications in biotechnology and medicine. The company offers LG690, a cell therapy for treatment of graft vs hot diseases; LG768, a cancer vaccine for the treatment of leukemia; stem cell therapy to prevent and treat medical disorders; LG631, a treatment that makes chemotheraphy for brain cancer less toxic; LG889, a steam cell therapy for hemophilia; LG611, an exact strain matched influenza vaccine for pandemic flu; LG811, an exact strain matched influenza vaccine for seasonal flu; LG747, a biosimilar erytho poieitin; and LG888, a novel factor VIII protein therapy for Hemophilia A. Lentigen Corporation was founded in 2004 and is headquartered in Gaithersburg, Maryland.

Galectin Therapeutics is applying its leadership in galectin science and drug development to create new therapies for fibrotic disease and cancer. Drug candidates based on the Company’s unique carbohydrate technology target galectin proteins which are key mediators of biologic and pathologic function. Galectin Therapeutics uses naturally occurring carbohydrate polymers with galactose residues to create complex carbohydrates with specific molecular weights. Using these unique carbohydrate-based candidate compounds that bind and inhibit galectin proteins, we are pursuing therapies for indications where galectins have a demonstrated role in the pathogenesis of a particular disease. We focus on diseases with serious, life threatening consequences to patients, and those where current treatment options are limited. Our strategy is to establish clinical development approaches that add value to the Company in the shortest time possible, and to seek partners as the program advances and requires much greater resources. Galectin Therapeutics leverages extensive scientific and development expertise as well as established relationships with outside sources to achieve cost effective and efficient development. We are pursuing a clear development pathway to clinical enhancement and commercialization for our lead compounds in liver fibrosis and cancer immunotherapy. Galectin Therapeutic stock is traded on the NASDAQ under the symbol GALT. The company is located in a suburb of Atlanta known as Norcross, Georgia USA