Corixa is a developer of immunotherapeutics with a commitment to treating and preventing autoimmune diseases, cancer and infectious diseases by understanding and directing the immune system. Having founded in 1994, the company conducted various preclinical development programs, including the BEXXAR® therapy and the MELACINE® vaccine. Corixa is focused on immunotherapeutic products and has a broad technology platform enabling both fully integrated vaccine design and the use of its separate, proprietary product components on a standalone basis. The company partners with numerous developers and marketers of pharmaceuticals, targeting products that are powered by Corixa™ technology with the goal of making its potential products available to patients around the world. Corixa was acquired by GlaxoSmithKline on 12 July 2005, and GSK had formerly made use of the Corixa's MPL adjuvant in some of their vaccines. The company ceased operations in March 2006.

The Institute Pasteur is a private, non-profit foundation. Its mission is to help prevent and treat diseases, mainly those of infectious origin, through research, teaching, and public health initiatives.The Institut Pasteur is a research center of international renown ideally located in the very heart of Paris. Each year the institute hosts a multitude of scientific and medical conferences and meetings as well as events on a variety of themes.

Glaxo Group Ltd. operates through its subsidiary Glaxo Laboratories Ltd. that engages in the production of food products for infants such as Ostermilk, Complan, Casilan, Farex. Glaxo Group Ltd. was formerly known as Glaxo Laboratories Ltd. and changed its name to Glaxo Group Ltd. in 1962. The company is based in Brentford, United Kingdom. Glaxo Group Ltd. operates as a subsidiary of Glaxosmithkline plc.

Otsuka Holdings operates in pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, and consumer products. The business activity of the company includes providing healthcare solutions in the areas of the nervous system, oncology, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, infectious disease, and others. The company engages in the research and development of functional foods and beverages, such as electrolyte drinks, nutritional foods, soy snacks, and dietary foods.

At the beginning of the twentieth century, tuberculosis was one of the UK’s most urgent health problems. A royal commission, entitled The Royal Commission Appointed to Inquire into the Relations of Human and Animal Tuberculosis, was set up in 1901. It aimed to find out whether tuberculosis in animals and humans was the same disease and whether animals and humans could infect each other. This page describes how, by 1919, the Commission had evolved into the independent Medical Research Council.

Janssen Pharmaceutica is a pharmaceutical company headquartered in Beerse, Belgium and owned by Johnson & Johnson. It was founded in 1953 by Paul Janssen. In 1961, Janssen Pharmaceutica was purchased by New Jersey-based American corporation Johnson & Johnson, and became part of Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and Development (J&J PRD), now renamed to Janssen Research and Development (JRD), which conducts research and development activities related to a wide range of human medical disorders, including mental illness, neurological disorders, anaesthesia and analgesia, gastrointestinal disorders, fungal infection, HIV/AIDS, allergies and cancer. Janssen and Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceutical have been placed in the Ortho-McNeil-Janssen group within Johnson & Johnson Company.

Becton, Dickinson & Co. engages in the development, manufacture, and sale of medical supplies, devices, laboratory equipment, and diagnostic products. It operates through the following segments: BD Medical, BD Life Sciences, and BD Interventional. The BD Medical segment produces medical technologies and devices that are used to help improve healthcare delivery. The BD Life Sciences segment provides products for the safe collection and transport of diagnostics specimens, and instruments and reagent systems to detect infectious diseases, healthcare-associated infections, and cancers. The BD Interventional segment offers vascular, urology, oncology, and surgical specialty products to hospitals, individual healthcare professionals, extended care facilities, alternate site facilities, and patients via its Homecare business. The company was founded by Maxwell W. Becton and Fairleigh S. Dickinson in 1897 and is headquartered in Franklin Lakes, NJ.

Archivel Farma SL provides research and development services to the pharmaceutical sector. It focuses on TB, more specifically, on the treatment of the latent TB infection diseases. The firm is association with the Germans Trias i Pujol Research Institut of Health Sciences and the Germans Trias i Pujol University Hospital has developed RUTI, the first therapeutic vaccine against TB. The company was founded in 2005 by José Martínez, Pere-Joan Cardona i Iglèsias, Jaume Amat i Reira and Isabel Amat i Riera and is headquartered in Badalona, Spain.

The United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is a federal Cabinet-level agency that provides near-comprehensive healthcare services to eligible military veterans at VA medical centers and outpatient clinics located throughout the country; several non-healthcare benefits including disability compensation, vocational rehabilitation, education assistance, home loans, and life insurance; and provides burial and memorial benefits to eligible veterans and family members at 135 national cemeteries.