Oando PLC, has truly carved a niche for itself as a Nigerian indigenous oil and gas company that represents the country at global events that shape the future of the sector and the world in general. Events such as the World Economic Forum (WEF) in Davos, International Petroleum (IP) Week, CERA in Houston and the Africa CEO Forum, to name but a few. At these events, Oando has engaged in open and transparent dialogue with a broad range of stakeholders to analyze and proffer solutions to global issues.

Adewale Tinubu, the Group Chief Executive (GCE) of Oando PLC, will once again reinforce the growth and strength of oil independents at the ongoing 7th OPEC International Seminar, with the theme ‘Petroleum – Cooperation for a Sustainable Future’ in Vienna, Austria. The 7th OPEC International Seminar aims to build on the success of previous editions over the last two decades, it will underpin OPEC’s longstanding commitment to strive for a secure and stable international oil market by promoting cooperation and dialogue with stakeholders around the world.

Oando catapulted to the ranks of IOCs with its game-changing acquisition of ConocoPhillips Nigeria assets in 2014 which saw the company move from producing 4,500boepd to an average of 50,000boepd. Since then the indigenous giant has taken the mantle of flying the flag for indigenous players both locally and internationally; showcasing the evolving and critical role that independents have to play in growing the sector locally and positively impacting perceptions internationally.

The indigenous oil giant, a gold sponsor of the OPEC International Seminar, will lead discussions on the ‘Global Oil Future Challenges’ panel on the second day of the event, which will be moderated by CNN’s John Defterios. The panel session will focus on existing and future challenges specific to the oil industry in the medium to long term. This includes challenges related to the current global supply/demand balance and the impact of energy policy and technology on future oil supply and demand.

Other participants on the panel include Amin H. Nasser, President and CEO, Saudi Aramco, Andrew Gould, former CEO, Schlumberger, Jay R. Pryor, Vice President Business Development, Chevron, John Hess, CEO, Hess Corporation and Daniel Yergin, Vice Chairman, HIS Markitt.

This 7th edition will be particularly special in that it is the first Seminar to be held since the historic OPEC and non-OPEC ‘Declaration of Cooperation’ signed on December 10, 2016. The Seminar is today regarded as one of the premier events in the world of energy. Insightful presentations and panel discussions from Ministers of OPEC member countries and other oil producing and oil consuming nations, as well as heads of international organizations amongst others, will move the energy debate forward.

Speaking on the event, the UAE Minister of Energy and Industry, Suhail Mohammad Faraj Al Mazroui said: “The Seminar offers an opportunity for experts from around the globe to engage on important topics that support the sustainability of our industry, for example, recognising the importance of the ‘Paris Agreement’, technologies that reduce and ultimately eliminate greenhouse gas emissions and opportunities to lighten the environmental footprint of oil.”

More than 800 key players and decision makers are on hand at this year’s Seminar; including His Excellency Suhail Mohamed Al Mazrouei, Minister of Energy and Industry, United Arab Emirates, President of the OPEC Conference, His Excellency Khalid A. Al-Falih Minister of Energy, Industry and Mineral Resources, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Emmanuel Ibe Kachikwu, Minister of State for Petroleum Resources, Nigeria, Mohammad Sanusi Barkindo, Secretary General OPEC, Amin H. Nasser, President and CEO, Saudi Aramco, Bob Dudley, Group Chief Executive, BP and Patrick Pouyanne, Chairman and CEO, Total to name a few. More than 100 high-level speakers and panelists — including captains of industry, officials from energy and oil ministries, executives from international oil companies and financial firms, along with representatives from international organizations and research institutions — will give presentations.

The Seminar which began in 2001, will further provide fresh impetus to key petroleum industry issues and challenges, helping to enhance existing avenues of dialogue and cooperation, while stimulating new ones.