Oando PLC is one of Africa's largest integrated energy solutions providers with a proud heritage. It has a primary listing on the Nigerian Stock Exchange and a secondary listing on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. the Oando Group comprises six companies who are leaders in their market: Oando Marketing: the leading retailer of petroleum products, Oando sells and distributes one in every five litres of petroleum in Nigeria via over 500 retail outlets, and has operations across West Africa – Ghana, Togo, and the Republic of Benin.

In a bid to improve the overall efficiency of the industry and to lower product cost for the consumer, Oando is poised to construct the largest products terminal in sub-Saharan Africa in the Lekki free zone and an offshore sub-marine pipeline delivery system in Apapa.

Africa's largest independent and privately-owned oil trading company involved in the large scale export and import of a broad range of refined petroleum products and crude oil throughout Africa, Europe, Asia and the Americas, with a track record of 100% delivery on its supply contracts.

Oando Gas & Power is a pioneer in fields of private sector pipeline network construction and the distribution of natural gas to industrial and commercial consumers. With 100km of pipeline already built in Lagos and another 128km in progress in Akwa Ibom/Cross River States. The Company is building sub-Saharan Africa's largest gas pipeline network. With its foray into power business, the company is poised to contribute several captive power plants to the Nigerian and sub- regional markets.

Nigeria's foremost indigenous oilfield services company providing products and services to major upstream companies operating in Nigeria. As the largest swamp rig fleet operator, OES has been natural partner to national and multination oil companies.

A leading Nigerian exploration and production company with 11 oil and gas assets, OEP is the first indigenous company with a participating interest in a deep offshore oil producing asset.

Developing a Greenfield refinery in Lagos, this subsidiary completes our imprints across the energy value chain.