Vesey In December 1698 John Vesey, Archbishop of Tuam from 1679 to 1716, bought almost 750 acres in the Hollymount area, barony of Kilmaine, county Mayo, from the sale of the estate of Colonel John Browne of Westport. In 1703 he bought circa 2000 acres in the barony of Clanmorris from the trustees for the sale of forfeited estates. These lands had formerly belonged to James Browne and Thomas Burke. Sir Thomas Vesey of Abbeyleix, eldest son of the Archbishop, bought Togher and Lehinch from Peter Browne of Westport in 1712. His half brother George was the rector of Hollymount. Title deeds in the De Vesci Papers in the National Library suggest that Sir John Denny Vesey sold part of his estate in counties Galway and Mayo to his uncle by marriage Henry Bingham of Newbrook and part to his uncle the Reverend George Vesey in 1731. It was George's daughter Frances who married Thomas Lindsey in 1757. The Vesey estate in the Hollymount locality appears to have passed into the possession of the Lindsey family through this marriage. The Lehinch estate was in the possession of the Blakes throughout the 18th century. John Wesley visited Hollymount in 1756 and described the house and gardens built by the Archbishop. Staples The Staples family baronets held land in a number of Irish counties, Queen’s County, Derry, Tyrone, Cavan and Mayo. The Cavan estate may have come into their possession through the marriage of Sir Alexander Staples and Abigail daughter and heiress of Thomas Townley of county Cavan. Their only son Sir Robert Staples, born in 1740, had by his second wife a son and successor Sir Robert and a daughter Hannah, who married Ralph Smyth of Gaybrook, county Westmeath. Her marriage portion was charged on the county Cavan estate. The Staples county Cavan estate was in the parishes of Lavey, Annagelliff and Kilmore. In a resume of Sir Robert Staples estate ownership circa 1828, the county Cavan estate was comprised of 1,500 acres. In 1878, Sir Nathaniel Staples of Lissane, county Tyrone, owned 1,457 acres in county Dublin, 990 acres in county Londonderry and 3,078 acres in county Tyrone. Records in PRONI suggest that the county Cavan estate was possibly sold in 1878. The Staples family held some church lands in the parish of Kilmainemore, barony of Kilmaine, county Mayo. Mary Vesey, eldest daughter of Archbishop John Vesey of Tuam, married early in the 18th century Sir Robert Staples 2nd Baronet. The Staples appear to have purchased Turin from the sale of the Dillon-Browne estate in 1851. Most of the Staples county Mayo estate was let to members of the Fair family. In 1878, Robert Staples of Dunmore, Durrow, Queen's County [Laois] owned 1,385 acres in county Mayo, 4,003 in county Londonderry and 1,424 in Queen's county. Miss K. Staples sold 1,387 acres to the Congested Districts' Board on 28 Nov 1907. Lindsey (Hollymount) This branch of the Lindsey family were descended from a younger son of the first Lindsey of Turin, parish of Kilmainemore, county Mayo. It was through his marriage in 1757 with Frances Vesey, granddaughter of Archbishop John Vesey of Tuam, that Thomas Lindsey came to own the Vesey's Hollymount estate, parish of Kilcommon, barony of Kilmaine. Charles Cromie was agent to the Lindseys in the 1830s. At the time of Griffith's Valuation the Lindsey estate was comprised of eleven townlands in the parish of Kilcommon and five townlands in the parish of Kilmainemore. In 1876 Miss Mary Lindsey owned 5194 acres in county Mayo. She married Heremon FitzPatrick, grandson of the 2nd Marquess of Headford and he assumed the additional surname of Lindsey. They had no children. The estate was sold to the Congested Districts' Board on 31 Mar 1915. Arbuthnot Local sources suggest the Arbuthnot family were located in the parish of Burrishoole, barony of Burrishoole, county Mayo in the 1780s. John Arbuthnot had an interest in the O’Donel lands of Carrigahowley or Rockfleet, Carrowsallagh or Windsor and Rossyvera, which he sold to the 1st Marquess of Sligo in 1801. In 1802, Sir Robert Arbuthnot, a son of John, married Susan, only child of Colonel William Vesey of Farmhill, parish of Crossboyne, county Mayo, a great-grandson of Archbishop John Vesey of Hollymount. Three townlands in the parish of Crossboyne belonged to the Arbuthnots during the 19th century and their estate was bought by John Charles Sheffield. Blake (Renvyle) Henry Blake returned from Montserrat in 1676 and, according to Martin J. Blake, bought the Lehinch estate at Hollymount, county Mayo, about 600 acres, from the patentee John Porter. He also bought the Renvyle estate, county Galway, from Richard Nugent, Earl of Westmeath in 1680. In 1780 the estates passed to a cousin, Valentine Blake of Mullaghmore and Windfield, county Galway, whose son Henry Blake of Renvyle sold part of his Lehinch estate, including his house, to Thomas Lindsey of Hollymount circa 1812 and the rest of the estate was bought by the 2nd Marquess of Sligo in 1818. The Lehinch estate was in the parishes of Kilcommon, barony of Kilmaine and parish of Tagheen, barony of Clanmorris. The Renvyle estate of nearly 13,000 acres in the parish of Ballynakill, barony of Ballynahinch, county Galway, was visited by Henry Blake for the first time in 1811. He refused to renew the O'Flaherty's lease of the property and took up residence there in the early 1820s. His descendants continued to live at Renvyle until the early 20th century. A large portion of the estate was sold in the early 1850s. Mrs Caroline Blake of Renvyle owned an estate of 4,682 acres in the 1870s. The author Oliver St John Gogarty bought the house and about 200 acres in 1917 and entertained many well known artists and literary figures there. Vesey (Castlebar) George Vesey of Castlebar held the townland of Cahernabrock, parish of Shrule, barony of Kilmaine, county Mayo and some lands in the parish of Crossboyne, barony of Clanmorris, in the mid 19th century. At the time of Griffith's Valuation George Vesey held about 16 townlands in the parish of Tuam and one townland in the parish of Liskeevy, barony of Dunmore, four townlands in the parish of Kilkerrin, barony of Tiaquin and two townlands in the parish of Boyounagh, barony of Ballymoe, all in county Galway. The Vesey's title to their estate in the barony of Dunmore derived from the purchase of the Lally estate by John Vesey, Archbishop of Tuam, from the Commissioners for the sale of forfeited estates in 1702. In the 1870s George Vesey of Long Ditton, Kingston-on-Thames owned 2,227 acres in county Mayo and 6,061 acres in county Galway. Parts of the Vesey's county Galway estate were vested in the Congested Districts' Board on 31 Mar 1913 and 5 Feb 1914 and the county Mayo estate on 24 Mar 1915. Lally A family with a large estate in the Tuam area of county Galway, centred on Tullinadaly Castle, which they forfeited after the Jacobite Wars. Edward Wilson of Tuam and Edward Crow of Carrowkeel, county Galway, bought parts of the Lally estate but most of it appears to have been acquired by the Vesey family. An estate centred on the house at Ballygaddy in the parish of Kilbennan, barony of Dunmore, county Galway, was held by the Lally family in the early 19th century. By the time of Griffith's Valuation John Daly occupied this property which he held from Nesbitt Kirwan.