The Signing:

Back in 2015 rapper Alejandro Mosqueda who goes by the stage name Almighty at just 19 years of age signed to Farruko’s record label called Carbon Fiber Music. Fast forward 3 year later and he is now an independent artist . What happenend?

Farruko formed Carbon Fiber Music in 2014, and in 2015 decided to look for new talent to establish it as a reputable music label. He first finds an artist by the name of Miky Woodz, but before he could sign him to a contract a friend named “Luisito” calls saying “I found someone who spits harder than Miky you have to check him out!” Farruko listens to a freestyle of his because at that time Almighty did not have a single song out and is immediately blown away by his talent. He calls him saying he is interested in working with him and Almighty right away is on board. In less than a week after Almighty is signed to Carbon Fiber Music.

Symptoms of Trouble

Farruko, not having enough time to watch over and mentor him, goes to his friend named “Nandito” to be with him day to day to keep him on track and out of trouble. Almighty somehow finds his way into trouble, he goes and picks a fight with rappers Bryant Myers and his cousin Anonimus. Ignoring Farruko’s warning after he had told him to relax and not do anything crazy, an altercation happens and Almighty gets a beating almost having to be sent to the hospital. One day Farruko and Nandito are hanging out and they hear the song Panda by “Desiigner”, joking around they come up with the idea to make a spanish version. Farruko records it with Almighty but is told “don’t have such a long verse in the song it’s my song.” Farruko is a little stunned at this point but just tells him to relax even going as far as making him the primary artist on the track. The song is released and it become’s so popular that Daddy Yankee gets in touch with them to make a remix.

During the recording for the remix Almighty acts out again joking about Yankee’s look saying, “looks like you used to wear a waist trainer didn’t you?” and Farruko right away apologizes. He then goes off on Almighty saying “What is wrong with you!? That is Yankee! You don’t disrespect him!”. Almighty responds with “he needs to know I’m the best rapper in the world.” And goes on to say “my bad it’s the voices in my head.” Farruko is annoyed but keeps letting things slide. Then another situation occurs with rapper Arcangel. Almighty goes to a studio to record a song but Arcangel is still there using the studio, while he is using it Almighty starts saying things like “oh I can do better than that, I’m a better rapper than you” etc. A fight almost broke out, but because Arcangel and Farruko are such close friends nothing physical happens.

Now Farruko sees things getting increasingly complicated and frustrating. Some time passes and unsurprisingly another situation occurs this time with Anuel AA. Another rapper who is also good friends with Farruko, comes out with a remix of Panda dissing Almighty in it, he calls Farruko and talks about how he’s like family to him but that he needs to do something about that “disrespectful punk.” Farruko defends him saying he is going through some things because he didn’t want to see him get jumped or hurt in another fight.

The Last Straw