Rights management company Orfium has signed a deal with Pony Canyon to administer the music catalogue of the Japanese music company on YouTube.

Orfium will use its AI-based matching technology to track the use of the label’s repertoire on user-generated content platforms. The service provided by Orfium will ensure that the revenue related to Pony Canyon's repertoire will be "maximised and effectively captured."

Pictured (l. to r.): Alan Swarts (CEO, Orfium Japan), Shiro Hosojima (COO, Orfium Ja...

Warner Chappell Music (WCM) has promoted David Goldsen to Senior Vice President, North America A&R. Based in Los Angeles, Goldsen, will continue to report to Ryan Press, President, North America.

Goldsen will work closely with Press "to sign and develop songwriters and artists across multiple genres, in addition to helping with leadership efforts for the North America A&R department."

He'll also remain focused on supporting songwriters in international markets and overseeing the publish...

Canadian artist Celine Dion has notified the Donald Trump/JD Vance campaign that the use of her 1997 song 'My Heart Will Go On' at a rally in Bozeman, Montana was not authorised and that in no ways did she endorse the use of any of her songs by the US Presidential candidate.

Following the August 9 rally where the song was played to the audience, Dion issued the following statement on X (formerly Twitter): "Today, Celine Dion's management team and her record label, Sony Music Entertainment Canada...

Media and entertainment group Paramount Global, which announced in July plans to merge with Skydance Media, has reported revenue down $6.81 in the second quarter of 2024, down 11% compared to the same period a year prior, and posted a net operating loss of $5.4bn, related to a one-time impairment charge associated with the the value of the company's cable networks.

The company's Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) division was the only unit posting growth in revenue during the quarter, with TV Media ...