Cape Town is a city in South Africa. It ranks third among the most populous urban areas in South Africa, after Johannesburg and Durban, and has roughly the same population as the Durban Metropolitan Area. It is also the provincial capital and primate city of the Western Cape.

As the seat of the National Parliament it is also the legislative capital of the country. It forms part of the City of Cape Town metropolitan municipality. The city is famous for its harbour, for its natural setting in the Cape Floristic Region, as well as for such well-known landmarks as Table Mountain and Cape Point. As of 2014, it is the 10th most populous city in Africa and home to 64% of the Western Cape's population. It is one of the most multicultural cities in the world, reflecting its role as a major destination for immigrants and expatriates to South Africa. The city was named the World Design Capital for 2014 by the International Council of Societies of Industrial Design. In 2014, Cape Town was named the best place in the world to visit by both The New York Times and The Telegraph.

Located on the shore of Table Bay, Cape Town was first developed by the Dutch East India Company as a victualling (supply) station for Dutch ships sailing to East Africa, India, and the Far East. Jan van Riebeeck's arrival on 6 April 1652 established the first permanent European settlement in South Africa. Cape Town quickly outgrew its original purpose as the first European outpost at the Castle of Good Hope, becoming the economic and cultural hub of the Cape Colony. Until the Witwatersrand Gold Rush and the development of Johannesburg, Cape Town was the largest city in South Africa.

Source information from Wikipedia

Cape Town

Overlay image

Our tour today stops over Cape Town, located at the northern end of the Cape Peninsula and one of South Africa's major ports and industrial centres; associated suburbs and satellite towns of the fast-growing metropolitan area extend south across the neck of the Cape Peninsula to False Bay (Valsbaai). The old part of the city, now marked by high-rise buildings and sprawling suburbs, is located between Table Bay to the north and the steep slopes of Table Mountain to the south. Several lesser peaks, including Lion's Head to the south-west and Signal Hill to the west, rise above the city and overlook the Atlantic Ocean. Cape Town is a popular holiday resort, noted for its scenic beauty and fine beaches. Population 2,993,000 (2001 estimate).

In particular we aim to show with this comparison of images between Sentinel-1 (Radar7 SAR instrument) and Sentinel-2 (Optical Sensor), the field of applicaton with these satellites relative to Copernicus project.

View large format slider

View Sentinel-1 high resolution image (JPG 2.8 MB)

View Sentinel-2 high resolution image (JPG 2.8 MB)

Map of area