An investigation into the drowning of a former Tasmanian cricketer and Liberal member of Parliament has detailed evidence he struggled to inflate his life jacket while panicking in the water, telling his friend "I'm in strife mate, I'm in strife".

Tony Benneworth, 67, drowned alongside his friend Anthony Long, 73, when their boat capsized off Tasmania's east coast at Ansons Bay in 2018.

In an investigation into the drownings, coroner Olivia McTaggart said they were "sad and yet unnecessary deaths … and would not have occurred if several basic aspects of maintenance of the boat had been remedied".

The investigation found Mr Benneworth, Mr Long and another man, Guy McKibben, landed hard on the crest of a wave while fishing in Mr Long's boat on the afternoon of March 10th.

Mr McKibben, who survived the incident, told the coroner the boat landed with a very hard thump, with him remarking at the time "if that was a car, you'd wipe the suspension out".

The men then noticed water in the boat and tried to start the bilge pump, but Mr Long reported "the bloody thing's not working", Mr McKibben told the coroner — with the men bailing the water out with an ice cream container.

Mr McKibben said he and Mr Benneworth were wearing life jackets at the time, but Mr Long did not have his on.

The report found the men tried to make a call on marine radio but couldn't raise anyone and by that stage they had lost the engine power, with water pouring in over the back of the boat.

They then all jumped out of the boat, Mr Long still without a life jacket on, the investigation was told.

Mr McKibben said the boat was "standing, the front sticking out" of the water and he told Mr Long to hang onto a rail while he tried to swim into shore and get help.

After two to three minutes in the water, Mr Benneworth said, referring to his life jacket, "it's not inflating, it's not inflating. I think I'm in trouble", the investigation was told.

Mr McKibben told Mr Benneworth not to panic — but a few minutes later he heard him yell out "I'm in strife mate, I'm in strife".

Mr McKibben said he swam to shore and alerted a boat which headed back out in an effort to find the stricken men.

The bodies of Mr Long and Mr Benneworth were found in the water a short time later and while CPR was performed, it was too late.

Deceased in a 'severe state of panic'

Coroner McTaggart did not make any recommendations in her report but highlighted the importance of wearing life jackets "[and] the importance of being familiar with the inflation process" of the particular jackets being worn.

She found the life jacket Mr Benneworth was wearing was nine years old but in good condition.

"A check of … records do not indicate that it had been serviced. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that it would have inflated properly if activated by Mr Benneworth," she said.

An independent survey of the boat found it had sustained considerable damage "as a result of being flooded, capsized and having been in contact with the sea floor".

However, it also found that some aspects of the boat's condition likely contributed to it taking on water and capsizing, including the starboard outboard pod inspection cover being missing, foam material beneath the cockpit floor creating an imbalance and the bilge pump not working.

'Had a healthy respect for the sea'

Mr Benneworth's wife, Linda Benneworth, said this sort of tragedy can strike at any time.

"My Tony had a healthy respect for the sea and I think everyone should too and not take it for granted," she said.

"Be as safe as you can be, make sure your boats are well maintained and if something tragic happens that you've got a life jacket on and you know how to operate it."

Mrs Benneworth said not a day goes by when the family doesn't think about Tony.