More than 800 mourners at the funeral for former Tasmanian politician and cricketer Tony Benneworth have heard a plea from his family for people to wear working lifejackets when they are boating.

Mr Benneworth, 67, drowned alongside his friend Anthony Long, 73, when their boat capsized off Tasmania's east coast at Ansons Bay on Saturday.

The Church of the Apostles was overflowing as symbols of Mr Benneworth's many passions were brought forward, including a cricket bat, motorcycle helmet and his Order of Australia medal.

Father Richard Ross paid tribute to Mr Benneworth's humour, compassion, generosity and dedication to helping his community.

He observed that many of Mr Benneworth's family and friends felt anger at his death, describing it as a "stupid waste of life".

"His manner of dying was cruel, unfair, painful, meaningless," Father Ross said.

But he said Mr Benneworth's family wanted others to learn from his death.

"We hope that it will help someone."

Mr Benneworth's niece, Lisa Benneworth, told the service her uncle was a "great and proud Tasmanian".

"It is difficult to encapsulate Tony in one word, but if I had to it would be 'generosity'," she said.

"He gave of himself without expectation of recognition or reward."

The service finished with a photo montage of Mr Benneworth's life, as It's Five O'Clock Somewhere by Allan Jackson and Jimmy Buffet was played.

Family overwhelmed: Graeme Page

Fellow Liberal MP Graeme Page was speaker of the Lower House when Mr Benneworth served in state parliament.

After the funeral service he said Mr Benneworth's family was overwhelmed by the community support they had received.

"They've had tributes from all over Australia and they're really being very buoyed by this," Mr Page said.

Past president of the Riverside Cricket Club, Peter Scott, said many people had learned from Mr Benneworth's example.

"He's been a leader, and a lot of what he's taught people like myself and other members of our community, and not just sort of our club, that rubs off and that will be his legacy."

Mr Benneworth was a former Tasmanian cricketer and Liberal member for the state seat of Bass.

Members of the Riverside Cricket Club and the Trevallyn Bowls Club formed a guard of honour for Mr Benneworth's casket.

A third man aged 69 survived the boating accident.

Mr Long's funeral will take place on Monday.