A blissful recent break in the paradise formerly known as Van Diemen’s Land just happened to coincide with a significant sporting celebration. The first Tasmanian team to win cricketing silverware came together again in Hobart. It was a 40th anniversary reunion of the team that won the Gillette Cup in January 1979.

Where to start an account of that day and the years that have followed? Perhaps with a tribute to the two absent friends.

John Hampshire, one of a pair of English imports in that team, lost his battle with cancer two years

ago. He’d played for England, umpired for the ICC, and was well liked across the cricket world.

Tony Benneworth, a dinky-di Tasmanian, died tragically last year. Indeed, it was a year ago today. "Benny", a former state politician, was fishing with two friends off Ansons Bay on the state’s east coast when their dinghy went down. Benneworth and his friend, Tony Long, both drowned.

Back in those early years of Tasmania’s entry to Australian first-class cricket, "Benny" had been the

team’s all-rounder. In that Gillette Cup final, he batted at three and was out cheaply, but took 3-14

with his medium-pacers.

My recollection of his cricket goes right back: we played our first competitive match together, in short pants in primary school. He batted in the upper order, top-scored, and was immediately the star of our team. Sixteen years later, he travelled to Perth with the first Tasmanian team to play a Sheffield Shield match. Three other alumni of his old school were among his teammates.

Tasmania’s entry to the national first-class competition was restricted. The state played each of its rivals only once and whatever points it accumulated were divided by five and multiplied by nine to establish its relativity to the other teams. Whatever relativity there was made bleak reading.

In the one-day competition, however, Tassie had X-factor. Its name was Jack Simmons, and he was the most unlikely provider of X-factor you could imagine. "Flat Jack", as he was known for his darting off-spin, was a journeyman county player from Lancashire.

He’d been hired to coach and play in northern Tasmania five years earlier and Jack embraced both

his task and his adopted state. He had a beautiful way about him and was taken to Tassie cricket’s heart.

The state had been included in the national one-day competition since its inception in 1969-70 but

had never won a game. In Simmons’ third year, though, things began to change. Playing Victoria at the MCG, Jack slammed the last ball of his team’s 40th (eight-ball) over to the boundary for a heart- stopping win. That Victorian team included six Test players.

Three seasons on, Tassie did the unthinkable and reached the final. A drubbing from Western Australia in Perth was no surprise, but when the two states again reached the following year’s decider Hobart was the venue!

These were the days when unlimited full-strength beer could be crammed into an Esky and taken

into a ground. The atmosphere at Hobart’s TCA was best described after the game by John

Inverarity, who congratulated the boisterous throng thus: "I’ve played in front of cricket crowds all

over the world, but I’ve never played in front of one like you." Or as Tasmania’s Roger Woolley put it

at the recent reunion: "I will never forget a paddy wagon going around the hill and being pelted by

cans."

Sent in to bat, Tasmania slumped from 0-51 to 6-84 before Simmons and Trevor Docking added an unbeaten 96. The eventual total of 180 was modest but vaguely defendable.

Inverarity and Graeme Wood produced a 38-run opening before Simmons came to the bowling crease. The wily Lancastrian quickly claimed three wickets, and – shock and disbelief – Wood was run out!

There was to be no recovery and Tasmania won by 47 runs. Simmons, whose unbeaten 55 gave his

team a chance and his 4-17 nailed it down, was man of the match and King of Tassie.

"Flat Jack" played for Lancashire for more than 20 years, was an integral part of the county’s domination of the one-day game in the early 1970s and was a Wisden Cricketer of the Year in 1985.

In the two forms of the game he took 1500 wickets and made more than 13,000 runs. He became

chairman of his county and, later, of the England and Wales Cricket Board.

And a couple of weeks ago in Hobart, he said Tasmania’s Gillette Cup win in January 1979 was the highlight of his career.

This is a story worth retelling for a range of reasons, not least to examine the significance of the

year 1979 in the history of Tasmania’s two traditional sports.

Cricket had trod a difficult road in the years leading up to the triumph of Simmons’ team and there were more lean years still to come. But 40 years later, the state has won three Sheffield Shields and

three more one-day trophies. Ponting, Boon, and Paine are global names. The Hobart Hurricanes are

one of the more consistently competitive teams in the Big Bash League.