A 15-year-old boy was shot and killed and three other people, including a 16-year-old boy, were shot and wounded late Monday in Triangle, Virginia, authorities say.

The teen who died was a Triangle resident, Prince William County police said. His name was not immediately released.

The surviving victims are 16, 18 and 20 and also are Triangle residents, police said.

A group of teen boys and young men were in a grassy area behind homes in the 3700 block of Masthead Trail, east of Richmond Highway (Route 1), when at least one person started shooting, police said the initial investigation revealed.

Neighbors said a party late Monday turned violent and they suddenly heard shots.

“I looked at my wife and said, ‘I don’t think that’s fireworks,’” Dumfries Councilmember Shaun Peet said.

Peet rushed to see what had happened and found one of the victims. He and other neighbors worked to help, he said.

“He was laying down, facing the grass, screaming, ‘Help me! Help me! I don’t want to die. Please help me,’” Peet said. “Everyone came together very well to help out until the EMTs got here.”

Officers responded at about 10:30 p.m. and people ran, police said. Officers from Prince William County and Dumfries found and provided first aid to two shooting victims. Medics took them to a hospital, where the 15-year-old died of his injuries.

The 16-year-old was found in the area with a graze wound and was treated at a hospital, police said. Another victim also went to a hospital.

No information on a potential motive was immediately released, nor was any information on any suspects or arrests.

The shooting does not appear to be random, police said. The investigation is underway. News4 video shows police and crime tape in a residential area.

No property damage was initially reported to police, the department said.

Peet said his heart goes out to the family of the 15-year-old who died. He’s the father of 15-year-old twins.

“I can definitely have a picture of understanding the feeling of having a 15-year-old out the family,” he said.

Anyone with potentially relevant information is asked to contact police.