Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20161109/437666

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20161109/437645

Schrager states, "The Sanya EDITION was conceived for the China of today and the China of tomorrow. The resort is a unique sophisticated vision and embodiment of a cosmopolitan China for all the world to see."

In ancient times, Sanya was known as "the end of the sky and ocean." The Sanya EDTION embraces this concept by responding to China's ever-changing landscape and introduces travelers to a new kind of luxury hotel experience. Centrally located in Haitang Bay, The Sanya EDITION is set within 50 acres of meticulously landscaped lush tropical greenery. Featuring a striking 20,000 m2 private ocean overlooking the South China Sea.

The Sanya EDITION was designed for people of all ages, which is a delicate balancing act. The fundamental idea behind this resort was to divide the property into different specialized zones that overlap with each other but simultaneously retain their own unique identities. The zones include water, fun, sports, kids, adult, family, eating, nightlife, entertainment, sensory and relaxation. They are magical in their interaction while the total experience becomes more than the sum of the individual parts. This makes for an incredibly unique one-of-a-kind experience unlike anything else.

While adventurers climb the rock wall or ride the paddleboards, friends gather in the Mahjong Rooms. As toddlers explore the water slides and fantastical treehouse, wellness seekers retreat to the meditation forest or find sanctuary in the 11 exclusive treatment rooms in The Spa at The Sanya EDITION. Throughout the lush tropical landscape, a village of family cabanas and relaxation pavilions – each one fitted with comfortable couches, flat-screen TVs and minibars – encourage lounging. Families can take advantage of designated child-friendly entertainment zones spaced throughout the property, from the outdoor movies and arcade games to the saltwater pool and rock-climbing wall. Driving entertainment in a new direction, a private bumper car rink invites youngsters – and the young at heart – to experience excitement behind the wheel of a brightly-colored bumper car.

The property highlights a balance of contrasts, where traditional elements meet contemporary culture, simplicity conveys sophistication, and modern design amplifies the natural beauty. In keeping with EDITION's customized, individual approach, The Sanya EDITION draws inspiration from local influences, remaining respectful of Hainan Island's rich cultural heritage, yet infuses each space with surprising, ultra-modern twists. The landscape was conjured as a tropical oasis reflecting the islands indigenous flora and fauna and 900 trees meticulously chosen and transported to the resort from across the island of Hainan to create a sustainable and captivating environment.

The reception area reflects the duality of the hotel where a traditional lotus pool and live bamboo grove serve as a counterpoint to a curated art gallery displaying the work of renowned Chinese artists. Guests are greeted with a striking view of the resort's Private Ocean, which is gracefully framed by a series of teak pavilions. The spectacular 20,000m2 private ocean overlooking the South China Sea is unique to China and serves as the property's focal point with numerous activities radiating around this vast body of water. The private ocean beach on the north shore, which is shaded by coconut palms, offers pristine white powdery sand and is designed for swimming and enjoying the water and its magnificent view. To maintain the private ocean within the resort, 10 million gallons of sea water is pumped in from the South China Sea throughout the day, recycling once every 32 hours. As a compliment, a series of age-specific pools in a number of different sizes are dotted around the private ocean, each one with their own program of special activities.

The Sanya EDITION comprises 512 residential-style guestrooms, including 46 suites, and an additional 17 exclusive hotel villas nestled into a terraced hillside, each one with a private pool and private outdoor space. Delivering on the new-luxury promise, all guestrooms in the horseshoe-shaped hotel offer stunning ocean views. While the standard rooms are well suited for families, the loft suites, with their sleek and sensual finishes, are designed to appeal to couples.

The villas emphasize wood and stone textures. The warm and inviting interiors exude a comfortable, simple sophistication, using light oak finishes and airy fabrics to evoke the relaxed beach vibe. The spacious, light-filled rooms contrast stone floors against a clean, light color palate. The inventive design extends to the main room where Lofts and Suites feature a striking standalone bathtub. The placement allows guests to fully luxuriate in and appreciate the surrounding natural views.

Throughout the property, specialty restaurants celebrate culinary innovation and creative design. The largest of these, Market at EDITION, references Sanya's history as a trading port with a design evoking an old Chinese warehouse. Rustic wood and faded tiles add texture to the high-ceilinged space where guests congregate for breakfast and enjoy a vibrant marketplace atmosphere. Divided into distinct sections, Market is designed to feel festive but also casual and relaxing.

The Jade Egret welcomes guests with a selection of cocktails, craft beers or premium wines and a selection of appetizers, including Peking duck pancakes, hand rolls or small plates inspired by Spain's famous tapas bars, in a yacht inspired space.

Take an idyllic evening boat-ride on a customized boat to be transported to Xian Hai By The Sea, the hotel's signature seafood restaurant where the focus is on specialty Cantonese dishes. Introducing a new level of dining luxury, guests can opt to dine atop illuminated floating platforms in the private ocean. The custom-designed live fishpond will feature fresh seafood for guests to select from to enjoy under the starry night sky. From afar, the picture-perfect venue appears to be a collection of glowing lanterns skimming the water.

Beach Barbacoa at EDITION captures the casual cool of beachside dining and the full-bodied flavors of Indonesian cuisine. With an enticing menu, that includes authentic Balinese-style satays and Tiger Prawn Balinese Curry with Coconut milk, Beach Barbacoa takes its culinary cues from the traditional market restaurants that line the beachfronts at Sanya. Guests can choose their fresh fish, meats and vegetables and have their selections cooked to order on an outdoor charcoal grill.

The rooftop bar is destined to be Sanya's premium gathering place for sophisticated guests. A relaxing poolside haven by day, the space transforms into a stylish lounge at night and is the best spot in the retorts enjoy sunrise and sunset. While the rooftop bar's open-plan layout and sleek design promote socializing, the private booths provide an exclusive escape.

Embodying EDITION's next-generation spirit, the broad range of amenities and activities cater to multifaceted lifestyles, allowing guests to create their own elevated experiences. Whether the guest is an explorer, an extrovert, a wellness seeker or a leisure traveler, the comprehensive activities program speaks to their interests.

Playland at EDITION is a new kind of family entertainment area bringing multi-generational family members together. A world of entertainment and imagination for adults and kids of all ages, Playland is a large dedicated area within the resort that has been transformed into an activity and fun zone, featuring everything from games and interactive experiences to entertainment and educational activities to train rides, bumper cars and mini golf.

Another unique and special element within the resort is Limited EDITION a lifestyle shop, co-curated by UCCA (Ullens Center for Contemporary Art) Beijing and Steven Giles of Miami EDITION. UCCA Beijing collaborates with over 80 artists and 100 designers to produce specially commissioned works from Chinese artists and beyond, displaying cutting-edge design and one-of-a-kind original merchandise for EDITION guests. No other store in China offers such a broad range of limited edition lithography, photography, sculpture, ceramics and installation art from the biggest names in contemporary art in China. From unique Chinese novelty items and hand crafted items to books and fashion created by both established and up-and-coming artists, the store represents a microcosm of current and contemporary art and culture making it accessible and affordable for everyone. UCCA aims to promote an inclusive, cosmopolitan vision of China in the world.

For any event planner, Sanya's year-round tropical climate, crystalline beaches and lush landscape provide the ideal stage to set any conference, wedding or social gathering. The Sanya EDITION's Forum, a grand ballroom which measures an expansive 1,300 m² (14,000 sq. ft.), with seating for 900 guests, making it one of the largest ballroom spaces in Haitang Bay. Striking views of the surrounding forest provide a refreshing backdrop in the meeting center. Blurring the boundaries between indoors and outdoors, teak-floored rooms and louvered wood panel walls open onto a generous sunken courtyard and garden. Adjacent to the meeting center is amphitheater offering a picture-perfect setting for open-air concerts and events.

Aside from the high-profile events, dazzling entertainment and bespoke experiences, The Sanya EDITION will distinguish itself with extraordinary levels of seamless service. From the point of booking to the departure, service remains the key pillar of the EDITION stay. Ian Schrager's sophisticated tastes, trend-spotting instincts and appreciation for innovative design have kept him ahead of the curve for decades. Beyond these innate skills, he understands the value of personal, approachable and genuine service.

The Sanya EDITION, like every other property in the collection, combines the personal, intimate, individualized hotel experience that Ian Schrager is known for, with the global reach, operational expertise and scale of Marriott International. Ian Schrager knows how to read the zeitgeist to surpass expectations, surprise pundits and anticipate the needs of his guests. With The Sanya EDITION, he continues the tradition.

For further information on The Sanya EDITION, please visit the website www.editionhotels.com or www.edition-hotels.cn

Facebook.com/EDITIONhotels / Twitter: @EDITIONhotels / Instagram: @EDITIONhotels

100 North Haitang Road, Sanya, China Prc. 572013

PHONE +86 898 8835 9999

For press enquiries please contact Stevie King ([email protected]), Kate Bell ([email protected]), alternatively please call +44 (0) 207 434 7065, or +44 (0) 207 434 7002.

SOURCE EDITION

Related Links