Sanya is a city with a long history, unique ethnic customs and a perpetually pleasant climate. Fondly referred to as 'The Deer City,' its ever-blooming flowers and panoramic ocean views from mountain climbing expeditions make it an ideal destination for couples. Banyan Tree Sanya captures the essence of the region's splendid tropical scenery with picturesque white sandy beaches and crystal blue waters.

Immerse yourself in the sensory dining experiences that Banyan Tree Sanya offers amidst its breathtaking natural surroundings. Whether you're dining by the shimmering golden beaches, overlooking the serene bay, or nestled in a jungle treehouse under a canopy of stars, the resort is committed to creating an intimate and romantic dinner setting tailored for you and your beloved.

Be welcomed to Banyan Tree Sanya with a ceremony like no other. Relish the warmth of true Sanya hospitality as waiters dressed in traditional Li costumes serve you soothing coconut juices or tropical fruit teas for a touch of local flair. The vibrant Li costumes, with their intricate patterns, are a testament to masterful hand stitching, showcasing the rich artistic culture of the Li family.

Yes, we can help arrange activities like watersports or beach activities. For advance bookings on activities, contact our team at +86 898 8860 9988 or email us at sanya@banyantree.com.

We are approximately 30 minutes away from Sanya Phoenix International Airport by car. For assistance in transportation booking, contact our team at +86 898 8860 9988 or email us at sanya@banyantree.com.

Yes, we are conveniently located near shopping and entertainment centres. The nearest shopping centre is only 2.5 km away, while the Luhuitou scenic spot is just 1 km away. For assistance with advance booking of transportation, kindly contact our team at +86 898 8860 9988 or email us at sanya@banyantree.com.

The best way to reach Banyan Tree Sanya from Sanya Phoenix International Airport is by taxi. After arriving at the airport, proceed to the designated taxi stands or queue to find a taxi for hire. For assistance with advance booking of transportation to the resort or any other inquiries, kindly contact our team at +86 898 8860 9988 or email us at sanya@banyantree.com.