Explanations and musical examples can be found through the Oxford Music Online, accessed through the Potsdam Library page at http://potsdam.libguides.com/music. Click on Music Reference, then Oxford Music Online.

Key terms and conceptsRelated to melody:

contour: the shape of the melody as rising or falling

conjunct: stepwise melodic motion, moving mostly by step in intervals of a 2nd

disjunct: melodic motion in intervals larger than a 2nd, often with a large number of wide skips

range: the distance between the lowest and highest pitches, usually referred to as narrow

(> octave) or wide (< octave)

motive: a short pattern of 3-5 notes (melodic, rhythmic, harmonic or any combination of these) that is repetitive

in a composition

phrase: a musical unit with a terminal point, or cadence. Lengths of phrases can vary.

Related to rhythm:

beat: pulse

measures or bars: a metrical unit separated by lines in musical notation

meter: groups of beats in a recurring pattern with accentuation on strong beats

non-metric, unmetrical: free rhythm, no discernable time

simple meters: beats subdivided into two parts (2/4, 3/4, 4/4)

compound meters: beats subdivided into three parts (6/8, 9/8, 12/8)

asymmetrical meters: meters with an uneven number of subdivisions (7/4, 5/8)

mixed meters: shifting between meters

mensurations: used in music from 1300-1600, the ratios of rhythmic durations

Related to harmony:

chords: three or more pitches sounding simultaneously

triads: three notes that can be arranged into superimposed thirds

extended chords: thirds added above the triad, usually as a 9th, 11th or 13th

consonance: a harmonic combination that is stable, usually in thirds

dissonance: a harmonic combination that is unstable, often including seconds or sevenths

parallel motion: two or more parts moving in the same direction and same intervals, as in parallel fifths

contrary motion: two or more parts moving in the opposite direction

oblique motion: occurs when one voice remains on a single pitch while the other ascends or descends

canon: (meaning rule) one melody is strictly imitated by a second part after a delay in the entrance of the

second part. In order for the parts to end simultaneously, the canon may break down at the end of the

composition. The canonic parts may occur at the unison or some other interval.

round: an exact canon, ending at different times, as in ?Row, row, row your boat.?

imitation: two or more parts that have the same or similar phrase beginning and with delays between

entrances (as in a round or canon), but after the beginning of the phrase, the parts diverge into separate

melodies

Related to tonality:

diatonic: a seven-note scale with a regular pattern of 5 whole and 2 half steps. Diatonic intervals are found

within this type of scale.

chromatic: using pitches outside of a particular diatonic scale, or using a succession of half steps.

major tonality: pitches are related to a central pitch called the tonic. Major scales are used.

minor tonality: pitches are related to a central pitch called the tonic. Minor scales are used.

modal: refers to music using diatonic scales with Greek names (Western) or non-Western scales

modulation: moving from one key area to another key

atonality: music that is not tonal or not based on any system of keys or modes

bitonality: the simultaneous use of two key areas.

polytonality: the simultaneous use of two or more key areas.

Related to texture:

monophony (noun; monophonic = adjective, as in monophonic texture): literally ?one sound? - one melodic line,

without harmony or any accompaniment, which can occur when one person or many people sing a

melody simultaneously. Singing in octaves is considered a monophonic texture.

homophony (noun; homophonic = adjective): one melodic line with a harmonic accompaniment that supports

the melody.

polyphony (noun; polyphonic = adjective): two or more parts sung or played simultaneously.

heterophony (noun; heterophonic = adjective): multiple voices singing a single melodic line, but with

simultaneous melodic variants between the singers. Heterophony often occurs in non-Western music and

sometimes in folk music.

homorhythms: the same rhythms in all parts, as in the singing of a hymn.

counterpoint (noun; contrapuntal = adjective): like polyphony in that it has two or more compatible melodies

performed simultaneously.

Related to tempo: consult the Oxford Music Online

commonly in Italian from the 17th-18th c., and then increasingly in other vernacular languages

largo, lento, adagio, andante, moderato, allegretto, allegro, presto, prestissimo

qualifying terms: meno (less), pi (more), molto (very or much) poco a poco (little by little), assai (very) mosso (motion), sostenuto (sustained), non troppo (not too much)

Related to expression:

crescendo

decrescendo/diminuendo

piano

forte

mezzo

terraced dynamics: a sudden and dramatic shift from loud to soft or soft to loud

accelerando

rubato

Releated to timbre: classifications of instruments

chordophone: string instruments

aerophones: wind produces the sound (woodwinds and brass instruments)

membranophone: a vibrating membrane produces the sound (drums)

idiophone: sound is produced from the material (wood, glass, stone, metal)

Related to ensembles:

choir: vocal ensemble

voice ranges: bass, tenor, alto, soprano (from lowest to highest)

choral: music written for a choir

a cappella: choral music without instrumental accompaniment, literally ?at the chapel?

polychoral: two or more choirs in a composition, usually with an antiphonal or echo effect

orchestra: large instrumental ensemble with strings

band: large instrumental ensemble without strings

chamber ensembles: trio, quartet, quintet, sextet, octet

Standard ensemble combinations:

string trio: three string instruments

piano trio: piano, violin, cello

string quartet: two violins, viola, cello

piano quintet: piano and a string quartet

brass quintet: 2 trumpets, french horn, trombone, tuba

wind quintet: flute, clarinet, oboe, bassoon, french horn

Related to text and music:

syllabic: one syllable sung to each note

melismatic: one syllable sung to several notes

sacred: religious music, often for the church liturgy (services)

secular: worldly, non-religious music, usually in the vernacular

vernacular: texts in the language of the people (English, French, Spanish, German, etc.)

Related to musical forms:

Generally capital letters are used to distinguish different sections of a composition. A capital refers to an exact repetition. A lowercase letter refers to the same music but new text. A prime number after the capital refers to a variation of the music from the original section.

repetitive forms:

strophic: a vocal form consisting of several phrases. The musical form is repeated using different verses

of text, as in a hymn or folksong.

modified strophic: simply means that the repetitions of the sections are varied slightly, but not so much

that they are a significant variation or the original.

bar form: two sections of music, with only the first section A repeated. Many hymns use the far form.

binary form: two sections of music, usually with each A and B section repeated. This is typically used in

dances. When a group dances are combined into a suite, the dances generally all stay in the same key.

processive forms: variation forms:

continuous variations: includes an ostinato -- a repeated bass line or set of chords (usually 4-8 measures)

with continuous variations above the bass pattern. This term is also called a ground bass, a chaconne,

and a passacaglia. These are common in the Renaissance and Baroque periods.

sectional variations: a theme and variation set, where usually each section is clearly marked. Generally

in a theme and variations, the theme itself is identifiable. Variation sets are commonly used in the Classical

period as the slow movement of a string quartet or symphony.

fugue: a one-subject (also called monothematic) composition in which the subject is continually restated on

different pitches and in various keys, processing the modulations, fragments or registers of the subject.

Like the other variation forms, there is usually a return to the subject in the original key.

return forms: the initial section returns following a contrasting middle section.

rounded binary: two sections, with a return of A in the second section: |: A :|: B A :| This form is typical of

late Baroque dances and of minuets/scherzos and trios of the Classical period.

ternary: ABA, with new material in the middle section and a return to the first A material (exactly or

varied). The return to the final A section can be recopied in the music, denoted by a phrase above the

music (da capo), or a sign (da capo al segno), which is common in da capo arias.

rondo forms: ABACA, ABACADA, etc. the initial section is contrasted with episodes in different keys and

styles from the original A material. Rondos are typically used as the last movement of a Classical sonata,

string quartet or symphony.

rondeau: a medieval song/dance, ABaAabAB

virelai: a medieval song/dance, AbbaA

sonata form: two contrasting key areas in the first section (exposition) are developed in the middle section

(development) and return in the final section (recapitulation) in the tonic key. The sonata form emerges

from an expanded rounded binary form in the Classical period.

compound forms: any two forms combined to make a new, large form.

two binary forms can be combined (Minuet ? Trio - Minuet) to produce a larger ABA structure

sonata-rondo: combines the contrasting rondo sections ABA-C-ABA with the sonata principles of an

exposition, development and recapitulation.

concerto-sonata form: derived from sonata form, but with two expositions (1. orchestra, 2. orchestra and

soloist) and a solo cadenza between the recapitulation and the coda.

additive form:

through-composed: continuous contrasting sections are composed together without repetitions of

previous material. Ballad songs and improvisatory instrumental pieces, like the fantasia, toccata or prelude

are examples of additive compositions. Some Renaissance genres (mass, motet, madrigal) are typically

through-composed.

Related to genres: compositional types or categories of works

examples of sacred vocal genres:

chant, plainsong or Gregorian chant

mass

motet

oratorio

chorale cantata

examples of secular vocal genres:

opera

solo cantata

madrigal

song

Lied

chanson

canion

song cycle

examples of instrumental genres:

dance

fantasia

prelude

toccata

fugue

sonata

suite

concerto

symphony

tone poem/symphonic poem

program symphony

Nota bene: Instruments, terms, concepts, tempi and expressions often go by different names in foreign languages. It is best to look up unfamiliar words when they are encountered.

Historical periods, musical styles and principal genres

Middle Ages (also referred to as medieval music): 600-1420. Generally called the Middle Ages, this long historical era can be broken into several distinct developmental periods and falls between Classical Antiquity and the Renaissance.