Be careful of telling lies, even small ones.

I used to work with a man named Dan. Dan and his wife held an annual barbecue at their house on July 4th weekend. One year, a friend of theirs came and brought a dessert to share. Dan wanted to be kind and try her dessert, but when he did, he discovered it tasted terrible!

Not wanting to hurt this woman’s feelings, Dan lied when she asked him how he liked it. “It was great!” The problem was it was far from great. So the next year, when the woman returned to the party, what do you think she brought with her? That same terrible dessert. “I brought that dessert you loved, Dan!” By the time Dan told me this story, this woman had been bringing this dessert and he had been playing this game for a long time.

Wild, huh? It’s amazing the problems we create when we aren’t honest. Dan would be free from that decade plus cycle of lying and pretending with just 15 seconds of honesty.

I was thinking about honesty when I listened to Brandon Lake’s song, "Greater Still." Lake speaks straightforwardly about his state before he met Jesus. “My sin was deep…my shame was wide…my guilt was great.”

WATCH NOW: BRANDON LAKE - Greater Still: Song Session

RELATED CONTENT: Brandon Lake Shows The Paramount Nature of God’s love in “Greater Still”

Lake is not only honest about what he was like before he met Jesus. He speaks candidly about his expectations and experience with Jesus.

“You met me at my lowest moment

You saw me at my very worst

When I expected disappointment

Love was all I heard.”

The song is powerful, not just because of the musical structure and Lake’s earnest vocals. "Greater Still" has power because it invites us into a level of sobriety and candor with God and others.

Listening to this song on repeat lately, I was struck by three invitations Lake gives listeners like me.

1. Be honest.

In an interview Lake gave around the release of this single, he said, “I believe it's important that we are real, honest, and raw about the mental battles we face.” Whether it’s sin, shame or guilt as Lake described in the song lyrics, or anxiety, depression and doubt, every one of us is fighting some sort of battle today.

Like my friend, Dan, though, we often choose to lie rather than be honest. When someone asks us, “How are you doing?” we say “great!” Even with people we like and trust, we often paint a prettier picture than is truly happening inside us.

Sure, being honest is scary. Getting honest would requires 15 seconds of courage. But on the other side of that honesty, we could find acceptance, help and encouragement we won’t find as long as we maintain a lie.

2. Be ready.

Lake also noted, “I believe we need honest songs, but we also need warfare songs to come against those attacks that try and keep us from being everything God wants us to be and from living truly free.”

We need to be ready for the spiritual warfare that is guaranteed to come against every one who follows Jesus. The Apostle Paul warns and urges us to be ready for this in Ephesians 6.

“Finally, be strengthened by the Lord and by his vast strength. Put on the full armor of God so that you can stand against the schemes of the devil. For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers of this darkness, against evil, spiritual forces in the heavens. For this reason take up the full armor of God, so that you may be able to resist in the evil day, and having prepared everything, to take your stand.”

The armor of God described in Ephesians 6 is much larger than the lyrics of a song. We can be ready for the spiritual warfare we will surely face when we put on and take hold of everything we have in Jesus Christ.

3. Be reminded.

Lake also made an interesting note after his comments about the need for honest songs.

“I believe it's important that we are real, honest, and raw about the mental battles we face - that we bring them into the light so God can remind us of who He is and who we are.”

One of my favorite quotes of all-time comes from 18th-century English author, Samuel Johnson. “People need to be reminded more than they need to be instructed.”

How many books have you read without retaining? Sermons have you heard and then promptly forgotten? If you’re like me, the answer is “too many!” We need to remember what we’ve already learned more than we need to learn new things.

RELATED CONTENT: Brandon Lake Reflects on His Story as “Gratitude” is Featured on NBC's "The Voice”

In Psalm 143, David wrote, “I remember the days of old; I meditate on all you have done; I reflect on the work of your hands.” The mental battles we face tend to dull our hope and sap our strength. But, when we take time to remember who God is, who God says we are, and what we’ve seen God do on our behalf in the past, our strength is renewed and our hope becomes brighter.

If you’re in a great battle today, I strongly encourage you to check out Brandon Lake’s song, "Greater Still." As you listen, meditate on the lyrics and the invitation to be honest, ready, and reminded of the truth you need to endure and win the battle. You are not alone and greater still is the One who loves you.