He wrote two autobiographies - fittingly, since Anthony Quinn's unbridled appetite for success, women and fatherhood meant his sins and achievements could fill a library.

The larger than life actor, who has died in Boston at the age of 86, started as an extra before World War II, made more than 270 films and remained a star into old age.

He won a brace of Oscars, first for supporting Marlon Brando in Viva Zapata, 1952, then as best actor of 1956 in Lust For Life. This was the story of Van Gogh (Kirk Douglas) but it was Quinn who took the prize as Gaugin.

To millions, Quinn's definitive movie was Zorba the Greek in 1964. It epitomised an image he cultivated offscreen - the 'natural man' whose zest and humanity excused defiance of conventions.

No Hollywood scriptwriter would dare present Quinn's story as fiction - too unlikely. Here was a dirt-poor peasant immigrant with a speech defect who turned himself into one of the cinema's most enduring leading men.

A notorious sexual athlete and scalphunter who ended his days with a partner younger than one of his granddaughters.

Rita Hayworth and Maureen O'Hara were among his better-known conquests. Quinn also lived dangerously by seducing the wife of boxer Jack Dempsey.

Towards the end of his first marriage - to director Cecil B, De Mille's adopted daughter, Katherine - he cheated in triplicate with British actress Margaret Leighton, a Hollywood starlet and wardrobe assistant Iolanda Addolori, later his second wife.

He did not dare take Miss Leighton to a hotel, so they made love in the back of a cruising limo.

Quinn shocked his family by embarking on a relationship with his last wife, Kathy Benvin. while still married to Iolanda. In 1997 he agreed to pay Iolanda half his £15million fortune after a bitter divorce battle.

He admitted starting families with five different women, for 13 offspring, but his son Francesco, from the marriage to Iolanda, believed that estimate was too small.

Though he lived hard, Quinn seemed indestructible, attributing his fitness to jogging six miles a day; in his 70s he was a keen cyclist, thinking nothing of 20-mile trips from his home near Rome.

Like his life, his triumph over adversity was the stuff of screen fable. He was born in Mexico, in 1915, to an Irish-Mexican mercenary soldier and a Mexican-Indian mother. When he was four, Mrs Quinn fled with him to Texas, then to California by cattle train.

Everything was against him, not least a speech defect. But aminor operation fixed that, and he acted in amateur plays while working at everything from boxer and labourer to clerk. Then he tried his luck in Hollywood, where the Quinn ego won him swift attention.

In 1936, posing as a Cheyenne speaking no English, he won a bit part in De Mille's The Plainsman. He ruined take after take by ignoring orders, telling De Mille a genuine Indian would never behave as the script decreed.

Tickled by his effrontery, De Mille altered the sequence and put the rebel under contract. But he was less thrilled when his daughter Katherine fell for the interloper.

Quinn - although highly experienced himself, thanks to an older woman he called Sylvia - expected a virgin bride and was enraged to learn otherwise. He beat Katherine up on honeymoon and rationalised his later adultery as revenge.

Hollywood sneered at an opportunist marrying the boss's daughter; Quinn countered by refusing to appear in De Mille films. His good looks and commanding presence soon brought better roles.

Katherine, who gave him four children, overlooked his moodiness and flagrant infidelities for decades, until what amounted to a common-law marriage to wardrobe girl Iolanda, whom he met in 1962. Divorce followed Iolanda's second child by him, and he married her.

Divorce from Hollywood royalty threatened his, career, but Anthony Quinn held box-office power. He survived and thrived in some of the most popular modern movies such as The Guns of Navarone and Lawrence of Arabia.

Quinn also had other outlets. At 15 he was named California's most promising junior sculptor, he idolised Picasso and considered himself an artist manque.

In longer intervals between films he developed his talent as a painter and wrote the first version of his life, The Original Sin.

A quadruple heart bypass in 1990 caused no more than a pause - within months he was jogging in Central Park.

He strayed yet again, fathering a daughter when he was 78. The mother, Kathy Benvin, had been his secretary for nine years. It was the last straw for Iolanda who took legal action.

Rejuvenated by his daughter Antonia, now eight, he settled for domestic bliss with Miss Benvin and their second child, Ryan, was born in 1996. His second set of memoirs, One Man Tango, published in 1995, rang with gratitude for being alive and having a fresh family.

Anthony Quinn, egoist, maverick and indomitable lover, was one of the few Hollywood greats whose private life upstaged his screen adventures over decades.

His self-awarded epitaph is fair enough: 'I have paid for mistakes. I've never taken drugs, I'm not a drunk, and I'm not a crook. I'm prepared to take responsibility for my sins, and although it hurts, it's not unbearable.'