BOSTON -- Actor Anthony Quinn, the two-time Academy Award winning movie star known for his portrayal of earthy characters with a zest for life, died on Sunday in a Boston hospital, a hospital spokeswoman said. He was 86.

The spokeswoman at Brigham and Women's hospital told reporters he died at 9:29 a.m. but declined to give further information.

Born in Mexico in 1915, Quinn won two Academy Awards for best supporting actor, one for his 1952 role as a Mexican revolutionary in "Viva Zapata!" and another four years later for his portrayal of the French painter Paul Gauguin in the film "Lust for Life."

Quinn was best known for his memorable portrayal of the title character in Zorba the Greek (1964). For Quinn, Zorba was far more than just a film role.

"I am Zorba," Quinn once said of the hero of the movie, a worldly wise Greek who lived life to the fullest.

Like Zorba, Quinn's life was painted on a broad canvas, ranging from an impoverished childhood in Mexico and Los Angeles to the pampered luxury of a Hollywood star.

Anthony Rudolph Oaxaca Quinn was born on April 21, 1915, in Chihuahua, Mexico, where his half-Irish father Francisco (Frank) Quinn had married a Mexican girl of Aztec Indian ancestry, Manuela, while fighting for revolutionary leader Pancho Villa.

The family moved to El Paso, Texas, and three years later to Los Angeles in search of work. Quinn was raised in a poor district of Los Angeles and never forgot his past.

As a teen-ager, he underwent minor tongue surgery to improve his speech and afterwards took voice lessons at a Los Angeles drama school, paying the fee by cleaning windows and floors. He began appearing in stage productions at 18.

Mae West gave Quinn his first big chance on stage in the play Clean Beds which she financed and produced. His part was a take-off of John Barrymore, then an aging actor fading from the limelight.

Quinn's first screen role -- a 45-second appearance -- came in the film Parole in 1936.

He later went on to appear in such movies as Lawrence of Arabia (1962), Guns of Navarone (1961) and La Strada (1954).

"To me, acting ... (is) living," he once said. "I love to live, so I live. I love to act, so I act. I gotta have vitality."

The 39 Best Shows on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

House of the Dragon, The Sopranos, and Fantasmas are just a few of the shows you need to be watching on Max this month.

The 46 Best Movies on Netflix Right Now

Hit Man, Under Paris, and Godzilla Minus One are just a few of the movies you should watch on Netflix this month.

The 21 Best Movies on Apple TV+ Right Now

Fancy Dance, Argylle, Mad Max: Fury Road, and Blade Runner 2049 are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Apple TV+ this month.

The 29 Best Movies on Hulu This Week

Origin, Anchorman, and Fight Club are just a few of the movies you need to watch on Hulu right now.

The 28 Best Movies on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

Mad Max, Stop Making Sense, and Dune are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Max this month.

The 29 Best Shows on Apple TV+ Right Now

Constellation, Presumed Innocent, and a Steve Martin documentary are among the best shows on Apple TV+ this month.

The 35 Best Shows on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Boys, My Lady Jane, and Fallout are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

The 19 Best Movies on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Idea of You, Road House, and American Fiction are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.