Presented annually by OTA to celebrities that champion the men and

women serving in the American Armed Forces, the southern rock and

country legend was awarded the Eagle Trophy for his countless endeavors

to support troops overseas and at local hospitals and for supporting

numerous military charities. Well known for his role as an American

Patriot, Williams, has performed at various military bases and continues

to meet military personnel at every concert appearance.

“I am extremely honored to award Hank Williams Jr the 2013 Patriot

Award. His art, legacy of family and Spirit of Patriotism is exactly

why this award exists. He never forgot his roots and why we have the

Freedom we do in America,” says OTA founder and executive director Mark

Woods.

Williams will join past Patriot Award recipients Toby Keith, Darryl

Worley, Aaron Tippin, Gary Sinise, Charlie Daniels, Mark Wills, and

KISS.

About Hank Williams Jr.

Though he began his career in the shadow of his legendary father,

Hank Williams Jr. emerged as a formidable Country singer-songwriter in

his own right with 1960s hits such as “It’s All Over But The Crying” and

“Cajun Baby.” But things changed with the 1979 release of “Family

Tradition,” where he broke the Nashville mainstream by adopting a rebel

image and writing/recording in a style incorporating his Blues and

Southern Rock influences. The results were staggering as 42 Top-10 hits

followed, two CMA Entertainer of the Year honors, three ACM Entertainer

of the Year honors, multiple Grammy nominations and a Grammy award for

“There’s a Tear in My Beer”, a duet with his father using electronic

merging technology.

As groundbreaking as Hank Williams Jr. became, it wasn’t just his

performance that people took note about, but rather his songwriting that

became so notable. The driven musician penned hits songs year after

year scoring 20 BMI Awards. One of the arguably most-heard Country song

of modern times, the four-time Emmy award-winning “Are You Ready For

Some Football?,” which was heard nationally as the theme song of ABC and

ESPN’s Monday Night Football telecasts, was aired for 21 years.