EastEnders star Jessie Wallace beamed as she posed with friends on a night out.

The soap star, 50, let her hair down after sparking rumours she had married her boyfriend Justin Gallowey, 50, in secret.

In a post on Instagram earlier this week, the actress, who plays Kat Slater, described her partner as "My hubby", as the pair cosied up at a London pub.

Captioning the post, Jessie said: "My hubby @justin_gallwey," and added a red heart emoji. Her co-stars rushed to the comments to gush over the happy couple.

Emma Barton, who plays Honey Mitchell, said: "Gorgeous," with a series of heard emojis.

Natalie Cassidy, who stars as Sonia Fowler in the soap, wrote: "You look so happy."

In two posts shared yesterday, the soap veteran appeared to be having a great night at a bar with three friends.

The actress wears a multi-coloured, long-sleeved maxi dress and tall silver high heels, as she wraps her arm around a brunette pal, in one snap.

Two other mates laugh and smile as they stand with Jessie.

The happy group pose in front of a sophisticated bar, with champagne flutes and wine glasses hanging down from the ceiling in neat rows.

Jessie simply captioned the photo with love heart emojis.

Friends and fans rushed to praise the picture, with one person writing: "You all look stunning."

Another wrote: "Always fabulous as you are."

A third said: "Looking good Jess."

In another snap, apparently taken on the same evening, the foursome make hilarious faces as they pose for a close-up selfie in the same bar.

Jessie captioned the sweet picture: "Friends reunited."

In May, it was first reported that Jessie was dating a mysterious builder, who she booked for a job.

Justin and Jessie have been friends for the last 34 years and had been together for 12 months, a source said in May.

Jessie was dating Majorca-based millionaire Paul Whitworth – once jailed for fraud – when she was cast in the BBC soap in 2000.

The pair split as she rose to fame and she went on to have a fling with American Andy Burton.

He later embarrassed her with kiss-and-tell revelations.

Jessie also dated policeman Dave Morgan and they moved in together but split shortly after their daughter Tallulah, now 17, was born.

Then, the actress planned to marry catering boss Vince Morse in 2011.

But she called off their reported £300,000 wedding just hours before they were due to tie the knot after finding out he had sent explicit photos of her to his ex-girlfriend.

And in 2016, Jessie split from musician Tim Arnold after a four-year romance.

Her most recent known boyfriend was father-of-five Paul Kempin, but the pair called it a day in 2019 after two years together.