Jessie Wallace is best known for playing Kat Slater on ever-popular British soap EastEnders. She's been in the role on and off since 2000 and most recently reprised the role in 2018.

Kat has seen her fair share of men since her marriage to Alfie broke up, and off screen Jessie's life is just as colourful. The EastEnders star has seen her share of scandalous relationships.

When she was first cast on the show, Jessie was dating Majorca-based Paul Whitworth. The ex-criminal was described by the Sunday Mirror in 2001 as a "handsome millionaire" and an "international man of mystery".

But the relationship wasn't to be as the two split soon after she rose to fame. While some sources speculated that BBC bosses had something to do with it and others blamed the distance, a biography by Emily Herbert claims Jessie said at the time: "We split up because it just wasn't working out."

READ MORE: EastEnders star Maisie Smith turns heads on red carpet as she unveils glam new look

Shortly after splitting from Paul, she had a brief affair with Andy Burton, who was six years her junior. However, the relationship ended and Andy sold the story of their relationship to the media, according to the Daily Mail.

The star then went on to date policeman Dave Morgan, whom she met after she was arrested for drink driving. The two moved in together and even have a daughter together, but split up shortly after she was born.

She then met catering boss Vince Morse and the two planned to get married when Jessie called the wedding off. According to the Daily Mail, Vincent had been unfaithful to Jessie and sent unflattering photos of her to his ex. Jessie reportedly planned to jilt him at the altar, but changed her mind at the last minute. A source told the Daily Mail at the time: "She was determined to do it so that everyone would know exactly what she thought of him. But as it got nearer she was just too upset and decided it was better just to cancel the whole thing."

In 2016, Jessie split from musician boyfriend Tim Arnold whom she had been dating for four years. They ended things because Tim was reportedly "tired of the limelight". Jessie's most recent boyfriend was father-of-five Paul Kempin, but the two split after two years together.