EastEnders icon Jessie Wallace is reportedly set to walk down the aisle for the first time after her boyfriend popped the question.

The 51-year-old TV star has been engaged and married multiple times on-screen as her much loved character Kat Slater.

But it will be the first time for Jessie to be the bride IRL as her 50-year-old carpenter boyfriend Justin Gallwey has asked her to be his lawfully wedded wife.

The happy news has been exposed after Jessie was spotted wearing a dazzling engagement ring while out picking up groceries from a local shop in North London.

The Sun on Sunday claims the couple are “getting hitched after at least a year together.”

While a source close to the couple told the publication: “Jessie has been proudly wearing the ring.”

A photo shared by the paper showed Jessie looking content as she went about shopping in a local supermarket and while wrapped up in a thick coat.

The actress, with her hair tied back behind a casual bandana, appears to have a content smile on her face in the snap - and a large ring is impossible to miss as it sits on her wedding finger.

Last year, the lovers sparked confusion when they hinted they were already married.

Jessie got fans flustered when she shared a snap of herself alongside Justin and a caption stating: "My hubby”.

Former EastEnders co-star Kacey Ainsworth, who played Little Mo, replied saying: “So happy for you both”, while Sonia Fowler actress Natalie Cassidy told her: “You look so happy.”

As fans flew into a frenzy of excitement about the exchanges, Jessie’s representative stepped forward to deny the actress had married Justin, saying: “It’s just a term of endearment.”

While Jessie and Justin are believed to have been together for around a year, they are said to have a strong relationship.

Justin stood by the soap star last year when she had a brush with the law following a rowdy night out.

Jessie has had boyfriends in the past, but has not married before.

She was involved with a policeman named Dave Morgan in the early naughties and the couple welcomed a daughter named Tallulah Lilac in November 2004 - but they split soon after their child was born.

Meanwhile, on EastEnders, Jessie’s character has been married to Alfie Moon, played by Shane Richie, twice - with their first marriage lasting from 2003 until 2013 and the second round lasting from 2014 until 2019.

The character has been engaged to Phil Mitchell, played by Steve McFadden, since 2022 - and in the past was engaged to doomed character Andy Hunter, played by Michael Higgs.

* Follow Mirror Celebs on Snapchat, Instagram, Twitter and Facebook.