EastEnders star Jessie Wallace has reportedly got herself a new boyfriend in the form of divorced father-of-five, Paul Keepin.

The actress and her rumoured beau, 40, were spotted sucking face at the Amy Winehouse Gala at London's Dorchester hotel earlier this month, The Sun reports.

“Jessie and Paul were quite obviously a couple when they attended the event together," a source claimed.

“They were kissing throughout the night posed up for selfies to stick on social media.

“They made absolutely no secret that they were dating.”

It's happy news for Jessie, 47, who has endured a roller-coaster love life.

In 2016 her four-year relationship with singer Tim Arnold collapsed after he got sick of her fame.

Arnold, whose stage name is The Soho Hobo, is the son of actress Polly Perkins, 72, who played Dot Cotton’s half-sister Rose. Walford veteran June Brown, 88, is his godmother.

Revealing his four-year relationship with Jessie was over, Arnold said: “People just want to know about the celebrities you know or have been with. I am tired of it.”

In August 2011 she called off her £300,000 wedding to catering boss Vince Morse on the day after learning he'd been sexting an old flame.

She has also had doomed romances with Paul Whitworth, an old pal of gang boss Reggie Kray.

She then fell for policeman Dave Morgan in 2007, the father of her seven-year-old daughter Tallulah.

After they split Jessie started seeing American toyboy Andy Burton, who is six years her junior. But she ended it after he went public on their relationship.

When Arnold started dating Jessie, a year after she ditched Morse, he pledged his loyalty to her, saying: “I knew about the terrible experience she’d had. I took it on board to make sure that I would be different. One of the greatest crimes that can happen to any woman, whether they are famous or not, is to be humiliated. So I always took it as a responsibility to be both supportive and protective of Jessie.

“And I have done that.”

Mirror Online has contacted Jessie for comment.