The Company

The Rs. 4,000 Cr. JoyAlukkas Group, a winner of the RetailMe ‘Best Retailer of the Year (Middle East)' Award has over 75 jewellery showrooms around the world including the world's biggest jewellery showroom in Chennai. It has a presence in 9 countries in GCC, India and UK.

The Group today enjoys the trust of over 10 million customers and employs a highly committed and satisfied team of over 3000 people world wide. Joyalukkas is the only jeweller to be conferred the ISO 9001 and 14001 in the UAE.

The Challenge

Joy Alukkas was one of the few Kerala Jewelers to penetrate into the Hyderabad Market, which at that point was filled with Hyderabad-based players. RBC was given the responsibility in a multi-agency creative pitch invited for the launch of their Hyderabad store.

Formerly known as Joy Alukkas, a family owned enterprise, the challenge here was to promote it as a corporate chain. This move was also vital in enabling the transformation of the Company from a national player into an international jeweler with a global vision.

The first task was to alter the market perception of Joy Alukkas - from that of a family-owned enterprise, to that of a Corporate's. The Alukkas family consisted of four brothers each of who had many stores under their individual identity - leading to a blurring and overlapping in customer discernment.

The Solution

To differentiate, the two names were merged into one as ‘Joyalukkas' and the new nomenclature was popularized through a consistent media campaign.

As Joyalukkas was one of the first Kerala-based retailer to enter the Hyderabad market,

a thorough and complete study was done on the market, target and products. A demographic, psychographic, behavioural and aspirational analysis was made to understand the market in depth, and to brand the Company as well as the products.

Subsequent to the gala launch of the Hyderabad store, TVCs were made for Indian as well as for the Dubai audience. Popular actress Ileana was roped in as the Brand Ambassador.

Joyalukkas' new product lines, Parineeta – a wedding collection, Lucia – a liteweight collection for teens were also launched by RBC in the all-India market.

The Result

The new name brought about the desired transformation. Joyalukkas changed just a name into a holistic corporate function.

The film with Ileana was a phenomenal success and drew curious crowds to the store.

The consistent mixed media plan kept Joyalukkas in the news, and the store soon became a first call destination for jewellery purchases