"Point me!"

This article is about the video game. You may be looking for the novel, film, soundtrack, video game soundtrack of the same name or man nicknamed Half-Blood Prince.

Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince is a video game developed by Electronic Arts and published by Electronic Arts. The game coincides with the theatrical release of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. The game was released on 30 June, 2009, on the Mac OS X, Microsoft Windows, Nintendo DS, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, Wii, and Xbox 360 platforms.

Plot[]

In Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Dumbledore prepares Harry for the final battle that he knows is fast approaching as Voldemort is tightening his grip on both the Muggle and wizarding worlds. Together they work to find the key to unlock Voldemort's defences and, to this end, Dumbledore recruits his old friend and colleague, the well-connected and unsuspecting bon vivant Professor Horace Slughorn, whom he believes holds crucial information about Voldemort's power.

Content[]

Quidditch

Wizard duels and multiplayer duelling mode

Potion-making

Hogwarts free-roaming (similar to the previous Harry Potter game, Order of the Phoenix)

Missions at night

Ron's love-life

Inferi battle

Locations[]

Note:- Locations in italics are optional areas that are not necessary to visit to complete the game.

Hogwarts[]

Initial location

Front Gates

Hagrid's Hut

1st location area unlocked (Main Entrance Area and Grand Staircase Tower)

Gryffindor Tower

Grand Staircase

Entrance Hall

Entrance Courtyard

Viaduct

Viaduct Entrance

Entrance Dungeon

Dungeons

Potions Classroom

Great Hall (Gryffindor Duelling Club Location)

Dumbledore's office

Paved Courtyard

2nd location area unlocked (Clock Tower Area - 5th Floor)

Hospital Wing

Clock Tower

Clock Tower Courtyard

Covered Bridge

Stone Circle

Quidditch Gate (Flying Club Location)

Training Grounds (Hufflepuff Duelling Club Location)

Hogwarts Greenhouses (Potions Club Location)

Boathouse

3rd Location area unlocked (7th Floor)

Sixth Floor

Seventh Floor

Slughorn's Office

Paved Courtyard (Slytherin Duelling Club Location)

4th Location area unlocked (Transfiguration Area)

Stone Bridge

Transfiguration Courtyard (Ravenclaw Duelling Club Location)

Library

Charms Classroom

Transfiguration Classroom

5th Location area unlocked (Astronomy Tower Area)

Suspension Bridge

Astronomy Tower

Moaning Myrtle's Bathroom (similar to sixth-floor boys' bathroom)

Owlery

Other locations[]

Horcrux Cave

The Burrow

Spinner's End (in cutscenes)

Diagon Alley (in cutscenes)

Gameplay[]

Wii[]

The game utilises the Wii Remote features as it did in the Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix video game.[1]. But unlike the previous game, players can now also use the motion sensing and vibration features to brew potions. Potion brewing involves following a complex recipe one step at a time. The steps include picking up vials of liquid, shaking them (by shaking the Wii Remote) until they froth, and tipping the Wii Remote to pour it into the mixture, being very careful not to pour in too much. Another possible step is stirring the mixture with the Wii Remote until it changes colour. If it starts vibrating, that is the sign to move away before it blows up.[2]

Harry Potter can duel against Draco Malfoy in a Duelling Room with a long platform, similar to the one seen in the second film, but wider to allow dodging of spells. Moving in order to dodge is done with the Nunchuk Control Stick, while casting spells is done with Wii Remote and Nunchuk gestures. Combat spells currently implemented include a shield spell ("Protego") cast by crossing the Wii Remote and Nunchuk, a standard attack spell by striking downwards with the Wii Remote ("Stupefy"), a charged version by holding the Wii Remote up for longer first, and a more powerful attack spell by swinging the Wii Remote and Nunchuck to the left.[2] There is also Quidditch & 2-player Duelling.

The game follows the film nearly word for word but misses out on some points from the book, just like the film did. First the player follows a story mode type of play and completes missions, but after Dumbledore's death, there is free time to finish potions, complete Quidditch trials and practise duelling with the Gryffindor's, Hufflepuff's, Ravenclaw's and Slytherins.

Nintendo DS[]

In the Nintendo DS version of the game, the Stylus is used, once again, for spells as well as mini-games such as Gobstones, collecting ingredients for potions, Quidditch games, and Exploding Snap. It also has have six "environmental" spells including Accio and Incendio, and twelve combat spells. The game is free roaming with mini quests as well as closely following the story line[3].

PSP[]

The Game-Mechanics are different in the PSP version, because of the lack of the right analogue stick. Detailed information about the mechanics is missing.

PlayStation 3[]

The game uses SIXAXIS controls or the right analogue stick just like the previous game, but this time it includes DUALSHOCK 3 vibration capability. Also, it includes use of the PS3's trophy system.

PC[]

A keyboard and mouse is used, just like the previous game and the controls are reportedly easier to use. However, the game can also be controlled with an analogue joypad. Support for the XBOX 360 controller is built in (and graphics of controls use this controller), but other generic controllers work perfectly as well. There is no multiplayer wizard duelling for the PC platform, as the PC is purely single player.

Xbox 360[]

Spells are cast with the control stick just like the previous game.

Playstation 2[]

Spells are cast with the control stick just like the previous game.

Characters[]

Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter (appearance), voiced by Adam Sopp

Rupert Grint as Ron Weasley

Emma Watson as Hermione Granger (appearance), voiced by Rachel Sternberg

Bonnie Wright as Ginny Weasley

Tom Felton as Draco Malfoy

Evanna Lynch as Luna Lovegood

Katie Leung as Cho Chang

Georgina Leonidas as Katie Bell

Jessie Cave as Lavender Brown

Josh Herdman as Gregory Goyle

Jamie Waylett as Vincent Crabbe

Alfie Enoch as Dean Thomas

Jim Broadbent as Horace Slughorn (appearance), voiced by Michael Percival

Alan Rickman as Severus Snape (appearance), voiced by James Faulkner

Helena Bonham Carter as Bellatrix Lestrange (appearance), voiced by Beth Chalmers

Violet Columbus as Shepherdess (appearance), voiced by Eleanor Hans

Michael Gambon as Albus Dumbledore (appearance), voiced by Christopher Birch

Helen McCrory as Narcissa Malfoy (appearance)

Dave Legeno as Fenrir Greyback

David Bradley as Argus Filch (appearance), voiced by Allan Corduner[4]

Romilda Vane (Mentioned only)

Hannah Abbott (Mentioned only)

Susan Bones (Mentioned only)

Amelia Bones (Mentioned only)

The Bloody Baron (Mentioned only)

Tony Dudson as Giffard Abbott

Jonathan Kydd as Basil Fronsac / Temeritus Shanks

Beth Chalmers as Damara Dodderidge / Gargoyle

Michael Percival as Timothy the Timid / Gargoyle

Isobel Middleton as Fat Lady

Fred and George Weasley (Mentioned only)

Sybill Trelawney (Mentioned only)

Fang (Heard only)

Leanne

Tom Riddle

Lestrange

Avery

Pansy Parkinson

Sirius Black (Mentioned only)

Freddie Stroma as Cormac McLaggen

John Cleese as Nearly Headless Nick (appearance), voiced by David Coker

Gryffindor students[]

Katherine Armitage

Bradley Cook

Jess Hill

Rosalind Knox

Matthew Sharman-Hayles

Elliot Smith

Hufflepuff students[]

Michael Hindmarsh

Matthew Hodge

Alex Howes

Jack Saunders

Chelsey Seymour

Joanna Shah

Playable characters[]

Harry Potter - Set as the main character, Harry can travel around the castle, on the grounds, at the Quidditch Pitch, duel, and mix potions.

Ron Weasley - when he is under the love potion sent by Romilda Vane. Hearts burst out of Ron's head as he walks and he is very slow. His only mission is to follow Harry to Slughorn's office.

Ginny Weasley - when Harry is in detention and can not make a Quidditch game. Ginny becomes Seeker and plays against Cho Chang in the Gryffindor-Ravenclaw Match.

Spells[]

Duelling spells[]

Stupefy

Protego

Expelliarmus

Petrificus Totalus

Levicorpus (if used on a Death Eater they will float upright instead of hang upside down)

Flipendo (Mobile version only)

Environmental spells[]

Wingardium Leviosa

Lumos (automatically cast when entering dark areas such as caves or at nightfall)

Incendio

Reparo

Accio (used to summon mini crests)

Depulso (used to push objects so they release mini crests, untargeted)

Other[]

Sectumsempra, Avada Kedavra and Vulnera Sanentur also appear in cut scenes.

3 Crests - Two Player Duelling Pack 1: Draco & Luna

8 Crests - More health in duels

14 Crests - Two Player Duelling Pack 2: Training Ground Duelling Arena

21 Crests - Dungbombs in prank boxes around Hogwarts

29 Crests - Two Player Duelling Pack 2: Crabbe & Goyle

38 Crests - Score boost in flying events

48 Crests - Exploding Cauldrons in prank boxes around Hogwarts

59 Crests - Two Player Duelling Pack 4: The Transfiguration Duelling Arena

71 Crests - Max health in duels

84 Crests - Two Player Duelling Pack 5: Ginny & Hermione

98 Crests - Love Potion in Potions Club

113 Crests - Two Player Duelling Pack 4: Paved Courtyard Duelling Arena

129 Crests - More mini-crests with each cast

150 Crests - Multiplayer Duelling Pack 7: Severus Snape

Achievements[]

Achievements Image Name Description Grime Buster Clean up after Fred and George at The Burrow Used the Pensieve View Dumbledore's first memory of Tom Riddle in the Pensieve Quidditch Captain Assemble the Gryffindor Quidditch Team Great Party Create a great Christmas party for Slughorn The Burrow Defender Protect The Burrow Good Deed Helped the Student retrieve her stolen Gobstone Great Mate Helped Ron avoid Lavender Hidden the Book Hid the Half-Blood Prince’s Potions Book Mystery Solved Retrieved Slughorn's missing memory Quidditch Champion Won the Quidditch Cup Escaped the Cave Escaped the Cave Portrait Novice Used your first portrait shortcut Portrait Pro Used all of the portrait shortcuts Portrait completed Completed the adventure Crest Collector 1 Complete Crest Collector Level 1 Crest Collector 2 Complete Crest Collector Level 2 Crest Collector 3 Complete Crest Collector Level 3 Crest Collector 4 Complete Crest Collector Level 4 Crest Collector 5 Complete Crest Collector Level 5 Crest Collector 6 Complete Crest Collector Level 6 Crest Collector 7 Complete Crest Collector Level7 Crest Collector 8 Complete Crest Collector Level 8 Crest Collector 9 Complete Crest Collector Level 9 Crest Collector 10 Complete Crest Collector Level 10 Crest Collector 11 Complete Crest Collector Level 11 Crest Collector 12 Complete Crest Collector Level 12 Crest Collector 13 Complete Crest Collector Level 13 Crest Collector 14 Complete Crest Collector Level 14 Potions Beginner Earned the Potions Beginner's Luck Badge Potions Club Star Earned the Potions Club Star Badge Potions Club Veteran Earned the Potions Club Veteran Badge Master Potioneer Earned the Master Potioneer Badge Duelling Beginnerg Earned the Duelling Club Champion Badge Duelling Veteran Earned the Duelling Veteran Badge Master Duellist Badge Earned the Master Duellist Badge Quidditch Beginner Earned the Quidditch Beginner's Luck Badge Precision Flyer Badge Earned the Precision Flyer Badge Earned the Combo Flyer Badge Earned the Combo Flyer Badge Earned the Keen Flyer Badge Earned the Keen Flyer Badge Master of Flying Master of Flying Badge

Behind the scenes[]

In the game, during the Death Eater attack on The Burrow, Harry duels Bellatrix Lestrange twice and Fenrir Greyback once. In the film, Harry only deflects a few of their spells, and sends a couple of spells back at them, with the aid of Ginny and later with the aid of Remus Lupin, Nymphadora Tonks, and Arthur Weasley. In the book, the attack on the burrow scene doesn't take place.

In the game, Harry duels two normal Death Eaters in the castle, Fenrir Greyback in the Clock Tower Courtyard, and Bellatrix Lestrange by Rubeus Hagrid's cabin, which is on fire. In the film, Harry doesn't duel with any of the Death Eaters. He casts two spells at Snape, both of which get deflected, and Bellatrix hits him with a spell. In the book, Harry sends several curses at Snape, all of which get deflected. Snape retaliates with some spells of his own, then he leaves. Some other Death Eaters also attack Harry.

In the game, the stalls in the bathroom that Harry and Draco duel in have disappeared, leaving a wide open space with urinals on two walls. There is no cover whatsoever, unlike in the film.

After Harry takes Felix Felicis, he duels Crabbe and Goyle. During this duel, Crabbe and Goyle cannot hit Harry even when aiming directly at him. He then meets Slughorn in the Herbology greenhouses and brews a Dragon Dung Fertiliser. While brewing this potion, Harry can add as much of each correct ingredient, and boil or stir the potion as much as he likes without causing it to smoke.

Several areas were added to the castle, and some were taken away. Areas that were added are the Entrance Gates, the Quidditch Gate, the Quidditch Pitch, the Astronomy Tower, the Training Grounds, Slughorn's office, and a passage in the dungeons that leads to a spiral staircase that goes up to the sixth and seventh floors. Areas that were taken away include the entire Fourth Floor (except the Hospital Wing and the corridor outside of it that leads to the Clock Tower), the Prefect's Bathroom (you can see the door, but you can't go inside), Myrtle Warren's bathroom (replaced with the boys bathroom), the Trophy Room (you can see the door, but can't go in), the North Tower, the DADA Classroom (which is inaccessible) and the Room of Requirement, which is also not accessible.

As described in the book, whenever Harry goes near the Room of Requirement, a girl drops a scale. In the game, when you do the mission to find Draco on the seventh floor (where you find the Polyjuice Potion recipe), a girl drops scales which can be repaired, broken, levitated, and repulsed.

All the wands in the game are exact replicas of Harry Potter's wand and all brooms resemble Harry Potter's Firebolt.

In the game, only a fully charged Protego sends Expelliarmus, Levicorpus, and Petrificus Totalus back, but if it's a non charged Protego the spell is not deflected, and the spell still hits you.

In the game, if you beat all of the Duelling Clubs, you can fire two Stupefys in one shot, making it easier to stun someone.

In the game, during Gryffindor's second Quidditch match against Hufflepuff, Harry catches the snitch and Gryffindor wins the match. In the book, Harry is hit in the head with a bludger by McLaggen, causing him to fall from his broom, and for Hufflepuff to win the match.

If Harry use Levicorpus on Bellatrix or Fenrir Greyback, the effect is not like when Harry casts it on students. Bellatrix and Greyback just fly up, they are not hoisted into the air and dangle upside-down.

This was the last Harry Potter game released for the PlayStation 2 and the PlayStation Portable.

There was a small cutscene where Harry finished making a Shrinking Solution and asked Ginny to go to Hogsmeade which she denied it. During this, you can hear a record screeching sound effect and becomes one of the hilarious transitions in an HP game.

Notes and references[]

J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter series Philosopher's Stone book film games film soundtrack game soundtrack Chamber of Secrets book film games film soundtrack game soundtrack Prisoner of Azkaban book film games film soundtrack game soundtrack Goblet of Fire book film games film soundtrack game soundtrack Order of the Phoenix book film game film soundtrack game soundtrack Half-Blood Prince book film games film soundtrack game soundtrack Deathly Hallows book film 1 games 1 film soundtrack 1 game soundtrack 1 film 2 games 2 film soundtrack 2 game soundtrack 2 Cursed Child script play Fantastic Beasts film series Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them book screenplay film game film soundtrack The Crimes of Grindelwald screenplay film film soundtrack The Secrets of Dumbledore screenplay film film soundtrack

Other written works Other games Quidditch Through the Ages Wonderbook: Book of Spells / Wonderbook: Book of Potions The Tales of Beedle the Bard Harry Potter: Quidditch World Cup Harry Potter Prequel Harry Potter: Find Scabbers Encyclopaedia of Potterworld (potentially cancelled) Harry Potter DVD Game: Hogwarts Challenge / Wizarding World Pottermore Presents Harry Potter: Spells The Harry Potter Wizarding Almanac Harry Potter Page to Screen: The Complete Filmmaking Journey / Harry Potter Limited Edition LEGO Harry Potter: Years 1-4 / LEGO Harry Potter: Years 5-7 LEGO Harry Potter: Building the Magical World LEGO Dimensions LEGO Harry Potter Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Motorbike Escape Harry Potter: A Pop-Up Book Harry Potter: The Quest J. K. Rowling: A Bibliography Harry Potter for Kinect Harry Potter: The Character Vault / Harry Potter: The Creature Vault / Harry Potter: The Artifact Vault Wizard's Challenge Harry Potter Film Wizardry Fantastic Beasts: Cases from the Wizarding World The Case of Beasts: Explore the Film Wizardry of Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them Harry Potter Trading Card Game Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them: The Art of The Film LEGO Creator: Harry Potter / Creator: Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets The Archive of Magic: The Film Wizardry of Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald Harry Potter: Hogwarts Mystery The Art of Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald Harry Potter: Wizards Unite Harry Potter: The Wand Collection Harry Potter: Puzzles & Spells J. K. Rowling's Wizarding World: Movie Magic Volume One: Extraordinary People and Fascinating Places / Volume Two: Curious Creatures / Volume Three: Amazing Artifacts Harry Potter: Magic Awakened Hogwarts Legacy Harry Potter: Quidditch Champions Other canon Other films / documentaries J. K. Rowling's official site Harry Potter and Me Pottermore / Wizarding World The Queen's Handbag J. K. Rowling's X account J. K. Rowling: A Year in the Life Harry Potter: The Exhibition Magic Beyond Words: The J.K. Rowling Story The Making of Harry Potter Harry Potter: Beyond the Page The Wizarding World of Harry Potter Individuals – Places – Creatures – Translations - Cover arts

See also[]

Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince

Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (film)

Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (soundtrack)