Half-Baked Prince

The Harry Potter series spawns another game, this one’s based on the Half-Blood Prince movie, and is available on every possible computing platform except the Amiga. You can play this game on the Mac, DS, PC, PS2, PS3, PSP, Wii, X360, and the mobile phone.

The PS3 title promises to “Summon the wizard within you” and then make it race through a carnival ride that makes you hurl chunks of vomit... till you are left begging for the sweet release of death. I might be overreacting a tiny bit here, but bear with me.

The game starts off with a plodding video sequence after which you, playing as Harry fly a broom through fields following a marked path for points. I don’t know why Harry would require points and what good it does him, but he does, so you’d better follow the marked out path. The first thing you notice after finishing this stage is how horrible Hermione looks. It’s as if all the nights spent partying have finally caught up, transforming her into a creepy spinster. Or maybe it was the geriatrics spell. Harry and Ron look decent except for weird creepy teeth. Maybe it’s because they’re British. Voice acting is bad across the game, not to mention the inability to skip video sequences, which makes things extremely tedious.

The game tries to immerse you in to the movie by forcing you to re-live scenes from the Half-Blood Prince. If it were done properly I would say it could be popular with Potter fans, but it isn’t, so the only people who would enjoy it are the ones Daniel Radcliffe has a restraining order against.

I recommend watching the movie before playing the game if you want to avoid spoilers. You would also need to watch the movie or read the book to know what the hell is going on, because the game just assumes you know the story line.

Half-Blood Prince forces you to do a lot of pointless things. One particular task you’ll be doing a lot of, is making potions. You can pick up various bottles, pour stuff, stir and then pour some more stuff, and stir some.

And if that didn’t get you bored you can play Quidditch – the premier sport of the wizarding world. You are forced to be the seeker (since Harry has already chosen the position for you). Of course, like everything else in the game, Quidditch is a pain in the groin, as tracking the seeker involves going through numerous glowing circles over and over again.

What I found most annoying with Half-Blood is the unnecessary use of motion blur. Seriously, who sees motion blur when they run. I bet even Usain Bolt didn’t see it when he broke the record for the fastest 100 metre sprint. There are a few more annoyances – the voice acting is bad, mostly because it isn’t voiced by the cast, and rather done with cheap

imitation wannabes. The 3D models for most characters are very sketchy. And since I took the trouble of investing in a PS3, HDTV and this game, I would have expected some level of detailing.

Except I didn’t really ‘invest’ much in the game, except for my time, but I am going to pretend I spent money on this crap so I can be angry at everything that is wrong with the world.

Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince

Developer: Bright Light Studio/EA

Price: Platforms: PS3 (Rs 2,499),

Xbox 360 (Rs 2,499), PS2 (Rs 999), PSP (Rs 1,599), Wii (Rs 1,999).