Harold E. Wilson Jr., age 79, passed away at Landmark Care in Yakima, Washington.

Harold was born to Harold E. Wilson Sr. and Ruth (Skiff) Wilson, in Alamosa, Colorado, on July 29, 1944. He grew up in Rifle, Colorado and graduated from Glenwood Springs High School in 1962.

After Graduation, Harold joined the United States Navy and served from 1962-1966, as a Machinist Mate. He sailed with the U.S. Navy Concord Squadron aboard the destroyer, USS Shelton. During his service, he was awarded the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal for service in Vietnam, and the National Defense Service Medal.

When he was on leave, Harold would spend time in Yakima with his Navy buddy, Gordon Guthrie. This led to the meeting and courtship of Charlene Guthrie. They were married on January 14, 1967, and made Yakima their home.

Harold worked at Decato Aircraft (Dowty Aerospace) as a Prototype Machinist for 44 years. He was involved in creating aircraft parts such as hydraulic fuses and aircraft carrier holdback bars for jets. After prototype, the part would be tested to determine if they functioned as designed, and without failure. Dad took pride in building many of the parts that are used in today's aircrafts.

Harold was a member of Yakima Evangelical Church and served as a Trustee and Usher. He participated in many of the sporting activities that the church had including softball, bowling, and volleyball. He also enjoyed performing with the church band, playing his bass guitar, and singing vocals.

Harold enjoyed many years of golf with his Decato Aircraft work partners, and started his son, Thad, caddying for him at age 9.

After his retirement, Harold spent time working on his "Touch Red" Corvette. Harold and Char joined the Yakima Valley Corvette Club and took many trips to car rallies and participated in many parades.

Harold is survived by his wife of 57 years, Charlene (Guthrie) Wilson, their two sons, Thad (Jeanne), and Jason, six grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.

The Wilson Family would like to extend our gratitude to dad's lifelong friend, Ron Mansfield. Harold is eternally grateful for the companionship and guidance Mr. Mansfield selflessly provided. We would also like to thank the staff at Landmark, for their care of Harold and Charlene, as well as Serengeti Home Care and the Walla Walla VA.

At Harold's request, no services are planned.

Those wishing to honor Harold are encouraged to make a donation payable to the Wounded Warrior Project and send in care of Brookside Funeral Home (PO Box 1267, Moxee, WA 98936), who is caring for the family. Memories and condolences may be shared at www.brooksidefuneral.com.