Welcome to the official Film/Art Gallery collection of original Cleopatra vintage movie posters, where we offer a wide range of artwork for one of cinema's ultimate historical epic drama films.

Cleopatra, a historical drama film, released in 1963, is maybe most popular for its off-screen happenings, prominently because the creation overwhelmed and almost bankrupted Twentieth Century-Fox and the relationship between stars Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton.

The film traces the romances between the Egyptian queen Cleopatra (played by Taylor) and her Roman suitors Julius Caesar (Rex Harrison) and Mark Antony (Burton).

Caesar, charmed with the lovely Cleopatra, announces her as sole ruler over Egypt, in spite of the fact that he keeps her as his own lover. When Caesar is killed in Rome, Antony, his protégé, takes over, and he as well gets to be fixated with Cleopatra. He later marries her, which causes an embarrassment in Rome and encourages his political equal Octavian (Roddy McDowall), to dispatch an attacking army to Egypt.

In a fierce battle, Octavian’s forces defeat Antony at Actium, near Greece. Misinformed that Cleopatra is dead, Antony takes his own life—an act that leads Cleopatra to do the same.

Cleopatra was a troubled production with a background story that dwarfed any on-screen action. Ineptly produced and prone to disaster, the film experienced shooting delays, location changes, script rewrites, and director changes (Rouben Mamoulian was replaced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz). Burton and Taylor (who were both married to other people at the time) also had an affair, resulting in a media frenzy. However, humiliation helped make a huge interest in the movie.

Cleopatra was among the highest-grossing films of 1963 but the studio was unable to recoup its massive production budget. However, the blockbuster epic was not without its merits. The visuals were impressive, and the acting by Burton and Harrison was outstanding; the latter earned an Academy Award nomination. Taylor’s interpretation of Cleopatra, however, was not as praised, with some calling her performance melodramatic.

Film/Art Gallery's Cleopatra movie poster collection of movie posters include the Howard Terpning artwork for the legendary epic and First Czech release Cleopatra poster designed by Jiri Hilmar.

Film/Art Gallery movie posters are original prints and film poster collectibles. These are original movie posters. We do not carry any movie poster reproductions or reprints of any kind.