Antony and Cleopatra is a historical action film based on the relationship between Roman politician/general Mark Antony and Egyptian ruler Cleopatra. It is the fourth film in the Ancient Rome Cinematic Universe (ARCU), and a spinoff to The Reign of Caesar. The film takes place between 35 and 27 BC. It is a tragedy based on the fall of Mark Antony and Cleopatra.

The film stars Jennifer Lopez, Orlando Bloom, Freddie Highmore, Nicki Minaj, Mark Valley, Gina Carano, and Keira Knightley. Like the rest of the ARCU, the film is mostly historically accurate, with some minor adjustments in order to make it cinematic.

Plot[]

Tensions between Octavian (Freddie Highmore) and Mark Antony (Orlando Bloom) have escalated since the events of The Reign of Caesar due to Octavian's land confiscation policies. Marcus Lepidus (Sean Bean), the third triumvir, fails to intervene. The policies greatly affected Fulvia (Keira Knightley), who is the wife of Mark Antony. She is a very powerful woman in Roman politics. Marcus Cicero (Greg Vaughan), still a very powerful senator, is a major opponent to Antony's leadership.

Mark Antony, feeling overwhelmed with tension from Octavian, Lepidus, Cicero and Fulvia, escapes to Egypt, dressed as a slave, to meet his mistress, Cleopatra (Jennifer Lopez), who is now the sole ruler of Egypt. She is accompanied by her advisors/bodyguards, Charmion (Nicki Minaj) and Iras (Blac Chyna).

Fulvia hears rumors that Mark Antony is having an affair with Cleopatra. Furious and on edge, she declares war on Octavian, with the help of Lucius Antonius (Kevin Durand), to fight his policies and show off to Mark Antony. She ultimately fails, and is killed by Octavian's commanders, Marcus Agrippa (Mark Valley) and Decima Saltius (Gina Carano).

Octavian and Lepidus call for Mark Antony to return to Rome after threats emerge from the son of Pompey the Great, Sextus Pompey (Dylan Minnette) in Sardinia. The three agree to terms. Mark Antony demands the death of Marcus Cicero for his opposition. Despite Octavian's neglect, Cicero is killed. In the battlefield against Sextus Pompey, there is major disagreement between Octavian and Mark Antony. The war is ultimately neglected and leaves for Cleopatra.

Mark Antony is beaten by Charmion and Iras because Cleopatra heard rumors that Mark Antony was cheating with Octavia (Lesley-Ann Brandt), the sister of Octavian. Mark Antony explains himself, and the two quarrel. They eventually make up.

After defeating Sextus Pompey, Octavian demands Mark Antony to return to Rome. Mark Antony, instead, devises a plan with Cleopatra to defeat Octavian in a battle. Cleopatra builds up an Egyptian army and, together with, Mark Antony, fight Octavian and his forces. Lepidus submits his forces to Octavian.

Octavian gets the upper hand. Mark Antony becomes desperate and is killed. Cleopatra is taken prisoner. She tries to charm Octavian, but fails. She unleashes an asp, which kills her.

Octavian is named the emperor of Rome. It is hinted that Charmion becomes the new ruler of Egypt.

Cast[]