Gauhati-university is one of the top State University in Guwahati, Assam. Here are the details about gauhati-university - Courses, Fees, Placements, cut off, Ranking, Facilities, Reviews.

Gauhati University, additionally referred to as GU, is a collegiate public nation college placed in Guwahati, Assam, India. It turned into set up on 26 January 1948 under the provisions of an Act enacted via way of means of the Assam Legislative Assembly. It is the oldest college in Northeast India.

Accreditation and Ranking

The University is accredited grade ‘A’ by National Assessment and Accreditation Council.

Courses Offered

Gauhati University courses are offered at various levels like Postgraduate Degree (i.e MBA, MCA, Master of Science (M.Sc.) Environmental Studies, Master of Arts (MA) Bengali, etc.). You can also find a brief overview of the different courses offered by the university across various disciplines with their specializations on the Course page.

Gauhati University, Guwahati campus life

Campus life at Gauhati University, Guwahati is just phenomenal. The Gauhati University, Guwahati, Assam and its Campus life provides lots of extracurricular activities like talent in dance, singing, art, literature, anchoring, event management, modelling and drama. Gauhati University Guwahati campus life and environment is lively and friendly. The premises have sufficient facilities- medical help, food, and departmental store, etc. to fulfil every need of the students.

At Gauhati University campus you get chance to groom your personality, learn something new. Also, All the festivals are celebrated with extreme enthusiasm at Gauhati University campus Guwahati so that students feel like home. Sports meet and annual college fests are huge stages for students to showcase their talent. Once you will graduate you will definitely miss the Gauhati University, Guwahati campus life.

Facilities and Infrastructure

Residential Accommodations:

Altogether, there are 24 students' hostels, out of which 12 are Girls' Hostels and 12 Boys' Hostels, inclusive of 3 hostels ( for boys and one for girls) for studies scholars. Each of those hostels has its very own piece of record with well-known alumni. These hostels have their very own cooking and protection staff. The typical in-price of any hostel is its warden, generally a school member. Then there are prefects (from the various hostel borders) who help the wardens. The hostels run their very own Mess Committee, which operates on a no-loss-no-income basis.

Library:

The University Library began its functioning in 1948 at Chandmari (now referred to as antique University Colony) after which shifted to Room No.1 of the Arts constructing and accommodated withinside the present construction in 1962. In 1982. The University Library became renamed K KHandiqui Library after the loss of life of its first Vice-Chancellor Professor K K Handiqui.

The private series of Prof Handiqui such as 7593 volumes of books generously donated with the aid of using him to Gauhati University is treasured and valuable ownership of the library. The series consists of books on 11 (eleven) specific languages like English, French, German, Greek, Italian, Latin, Pali, Prakrit, Russian, Sanskrit, and Spanish.

Medical Facilities:

Gauhati University Hospital is the number one healthcare facility of Gauhati University. Besides the offerings it offers to the college community, the GU Hospital stays a primary source of healthcare facility to the neighboring areas across the university campus. It contains the OPD offerings in addition to 24 hours Emergency Services and is equipped with ambulances, doctors, nurses, and different assisting staff.

Sports Facilities:

The campus provides facilities for gambling diverse games & sports activities e.g. Football, Volleyball, Cricket, Badminton, Table Tennis, Hockey, Kabbadi, Basket Ball, Carrom, etc. The indoor stadium has a number of Badminton Halls with international quality floor mats.

Gym:

The college has a well-prepared and huge Gymnasium Hall and a mini Gymnasium corridor within the Girls Hostel Campus. Both the gyms are well-prepared with vital centers like treadmills, weights, and different current infrastructure with five units of weightlifting units of opposition standard.

Admission

Admission to Gauhati university is done through different entrance tests. Students taking admission in any of the affiliated colleges are also obliged to give the entrance exam for admissions.