Displaying list of all colleges affiliated to Gauhati University.

Colleges Affiliated to Gauhati University

Army Institute of Nursing Guwahati

Army Institute of Nursing (AIN) Gauhati is one of the renowned colleges in the north eastern part of India. The institute is located in the premises of 151 Base Hospital at Basistha, Gauhati

Asian Institute Of Nursing Education

Asian Institute of Nursing Education is a premier educational institute, located in Gauhati, Assam. The college was established in 2004 by the INS Trust

Asom Shikshak Prashikshan Mahavidyalaya

Asom Shikshak Prashikshan Mahavidyalaya or Asom Sikshak Prasikshan Mahavidyalaya, located in Kamrup district of Guwahati/Gauhati, is a premiere college of education in Assam

Assam Engineering College

Assam Engineering Collegeis one of the oldest and reputed engineering college in the country. It was established in 1955 as the first undergraduate engineering college in the northeastern India

Assam Government Homeopathic Medical College and Hospital

Assam Government Homeopathic Medical College and Hospital is one of the prominent educational institutions in north eastern part of India. The college is located in Nagaon district of Assam

B.R.M. Government Law College

Established in 1914, B.R.M

Baihata Chariali B.Ed College

Located 30 km north of capital city Guwahati, in Agdala village, Baihata Chariali B.Ed College is the only college of education in the north eastern district of Kamrup

Banikantha College of Teacher Education

Located in Guwahati/Gauhati in Assam, Banikantha College of Teacher Education is one of the premiere colleges of education in the region

Barpeta B.T College

Located 2 km away from Barpeta town of Assam, Barpeta B.T College is the only college of education in the district head quarters

Barpeta Law College

Located in Barpeta (Assam), Barpeta Law College came into existence in 1972. It is affiliated to Gauhati University, Guwahati

Biswanath College of Education

Located in Biswanath Chariali Town of Sonitpur district in Assam, Biswanath College of Education offers 1 year duration Bachelor of Education programme. Spread over an area of 3

Bongaigaon B. Ed. College

Located in Bongaigaon city of Assam, Bongaigaon B. Ed. College is a premiere college of education offering one year duration Bachelor of Education programme

Bongaigaon Law College

Bongaigaon Law College is located in Bongaigaon district of Assam. Established in 1972, the college is among the prominent law colleges in the state. It is affiliated to Gauhati University, Guwahati

College of Education Boko

Located in Boko of Kamrup district (Assam), College of Education Boko is a renowned institute of teacher education, offering Bachelor of Education programme

College of Education Christian Basti

Located in Dispur, the ancient and former capital of Assam, College of Education offers 1 year Bachelor of Education programme

College of Education Morigaon

Located in Morigaon district of Assam, College of Education offers one-year Bachelor of Education programme. The college of teacher education was established in 1994

College of Education Nagaon

Located near Srimanta Sarkar Mission Road, 200 mtrs away from NH-37, College of Education Nagaon (Assam) offers 1 year Bachelor of Education programme. The college established was in 1992

Dakshin Guwahati B Ed College

Located in Kamrup district of Assam, Dakshin Guwahati B Ed College started functioning from temporary campus from Fatasil Ambari at NH-25, Guwahati

Dhubri Law College

Dhubri Law College is located in Dhubri, Assam. It is considered as one of the oldest law colleges in the state, as it was established in 1967

Dispur Law College

Dispur Law College is located in Guwahati/Gauhati, the capital city of Assam. Affiliated to Gauhati University, the college was established in 1994

Dr. Anita Baruah Sarma College of Education

Located in Nabin Nagar (Guwahati/Gauhati), Dr. Anita Baruah Sarma College of Education is one of the prominent colleges of Gauhati (Assam)

Gauhati Commerce College

Established in 1962, Gauhati Commerce College is among the prominent colleges of its field in Assam. The college is situated in Guwahati, the capital city of Assam

Gauhati Medical College and Hospital

Guwahati/Gauhati Medical College and Hospital was started in 1960. The medical college is located in Gauhati, Assam. It is managed and run by the Government of Assam

Girijananda Chowdhury Institute of Management & Technology

Girijananda Chowdhury Institute of Management & Technology is located in Kamrup, Assam. It was established in 2006. The institute is managed and run by Shrimanta Shankar Academy

Goalpara Law College

Goalpara Law College came into existence in 1987. Located in Goalpara (Assam), the college is renowned as one of the forefront institutes for quality education in India

1 2 Next