Cara Black

14/7/2022 Next-->

It was such a delight watching Cara Black playing in The Invitational Doubles at Wimbledon. She still looks not a day over 21!! (I was consoling myself at her amazing trim light body that 'well she has never had kids thats why!!' and then I found out she does have a young son!!

She was playing an invitational doubles match with longtime favourite Todd Woodbridge against that fabulous comedian Frenchman of venerable years Mansour Bahrami and Conchita Martinez.

Cara Cavell Black is our former professional tennis player from Zimbabwe who played until 2015. She is primarily a doubles specialist, winning 60 WTA and 11 ITF titles in that discipline. A former No. 1 ranked women's doubles player in the WTA rankings, she has won ten Grand Slam titles in women's doubles and mixed doubles combined. By winning the mixed doubles title at the 2010 Australian Open, Cara became the third woman in the Open Era to complete a Career Grand Slam in mixed doubles (after Martina Navratilova and Daniela Hantuchova). Having won one singles title on tour, she also peaked at no. 31 in the singles rankings in March 1999.

Cara was born in Salisbury, Rhodesia to Donald and Velia Black. (HeeHoo remembers being chastised by Don Black once for raiding his orange orchard!!)

Her father and older brothers, Wayne and Byron Black, were all professional tennis players themselves. The siblings all compete mostly in doubles - Wayne was the 2001 US Open and 2005 Australian Open champion and Byron was the 1994 French Open winner.

Cara partnered with her brother Wayne to win the 2002 French Open and 2004 Wimbledon Championships mixed-doubles events.

In August 2005, Cara announced that she would marry her longtime boyfriend, Australian mental and fitness trainer Brett Stephens. The couple's son was born in 2012 following her break from tennis after Wimbledon 2011.

This year tennis fans all over the world have spoken: Cara was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame's Class of 2022.

Watchdog

The Pastor for the Ngozi mine church had his car burgled a few nights ago and in the car was a bag with fabrics and sewing kits for the Ngozi mine sewing club, the bag was stolen , we are really sad that this has happened as the children and community at large were really keen on learning a new skill out there .

We are looking for patterns , fabrics and threads scissors etc to start over with this project we would also like to appeal for assistance to get solar panels and inverters to power up some of the sewing machines which are electric, one or two hand sewing machines welcome as well, if anyone has any lying around they would like to donate . We will also be staring a club at Mustard seed communities too for the able bodied children.

Any farmers or well wishers able to assist , we are in need of veggies for the soup kitchens weekly , Tomatoes, cabbages, onions etc to add on to what we grow at the home, please get in touch with me on 0772241552 or get in touch with Mustard Seed Communities Children's home in Woodville. Donations are picked up from me every Monday morning if you would care to drop off any veggies towards the 5 kitchens, we are feeding over a thousand children daily. T.I.A

irismhlanga@gmail.com