Music video

A music video to accompany the release of "Live My Life" was first released onto YouTube on April 5, 2012 through Far East Movement's Vevo channel at a total length of four minutes and forty-three seconds. Justin Bieber do not appear in the video, but Redfoo and the Party Rock crew does. They are seen throughout the video touring and partying through the streets of Amsterdam in the Party Rock bus. They also perform a synchronized dance routine in a flash mob-style. Far East Movement perform their respective verses. Dutch singer Eva Simons cameos in the video, seen entering the party bus midway through the video, as well as Dutch DJs Sidney Samson, Sick Individuals and Quintino. The music video has over 30 million views.

An alternate video edit was made for the Party Rock Remix at a total length of four minutes and thirty-eight seconds. It features the same scenes from the original and includes Redfoo performing his verse. This version has over 16 million views.

The videos were written by Redfoo and Kelly Covell and directed by Mickey Finnegan (who has previously directed music videos for LMFAO's songs such as "Party Rock Anthem" and "Sexy and I Know It" among others) while production was handled by Cisco Newman and Alexa Dedlow.

The video makes a reference to John Cusack's character from the film Say Anything; it begins with Kev Nish holding up a boombox while standing outside of a female lead's apartment window, and ends with him taking her home.

Credits and personnel

Vocals – Far East Movement and Justin Bieber

Lyrics – Bilal "The Chef" Hajji, Kevin Michael Nishimura, James Hwan Roh, Jae Won Choung, Virman Pau Coquia, Nathan Lawrence Walker, Justin Bieber

Music – Nadir "RedOne" Khayat, Jonathan Maman, Jean Claude Sindress, Yohanne Simon (De Paris)

Producer, instrumentation, programming – RedOne and Yohanne Simon (De Paris)

Recording – Trevor Muzzy, Jeremy "J" Stevenson, Jaime "Jimmy Cash" Lepe and Kyle Kashiwagi

Vocal producer (Justin Bieber's vocals) – Kuk Harrell

Vocal recording and editing (Justin Bieber's vocals) – Josh Gudwin, Chris "TEK" O'Ryan

Remixer, additional vocals (Party Rock Remix) – Stefan Kendal "Redfoo" Gordy

Additional keyboards (Party Rock Remix) – Martin "Cherry Cherry Boom Boom" Kierszenbaum

Mixing – Robert Orton

Mastering – Gene Grimaldi

Label: Cherrytree Records / Interscope Records