Two major development houses are now closed: LA Noire creator Team Bondi and Split/Second developer Black Rock Studios.

Those of you keeping close tabs on the Sydney, Australia-based Team Bondi shouldn’t be surprised by this revelation. Yesterday, we brought word that the company had been placed in administration. Now, according to news.com.au, it seems that the company’s offices have gone dark and are now up for lease.

“This recently refurbished commercial office floor is located in Ultimo / Pyrmont and is available for the first time in over 5 years. The building has a vast floor plate of over 3300 square metres which allows any large business or corporation to utilize only 1 floor and have all staff located together,” says the ad, alongside an image of the building and its absurd curbside hill.

Team Bondi has stated no interest in issuing any sort of official announcement regarding the closure.

On the opposite side of the once grand British imperium, lies developer Black Rock Studios. You know them best as the Disney-owned firm responsible for the surprisingly excellent Pure and the also quite good, but apparently not as lucrative as one might hope racing game Split/Second.

According to former Black Rock game director Nick Baynes, it too has closed its doors. “@blackrockster officially closes it’s doors today. Thoughts go out to all facing their last day. A bright future awaits all though I’m sure!” Baynes tweeted this morning.

Unfortunately, this too comes as little shock. In July, Disney announced that the studio’s latest project had been rejected, and that the firm was to be shuttered. Since that time, various Black Rock employees have struck out on their own, creating not one, but two new gaming studios. As Gamasutra points out, this includes the smartphone-focused ShortRound Games and the as yet mysterious Roundcube.

As far as we are aware, neither Team Bondi, nor Black Rock Studios was working on anything of note when they were closed.

It’s always a shame when a gaming firm shuts down, and our condolences go out to the employees of both Team Bondi and Black Rock Studios.