Our Vineyard

You have arrived!

You deserve a lovely view, a cool breeze, a delicious dish, and a glass of world-class wine. Plan your visit to Upper Shirley Vineyards and discover all the ways you can make a day into a cherished memory.

Thank you kindly for abiding by the ground rules:

You are welcome to bring blankets and lawn chairs.

By law, no outside food or beverages are allowed on vineyard premises (this includes coolers)

No pets

Bus and limousine operators, please call in advance to make arrangements: (804) 829-9463

Upper Shirley Vineyards

600 Shirley Plantation Rd.

Charles City, VA, 23030

(804) 829-9463

Get Directions →

Hours of Operation

Wednesday - Sunday

11 am - 5 pm

Food service until 4 pm.

Frequently Asked Questions

Yes, we do offer a 10% case discount, with 12 bottles in a case.

Yes, we find that Uber is more responsive to ride requests and we recommend scheduling your ride no later than 2 pm.

Yes, you can bring a bus or limo; however, you will need to coordinate with us. Please email us at info@uppershirley.com

No, by law, outside food or beverages are not allowed on vineyard premises.

No, by law, outside food or beverages are not allowed on vineyard premises.

Unfortunately, we have a strict policy that no pets are allowed on the property.

Yes. We do not use any animal products in our wine-making process.

Our wines are available for purchase at our tasting bar, or online via our Wine order page.

Yes, we serve local craft beer.

All of our wines run on the dryer end of the spectrum; however, we do have two off-dry wines.

No, all of our wines contain alcohol.

Contact us by submitting an event inquiry.

Check out our Weddings page for more info.

Enjoy the fruits of our labor.

Our wines begin as grapes grown here on our 22 acres in vine. The fruit at Upper Shirley Vineyards is bathed by river breezes and nourished in the Tidewater region’s rich soil, the oldest tilled land in the United States. We tend our vines by hand, using age-old methods. It’s demanding work, but worth the effort. One taste, and you’ll understand why.

Drink in the view.

Upper Shirley Vineyards offers riverfront views sitting on a tributary of the James River. Across the way, you can see the Presquile National Wildlife Refuge, a 1,300-acre island bird sanctuary. If you look closely, you may spot a Bald Eagle! Upper Shirley Vineyards is also one mile off the Capital Bike Trail halfway between Richmond and Williamsburg.

Photo Credit: Instagram user @kindred.jones