I was excited to discover that Upper Shirley Vineyards near Richmond, Virginia was having a Governor’s Cup Wine Dinner pairing their 2024 gold medal winning wines with an enticing chef inspired dinner! We have been to Upper Shirley Vineyards before and we just love the plantation house winery and restaurant, the view of the James River, and the wonderful wines we have tried over the years! You somehow feel like royalty being at this elegant estate with friendly hospitality. So YES…. let’s taste the gold medal wines with some indulgent foods right now! Upper Shirley Vineyards won 3 gold medals this year for their 2021 Viognier, 2020 Chardonnay, and their flagship wine, the 2018 Zachariah Red Blend. The winemaker here at Upper Shirley is Michael Shaps so you can understand how these wines were noticed and appreciated by the judges at the Virginia Governors Cup.

Upon entering the Upper Shirley Winery Plantation House, we were immediately greeted with the Upper Shirley Sparkling Rose’ to get the palate jump started. This 2022 Sparkling Rose’ won a silver medal this year and has flavors of lush strawberry, hints of white peach, and a refreshing mineral finish. There were about 30-40 couples enjoying the Sparkling Rose’ as we entered the banquet hall for the wine dinner. It was great meeting new people and having fun conversation with others who also love delicious food and wine! There is a distinct comradery with those who make intelligent and fulfilling decisions with their palates so this is the type of atmosphere that feels like “home” to me. We all sat down at our assigned seating and got to know the other interesting dwellers at our table.

Tayloe M.B. Dameron is the Wine Director at Upper Shirley Vineyards and he stepped onstage to welcome us to the Governor’s Cup Gold Medal Wine Dinner. Tayloe is very familiar with the wine industry as he is a WSET Level 4 Sommelier and he is involved in every part of the Upper Shirley wine process from the vineyards, harvest, cellar, to the bottling and distribution of the wine. Tayloe gave a great description of all 3 gold medal winning wines and how the food pairing would be the perfect marriage of flavors. The talented servers were busy coming to each table to present our hors d’oeuvre and pour our first wine. The hors d’oeuvre was a Garlic Poached Lobster with Orange Gastrique on Brown Butter Toast…..very delightful! Paired with the gold medal 2021 Viognier which has aromas and flavors of juicy apricot, ripe apple, D’Anjou Pear, and hints of honeysuckle on the long and lovely finish. Medium bodied and dry in style, smooth across the palate, balanced, with a good acid structure. Very good!

Onward to the First Course in this wonderful Upper Shirley Wine Dinner! This course was a delicate Duck Confit with Wild Mushroom Risotto and Honey Rosemary Jus and it was beautifully prepared. The Duck Confit was paired with the gold medal 2020 Chardonnay which was barrel fermented and aged in French oak. On the nose, aromas of tropical fruits, citrus, apple, vanilla, and oak. Medium to full bodied across the palate, velvety, with an elegant creamy mouthfeel. Flavors of bright pineapple, tangerine, mango, red apple, and hints of spices on a graceful vanilla oak finish. This 2020 Chardonnay was a perfect pairing with the flavorful Duck Confit. Excellent!

The Second Course was a savory Beef Bourguignon made from beef shoulder with Cipollini Onions, Malibu Carrots, Gnoki Mushrooms, and Pomme Puree which was rich and wonderfully exquisite! This Beef Bourguignon was paired with the gold medal 2018 Zachariah Red which is a compelling blend of Merlot, Petit Verdot, and Tannat. Deep violet in color with seductive aromas of black fruit, black licorice, herbs, and exotic spices. Full bodied across the palate, velvety, with a noticeable tannin structure (which is great for longevity and aging). Bold with flavors of ripe blackberry, blackcurrant, juicy red plum, cocoa, tobacco, anise, and vibrant baker’s spices! Complex and layered, ripe and balanced, graceful with notes of oak on the long finish. Cosmic!