Jeepers Creepers 2 is a 2003 American horror film written and directed by Victor Salva.

A sequel to the 2001 film Jeepers Creepers, the film portrays the Creeper, a demonic creature and mysterious serial killer who pursues a school bus filled with high-school students. Ray Wise also appears as Jack Taggart, a farmer who seeks to hunt down and kill the Creeper as revenge for his younger son who the Creeper had murdered that same week. Additionally, Francis Ford Coppola returned to the franchise as an executive producer.

Produced by Myriad Pictures and American Zoetrope, filming for Jeepers Creepers 2 took place in Tejon Ranch, and Long Beach, California in 2002. The film was theatrically released by United Artists in the United States on August 29, 2003, where it was met with mostly negative reviews from critics.

With a $17 million budget, the film grossed between $63.1 and $120 million worldwide (sources differ) and spawned a prequel, released as Jeepers Creepers 3 in 2017.

Summary

Three days after the events of the first film, the Creeper abducts a young Billy Taggart in front of his father Jack Sr., his older brother Jack Jr. and their dog Mac in its 22nd day of feeding. The next day, a school bus carrying a high school basketball team and cheerleaders suffers a blowout, after one of the tires is hit by a hand-crafted shuriken made of bone fragments. Later a cheerleader named Minxie Hayes has a vision of Billy Taggart and Darry Jenner who attempt to warn her about the Creeper before it blows out another tire and disables the bus. With the team stranded, the Creeper abducts bus driver Betty Borman and coaches Charlie Hanna and Dwayne Barnes. When the Creeper returns, he singles out six of the students: Dante Belasco, Jake Spencer, Minxie Hayes, Scotty Braddock, Andy "Bucky" Buck, and Deaundre "Double D" Davis. Minxie has another vision in which Darry says the Creeper emerges every 23rd spring for 23 days to eat humans and she tells the other students.

After hearing several police reports, the Taggarts go hunting for the Creeper and soon make radio contact with the school bus. The Creeper attacks Bucky, but Rhonda stabs it through the head with a javelin. Dante begins prodding the Creeper's wing, only for it to grab and decapitate him. The Creeper tears off its injured head and uses Dante's severed head to replace its own. The students decide to leave the bus to find help, but the Creeper returns and chases them into a field, where it kills Jake and takes Scotty.

When the Creeper attacks Jonny, Chelsea, and Bucky on the bus again, the Taggarts and Mac arrive and Jack shoots it with a harpoon, which the Creeper fights off, managing to escape after flipping over the bus. Rhonda, Izzy Bohen, and Double D find a truck and attempt to escape but are chased by the Creeper again. Izzy pushes Rhonda out of the truck before causing the vehicle to crash, injuring both Double D and the Creeper, who loses an arm, a leg, and a wing, although Izzy crawls from the wreckage before the truck explodes. The Creeper continues to pursue Double D by leaping towards him and, when it has Double D pinned down, Jack shows up and shoots the Creeper in the head with the harpoon. He repeatedly stabs the Creeper in its heart but it goes into a hibernation state before it can die.

23 years later, in 2024, 3 teenagers drive out to the Taggart farm where the Creeper is a sideshow attraction called "A Bat Out of Hell" and the middle-aged Jack Jr. is charging entrance fees. They see an elderly Jack Sr. watching it with the harpoon at his side and when they ask him if he is waiting for something, he looks up at the Creeper and says "About three more days, give or take a day or two".

Bad Qualities

It mostly lacks the suspense build that it’s predecessor had.

The characters are completely unlikable and clichéd that it makes it hard to root for most of them, especially Scotty.

Minxie is a complete rehash of Jezelle from the first movie since they both have psychic powers and are able to figure out what the Creeper wants.

We don’t get as much action or suspense build-up as the first movie as most of it is just the main characters arguing and trying to survive while in a broken-down bus.

It recycles some of the elements the first movie had.

The teenage characters argue with each other SO MUCH in this movie.

The characters drop so many F-bombs that it just gets irritating.

An unneeded brief subplot where one of the main characters has a gay attraction for another character.

Some scenes come off more hilariously disturbing then it does scary

Like the scene where one of the characters gets their head torn off by the Creeper’s wing and starts moving around hysterically which is also a basic rip-off of the decapitation scene in Friday The 13th.

The scene where the Creeper is picking out a particular teenage inside the bus to eat feels like something out of South Park it was meant to be a suspenseful moment.

A pointless cameo by Justin Long who returns to play his character, Darry, from the first movie and has nothing else to do with the film then to be a part of Minxie’s dream sequence.

Good Qualities

There are several of the teenage characters that are pretty decent and likable, like Rhonda, Bucky and D.

Jack Taggart Sr. and his son, Jack Taggart Jr., are pretty decent characters to watch as well.

The acting is not too bad and the actors give some great performances, like Jonathan Breck who returns to play the man-eating Creeper.

Some of the scenes are awesome, like the scene where the Creeper chases the main characters through a large landscape or the scene where the Creeper forms a new head with Dante’s decapitated head.

The opening scene where the Creeper disguises itself as a scarecrow, runs through a cornfield and kidnaps a farmer boy.

The cliffhanger ending was okay and leaves it open for a sequel.

Some of the Creeper's weaponry, especially the shurikens, are pretty cool.

Creepy, yet good soundtrack.

Reception:

Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 24% of 127 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating is 4.2/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Jeepers Creepers 2 is competently made, but it doesn't have the scares of the original."

Metacritic rated it 36/100 based on 29 reviews.

Andy Klein of Variety wrote, "Few things are scarier than a sequel to a bad movie, but, in fact, Jeepers Creepers 2 is substantially better than its predecessor, even while staying strictly within the genre's well-defined boundaries."

Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "The sequel has got the creepy bits down cold but lacks a fair share of scares."

Roger Ebert, writing for The Chicago Sun-Times, rated the film one out of four stars and said, "Victor Salva's Jeepers Creepers 2 supplies us with a first-class creature, a fourth-rate story, and dialogue possibly created by feeding the screenplay into a pasta maker."

In The New York Times, Dave Kehrwrote that the creature lacks personality when the concept is retooled into a film series. Gene Seymour of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the sequel lacks the mood of the first film, and the teen protagonists are too annoying to draw much of the audience's sympathy. However, Seymour praised Wise's performance.

In a positive review, Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club called it "the rare sequel that's not only bigger than its predecessor, but also better".

Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "C+" on an A+ to F scale.