Difference Between Sweetheart of the Song Tra Bong &amp; A Soldier's Sweetheart

Once a successful novel hits the market, producers are inclined to adapt the story into a movie. Since imagination, symbolism, and character psyches are explored in a novel, the movies tend to lack the luster of the original text. Using their imagination, readers are able to conjure up characters and scenes that are unique. This is the case with Tim O’Brien’s, “Sweetheart of the Song Tra Bong.” This is a story where love and war collide after a soldier brings his sweetheart to his Vietnamese post. On the whole, this chapter in The Things They Carried is far superior to the film, The Soldier’s Sweetheart, because it has thorough descriptions of characters’ …show more content…

She wanted to learn more about how to shoot a gun. She wanted to be like one of the guys. The novel installs all these ideas, but it also allows the reader to use their creativity. It also gives more emphasis on little traits of the character that make the character more unique. Therefore, due to the film's inability to give audiences more information about the characters, their role and their emotions, the novel is much more informative.

The novel is capable of giving readers more insight into the story with the use of symbols and hidden meanings. It is able to do this because it depicts important underlying messages and incidents. For instance, in the novel one may realize that Mary Anne starts to wear a necklace with tongues on it. This shows the readers that Mary Anne is no longer than clean innocent girl. She is now a brutal solder always ready to kill. “Elongated and narrow, like pieces of blackened leather, the tongues were threaded along a length of copper wire, one overlapping the next, the tips curled upward as if caught in a final shrill syllable” (O’Brien 111). Portrayed in both the novel and movie is Mary Anne’s change in personal hygiene. “No cosmetics, no fingernail filing.” “She stopped wearing jewelry, cut her hair short and wrapped