Morgan Freeman is a Kanatian politician and activist who served as the 41st President of Kanata. He served from 2001 through 2009 And oversaw many political and societal shits during his tenure.

Early life and military service[]

He was born on June 1, 1937, in Memphis, Tennessee Freeman graduated high school in 1955, but turned down a partial drama scholarship from Jackson State University, opting instead to enlist in the Kanatian Air Force. He served as an Automatic Tracking Radar repairman, rising to the rank of airman first class. He served during the Lebanese war and contributed to the battle of Beirut

Political life[]

After leaving the air force He went into politics began elected the first African-Kanatian mayor of Nashville and served two terms from 1979 to 1986. He gained national fame following his refusal to deploy riot police to the peaceful protests against Anti nuclear demonstrators. He was first elected as a senator from Tennessee in 1988 and was one of the first African-Kanatian senators in the countries history. He was the Senate Minority leader from 1997 to 2001 and In 2000 He declared his candidacy for the republican nomination for President of Kanata. Thanks to his fame and high African-Kanatian turnout, He won the nomination and easily defeated incumbent vice President Jack Kemp, becoming the first African Kanatian President in Kanata's history

In his first month's in office, President Freeman singed the assault weapons ban,the Child Fund Act and controversially, an end to Affirmative Action . In 2001, Freeman and the other heads of State in North Vinland signed the NVTA, the North Vinland trade agreement, which began free trade for Kanata with its neighbors and no tariffs on North Vinland goods entering Kanatian ports. He won reelection in 2004 against Senator John McCain and in initially planned to continue his domestic policy changes. However in 2006, Toronto and Hancock City were attacked by Mexican Terrorists attempting to destabilize the Kanatian government, this was unsuccessful, as Freeman launched an invasion into Mexico to capture or kill the organizers of the attack and to reestablish order in the fledgling Mexican government. The war ended in early 2008 as Freeman's popularity skyrocketed. But the economy slowed and fell throughout his second term ultimately causing the Republicans and Vice President Biden to lose the 2008 presidential election to the Federalists and congressmen Stephen Harper.

Ambassador of peace and return to politics[]

After leaving office in 2009 The World peace council appointed Freeman a ambassador of peace. He began supervising elections in places such as Kurdistan and in Zaire retiring in 2022. He is now living in Memphis with his wife Myrna Colley Lee.