Petra Kvitova, Helena Sukova and Wimbledon chairman Philip Brook were among 300 people that attended the funeral of Jana Novotna on Monday.

Novotna passed away on November 19th after a long battle with cancer at the age of 49. Her death stunned that world of tennis with few people knowing about the severity of her illness. The funeral was held in her birthplace in Brno, the Czech Republic. Novotna returned to Brno several years ago after living in Florida.

Two-time Wimbledon champion Kvitova praised Novotna for inspiring her career. Novotna peaked at a high of 2nd in the WTA rankings in 1997. Her biggest achievement occurred at the 1998 Wimbledon championships when she claimed her first and only grand slam title. Five years after suffering a heartbreaking loss in the final of the tournament, where she was leading Steffi Graf in the final set. It was at that tournament where Novotna made world headlines after crying on the shoulder of the Duchess of Kent.

“Jana was always amazing and smiling. I will remember that. Her frivolity was incredible. She congratulated me on both Wimbledon victories, she even cried at the first. She was my model (idol).” Kvitova told reporters on Monday.

“I have admired her fighting spirit. She advanced to the Wimbledon final twice, but won it for the third time only.” She later added.

The chairman of the Czech tennis association, Ivo Kaderka, added that the world has lost a ‘great person.’

“Not only a great tennis legend has passed away, but also a great person and a good girl. This has saddened us all,” Kaderka told CTK.

Novotna won 24 WTA singles titles during her career and ended every season inside the world’s top 10 between 1989-1998. She was also an exceptional doubles player, winning 12 grand slam titles in the women’s doubles and a further four in the mixed. In total, Novotna won 100 WTA titles.

She is also a three-time Olympic medallist. Claiming two silvers in the doubles (1988 and 1996) and a bronze in the 1996 singles competition.

After retiring from the tour, the Czech continued working in the sport. Briefly coaching France’s Marion Bartoli and mentored Barbora Krejcikova. She also worked for the BBC during Wimbledon.

According to the WTA record book, only six women in the Open Era have won more WTA doubles titles than Novotna.

Poland’s top player on the ATP Tour is not giving up on his dream of winning a medal at the Olympic Games despite recently undergoing a medical procedure.

World No.7 Hubert Hurkacz suffered a knee injury during his second round clash at Wimbledon against France’s Arthur Fils. In the fourth set tiebreak of their clash, Hurkacz dived for a shot but landed badly on his knee and required on-court medical attention. He then played two more points before retiring from the match.

In a social media post published on Wednesday, the 27-year-old confirmed he underwent a procedure on his knee earlier this week but didn’t provide any further details. Although Hurkacz has stated his intention to play at the upcoming Olympic Games in Paris, where the tennis event will be held on the clay at Roland Garros.

“I had a knee procedure this Monday, but I’m feeling better already and my team and are dedicating extensive time each day to the rehab process.” He wrote on Instagram.

“It’s a dream for every athlete to represent their country at the Olympics, and I want to make sure I am fully fit and ready before making the final decision to step on court. The aim is not only to participate, but to win a medal for my country.”

So far this season Hurkacz has won 34 out of 48 matches played on the Tour. He won the Estoril Open in April and was runner-up to Jannik Sinner in Halle.

The Olympic tennis event is scheduled to begin a week Saturday on July 27th. Poland is yet to win a medal in the event but expectations are high with women’s No.1 Iga Swiatek also taking part.

It must have seemed like the whole world was against her when Barbora Krejcikova served for the match for a third time against crowd favorite Jasmine Paolini.

But Krejcikova was only going for her 12th Grand Slam title. She was well prepared.

So, she released her patented way-out-wide serve to the smallish Paolini’s backhand, and the best the Italian could do was get her racket on the ball enough to return the serve far off the court, long and wide.

ARMS UP FOR A CHAMPION

The weight of the world was gone as Krejcikova threw her arms over her head and calmly walked to the net to greet the Wimbledon runner-up.

Now, Krejcikova was half-way home to a career Grand Slam in singles. She already owns a career Grand Slam in doubles among her dozen Grand Slam titles that also include one mixed doubles Grand Slam title.

She has won the hard ones, the French Open on clay and Wimbledon on grass.

At 28 years old, anything must look possible to this 5-10 Czech.

KREJCIKOVA COMES THROUGH UNDER PRESSURE

Paolini simply was out played in a second straight Grand Slam final, on clay and on grass. Now she faces the real tests, two straight Grand Slam tournaments on hard surfaces that might not be overly friendly to the 5-4 Paolini.

But there it was, a 6-2, 2-6, 6-4 victory for Krejcikova on Wimbledon’s famed Center Court.

After what might be called a throw-away second set for Krejcikova, she came alive in the third set, pinning Paolini to the deep corners while nailing low hard-hit balls to both corners.

Krejcikova got off to 40-0 starts on her first four service games of the decisive set and ended all four with service winners to take a 5-3 lead (with the aid of the only service break of the third set). She yielded only one point in those four service games, a double fault at 40-0 that was followed by an ace.

Of course, it was the serve again that saved the day for Krejcikova and gave her set points two and three, then sealed the deal for a spot in Wimbledon history.

—

James Beck was the 2003 winner of the USTA National Media Award for print media. A 1995 MBA graduate of The Citadel, he can be reached at Jamesbecktennis@gmail.com.

The Prime Minister of Italy has praised Jasmine Paolini for lighting up the hearts of others during her Wimbledon run.

Paolini missed out on her first Grand Slam title to Barbora Krejcikova, who prevailed in three sets to capture her second major trophy. Despite her defeat, she has made history at the tournament by becoming the first female player from her country to reach the final. Until this year, she had never won a Tour-level main draw match on the grass.

Whilst disappointed about missing out on the biggest title of her career, Italian Premier Giorgia Meloni posted a tribute to Paolini on social media just moments after the final had concluded.

“Proud of Jasmine Paolini,” The Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (ANSA) quotes Meloni as saying.

“The first Italian tennis player to reach the final of the prestigious Wimbledon tournament.

“Despite the defeat, you lit up the hearts of the Italian people, succeeding in conveying grit and passion to all of us who supported you”.

Paolini is the first player ranked outside the top five to reach the final of both Wimbledon and the French Open within the same year since the ranking system was introduced in 1975. She is also only the fourth female player in the Open Era to have reached her first two Grand Slam finals in the same year at Roland Garros and Wimbledon after Chris Evert (1973), Olga Morozova (1974) and Steffi Graf (1987).

Should she win three or more matches at the US Open later this year, she will also set a new Open Era record for the most Grand Slam wins achieved by an Italian female player in a single season.

“The last two months have been crazy for me. I want to thank my team, and my family. They always support me and I wouldn’t be here without them. The crowd have been amazing. I received a lot of support. Just incredible to feel the love from them, I enjoy it so much.” Paolini said following her Wimbledon defeat.

The 28-year-old will rise to a ranking high of No.3 on Monday.