Who was Jana Novotna?

Novotna was born in 1968 in Brno, Czech Republic.

She turned pro in 1987 and was primarily known for her success as a doubles player.

DID JANA NOVOTNA KEEP ILLNESS A SECRET?

Novotna was initially coached by Mike Estep before going under the wing of four-time Grand Slam singles champion Hana Mandlíková.

At the peak of her powers in the 1990s, Novotna features in one of the most enduring images in the long history of Wimbledon after famously being consoled by the Duchess of Kent after losing the 1993 final to Steffi Graf.

She was known for her battling qualities, though, and overcame another final defeat in 1997, this time to Martina Hingis, to finally get her hands on the trophy in 1998, beating Frenchwoman Nathalie Tauziat.

That ended up being her only grand slam title in singles, though she was prolific in the doubles, winning 24 grand slams and ticking off the full set of Wimbledon, the French Open, the Australian Open and the US Open.

Novotna also represented her country with success, claiming silver medals at the 1988 and 1996 Olympics as well as a bronze in Atlanta.

She was the world number one ranked player in doubles in 1990 and got as high as number two in the singles in 1997.

Who has paid tribute to Jana Novotna?

WTA chief executive officer Steve Simon said: "Jana was an inspiration both on and off court to anyone who had the opportunity to know her.

"Her star will always shine brightly in the history of the WTA. Our condolences and our thoughts are with Jana's family."

Former British number one Jo Durie paid tribute to Novotna's spirit on court.

She said on Twitter: "Oh no how terrible sad. All thoughts to her family and friends. So glad Jana won Wimbledon. Such a fighter on court & a wicked sense of humour."

Former American doubles star Pam Schriver added: "Jana was as kind as she was athletic, as smart as she was competive. I can't believe she is gone this soon. Her smile lives forever young."

Former British player Andrew Castle, now a commentator for the BBC, said: "What a terrible shame. She was good fun of an evening, a champion on court, so tough to play against. And her smile was wonderful."

Martina Navratilova tweeted: “The tennis world is so sad about the passing of Jana Novotna...I am gutted and beyond words- Jana was a true friend and an amazing woman…”