>>Weather by month // weather averages Llano

>>Climate graph // Weather by Month Llano

>>average temperature by month Llano

>>Weather Llano

The climate here is considered warm and temperate. The precipitation levels in the city of Llano are noteworthy, as there is a considerable amount of rainfall even during months that typically experience dry weather. The climate here is classified as Cfa by the Köppen-Geiger. The average annual temperature in Llano is 19.9 °C | 67.9 °F. Approximately 707 mm | 27.8 inch of rainfall occurs on a yearly basis.

Llano is in the northern hemisphere. Its north to the equator line The onset of summer commences towards the conclusion of June and culminates by September. The months that constitute this season are referred to as June, July, August, September. The optimal period to plan a visit would be during the months of May, June, September.

Climate graph // Weather by Month Llano

In August, the precipitation level plummets to a mere 38 mm | 1.5 inch. This month holds the title for being exceptionally arid. On average, the highest amount of rainfall occurs during May with a mean value of 95 mm | 3.7 inch.

average temperature by month Llano

The month of highest temperature is August during which the average temperature reaches up to 29.7 °C | 85.4 °F. On average, the month of January is considered to be the coldest time of year with temperatures averaging at around 9.7 °C | 49.4 °F.

Weather by month // weather averages Llano

<>

Avg. Temperature °C (°F) Min. Temperature °C (°F) Max. Temperature °C (°F) Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in) Humidity (%) Rainy days (d) avg. Sun hours (hours)

January February March April May June July August September October November December

Data: 1991 - 2021 Min. Temperature °C (°F), Max. Temperature °C (°F), Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in), Humidity, Rainy days. Data: 1999 - 2019: avg. Sun hours

The precipitation variance between the months with the lowest and highest levels of rainfall is 57 mm | 2 inch. The fluctuation of temperatures across the seasons is referred to as 20.0 °C | 36.0 °F.

The month that sees the most relative humidity is November (50.30 %). The month with the lowest amount of relative humidity is August (50.30 %). The month with the highest amount of rainfall is May (9.70 days), whereas the one with the lowest precipitation level is July (4.97).

Llano weather and climate for every month

Hours of sunshine in Llano

avg. hours of sun

Total hours of sun

In the region of Llano, it has been observed that July is the month which experiences maximum daily sunshine hours, with an average duration of approximately 11.11. The total number of sunlit hours during this period amounts to a staggering sum of about 344.37.

The location of Llano experiences the least amount of daily sunshine hours during January, with an average duration of only 6.75. The total number of sunlight hours recorded in this month is equal to 202.56.

It has been estimated that the total annual sunshine duration in Llano is approximately 3050.53 hours. This translates to an average monthly value of roughly 100.19 hours for each month, on a consistent basis.

Airport close to Llano

The closest Airports of Llano are: Robert Gray Army Airfield (GRK) 88.15km,Robert Mueller Municipal Airport (AUS) 114.72km,San Antonio International Airport (SAT) 138.63km

You can reach Llano from this Cities by Plane: London (LHR), Baltimore (BWI), Detroit (DTW), Dallas (DAL), San Francisco (SFO), Houston (HOU), New Orleans (MSY), Seattle (SEA), Cancún (CUN), Las Vegas (LAS), Nashville (BNA), El Paso (ELP), New York (JFK), Mexico City (MEX), Orlando (MCO), Salt Lake City (SLC), Phoenix (PHX), Oakland (OAK), Lubbock (LBB), Denver (DEN)