Charlie Baker Deval Patrick

Governor Deval Patrick and Governor-elect Charlie Baker share a laugh outside the governor's office on November 5, 2014.

(Garrett Quinn/MassLive.com)

BOSTON - On Monday, Gov. Deval Patrick, a Democrat, attacked Republican gubernatorial candidate Charlie Baker as a politician "who had authenticity problems." Patrick criticized Baker's tax proposals and talked about "kicking a little Republican ass."

Two days later, after Baker defeated Democratic attorney general Martha Coakley to win the governor's race, Patrick and Baker held a private meeting, then stood side by side before the media and promised to work together to ensure a smooth transition. The interaction marked the end of a divisive campaign as Baker begins to build bridges and establish his ability to govern.

"The campaign's over," Patrick said. "We're both looking ahead."

"It's really important to the Commonwealth and the people we serve and the people that the governor-elect will serve that this be a serious, thoughtful and helpful transition, and we're committed to that on both sides," Patrick said.

Baker described their meeting as open, collaborative, positive and constructive. "The campaign's over," Baker said. "This is about moving the state forward."

Patrick on Wednesday morning unveiled a public website that includes material for Baker's team about every state agency.

Patrick said he provided Baker with additional material electronically. He set up office space for Baker's transition team in the Statehouse and designated a liaison between the transition team and the administration to set up meetings.

"We look forward to being as helpful as possible during the transition to make sure that the functions of state government transition smoothly, and we are excited about supporting the success of our soon-to-be new governor," Patrick said.

Among the major issues that will confront Baker soon after taking office: Baker will have to begin crafting the next state budget; he will have to ensure the successful implementation of the state's Health Connector website; and he will have to address ongoing concerns around the state's preparedness for Ebola.

Though Patrick touted the work his administration did in areas including education, health care, energy and veterans' services, he said there is still more to be done, particularly on the economy. "There are still kitchen tables in neighborhoods around the Commonwealth where the recovery hasn't yet reached, and that will be in part the responsibility of the next governor," Patrick said.

Earlier Wednesday, Baker said his first step will be appointing the team that serves in his administration. He said there are a number of issues he needs to learn more about including the state of the Massachusetts Health Connector website, the progress of opening medical marijuana dispensaries, and the planning and application process for bringing the 2024 Olympics to Boston.

Coakley had campaigned as a successor to Patrick, who could build on Patrick's accomplishments over the past eight years. Baker, during the campaign, criticized Patrick's mismanagement related to the Department of Children and Families and the technical failures of the Massachusetts Health Connector website.

Patrick repeatedly declined to speculate on the message behind Baker's victory. Asked about it, Patrick replied, "It says he got more votes than the Democratic nominee."

Baker said the closeness of the race – he defeated Coakley by less than 2 percent of the vote - indicates that the electorate expects the new administration "to work collaboratively across the aisle with all people of good will to get stuff done."

After a contentious campaign, both Baker and Coakley struck conciliatory notes on Wednesday, with each describing the other as "gracious." Coakley, in a concession speech delivered Wednesday morning, said she would help Baker in any way she could. Coakley joked that she has Baker's cell phone number and "I'm going to hold him to his campaign promises."

Throughout the day, legislators from both parties issued congratulatory statements to Baker. Incoming state senate president Stan Rosenberg, an Amherst Democrat, said he worked with Baker when Baker was secretary of administration and finance and Rosenberg chaired the Senate Committee on Ways and Means. "I am confident that we will work together well, because we have done so in the past," Rosenberg said.