Has a Hollywood war movie left its thumbprint on you?

For us, one such film was Apocalypse Now (1979), a haunting dreamscape in an exotic war zone. It confronted us with the reminder the world isn’t always the place we wish it to be.

We were mulling this over after seeing a new five-part documentary, released by Cantilever Films, that looks at American war films and how they reflect North American society.

War Movie: The American Battle in Cinema (2023) is a thorough examination of over a century of Hollywood films, from 1900 to 2020. Historians, academics, and army personnel are interviewed, giving different perspectives on the ways war is portrayed by Hollywood.

They offer surprising insights:

“Most people who make war movies have seen more war movies than actual war.”

“We conflate World War II with a World War II movie.”

“Iron Man is the most successful [war] movie set in Afghanistan.”

Agree or disagree, War Movie challenges us to view war movies – portrayals of the ultimate conflict – as reflections of us and our society.

The documentary is divided into five parts:

The Camera and the Gun, 1900-1938

The “Good” War, 1938-1949

The Shifting Tide, 1950-1975

Into the Jungle, 1976-2000

Brave New World, 2001-2020

Each part runs approximately an hour, and each offers thoughtful analyses on the wars that were portrayed, the effects of battle, and how society reacted to both the war and movie depictions.

It explores the early years of film and Hollywood portrayals of WWI and WWII, along with the role of propaganda.

The documentary then turns its attention to the Cold War years of the 1950s and 60s, and the resurgence of sci-fi, westerns, and American Civil War movies. There was also a trend for “re-enactment” films, such as The Longest Day (1962), The Great Escape (1963), and Lawrence of Arabia (1962).

Then there was the Vietnam War, the first American conflict to be televised. Much was documented about the protests in the United States, but it wasn’t until 1977-1979 that American filmmakers felt ready to tackle the subject.

Movies about the Vietnam War struggled to make sense of the thing, as did many Americans personally, whether veterans or civilians. Coming Home (1978) tried to answer the question, “What happened?”, while First Blood (1982) and Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) tried to “rewrite” the war.

“War movies,” says one expert, “became a metaphor for the public’s disenchantment with the U.S. government and its military policies.”

Even so, Hollywood would continue to collaborate with the American military. One famous example is Top Gun (1986), a movie that created the biggest spike in U.S. Navy enrollment in years.

Current Hollywood war movies deal with the war on terror, an ongoing conflict with no real conclusion in sight.

They also take a clear-eyed look at the personal cost of war, just like The Big Parade (1925) and The Red Badge of Courage (1951) had decades before.

Yet, movies such as The Hurt Locker (2008) and American Sniper (2014) ask, What do repeated deployments do to a person’s psyche?

As for War Movie, it is careful and curious, and sometimes it says the Quiet Part out loud.

Don’t let the five-hour runtime deter you; it’s worth every minute. You don’t have to be a film aficionado or a military historian to see its value.

Because there are so many interesting observations, and we can’t possibly list them all, we’ll save them for you to discover on your own.

You can thank us later.

Disclosure: Cantilever Films sent us streaming links in exchange for an unbiased review.