Peter’s Friends is a 1992 comedy drama film helmed by Kenneth Branagh. It follows a man who invites his friends from college, whom he hasn’t met in a long time, to the country estate he inherited. When his friends arrive, everyone realizes how different their lives are now.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Peter’s Friends via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is Peter’s Friends available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Peter’s Friends is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

The plot of the film revolves around Peter and his college friends. In 1983, they gather at his family’s country estate for New Year’s Eve, while Peter’s father is also present with his middle-aged friends. Later, when Peter inherits the country estate, he invites his friends back to the estate for the 1992-1993 New Year’s Eve.

They all arrive, including Roger, Mary, Sarah, Maggie and Andrew, and some bring their partners along. As they spend time together, they realize how much their lives have changed since the last time they met. Further, Peter takes the opportunity to reveal the real reason for inviting them.

The film stars Stephen Fry as Peter Morton, the man who inherits the country estate. Kenneth Branagh plays Andrew Benson, one of Peter’s friends. We also see Emma Thompson playing the role of Maggie Chester.

Watch Peter’s Friends streaming via Amazon Prime Video

Peter’s Friends is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video.

It is a very popular streaming platform that provides a vast library of on-demand content, inclusing hit original series like Fleabag and The Boys.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

Peter’s Friends’ official synopsis is as follows:

“After inheriting a large country estate from his late father, Peter invites his friends from college: married couple Roger and Mary, the lonely Maggie, fashionable Sarah, and writer Andrew, who brings his American TV star wife, Carol. Sarah’s new boyfriend, Brian, also attends. It has been 10 years since college, and they find their lives are very different.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.