Henry Kissinger, former Secretary of State and an advisor to 12 of our Presidents, died on November 29, 2023 at the age 100. Among other accolades, he won the Nobel Peace Prize for his diplomacy in ending the war and in Vietnam and was credited for being the person responsible for opening Mao’s China to the US and the world. But Kissinger was not only celebrated, he was also reviled.

On today’s show we revisit New Mexico People Place and Ideas’ host Stephen Spitz’s interview with author Christopher Hitchens. In his book, The Trial of Henry Kissinger, Hitchens outlines atrocities authorized by Kissinger in Indochina, Bangladesh, Chile, and East Timor, “including conspiracy to commit murder, kidnap, and torture.” All this was done in the name of US policy, but did it ultimately benefit the US? Hitchens will give his take.

Produced with the assistance of Lynn Schibeci, Gus Tofoya, and Roman Garcia.

Raul Torrez, who took office on January 1, 2023 as our Attorney General, is changing the Office in ways that seem to embody a different philosophy. The examples are many: cooperate rather than fight plaintiffs in the Yazzie education lawsuit, criminal charges against police officers, and starting a new Civil Rights Division. AG Torrez is undertaking these and other ambitious goals while of course still performing all of the traditional duties of his Office.

On today’s show, Mexico People Places and Ideas’ host Stephen Spitz is joined by Attorney General Torrez to discuss this seeming break from the past, and what principles will guide his actions.

Produced with the assistance of Lynn Schibeci, Gus Tofoya, and Roman Garcia.

In a landmark 2018 decision, the court in Yazzie/Martinez held that the State was violating New Mexico students’ constitutional right to a “sufficient education”. The State was therefore required to invest in the programs and services that have proven successful in raising outcomes for Native Americans, English Language learners, those with disabilities and students from low income households. Leading the way for plaintiffs have been Native American rights groups, and on today’s show New Mexico People Place and Ideas’ host Stephen Spitz is joined by Regis Pecos, Chair of the Tribal Education Alliance on education.

The show will focus on why the education of Native Americans and others was found to be insufficient, what are the programs and services that raise those outcomes, and if they have changed since 2018. We will also discuss the NM Attorney General’s announcement that he intends to replace the law firm defending the case after meeting with plaintiffs and Native American leaders.

Produced with the assistance of Lynn Schibeci, Gus Tofoya, and Roman Garcia.

Today we listen back to an interview with renowned Albuquerque civil rights lawyer, Nancy Hollander, who was portrayed by Jodie Foster in the 2021 film, the Mauritanian. The film portrays Hollander’s fight to free her client, Mohamedou Slahi, from US prison in Guantanamo, Cuba. Slahi had been “extraordinarily rendered” to Jordan from his home in Mauritania and later tortured.

New Mexico People Place and Ideas’ host Stephen Spitz also discusses with Hollander her defense of “Holy Land”, once the largest the Muslim charity in the US, against terrorism charges, and her suit against the US Government to stop the wire-tapping of attorney-client conversations.

Produced with the assistance of Lynn Schibeci, Gus Tofoya, and Tristan Clum

Today’s guest is Michael S. Vigil, a former undercover DEA agent in Mexico, who rose to be the DEA’s Chief of International Operations worldwide. In our March 2023 show, Vigil traced the origin and development of the Mexican drug cartels. This month New Mexico People Place and Ideas’ host Stephen Spitz focuses on how that history affects Mexico today. We start with a cause celeb in Mexico, the 43 missing and presumably murdered college students. The resulting 2014 criminal case has gone nowhere, allegedly because those implicated are the military, the police, politicians, and judges.

What does this say about Mexico’s criminal justice system? Next we look at the cartels’ entry into lawful businesses, with up to 60% revenues now coming from extortion and theft. Finally, the positives. Mexico is now the US’s #1 trading partner and already is an economic engine for NM. What are the prospects?

Produced with assistance of Gus Tafoya, and Roman Garcia.

How does stress affect brain function and conduct? Can be stress passed on epigenetically ( not experientially) to succeeding generations? Can the effect of stress on the brain actually be measured and mapped via non-invasive neuroimaging of the brain?

The Mind Research Network at UNM has been doing such brain scans since 1997 to better understand just such questions and provide objective data for patients. Physicist Julia Stephen, Director of Neuroimaging at MRN, has been using brain scans to investigate the effects of stress on brain function in early childhood and adolescents. But how can non-invasive brain scans do this—what does it see, how does it see it, and what do these scans tell us about the effect of childhood stress?

New Mexico People Place and Ideas host Stephen Spitz will put these and related questions to Dr Stephen this Friday at 8:00 am.

Produced with assistance of Gus Tafoya, and Roman Garcia.

By early Spring New Mexico had already experienced its two largest wildfires in history as well as the McBride fire, which destroyed more than 200 homes in Ruidoso. Is this the new normal? And are controlled burns really the answer given that the disastrous Hermits Peak fire that ended up destroying more than 300 homes and displacing thousands of New Mexicans.

Joining host Stephen Spitz to discuss this is UNM professor and fire ecologist, Dr. Matthew Hurteau. We will explore how fire risks are best managed, why fire suppression still rules the day, and how the Hermits Peak fire went so horribly wrong.

Produced with assistance of Lynn Schibeci, Elias Henley, Tristan Clum, and Roman Garcia.

From potters to political game changers, women have been shaping New Mexico history for centuries. However while NM’s Historic Roadside Markers program began in 1935, as of 1996 it was unclear how many women had been so recognized. That year Patricia French, after stopping to read a historic marker on the Santa Fe trail, wondered out-loud to her friends Beverly Duran and Alexis Girard, how many women had been mentioned?

They found out the answer was only 1 woman out of 500 markers and launched an effort to put the record straight. Now the New Mexico Historic Women Marker Initiative highlights the accomplishments of more than 100 women. How exactly does one explain this disparity, what did Patricia French and her colleagues do to change the Program, and who are the women now recognized on State markers?

New Mexico People Place and Ideas host Stephen Spitz will put those and related questions to Patricia French this Friday at 8:00 am.

Produced with assistance of Gus Tafoya, and Roman Garcia.

Sunday, May 28 is the 107th running of the Indianapolis 500 mile race. The Unser family, Al, Bobby, and Al Jr., have won the 500 a record nine times. Our guest is racing legend Al Unser, who passed away on December 9, 2021 and who still holds the record for most Indy wins.

New Mexico People Place and Ideas host Stephen Spitz sat down with Al in 2005 at the Unser Museum to talk about the Museum, what its like to first take the track at speeds over 200 mph, how to win, and racing against your own son. The show explores all this and much more.

Produced with assistance of Gus Tafoya, and Tristan Clum.