kcramer@thevictoryvipers.com

Kelly was the Vice President and Director for Lenape Valley Indians Football & Cheer organization. She ran the Pop-Warner cheerleading program for 11 years. She was awarded the 2010 Coach of the year for Bux-mont Pop Warner Cheerleading and led the program to 3 consecutive Bux-mont Championships. Kelly was the head coach for JV & Varsity at CB West cheerleading program for 8 years. Her co-ed team took 2nd in PIAA State Championships in 2015. She was proud to be a part of Buck nation.

Kelly received her Associates Degree in Travel and Tourism management and her Bachelor's Degree in Business Management from Widener University. She currently lives in Doylestown, Pennsylvania with her husband Kevin, mother in law and 3 children, Bailey, Jackson and Peyton.

Since starting Victory Vipers, Kelly has coached all levels and all age groups, from Minis to graduating seniors. She has coached M1 Rattlers, Y2 Boas, S2 Lady A’s, S3 V3nom, SC4 Fang, & SC5 Poison. Her teams have received multiple bids to the D2 Summit and Summit. She is so grateful to have joined the all-star cheerleading world and is most proud of creating a family-style atmosphere where our athletes can thrive. She believes that hard work and dedication we teach at Victory will lay the groundwork to be successful, not just in cheerleading, but also in life.

mmctague@thevictoryvipers.com

Mark is a native of Philadelphia. He attended Temple University and received a Bachelor's Degree in Exercise Physiology. As a student at Temple, he was a 4 year member of the varsity cheerleading squad. He then attended graduate school at Morehead State University (MSU) in Morehead, Kentucky where he received his Master's Degree in Exercise Science. While at MSU, he became a 3 time Universal Cheerleaders Association (UCA) Collegiate National Champion and top 10 UCA Partner Stunt Finalist. Mark also taught 8 years as a staff member for UCA. In addition, he has worked with many successful high school cheerleading programs, including Greenup County, Pikeville, and Upper Darby.

In April of 2013 Mark set out with his business partner, Kelly Cramer, to start Victory Vipers.

Since opening Victory Vipers, Mark has coached the Y2 Boas, S2 Lady A’s, S3 AGM V3nom, SC4 Fang, & SC5 Poison and our M1 Rattlers. Over the years, his teams have received multiple bids to the D2 Summit and The Summit.

asteglik@thevictoryvipers.com

Audrey is a Pennridge High School graduate born and raised in Perkasie, PA. She has received her associates in Exercise Science from Bucks County Community College. Audrey has cheered in various programs: rec, high school, and all-stars which has given her a passion to pursue coaching.

Audrey has experience coaching levels 1 - 6 and all age groups. Since starting in our program, Audrey has obtained numerous Summit bids and finalist finishes as a coach and athlete that she hopes to continue to add to. She was a member

of our 1st team formed in 2013!

In her time coaching, she hopes to help athletes develop and gain new skills while sharing life lessons with them in an exciting

and challenging environment.

This season, Audrey is coaching:

Rattlers, Mini Prep 1.1

Hiss, Youth 1

Miss Mambas, Senior 4