[http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0865587/ Gina Tognoni - IMDb.com] ] The character returned in July 2003 portrayed by Tracy Lindsey Melchior until November 2003, only to be replaced by Heather Tom from December 11 2003 until December 14 2006. The character crossed over to the ABC's "All My Children" on March 29 2004 and April 6 2004 and later February 18 2005 during a "baby switch" storyline involving both series.

Character history

The early years

Kelly appears on the doorstep of her aunt, Dorian Cramer Lord, in 1995. The daughter of Dorian's younger sister Melinda, Kelly had been expelled from her Parisian boarding school. She soon befriends Jessica Buchanan, the daughter of Dorian's nemesis Victoria Lord, and later falls in love with Jessica's brother (and Dorian's former lover) Joey.

Devastated over her breakup with Joey, Kelly gets into a car accident in the rain. The passenger in the other car is Kelly's cousin Blair Cramer, who loses her unborn baby (later named Brendan Thornhart). Wracked with guilt, Kelly hides her involvement; the secret is soon revealed, and she and Blair are estranged for a long time.

Kelly dates wealthy Ian Armitage and inherits his fortune when he dies in a plane crash in 1998. She then becomes romantically involved with Joey and Jessica's cousin Drew Buchanan, who is also later killed in 1998. In early 1999, Kelly has an affair with Max Holden; she later leaves him at the altar when she realizes she is still in love with Joey. Kelly's boarding school friend Grace Monroe comes to town in 1999 and becomes engaged to Joey's brother Kevin Buchanan, but is tragically drowned the same year. Kelly and Kevin console each other as she and Joey become engaged in December 1999. That New Year's Eve, Kelly and Kevin have a few drinks and kiss. They stop themselves from making love and decide not to hurt Joey by telling him about it. Joey learns of his mother's breast cancer, and he and Kelly elope on 14 April 2000. Kelly struggles with her feelings for Kevin as she tries to make her marriage work. She ultimately confesses all to Joey, and they divorce in January 2001. Joey moves to London, and Kelly begins a relationship with Kevin. When Kevin moves to Texas to be closer to his young son Duke in August 2001, Kelly follows him.

Kelly returns for Blair's wedding to Todd Manning in December 2001, and again briefly in January 2002.

The return

In July 2003, Kelly returns to Llanview on the heels of Kevin, now her husband. Their marriage strained, it is soon revealed that Kevin's new political career had pushed a lonely Kelly into an affair with a man named Nick Carson in Texas. Desperate to save the marriage, Kelly tries to get pregnant even though it may put her life in danger. Kevin asks for a divorce but changes his mind when Kelly becomes pregnant. While out of town in 2004, Kelly loses the baby and finds herself on the verge of a breakdown.

Meanwhile, a MEDEVAC helicopter piloted by Kelly's half-brother Paul Cramer crashes in a storm in nearby Pine Valley, carrying Bianca Montgomery and Babe Carey, Paul's ex-wife. Both Bianca and Babe are pregnant and give birth during the crisis on March 24 2004. Paul gives Babe's son to Kelly and gives Bianca's daughter to Babe, telling Bianca that her baby died. Unaware of the child's origins, Kelly brings Babe's infant back to Llanview, passing him off as her child with Kevin. Kevin and Kelly name the baby Asa "Ace" Buchanan II after Kevin's grandfather. Their marriage crumbles anyway in 2005, and Kevin secures custody. Meanwhile, a devastated Kelly discovers that Paul had stolen Ace from his mother; Paul, desperate for cash, blackmails Kelly by threatening to reveal the secret to Kevin and Llanview. Armed with the truth, Kelly realizes they must return the child to his parents; though broken hearted, they do.

Kevin and Kelly begin dating again but soon break up; she briefly dates Dr. Spencer Truman and then reconciles with Kevin. After Spencer performs a new surgical procedure on Kelly that could potentially reverse her infertility, Kevin proposes. Spencer, however, enacting his vendetta against the Buchanans, exposes Kevin to a virus that renders him sterile. Kevin falls into a depression that strains his relationship with Kelly. Kevin's son Duke, now an adult, consoles Kelly and soon falls in love with her; they sleep together once before a tornado hits Llanview. Kelly and Duke are both seriously injured; with only one surgeon available, Kevin is forced to choose whether his ex-wife or son will go into surgery first. He chooses Kelly, and is devastated as Duke dies in his arms.

In the wake of Duke's death, Kelly discovers that she is pregnant with his child; Kevin swears he will never forgive her, and Kelly decides to leave Llanview. Kevin has a change of heart, and convinces her to stay; he is at her side when she gives birth prematurely to a son, and they name the baby Zane. Reconciled and resigned to start over as a family, Kevin and Kelly relocate to London with Zane.

References

External links