Press Releases

Principal photography commences on Andrea Arnold's Fish Tank

BBC Films, the UK Film Council and Limelight are pleased to announce that principal photography has begun on Fish Tank, Academy Award-winning writer and director Andrea Arnold's follow-up feature to Cannes Prix du Jury winner, Red Road.

Artificial Eye has acquired the UK theatrical rights; ContentFilm International is handling worldwide sales.

Following his critically acclaimed performance in Hunger, Michael Fassbender (300, Angel) takes the central role in Fish Tank, opposite talented newcomer Katie Jarvis.

Rounding out the principal cast are BAFTA-nominated Kierston Wareing (It's A Free World), who is joined by Rebecca Griffiths and Harry Treadaway (Control).

Produced by Kees Kasander (Prospero's Books, The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover, The Pillow Book), for Kasander Films, and executive produced by Paul Trijbits (Ruby Films) and Christine Langan and David M Thompson for BBC Films, Fish Tank will be shot entirely on location in the UK.

Fish Tank is the story of Mia (Katie Jarvis), a volatile 15-year-old, who is always in trouble and who has become excluded from school and ostracized by her friends.

One hot summer's day her mother (Kierston Wareing) brings home a mysterious stranger called Connor (Michael Fassbender), who promises to change everything and bring love into all their lives.

Touching on the themes of Andrea Arnold's Academy Award-winning short Wasp, Fish Tank is an original and unique modern tale of our times.

Paul Trijbits, Executive Producer, says: "Andrea is the UK's most exciting new female director, whose work is embraced by audiences and festivals all over the world.

"Having commissioned both Andrea's Oscar-winner Wasp and Cannes prize-winner Red Road, I am delighted to have been a part in putting Andrea's next film together."

Christine Langan, Executive Producer for BBC Films, says: "BBC Films prides itself in providing a home for some of the most distinctive talent working today.

"We are especially pleased to team up with Andrea once again and to help bring her unique vision to the screen."

David M Thompson, Executive Producer for BBC Films, says: "We were delighted to be involved in Andrea's Red Road, which is one of the most startling films I have ever seen from a first-time feature director.

"Naturally we were thrilled at the opportunity to develop Andrea's next project, which we think will result in a highly distinctive and compelling film, from one of Britain's most exciting film talents."

Lenny Crooks, Head of the UK Film Council's New Cinema Fund, says: "Andrea has proved herself to be one of the most exciting film-makers to have come out of the UK for years.

"She received international acclaim for her first feature and her shorts work and we are delighted that we can help her to progress her career."

BBC Films and the UK Film Council in association with Limelight present a Kees Kasander production.