This open source icon is named "korea flag" and is licensed under the open source Apache 2.0 license. It's a colored icon. This icon is light colored, meaning out the box, it needs a contrasting background color to make it stand out. It's available to be downloaded in SVG and PNG formats (available in 256, 512, 1024 and 2048 PNG sizes).

It's part of the icon set "Mozilla FxEmojis", which has 1,036 icons in it.

If you need this icon available in another format, it should be pretty straight forward to download it as an SVG image file, and then import it into apps like Canva, Easil, RelayThat or Stencil. Converting it to an ICO, JPEG or WebP image format or file type should also be pretty simple (we hope to add that feature to Iconduck soon).

This icon can be used for both Personal & Commercial purposes and projects, but please check the license to see if the designer is requesting attribution (for example, a link back to their website).

It was published to Iconduck on: 31 December, 2020

Some use-cases for this icon include:

Adding to a PowerPoint presentation

Adding to a Sketch design

Using in a Photoshop design

Using on a Zoom background

Including in an Instagram photo

Using in a Google Slides presentation

Related tags: map, countries, location, flag, emojis

Can I use this icon for personal purposes/projects?

Yes. This icon can be freely used for personal projects including websites, designs, presentations and other things.

Can I use this icon for commercial purposes/projects?

Yes. This icon can be used for commercial purposes, but may require attribution (eg. a link). If it's a logo or trademark, it may be owned by another company.

Can I download this icon for free?

Yes! This icon has been open sourced, and can be downloaded at no charge / for free. We also don't require you to sign up for Iconduck, but you can join our mailing list to get notifications on when new icons are available.

Where can I find free country icons & illustrations?

Iconduck has 273,858 free open source icons & illustrations. You can find more country icons right on this website.