I could tell right away that Peary's Gilderesleeve character was likely based on a contemporary radio show. Peavey's laugh and vocal style appeared in several Loony Tunes episodes so I put that into my prejudice early in the film. While the movie's plot is surprisingly very TV sit-com, there are a few moments of laughs to be had. Unfortunately, there's not much to recommend this as a timeless movie, but rather a dated comedy that will be lost to most contemporary viewers.

I'm not too familiar with Harold Peary's character Gildersleeve, except that he's turned up in a few movies I've seen. Apparently he was a very popular on radio in it's day. The Great Gildersleeve (1942) was the first of four Gildersleeve films to be released during the war. Your typical B-comedy. Broad and clear comedy, relaying on confusion to fill it's hour of laughs. Quite entertaining, even if I doubt the character will be among my favorites.

They made four Gildersleeve movies during World War II, because apparently at least one studio didn't think that Americans were having a rough enough time with the war as it was that it was necessary to ration entertainment, too.

The plot here feels incredibly thrown together and poorly developed, and that really puts an upper limit on how well this could work. For the most part, that's a pretty low upper limit, and so while there's a few bits of comedy that work, they were pretty spread out and there's a lot of dead time in here.

Maybe this edges itself up to 2 stars, but there's far too much of this that just felt like I was waiting for this to be over because I really didn't feel invested and the issues felt forced.

During the first few minutes I kind of feared I would really dislike The Great Gildersleeve. The laugh, the over the top mannerisms of Harold Peary, the overacting of his co-stars, everything bothered me, but just a few minutes after that this big loudmouth klutz turned that all around and I enjoyed it as if I were a fan of the radio show the character originated on.

Throckmorton P. Gildersleeve is guardian to his niece and nephew, but he needs a woman in his life to get full guardianship, or so Judge Hooker states. That Judge also happens to be the brother of Amelia Hooker, the woman who has Gildersleeve in her sights as a marriage prospect, much to Gildersleeve's…