Throckmorton P. Gildersleeve relates to a W.P.A. employment advisor the story of how he lost the mayorship of the town of Monotony and became a forgotten man: Jed Blower returned to his sixteen member hillbilly family with his business partner Gusty Mann, who convinces the family that they should play their mountain music on the radio. The family moves down the hill to Monotony, where their radio show brings in tourists and improves business for everyone. The Blowers refuse a chance to play in Nashville however, when they return to the mountain to feud with the Beagle family. In the meantime, Gildersleeve has been campaigning for mayor and expects to win, although he treats the townspeople and the residents of the poorhouse ruthlessly. After Gildersleeve thwarts store owner Lester Smoot's attempt to enter the campaign, Jed decides to run for Mayor when he realizes that this would improve his chance of marrying Belinda Watters, who has been pining for a balloonist since he left town years ago. The balloonist returns but does not remember Brenda, and when Jed ousts him, Belinda falls in love with him. The Blowers and the Beagles then call a truce so they can vote for Jed, and he wins by a landslide. The employment advisor decides to give Gildersleeve a job that he believes is perfect for him: as butler at the Monotony poorhouse, where Jed and Belinda marry.

Fast-talking Johnny Campbell works hard as the campaign manager of gubernatorial hopeful Stogie McPhee and uses his verbal talents to persuade Pepper Wilson to marry him if McPhee wins. Pepper is uncertain of Johnny's true character, however, and begins campaigning for McPhee's rival, Gildersleeve, whom she hopes to get elected and thereby nullify her promise to Johnny. The campaign progresses at a furious pace, but the candidates soon realize that they must obtain the support of rural Potts County in order to win. The candidates and their managers travel to Pottsville, the county seat, and arrive in the midst of the county fair celebrations. The local citizens, who abhor politicians, are much more interested in the fair and in the town belle, Lulubelle Tinkle, who is the girl friend of mayor and blacksmith Gunther Potts, than they are in the candidates. Desperate to win both the election and Pepper, Johnny hits upon the scheme to convince Lulubelle and the townsfolk that Lulubelle is McPhee's long-lost daughter, who was kidnapped by gypsies as an infant. The stunt backfires, however, for McPhee has been pontificating about the benefits of his bachelor status. Certain that he is going to lose the election, McPhee makes a deal with Cash Nichols, a tough gangster, who promises to give him a cut of the money he intends to bet on Gildersleeve's victory. McPhee's running mate, Cornelius Simpson, has dropped out of the race, and when Gunther decides to replace him, despite the trick Johnny played on Lulubelle, it suddenly appears as if McPhee will win. McPhee is flabbergasted when he does indeed win the election, and in order to avoid Nichols' vengeful goons, he slips out of town. After Gunther takes over as governor, he is reunited with Lulubelle and uses his new powers to ensure Potts County a new fairgrounds. Meanwhile, Pepper is finally convinced of Johnny's sincerity and agrees to marry him.