Conquest of the Planet of the Apes is a 1972 American scientific film that depicts a future ravaged by a pet-killing disease, humans turn to apes as replacements. Caesar, the intelligent son of teleported apes from the past, grows up a mistreated slave. Witnessing the brutality, Caesar leads his fellow apes in a rebellion against their human oppressors. This revolt sets the stage for a future where apes become the dominant species

Here’s how you can watch and stream Conquest of the Planet of the Apes via streaming services such as Hulu & Starz.

Is Conquest of the Planet of the Apes available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Conquest of the Planet of the Apes is available to watch via streaming on Starz and Hulu.

Decades after a space plague wipes out Earth’s pets, humans enslave apes for labor. Caesar, the intelligent son of telepathic apes from the future, emerges from hiding. Witnessing the cruelty, Caesar ignites a rebellion, leading the oppressed chimps, gorillas, and orangutans in a fight for freedom.

The movie features Roddy McDowall as Caesar, Don Murray as Governor Breck, Ricardo Montalbán as Armando, Natalie Trundy as Lisa and Hari Rhodes as MacDonald.

Watch Conquest of the Planet of the Apes streaming via Hulu

Conquest of the Planet of the Apes is available to watch on Hulu.

Hulu is a leading online streaming platform that allows users to watch tv shows, movies via paid subscription.

You can watch via Hulu by following these steps:

Go to Hulu.com/welcome

Select ‘Start Your Free Trial’

Choose a plan:

$7.99 per month or $79.99 per year (With Ads)

$17.99 per month (No Ads)

Hulu (With Ads) is the cheapest option, providing users access to Hulu’s streaming library with commercials. Hulu (No Ads) is the service’s premium option, providing access to its library without any advertisements. There are also several bundles available with Hulu that pair the service with Disney Plus and ESPN Plus, along with Live TV plans that also include many live TV channels.

Watch Conquest of the Planet of the Apes streaming via Starz

Conquest of the Planet of the Apes is available to watch on Starz.

Starz is an online streaming platform that you can use to watch movies and tv series.

You can watch via Starz by following these steps:

Go to Starz.com’s sign-up page.

Select either the six-month plan or the monthly plan

The standard rate for the six-month plan is $46, excluding any special offers

The standard for the monthly plan is $9.99 per month, excluding any special offers

Starz is also available as a Prime Video Channel, meaning that subscribers to the Amazon Prime Video service can also receive discounted access to Starz. The discounts offered vary throughout the year. You can sign up here.

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

All Her Fault: Sarah Snook to Star In & Produce Peacock Thriller Emmy and Golden Globe winner Sarah Snook will star in All Her Fault, a brand new thriller for Peacock that… TV Anthony Nash 9 hours ago Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban Forever Changed the Series Remember the good old days when a new Harry Potter movie or book arrived seemingly every year to provide us… Movies Jeff Ames 10 hours ago The Mandela Effect Phenomenon Trailer Sets Release Date for Documentary The Mandela Effect Phenomenon trailer for Uncork’d Entertainment’s forthcoming documentary film has been released. The video highlights popular theories surrounding… Movies Maggie Dela Paz 10 hours ago Spike Lee’s High and Low Remake With Denzel Washington Wraps Production Spike Lee’s remake of High and Low starring Denzel Washington has wrapped production. On Instagram, Lee’s official account announced a… Movies Brandon Schreur 10 hours ago