Conductor and composer Stephen Barlow’s No 1 String Quartet followed by Brahms No 1 String Quartet in C Minor Op51 thrilled a packed audience at the Rye Creative Centre last week.

Bridgepoint Ensemble concerts are enhanced by historical and anecdotal insights about the programme given by director Tom Elliott and his musicians. Brahms we heard was apparently plagued by doubt and intimidated by the work of brilliant composers who had gone before him while writing his 1st string quartet. Beethoven had written sixteen string quartets by that time which were regarded as the pinnacle of the form. It seems Brahms made twenty attempts over a period of eight years before finally allowing his very first quartet to be published.

Stephen Barlow also expressed humility in the service of great chamber music which preceded the world premier of his own String Quartet No 1, a two movement work performed by these four exceptionally talented musicians in the Bridgepoint Ensemble.

Mathilde and Nicky are both prize winning violinists, performing with international orchestras and in festivals around the world. Mathilde has been praised by The Strad for her “perfect intonation shaping and colouring nailing each new stylistic and emotional universe”.

Nicky has led the Irish Chamber Orchestra on major tours in South America, Europe and the USA and loves playing different kinds of music including recordings for TV, film and pop including live shows with Stevie Wonder.

Fiona is associate principal viola of the Academy of St Martin in the Fields and principal viola of the City of London Sinfonia. She performs regularly for films and television, collaborates with dancers in the Mathew Bourne dance company and enjoys coaching young viola players from the National Youth Orchestra.

Katherine is recognised as one of the UK’s leading cellists, specialising in solo and chamber music. She performs as recitalist and concerto soloist throughout Europe, in Africa, Asia and the USA. In contemporary music she has been invited to make recordings with exceptional modern composers including Oliver Davis, Richard Allain as well as a world premiere of a new chamber version of Elgar’s Cello Concerto. Katherine plays on a 1703 Italian cello by Taningard.

As a “lay listener” and very appreciative audience member I felt the full gamut of emotions during this romantic winter evening: intense, turbulent, restrained, pensive, melancholic, sad, breathlessly energetic, sentimental, romantic, lyrical, wistful, sweet and gentle.

Grateful thanks to everyone involved in giving us such an emotional musical treat.

I am looking forward to Saturday, March 18 at 6:30pm when the Bridgepoint Ensemble returns to the Rye Creative Centre with some special guests for a programme of Mozart, Saint Saens, Ravel and Rousell.

Book tickets £25 each (under 18s free) free parking plus charity bar www.ryecreativecentre.co.uk.

Image Credits: Bridgepoint Ensemble .