Citation preview

American Science Fiction and the Cold Gold War

American Science Fiction and the Cold War Literature and Film

David Seed

E D I N B U R G H U N I V E R S I T Y PRESS

© David Seed, 1999 Edinburgh University Press 2 2 George Square, Edinburgh Transferred to digital print 2006 Typeset in Monotype Apollo by Koinonia, Bury, and Printed and bound by CPI Antony Rowe, Eastbourne

A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN-10 1 85331 227 4 ISBN-13 978 1 85331 227 4

ISBN 978 1 4744 7248 7 (EPDF)

The right of David Seed to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 .

Contents

Acknowledgements

vi

Introduction Postwar Jeremiads: Philip Wylie and Leo Szilard Variations on a Patriotic Theme: Robert A. Heinlein History and Apocalypse in Poul Anderson Views from the Hearth Cultures of Surveillance Take-Over Bids; Frederik Pohl and Cyril Kornbluth

1 14 28 40 53 68 82

VII The Russians Have Come VIII Embodying the Arms Race: Bernard Wolfe's Limbo IX The Cold War Computerised

94 107 119

X XI XII XIII XIV

Conspiracy Narratives Absurdist Visions: Dr. Strangelove in Context The Signs of War: Walter M. Miller and Russell Hoban In the Aftermath The Star Wars Debate

132 145 157 168 181

Bibliography Index

194 212

I II III IV V VI

Acknowledgem ents

Grateful thanks are given to the following for their help during this project: Poul Anderson, Paul Boyer, Ray Bradbury, Paul Brians, David Brin, John Clute, Chandler Davis, M. J. Engh, Jack Finney, H. Bruce Franklin, Charles Gannon, Russell Hoban, Dean Ing, David Karp, Judith Merril, Frederik Pohl, Jerry Pournelle, Kim Stanley Robinson, Mordecai Roshwald, Andy Sawyer, William J. Scheick, George Slusser, Albert E. Stone, Lorna Toolis, and Daniel L. Zins. I acknowledge the invaluable release from teaching to complete this book from an ahrb award and a fellowship from the Leverhulme Trust. Finally a special debt of gratitude to my wife Joanna for her unwavering encouragement and support at every stage of this project.

Introduction

(1) The Cold War was a metaphor. As soon as the label was applied to material conditions it carried entailments for subsequent designa­ tions of the postwar scene. Generally dated from a 1947 speech by Bernard Baruch ('we are in the midst of a cold war') and then popularised by the journalist Walter Lippmann (see Goldman 1960: 60), the phrase had been used as early as October 1945 by George Orwell whose article 'You and the Atom Bomb' foresaw a situation of armed paralysis, of hostility that could never develop into overt combat with a superstate 'at once unconquerable and in a permanent state of "cold war" with its neighbours'. Orwell mistakenly assumed that the atomic bomb would stay too costly to mass-produce, but shrewdly found early signs of a status quo that could only be described paradoxically as a 'peace that is no peace' (Orwell 1970: 26). Once put into circulation the two terms in 'cold war' came to imply that 'two mutually exclusive political systems were frozen in ideological place' and that politics could only be conducted as conflicts where victory became the 'only means of resolution' (Hinds and Windt 1991: 219). Examination of political speeches for covert messages has led one commentator to argue that the us perception of the Cold War was structured around key metaphors, like the analogy between the Soviet Union and 'dangerous predators' (Medhurst et al. 1990: 74). Such metaphors carried their own narrative with them —here primarily of attack —which postwar science fiction repeatedly actualised. The 1954 film Them!, for instance, picks up the double metaphor of ants-as-monsters and ants-as-people to dramatise the unpredictability of the Bomb and fears of Communist attack. Radiation from the White Sands testing ground has produced gigantic mutant ants who threaten centres of civilisation like Los Angeles. They are thus 'spawned' by the Bomb but also embody a

perception of Communist society. An expert in the film virtually draws the analogy for us when he explains: 'Ants are the only creatures on Earth other than man who make war. They campaign; they are chronic aggressors; and they make slave labourers of the captives they don't kill'. So when the military moves into action against the ants it is no surprise that a journalist asks 'has the Cold War gotten hot?' The question opens up one way of viewing the narrative as a battle between the usa and Communist aggressors encoded as a monster fantasy, and the film was no isolated instance. The novelist Poul Anderson figured the Communist millennium as 'humanity turned into an ant-hill' and Norman Spinrad concluded The Iron Dream (1972) with a description of an empire resembling the Soviet Union as the 'end-product of Communist ideology —an anthill of mindless slaves presided over by a ruthless hierarchy'.1 These examples, taken from fictional and non-fictional sources, suggest that science fiction novels and films are not producing arbitrary fantasy but rather reworking key metaphors and narra­ tives already circulating in the culture. Hayden White has argued that historical and fictional discourses have common aspects in narratives that transmit 'messages about the nature of a shared reality'. At any given historical moment there exists an 'enormous number of kinds of narratives that every culture disposes for those of its members who might wish to draw upon them for the encodation and transmission of messages' (White 1987: 41). These narratives are formed through a process White labels the 'tropics of discourse', by which he means the meta­ phorical and related strategies employed by historian and novelist alike to fashion a 'comprehensible totality' from their materials (White 1978: 2, 125). White's argument is broader than that of Lakoff and Johnson (Lakoff and Johnson 1980) on metaphor, although both coincide in demonstrating that metaphor and other rhetorical devices play an integral part in how we structure our concepts. Being less tied to prescriptive conventions of represen­ tation than realism, science fiction can defamiliarise metaphors of the times by rendering them as concrete metonyms. Thus Bernard Wolfe depicts the arms race as a bizarre form of athletics in Limbo and Nick Boddie Williams transforms the Iron Curtain metaphor into an atomic curtain in his 1956 novel of that title, a curtain which now screens postholocaust America, not the Soviet bloc.2 In these and similar cases the fiction uses narrative to interrogate the key metaphors within Cold War discourse. White bridges the gap between factual material and fiction by arguing that both draw on a common pool of narratives and images

circulating in the culture. For example, in February 1957 James W. Deer addressed the controversy on civil defence in the pages of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists where he extrapolated a sequence of races from 1945 into the near future of fission (A) bombs, fusion (H) bombs, icbms, and finally an 'international race for shelter'. Deer foresaw the construction of self-sufficient underground 'city-states' which would house most of the population. His account did not demonstrate planning so much as a confirmation that humanity was performing to a script: The play has begun, and we are the actors. The end is implicit from the nature of the beginning. Within the framework of fusion bombs, guided missiles, and shelters, there is nothing we can do but go ahead and play out our part in the preordained ritual. (Deer 1957: 67) The following year James Blish's novel A Case of Conscience incorporated Deer's propositions. Here an arms race has indeed led to a shelter race and massive underground complexes. However, Blish makes explicit what is only a suggestion in Deer: that these complexes resemble tombs not refuges: 'the planet would be a mausoleum for the living from now until the Earth itself perished' (Blish 1963: 97). Secondly Deer's fatalism is explicitly protested, but by a figure from another planet who renounces the 'Shelter state' declaring his right to be a 'citizen of no country but that bounded by the limits of [his] own mind' (Blish 1963: 168). Blish applies Deer's perception of ritual through a party (performance) where the guests travel around on trains (i.e. according to preordained 'tracks'). And lastly, Blish exploits the traditional topography of the unconscious to demonstrate a collective neurotic unrest simmering 'underneath the apparent conformity'. Blish's novel supplies an unusually direct instance of non-fictional debate feeding into fictional imagery but such connections will recur throughout this period. The one overriding issue was that of nuclear war which raises particular difficulties of realisation as a subject. (ii) Derrida and the Nuclear Subject

In the summer of 1984 the journal Diacritics brought out a special number designed to found a new school of post-structuralist analysis called 'Nuclear Criticism', which was to examine 'all the forms of nuclear discourse'. A start was made on this programme

with discussions of the contradictions within deterrence and the relation between the nuclear and the tradition of the sublime (Fergusson 1984), but the centrepiece of the issue was an essay by Derrida ('No Apocalypse, Not Now (Full Speed Ahead, Seven Missiles, Seven Missives')) in which he bombards the reader with a number of propositions, the most important of which for present purposes are three dealing with the nuclear referent, specialism and literary representation.3 Derrida argues that nuclear war would be an event without precedent bringing the 'total and remainderless destruction of the archive'; and then he puts forward his central point: 'the terrifying reality of the nuclear conflict can only be the signified referent, never the real referent (present or past) of a discourse or a text' (Derrida 1984: 23). Nuclear war thus takes on a 'fabulous textuality' since it only exists 'through what is said of it' and, since they cannot be known in advance, the views of 'experts' become merely opinion. Derrida carefully retains the real as the starting point for his formulation, but runs the risk of substituting one kind of specialism for another. Ken Ruthven has accordingly insisted that it is crucial to 'preserve the nuclear referent and to resist efforts to textualise it out of existence' (Ruthven 1993: 174). More elaborately J. Fisher Solomon has argued for including the process of becoming within referentiality, proposing an 'objective reality of empirical potentiality' (Solomon 1990: 63) to counter Derrida's stark opposition between science and belief. If Derrida is redefining rather than denying the nuclear referent, one effect of his argument is to raise the status of literature.4 For if nuclear war can only be approached speculatively, then literature — and particularly science fiction - can occupy a space equal to sociological, strategic and other modes of speculation. Paradox­ ically, even as he is opening up a literary subject, Derrida turns his back on nuclear fiction in a gesture of conservatism by citing Modernists like Mallarmé, Kafka and Joyce as being more relevant to the nuclear age. He thereby ignores the massive corpus of fiction listed in Paul Brians's pioneering and indispensable Nuclear Holo­ causts (1987), for if nuclear war is as important as Derrida recognises, then this fiction should be attended to and the literary canon re-examined (cf. Zins 1990). In fact this very fiction confirms Derrida's thesis on the unusually elusive nature of the nuclear subject by showing again and again a collective suppression of the dreaded event which is often signalled pronominally quite simply as 'it'. The recurrence of secret underground locations suggests a representation through images of the suppressed. James Agee's 1946 sketch 'Dedication Day' (Agee 1972), for example, describes a

surface celebration of technological triumph while beneath the surface workers, including survivors from Hiroshima and Nagasaki, labour over the 'Eternal Fuse'. This topographical separation has been read as spatialising the same ambivalence of American attitudes to the Bomb (Boyer 1994: 244) which informs Nick Boddie Williams's The Day They H-Bombed Los Angeles (1961). Here the 'they' of the title proves to be the USA itself and the true enemy other Americans who are being transformed into predatory animals. The agent of this change is a giant, expansive protein molecule created by the Pacific H-bomb tests and washed on to American shores as plasma. The narrative therefore has a circularity in so far as H-bombs are being used to eradicate the mutants caused by the bomb in the first place and not, as one character assumes, by 'them damned dirty Commies'. The bomb's value as a weapon is counter­ balanced by the threat of its effects getting out of control. Granted that nuclear war poses a special problem of expression, Derrida's insistence on foregrounding the 'strategic manoeuvers' of discourse to 'assimilate that assimilable wholly other' (Derrida 1984: 28) rightly directs us to pay attention to the narrative and stylistic procedures followed in attempts at describing such an event. Peter Schwenger's Letter Bomb (1992) follows this lead in skilfully demonstrating the twists, turns, and deferrals of nuclear texts which, for example, follow a circular time-sequence: 'Predicting a future, we ... find ourselves turned back to the past, which is our present, and our present task to interpret' (Schwenger 1992: 10). Derrida's warning of the elusiveness of the nuclear subject can already be seen in H. G. Wells's The World Set Free (1914), a precursor narrative which both alarmed physicist Leo Szilard with its depiction of nuclear war and also suggested to him the possibility of a chain reaction he was to apply in the planning of the first atomic bomb (Lanouette 1992: 107, 134). Wells's account of nuclear attack is problematised at its centre: 'It is a remarkable thing', the narrator reports, 'that no complete contemporary account of the explosion of the atomic bombs survives. There are of course innumerable allusions and partial records, and it is from these that subsequent ages must piece together the image of these devastations' (Wells 1988: 137). The result is a patchwork of specu­ lation and rumour because Wells shrewdly notes that survivors' trauma would lead them to suppress memories of their experience. Wells sets a pattern which will recur throughout the Cold War where representational difficulty regularly makes the nuclear subject metafictional. We can see this process at work in Roger Zelazny's Damnation Alley (1969) where a major textual disruption

temporarily suspends the narrative of a journey across post­ holocaust America made by an alienated lone biker as he takes medical supplies from California to Boston. The landscape he traverses confronts him with increasingly fabulous monsters (mutations, giant bats), but before he reaches his destination Zelazny suspends the narrative to describe a 'setting without plot or characters', inviting the reader to 'frame' it with a chosen title. Through a single sentence extending for more than two pages Zelazny evokes a nuclear apocalypse written across Nature where the transformation of elements expresses itself through alternative propositions ('perhaps it takes fire from the hot spots where the cobalt bombs fell and, of course, perhaps not also') which ultimately elude coherence: 'it just doesn't seem that any name will fit'.5 As language slips off a stable referent it seems that the subject escapes. (iii) Nuclear Ultimacy

Derrida installs his discourse of ultimacy ('absolute', 'irreversible', 'total', etc.) through the premise of the 'uniqueness of an ultimate event' whose very uniqueness collapses the distinction between belief and science. It makes no sense to Derrida for anyone to claim any special expertise on nuclear war because no precedent exists which would underpin such expertise. What about Hiroshima and Nagasaki? one might object. Not so, Derrida replies: 'The explosion of American bombs in 1945 ended a "classical", conventional war; it did not set off a nuclear war' (Derrida 1984: 23). In this amazingly categorical statement Derrida ignores the continuing debate over how to 'narrativise' these two events (to speed Japanese surrender or to warn the Soviets of America's new technology?). These events are used throughout the postwar period to measure the possible destruction of a nuclear war. The latter's grim iconography (clothes patterns imprinted on bodies, eyes turned to jelly, the shadows of atomised victims imprinted on walls, etc.) all derives from 1945, particularly from John Hersey's reportage narrative Hiroshima (1946).6 The 1984 issue of Diacritics devotes considerable space to Jonathan Schell's The Fate of the Earth (1982) which attempts to describe a full-scale holocaust and attacks the Reagan administration's nuclear brinkmanship. There are, however, important differences between Schell and Derrida which emerge if we backtrack to a key contribution to the nuclear debate, Herman Kahn's Thinking about the Unthinkable (1962), which set out to attack the pessimism of

Nevil Shute's On the Beach. His declared target was fear: 'Either they ["many people"] are afraid of where the thinking will lead them or they are afraid of thinking at all' (Kahn 1962: 27). Kahn confronted this situation with a determination to introduce an analytical rigour which would have been congenial to Derrida. In practice this resulted in an abstracted emphasis on technology and international politics, so Kahn's claim of strategic expertise then would be part of the 'science' which Derrida rejects as spurious. In contrast, both Kahn and Schell view nuclear war as a variety of scenarios, not a single instance (Kahn discusses 'war surviving' situations); and Schell further describes nuclear war as a process not a discrete event. Admittedly taking the worstcase scenario, Schell argues from a premise of ecological and social holism that the Earth and human society form a single system whose delicate balance will be unpredictably disrupted by a nuclear war, constructing an argument from scientific reports and speculation which exemplifies before the fact Derrida's blurring of science and belief. But if nuclear war is the unknown limit case, then the proposition itself that it is a total unique event becomes a matter of belief, a conviction of probability. Derrida's insistence on ultimacy forms part of his view of nuclear war as an ending, but here again Cold War narratives problematise the concept and make it into part of their subject. Thus an early film of the making of the atomic bomb was entitled The Beginning or the End (1947) while a later pulp movie about radiation producing gigantic grasshoppers was called The Beginning of the End (1957). The eschatology of science fiction narratives of the period (con­ textualised in W. Warren Wagar's Terminal Visions, 1982) revolves around the possibility of survival of course, but also around the story of that survival. The narrator of Stuart Cloete's 'The Blast' (1947), for instance, begins his account of nuclear attack after his assumption has passed that he is the sole survivor. The attack 'was what might be called the last real event in history. I seem to be in the interesting position of having survived history, of being history itself' (Conklin 1954: 12). The temporary impression of being history collapses together his self-perceptions as subject and object. Only the discovery of other survivors gives him an impetus to narrate and in the process changes his subject. When he is taken up by a band of American Indians he reflects that he has completed his 'story of the end of the white man's world'.7 Cloete's awareness of what sort of narratives might articulate the nuclear aftermath is echoed much later by Bernard Malamud's Robinsonnade God's Grace (1982). This time the sole survivor is one Calvin Cohn, his

name combining ironic suggestions of predestination and priestly election, who attempts to reenact stories from Western culture on an island where his sole companions are apes. The latter perform — literally 'ape' - the role of humans in recapitulating the story of Abraham and Isaac, even simulating human speech. The apes' final loss of speech seems to indicate the end of civilisation (Schwenger 1992: 80), but here again the ending is not final. Though the novel closes with Cohn's impending death, a chronological beyond has been opened up, albeit tentatively, by the line 'maybe tomorrow the world to come?' and in the non-specific other presence implicit within the third-person narrator. It seems then that nuclear narratives refuse ultimate endings. As the novelist Algis Budrys states, 'even its [science fiction's] most dedicatedly ingenious tales of apparently unremitting cataclysm must, by the nature of the prose, include a narrative presence of some sort —an actual character, or at least the author's voice' (Budrys 1986: 45). Richard Klein does not express this issue as a question of voice but rather locates a 'ghostly survival' in the 'position from which one anticipatorily contemplates the end, utter nuclear devastation, from a standpoint beyond the end, from a posthumous, apocalyptic perspective of future mourning' (Klein 1990: 77). Such narratives might play with contradiction like the 1955 film The Day the World Ended which opens with the 'Total Destruction' day of nuclear war, proceeds to reduce the term 'total', and concludes with a shot entitled 'The Beginning' as a man and woman straighten their rucksacks and march into the post-holocaust future. (iv) Science Fiction as Social Criticism

The unique urgencies of the Cold War, and particularly fear of nuclear war, affected writers' perceptions of the changed status of science fiction. Asimov dated the shift precisely: 'The dropping of the atomic bomb in 1945 made science fiction respectable'. Similarly James Gunn: 'from that moment on thoughtful men and women recognised that we were living in a science fiction world'. Indeed by the mid-1960s news reports of rockets and nuclear weapons had become so routine that for James Blish they challenged the novelist's imagination.8 Certainly science fiction was so quick to engage with nuclear war that by 1952 H. L. Gold, the editor of Galaxy, was com­ plaining about how many stories 'still nag away at atomic, hydrogen and bacteriological war, the post-atomic world, reversion to barbarism, mutant children ... world dictatorships, problems of

survival wearily turned over to women, war, more war, and still more war' (Gold 1952: 2). Despite the stifling effects of the McCarthy years many novelists took justifiable pride in the way 'science fiction became the vehicle for social criticism' (Davenport 1964: 102). So declared Robert Bloch in a lecture series on this very topic delivered at the University of Chicago in 1957.9 This study will contend throughout that science fiction novelists made constant interventions in the debates that were raging throughout the Cold War on such matters as civil defence, foreign policy and internal security. Above all these issues loomed the threat of nuclear war which gave an added urgency to this fictional representation. Here, paradoxically, the latter's power is deployed towards a realisation which will 'put off the day' (Dowling 1987: 86). These narratives perform a role of negative prophecy where dreaded outcomes are envisaged and therefore hopefully deferred, in such a way that the reader is induced to ponder on present signs of disaster. How to decipher such signs can be a complex problem. Murray Leinster's Operation Terror (1962) appears to be using the timehonoured narrative of alien invasion when reports start leaking out of a 'paralysis beam' from a landed ufo , operated either by monsters or by men.10 If men, it must be a 'cold war device'; and if it is not the Americans, there is only one other conceivable country respon­ sible. But there is a third possibility, only discovered at the end: the United States knew the Soviets were finalising such a weapon and manufactured the ufo story so that the Americans would be seen as protectors. 'This was an attempt to fight the last war on earth in disguise' (Leinster 1968: 147). The 'theatre of war' revolves around not combat but the circulation of information. The wartime restrictions on any material relating to the Bomb which had led to the arrest of the writer Clive Cartmell in 1944 (see Berger 1984) had if anything become even tighter as the postwar security state took shape. Kris Neville's 'Cold War' (1949) defines the status quo through an absolute imperative of secrecy. When a journalist stumbles across a story about the neuroses of Space Station commanders he is gunned down by the secret service because the issue was 'too big to protect by normal, democratic procedures' (Campbell 1952: 411). In a lighter vein William Tenn parodies institutional secrecy in 'Project Hush' when an army team land on the Moon and discover a dome built —not by aliens —but by the 'goddam United States Navy' (Tenn 1956: 219). Secrecy often legitimates the reification of characters so that they become indis­ tinguishable from the information they carry. So C. M. Kornbluth's teenage physics genius in 'Gomez' (1954) is classified as a 'weapon'

by Atomic Energy Commission Intelligence.11 The restrictions on information explain the intended appeal of the stories in William Sambrot's Island of Fear (1963) which purport to be secret reports from different government agencies, giving the reader an illusion of insider knowledge on the space race and nuclear research labora­ tories. Postwar science fiction demonstrates again and again the ways in which secrecy becomes institutionalised in mechanisms of control. Two of the most powerful treatments of this issue, Wilson Tucker's Wild Talent (1954) and Algis Budrys's Who? (1958) dramatise the failure of the state to contain its subject. In the first, a telepath Paul Breen is brought in by the American secret service to detect espionage routes. Finally shot because uncontrollable, Breen's treat­ ment by the authorities is a 'mixture of exploitation and anxiety [which] mirrors reactions to the A-bomb itself' (Shippey 1979: 106). Who? pursues the logic of security processes to their ultimate impasse. Lucas Martino, an American scientist working on a topsecret project, is taken to an East German clinic after a near-fatal accident at his plant near the border. The novel opens with Western agents awaiting his return. To their amazement Martino has been rebuilt so extensively that he resembles a robot with an all-metal head. From then onwards his identity becomes an open enigma. Every hypothesis can be reversed: a recurring nightmare might show memories of what 'they' did to him, or anticipate his fear of the Americans. In other words, Martino might be a 'plant'. The tropes of physical investigation ('dig deeper', 'pull this thing apart', etc.) lead nowhere. As in Curt Siodmak's science fiction thrillers, like Hauser's Memory (1968) where the r n a of a defecting scientist is used to access his memory, the human subject and information become identified, while the latter remains elusive. In Budrys's novel we are told: 'The war was in all the world's filing cabinets. The weapon was information' (Budrys 1964: 6). The narratives just considered do not fit the label of science fiction as 'futuristic' in any straightforward way and most of the works discussed in this study will turn out to be set in com­ paratively near futures with some internal examination of what changes brought about the new state of affairs. These futures, in Fredric Jameson's words, 'serve the ... function of transforming our own present into the determinate past of something yet to come' (Jameson 1982: 152). Whether the narratives estrange the reader from the present by the introduction of 'novums' or whether they use a chronologically more distant method of 'future retrospect', the focus here will fall primarily on how American science fiction

deals with the overlapping issues of nuclear war, the rise of totalitarianism and fears of invasion.12 The result will demonstrate the fine responsiveness of fiction and film to a whole range of social, technological and political changes taking place during the Cold War. (v) Cold War Criticism

Although the special number of Diacritics hardly triggered a new critical school it did help to develop 'nuclear criticism', in the lower case, to adopt a distinction by Ken Ruthven whose own Nuclear Criticism (1993) remains an excellent introduction to the subject. The earliest monograph in this area was David Dowling's Fictions of Nuclear Disaster (1987) which gives priority to the apocalyptic paradigm and opens a discussion of how writers 'attempt to locate the experience of nuclear disaster by surrounding the inexpressible with verbal strategies' (Dowling 1987: 13-14). Special issues on nuclear war were produced by the Northwest Review (1984) and Science-Fiction Studies (July 1986), the latter edited by H. Bruce Franklin whose War Stars (1988) remains an invaluable history of the superweapon in the American imagination. Martha A. Bartter's The Way to Ground Zero (also 1988) provides a useful thematic survey of treatments of the atomic bomb in American fiction. 1988 finally saw the foundation of the journal Nuclear Texts and Contexts which continues to provide a crucial forum for critical debate. Thomas Hill Schaub's American Fiction in the Cold War (1991) proposes a paradigm shift from thirties radicalism to a postwar 'liberal narrative' of disillusionment where writers shy away from partisan politics. Schaub limits his discussion to realist fiction, but his study reflects a general critical revision of writers like Flannery O'Connor and Sylvia Plath. Even literary criticism itself has been historicised by Tobin Siebers who accuses critical schools of shadowing the policies of different us administrations and who argues that the Cold War has 'introduced a model of the selfconscious critic whose greatest desire is to deny his or her own agency in the world' (Siebers 1993: 34). In addition to booklength studies two further collections have been published on nuclear literature. The Winter 1990 special number of Papers on Language and Literature focuses more tightly on literature than the comparable issue of Diacritics but adopts a critical pluralism since, in the words of the editor William J. Scheick, nuclear criticism is a 'polymorphous ethical mode of

critical enquiry' based on the imperative to preserve life. Scheick and other critics figure also in Nancy Anisfield's 1991 collection on nuclear war literature, The Nightmare Considered. Arne Axelsson's Restrained Response (1990) surveys post-1945 American war fiction but uses a constraining realist model, whereas Patrick Mannix (The Rhetoric of Antinuclear Fiction, 1992) applies the Aristotelian modes of rhetorical appeal - ethical, rational, and emotional - to produce an account valuable for identifying spokespersons and the nature of debate in the fiction. Of the two more recent studies, Albert E. Stone's Literary Aftershocks (1994) discusses clusters of works including children's fiction and poetry to demonstrate 'literature's power as social instrument of information and indoctrination' (Stone 1994: xvi), whereas continuing the line of post-structural analysis Alan Nadel's Containment Culture (1995) cross-relates an impressive range of cultural texts from Playboy to diplomatic dispatches. Subjecting these works to sophisticated scrutiny, Nadel focuses his study on the trope of containment which is shown to conceal a duality of perspectives towards the bomb and related issues. To conclude this brief survey, two works deserve special mention for the breadth of their scholarship which makes them essential reading for Cold War culture. Paul Boyer's By the Bomb's Early Light (1985, 1994) gives an astonishingly thorough 'thick description' of American responses to the Bomb within the first postwar decade and has been consulted at every stage of this study. And Spencer R. Weart's Nuclear Fear (1988) documents the whole postwar period, examining its topic through 'images', a notion broad enough for Weart to negotiate between motif and discourse. Like Paul Brians, Weart demonstrates that fear of doomsday, superweapons, etc. predates 1945 and that the Cold War was reinforcing already existing imagery. This study will attempt a balance between close textual analysis and the historicism proposed by Hayden White and others. It will examine primarily us science fiction from 1945 up to the 1980s in a series of chapters which focus on individual authors or themes and which follows an approximate chronology up to the period of the Star Wars controversy. Each chapter will raise issues - the role of the home, operative metaphors, and so on - which are not unique to that material but which could be applied to the fiction discussed in other chapters. Space limitations have inevitably restricted coverage of topics like Vietnam, as well as the number of films covered.13

Notes

1. Anderson 1972: 89; Spinrad 1974: 252. In Thermonuclear War Anderson described the aim of Communism similarly: 'man is to be turned into a kind of ant' (Anderson 1963a: 111). Cf. Biskind 1983: 123, 132. 2. Cf. the author's note: 'It was written at the time we were debating the setting up of a fixed line far out from our shores (the Taft plan, the Hoover idea)' (Williams 1956:1). 3. For a point-by-point discussion of Derrida see Ruthven 1993: 71-8. 4. Christopher Norris glosses Derrida as follows: he recognises 'that nuclear "reality" is entirely made up of those speech-acts, inventions and projected scenarios which constitute our present knowledge of the future (unthinkable) event' (Norris 1995: 241-2); and continues that literature preserves its value by being performative (ibid.: 246). Jean Baudrillard's related diagnosis of the 'hyperreality' of nuclear culture is discussed in Messmer 1988b: 399— 402. 5. Zelazny 1973: 145. For critical commentary on Zelazny see Morrissey 1986: 182-91. 6. For discussion of Hersey see Nadel 1995: 53—67 and Ruthven 1993: 35-40. 7. Conklin 1954: 64. Cloete anchors his narrative to the 1946 Bikini tests: 'it was, if one had been clever enough to see it, the beginning of the end' (ibid.: 26). 8. Asimov 1970: 93; Gunn 1975: 174; Blish 1965: 184. 9. The other speakers were Alfred Bester, Robert Heinlein and C. M. Kornbluth. 10. Leinster published one of the earliest accounts of a nuclear attack on America (The Murder of the USA, 1946), the reprisal for which estab­ lishes a Pax Americana. Leinster's 1945 story 'First Contact' about an encounter with an alien spacecraft achieved the rare privilege of being critiqued in Soviet science fiction. Ivan Yefremov described it as exemplifying a 'war ideology' in 'The Heart of the Serpent' (1961). 11. It was exactly this use of youth which John Hersey's The Child Buyer (1960) protested. The panicky search for potential scientists in the wake of the 1957 Sputnik launch 'as if children were to be somehow instruments of our power' led Hersey to construct a narrative as a hearing into this conspiracy against the nation's youth (Hersey inter­ view. Columbia, mo: American Audio Prose Library). 12. The 'novum' is a term denoting a deviation from the reader's implied notion of reality applied in Suvin 1979. 13. For discussion of Vietnam see Franklin 1998; 165-86; for film criticism see Biskind 1983, Sayre 1982 and Shaheen 1978.

1

Postwar Jeremiads: Philip W ylie and Leo Szilard

The blame for Armageddon lies on man (Philip Wylie 1942)

(I)

All the narratives examined in this volume are warnings, envisag­ ing a future whose imaginative representations, it is hoped, will prevent it from materialising. This chapter will examine primarily the works of the best-selling author Philip Wylie (1902-71) viewed as an example of the jeremiad genre which by the modern period had become inverted into an 'anti-jeremiad', which deploys a 'doomsday vision' through the 'denunciation of all ideals, sacred and secular, on the grounds that America is a lie' (Bercovitch 1978: 194, 191)- Such a description fits Wylie's oeuvre. The son of a Presbyterian minister, Wylie rejected orthodox Christianity in favour of the role of spokesman for cherished national ideals which he felt were lapsing. He described his wartime indictment of the national character, Generation of Vipers (1942), as a 'miscellaneous Jeremiad', attacking American materialism, hypocrisy and —most importantly as a prediction of postwar developments —the creation of a dictatorship in the USA (Wylie 1942: 305). Wylie first achieved fame through two collaborations with Edwin Balmer, When Worlds Collide (1933) and After Worlds Collide (1934). The first of these describes the discovery of two planets hurtling towards Earth, the one set on a collision course, the other offering a chance of salvation in appearing habitable. The novel combines the story of Noah with apocalypse so that the old world is destroyed and a saving remnant is conveyed by spaceship (the 'Ark') to the new planet in a combination of spiritual will, national destiny and technological know-how. The sequel, however, brings this triumph into question when the pioneers discover that another rocket from Earth has landed with a band of Russians, Germans and Japanese determined

to set up a Soviet. The new planet now becomes the site for an ideological and territorial struggle between freedom and despotism, a clear anticipation of Cold War rivalries. As one character explains, 'they were sworn ... to set up their own government —to wipe out all who might oppose them. It is not even a government like that of Russia. It is ruthless, inhuman —a travesty of socialism, a sort of scientific fanaticism' (Wylie and Balmer 1970: 92). From the end of the war up to the mid-fifties Wylie was involved with government nuclear policy in a whole range of areas. After serving with the Office of War Information he was invited to report on the Hiroshima bombing, a report which in the event was carried out by the journalist William L. Laurence. He served as special adviser to the Chairman of the Joint Committee for Atomic Energy and was given a Q (i.e. maximum) security clearance so that, again at government request, he could attend the Desert Rock A-bomb tests and brief publishers on the implications of the atomic age.1 And finally he served as consultant to the Federal Civil Defence Authority whose perceived inertia led him to write the novel Tomorrow!. All of these roles were related to each other by the looming shadow of the Bomb, which Wylie was convinced had induced a national neurosis of suppressed fear. He revelled in the charge that he was an alarmist, claiming: 'I have done my best to create alarm about the Atom Bomb —a certain kind of alarm'.2 Wylie fought consistently against a superficial optimism over the nuclear age and polemicised on behalf of supplying the public with inform­ ation, however unwelcome. One of his more extreme proposals was to mount a series of public displays to acquaint the public with nuclear casualties from burns to decapitation. There is no evidence that this suggestion was acted on. The Cold War then for Wylie was defined through one prevail­ ing emotion. 'We live in a midnight imposed by fear - a time like all dark ages', he declared in his memoir Opus 21 (Wylie 1949: 256). And four years later he stressed the unique capacity of science fiction to engage with that fear. In 'Science Fiction and Sanity in an Age of Crisis' Wylie railed against pulp science fiction for pro­ ducing 'wild adventure, wanton genocide on alien planets, gigantic destruction and a piddling phantasmagoria of wanton nonsense' (Bretnor 1953: 234). It was only a few writers like Wells, Olaf Stapledon and Aldous Huxley who address the reader's mind. Science fiction should incorporate 'logical extrapolations from existing laws and scientific hypotheses' into tales 'with the hope of a subjective integration to match the integrated knowledge we have of the outer world' (Bretnor 1953: 239).

Throughout his postwar career Wylie attempted to realise this role by attacking two targets: national self-delusion and Commun­ ism. His unwavering hostility to Communism had an unusually personal basis. With his stepbrother he visited the Soviet Union in 1936, travelling as far as the Caucasus where they both rashly expressed their determination to report on the repression, poverty and suffering they had witnessed. During their return via Poland their railway carriage was left for hours in a siding. Wylie drank from a bottle of water and promptly fell seriously ill, possibly from cholera or plague. In the meantime Wylie's stepbrother was thrown to his death from a Warsaw hotel room, probably by Soviet agents. This information was made public by Wylie in The Innocent Ambassadors (1957), a narrative of a journey round the world framed as a report on the Soviet plan to dismember the world. 'What the cold war concerns', he declares, 'is human belief: primarily your belief!' (Wylie 1957: XIV). Wylie's conclusion to The Innocent Ambassadors resembles the 'application' which might close a sermon. Like Robert Heinlein (who read The Innocent Ambassadors before his own visit to the Soviet Union), Wylie calls on his readers to respond to a common danger by embarking on a mission to preserve freedom. Ironically, he takes John Foster Dulles to task for irrelevantly attacking Soviet atheism, although both writers applied a discourse of moral absolutes to contemporary politics. Wylie's jeremiads regularly promote a sense of crisis and envisage disasters as a means of testing American values and morale. Whatever narrative means he adopts, there is usually a single voice which expands, sometimes stridently, the author's convictions. Narrative and polemic often pull against each other, as they do in the works of the writer Wylie most admired at this time: Aldous Huxley. In his 1946 tract Science, Liberty and Peace Huxley inveighs against nationalism as the root of all evil: To be a worshipper of one of the fifty-odd national Molochs is, necessarily and automatically, to be a crusader against the wor­ shippers of all the other national Molochs. Nationalism leads to moral ruin because it denies universality, denies the existence of a single God, denies the value of a human being as a human being. The 'natural reaction' of the nationalist to the atomic bomb is to 'make use of the new powers provided by science for the purpose of establishing world dominion for his particular gang' (Huxley 1947: 34, 37). Huxley embodied this bleak vision in Ape and Essence (1948) where the contemporary frame-narrative establishes nationalism as

a system of enforced orthodoxy specifically in Hollywood, con­ demning as 'un-American' any heterodox screenplays. The latter are burnt in scenes at once echoing the Inquisition and anticipating Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451. The scenes also open up a space for Huxley's own novel as a criticism of contemporary culture. The inset script describes a post-holocaust America in the year 2108 con­ textualised by the narrator who describes modern history as a steady rise in nationalism and the abuse of science until fear has become the 'very basis and foundation of modern life'. The worship of false gods like science and nationalism has resulted in a literal cult of Moloch. Here Huxley anticipates later post-holocaust writers like Leigh Brackett and Edgar Pangborn in evoking a world of organised repression and ignorance where difference is suppressed as deviancy. Huxley refuses the grand narrative of evolution when nuclear war is ironically described by the narrator (clearly an author-surrogate) as the 'consummation of technological progress' (Huxley 1949: 37, 50). Wylie had long admired Huxley's work and in 1949 he sent Huxley a copy of his Opus 21 which contained assertions that Ape and Essence was no 'wild fantasy', but rather the 'logical extension of current events' (Wylie 1949: 198). His attacks on the over­ valuation of science and the hypocrisy of established religion must have been totally congenial to Huxley who thanked Wylie for his gift and shrewdly recognised a problem the two writers had in common: 'You suffer, as I have always done, from the difficulty, the all but impossibility, of combining ideas with narrative'. Just as Huxley urbanely spotted the polemicist in Wylie, so the latter took Ape and Essence as evidence of the Cassandra-like role which by 1955 Philip K. Dick had decided was obligatory for the science fiction writer (Sutin 1995: 54): 'Huxley secretly views himself as more of a prophet than a potential savior'.3 Ironically, this was exactly the role that Wylie was to play in his own novel on humanity's suicidal nuclear madness, Triumph.

(II) Wylie used his fiction to engage with Cold War issues as early as 1946 when he published his story 'Blunder', set in the state of 'armed secrecy' following World War III (waged in 1966) which has left New England and Central Europe a lunar wilderness. Two scientists have discovered 'bismuth fission' and plan to explode a device in an abandoned mine to produce a new and indefinite

source of power. The realisation by other scientists that there is an error in the original calculations cannot be communicated in time to prevent the experiment and the resulting explosion (an 'omega ray') destroys the Earth. Taken literally, the potential moral stated by one of the scientists sounds absurd: 'If this goes wrong ... it's justice! It will teach the whole idiotic world that you cannot monopolise knowledge!' (Derleth 1948: 377). By the end of the story the 'whole idiotic world' has been reduced to red-hot ash and is incapable of learning anything, so that Wylie has to posit imaginary observers on Mars symbolically placed outside this final round of human lunacy. (For a comparable narrative of a ballistic missile triggering a massive underground fire see Anvil 1957.) The Disap­ pearance (1951), by contrast, represents a more fantastic parable on the Cold War situation. On a certain day all women disappear, whereupon the Russians, assuming that the Disappearance has been engineered by the American imperialists, then activate plans for atomic attack using coastal mines and bombs smuggled into the country. The resulting war has a kind of diagnostic function within the novel to demonstrate the thesis that 'hatred is man's principal characteristic; hostility and aggression are the chief manifestations of it in the objective realm' (Wylie 1972: 232). Where The Disappearance attributes social and political ills to gender separation the 1955 novella The Answer draws on Christian mythology for its parable of the arms race, which drew appreciative comments from Eleanor Roosevelt and Bernard Baruch. A us nuclear test proves to have killed an angel who falls to Earth with a book bearing the message 'love one another'; then a parallel explosion takes place in Siberia with the same results. The Russian premier has a positively apocalyptic reaction: 'In the angel he saw immediately a possible finish to the dreams of Engels, Marx, the rest. He saw a potential end of communism and even of the human race' (Wylie 1956: 47). Each event then critiques the ideology of the opposing sides, ironically recalling the common Christian origins of American and Russian culture.4 The parable suggests parallels between the two sides but the apparent evenness of comparison is undermined by the description of the Russian premier as a wily oriental despot with a 'Mongol face and eyes as dark as inexpressive and unfeeling as prunes'; and American officers as the embodiment of righteous strength ('anvil shoulders, marble hair, feldspar com­ plexion', etc.) (Wylie 1956: 45, 10). The revelation of ideologically controlled hatred as a transformation of fear is a diagnosis directed only against the Russians, so The Answer proves in that sense to be a skewed fable. On the surface it recommends mutual respect and a

recognition of parallels between East and West; but the subtext uncritically polarises each regime along a series of oppositions between humanity and despotism, reason and repression. This same imagery of illness and disease was used in Wylie's excursion into the thriller genre to describe Soviet sabotage. The possibility of the USA being attacked by smuggled atomic bombs had been raised in Dexter Masters's One World Or None (1946), and Chandler Davis's 1946 story 'The Nightmare' describes the related situation of a secret laboratory in New York for assembling bombs. The FBI agent-protagonist has a 'sudden vision': 'A pillar of multi­ colored smoke rising from the city, erasing the Bronx and Manhattan down to Central Park ... A nightmare, a familiar and a very real night­ mare, an accepted part of modern life, something you couldn't get away from' (Conklin 1948: II). Exposure pre-empts the conspiracy whose national origin is never revealed. Wylie took up the same issue in his 1951 serial The Smuggled Atom Bomb which makes extensive use of the frisson of danger within the commonplace. A Florida physics graduate discovers an unusually heavy box in his lodger's room, which proves to contain uranium. Eventually it is revealed to be part of a Soviet conspiracy to destroy New York, which is forestalled by collaboration between the boy and the fbi. One agent describes espionage as a literal process of corruption where the conspirators 'reach the insides of patient, peaceful, lawabiding guys ... rot out their hearts! And yet leave their outside just like always' (Wylie 1965: 92). The sapping of the body politic by the enemy within fails this time, unlike a story ('The Sacrifice') Wylie was planning in 1954 on the same theme where New York is destroyed but the Soviets 'forever disgraced'.5 Wylie makes no bones about the identity of the only other nation with an atomic capability and so has no need to spell out who the saboteurs are. He continued to take Soviet sabotage so seriously that in 1961 he corresponded with Kennedy on the likelihood of American har­ bours being mined. Wylie's presumption was of a Communist expansionism which informs his two most famous novels of EastWest combat, Tomorrow! (1954) and Triumph (1963), both of which describe pre-emptive strikes by the Soviets.

(III) Tomorrow! was originally planned as a screenplay for a film [The Bomb) about a nuclear attack on American cities. His plan was enthusiastically received by General Vandenberg (Air Force Chief of

Staff), and supported by the Secretary for Defence and the chairman of the aec (Atomic Energy Commission), Wylie explained his purpose as follows: The a-bomb is the great modern fear and will remain so for many years . . . But it is more than a 'fear'; it is a fascination, a reality, a thing about which nearly all men and women and children constantly seek to learn more, even when what they learn constantly increases unconscious dread.6 Wylie's diagnosis of ambivalence brings more under control a contradiction which Alan Nadel has found in early conceptions of the nuclear age: that it represented 'both hope and horror' (Nadel 1995: 19). Certainly Wylie himself had experienced this uncertain­ ty. In his article 'Deliverance or Doom' he tried to articulate a hope that nuclear power might aid the 'replanning of our world', but at the same time recognised that the 'military value of atomic fission' was 'enormous' and would not stay an American monopoly for long (Wylie 1945: 18). In the event the film was jettisoned in favour of a novel which schematically separates out two attitudes to civil defence embodied in the twin midwestern cities of Green Prairie (preparedness) and River City (denial), loosely modelled on St. Paul and Minneapolis. Wylie explained that in the novel he had 'predicted that [the] u sa , under atomic blitz, might panic and stampede simply because our people will not learn the lessons and the facts that their government, through fcda [the Federal Civil Defence Authority] has tried for years to reach them'.7Reviewers took Wylie to task for the flatness of his characterisation but one of the main points of the novel is that these figures and the viewpoints they articulate should be familiar to the point of cliche. Characters are distinguished from each other primarily according to their capacity to accept and deal with the nuclear threat; indeed, Wylie reportedly wanted his novel to be the 'Uncle Tom's Cabin of the atomic age' (Frazier 1954: 128). Standing above all of them is a local newspaper editor whose extended editorial goes some way to justifying one reviewer's complaint that his was a 'tract in the form of a novel' (Hine 1954: 15). There is an absolute congruence between the editor's and the narrator's diagnoses of a collective denial of dread: 'It was a time when Americans once again refused to face certain realities that glared at them with ever-increasing balefulness' (Wylie 1954b: 49). The trouble with official surveys, he asserted in a 1954 article in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists was that statistics paid no attention

to the unconscious. In contrast Wylie's own conclusion was 'that the American people undoubtedly would panic under such bomb­ ing in their present state of mind,' (Wylie's emphasis, 1954a: 37—8). Wylie's novel, therefore, aimed to confront this fear by debating, then describing, nuclear attack. Section headings supply an apocalyptic 'bomb-time' counting down to disaster: 'x-day minus 90' and so on. The attack comes on Christmas Day and Tomorrow! is one of the very few nuclear novels to describe an explosion. Wylie's desire to convey scale leads to a series of comparisons which show what the blast is not like: On the sidewalks, for a part of a second, on sidewalks boiling like forgotten tea, were dark stains that had been people, tens of thou­ sands of people. The Light went over the whole great area, like a thing switched on, and people miles away, hundreds of people looking at it, lost their sight. The air, of a sudden, for a long way became hotter than boiling water, hotter than melted lead, hotter than steel coming white from electric furnaces ... (Wylie 1954b: 269) The drama of Wylie's description risks blinding us to its problem­ atical nature, for such an explosion cannot be witnessed like any other event. The focaliser at this point is the editor whose role of witness lasts only a nano-second before he is killed. Isaac Asimov addresses the same problem in his 1956 story 'Hell-Fire' (collected in Earth is Room Enough) where a super-slow-motion film of a nuclear explosion converts it into a spectacle with an unexpected revelation of a laughing demonic face in the fireball.8 And, when describing a nuclear attack on New York, Jonathan Schell has to simultaneously hypothesise and deny the possibility of an observer two miles from ground zero in order to describe the sequence of flash, blast and fireball (Schell 1982: 48). Wylie implicitly (the imprint of human figures on the sidewalks) and Schell explicitly draws comparisons with Hiroshima, in the latter case to convey the monstrous scale of the imagined destruction. In fact Wylie admitted to a correspondent in 1952 that sense-perception was not the issue: 'at any reasonably safe distance, the bomb isn't what you see but what you know'.9 The contradictions within Wylie's description extend into the novel as a whole. In one of his articles on nuclear survival Wylie exhorts Americans to remember the spirit of Londoners when the V-2 rockets were following (Wylie 1951b: 42), but the analogy collap­ ses before the scale of atomic bombs. And in Tomorrow! the obsoles­ cence of Wylie's civil defence propagandising is demonstrated

firstly by the fact that H-bombs are already being used against America and secondly by the novel's denouement. When the Soviets demand surrender after bombarding the usa with nuclear and biological weapons, America responds by detonating a 'dirty' H-bomb (coated with cobalt) in the Baltic which wipes out whole countries this time, not only cities: 'In the ensuing dark, a Thing swelled above the western edge of Russia, alight, alive, of a size to bulge beyond the last particle of earth's air' (Wylie 1954b: 353). By this point Wylie has totally shifted the novel away from considerations of civil defence and survival on to apocalyptic ultimacy in America's confrontation with the enemy. The fact that Finland and the Baltic states are wiped out goes unnoticed before Wylie's preoccupation with the 'last war' which for the editor of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists seemed to pander to 'American smugness about being ultimately the inevitable victor'.10 In 1954 Wylie was approached by Martin Caidin, then a tech­ nical specialist with the New York State Civil Defence Commission, who was working on his first novel The Long Night. Like Wylie, Caidin had a specific civil defence thesis to substantiate, namely after nuclear attack to 'get the people back into their city' (Caidin 1956: 232). He explained that he 'concentrated upon the city as an entity' rather than on specific characters.11 The Long Night (1956, originally entitled This City Lived) concentrates entirely on the collective experience of a city like New York during and immedi­ ately after nuclear attack. This episodic account combines individuals' experience of confusion with a scientifically precise description of the bomb blast and a demonstration of how an efficient civil defence system can swing into action. Caidin embraces apocalypse, however, in his novel's set piece: the firestorm which rages within hours of the explosion. Repeating the refrain 'there was no escape', he evokes a spectacle suggestive of hell and volcanic eruption: Shrieking insanely, they [the citizens] raced down streets over which the tar and asphalt ran in lava-like rivulets. Most of them covered no more than one or two hundred feet, before their shoes and feet burst into flames. Grasping their burning legs in maddened pain, they toppled and writhed in agony in the bubbling, flaming tar. (Caidin 1956: 124) Caidin does not linger over his victims but gradually withdraws the narrative vantage point to the edge of the city so that he can conclude with a triumphant reestablishment of the municipal services. The long night has its dawn.

(IV)

The incipient anachronism of Tomorrow! was recognised by Wylie who saw the H-bomb as a weapon against which there was no defence and as a result withdrew from civil defence work. By 1960 he was attacking a persistent belief, 'as absolute as a religious faith', that, a nuclear war was winnable (Wylie 1960: 22). This same naive triumphalism is the target of Wylie's 1963 novel Triumph where one character ridicules those 'prophetic books and movies about total war in the atomic age' where 'Americans took dreadful punishment and then rose from the ground ... and defeated the Soviets and set the world free' (Wylie 1963: 96). Triumph then levels a polemic against the naive optimism of earlier nuclear fiction as well as reflecting Wylie's scepticism about civil defence which persisted right through to 1968 when he attacked Robert McNamara's 'thin shield' of nuclear weapons as ineffectual and expensive. In Triumph Wylie radically alters his sense of an ending to undermine the very possibility of survival and in the process to repudiate his own earlier novel. The novel opens with what promises to be a weekend party at the home of millionaire Vance Farr. Beneath his house Farr has fitted out a nuclear shelter so elaborate as to be an absurd denial of any national civil defence system. After a nuclear strike, like Heinlein's Farnham's Freehold and Dan Ljoka's Shelter, chapters alternate between descriptions of the behaviour of Farr's group and non-narrative predictions of the external destruction: In a roughly circular area, miles across, underneath this thing, all buildings will have been vaporised. Farther out, for more miles the thrusting ram of steel-hard air will topple the mightiest structures and sweep all lesser edifices to earth, as if their brick and stone, girders and beams were tissue paper. (Wylie 1963: 40) While the casualties mount ('millions', 'myriads', 'multitudes'), Farr and his guests are still down in their shelter experiencing such blasts through the mediation of recording equipment. The latter offers Wylie the means to link inside to outside. A surviving tv station in Central America transmits film of explosions taken for posterity ('the surviving world needs to know') by an aircrew which subsequently dies of radiation. As the survivors in the shelter gather before the screen, holocaust becomes media spectacle, the camera panning across lunar landscapes swept by radioactive clouds.

Both Tomorrow! and Triumph describe scenarios of nuclear attack where the usa reacts to first strikes from the Soviet Union, in the latter novel preceded by an invasion of Yugoslavia by 'volunteer' troops. The us defence system is attacked constantly by the narrator and later by Farr, speaking as Wylie's surrogate, for missing obvious inferences, failing to design a coherent plan, and above all for missing the ideological premise of Soviet Communism which was that their leaders 'had always been willing to pay any price whatever to conquer the world' (Wylie 1963: 46). Unlike the Americans, the Russians have a 'fiendishly planned' long-term strategy whereby state-selected members from all walks of life will be housed in massive underground bunkers. The few surviving us submarines bomb the underground bases but are themselves destroyed in the process. Wylie then points a sardonic epitaph: 'the doctrines of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Krushchev, Merov, and Grodsky were finally undone ... at the cost of half a world and of the vast majority of people who once called themselves free and civilised' (Wylie 1963: 240). The irony here is ambiguous since it could be directed solely against Communism but the novel equally attacks the us govern­ ment's use of war games and routine 'doomsday' scenarios in its defence planning. East and West are both (unequally) indicted for their militarism and materialism. At the end of the novel, despite some similarities with Nevil Shute's On the Beach where no-one survives, Farr and his companions are rescued by helicopters from an Australian carrier and taken away from an America which will have 'no name'. Clearly there is no suggestion here of trans­ formation, only of national erasure. Within Wylie's secular apoca­ lypse the mushroom cloud here functions as a sign of destruction. The thunder, lightning and devastating fire similarly signify the spiralling of military technology out of human control, and the alignment of nations cannot be read as the godly confronting the ungodly because part of Wylie's purpose is to show his own nation's slippage into worshipping the false god of materialism. However potent the external threat is from Russia, Wylie ultimately writes America's status as a superpower into the novel as a negative quality since the failure of the usa to anticipate war results in worldwide destruction.

(V) Wylie's hatred of the bomb was shared by the Hungarian-born physicist Leo Szilard who, however, approached the problem from a totally different perspective. Where Wylie feared the super­ weapon, particularly in Soviet hands, Szilard saw its existence as a damning comment on humanity as a whole. Though a co-designer of the first atomic bomb after 1945, Szilard turned against its use and became a tireless campaigner for nuclear disarmament. Like Wylie, he opposed the imposition of security restrictions on scientific research and, mostly through the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, produced a series of stories all revolving around the subject of nuclear war, the most important of which were collected in The Voice of the Dolphins (1961). Like Dexter Masters, Judith Merril, and H. G. Wells before him, Szilard took an internationalist approach to world problems, declaring that a 'crusade for an organised world community' was needed (Szilard 1947: 34). Where Wylie addresses the conscience of his nation as a secular prophet, Szilard adopts the role of scapegoat in 'My Trial as a War Criminal' (1947). After the Third World War (Russia attacks New Jersey with a biological weapon, America surrenders), the narrator and the whole American leadership are put on trial for their bombing of Japan. 'Russia' in this context is an idealised projection of Szilard's hopes in producing rational political planning and in declaring its allegiance to world government. Similarly 'The Diary of Dr. Davis' (1950) uses a Wellsian 'sleeper awakes' frame to describe the experiences of a scientist who has slept from 1948 to 1980 in his imagination, experiencing rational discussion of how to achieve peaceful coexistence. The voices of reason in the diary, however, go unheeded and two more world wars have to be endured before world government is established. The same sequence is followed in Wells's The World Set Free which opens its description of the 'last war' with the incredulous words: Viewed from the standpoint of a sane and ambitious social order, it is difficult to understand and it would be tedious to follow the motives that plunged mankind into the war that fills the histories of the middle decades of the twentieth century. (Wells 1988: 56) Szilard converts Wells's rational retrospect into his preferred fictional form of an autopsy on humanity itself. 'Report on "Grand Central Terminal'" (1948) uses the science fiction device of the extraterrestrial visit in order to dramatise the possible consequences

of the arms race. Visitors land in New York and other cities to find them deserted but undamaged, possibly expressing a fear expressed earlier by Szilard that America might be covered with radioactive dust (Szilard 1947: 7). One of the investigators Xram (Marx reversed) speculates that humanity destroyed itself in a massive war. The narrator remains sceptical: This sounded pretty unlikely indeed, since uranium is not in itself explosive and it takes quite elaborate processing to prepare it in a form in which it can be deteriorated. Since the earthdwellers who built all these cities must have been rational beings, it is difficult to believe that they should have gone to all this trouble ... just in order to destroy themselves. (Szilard 1992: 144) The narrator here personifies the rationality that humanity has lost, his puzzlement commenting satirically on mankind's demise. Again and again in Szilard rationality is displaced in time or across species. Dr. Davis's diary is juxtaposed to the course of history without affecting it; the quasi-anthropological visitors arrive too late to save humanity; and in 'The Mined Cities' (1961) Szilard returns to the 'sleeper awakes' device to give a perspective from 1980 where nuclear balance is ensured by devices placed with each superpower. 'The Voice of the Dolphins' (1960) grew out of Szilard's frus­ tration with the East— West stalemate and gloom over the virtual inevitability of nuclear war, which led him to write to Krushchev and Kennedy. It is the fullest of Szilard's future histories and starts as an indictment of the Eisenhower administration's failure to solve the problem of the Bomb. The cause of peace is promoted when the Soviets and Americans establish a Biological Research Institute in Vienna. This develops into a 'think tank' from which the dolphins send proposals for disarmament and from which is bred a symbolic food of detente, an algae called 'amruss'. Szilard insisted that the book was not 'about the intelligence of the dolphin but about the stupidity of man' (Lanouette 1992: 415). The dolphins' utterances become institutionalised as the eponymous television programme named in opposition to the partisan Voice of America. Just at the point where disarmament has been agreed a virus kills off the dolphins, and so yet again the voice of reason is stilled. Szilard's biographer has written that 'most of Szilard's attempts to control the weapon he had helped create were too visionary. Too rational. Too clever. Too impatient' (Lanouette 1992: 357). His stories sardonic­ ally turn this impatience against themselves, problematising their own reception. 'Szilard' is thematised in 'The Voice of the Dolphins'

as a marginalised prophet who receives the minimal recognition of having a 'small crater' on the 'back side of the moon' named after him by Soviet scientists. Notes

1. Wylie explained to J. Edgar Hoover that his purpose was 'to think more effectively about our own defences from onslaught and about ways of attacking Russia' (letter 5 May 1951, Wylie archive, Princeton University). 2. Draft of 'What Frightens Jon?' 5, Princeton. This essay was finally published in The Redbook for May 1952 3. Letter from Huxley to Wylie, 9 April 1949; letter from Wylie to Canfield (Huxley's publisher), 25 May 1948. Princeton. 4. The 1952 film Red Planet Mars similarly uses purported messages from Mars to trigger a religious revival which topples the Soviet regime and purifies the American administration. 5. Letter to fiction editor of Collier's, 18 March 1954; Princeton. 6. 'The Bomb', 801, Princeton. Tomorrow! became recommended reading for civil defence programmes and was enthusiastically reviewed by a fcda administrator (Vol. I , Peterson). 7. 'The ABC's of the H-Bomb' (1954: I). Draft essay, Princeton. 8. The use of ultra-slow film established the image of the mushroom cloud: see Rosenthal 1991: 63—92. 9. 'Agenda for a Bull Session' (1952; 5), Wylie folder, Records of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, National Archives, Washington. 10. Letter to Wylie from Eugene Rabinowitz, 18 January 1954, Princeton. 11. Letter from Martin Caidin, 28 January 1954, Princeton. See parti­ cularly Wylie 1948 and 1951a. Wylie also contributed by invitation to the 1951 Collier's special issue 'Preview of the War We Do Not Want'.

II

Variations on a Patriotic Theme: Robert A. H einlein

World War III is going on now (Robert A. Heinlein, 1963)

(I) In The End of Victory Culture (1995) Tom Engelhardt identifies a national war narrative where the USA re-enacts its own establish­ ment and growth. 'War was invariably portrayed as a series of reactive incidents rather than organized and invasive campaigns' (Engelhardt 1995: 4) and a series triggered by a sneak attack or ambush. Engelhardt's thesis is that, despite its ostensible victory in 1945, such reconfirmation of national identity gradually collapsed throughout the postwar period as the usa lost an enemy. This grand narrative lies at the heart of Robert Heinlein's postwar work where the nation repeatedly figures as protagonist. Where Philip Wylie attacks the nation's failings and Leo Szilard pleads for a trans­ national rationalism, Heinlein dramatizes the nation's destiny in action. His insistence on freedom, so strident that he sometimes sounds jingoistic, jostles an opposing possibility (Calvinist or Darwinian) that human actions are somehow determined by larger forces, genetic or other. No sooner had the war finished than Heinlein proclaimed a crisis demanding national vigilance: 'we are in more danger now than ever before in our history'.1 Heinlein had already written this perception of crisis into a work first published in the year of Pearl Harbor. The Day after Tomorrow (serial 1941; novel entitled Sixth Column 1949; 1951 retitled) describes an America invaded and subjugated by the PanAsians, a composite force of Chinese and Japanese. They establish a repressive bureaucratic regime which anticipates later narratives of Soviet invasion. A scientific research establishment in the Rocky Mountains forms the nucleus of a covert resistance movement. Using a device for transforming matter this group of stalwarts

purports to found an expanding religious cult which it uses to screen its subversive activities, discovering in the process that Asiatics are particularly sensitive to radio beams of certain frequencies, in other words they have a biologically determined Achilles heel. As the resistance fighters play on the psychology of their rulers and gradually take over all communications, the morale and then the occupation of the PanAsians collapse and America is liberated. For K. A. MacDermott the placing of the novel's action is all-important: By locating these monsters [the PanAsians] within a conquered America rather than across enemy borders, Heinlein anticipates the fundamental strategy of cold war plotting: the enemy is within and threatens not just our sovereignty but our culture itself, right down to our very identities.2 The scene is thus set, as usual in Heinlein's political fiction, for a heroic elite to save the nation. Ardmore, the leader of the rebels, comes from a background in commerce, presides over a scientific establishment, and runs it with military rigour, combining three factors which underpin his men's fitness to regain control of the country. The PanAsians represent an early manifestation of the threatening groups which will recur through Heinlein's Cold War fiction, characterised by manifest technological skill and military organisation, numerical supremacy and malign intent. In order to readjust his narrative to the Cold War, Heinlein reduced references to the 'yellow monkeys' and inserted new passages of exposition which fill out the novel's fictional history. One describes the merging of China and Russia into a massive power bloc while another stresses the national importance of intelligence, even over the most sophisticated weaponry: An intelligence service was as important as a new secret weapon - more important ... A ridiculously inadequate military intelli­ gence had been the prime characteristic of the United States as a power all through its history. The most powerful nation the globe had ever seen —but it had stumbled into wars like a blind giant. Take this present mess: the atom bombs of PanAsia weren't any more powerful than our own —but we had been caught flatfooted and had never gotten to use a one. (Heinlein 1951a: 15) As always, Heinlein demonstrates a sensitive awareness of contem­ porary political developments. In 1947 the National Security Act

established the cia. The out-going director of the Central Intelli­ gence Group, General Vandenberg, spoke in support of the bill, citing America's total lack of preparedness for Pearl Harbor, clearly implied here by Heinlein as one of his country's 'stumbles' (Ranelagh 1986: 109). Heinlein's revisions reinvent the enemy's identity and situate the action within a new world order where, however, the structure of oppositions stays largely unchanged and where national survival depends on internal loyalty as much as external threat.3 The problem of distinguishing traitors underpins The Puppet Masters (1951), described by Heinlein as a 'horror story' influenced by Poe (Heinlein 1989: 196), but transparently a Cold War allegory. Flying saucers have brought an advance guard of sluglike creatures from the planet Titan who fasten themselves on to the backs of their human subjects like overgrown leeches. Like other invasion narratives of the fifties the novel describes them as taking over the individual and communal body: 'they are pinching off the nerve cells of our social organism', one character exclaims (Heinlein 1979c: 25). H. Bruce Franklin identifies their political symbolism, declaring that 'the slugs are not distinct individuals but unfeeling members of a communal mind dedicated to the enslavement of all other societies' (Franklin 1980: 99). Essentially they represent a variation on the Communists-as-bugs trope discussed in the introduction which we will see again in Starship Troopers. Heinlein was clear from the beginning that they represented a political force, describing the parasites as 'completely perfect fifth columnists' and, revising the serial into the novel, he inserted lines which made the analogy even more explicit: 'Too big to occupy and too big to ignore, World War III had not settled the Russian problem, and no war ever would. The parasites might feel right at home there.'4 Philip E. Smith has accused Heinlein of wanting to have it both ways: 'the slugs represent communists for readers in the present, and in his future world Russian Communism has already been defeated but not destroyed by the United States in World War III' (Smith 1978: 149). The reason for this supposed contradiction must lie in Heinlein's fear that Communism was a set of beliefs as well as the official ideology of a power bloc and therefore might never be defeated. The slugs embody the fears of militant Communism and the bomb (they reproduce by fission) and perform a process of social transformation which ironically can only be countered by mirroring the methods of the aggressors. Just as in The Door into Summer (1957) the us possesses a drug which is 'Uncle Sam's answer to brainwashing', so the intelligence elite can only combat the slugs

by functioning as one organism. Danger is not removed, only displaced back to its source from which it could re-emerge; The Puppet Masters ends with a declaration of intent to take combat to Titan: 'Death and Destruction!' (II) Heinlein had already discussed the political dimension to superweapons before the end of the war in 'Solution Unsatisfactory' (1941) where scientists invent a deadly radioactive dust which is used to subdue Germany. At first the weapon promises the scientist-narrator the means of ushering in a Pax Americana but a scheme to impound the world's aeroplanes goes wrong when the Eurasian Union proves to possess the dust itself. There follows a 'Four-days War' whose victory gives the uaA the power 'to turn the entire globe into an empire, our empire' (Heinlein 1975: 123), whereupon a second conflict emerges between the President's championing of democracy and the lust for power of a us officer who ultimately turns himself into the 'undisputed military dictator of the world'. This story anticipates a situation described by John W. Campbell in 1947 where the USA's possession of an 'irresistible military weapon' (Heinlein calls it an 'absolute' weapon) gives a unique but politically unacceptable chance to 'conquer every nation on Earth and establish a single world government' (Campbell 1 9 4 7 : 2 8 4 ).

Heinlein was less sanguine than Campbell about this military superiority thanks partly to reading Life's special feature for 19 November 1945, 'The 36-Hour War'. This article extrapolated on a warning from the chief of the us Air Force that ballistically delivered atomic bombs could open up America to attack: 'with present equipment and enemy air power can, without warning, pass over all formerly visualised barriers and can deliver devastating blows at our population centers and our industrial, economic or govern­ mental heart even before surface forces can be deployed' [Life 1945: 28). This account described the bombing of thirteen American cities, concluding with a graphic picture of New York reduced to a radioactive ruin. Heinlein's jeremiad 'The Last Days of the United States' (collected in Expanded Universe) warns the reader that this narrative is 'much too optimistic' since the destruction would almost certainly be more widespread. In contrast, Heinlein refused to envisage nuclear war as bringing an end to human life: 'Forget On the Beach', he declared in 1961, 'the future isn't that bleak' (Heinlein

1992a: 235. And accordingly his concept of the 'death' of the usa is a political event, the demise of freedom, where a saving remnant can continue the good fight. So when 'The Last Days' confronts its startled reader with an epitaph to the United States rip, this shock tactic is firstly designed to force consideration of the Bomb on an apathetic public (one of Heinlein's main purposes after 1945) and secondly to bring about a realisation that, with the waning of faith in a world state, only two choices remain: a 'permanent state of total war' or resigned waiting 'for death to come out of the sky' (Heinlein 1982: 162). Usually nuclear war performs the function for Heinlein of bringing about a radical transformation of society. Rejecting the fatalism of total nuclear destruction, he recommended to his readers that they develop a 'survival point of view' (Heinlein 1982: 168) and in 1961 he built a shelter for his family, as he explained to Judith Merril, 'as an act of faith, as an example to others'.5 Coincidentally the symbolism was increased by Heinlein's proximity to the massive underground Cheyenne Mountain complex for the North American Aerospace Defence Command (no r a d ) which Heinlein visited that same year for a briefing on space detection.6 Heinlein's championing of the cause of survivalism anticipates the writing of figures like Dean Ing (see chapter 13) and provides the basis for his 1964 novel Farnham's Freehold which centres on a family with a well-equipped shelter or 'panic hole' as they jokingly call it. An unprovoked attack by the Soviet Union sends the family, neighbour and servant into the shelter which is located in the same area of Colorado as the Heinlein home. Hugh Farnham, the patriotic ideologue of the novel, even welcomes the attack because it might perform the eugenic function of killing off the stupid.7 A Soviet 'cosmic bomb' (a massive H-bomb in satellite orbit) detonates near the Farnham shelter and throws them all forward in time to a 'long­ lost Edenic frontier' (Franklin 1980: 154). The family reconstitute the nation through the rituals of raising and lowering the flag, singing 'The Star-Spangled Banner', but they are not alone. The third section of the novel shows a future where, after life in the northern hemisphere has been destroyed, blacks have taken over, establishing a regime reminiscent of America's former enemies in being a 'setup for an absolute totalitarian communism' (Heinlein 1974: 205). After the fourth shift when the Farnhams are returned to their present, we see them re-established in a trading post above which the 'starry flag' continues to fly. It becomes clear that the 'freehold' in the title is nothing less than the country itself whose national contract has been broken by the creation of slavery. The

conclusion to the novel then transposes an image of a lost frontier life on to a post-nuclear landscape mined and cratered where Farnham's family might form the nucleus for national rebirth. The gesture towards permanency in the last line ('they are still going on') is offset and questioned by the reader's memory of the forth­ coming autocracy. (III) The symbolism of Farnham's Freehold is only one example from many of Heinlein foregrounding the fate of the nation. From 1945 onwards his fiction takes on a conservative colouring as he replays scenarios of invasion or rebellion to release the nation from autocratic bondage.8 Heinlein saw American history as a prolonged struggle for freedom. In 1952 he appeared on Ed Murrow's CBS 'This I Believe' and declared his conviction that 'you and I are free today because of endless unnamed heroes from Valley Forge to the Yalu River' (Heinlein 1989: 171). Heinlein defined nationhood opposi­ tionally against the communistic forces he saw as threatening it, a perception which hardened during the 1950s when Heinlein singled out for special praise those science fiction novelists like Pat Frank and Philip Wylie who shared his political convictions.9 If conflict was Heinlein's narrative premise, this even extended to near space and the question of national security. In 1947 he wrote to the Saturday Evening Post predicting interplanetary exploration and adding as a quip 'however, we may wake up some morning and find that the Russians have quietly beaten us to it' (Heinlein 1989: 179). Joke or not, space was rapidly becoming politicised. As H. Bruce Franklin records, in 1948 the Secretary of Defence proposed that the United States build a space station as a 'military guardian in the sky' (Franklin 1980: 98). The following year Heinlein published 'The Long Watch', a story dealing with an attempted military coup on the us Moon Base, and shortly after wrote the screenplay for the George Pal movie Destination Moon (1950). Here the flight is dramatised as a continuation of the us military machine (the space rocket is named Big Boy, a revision of the Hiroshima bomb Little Boy) and, more importantly, as a national race between the usa and the Soviets: 'the first base is going to belong to us —or to Russia', declares one of the crew (Heinlein 1979a: 155). The Soviets unsuc­ cessfully attempt sabotage and the narrative closes with unresolved doubts about whether the crew will manage the return voyage.10In fact the rocket represents yet another metaphor of the nation where

a member points the moral of heroic sacrifice to the collective mission: 'every man dies; the group goes on' (Heinlein 1979a: 170). From this date onwards Heinlein remained convinced of the strategic importance of near space, enthusiastically endorsing the writings of his friend Jerry Pournelle and later supporting Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defence Initiative. Heinlein's friend and fellow novelist L. Sprague de Camp has claimed that up to 1960 Heinlein was a 'bright pink liberal' and thereafter became an 'outspoken conservative' (De Camp 1988: 40). The date in question marked the Heinleins' visit to the Soviet Union, following which Heinlein attacked the state Orwellian manipulation of the news media and the Intourist system,11 However, it is diffi­ cult to see this year as a turning point since Heinlein's steadfast opposition to Communism had formed much earlier and in 1958 he engaged in one of his most strident pieces of political polemic. Outraged by the promotional literature of the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy, Heinlein and his wife published an advertisement called 'Who Are the Heirs of Patrick Henry?' taking as its theme the national ideal of freedom. Here Heinlein argued that the 'Sane' proposals followed (consciously?) a pro-Soviet line which boils down to an 'abject surrender to tyranny' (Heinlein 1982: 391). In his 1961 address at the World Science Fiction Conference Heinlein returns to this issue, grimly predicting the 'destruction of the United States of America as the political entity we know' with fifty to sixty million deaths into the bargain (Heinlein 1992a: 228). Drawing on Orwell, Heinlein paints a picture of a Soviet-occupied America which would at least give the surviving citizens an opportunity to fight back. Once again he evokes the dreaded spectacle of 'sur­ render to this monstrous evil' (ibid.: 244). But there is something even worse: Communism's 'cold-blooded murder of the truth' (ibid.: 245). Heinlein's nightmare is the erasure of national history which would come about by the assimilation of the USA into the Communist World State, a situation which Heinlein had already described in Revolt in 2100 (1953) where the young protagonist disobeys the ruling theocracy by rediscovering the suppressed archive of the American past. Starting with Tom Paine, his new information empowers him to denaturalise the state ideology and relocate it within a historical sequence. Accordingly the thinly veiled portrayal of McCarthyite loyalty checks under a new 'Inquisition' is encoded as an aberration from the national tradition. Similarly Assignment in Eternity (1953) describes another post-World War III situation where 'the evil ethic of communism had corrupted, even after the form had gone' (Heinlein 1977: 66).

Unlike the first novel where the rediscovery of history opens up heroic roles for the protagonist, Assignment plunges the reader straight into an espionage thriller where contemporary perceptions of Communism (torture and brainwashing) combine with trans­ formed security institutions: the fbi reappears as the Federal Bureau of Security. Initially at least Assignment presents a protagonist trapped paranoiacally within a world of espionage where it proves impossible to locate enemies and therefore do more than improvise from situation to situation. By contrast, Lorenzo the actor-prota­ gonist of Double Star (1956), is called on to play the role of doubling for a kidnapped political leader and then asked to continue that role even after the original has been found. The latter is discovered on the spaceship Tom Paine, a name which by now should be clear as a sign of national duty, and it is the ultimate duty as leader which Lorenzo accepts after the transformation of his role. American history for Heinlein figured as an inheritance imposing its own demands of duty and vigilance. One of the most bizarre instances of such vigilance occurs in 'Project Nightmare' (collected in Expanded Universe), published in 1953, the year when the Soviet Union exploded its first H-bomb. Here a group of 'sensitives' use their esp talents to prevent the detonation of bombs smuggled by the Soviets into key American cities. By sheer force of will this group acts out collectively the role of national saviour, with the single exception of one who nods off and as a result Cleveland goes up in smoke; but this detail does not compromise the triumphalism of the story. Heinlein's commitment to the American right was confirmed in 1964 when he campaigned for Barry Goldwater whose 1960 manifesto The Conscience of a Conservative coincides at many points with Heinlein's thinking. Both shared a hostility to the Soviet Union, a rejection of the belief that material goods could 'convert' the latter, and a sense of national betrayal by the compromises of the Eisenhower administration. Goldwater declared: 'our leaders have not made victory the goal of American foreign policy' (Goldwater's emphasis, 1960: 91). When Goldwater and Heinlein recommend their readers to go on the offensive both lapse into ambiguous references to a Tong fight' and a 'war of attrition' against the enemy which can scarcely be read as metaphor only. Indeed one of Heinlein's most famous novels presents military training and combat as the very model of good citizenship.

(IV)

Heinlein and his wife were deeply involved in their 'Patrick Henry' drive when Eisenhower ordered a unilateral cessation of all nuclear testing. Heinlein's fury at what he saw as a gratuitous concession to the Soviets reflected a total disillusionment with the President: 'I knew that he was a political general long before he entered politics —stupid, all front and depending on his staff' (Heinlein 1982: 396). Heinlein expressed his indignation in one of his most controversial novels, Starship Troopers (1959), which attempts to combat the 'slow-motion collapse of a heroic war ethos' (Engelhardt 1995: 10) by reinstating the role of the hero within the drama of national survival. The novel is a Bildungsroman of the military life, narrated by Juan Rico from his induction up to his achievement of the rank of officer. The concentration on the detail of military life is so remorseless that Alexei Panshin reads the novel as a recruiting film in prose starting with an initial episode of rapid action to catch the reader's attention and then moving through sections on basic training and instruction. He concludes: 'There is no sustained human conflict ... The narrator goes in as a boot and emerges a lieutenant, and that is all' (Panshin 1968: 95). The novel contains yet another transformed version of the struggle against Communism, this time pursued to its power centre. Rico's narration gives a moment-by-moment drama to events within strategically encoded landscapes and privileges the func­ tioning of the military. War is a structuring premise not an issue to be speculated over. Heinlein introduces two analogies to underpin Rico's growing awareness of the infantry: that of the body and that of the extended family. During bootcamp training Rico realises that the exercises and tests have as their purpose a kind of surgery, to cut the fat off the collective body. As the failures (the majority) drop away and as the muscles in his own body develop, Rico experiences the satisfaction of merging into a larger whole expressed as a transformed family. Rico leaves his biological parents behind to find substitute fathers in the officers who instruct him and supply role models while a platoon sergeant ('Jelly') plays the role of substitute mother. Once the Bug War breaks out Rico's father joins up to find a patriotic substitute for self-doubt ('I had to prove to myself that I was a man' [Heinlein 1976b: 146]) and his mother is killed when the Bugs 'smear' Buenos Aires, and trans­ formed into a motivation for combat. Heinlein was not alone in showing how the military could engross the family into its structure. The 1955 film Strategic Air Command merges the domestic

and military spheres, synchronising the birth of the protagonist's baby with the unveiling of a new 'family' of bombers. Bomber crew, family and squadron are situated within an expanding series rising to the ultimate collectivity of the nation itself. Because Rico is learning the military trade the narrative has to be suspended at regular intervals for its informing ideas to be expounded and debated. Rico's leading tutor Dubois, for instance, puts the case for heroic sacrifice: 'the noblest fate that a man can endure is to place his own mortal body between his loved home and the war's desolation'.12 Military service is thus presented as an idealised form of citizenship built upon the survival instinct. The novel refers to the Korean War as a notorious instance of the failure of conscript armies to instill such high ideals. Although Heinlein wrote soon after Hiroshima that'all previous military art is obsolete in the atomic age' (Heinlein 1982: 152), Starship Troopers deploys epigraphs from the Bible and writers like Tom Paine, Kipling and Churchill to suggest a historical continuity of righteous combat. Heinlein's author-surrogate in Starship Troopers justifies war as an elaboration of the survival instinct applied to larger and larger groups (family —nation —alliance —species) based on a premise of inevitable conflict between such groups whose living space is finite. This depiction of war as an imperative probably reflects Heinlein's frustrations with Cold War diplomacy where he felt the West was constantly being outmanoeuvred by the Soviets. In the novel war becomes a mechanism for bonding the military in right action against two alien groups. In the opening episode the enemy are humanoid 'natives', unnaturally tall figures, while the main enemy is the Bugs whose organisation resembles that of ants, the 'ultimate dictatorship of the hive' (Heinlein 1967b: 117). They embody a 'total communism' presided over by bug 'commissars'. In short the Bugs represent the perceived characteristics of Soviet Communism transposed, after a defeat of the 'Chinese Hegemony' in the novel's future history, on to an alien species, as we saw in The Puppet Masters. Political difference is thereby naturalised into the threat­ eningly alien. One reviewer spotted the parable immediately, declaring: 'We are up against World Communism ... can we turn our backs on war as an instrument of survival for our society, when the "Bugs" have not?' (Miller 1960: 158). The Cold War 'two worlds' ideology is simplified into a survivalist alternative ('the Bugs or us') and Rico's campaign proves successful in knocking out the enemy 'royalty'. Starship Troopers provoked two burlesques which contested Heinlein's idealisation of warfare. Harry Harrison's Bill, the Galactic

Hero (1965) transforms Heinlein's narrative into third-person picaresque and parodies the military as systematised brutality. The hapless Bill is presented as a 'fighting fool' surrounded by obsess­ ives and swept from one situation to another virtually without subjectivity in a world where excessive loyalty by the troopers is treated as suspicious by the paranoid authorities. Joe Haldeman's The Forever War (1974) pursues a different tack. Drawing on Haldeman's own experiences in Vietnam, the novel now describes a colonial war between the United Nations Expeditionary Force and the 'Taurans', an extraterrestrial race resembling small skeletal humans with chronic goitre. Haldeman's narrator Mandella rises through the ranks to major but privately rejects the military ethic: 'I had a magic wand [a laser gun] that I could point at a life and make it a smoking piece of half-raw meat; I wasn't a soldier, nor ever wanted to be one' (Haldeman 1978: 48). The narrator recoils from such a spectacle into a prolonged self-interrogation where he finds himself simultaneously 'thirsting for alien blood' and hating the conditioning (the 'puppet master of the unconscious') which pro­ duces that desire. Asked repeatedly about the impact of Heinlein's novel on The Forever War, Haldeman has stated that he was reacting against the former 'at an unconscious level' (McMurray 1978: 18) and that Heinlein wrote out of the 1940s in having 'everyone essentially all behind' his war (Schweitzer 1977: 26). The essential difference between the two writers emerges in each one's treatment of ideological closure. Heinlein on the one hand gradually removes all opposing voices from his narrative until in the final line an anonymous radio speaker articulates a collective tribute or dedication: 'to the everlasting glory of the infantry'. Haldeman on the other hand preserves disjunction to the very end, between a discredited official voice and Mandella's inner opposition.13 He revises Heinlein's biological imperative into a cynical or at least deceptive throw-back, declaring that warfare is an 'atavism, carefully (if unconsciously) nurtured by the people who are in positions of power, to assure that they stay in power' (Haldeman 1:987: 4-5). Mandella embodies in one person the roles of private dissident and exploiter, thereby reflecting Haldeman's perception of a contradiction in the public attitude to the Vietnam War where overt opposition was compromised by economic support.

Notes

1. Heinlein 1992: 250. For excellent analyses of the relation between Calvinism and Social Darwinism in Heinlein see Slusser 1977a. Take Back your Government! was written at the end of the war but remained unpublished until 1992. 2. MacDermott 1982: 258. See 259-60 for a tabular breakdown of the ideological positions of the novel. 3. A similar process has been noted in Heinlein's revision of his story 'Lost Legion' (1941) into 'Lost Legacy' (1953) (Franklin 1980: 47). 4. Heinlein 1979c: 99, and 1951b: 102. If the slugs are identified with Soviet Communism the novel implies that both have to be confronted with equal ferocity (Disch 1998: 86-7). 5. Letter to Judith Merril, 18 October 1961, Merril papers, Canadian National Archive, Ottawa. 6. The complex is described in Ford 1986: Chapter 1, and was to be used as the main setting for the 1983 film War Games. 7. Cf. Heinlein's sketch 'Pie from the Sky' which lists many aspects of American life from alarm clocks to roadhogs that 'would be mightily improved by a once over lightly of the Hiroshima treatment' (Heinlein 1 9 8 2 : 1 7 5 ).

8. For comment on Heinlein's pre-1945 politics see Wells 1993: 1, 3-7. 9. Heinlein cites Frank's Forbidden Area and Hold Back the Night as well as Wylie's Tomorrow! in his lecture on Science Fiction (Davenport 1964: 29, 52); and he took bearings from Wylie's The Innocent Amb