Ike Turner, Rock Pioneer & Ex-Husband of Tina Turner, Dead at 76

8 minutes ago

SAN DIEGO - Ike Turner, whose role as one of rock's critical architects was overshadowed by his ogrelike image as the man who brutally abused former wife and icon Tina Turner, died Wednesday at his home in suburban San Diego. He was 76.

"He did pass away this morning" at his home in San Marcos, in northern San Diego County, said Scott M. Hanover of Thrill Entertainment Group, which managed Turner's musical career.

There was no immediate word on the cause of death, which was first reported by celebrity website TMZ.com.

Turner managed to rehabilitate his image somewhat in his later years, touring around the globe with his band the Kings of Rhythm and drawing critical acclaim for his work. He won a Grammy in 2007 in the traditional blues album category for "Risin' With the Blues."

But his image is forever identified as the drug-addicted, wife-abusing husband of Tina Turner. He was hauntingly portrayed by Laurence Fishburne in the movie "What's Love Got To Do With It," based on Tina Turner's autobiography.

Associated Press

Warning: the following comment is opinionative.

Sure he was a pioneer of rock and roll music, but I'm not going to turn around and say how much of a good guy he was just because he's now dead. He's just as much of bad person dead as he was alive.

Do we check out all the heros that we honour to see their lifestyle. You would be surprised with what we find. Ike's misfortune was that his personal lifestory was told by his ex-wife. Others are left in the closet. Check out the bio of heros in history and you will find the same history of tortured lives. Kings and queens included. Oh, yeh, and presidents.

Rest in peace Ike turner, you made beautiful music.

Warning: the following comment is opinionative.

Sure he was a pioneer of rock and roll music, but I'm not going to turn around and say how much of a good guy he was just because he's now dead. He's just as much of bad person dead as he was alive.

I agree. The fact that he's been a good artist is not an excuse what he did in private life. He is still human as we all are.

I also agree that it is sad when somebody dies. So RIP

As you get older, you change and grow. You also observe others changing, as they get older.

Who's to know whether Ike repented to Tina and to God for the way he was.

I agree that we'd better reserve judgement for our Maker.

Enjoy the contribution Mr. Turner made to us.

Here's a contribution he made to me

Thank you again Mr. Turner for this extreeeemely fonky song, and , may you rest in peace. :flowers:

http://fr.youtube.com/watch?v=IhlQtKG4esI

Here's the original recording at 2:47 of this montage :flowers: Tina's voice is amaaaazing and Ike is pumped like I've never heard him - they are having a blast y'all!

Their version of COME TOGETHER ain't bad AT ALL, either as you will also hear.

I think MJ fans will be pleased with it

Enjoy!

http://fr.youtube.com/watch?v=aWoSa3gO1lQ

and once again...the LIVE version: :flowers:

http://fr.youtube.com/watch?v=IhlQtKG4esI

Yes.Many great men had troubled personal lives. it is such a shame that our black heros personal lives are brought to the fore to diminish their achievements. Check out all the big names in history and you will find that they have unorthdox lifestyles. Ikes personal life should not overshadow his achievements in music. This would be a travesty.

Rest in peace Ike Turner.

:yes:

The Creator is the only One who knows what Ike Turner's last words were on the subject, and the only One who knows Ike's heart.

All we have is our right and oblgation to forgive men their trespasses if we want our Creator to forgive our trespasses...and we do have them...

everybody didn't beat and abuse their wife but everybody without exception ....has trespasses...

.

Well that don't stop Marvin, Miles, Jimi and 'em for being recognized as heroes while they had their own personal demons. The only difference is Ike had his dramatized in a film about his ex.

Here's facts not true about Ike & Tina's relationship:

*Despite the "rape scene" in "Nutbush City Limits", he didn't rape her. Both he and Tina actually DENIED this.

*Ike NEVER confronted Tina during a performance at the Ritz, neither did he abuse his kids (in fact, the "What's Love Got to Do With It" Hollywood-ized Tina's life when in reality the truth is stranger than fiction).

*Ike reportedly did admit he abused Tina even when he used to deny it.

*Tina still thanks Ike for her professional career. Let's face it, without Ike, would there have been a TINA TURNER?

I doubt it.

Well that don't stop Marvin, Miles, Jimi and 'em for being recognized as heroes while they had their own personal demons. The only difference is Ike had his dramatized in a film about his ex.

Here's facts not true about Ike & Tina's relationship:

*Despite the "rape scene" in "Nutbush City Limits", he didn't rape her. Both he and Tina actually DENIED this.

*Ike NEVER confronted Tina during a performance at the Ritz, neither did he abuse his kids (in fact, the "What's Love Got to Do With It" Hollywood-ized Tina's life when in reality the truth is stranger than fiction).

*Ike reportedly did admit he abused Tina even when he used to deny it.

*Tina still thanks Ike for her professional career. Let's face it, without Ike, would there have been a TINA TURNER?

I doubt it.

Thank you for setting that record straight. What people do tend to forget is that there are 2 sides to every story. We heard one side. Ike has maintained his dignity and said nothing. Also, it was a different time. Many celebs fall into the trap of wife abuse and drugs abuse. Mohammed Ali had problems with his first wife, it was not dramatised so we don't get to delve in his private life. Ray Charles private life was far from perfect, so are many hollywood stars. We just don't get to hear about them and get to pass our own self-righteous judgement.

Nobody knows what kind of pressure these people were under and what drove them to it. Wasn't Elvis abusive to precilla too, didn't his daughter cry outside his bedroom door for attention as he drugged himself inside. Is it fair to make a judgement about one person's life when we don't put everyone else's under the microscope? How do we know how we would have behaved given the same set of circumstances? We need to stop judging other people by our own substandards.