Big Dipper, a rock-and-roll quartet from Boston that will perform tonight at the Knitting Factory, pulls its inspiration from sources as varied as punk-rock, American history, the Billboard charts, romantic poetry and PBS. Its members are musical contortionists: they love to toy with extremes, juxtaposing ferocious guitar noise with celestial vocal harmonies or planting a delicate melody in jagged rhythm. Already established favorites on the club circuit and college radio stations, the band makes its major-label debut later this month with ''Slam,'' a sonic romper-room of colliding dynamic extremes and witty, irreverent lyrics.

Big Dipper's current sophistication owes much to the fact that each band member brought years of musical experience with him when Big Dipper was formed in 1985. Bill Goffrier and Gary Waleik (the two lead singers and guitarists), Steve Michener (the bassist) and Jeff Oliphant (the drummer) played in groups like the Embarrassment, Volcano Suns and Dump Truck; their stylistic terrain ranged from arty guitar pop to ear-singeing garage punk to gentle folk-rock. As Big Dipper, they began to recombine their influences into a more cohesive sound that kept elements of each genre, but often mangled them beyond recognition.

''It's a very democratic band, so it never comes out sounding like what any of us wants to hear,'' Mr. Goffrier said recently in a phone interview from Boston. ''We had an audience that seemed to like that here was this loud, reckless punk guitar band that had catchy melodies.''

In 1987 the band released its first EP, ''Boo-Boo,'' which has quirky, agitated melodies played with arty minimalism at punk velocity. But Big Dipper was searching for a stronger identity that went beyond the sum of its individual parts. By the LP ''Heavens,'' released at the end of that year, Big Dipper was emerging as a pop band, albeit a highly unusual one. Songs like ''She's Fetching'' and ''All Going Out Together'' have wonderfully coaxing melodies undercut by an almost alarming roughness in technique. A breezy guitar riff would be echoed by the same notes played octaves lower; Mr. Goffrier's flat, wavering vocals added a touch of irony to lyrics like ''I saw a tree that still had one last leaf.''

Sound vs. Manner

Live on stage, the band also alternated between punkish fury and dapper pop, with sweet melodies struggling to be heard above a wall of feedback. Big Dipper was perfecting the art of playing pretty sounds in the ugliest manner possible.

This insouciance carried over to the band's lyrics. Instead of boy-meets-girl love songs, Big Dipper wrote about astronomers, Presidents, boats, anything that defied expectation and appealed to the group's offbeat sense of humor. Big Dipper seemed tickled by the idea of placing friendly characters in vaguely threatening situations. ''Ron Klaus Wrecked His House,'' a song from the 1988 album ''Craps,'' told the story of one of Mr. Goffrier's former bandmates. It starts innocently enough (''He had a party/he had a band/and a thousand loving friends'') but it quickly turns bizarre (''He threw the doors out of the windows/and the windows out of the doors'').

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.