Esperanza Limjap-Osmeña, wife of Philippine President Sergio Osmeña, reserves her first painting at the Filipino painters exhibition, Manila, Philippines, Feb. 23, 1946

She became first lady upon the death of Manuel L. Quezon, when her husband succeeded to the presidency of the Philippine government-in-exile in the United States. However, while her husband was president-in-exile, she herself was still in the Philippines and remained there, during the Japanese occupation of the Philippines during World War II. Mrs. Osmena was in Baguio. She and her three children, Ramon, (22), Rosie (20) and Victor (11), escaped from Japanese held Baguio by walking 50 miles across the mountains to Dagupan, Luzon, Philippines early Feb. 1945.

US Signal Corps Photo, US National Archives

I have been going through the USA National Archives, WWII Philippines photographs albums that are posted on line. The picture here is one of them. It will take a long time to go through them all, as there are 134 albums of about 160 pictures per album that equals approximately 21,000 pictures. I believe it is import to save the most important images and to share them as I have time to work on them and to have them available on a memory drive that will go to researchers for many years to come. There are a lot of pictures of people shaking hands and pinning metals on each other that does not interest me much. The subject mater of the pictures are mostly haphazardly arranged with very poor to nonexistent indexing so I have to look at each what appears in a postage stamp size thumbnail picture to ascertain if it is important to save. Many of the pictures are very gruesome and difficult to look at but needs to be seen for an accurate picture of what truly happened here in the Philippines. I am realizing that what most think of the history of WWII Philippines is not the real picture of what happened but only a selected very condensed picture that often relate to personal views, I will take some of the blame as this includes myself. The pictures I will personally be sharing online will predominately show the humanitarian side of the war.

I am needing a memory storage device such as a USB hard drive that would last a long time and be a safe place to archive all the pictures I am saving if anyone would like to help. Also need advice to where would be best for all my history pictures could be saved for future generations long after I am gone.