168. ESPERANZA ESCOLAR LIMJAP-OSMEÑA: From a Carnival Princess to the Country’s First Lady

FROM A FIRST PRINCESS TO A FIRST LADY. Esperanza Escolar Limjap, from the nationalist Limjap family, was in the royal court of the 1915 Carnival Queen. She eventually became the First Lady of the Philippines by becoming the 2nd wife of Pres. Sergio Osmena.

Seven years after the first Carnival of 1908, the national fair had established itself as a grand event of eminence, due not just to the spectacles, but also in part to the prominent, high-profile personalities who participated actively in the Carnival festivities. One of the most ardent supporters were members of the wealthy Filipino-Chinese Limjap family, led by the family patriarch, Mariano Limjap and his wife, Maria Escolar.

It is to be remembered that the very first Carnival Queen of 1908 was Leonarda Limjap, an elder daughter of the Limjap couple. She, however, had to abdicate her throne in favor of a family trip to Japan. Pura Villanueva stepped in to assume the queenship of the very 1st Carnival. Perhaps to make up for that inconvenience, the Limjaps gamely joined the winner’s royal court of honor in the next few years.

First to make her appearance as a princess of the 1915 Carnival Queen, Concepcion Medina, was 19 year old Esperanza Escolar Limjap. Born in 1896, Esperanza , aside from Leonarda, had two other sisters—Felisa and Paciencia, and two younger brothers, Jose and Francisco, who would both marry Carnival Queens. Jose or Perico was wed to Catalina Apacible (1923 Queen) while Francisco was the King Consort of the 1926 winner, Socorro Henson. The Limjap sisters were popular high society figures due to the status of their family, who were also held in esteem for their strong nationalist bent—Mariano was known to have lent his financial support for the Philippine Revolution.

Just five years after her Carnival stint, Esperanza would meet and marry Sen. Sergio Osmeña, a widower who had previously lost his first wife two years before, Estefania Chiong Veloso. Osmeña had been tirelessly working for Philippine independence ever since he launched his political career, becoming a Speaker of the House of the 1907 Philippine Assembly. The promised independence was delayed by the World War II and the Japanese Occupation. Upon the death of Pres. Manuel Luis Quezon, Osmeña ascended the presidency of the Philippine government-in-exile in the United States—making Esperanza the fourth First Lady of the land.

She remained in the Philippines, however, all throughout the dark days of the World War II. She was a First Lady for just two years, while rearing her children Victor, Ramon and Rosalina. Esperanza Limjap-Osmeña, the beautiful lady-in-waiting of the 1915 Carnival court who became a First Lady, died in 1978 at age 82 years old.

166. THE 1932 ORMOC CARNIVAL

ORMOCANON QUEEN. The royal queen of the 1932 Ormoc Carnival, identified only as T. Torres. Dated 1932.

Ormoc, now a city of Leyte, got its name from 'ogmok', an old Visayan term for lowland or depressed plain. Its early economy is agriculture-based, with a well-developed sugarcane, rice and pineapple industry. Ormocanons also subsisted on aquaculture or fishing.

The people of Ormoc are predominantly Catholic with a visible Muslim minority. Like other Philippine towns and places, Ormoc celebrates its annual fiesta in honor of the patron saints Saint Peter and Saint Paul on June 28 and 29.

In 1932, the one and only known Ormoc Carnival was held, possibly to coincide with their fiesta celebration. Chosen as the royal queen was the lovely Trinidad Garces Torres.The future carnival beauty was born in Ormoc on 5 July 1905, to Nicolas Torres and Carlota Garces. The prominent Torres family were of Spanish-Filipino-Chinese descent and this mix of races showed best in Trinidad's refined and delicate beauty (Lucy Torres, congresswoman, showbiz personality and wife of actor Richard Gomez comes from this clan).

“Trining”, as she was fondly called by close friends and family members, studied at a local school, St. Peter’s Academy. For her college education, she was sent off to Cebu where she enrolled at the Colegio de la Inmaculada Concepcion.

Tall, gentle and always with a ready smile, Trining was the perfect choice to reign as the Queen of the 1932 Ormoc Carnival. She not only captivated the local crowd, but also a military man--Col. Segundo de Guzman Vergara, AFP PC, whom she married right after the Carnival on 21 May 1932.

As a young wife, Trining became adept in the domestic arts: sewing, baking and cake decorating. Gifted with an artistic flair, she took up painting as a hobby. The Ormoc ancestral home which was just across the Ormoc tennis court, gave her the chance to learn tennis and she enjoyed it as her sport. The Vergaras had seven children: Fe, Esperanza (twins), Caridad, Rodolfo, Teresita. Nicolas and Ma. Corazon.

At the height of the second World War, Col. Vergara, who was engaged in guerrilla activities, was caught by the Japanese in Baguio City. Trining’s strong devotion to the Sacred Heart and her valiant spirit saw the family through in their most difficult times.

After her husband’s retirement from military service, the family settled in Cebu City where Trining took an active part in the Sto Rosario Parish as a Catholic Womens’ League officer. At the age of 52, she was called back home by the Lord on 19 July 1957.

She lived long enough to writer her memoirs which were published and given away to relatives and friends who came to celebrate her 100th birthday.

Today, local residents are proud of what Ormoc has become--an independent component city, not subject to regulations from the Leyte provincial government. In fact, Ormoc today is the acknowledged economic, educational, cultural, commercial and transportation hub of western Leyte, notwithstanding the killer typhoon that flooded the city and took more than 6,000 lives in November 1991.

(Many thanks to Ma. Corazon Vergara Mendoza, daughter of Mrs. Trinidad Torres-Vergara for the biographical sketch of her mother. Additional info provided by Mr. Louie Nacorda, after contacting his cousin, Jullie Martinez Torres, Lucy Torres' mother).