By Gary Wilhelms

The Oregonian's editorial on redistricting is right on target. There was an error, however. In 2001 the Legislature did not fail to agree on a plan as the editorial stated. It did its job and passed a plan that was then vetoed by Gov. John Kitzhaber.

Redistricting is the single most partisan political project our Legislature faces every 10 years. This shouldn't surprise anyone. Legislators are politicians, after all, and they are partisan.

We now have legislative district boundaries in Oregon drawn in a most partisan way by former Oregon Secretary of State Bill Bradbury. Kitzhaber made sure of that with his veto.

The Legislature did its duty and passed plans for both legislative and congressional redistricting. Legislators and staff worked for months putting together plans that accurately reflected the demographics and population growth of the state. The plans were responsive to public testimony and met the requirements of the Oregon Constitution and Oregon state law.

It became apparent early in the session that the Democrats' strategy was to take full advantage of the constitutional provisions that allowed them to force the redistricting project onto their fellow Democrat's desk in the secretary of state's office, as opposed to negotiating a legislative compromise. Because the Democrats knew they could count on their governor's veto over any plan with which they disagreed, they had no reason to work objectively with the Republicans in the Legislature – and they didn't. The Democrats stuck to their strategy and were successful in achieving their partisan objectives.

To be fair to the Democrats, Republicans might well have taken the same action had the roles been reversed. And that's the problem with the current system. Bipartisanship and redistricting appear to be incompatible.

In 2005-2006, it was my honor to serve as co-chairman of the Public Commission on the Oregon Legislature. The commission recognized the extreme partisanship of our current redistricting system and recommended establishment of a redistricting commission to carry out the task. It makes good sense for Oregonians to place The Independent Redistricting Commission Amendment on November's general election ballot and pass it, thus preventing such blatant, irresponsible partisanship by either major party from occurring in the future.

Gary Wilhelms lives in Northwest Portland.