Widely thought to be the greatest NBA player of all time, Chicago Bulls legend Michael Jordan has proven himself to be as good a businessman as he was a ball player, boasting an incredibly large net worth that was only really made after the player hung up his Jordans.

In a career spanning nearly two decades, Jordan set many NBA records and won six titles with the Chicago Bulls. He was a five-time NBA MVP, a six-time NBA Finals MVP, 14-time NBA All-Star and member of the 50th Anniversary All-Time Team.

Jordan was so prolific and had such a massive impact that upon his final retirement in 2003, the Miami Heat retired his famous number 23 jersey, despite the fact the player never played for the team.

Even during his playing career, Jordan was already being viewed as the greatest of all time.

‘There’s Michael Jordan and then there is the rest of us,’ NBA and LA Lakers legend Magic Johnson once said, while Larry Bird said: ‘God disguised as Michael Jordan.’

Here is all you need to know about Michael Jordan including who he is, his NBA career and stats, what is his net worth and how much he earns today.

Who is Michael Jordan?

Born in Brooklyn, New York but raised in Wilmington, North Carolina, Michael Jordan attended the local Laney High school, where he initially failed to make the varsity basketball team as a 5ft 11 sophomore.

However, growing to 6ft 3 over the summer ensured that Jordan’s prolific talent didn’t remain hidden for long. He ended his high school basketball career as an All-American.

He chose a basketball scholarship at University of North Carolina and played his way into the university’s Tar Heel basketball program mythology when he made the game-winning jumper for his university against Georgetown in the 1982 NCAA championship game, with just 18 seconds on the clock; the game ended 63-62. He was voted Sporting News’s College Player of the Year both as a sophomore and as a junior.

In 1984, Jordan was the third overall draft pick, being selected by the Chicago Bulls. Jordan immediately became a fan favourite at the Chicago Stadium and attendances actually began to increase, with people turning up to see the new wunderkind. He ended his first season as the Rookie of the Year.

A foot break early in the second season saw Jordan miss 64 games only to return later in the season and score a record 63 points in an NBA playoff game.

It was in his third season, 1986-87, that Jordan truly got up and running in the NBA. It was the first of seven consecutive seasons that Jordan scored an average of 30 points or more per game. That season also saw Jordan set the record for scoring 23 consecutive points in a game, as well as scoring 40 points or more in nine games in a row.

Between 1987 and 1990, during which time Jordan’s Bulls lost to the Detroit Pistons in the NBA playoffs, Jordan led his team to three consecutive NBA titles, firmly earning himself a place in NBA lore.

However, the shocking murder of his father and idol in 1993 contributed to Jordan’s surprise decision to retire in October of that year.

He then surprised the sporting world again by signing up to Minor League Baseball, before returning to NBA and the Bulls in 1995, simply saying: ‘I’m back’.

His return pushed the struggling Bulls to another ‘three-peat’—winning the NBA title three times in a row, with Jordan sealing the threepeat in the 1997/98 season with a game-winning shot against the Utah Jazz with just 6.6 seconds on the clock.

Jordan retired for the second time in 1999 only to return to the NBA again in 2001 for two years. He finally retired for good in April 2003.

What is Michael Jordan’s net worth?

Michael Jordan’s net worth is estimated to be $1.7 billion (£1.2bn), according to Forbes.

The basketball legend earnt the bulk of his staggering net worth after his playing career ended. According to Sportrac, Jordan earnt just under $90 million during his NBA career.

However, despite being retired, Jordan is thought to make much more than any active NBA player, including LeBron James, Kevin Durant or Stephen Curry. According to Forbes, Jordan makes $100 million a year from his Nike Air Jordan royalties.

LeBron only makes $90 million in total, including his salary and endorsements. Jordan’s Air Jordan sneakers reportedly generate $2 billion a year, not a bad return for Nike, who signed up Jordan in 1984 for just $250,000.

After Jordan retired, he gradually moved into franchise ownership and operation oversight, ultimately buying the Charlotte Hornets for $175 million in 2010. As of 2018, the NBA team is worth $1.05 billion and Jordan owns 90 per cent of it.

Jordan’s incredible wealth has allowed the legend to purchase things like a private jet that has the famous Air Jordan logo on it, as well as his iconic 23 jersey number and initials.

He also owns a $13 million home in Florida and is building his own golf course called Grove XXIII, which will open in 2019.

Jordan also owns multi-million properties in Charlotte and Chicago.