Palenville. . . . Dolores “Lola” Jordan, 83, fell asleep in death Tuesday, January 3, 2023 at Northern Dutchess Hospital with her family by her side. Dolores was born on April 4, 1939 to Severo and Rosa Rodriguez of Carlsbad, New Mexico. After getting married in 1963, she moved to Southern California where she gave birth to her two boys, then returned to Carlsbad New Mexico where she raised her family, and finally, about 16 years ago, relocated to upstate New York where she lived until her death.

She is survived by her older sister Julia Calderon, and her two sons, James and his wife Renee Jordan of Belleville, Michigan and David and his wife Melissa Jordan of Palenville, New York and four grandchildren - Lauren, Taylor, Kadon and Silas.

In 1969, while living in California, she was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Since then, Dolores was known as a woman of strong faith, who had a life of relying on her Creator to care for her needs. She found great joy in sharing as a full time minister for over 35 years, spending many hours each week teaching and training others to learn about and worship God. She lived by the words of Jesus at Matthew 6:33 who told his followers “to seek first the Kingdom and all these other things (life’s necessities) will be added to you”. She provided for herself by working part time as a school crossing guard, in addition to making and selling delicious tortillas and tamales by the dozen, which she became well known for.

For the last 16 years she has been associated with the Saugerties congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. She touched many people by her love and devotion and left behind many spiritual friends, children and grandchildren. She truly believed in what she taught. She had full confidence in the resurrection hope that the Bible promises in the Paradise to come.

Memorial service is to be held Saturday, January 14th at the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses at 293 Mike Krout Road in Saugerties, New York at 4:00 pm

.

In lieu of flowers, donations could be made to jw.org in her behalf.