Vince Carter was one of those unfortunate souls who arrived in the NBA at a time when he and other high-flying wing players tried to live up to the hype of being “the next Michael Jordan,’’ and couldn’t pull it off.

Off the court? The eight-time NBA All-Star was every bit Michael Jordan, if not bigger – in Canada.

The former Toronto Raptor did more for the game of basketball and the NBA in Canada than the most famous Canadian associated with the sport, the game's inventor, James Naismith. Because of Carter:

--The NBA has seen the influx of future superstars who hail from Canada, starting with Toronto product Andrew Wiggins, now in his second season in Minnesota.

--The Canadian national team, with only one medal in nine previous Olympics, has a record eight NBA players on its roster and is considered a favorite to go home with a medal if it qualifies for the upcoming Summer Games in Rio.

--The explosion of youth basketball in Canada is to the point where kids today in Toronto and Montreal are picking hoops over hockey, forever the national sport.

--Unlike their Canadian brothers out in Vancouver who came into the league at the same time, in 1995, the Raptors were able to put down roots, as Carter exploded on the NBA scene, and didn’t end up south of the American border in a place like Memphis, where the Grizzlies relocated after only six seasons in British Columbia.

--Toronto is hosting the 65th annual NBA All-Star Game this weekend, the first time it’s being held outside the United States.

As impactful as Michael Jordan was on the game of basketball, with a generation of kids wanting to "be like Mike,'' His Airness never did all of that.

“It’s surreal,’’ Carter told Forbes the other day after a game in New York playing for the Grizzlies (how ‘bout that, Vancouver?). Now 39, he isn’t up in Toronto to bask in the glory this weekend. Family obligations have him in Florida.

“Coming into the league at 21, I was just trying to establish myself. I was just trying to make my way and show the world what I could do,’’ he said. Then, reflecting on what he did for basketball in Canada, where a generation of kids had his poster on their bedroom walls, he said, with a smile, “It’s freakin’ awesome. It’s hard to believe.’’

It is difficult to fathom because it’s not like he spent a lifetime in Toronto winning titles. After only six seasons and just 15 playoff games for the Raptors, he had worn out his welcome with a lot of fans. He came into the NBA in 1998, around the same time as other gifted athletes who drew the unfair Jordan comparison at a tender age -- Tracy McGrady, Harold Miner, Penny Hardaway, Grant Hill and Kobe Bryant, to name just a few. Carter had an additional burden, coming out of North Carolina as Jordan did more than a decade earlier. In the end, only Bryant came close, with his five rings and legendary competitive fire that will be hailed this weekend when he makes his 18th and final All-Star Game appearance.

Carter has spent the rest of his career with five teams, never reaching the heights some expected. But he never disappointed thousands of Canadian kids who saw him live up to his “ Air Canada ’’ nickname with his rousing 2000 victory in the NBA All-Star slam-dunk contest. That night, they were hooked for life, with some even putting down their hockey sticks for good and dribbling off to promising careers in basketball.

“If you look at how popular the Raptors are now, they sell out every game,’’ said Nik Stauskas, a second-year player for the Sixers who grew up outside Toronto, in Mississauga, and became a basketball gym-rat during Carter’s heyday. “That popularity started with Vince Carter. Before he got there, basketball was not really big in Toronto or Canada. But now, everywhere you go, everyone is playing basketball. Even though it’s a country where most kids are playing hockey, it’s leveling out now, the amount of kids playing basketball over hockey.’’

They start out dribbling early, with four-year olds being taught the basic rules and fundamentals. The highly-acclaimed CIA-Bounce program keeps it going in grade school and then sends junior-high age teams to the United States to compete against Americans. This is how Wiggins got his start, along with the Cavs’ Tristan Thompson, and several others who have succeeded in making NBA rosters.

A record-tying 12 Canadians are playing in the NBA this season, more than any other country outside the United States. This weekend in Toronto, Wiggins, Saskatoon’s Trey Lyles, now with the Utah Jazz, and another Toronto product, Dallas Maverick forward Dwight Powell, are playing for the World Team in the BBVA Compass Rising Stars Challenge in Air Canada Centre. Many Canadians in the NBA have come from marquee college programs like Kentucky and Kansas, so it proves that the Canadian youth programs are doing something right. Under Vancouver’s Steve Nash, the former two-time NBA MVP now running the Canadian national team, they’re seen as Summer Games medalists for the first time since 1936, when they won the silver in Berlin.

“If we get to Brazil, we’ve got a shot to win a medal,’’ said the Celtics’ Kelly Olynyk, another Toronto product and member of the Canadian National team who grew up with a poster of Carter dunking on his bedroom wall.

Last summer, the Raptors, now right on the heels of LeBron James’ Cavs in the East, brought in Toronto native Cory Joseph as a free agent. If not for Vince Carter, Canadians like Joseph might not have the chance to return home to continue their NBA careers.

“When the Grizzlies didn’t make it in Vancouver, there was a feeling that maybe the Raptors would also be leaving,’’ said Tas Melas, a Toronto native and part of the quartet of Canadians who comprise “The Starters’’ on NBA TV. “But Vince Carter, more than any other player, brought such a level of excitement and popularity to the Raptors, he might well have prevented the Raptors from leaving Toronto. That’s how big he was for the city. He really did put the Raptors on the map. He made them relevant.’’

Along with basketball, from Halifax all the way out to the Yukon.