The twentieth century was an era of unprecedented horror.

From the Russian Revolution through the two world wars to

the Chinese “Cultural Revolution” and the Cambodian “killing

fields,” millions upon millions have been oppressed, enslaved, or

slaughtered by revolution, war, and the policy of their own

governments. Although one may hope that the worse excesses of

that age have run their course, the Soviet Union has disintegrated

and Eastern Europe is rising, our time remains characterized by

a pervasive apprehension that something is “out of joint.” Freedom,

justice, peace, prosperity, civilization itself seem far from

secure, even in the Western liberal democracies. The widespread

unease and the unparalleled disorder of our era cry out for

explanation.

The philosophy of Eric Voegelin offers insight into the causes

of the twentieth-century nightmare, causes, he suggests, bound

up with the very nature of “modernity” itself. According to

Voegelin, the great modern ideological movements—communism,

fascism, national socialism—are neither random and inexplicable

outbursts nor solely the products of particular material

and historical conditions. They should be understood instead as

the extreme manifestations of a form of spiritual disorder or

psychic disorientation that springs from certain tensions inherent

in human existence. For Voegelin, the crisis of modernity is in

essence a spiritual crisis rooted in a deformation of the truth of

reality.

The Balance of Consciousness

According to Voegelin, human existence is always and everywhere

“existence-in-tension,” existence in the “in-between” reality that

Plato termed the metaxy and that is constituted by a simultaneous

tension toward both mundane existence and its transcendent

divine ground. Human consciousness in all times and all places

finds itself embedded within a mysterious, participatory reality

“halfway between God and man,”1 a reality constituted by a

tension toward the existential poles of immanence and transcendence,

the poles of mortality and immortality, ignorance and

knowledge, time and timelessness, imperfection and perfection,

matter and spirit, existence and non-existence, life and death,

truth and its deformation. Reality is a comprehensive whole that

consists of both mundane and transcendent dimensions, of mutual

participation of the human and the divine.

A “healthy,” “balanced,” or “well-ordered” consciousness is

for Voegelin one that accepts the “tensional structure of existence”

2 and mediates successfully between its contrary poles.

“Diseased” or “unbalanced” or “disordered” consciousness, on

the other hand, may be defined as a mode of experience wherein

one or the other of the existential poles whose tension constitutes

the “in-between” reality of human existence has been collapsed; it

is existence within a truncated or deformed reality characterized

by the eclipse of one or the other of its inseparable dimensions.

Disordered consciousness may, then, take one of two main forms,

depending upon which existential dimension, the immanent or the

transcendent, recedes from experience. In the case wherein

intense consciousness of transcendent reality serves to eclipse

mundane reality, a condition that Voegelin terms “metastatic

faith,” the belief in the imminent arrival of divine presence on

earth in such a manner that worldly existence is transfigured

prevails. The second possible response to the tension inherent in

human existence and the one more problematic in the modern era

is the eclipse of the transcendent realm by the illegitimate

expansion of immanent to total reality; such, Voegelin maintains,

is the existential response that underlies both the various ideological

constructions and other peculiarly “modern” political and

social movements.

According to Voegelin, the phenomenon of imbalanced consciousness

is intimately bound up with mankind’s spiritual advance

from what he terms the “compact” spiritual experience of

the ancient cosmological empires to the “differentiated” experiences

manifested in classical philosophy and Christianity. The

inhabitants of the cosmological empires (e.g., Egypt, Persia,

Syria) experienced the Divine Source as an intra-cosmic entity;

they dwelled within a divinized “world full of gods.” Their world

was experienced as a microcosm that reflected the divine order of

the cosmos, an order mediated through the political ruler to the

people and the realm. For cosmological man then, the divine and

the immanent were inseparable; he had not yet discovered either

the soul or the transcendent ground of being, experiences that

could dissociate the cosmos and the ground of being into radically

immanent and radically transcendent realms. Although there

undoubtedly existed tension between the “truth of the soul”3 and

the “truth of society”4 even in the compact societies, such tension

could not become socially disruptive so long as the cosmological

order was experienced as all-embracing and so long as the

existential reality of the psyche and the transcendent Divine

Source remained undifferentiated.

Thus the problem of unbalanced consciousness, “the problem

of maintaining a balance between openness to transcendent

experience and sober attentiveness to the necessities of mundane

existence,”5 is bound up with the “theophanic events” wherein the

transcendent God revealed himself to man; it first appears on the

historical scene with the revelation of the “I Am” to the Hebrews.

Indeed, the prophet Isaiah is for Voegelin the prototypical bearer

of “metastatic faith,” the “faith that the very structure of pragmatic

existence in society and history is soon to undergo a decisive

transformation.”6 Isaiah, of course, counseled the king to lay

down his arms and trust that God would defeat his enemies.

Isaiah’s experience of the transcendent God was so intense as to

eclipse the reality of political existence in time; he became

convinced that divine intervention would transform the very

structure of mundane reality in such a way as to insure the victory

of the Chosen People over their worldly enemies. The point is that

Isaiah’s experience of participation in divine transcendent reality

was so strong that he “tried the impossible: to make the ‘leap in

being’ a leap out of existence into a divinely transfigured world

beyond the laws of mundane existence.”7 According to Voegelin,

this “prophetic conception of a change in the constitution of

being,”8 bound up as it with the existential discovery of the “truth

of transfigured reality,”9 lies at the root of the ideological consciousness

which he identifies as one of the main sources of

disorder in the modern era.

The classical philosophers also struggled with the problem of

existential balance deriving from the discovery of spiritual order.

The discoveries they made, of the transcendent nature of the

Divine Source (the Platonic epekeina or beyond) and of the

psyche, the “human spiritual soul” that is the “sensorium of

transcendence,” were epochal events in mankind’s advancement

from spiritual dimness to spiritual clarity. For Plato discovered

that the openness of the psyche toward divine reality may permit

certain transcendent experiences that shape the order of soul and

society; he discovered the transcendent ground of being which is

the source of personal, social, and historical order. Plato, however,

unlike Isaiah, managed to maintain the balance of consciousness

in the face of the theophanic event; he did not permit

his transcendent experiences to disturb his awareness of the

autonomous structure of mundane reality, of the enduring reality

of existence in the cosmos of begetting and perishing. Although he

glimpsed a realm of enduring perfection, he remained lucidly

aware of the “improbability”10 of its establishment in time as well

as of the inevitable decline of such a perfect order if it were

somehow to come into being. Platonic philosophy represents for

Voegelin a model of “noetic control,” of healthy, balanced existence

within the enduring tensions of the metaxy.

Although the Platonic discovery was an advance from compactness

to differentiation, it was, according to Voegelin, but a

step on the spiritual path that found its end in the epiphany of

Christ. Christianity, for Voegelin, represents the “maximal differentiation”

of the relation between God and man; the “leap in

being” that accompanied the epiphany of Christ fully differentiated

the radically transcendent nature of the Divine Source and

the truth of transfigured reality. The effect was not only to

heighten the tension of existence in the metaxy but potentially to

“destabilize” the balance of consciousness. It is perhaps difficult

for modern man to re-experience the “shock” felt by those who

first experienced the revelation of the transcendent God and the

concomitant “withdrawal of Divinity from the world.” The newly

de-divinized cosmos must have “seemed to be left an empty shell,

void of meaning, [indeed,] void of reality.”11 Moreover, and most

importantly, Christianity permanently “reordered human existence

in society . . . through the experience of man’s destination,

by the grace of the world-transcendent god, towards eternal life

in beatific vision.”12 Such an experience threatened to diminish

the value of mundane existence (what is the meaning and significance

of that existence in light of man’s ultimate transfiguration

in God out of time?). For various reasons then, the Christian

revelation would challenge the existential balance of consciousness.

Thus it is not surprising that the modern ideological movements,

which Voegelin regards as manifestations of existential

imbalance and disorientation, should prove to be intimately

bound up with the Christian experience.

Gnosticism and Modernity

From the seventh century B.C. onward the ancient Near East was

wracked by a series of military conquests that profoundly disoriented

the inhabitants of the various cosmological empires. A

widespread sense of meaningless and psychic disorientation was

engendered by the slaughter, the enslavements, the forced intermingling

of peoples and cultures, phenomena which inevitably

undermined faith in the traditional cosmological order. Various

responses arose in the attempt to comprehend the meaning of

existence within such a troubled world, among the more important

of which were stoicism, Christianity, and gnosticism.

To gnostic man, the world appeared neither as the “wellordered,”

the cosmos of the Greeks, nor as the Judeo-Christian

world that God created and “found good.” On the gnostic view, by

contrast, the world appeared as a “prison from which [man must]

escape, . . . as an alien place into which man has strayed and from

which he must find his way back home to the other world of his

origins.”13 The fundamental experience of the ancient gnostics

was of an alien, disorganized, chaotic, and meaningless world.

They experienced God as an absolutely transcendent entity utterly

divorced from mundane existence, the existing world as

false, as devoid of reality, as “existent nothingness.” Not surprisingly,

the central theme of the diverse gnostic thinkers was the

“destruction of [such an abhorrent] old world and the passage to

[a] new.”14 A new world that offers salvation from an old world felt

to be wrong in its very constitution could, they taught, be gained

through personal effort and a privileged gnosis of the means of

escape.

According to Voegelin, the ancient gnostic speculations engendered

in response to the disorder of the “ecumenic age” are of

significance because the experiences and beliefs they symbolize

have re-emerged in modern times with such force as to have

decisively shaped the character of that era. The history of

“modernity” is for him the history of a struggle between different

representations of the truth of existence, represented on the one

hand by the truth of the soul and of man’s relationship to God

manifested in classical philosophy and Christianity, and on the

other by the “new truth” propounded by modern “gnostic”15

thinkers, the truth of the radical immanence of existence and the

promise of a revolutionary transfiguration of man and society in

time. Philosophy, we have seen, discovered the truth of transcendent

divinity, a truth decisively differentiated by the epiphany of

Christ. These events an “uncompromising [and] radical dedivinization

of the world”16 and a concomitant dissociation of

previously unified spiritual and temporal power. Henceforth

man’s transcendent spiritual destiny was to be existentially represented

by the Church, the de-divinized temporal sphere of

political power by the Empire, a “double representation of man

in society”17 that endured through the Middle Ages.

Voegelin maintains that this truth of man in society was

challenged during the late Middle Ages by the rise of various

“gnostic” spiritual movements which would prove to be the

seedbeds of modern ideological consciousness and which ultimately

effected the “re-divinization” of political society in the

name of a new truth of existence. Such movements were an

outgrowth of a “fissure”18 within the early Christian community

that stemmed from varying interpretations of the Revelation of

St. John. The Revelation had aroused chialiastic expectations in

certain early Christians, and they impatiently awaited Christ’s

imminent second coming. Augustine sought to dash such expectations

by re-interpreting John: Christ’s thousand-year reign on

earth, he declared, had already begun with the Incarnation; thus

“there would be no divinization of society beyond the pneumatic

presence of Christ and his Church.”19 According to the Augustinian

philosophy of history, the period following the epiphany of

Christ was the last of six historical phases, the saeculum senescens,

a time of waiting for the end of history to be brought about

through eschatological events. Augustine, moreover, had drawn

a further distinction between profane and sacred history, which

was, in turn, embedded in a transcendental history of the civitas

dei. Only transcendental history, including the sacred history of

the epiphany of Christ and the establishment of the Church, had

direction toward eschatological fulfillment. Profane history had

no such direction, or indeed, meaning of any sort; it was merely

a waiting for the end in a radically “de-divinized” world.

The End of History

The twelfth century was a time of civilizational expansion and

growth; population was increasing, trade and settlement expanding,

urban culture and intellectual life flourishing. Augustine’s

notion of a “senile” age was incongruous in the midst of such

expansive vitality. At this critical juncture, a new construction of

history emerged to challenge the Augustinian construction. The

Calabrian monk Joachim of Flora created a speculative history

that satisfied the desire to endow mundane human existence with

a meaning which Christianity, and especially the Augustinian

conception of history, had denied it; and he did so by relocating

the end of transcendental history, the Christian eschaton, the

ultimate transfiguration in God out of time within historical

existence. Joachim’s project, according to Voegelin, was the “first

Western attempt at an immanentization of the meaning of history.”

20 What begins with Joachim is a conception of “Western

society as a civilizational course that comes into view as a whole

because it is moving intelligibly toward an end.”21 Thus begins the

modern attempt to find a Final End of mundane history that

would substitute for the end of history in the transcendent

Christian sense.

Joachim modeled his new conception of history on the

Trinity; he divided history into three ages, the Age of the Father,

the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Age of the Father spanned the

beginning of creation to the time of Christ; the Age of the Son

began with Christ and ended in Joachim’s time; the Age of the

Holy Spirit was about to dawn (Joachim predicted it would begin

in 1260) and would last indefinitely. According to Voegelin,

Joachim’s construction is of significance because the three-age

symbolism he created rules not only the modern ideological

constructions of history, but the “self-interpretation of modern

[Western] society” and thus the structure of its politics to this day.

In Joachitic history, which let immanent history end with the

end of sacred history, transfiguration in God was “fallacious, but

not un-Christian.”22 In the several centuries following Joachim’s

construction, the new historical expectations he created remained

more or less within the Christian orbit; it was thought that

an increase of fulfillment in history would come about through a

new eruption of transcendent spirit. Over time, however, the

process of “fallacious immanentization” begun by Joachim became

more and more radical and the relation to transcendence

ever more tenuous. By the eighteenth century, the increase of

meaning in history would be conceived as a radically intramundane

phenomenon; the transcendent pole that sustains the balance of

existential consciousness collapsed. The result, according to

Voegelin, is the spiritual and temporal disorder and disorientation

of the “modern age.”23

What unites the various manifestations of this spiritual disorder—

positivism, progressivism, Marxism, psychoanalysis, liberalism,

fascism, National Socialism—is the radical “will to

immanentization,” the closure toward the transcendent dimension

of human experience, that underlies their construction.

Indeed, the most extreme modern ideologies go a step further;

their proponents not only reject the transcendent ground but seek

to “abolish the constitution of being, with its origin in divine,

transcendent being, and to replace it with a world-immanent

order of being.” They aim to bring about the transfiguration of

human nature through human action in history and to build a

terrestrial paradise endowed with the meaning and salvational

qualities of the Christian eschaton. In short, the ideological

constructions embody, in Voegelin’s famous terminology, a radical

and “fallacious immanentization of the Christian eschaton.”24

The Christian conception of man’s ultimate transfiguration in

God was brought “down to earth,” transformed into the notion of

human transfiguration in time, to be accomplished through

strictly human and immanent action; the transcendent Christian

end of history was transformed into a mundane “End of History”

to be realized in the immanent future. The ideologists carried the

process begun by Joachim to its limit; the transcendent dimension

of reality was fully absorbed into mundane existence.

Gnostic Experience and Symbolism

As we have said, Voegelin contends that the modern ideological

constructions are the productions of “speculative gnostics” who

share the basic existential motivations and aims of their ancient

forebears. These include:

1. Dissatisfaction with present existence.

2. The belief that this dissatisfaction results from the intrinsically

poor organization of the world. If something is not right, the

reason is to be found in the evil of the world.

3. The belief that salvation from the wickedness of the world is

possible.

4. The belief that the order of being will be changed in an

historical solution, that a good world will evolve historically.

5. The belief that a change in the order of being can be realized

through human action, that “self-salvation” is possible through

man’s own effort.

6. The construction of a “formula” for self- and world-salvation

based upon knowledge of how to alter being. The gnostic

thinker typically presents himself as a prophet proclaiming

knowledge about the salvation of mankind.

The ancient and modern gnostics differ in that the moderns

assume an aggressive, activist stance toward the “evil” of existent

reality, while the ancients were relatively quietistic. Nevertheless,

according to Voegelin, their experiential motivations as well as

their aims are of a piece. All gnostics experience the world “as a

place of total chaos which would be transformed into a world of

perfected, durable order by divine or human intervention.”25 All

gnostics aim to alter the constitution of being through human

effort in order to escape a world experienced as alien and evil, and

they aim to do so through applying their special gnosis to that task.

All of them have falsely extrapolated their experience of the

“beyond” to the “beginning,” claiming knowledge of the nature

and meaning of human existence and of history as a whole that

they do not and can not actually possess.

The modern ideological “gnostics” also differ from their

ancient counterparts in that the modern “revolt against reality” is

directed against a world shaped by the Christian differentiation of

spiritual truth; their constructions must be understood in light of

the Christian background against which they rose in rebellion.

Indeed, the modern ideologies may be said to “derive” from

Christianity in that they represent radically immanentized transformations

of Christian experience and symbolism, a derivation

evinced in their structural congruence with Christian doctrine.

First, all the modern ideologists adopted and transformed the

Christian idea of perfection. For the Christian, life on earth is

shaped by the expectation and aim of realizing a “supernatural

[fulfillment] through grace in death.”26 The Christian idea of

supernatural perfection thus consists of two components: a

teleological movement toward a final axiological goal, the state of

ultimate perfection or “highest value.” As we have said, all the

ideological movements immanentize the Christian eschaton by

aiming to produce a final state of perfection within historical

existence, a perfect society that is to be created through implementation

of the ideologists’ program or system. The ideological

constructions differ, however, according to whether they emphasize

either the teleological or axiological element of the Christian

conception from which they derive. Accordingly, the various

immanentist constructions may be classified into several types:

1. Teleological immanentization. When the teleological component

of the idea of perfection is immanentized, the main

emphasis of the system lies on the forward movement toward the

goal of perfection in this world. According to Voegelin, the

eighteenth century ideal of “progress” is of this type as is liberal

progressivism in general. The emphasis is on movement; typically

there is little clarity about the final state to be realized.

2. Axiological immanentization. Here the emphasis is placed on

the state of perfection in the world. Generally the thinker paints

a detailed picture of the proposed perfect society while giving

short shrift to the means by which it is to be realized. All

formulations of “ideal societies” fall into this category; Thomas

More’s Utopia is a classic example.

3. Activist mysticism. In this form of immanentization, the

teleological and axiological types are combined. Here the thinker

typically provides a more or less clear picture of the final state to

be achieved as well as “knowledge” of the means by which it is

to be brought into existence. Auguste Comte’s final state of

industrial society under rule of the managers and positivists is

one example; Karl Marx’s communist society to be ushered in by

the proletarian revolution is another.

The second set of Christian symbols transformed by the

modern ideological speculators derive from the Joachitic conception

of history we have previously discussed. Joachim created and

bequeathed to modern man a complex of four symbols.27 The first

is that of the “Third Realm,” the third “world-historical phase that

is at the same time the last, the age of fulfillment.” Such symbolism

reappears at a later date as the now familiar distinction between

ancient, medieval, and modern historical periods; in the Comtean

periodization of history into the theological, metaphysical, and

positivist ages of man; in Marx’s division of history into primitive

communism, bourgeois class society, and the final realm of the

classless Communist paradise; in the “Third Reich” symbolism

adopted by the Nazis; and so forth.

The second symbol derived from the Joachitic trinitarian

eschatology was the symbol of the leader, the dux, who “appears

at the beginning of each new era and establishes it through his

appearance.” This symbol reemerges in various guises throughout

the ensuing centuries: in the belief that St. Francis of Assisi would

usher in the new Age of the Holy Spirit; in the paracletes imbued

with the spirit of God who led the various sectarian movements of

the Renaissance and Reformation; in Machiavelli’s Prince; in the

charismatic leaders of the national-socialist and fascist movements.

The third symbol created by Joachim and adopted by the

ideological thinkers was that of the prophet, the precursor of each

of the three ages. This symbol was transformed over time from the

still-Christian conception of Joachim’s era into the secular intellectual

who knows the program for salvation from the evils of the

world, who can predict the future course of world history, and

who knows the meaning of that history (Hegel, Marx, Comte).

The final symbol bequeathed by Joachim to the modern world

was that of the “community of spiritually autonomous persons.”

Joachim believed that the Age of the Holy Spirit would be one

wherein highly spiritualized individuals would exist in community

without the mediation and support of institutions and organizations.

Joachim had the monks in mind. This notion reappears in

later times as, for instance, the Marxian and anarchist notion of

the withering away of the state and as the radical-democratic

conception of a society of autonomous men.

“The substance of history,” Voegelin insists, “is to be found on

the level of experiences, not on the level of ideas.”28 In order to

understand the logic of modern political developments and the

rise of the ideological mass movements, then, we must examine

them in light of the existential consciousness that engendered

them, trace them to their source in the experiences and motivations

of their founders and followers. More particularly, we must

understand them as impelled by an intense “will to

immanentization” which is in turn related to a desire to assuage

the tensions of existence in the metaxy by eliminating one of its

sources, man’s experience of the transcendent.

We recall that for Voegelin human existence is existence-intension

within the participatory reality constituted by simultaneous

tension toward both mundane existence and its transcendent

divine ground. By definition, a healthy or well-ordered

consciousness is one that successfully mediates between the

existential poles of immanence and transcendence; a disordered

consciousness does not so succeed. Because all ideological consciousness

entails a rejection of the transcendent dimension of

reality, a closure toward the divine ground, it may be regarded as

a form of imbalanced or disordered consciousness in the

Voegelinian sense. What accounts for this disturbed relation to

reality? Although there is no one “cause,” the following elements

enter into Voegelin’s analysis of the existential roots of

“pneumopathological,” or spiritually disordered, consciousness.

In all cases of ideological consciousness, the will to power of

the thinker “has triumphed over the humility of subordination to

the constitution of being.” We recall that the principal aim of the

ideological thinkers is to “destroy the order of being, which is

experienced as defective and unjust and through man’s creative

power to replace it with a perfect and just order.” In order to

destroy such a “defective” order, it must be conceived as susceptible

of human intervention; it can not be the created order of the

Christian God which is, of course, impervious to human manipulation.

Because the order of being must be conceived as under

man’s control, then, its “givenness . . . must be obliterated.”29 This

requires the “retroactive” destruction of the God whose existence

would prevent man from fashioning the order of being to his

liking.

Consequently, the first and most important task of the

ideological thinker is, as Nietzsche succinctly put it, to “murder

God.” What underlies the “will to immanentization” and the

passion to abolish transcendent reality is an unbounded desire for

power over being, the pneumapathological wish and need to be

God. According to the “logic” of the disordered soul, such a wish

can be realized by destroying God, for, magically, he “who

murders god will himself become god.” Thus, the “murder of God

is of the very essence of the gnostic recreation of the order of

being.”30 What, one may ask, engenders such a seemingly insane

aspiration? “Beyond the psychology of the will to power we are

confronted with the inscrutable fact that grace is granted or

denied.”31 On Voegelin’s view, our search for an ultimate explanation

for the emergence of so many would-be modern gods

founders on the ultimate mystery of man’s relation to God.

Existential Resistance

Voegelin wishes to emphasize that the ideological thinkers do not

deny the truth of reality (they may in fact be spiritually sensitive

persons with an acute sense of transcendence), they resist it. The

gnostic resisters who created the ideological systems, like the

philosophers and prophets who created the philosophical and

Christian symbolism, experience a reality that has eschatological

direction, that is moving beyond its present structure. Moreover,

they know reality moves not only into an historical future but

toward a transcendent Beyond; notions such as “transcendence

into the future” clearly point to the distinction they intend to

obscure (an existence that “comes to an end in time without coming

to [a] final End out-of-time”32). Why do the resisters resist a truth

which with they do not disagree? And what are the experiential

sources that have made such resistance a recurring force in history?

The existential resisters are dissatisfied with the lack of order

they experience in personal and social existence. Such dissatisfaction

is itself understandable, for human existence is afflicted with

many miseries—hunger, hard work, disease, early death, injustice—

and painfully disoriented by rapid change (such as that

engendered by the modern scientific and industrial revolutions).

Ideological resisters, like many others, suffer from present disorder,

but, more importantly, they suffer from the discrepancy

between that disorder and the higher, truer order which they also

apprehend yet which seems to lie beyond the possibility of

realization. They are “disappointed with the slowness of the

[transfiguring] movement in reality toward the order they experience

as the true order demanded by the Beyond”; they are morally

outraged by the misery entailed by this “slowness.” Such experiences

can lead to the conviction that something is “fundamentally

wrong with reality itself.” At such a point, the resister to disorder

becomes a revolutionary who seeks to overturn the very structure

of reality itself. The tension of existence in the metaxy dissolves;

the “Beyond is no longer experienced as an effective ordering

force.”33 The ideologist constructs a system that will replace the

defective force.

There is, however, an even deeper stratum of resistance, one

originating from the structure of consciousness itself and especially from its imaginative capacity. Imagination for Voegelin is

the capacity that permits man to symbolize, to articulate and

express, his participatory experience within the “metaxy of divinehuman

movements and countermovements,” the capacity that

makes him a “creative partner in the movement of reality toward

its truth.”34 This creative imaginative force can go awry, however,

if the creative partner forgets he is a partner and begins to regard

himself as “the sole creator of truth.” It is such an “imaginative

expansion of participatory into sole power”35 that underlies the

ideologist’s illusory belief that he can create a new reality through

creating a new image. Because of his imaginative capacity, man

can confuse his image of reality with reality itself.36

Ideology and the Drive for Certainty

We have seen that the ideological thinker aims to abolish existential

reality and the constitution of being in order to deliver man

from various perceived evils. But the control of being does not of

course actually lie within his grasp; reality is not susceptible of

human manipulation. Accordingly, “nonrecognition of reality is

the first principle”37 of the ideological constructions. In order to

make his pathological constructions seem plausible, the thinker

must imaginatively construct what Voegelin, following Robert

Musil, calls a “Second Reality,” a transfigured “dream world” that

replaces the First Reality he finds so unsatisfactory. The various

Second Realities38 resemble the First Reality in many respects

(otherwise they would be too patently absurd), yet the ideological

constructor necessarily eliminates certain inconvenient features

of reality from his model. The ideologists vary in regard to which

element of reality they omit; it may be the primary experience of

the cosmos (the begetting and perishing of all existent forms), as

in all constructions which anticipate the “End of History”; the

need for institutional constraints and incentives as in Marx; the

summum bonum as in Hobbes; the human penchant for possession,

as in More’s Utopia, and so on. The point is that every

ideological thinker constructs an imaginary reality that eliminates

essential elements of reality as we know it.

As we said, the construction of ideological systems or programs

does not of course permit actual control over being or

reality. According to Voegelin, what the ideological constructors

gain is the “fantasy satisfaction” of certain psychic needs, more

particularly, of the need for “a stronger certainty about the

meaning of human existence.”39 Ideologues and their followers

are comforted by the sense of increased certainty that accompanies

their new-found knowledge, and the pretense of knowing the

future course of events provides a firmer, if illusory, basis for

action. For Voegelin, then, it is the inherent uncertainty of human

existence, the tension of existing in a world whose only assurance

of meaning and purpose is to be found through faith-engendered

experiences, that impels the ideological thinkers into their Second

Realities and to the construction of philosophies of history that

envision an everlasting realm of bliss in time.

As we suggested earlier, Voegelin maintains that the heightened

spiritual tension engendered by the Christian differentiation

is bound up with the rise of the modern ideological movements.

Christianity, in further differentiating the truth of the soul and

clarifying man’s relation to a radically transcendent God, exacerbated

the existential uncertainty the ideological constructions

serve to assuage.

The Christian faith, as Voegelin understands it, requires great

spiritual strength; it provides no assurance of the meaning or

value of personal existence other than that gained by faith itself.

It does not generate certain knowledge of the nature of being, of

God, or of the meaning of mundane events; it reveals, on the

contrary, the hard truth that the “order of reality is essentially

mysterious.”40 A faith whose very “essence is uncertainty,”41

Voegelin suggests, may generate an intolerable anxiety among

those who long for greater assurance. The fact that the Christian

differentiation of the truth of the soul is “more accurate” may

provide scant consolation to those who crave a more certain

guarantee of meaning and purpose.

Voegelin contends that Christianity’s widespread social success

brought many people into the Christian orbit who did not

have the spiritual stamina to endure the strains of existence

demanded by Christian faith at the same time further differentiation

revealed the uncertainty that is its essence. The result was

that “great masses of Christianized men who were not strong

enough for the heroic adventure of faith became susceptible to

ideas that could give them a greater degree of certainty about the

meaning of their existence than Christian faith.” Because the

reality of being as it is known by Christianity is difficult to bear,

he maintains, many persons took flight into alternative spiritual

constructs that permitted a seemingly “firmer grip on God”42 than

that afforded by Christian faith alone.

This was not, Voegelin tells us, an entirely novel historical

phenomenon, but one that appeared wherever the truth of the

transcendent God had been differentiated; the “temptation to fall

from spiritual height that brings uncertainty into final clarity

down to a more solid certainty of world-immanent, sensible,

fulfillment seems to be a general human problem.”43 The Israelitic

differentiation of the transcendent God had engendered a similar

response; those who could not endure the demands placed upon

the Chosen People fell back upon the still culturally viable

polytheism of the surrounding society. In the late Middle Ages,

the socially available spiritual alternative to a difficult Christianity

was the “living culture” of the various underground gnostic

movements, which provided “experiential alternatives sufficiently

close to the experience of faith but far enough from it to remedy

the uncertainty of strict faith.”44

More particularly, the “experiential alternatives” offered by

the gnostic spiritual movements (the cradle of the modern ideological

movements) consisted of various attempts to “expand the

soul to the point where god is drawn into the existence of man,”45

of attempts to “divinize [the person who undergoes the experience]

by substituting more massive modes of participation in

divinity for faith in the Christian sense.”46 Such experiences are of

three kinds: intellectual, emotional, and volitional. The intellectual

variant typically takes the form of a “speculative penetration”

of the mystery of creation and existence; the Hegelian system is

a good example. The emotional variant assumes the form of an

“indwelling of divine substance in the human soul,” as in the

experiences of the paracletic sectarian leaders. The third type, the

volitional, manifests itself as an “activist redemption of man and

society,” best illustrated by Comte and Marx. According to

Voegelin, it is this existential self-divinization that constitutes the

“active core” of the immanentist eschatology that has impelled the

modern re-divinization of society “from medieval immanentism

through humanism, enlightenment, progressivism, liberalism,

positivism, and Marxism.”47

Marx provides a clear example of the existential dynamics

involved in the process of self-divinization/secularization. Marx,

following Feuerbach, insisted that God was a “projection” of

man’s highest and best qualities into some illusory beyond. Thus

man’s task is to draw his projection of God back into himself; in

so doing, man becomes conscious that he himself is god; he is

transfigured into “superman.” According to Voegelin, however,

this Marxian transfiguration represents the extreme form of a

“less radical medieval experience, which drew the spirit of God

into man, while leaving God himself in his transcendence”; the

modern “superman” of Comte, Marx, and Nietzsche is the end of

the road to radical secularization marked by such figures as the

paracletic sectarian leader, the “godded man” of the English

Reformation mystics,”48 and so on. “Modern secularism should

be understood as the radicalization of . . . earlier forms of

[medieval and] paracletic immanentism, because the experiential

divinization of man is more radical in the secularist case.”49 All of

this highlights the historical continuity between earlier and later

gnostic movements and the experiential dynamics involved in the

growth of the gnostic consciousness that has gradually transformed

man’s self-understanding over the course of centuries.

We have seen that the ideologists’ aim is to abolish the

tensions of historical existence by freezing history into an everlasting

final realm on earth. To eliminate such tensions, they must

abolish one of its sources, the truth of the open soul in tension

toward the divine, as well as its symbolic manifestations, philosophy and Christianity. Thus the marked hostility to both philosophy

and Christianity that characterizes the peculiarly “modern”

strains of Western civilization. On Voegelin’s view, however,

Christianity is not blameless in this regard, for over time it came

to embrace an excessive doctrinization and dogmatism which

served to eclipse the experiential foundation of Christian truth.

The ossification of that truth in formalistic and literalistic theological

and metaphysical doctrine caused the Christian symbols

to become opaque; the existential truth they were meant to

express became increasingly obscure. It was this erosion of the

existential meaning behind the Christian symbols which “permitted

gnostic symbols of reality to take over the representational

function among the nation states of the Western world.”50

Indeed, the rise of gnostic consciousness led to a gradual

transformation of the meaning of the main symbols by which

Western civilization had ordered itself for a millennium. “Man”

became merely a world-immanent being who governs the universe

through intellect and will, through science and pragmatic action.

The highest-order goods in the Western tradition, the life of

contemplative reason expressed in philosophy and the life of the

spirit symbolized by the Church, were attacked as “false and

anachronistic.” Under the influence of the scientistic and positivistic

“science” that stems from gnostic consciousness, the “real”

was contracted to only that which is immanent and “objective”;

man’s spiritual needs were no longer regarded as grounded in the

truth of being. The resulting experiential impoverishment partially

accounts for the mass appeal of the modern “political religions.”

Men can allow the world to so expand that the world and the God

behind it disappear. But they cannot thereby solve the problem

of their existence, for it endures in every soul. Thus when the

God behind the world is unseen, the contents of the world

emerge as new gods.51

The most devastating result of the gnostic victory, however,

was the “radical expurgation of a whole range of experiences

previously open to man,” the symbolic experiences of transcendence

through which man gains his sense of order, meaning, and

immortality. Indeed, the loss of such experiences was both cause

and effect of the rise of revolutionary gnostic consciousness. As

we have said, the ossification of existential truth into dogma

served to eclipse the living truth such dogma was meant to

protect; it created an existential void to be filled by the gnostic

promise. The radical immanentization that ensued served further

to suppress those intimations of order and meaning rooted in

participation in the divine ground; indeed, it created a closed

world deprived of any relation to transcendent being. The resulting

sense of confinement fanned the flames of revolt against the

limits of such an existence; it fueled the various revolutionary

attempts to realize the “impossible goal of intramundane perfection.”

52 The nightmare of our century was created by disoriented

souls railing against the confines of a closed reality.

As we observed at the outset, the twentieth century has been

an era of “unprecedented destructiveness” and remains pervaded

by a diffuse sense of unease, dissatisfaction, and even alienation.

At the same time, however, it has witnessed significant achievement:

the growth in population accompanied by advances in

material well-being, longevity, and literacy, much of which is

made possible by the remarkable development of science and

technology. Our time represents the curious phenomenon of a

civilization that is “declining” and “advancing” at the same time.

Voegelin’s analysis of modernity suggests that the simultaneous

material growth and spiritual decline of Western civilization

is related to the process of radical immanentization or

“secularization” we have discussed. “Gnostic speculation overcame

the uncertainty of faith by receding from transcendence

and endowing man and his intramundane range of action with the

meaning of eschatological fulfillment; . . . as this immanentization

progressed experientially, civilizational activity became a mystical

work of self-salvation.”53 This ‘recession from transcendence’

permitted the release of tremendous spiritual energy for the

pursuit of worldly achievement; in building civilization, man was

earning salvation itself. Insofar as civilizational pursuits became a

diversion from or substitute for genuine spirituality, however, the

true life of the spirit was vitiated. Insofar as intramundane activity

“absorbed into itself the eternal destiny of man,” the transcendent

experiences which are the source of both personal and social order

tended to disappear or become unintelligible. “The price of

progress,” Voegelin observes, “is the death of the spirit.”54

The absurd and even demonic consequences of the modern

drive to immanentization are dramatically illustrated by the

example of Auguste Comte, the founder of the “religion of

humanity.” Comte was moved to proclaim himself the new

Christ, the “world-immanent last judge of mankind, deciding on

immortality or annihilation for every human being.”55 The memory

of those who had made significant intramundane contributions

would, he declared, be preserved forever in the annals of mankind;

indeed, the especially illustrious would earn a spot on the

positivist “calendar of saints.” Those who failed to make an

enduring contribution to immanentist human welfare were, on

the other hand, to be consigned to social oblivion; their memories

would simply be erased from the records of human existence.

Comte’s ideas were taken seriously by many eminent persons,

John Stuart Mill among them. How could this be? Voegelin’s

answer is that Comtean messianism is not all that far removed

from the ethos of secular liberal progressivism and its ideal of

ever-advancing immanentist progress. Progressivism, like its

ideological brethren, is a manifestation of existential imbalance;

it too relegates the transcendent to oblivion. Thus, from the

Voegelinian perspective, liberal progressivism appears as far less

benign than its proponents believe. Not only does it impoverish

human existence by identifying “progress” with material advance,

but, in relegating the spiritual life to the private sphere, it created

a spiritual vacuum in the “public square” into which the messianic

ideologues with their promise of ultimate fulfillment on earth

eagerly rushed. The end of a radically immanentist “progressivism”

is not, Voegelin warns, the emergence of positivist supermen

or a realm of earthly paradise, but the gulag and the concentration

camp. As he starkly put it, the “progressivist symbolism of contributions,

commemorations, and oblivion [characteristic not only of

Comte but of liberal-progressivism in general] draws the contours

of those ‘holes of oblivion’ into which the divine redeemers of the

gnostic empires drop their victims with a bullet in the neck.”56

Despite all of this, however, there is ground for hope, for

human nature does not change. “The closure of the soul in modern

gnosticism can repress the truth of the soul,

but it can not remove the soul and its transcendence from the

structure of reality.” The flight from reality can not last forever.

Moreover, the eschatological interpretation of history results in

a false picture of reality (the order of concrete human societies is

not in fact an eschaton); and errors with regard to the structure

of reality have practical consequences. Surely the recent collapse

of the former Soviet Union should give pause to even the most

zealous ideologues.

Voegelin’s work constitutes a major contribution to the investigation

of personal and social disorder from an ontological

perspective; his insights into the respective orders of being and

politics remind us that the nature of being cannot be ignored in an

examination of political (or indeed any other) phenomena. Although

these are thorny and difficult, if not “impenetrable,”

matters, the participatory exploration of the nature of reality as

practiced by Voegelin is surely the sine qua non for the advance of

knowledge in this area; surely he is correct to suggest that the path

toward personal and social order must begin with the existential

recovery of its transcendent source. Voegelin lovingly probed the

beyond in search of truth. The tragedy of our time should impel

each of us to undertake a similar exploration. For we have learned

that existence divorced from the comprehensive reality which

sustains and nourishes it is a wasteland indeed.

Linda C. Raeder

Palm Beach Atlantic College

NOTES

Plato, cited in Eric Voegelin, “Reason: the Classic Experience,”

in Anamnesis, trans. and ed. Gerhart Niemeyer (Columbia,

MO: University of Missouri Press, 1978), 103.

Voegelin, “Reason,” 100.

That is, universal humanity’s existence under God, the

discovery that the human psyche immediately participates in the

Divine Source of order.

The conventional self-interpretation of a society as it

regards its existential role as representative of a higher truth.

Michael Franz, Eric Voegelin and the Politics of Spiritual

Revolt: The Roots of Modern Ideology (Baton Rouge: Louisiana

State University Press, 1992), 30.

Ibid., 32.

Ibid., 34.

Ibid.

Thomas J. J. Altizer, “A New History and a New but Ancient

God,” in Eric Voegelin’s Thought: A Critical Approach, Ellis

Sandoz, ed. (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1982), 184.

Ibid., 51.

William C. Havard, “Voegelin’s Diagnosis of the Western

Crisis,” Denver Quarterly X (1975), 129–30.

Eric Voegelin, The New Science of Politics: An Introduction

(University of Chicago Press, 1952), 107.

Eric Voegelin, Science, Politics, and Gnosticism (Chicago:

Henry Regnery Company, 19678), 9.

Ibid., 10.

Voegelin uses the term “gnosticism” in an unconventional

and very broad sense. It is his term for certain disorders of the

spirit arising from “pneumapathological” or imbalanced consciousness.

It is more or less synonymous with other terms

Voegelin employs to symbolize the phenomenon of spiritual

disorder: “activist dreaming, egophantic revolt, metastatic faith,

activist mysticism, demonic mendacity, Prometheanism,

parousiasm, political religion, social Satanism, magic pneumatism,

and eristics” (Franz, 17).

Voegelin, New Science, 100.

Gregor Sebba, “History, Modernity, and Gnosticism,” in

Peter J. Opitz and Gregor Sebba, eds., The Philosophy of Order:

Essays on History, Consciousness and Politics (Stuttgart: Ernst

Klett, 1981), 231.

Sebba, 231.

Ibid.

Voegelin, New Science, 119.

Ibid., 128.

Havard, “Diagnosis,” 131.

Indeed, Voegelin maintains that the symbol of a “modern

age” was created precisely to denote the “epoch marked by the

decisive victory of the gnostics over the forces of Western

tradition in the struggle for existential representation” (New

Science, 134).

Voegelin, New Science, 121.

William C. Harvard, “Notes on Voegelin’s Contributions

to Political Theory,” in Ellis Sandoz, ed., Eric Voegelin’s Thought:

A Critical Appraisal (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1982),

97–98.

Voegelin, New Science., 105.

Ibid., 111–13.

Ibid., 125.

Voegelin, Science, Politics, and Gnosticism, 107, 53.

Ibid., 55.

Ibid., 31.

Eric Voegelin, Order and History, Vol. 5, In Search of

Order (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1987), 34.

Ibid., 36–37.

Ibid., 26, 37.

Ibid., 38.

This “imaginative perversion of participatory imagination

into an autonomously creative power has been a constant in

history,” recognized and expressed in such terms as hybris,

pleonexia, superbia vitae, libido dominandi, will to power, in the

romantic notion that “the world, it was not before I created it”

(Ibid.) Nevertheless, Voegelin observes, the identification of this

perverted imaginative force has not and will not eliminate it from

human experience. For such deformation is not a mistake that can

be corrected, but a permanent potential in human existence that

arises from the paradoxic structure of consciousness-reality and

from the “paradoxic play of forces in reality as it moves toward its

truth” (Ibid.). In other words, the thinker who is engaged in the

quest for truth is also a human being who, like his resisting

counterpart, is troubled by the forces of self-assertion, while the

resisters to the truth of reality are, like the questers, troubled by

the awareness of that truth.

Moreover, Voegelin suggests that the deformative potential

inherent in the structure of reality and consciousness may be

indispensable to the emergence of truth. For the movement

toward truth always originates as a resistance to untruth; every

thinker who is engaged in the quest for truth resists a received

symbolism he considers inadequate to express truly the reality of

his own experience.

Voegelin, New Science, 169.

For instance, Marx’s communist paradise; Comte’s positivist

industrial society; the thousand-year rule of the Aryan

masters, the eternally peaceful order of liberal constitutionalism,

and so forth.

Voegelin, New Science, 107.

Ibid., 68.

Ibid., 122–23.

Ibid., 124.

Voegelin, Science, Politics, and Gnosticism, 114.

Voegelin, New Science, 124.

Ibid., 124.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid., 126.

Ibid.

Harvard, “Notes,” 98.

Eric Voegelin, Political Religions, trans. T. J. DiNapoli and

E. S. Easterly III (Lewiston, NY: The Edwin Mellen Press, 1986),

50–51.

Havard, “Diagnosis,” 131.

Ibid., 129.

Ibid., 131.

Ibid.

Ibid.