7:30PM doors -- music at 8:00PM••• 21 AND OVER

$13Often Easy

ofteneasy.com/

danceable pop

San Francisco Sound Experiment

open.spotify.com/artist/4lIjQ85zvsnykGoEWxf7DN

psychedelic alternative rock

The Seagulls

theseagullssf.com/

post-punk pub-rock.

Often Easy

-from San Francisco, CA

-Often Easy is a musical project based out of the SF Bay Area. Often Easy was conceived of by frontman Spencer Hitchcock (Vocals, Guitar). Featuring accompaniment from Emily Rogers (Saxophone), Davis Perez (Bass), Baylor Odabashian (Guitar), and Tomas Georgiou (Drums).

Often Easy makes ragged, pop conscious danceable anthems guaranteed to let the steam off your engine and tickle your fancy.

Movin, groovin and doing the damn thing in San Francisco, CA since 2022

San Francisco Sound Experiment

-from San Francisco, CA

-San Francisco Sound Experiment has its roots in psychedelic and alternative rock. The majority of the band is from the North Bay and is lead by their vocalist Celeste Castellon who is originally from Miami, Florida. The band dubbed its name when all the members moved to San Francisco and began to branch out into other genres and experiment with their sound. Their debut single Sally Stone represents an upbeat and aggressive side of the band, driven by their unrelenting rhythm section and heavily distorted guitar. Celeste’s vocals drape over the sonic landscape to produce the band’s first of many musical experiments.

The Seagulls

-from San Francisco, CA

-The Seagulls are a San Francisco post-punk band fronted by UK songwriter Jon Brooder. Their “modern classic” raucous sound has hooks galore, old school anthems and a pop punk edge.

Coming of age in South London in the 70s, Jon was exposed to a diverse sound palette with influences ranging from 50s rock ‘n roll, Motown, Rock Steady, British Pub Rock and first wave punk rock.

Jon’s first foray into the U.S. music scene was in the late 80s, playing bass with British punk band Lightning Strike at CBGBs & other clubs. This planted a seed that landed Jon in San Francisco in the early 90s, where he joined with The Music Lovers and met keyboard player Isaac Bonnell. Jon and Isaac went on to form The Seagulls in 2012.

Isaac Bonnell (Matthew Edwards and the Futurists, The Vivants, Upstairs Downstairs) musical conversion therapy came early, when he first heard the keyboard solo on Del Shannon's 'Runaway' as a tyke. The sound ran down his juvenile spine like lightning & he was hooked!

Geri “Don’t F*ck With Me” Vahey, drums, (The Minks, Skint), joined The Seagulls 4 years ago and enjoys working with Jon on lyrics and songwriting.

Christina Michelle "Proper Rocker" Bailey, bass, (The Minks, Malice Cooper) enjoys bringing some low-end love with her vintage Rickenbacker (aka “The Crimson Destroyer”) to the Seagulls’ energetic and passionate songs.

&amp;amp;amp;lt;a href="https://theseagullssf.bandcamp.com/album/momma-knows-best"&amp;amp;amp;gt;Momma Knows Best by The Seagulls&amp;amp;amp;lt;/a&amp;amp;amp;gt;