“It’s just a happy coincidence.”

That’s my oft-repeated mantra when I’m asked if I’m related to Ringo Starr, the subject of my new book, “Ringo: With a Little Help” — the first comprehensive biography of The World’s Most Famous Drummer.

You’d be surprised how often I’m asked that particular question, mostly by people who either don’t know — or just plain forgot — that Ringo Starr was born Richard Starkey in Liverpool, England, 75 years ago on July 7, 1940.

But that’s not the only thing about Ringo that people forget — or didn’t know about him in the first place:

The ingrained Dickensian image (particularly among Beatles fans) of Richy Starkey growing up dirt-poor in Liverpool? Not quite. While Richy and his mom, Elsie, lived in the Dingle — a gritty part of town located near the rough-and-tumble Liverpool docks — Elsie worked several jobs (barmaid, cleaning houses) to keep a relatively comfortable roof over Richy’s head. A photo from his youth shows Richy and his childhood friend Dave Patterson posing in sharp suits — and the Starkey grandparents lived just down the street from their adored grandson and often cared for Richy while Elsie was working.

Ringo Starr was not born clenching drumsticks in his hands. In fact, he didn’t really exhibit a passion for drumming until he was hospitalized for two years for tuberculosis when he was 12 — the second of two extremely lengthy hospital stays — when patients participated in a musical program. That led Richy to discovering that cardboard cotton holders, stripped of their cotton, made for great drumsticks to thwack away on his bed and locker. (His first hospital stay, when he was 6, followed a burst appendix which almost killed him — and kept him bedridden in Liverpool’s Royal Children’s Infirmary for nearly a year.)

When Ringo joined his first professional band, Rory Storm and the Hurricanes, it was flamboyant band leader Rory Storm — born Alan Caldwell — whose idea it was to change Richy Starkey’s name to Ringo Starr, reflecting his drummer’s penchant for wearing lots of rings (the “Starr” just sounded right).

John Lennon, Paul McCartney and George Harrison didn’t just pluck Ringo from obscurity after firing their original drummer, Pete Best. Ringo was considered the coolest, best drummer in Liverpool (he had a beard, a car and a gray streak in his hair) and he knew John, Paul and George from Hamburg — where the Beatles shared the bill with Rory Storm. He’d already filled in for Best several times (while still a member of Rory’s band). The Beatles, about to go into the studio with George Martin — and brimming with self-confidence — knew they needed the best drummer around. That was Ringo. Listen to his isolated drum track on “I Feel Fine.” Classic.

When The Beatles first arrived in the US for their iconic appearance on “The Ed Sullivan Show,” it was Ringo — and not John, Paul or George — who was considered the “Favorite Beatle.” He was “The Funny One” with the big nose, infectious smile and sharp Liverpool wit. Watch the group’s first “Ed Sullivan Show” performance; when the camera introduces each individual Beatle to America, it’s Ringo who elicits the biggest reaction (cue the shrieking). He was the breakout star of the group’s first movie, “A Hard Day’s Night,” and elicited the most critical acclaim for his deadpan delivery and natural style.

It was Ringo who was the first Beatle to quit the group — walking out during the “White Album” sessions in 1968 because he was fed up with the acrimonious infighting (and wasn’t happy with his drumming). He spent a few weeks on friend Peter Sellers’ yacht, where he wrote “Octopus’s Garden,” while John, Paul and George bombarded him with telegrams imploring him to return. When he came back, George — who’d pushed the hardest to recruit Ringo into the Beatles in 1962 — decorated the entire recording studio, and Ringo’s drum kit, with flowers.

Ringo’s oldest son, Zak Starkey, exhibited an early talent for drumming — but Ringo never took much interest, giving Zak one lesson before calling it quits. No matter; Ringo’s pal, Who drummer Keith Moon — Zak’s godfather, “Uncle Keith” — gave the young lad drum lessons and even brought him a huge, Moon-sized drum set one Christmas. Zak is now considered one of the best drummers in rock — and has played with Oasis, the Who and Led Zeppelin (subbing for their late drummers, Moon and John Bonham).

After The Beatles broke up in 1970, it was Ringo who had the earliest success as a solo artist, firing off a string of hits including “It Don’t Come Easy,” “Back Off, Boogaloo,” “Photograph” and “You’re Sixteen,” with a little help from his ex-bandmates, particularly George Harrison — who’d already had a short-lived affair with Ringo’s first wife, Maureen. Ringo’s reaction to the betrayal? “Better you than someone we don’t know.” Fast-forward to 1994: Ringo, already happily married to Barbara Bach, was sitting at Maureen’s bedside when she died (at 48) from leukemia. Sweet and touching.

Ringo partied away the ’70s and ’80s — mostly with pals Keith Moon and Harry Nilsson — and got dead drunk on the way to rehab with wife Barbara in 1988. It was her idea, after their alcoholism led to blackouts, public bickering and more. They both got clean and sober and, shortly thereafter, a newly recharged Ringo launched his first All Starr Band tour — an annual rite he continues to this day.

Michael Starr is the TV editor of The New York Post. His new book, “Ringo: With a Little Help” (Backbeat Books), is out now.