Jim Carrey has been a significant figure when one thinks about Hollywood comedies. He has made a name for himself in the genre of slapstick humor with movies like The Mask, Ace Ventura: Pet Detective, Bruce Almighty, and many others. Besides his celebrated acting career, the other part of his life that has also been subjected to several headlines and controversies is his love life.

Advertisement

The 61-year-old has been through a highly talked-about romantic journey. Jim Carrey has been in relationships with some of the most notable female faces such as Linda Ronstadt, Lauren Holly, Renée Zellweger, and Jenny McCarthy. While his exes have often talked about the actor, major headlines were raised when McCarthy called him out publicly for his unfair treatment of her son.

Also Read: “Everything was so chaotic”: ‘Perfectionist’ Jim Carrey Regrets $74 Million Kate Winslet Movie

Advertisement

Why did Jenny McCarthy call out Jim Carrey?

Jenny McCarthy was one of the most popular n*de models for Playboy magazine before enjoying an acting career in movies and television as well. She was married to Jim Carrey in 2005 and had a happy marriage life before their union faced an unfortunate end in 2010. However, some of her statements about her former husband on The Howard Stern Show in 2012 pushed The Truman Show actor into a major controversy.

The audiences were surprised to hear another side of Jim Carrey as McCarthy claimed that The Cable Guy star abandoned her kid after parting ways. She had her son Evan from her previous marriage to John Mallory. Jenny McCarthy claimed that her autistic son missed her father and asked about him frequently to which Carrey didn’t pay any heed.

But the Scream 3 actress added that she still loved him and was disappointed in him for his treatment of the child following their break up.

Advertisement

“I think that sometimes people need to take a real break from each other. … But I still love him. I think you can love people from a distance and respect him. But as a mother, you just hope when you have a relationship with someone, it has nothing to do with the child when you break up.”

However, things did work out between the former couple as the actress once again made it to the headlines claiming that everything was sorted between the two. This came soon after Jim Carrey was publicly called out by Shia LaBeouf and Donnie Wahlberg’s wife took no time to come to her ex-husband’s rescue.

Also Read: “I am not serious in any way”: Jim Carrey Became Rich Using A Pet Cat As His Inspiration

How did Jenny McCarthy come between Shia LaBeouf and Jim Carrey?

It was in 2014 when the entertainment industry witnessed a peculiar feud between Shia LaBeouf and Jim Carrey. A war of words started between the Transformers star after the Dr. Robotnik voice took to the Golden Globes to take a dig on LaBeouf who was then accused of plagiarism. Carrey passed a comment that offended Shia LaBeouf badly. It was:

Advertisement

“Dying is easy. Comedy is hard. I believe it was Shia LaBeouf who said that. So young, so wise.”

Very soon, the Indiana Jones 4 star took to his Twitter to call out our beloved Grinch where he said:

“At least I don’t get arrested for indecency on major LA highways! Or abandon love child’s [sic].”

Also Read: Transformers Star Shia LaBeouf Threatened Jim Carrey after Heated Golden Globes Brawl: “If you explain Jim Carrey you’ve killed him…”

Jenny McCarthy believed that the Fury actor went beyond his limits and publicly announced that she and Jim Carrey had become good friends. She also mentioned Carrey’s daughter Jane with former wife Melissa Womer and complemented the actor to be a very good father. However, the feud soon came to an end as Shia LaBeouf stated a public apology.

Advertisement