Hollywood actor Jim Carrey has stunned fans by announcing his five-year relationship with gorgeous Jenny McCarthy is over - on social networking site Twitter.

The Yes Man star, 48, shocked more than half-a-million followers on his page with the revelation saying: 'Jenny and I have just ended our five-year relationship. I'm grateful for the many blessings we've shared and I wish her the very best! S'okay!'

The Canadian-born actor - star of hit comedies including Dumb and Dumber and Liar, Liar - started seeing the ex-Playboy model, 37, in 2005.

Jenny also posted a message on Twitter later, saying: 'I'm so grateful for the years Jim and I had together.

'I will stay committed to Jane and will always keep Jim as a leading man in my heart.'

Twice-married, Carrey was previously engaged to 40-year-old Bridget Jones star Renee Zellweger.

Support: Carrey carries Evan McCarthy, Jenny 's son during a 2008 march on Washington to call for healthier vaccines

The breakup came as something of a surprise as the pair had appeared to be one of Hollywood's happiest and most devoted couples.

Just last month McCarthy told E Online: 'I love Jim in any form. He could have no arms and no legs and I'll love the stump of him.'

Carrey had grown close to McCarthy's autistic son Evan. 'He taught me how to love,' the comic star said at a march to raise awareness for healthier vaccinations in Washington, D.C., two years ago.

'And without Evan I might never have seen the greatness of Jenny's spirit,' he added.

Funny couple: Comic Carrey took a leisurely stroll on Malibu beach in 2008 wearing McCarthy's swimsuit

In February the couple jointly hosted an event in Miami to support McCarthy's autism organisation, Generation Rescue.

'Jenny is the first person that I’ve been with where I don't have a giant question mark over my head,' Carrey told People magazine.

While McCarthy has praised her then-boyfriend's devotion to Evan.

She has said: '[He has the] capacity to love and to take on something that most men would completely run away from.'

The former couple have been outspoken about not getting married, but McCarthy recently joked that they were considering walking down the aisle.

'We say "never" but I don't know. Maybe for tax purposes, someday, when we are old.'

Carrey recently revealed on Twitter that he had become a grandfather after his 22-year-old singer/songwriter daughter Jane gave birth to grandson Jackson Riley Santana.

McCarthy said she was thrilled to be a grandmother to Jane's baby.