Jim Carrey has spoken up in defense after ex-girlfriend Jenny McCarthy accused him of abandoning her 10-year-old son.

Formerly a couple for five years, Carrey, 50, and McCarthy, 39, broke up in 2010. During their relationship, Carrey became close to McCarthy's son Evan from her previous marriage.

While on Howard Stern's radio show Monday, McCarthy said Evan frequently asks where Carrey is and that the actor has ignored her requests to visit.

Get Our Latest News for FREE

Subscribe to get daily/weekly email with the top stories (plus special offers!) from The Christian Post. Be the first to know.

"I've tried to ask [Carrey] numerous times [to see Evan], because my son still asks," said McCartney, who added that Evan asks about Carrey "almost weekly."

In response to the statement, Carrey has admitted that while he loves Evan, he does not see him, but did not explain why.

"I will always do what I believe is in the best interest of Evan's well being," said the actor in a statement released by his publicist. "It's unfortunate that Evan's privacy is not being considered. I love Evan very much and will miss him always."

While speaking with Stern, McCarthy also divulged that Evan has dealt with missing Carrey with professional help.

"He's been in therapy," said the model and actress. "It's a process, he's working on it."

In the past, McCarthy shared that her son "saved" her. The comedienne admitted that she had doubt of ever returning to show business following her son's autism diagnosis in 2005.

"When I was at my lowest point in my life, when my son was having seizures and cardiac arrest, I really thought I would never be able to go back [to work] and do anything funny," McCarthy told Celebuzz. "When your kid's sick, it's over."

After receiving treatment, Evan's condition improved.

"Once he got better and was happy, then I started to enjoy life again," recounted the actress. "People say, 'Oh my God, you saved your son!' But he really saved me. He brought a whole new perspective to me on what matters and what doesn't."