The rocky road to love. Jim Carrey’s dating history is stuffed with high-profile celebrities, from Renée Zellweger to Jenny McCarthy.

The Yes Man actor has been married two times: to Melissa Womer from 1987 to 1995 and to Lauren Holly from 1996 to 1997. Carrey shares daughter Jane, who competed on American Idol in 2012, with his first spouse.

After his 2d divorce, the Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind big name moved on with Zellweger, with whom he worked on 2000’s Me, Myself and Irene. The duo were briefly engaged but by no means made it down the aisle.

“She was special to me, very special. I think she’s pretty,” the Golden Globe winner stated of his ex right through a July 2020 interview on The Howard Stern Show. “I don’t regret — I don’t have those issues. But I do admire the folk that experience come thru my lifestyles for the great that they gave me … however I don’t pine for anyone, it’s now not that more or less situation. It’s just my way of claiming, ‘There used to be a vital factor there,’ and to acknowledge that.”

At the time, just about two decades after he and the Bridget Jones’s Diary actress known as it quits, Carrey confessed that he thought to be her “the great love of [his] lifestyles.” Zellweger, for her part, previously mirrored on her “surprising” reference to the Memoirs and Misinformation author.

“It used to be only a in point of fact natural thing to want to be around every different,” she informed Entertainment Weekly in June 2000. “And we didn’t see each and every other for a few months after we completed the picture — or in reality discuss even — and I simply noticed his absence significantly. It simply felt like, ‘Wow, I truly pass over him.’”

After splitting from the Judy superstar, Carrey sparked a long-term relationship with McCarthy in 2005 following her divorce from John Asher. The former View cohost and the director welcomed son Evan in 2002.

The Truman Show alum and the Scream 3 actress had been together for five years before Us Weekly confirmed their split in April 2010. “I’m so grateful for the years Jim and I shared in combination,” McCarthy instructed Us in a remark on the time. “I will be able to proceed to be in his daughter’s life and will always stay Jim as a number one man in my center.”

Shortly before their breakup, McCarthy unfolded about why she and Carrey didn’t feel harassed to get married.

“We say ‘never,’ however I don’t know,” she told Us in February 2010. “Maybe for tax purposes, in the future, when we are previous.”

Things between the former couple soon turned messy, as the Masked Singer character claimed that her son felt abandoned via Carrey.

“I’ve attempted to invite [Jim] numerous instances [to look Evan] as a result of my son nonetheless asks,” she stated on The Howard Stern Show in June 2012. “I believe that every so often other people wish to take a real smash from each different. … But I still love him. I feel you can love other folks from a distance and respect him. But as a mom, you just hope in case you have a relationship with any person, it has nothing to do with the kid while you get a divorce.”

Thank You!

You have effectively subscribed.

At the time, the Bruce Almighty actor told Us in a statement that he nonetheless cared deeply about Evan, noting, “I can always do what I believe is in the most efficient hobby of Evan’s well-being. It’s unfortunate that Evan’s privateness is not being regarded as. I love Evan very a lot and will leave out him all the time.”

Scroll down for a better look at Carrey’s courting history:

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tr%2FMmp6aspmjsm%2BvzqZmnJ2cmq%2BztdOyZKedp6h8sbXCrayrnaNkt6q5jJyYq6qVrsBusMCtoKefXZ22tMDOq7BmqpWjsqZ52Z6jpa%2BVnLKzecmepaexXaKwpK3RrZ%2ByZZ2kv6Z7