Jim Carrey and Jenny McCarthy have called it quits.

“Jenny and I have just ended our 5yr relationship. I’m grateful 4 the many blessings we’ve shared and I wish her the very best! S’okay! ?;” Carrey, 48, posted on Twitter Tuesday.

“Jim and Jenny have recently decided to end their five-year relationship,” Carrey’s rep, Marleah Leslie, tells Entertainment Tonight in a statement. “They are grateful for the many blessings they have shared and wish each other the very best.”

The former couple have been outspoken about not getting married, but McCarthy, 37, recently joked to UsMagazine that they were considering walking down the aisle.

“We say ‘never,’ but I don’t know,” she said at the 8th Annual World Poker Tournament in L.A. in February. “Maybe for tax purposes, someday, when we are old.”

“That’s what we keep joking — like, when we are 70! But for now, we’re fine. We are really fine!” she continued.

McCarthy recently told Us she was “really excited” to become a grandmother to after Carrey’s 22-year-old daughter, Jane, gave birth to son Jackson in February.

McCarthy divorced director John Asher, the father of her 7-year-old son Evan, in 2005 after six years of marriage. Carrey has been married twice: to Melissa Womer, with whom he split in 1995, and Lauren Holly, whom he split from in 1997.

Michael Douglas‘ son Cameron Douglas is hoping his star-studded clan can keep him from doing hard time.

His grandfather Kirk Douglas and stepmom Catherine Zeta-Jones are among the bold-faced names who sent letters to the Manhattan judge who will sentence him for dealing drugs on April 27.

The “Spartacus” legend said he was surprised to hear his long-troubled grandson was in trouble with the law.

“I remember when he played a part in the movie with me and Michael. He was a natural. We were so proud,” he wrote to Judge Richard Berman.

“I was shocked when he got in such a mess. I am convinced that Cameron could be a fine actor and a person that cares for others. I hope I can see that happen before I die. I love Cameron.”

Zeta-Jones wrote about what a wonderful step-brother Douglas was to her and Michael’s two children and said he deserved placement in a treatment facility – not a long-prison term.

“I use the word “disease,'” she wrote.

“My stepson is a caring, considerate worthy human being, but never the less, the disease that for years he has tried to combat, did take over again.

Family friend and NBA coach also Pat Riley begged the judge to send Douglas to rehab.

“I know in the bottom of my heart that he can become a valuable, responsible productive person in society,” Riley wrote on official Miami Heat stationary.

Douglas, who pleaded guilty to dealing drugs, faces a minimum of 10 years unless the judge shows him leniency.

Jennifer Aniston‘s latest film, “The Bounty Hunter,” didn’t fare any better across the pond.

Her film made just over $5 million at the UK box office over two weeks in release.

The actress has spent the past few weeks touring the globe on a publicity trail for her new film promoting her ‘chemistry’ with her co-star Gerard Butler

However, the film, in which the pair play a feuding ex-husband and wife, made just $5.8 million at the UK box office after its first two weeks of release – compared with Tim Burton’s Alice In Wonderland, which after four weeks of release made over $50 million.

“The Bounty Hunter,” which has received terrible reviews, also pulled in only $36 million in its first 10 days at the U.S. box office last month, where it was beaten by “Diary Of A Wimpy Kid” and “Alice In Wonderland.”

Actress Nicollette Sheridan, whose “Desperate Housewives” character was killed off in early 2009, is suing the show’s creator for more than $20 million, alleging assault and battery, gender violence and wrongful termination, TMZ and others report.

Sheridan alleges that on Sept. 24, 2008, after she questioned something in a script, Marc Cherry took her aside and “forcefully hit her with his hand across the face and head,” according to People, then fired her a few months later in retaliation for complaining about him.

She says she’d gone to ABC about the incident but that no action was taken.

“While we have yet to see the actual complaint, we investigated similar claims made by Ms. Sheridan last year and found them to be without merit,” ABC Studios said Monday.

The suit paints a picture of Cherry as someone who’d turn hostile of his authority when questioned, EW reports.

lsmith@denverpost.com

More celebrity headlines