Highlights

Funnyman Jim Carrey was spotted getting cozy with his new girlfriend on the beach in Malibu.

The 50-year-old, who has been married twice and also has a son with model-actress Jenny McCarthy, was seen enjoying the sunny day with his girlfriend, who looked much younger to him, reported Contactmusic.

Jim Carrey was earlier dating 23-year-old Russian student Anastasia Vitkina. It was even rumoured earlier this year that the Dumb and Dumber star was planning to marry the Russian student.

Jim Carrey and Jenny McCarthy split in 2010 after five years together, and McCarthy has said that her son, who has autism, still misses Carrey.

"I've tried to ask Jim numerous times to see Evan, because my son still asks. I tell Evan that someday you'll cross paths, meet again. It's hard. He's been in therapy. It's a process, he's working on it," she had said.

Mr Carrey had been largely single since splitting from long-term love Ms McCarthy but was soon spotted on a date with 'America's Next Top Model' contestant Anchal Joseph, 24.

His first marriage to Melissa Womer lasted seven years and the couple have a daughter Jane, now 23, who recently appeared on American Idol.

London: Funnyman Jim Carrey was spotted getting cozy with his new girlfriend on the beach in Malibu.

The 50-year-old, who has been married twice and also has a son with model-actress Jenny McCarthy, was seen enjoying thesunny day with his girlfriend, who looked much younger to him, reported Contactmusic.

Jim Carrey was earlier dating 23-year-old Russian student Anastasia Vitkina. It was even rumoured earlier this year thatthe Dumb and Dumber star was planning to marry the Russian student.

Jim Carrey and Jenny McCarthy split in 2010 after five years together, and McCarthy has said that her son, who has autism,still misses Carrey.

"I've tried to ask Jim numerous times to see Evan, because my son still asks. I tell Evan that someday you'll cross paths, meet again. It's hard. He's been in therapy. It's a process, he's working on it," she had said.

Promoted

Listen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.com

Mr Carrey had been largely single since splitting from long-term love Ms McCarthy but was soon spotted on a date with'America's Next Top Model' contestant Anchal Joseph, 24.

His first marriage to Melissa Womer lasted seven years and the couple have a daughter Jane, now 23, who recentlyappeared on American Idol.

.