If you want to shoot a werewolf, you'd better use a silver bullet. Regular bullets just won't do the trick. But that's about all silver bullets are good for.

The term "silver bullet" has come to mean a new technology or practice that will easily cure a major prevailing problem.

In discussions about energy, Global Warming and Peak Oil, we are constantly reminded (rightly!) not to waste our time looking for silver bullets. Instead, we are advised to look for "silver BBs"-- a whole bunch of modest improvements which may collectively solve the problem.

I want to suggest a new metaphor. I think we should fight Global Warming with Golden Bullets.

Golden Bullet (n): A partial solution to Global Warming that saves or earns money for someone (preferably me).

Framing policies as golden bullets makes them easier to sell. And while silver bullets don't exist, Golden bullets are everywhere...

Examples of Golden Bullets

Energy conservation is a Golden Bullet: As we discussed the other day, conservation (aka negawatts) is a clean, cheap way to reduce emissions. And conserving energy saves me money (and a penny saved is a penny earned). Also, a lot of things I might buy while conserving (CFLs, Smart Meters, more efficient appliances) could make money for others.

Good for the environment? Check. Capable of making/saving money for someone (preferably me)? Check. Its a Golden Bullet.

(BTW, one of these days, I'm going to collate all the great additional suggestions people made in the comments to that diary.)

Wind is a Golden Bullet. Wind brings cheaper electricity. In some cases, down to 5 cents per kw-hour, which is a lot less then I pay for my electricity.

Wind can also make people rich. Although I don't want to engage in a "callout diary", I'll bet if I concentrated really hard I could probably think of someone who makes a nice living financing large-scale wind projects.

And wind power is clearly a highly beneficial weapon in the struggle against global warming. Its renewable, non-polluting and very available. Its a golden bullet.

Solar is a Golden Bullet: Solar is a bit pricey now, but it was recently pointed out that Big Time concentrated solar could be right around the corner, which could save us all quite a bit, and make some serious money for its proponents. Other technologies (e.g., Thin Film, or non-silicon solar cells also offer huge promise). Another golden bullet.

Fuel efficient vehicles are Golden Bullets: Just as Toyota. Or ask the owner of a hybrid car-- at these gas prices, they easily pay for themselves. Another golden bullet.

Bicycle commuting is a Golden Bullet: Taking cars off the road is good for the environment, and bicycle commuting is far cheaper for the commuter than commuting by car (which costs about $.50/mile). And that's before one factors in the health benefits of regular exercise.

I think you get the idea.

Not everything is a Golden Bullet

Just to be clear, not everything energy-related that makes money for someone is a Golden Bullet. Corn-based ethanol doesn't qualify, because (although this is another discussion for another time) it really doesn't do much to mitigate Global Warming. Its not a golden bullet-- more fool's gold.

And not everything that will fight Global Warming will benefit the investor (let alone me). Basic research tends to pay off unpredictably, and generally to society as a whole. So, although very worthwhile, its not a Golden Bullet. Funding things like this are best left to governments. Some of Energize America's proposals are golden bullets, some are not, (but all facets aspects of a sound energy policy).

Framing discussions

The level of alarm about Global Warming is steadily rising. An awful lot of people want to "do something." But no individual, city, state or nation is exactly swimming in money. A golden bullet allows people to do something for free-- or less.

I don't care about people's motives for helping the struggle against global warming. We're not in a contest for sainthood-- we're locked in a deadly struggle and can use all the help we can get, including from people whose motives we don't approve of.

So I'd like to see us use this term in our energy discussions with our friends, neighbors and fellow citizens. Here are some more examples:

"CFLs aren't a silver bullet, but they are a golden bullet. They pay for themselves in months."

"Cape Wind isn't a silver bullet, but it is a golden bullet. It will lower electricity costs and avoid costly pollution."

"Carbon trading isn't a silver bullet, but it is a golden bullet. Think of the new markets that are created."

"Increased CAFE standards aren't a silver bullet, but they are a golden bullet. They'll save us all money on gas and make Detroit competitive again."

Please suggest more golden bullets in the comments..