FH JOANNEUM is one of the biggest universities of applied science in Austria. It has about 5,000 students and about 750 employees. The main campus is located in Graz and there are two more in Kapfenberg and Bad Gleichenberg. All three are situated in the province Styria in Austria.

Capturing new markets, making companies and institutions more productive, increasing the efficiency of technical as well as business processes and realising the potential of new products and services – the Department of Management focuses on meeting the challenges of the global economy. We manage regional and international projects in cooperation with companies and institutions in trade and industry, banking and insurance, tourism and healthcare. Our international network of academic and corporate partners enables students to gain valuable experience abroad by spending a semester at a foreign university or completing an internship with an international company.

The research projects carried out by our transfer centre address state-of-the-art tools and didactic approaches. We explore the latest e-learning trends in management education with a focus on didactics in close collaboration with national and international partners. Methods that prove successful in projects and online learning experiments are transferred into innovative training scenarios and modern teaching formats. The transfer center has extensive experience in EU projects and a long history of successful capacity building projects.

FHJ serves to the following tasks-

Prepare, host and Provide training of key representatives on HEI Quality teaching

Provide technical support to VESIM in project management issues

Support the European partners in training of trainers

Develop teaching learning pedagogy model for best practices

Suggest valuable inputs for best practices in quality education

Prepare the SDG indicators and connect them with the project objective achievement.

Help preparation of strategy plans and launching of COE in each institution