Please choose your photo size from the drop down menu below.

If you wish your photo to be framed please select Yes.

Note: 16″x 20″not available in a frame.

Images can also be added to accessories. To order please follow these links

Description

Dudley, Worcestershire born left half Percy Grosvenor began his football career with Dudley Works in 1931 and after an unsuccessful trial with West Bromwich Albion, he played for Evesham Town in 1932 before joining First Division Leicester City in February 1933, being signed by Leicester manager Peter Hodge, making his Football League debut against Aston Villa just before the year end. His major contribution during his debut season was to play in 5 FA Cup ties including Leicester’s 1934 FA Cup semi final appearance, when they were beaten by Portsmouth at St Andrews.

After their relegation from the First Division, Grosvenor established a regular place in The Foxes’ first team from September 1935, and played 34 times in their 1936-37 Second Division Championship campaign, scoring his only career goal in a 2-1 win at Barnsley in late December 1936, and he was an ever present in Leicester’s first campaign back in the First Division. Described as “a strong, forceful footballer”, “talented, constructive… especially clever in ball control and in helping the attack”. and “one of the soundest wing halves in the country, he uses his height to good effect defending the goal, but it is in his good ability in initiating attacks that he really shines”, his career was effectively ended by the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, by when he had made 181 appearances for Leicester City. Having played 6 times for Leicester during the first wartime season, he retired from the game in May 1940.

His father Sydney played twice in the Football League for Wolverhampton Wanderers in early 1905 and also played non league football for Crewe Alexandra, Worcester City and Walsall. His older brother Tom played for Birmingham, Sheffield Wednesday and Bolton Wanderers in the 1930’s, winning 3 caps for England, and another brother, Cliff, was on the books at Leicester City and West Bromwich Albion without making a League appearance. A nephew, Billy Brookes, played for West Bromwich Albion in the 1950’s.