NFL superstar Tom Brady has been told it could take 10 years to make a return on his investment in Birmingham City.

Brady, 46, was confirmed as a minority investor in Blues at the beginning of August and attended the last match at St Andrew's against Leeds United. Brady is a business partner of Blues' new owner Tom Wagner and the seven-time Super Bowl winner is expected to advise club staff on 'health, nutrition, wellness, and recovery systems and programs'.

It isn't clear how much Brady has invested in the club, but Wagner insists the move isn't a ploy to attract media attention. “It’s not a publicity stunt,” Wagner said. “Tom is actively engaged in the sporting side of the team. He is going to play a meaningful role. The fans of other Championship teams probably wish it was a publicity stunt. Unfortunately for them it is much more than that.

“I think others will adopt a lot of what Tom has done. He is proven to be successful in American football and I think this is a great platform for Tom to get his message out, which is something I believe very, very deeply in.”

READ: Birmingham City notebook includes striker domino, Gray deal, St Andrew's repeat

READ: Tom Cannon, Clarke-Harris and Birmingham City's other options in search for goals

Football is rarely a money-making business, particularly in the Championship where broadcasting revenue doesn't compare to the riches of the Premier League. Reaching the promised land is ultimately how Brady will make a return on his investment, if that is indeed what he is chasing.

Rob Wilson is a professor of economics at Sheffield Business School, and has provided some insight into a timeline of Brady's potential benefits from his investment in Birmingham.

“If return on investment is Brady’s prime motive, and we don’t know what that is, then you’re looking at a time frame of more than 10 years,” Wilson told Grosvenor Sport. "You’re also talking about investment in the playing and coaching squad, plus restructuring the stadium too.

“Birmingham is a big city and a lot of football gets played in and around it, whether it’s Aston Villa, West Bromwich Albion etc, so there’s a lot of competition in and around the city for them to get around before they can start to make some strong financial returns.

“So I don’t think a 10-year time horizon is excessive, I think it’s quite modest. Ultimately it requires promotion and it requires much tighter cost control so they can wash their face financially in the league they are playing in and hopefully generate additional revenues from being promoted, generating inward investment.”