Virginia is positively brimming with local wineries, and they can be found throughout the state. From mountaintop vineyards to those situated in the river realm, there’s simply no shortage of unique ways to experience Virginia wine. Today’s feature destination has the added appeal of being located alongside a biking trail. So, if you’re up for an adventure, you can ride your bike to a gorgeous riverfront winery known as Upper Shirley Vineyards in Charles City, Virginia. Ready to learn more?

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Whether you’re looking for winery tours in VA or simply enjoy sampling local wine, we think you’ll agree that Upper Shirley Vineyards in Virginia is a special place. Have you ever visited Upper Shirley Vineyards? What did you think of your experience there? Be sure to share your thoughts with us in the comments below — we’d love to hear from you! For more information, be sure to visit Upper Shirley Vineyards online. You can also follow Upper Shirley Vineyards on Facebook for exciting updates and more.

Want more Virginia in your inbox?

Get the latest on things to see, do, and eat around Virginia!

spinner

Thank you! You'll receive your first newsletter soon!

An error occured.

More to Explore

Wineries In Virginia

What are some of the best wineries in Virginia to visit?

Virginia is famous for its array of local wineries. Below you'll find some of the best wineries in Virginia to visit:

Ankida Ridge Vineyards

Barboursville

Blenheim Vineyards

Boxwood Estate

Early Mountain Winery

King Family Vineyards

Linden Vineyards

Potomac Point Winery

Rappahannock Cellars

RdV Vineyards

What are some fun Virginia day trips?

If you're looking for some serious adventures, check out our list of fun Virginia day trips:

Liberty Mills Farm (Somerset)

Chincoteague Island

Pippin Hill Farms & Vineyard (Charlottesville)

Virginia's Ice Cream Road Trip

Virginia Safari Park (Lexington)

Factory Antique Mall (Verona)

Hike Old Rag Mountain

Drive the Snickersville Turnpike (Loudoun County)

Virginia's Natural Sand Cave

The Town of Floyd

Harper's Ferry Adventure Center (Purcellville)

Have you experienced any of these bucket-list-worthy adventures? To learn more, be sure to check out our complete guide to some of the very best day trips in Virginia.

What are some of the most beautiful Virginia destinations?

Below you'll find a list of some of the most beautiful places in Virginia:

Grayson Highlands State Park

Skyline Drive

Assateague Island National Seashore

Great Falls National Park

Falling Spring Falls

Devil's Bathtub

The Light of Truth Universal Shrine

Thomas Walker Civic Park

Staunton River State Park

Carvins Cove

Learn more about these beautiful destinations in Virginia.

Featured Addresses

Upper Shirley Vineyards, 600 Shirley Plantation Rd, Charles City, VA 23030, USA