Mention Virginia plantations and you are talking about a slice of American history. Some of the finest examples can be found along the James River.

The flourishing plantation lands, the outstanding architecture of the manor houses, the exquisite beauty of the gardens and landscaping speak of another time. Yet, the past and the present blend in many ways. Some family members still call the manors home. The ramifications of events that took place on these lands continue to be felt today.

Then, too, there are the stories -- from "boys will be boys," to "Auntie's Haunting," to "the refusal room" to the stair-climbing horse. The James River Plantations have a story to tell. We will listen to those of Shirley, Berkeley, Evelynton, and Carter's Grove.

Shirley Plantation, located in Charles City County, Va., has the distinction of being Virginia's oldest plantation and is a National Historic Landmark. Home to 11 generations of Hill-Carters, Shirley is still "in the family." Family names you might recall from the past are Ann Hill Carter, who married Revolutionary War hero, "Light Horse" Harry Lee in the parlor at Shirley. Ann and Harry's son, Robert E. Lee, had lessons with his cousins in the schoolroom, a converted laundry at Shirley.

The three-story manor house, built about 1725, is made of Flemish bond brickwork and has a slate mansard roof. For 230 years, a 31/2 foot carved-wood pineapple finial has adorned the roof. Our docent, Paula, says, "The pineapple stands for hospitality and represents wealth."

The front entrance of Shirley faces the James River. Visitors used the river as their main "road" and arrived by boat. When it comes to name-dropping, Shirley doesn't have to take a back seat. Harrison, rd, Lee, Washington, Tyler, Roosevelt, and Rockefeller have been guests at the plantation.

Seven original dependencies are located behind the main house in an equal distance from the house. Four of the outbuildings (large two-story kitchen, laundry house, and two L-shaped barns) make a Queen Anne forecourt. They are said to be the last example of this architectural style in America. Shirley is an architectural treasure. It boasts a square-rigged flying staircase which rises three full stories. There is no visible support. Paula says, "You can feel the stairs give when you walk on them." This staircase, built of walnut and pine, is the only one of its kind in America.

Some other parts of the house worth giving a second glance are the grooved, heart pine floors, the fine wood paneling, and the 18th century hand-carved woodwork. Let your eyes wander to the urn of plenty which stands over the doorway in the dining room. According to Charles Hill Carter III, this symbolizes a bountiful harvest. It also insures good food and talk in the house.

Take special note of the ornate fireplace mantle. The carved oak log represents longevity, while the acorn represents perseverance. However, the acorns have another story to tell. Charles Carter's five great-grandsons received pocket knives one Christmas. It seems that perseverance allowed them to carve out all but four of the tiny wooden acorns. Did you say, "Boys will be boys?"

Shirley has its traditions. One of them shows that the young brides were no fools. They scratched their initials or names in the glass of the windows at Shirley to test whether the diamonds in the ring were real.

Shirley plantation has known war. During the Revolutionary War, it served as a supply center for both the Continental Army and a reconnaissance post for the Americans and the English. During the Civil War, Shirley served as a field hospital for the Union soldiers. The family provided water, soup, and bandages for the wounded until ships arrived to take them to hospitals. Their humanitarian efforts were appreciated and rewarded by Union General George B. McClellan, who gave them safe conduct passes. Our guide emphasizes, "Their actions spared Shirley from attack."

Not to be missed on the grounds of Shirley are the 350-year-old willow oak tree and the 100-year-old holly tree. Take time to walk through the 18th-century-style herb garden.

And then there is the matter of hauntings. If you visit Shirley, ask about Aunt Pratt. What happened at the haunted artifact exhibit at New York's Rockefeller Plaza? Was Aunt Pratt involved in those strange noises in the attic? Take a look at the portrait of Auntie in the first-floor bedroom. You have to love family ghosts.

Berkeley Plantation, located on a beautifully landscaped hilltop overlooking the James River, is considered by many to be Virginia's most historic plantation. Birthplace of Benjamin Harrison, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, and William Henry Harrison, "Tippecanoe," the ninth president of the United States, Berkeley is also the ancestral home of our 23rd president, Benjamin Harrison. Today it is a National Historic Landmark.

Where do you think the first Thanksgiving was held in America? If you said Berkeley, you were right. Thirty-eight men sailed from England on a ship named Margaret to settle Berkeley Hundred. In thanks for their safe 21/2-month voyage, they held the first Thanksgiving on Berkeley grounds Dec. 4, 1619.

The next time you go to your friendly neighborhood package store, you might want to ask a trivia question. "Where was the first bourbon whiskey in America distilled?" You know the answer; it was at Berkeley.

There is no question that the grounds at Berkeley are beautiful. Ten acres of manicured lawn and a formal boxwood garden extend a quarter-mile from the front door to the river. The maze gardens are eye-catching. The plantation grounds boast roses, magnolias, dogwoods, crepe myrtle, tulip poplars, and black locusts as well as other gorgeous flowering plants and shrubs. Don't miss the enclosed gazebo, aptly named the Tea and Mint Julep House. Be sure to take a walk through the grounds to the James River and soak in the natural beauty of Berkeley.

Berkeley is fortunate to have Martha Fox on board as a docent; we were lucky enough to have her as our guide. Her polished delivery, complete with appropriate vocal inflections, facial expressions, and mannerisms of Berkeley's history and the manor house's attributes gave her my vote for the docent of the year. No dry presentation from Ms. Fox -- just a lively hold-your-attention tour.

The Georgian mansion at Berkeley, built in 1726, sports another Berkeley first. It was the first to have a pediment roof. The exterior of the three-story house was built from brick fired on the plantation. There is one unique brick in the basement. It has an imprint of a pig's foot on it. Apparently, the pig stepped on the brick when it was put out to dry and the rest is now history. While in the basement notice the hand-hewn joists.

As the tour group stood in the south parlor of Berkeley, Ms. Fox remarked that the first 10 presidents of the United States were entertained right there. She also noted that President William Harrison was the first president to actively campaign for office and the first to die in office. Harrison's presidency lasted 30 days. Supposedly, he died from pneumonia that he contracted after standing in the rain at his inauguration.

The rooms at Berkeley have an impressive collection of 18th-century antiques. According to Ms. Fox, the 300-year-old William and Mary chest is the oldest piece in the house. She also points out that the diamond-dust-back mirrors of the ladies' secretary are more than 200 years old. The writing surface of this secretary has a secret panel with a hidden drawer.

Who among us has not been touched by "Taps?" The story of this famous bit of music records yet another first at Berkeley. During the Civil War, "Taps" was composed by Union General Dan Butterfield who whistled it for his brigade bugler, Oliver Wilcox Norton. Norton played around with the notes and came up with "Taps" for the "lights out" call. He then played it on his bugle. From across the James River, the haunting melody played by Confederate soldiers echoed back to Berkeley.

A drummer boy with McClellan's troops at Berkeley should also be mentioned. John Jamieson was his name, and, in 1905, he bought Berkeley and its surrounding 1,400 acres for timberland. His son, Malcolm, has owned the estate since 1938, and is responsible for it being brought back to prime condition.

At the end of our tour, Ms. Fox walked us outside and pointed to a dated stone over a side door. There on the marker were inscribed the initials of the owner, Benjamin Harrison IV, and his wife, Anne, along with the date of the building, 1726.

Fox encouraged us to take a look at the kitchen dependency before leaving Berkeley. There on an exterior wall was a little something extra -- a cannon ball from the attack of Confederate General J.E.B. Stuart on the army of the Potomac. Ms. Fox said, "The cannon ball was J.E.B. Stuart's calling card."

Just as Stuart left behind his mark, Berkeley leaves a visual and historical mark on all who visit.

Evelynton, too, is located along the historic James River. Originally part of William rd's Westover Plantation, the plantation was named after rd's daughter, Evelyn.

Some would romanticize Evelynton and the story of its namesake. rd and his daughter did not always see eye to eye. He did not approve of her beloved suitor and would not allow her to marry him, but she wanted no other.

Evelyn died before she was 30. The legend goes she died of a broken heart, pining for her lost love. Perhaps that explains the spirit that some claim wanders the grounds many nights.

Since 1847, Evelynton has been owned by the Ruffian family. This 250-acre, family-owned and operated farm is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. As far as ancestry goes, the family patriarch, Edmund Ruffian, has his place in Civil War history. He is credited with firing the first shot in the Civil War at Fort Sumter in 1861.

Evelynton has seen war. During the Peninsula Campaign in the Civil War, many skirmishes took place on the plantation grounds. It was also the scene of the Battle of Evelynton Heights.

The final approach to Evelynton is one of pleasing aesthetic beauty. Beyond the double-gate entry is a majestic, tree-lined walkway leading to the imposing mansion. The gardens and landscaping of Evelynton with a scenic view of the James River just beyond give the visitor a visual treat.

Evelynton's appearance is deceiving. The mansion looks original, but the only thing original is its foundation. Built in 1937, this Georgian Revival style home was constructed with 250-year-old bricks. Many of the architectural elements incorporated in its design came from other James River plantations. The intent was to make it look original, and the plan succeeded.

The interior of Evelynton is furnished with American and European antiques. Of particular interest is the tea caddy that dates back to Napoleon.

You can't miss the imposing, full-length portrait of Robert E. Lee overlooking the stairway. And what a story this impressive painting has to tell! There are two holes in the portrait. Dick, our tour docent, said of the upper hole, "A child shot a slingshot at a soda can on the bannister, missed, and hit the portrait." To add further insult and injury to this portrait of Robert E. Lee, there is a second, still larger hole. Dick said of this one, "Iit was a tennis ball. A child was sending the ball around the house with a vacuum cleaner." The culprit was the son of the previous owner.

Carter's Grove boasts 400 years of history. Located 6 miles from Williamsburg, Va., it is owned today by the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation. The 200-year-old, three-story, 30-room, brick Georgian style manor house has been acclaimed by many as the most beautiful house in America.

Visiting Carter's Grove is a unique experience. Besides the main house, the slave quarter, the fields, and flourishing gardens, there is the exciting archaeological find of Wolstenholme Towne, a fortified town built about 1620. Excavations on the property of Carter's Grove revealed artifacts such as helmets and Chinese porcelain, and the graves of 48 settlers, some in coffins. Visitors can view reconstructed palisades, fences, and buildings and listen to audiotapes at various displays to learn more about Wolstenholme Towne and its significance. The Winthrop Rockefeller Archaelogy Museum at Carter's Grove provides additional insight and understanding of the find.

You don't have 400 years of history under your belt without having stories to tell. The following two human interest stories from Carter's Grove seem to have broad appeal.

It's too bad the walls can't talk in the west drawing room, now called the "Refusal Room." It is said that George Washington proposed to Mary Cary in this room. She turned him down. In later years, Mary saw George lead his troops through Williamsburg. Her reaction was to cry hysterically and run from the scene. It also was in this room that Thomas Jefferson asked Rebecca Burwell for her hand in marriage. Her answer "No." Is there any truth to the story that flowers placed in this room at night are wilted by morning?

There is another story that has made its way into legend through the years. It is an escapade of British Colonel Banastre Tarleton that occurred while he used Carter's Grove as his headquarters during the Revolutionary War. It is said that Tarleton rode his horse up the staircase and slashed the stair rail with his saber as he went to wake his sleeping men in the second-floor bedrooms. The marks are still visible.

The James River Plantations stand testimony to a slice of American history. The restored homes and lands are today architectual and historical treasures. Their beauty is overwhelming. Each has a unique story to tell and lessons to learn. They serve as a reminder that the people who owned or own them are not just names in a history book or a travel brochure but real, flesh and blood men and women. The plantations with their sweeping view of the James River continue to hold a place in American history.

For more information Shirley Plantation, (800) 232-1613; Berkeley, (804) 829-6018; Evelynton, (800) 473-5075; Carter's Grove, (800) HISTORY.

is a freelance writer who lives in Fairhaven.