100 miles from Upper Shirley, VA

Map of local cities around Upper Shirley, VA

Major cities near Upper Shirley, VA

This is a list of large cities closest to Upper Shirley, VA. A big city usually has a population of at least 200,000 and you can often fly into a major airport. If you need to book a flight, search for the nearest airport to Upper Shirley, VA. You can also look for cities 4 hours from Upper Shirley, VA (or 3 hours or 2 hours or 1 hour) or just search in general for all of the cities close to Upper Shirley, VA.

63 miles to Norfolk, VA

67 miles to Chesapeake, VA

78 miles to Virginia Beach, VA

108 miles to Washington, DC

130 miles to Durham, NC

132 miles to Raleigh, NC

139 miles to Baltimore, MD

165 miles to Greensboro, NC

214 miles to Philadelphia, PA

246 miles to Charlotte, NC

More trip calculations

Hotels near Upper Shirley, VA

Airports near Upper Shirley, VA

Location of Upper Shirley, Virginia

Airports in Virginia

Cities in Virginia

Airports in the United States

Cities in the United States

Local towns near Upper Shirley, VA

This is a list of smaller local towns that surround Upper Shirley, VA. If you're planning a road trip or exploring the local area, make sure you check out some of these places to get a feel for the surrounding community. You can also search for cities 100 miles from Upper Shirley, VA (or 50 miles or 30 miles).

Shirley, VA

Presque Isle, VA

Appomattoc, VA

City Point, VA

Granville, VA

Mount Blanco, VA

Kimages, VA

Jordans Point, VA

Hopewell, VA

Rivermont, VA

Wayside, VA

Enon, VA

Perkinson Heights, VA

Meadowville, VA

Rolands Mill, VA

Ocre, VA

Screamersville, VA

Upper Shirley, Virginia

City: Upper Shirley

State: Virginia

Country: United States

Category: cities

Nearest cities

Travelmath helps you find cities close to your location. You can use it to look for nearby towns and suburbs if you live in a metropolis area, or you can search for cities near any airport, zip code, or tourist landmark. You'll get a map of the local cities, including the distance and information on each town. This can help in planning a trip or just learning more about a neighboring city so you can discover new places.