This was the Nettwerk Music Group's website.

The content below is from the site's archived pages from 2002-2005.

The current site for Nettwerk is found at: http://www.nettwerk.com/

Nettwerk Music Group was the umbrella company for Nettwerk Records, Nettwerk Management, and Nettwerk One Publishing

American division of Canada's Nettwerk label registered in the USA by Nettwerk America LLC.

According to Wikipedia the Nettwerk Music Group was established in 1984, the Vancouver-based company was originally created by Nettwerk principals Terry McBride, Mark Jowett, Ric Arboit and Dan Fraser,as a record label to distribute recordings by the band Moev, but the label quickly expanded in Canada and internationally, ultimately becoming one of the largest and most influential independent record labels in the world. Initially specializing in electronic music genres such as alternative dance and industrial, the label also became a powerful player in pop and rock in the late 1980s and 1990s, with label and management clients including Coldplay, Sarah McLachlan, Dido and Barenaked Ladies.

Today, Nettwerk continues to achieve critical and commercial success with label, management and publishing rosters.

This international company has been in the news often for reasons related to the record industry. Artists tend to attract press attention with their antics on and off stage. But there was one story told not in the press so much as in Google's search results. The search results for the band named Barenaked Ladies at one time contained links to an article claiming that the band members were Satanists and pedophiles. The label freaked out. The band members actually didn't care. But management won out and the lawyers were sicced. Google ignored the lawyers, and the search result remained. The lawyers then went after the publisher, who was based in Costa Rica and he ignored them. Management then found this NYC based seo who worked to lower the offending search results in Google by using search engine optimization to advance other sites in that search. Management was concerned that Google would not like their search results being tampered with, but in the long run gave into their desire to not be offensive. It took over 3 months for the removal effort to work, and right about that time management gave up on the spend. This is what hit the news - "Blasted by Google: label & management fail to support one of their premiere bands." This drove sales like nothing else, even though the problem search result was still there. Barenaked Ladies are made of Teflon.

Circa 2005

2003

Gob to perform on Mike Bullard Show December 17th!

Gob will dro by the Global studios of Mike Bullard's new talk show home...

Sarah McLachlan and the Friends of Clayoquot Sound...

Friends of Clayoquot Sound

Sarah Live@LAUNCH!

Sarah's recent performance on Live@LAUNCH is viewable to subscribers...

LAUNCH

Sarah to perform at Jingle Jam 2003!

Sarah to perform acoustic set at Jingle Jam in Duluth...

Tiesto voted World's #1 DJ second year running!

DJ Mag votes prove Tiesto a winner once again...

Did you win with MusicStakes?

2002

NEIL FINN

The new album from NEIL FINN, One All is in stores now! Features the single, "Driving Me Mad." Go to the Tour section for information on Neil's summer tour dates.

2002c ALBUMS COMING SOON:

May 7:

Various - Chillout V.2

Soundtrack - Felicity

May 21:

Neil Finn - One All

May 28:

The Scumfrog vs. David Bowie - Loving The Alien (vinyl single)

June 4:

Luce - Luce

June 18:

Margaret Cho - Notorious C.H.O. Live At Carnegie Hall

The Brothers Creegan - Sleepyhead

July 2:

The Scumfrog Vs David Bowie - Loving The Alien (CD single)

Lunik - Ahead

July 16:

Alex Lloyd - Watching Angels Mend

Beam Vs. Cyrus - Lifestyle (single)

July 23:

Various - Plastic 6

August 13:

Martina Sorbara - The Cure For Bad Deeds

August 27:

Conjure One - Conjure One

Coralie Clement -Salle Des Pas Perdue

Maren Ord - Waiting

DJ Tiesto on Moby Area 2 tour this summer!

Check out DJ Tiesto this summer on the Area 2 tour. Tiesto will be co-headlining the dance tent with John Digweed and Carl Cox.

NEIL FINN & DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS

Neil Finn and the guest artists featured on Neil's forthcoming live album, 7 Worlds Collide, (in-stores February 26, 2002) will be donating all royalties from the sale of the CD & DVD to Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders) to aid with their work in Afghanistan.

Since 1971, some 15,000 Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) volunteers have provided medical relief to the victims of natural disaster and war in over 80 countries. In many remote and volatile places, MSF is the only international presence. Teams travel by boat, car, plane, pack horse, and on foot to bring relief wherever it is needed.

When medical relief is not enough to save lives, volunteers speak out and advocate on "forgotten" and "hot news" issues alike. The New York and Los Angeles offices are in regular contact with American and other volunteers in the field and can help cover dangerous and remote areas of the globe.

Integral the efforts to publicize the good works of DWB/MSF is the use of websites and social media to not only promote awareness but also to raise much needed funds for their good works. The Vision Project is a great example of an NGO using modern tools to deliver eye exams, cataract surgery, glasses and vision education to 3rd world environments. Volunteer eye surgeons can bring individuals back from near blindness to clear vision. Following up with simple and inexpensive eyewear can change a person's life. By teaching the value of eyecare and and providing information about glasses, they bring important knowledge to these communities in need in a way that can be further shared among its members long after the team leaves. Managing the multitude of individual donors, fund raisers, and groups seeking help falls on automated systems known as help desks, which can simplify the tasks by managing what is known as helpdesk workflow. This kind of customized software permits the organization to follow up on each request, provide substantial information where needed, and prioritize the most urgent responses using the minimum number of employees, keeping costs and human efforts focused on helping the most needy of help.

DJ MAGAZINE POLL RESULTS IN!

Every year DJ Mag publishes its highly respected Top 100 DJs poll. Congratulations to Nettwerk recording artists DJ Tiesto (#6), Nick Warren (Way Out West) (#28) and BT (#76).

NettwerkAmerica.com