Sebastian Kehl

Date of Birth: 13 February 1980

Birthplace: Fulda, Fulda, West Germany

News from Eyefootball

Brighton to sign Mohamed Dahoud

Brighton and Hove Albion will sign Mohamed Dahoud from Borussia Dortmund this summer, with the 27-year-old ready to sign a three year deal at the Premier League outfit. The German international, who has two caps to his name, has played over 100 games for Borussia Dortmund since his arrival at his current club from Borussia Monchengladbach in 2017.

Fabrizio Romano updates on Manchester United's pursuit of Jadon Sancho

Transfer expert Fabrizio Romano has revealed that Manchester United have made no progress in the negotiations to sign Jadon Sancho from Borussia Dortmund.

Borussia Dortmund in for Per Mertesacker?

Borussia Dortmund have expressed interest in struggling Arsenal centre back Per Mertesacker. The giant German has recently been dropped from the Gunners' first team.

Sebastian Kehl signs new Dortmund deal

Long serving Borussia Dortmund defensive midfielder Sebastian Kehl has signed a new contract. The 34-year-old has told reporters that this is the last deal of his long career.

Dortmund close in on Bundesliga title

Borussia Dortmund have closed in on a second successive Bundesliga title, as they defeated bitter city rivals Schalke 2-1 at the Gelsenkirchen yesterday evening. The victory leaves Dortmund 8 points ahead of Bayern Munich.

Blackburn eye Nolan

Blackburn boss Paul Ince is keeping tabs on Bolton midfielder Kevin Nolan. It is rumoured that Inc ewill be making a January transfer move for the player in the region of £4 million.

Kinnear draws up shortlist

Newcastle temporary boss Joe Kinnear has reportedly drawn up a list of four players that he hopes to bring to the club this summer. One of them is believed to be Borussia Dortmund midfielder Sebastian Kehl.

Blackburn eye Kehl swoop

Blackburn Rovers are considering a January transfer window move for Sebastian Kehl, the Germany international who has spent the majority of his career at Bundesliga side Borussia Dortmund.