Margit Lichtenberger glowed after she walked by the coffin holding the body of Frederick the Great. "A great man. I'm so happy that he's back here," the 55-year- old bookstore owner said.

All day Saturday, thousands of people filed by Frederick and his father, Frederick William I, whose remains were returned to eastern Germany for a lavish and controversial reburial, having spent the past 39 years in the west.

Frederick's body was removed from Potsdam when the Soviet army was advancing on the city at the end of World War II and spirited out of the communist-controlled east some time later.

With Germany's reunification and the fall of the communist regime, the former German royal family brought its most famous relative back to Potsdam to fulfill his wish to be buried beside his faithful greyhounds at the glorious Baroque palace, Sans Souci.

The coffins were taken by train from the family's ancestral castle in the south to Potsdam in the east, where a horse-drawn wagon carried them to the castle grounds.

At midnight, the coffin, draped in Prussia's black and white colors, was lowered into the grave that Frederick had picked out more than 200 years ago.

One of the 60,000 people who filed by the coffin during the day was Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who said Frederick's reburial was a positive symbol of Germany's reunification.

Supporters say that during Frederick's rule _ from 1740 until his death in 1786 _ through reforms and wars, he dragged his state out of poverty and made it one of Europe's five major powers.

Critics saw it differently.

"Frederick the Great was the embodiment of militarism and expansionism. He started three aggressive wars and was an absolute ruler. We should honor this man?" asked former Berlin Mayor Walter Momper.

After his death, he was admired and honored by the likes of Adolf Hitler, who kept the king's portrait in his Berlin bunker until the end of World War II.

Rudolf von Thadden, a historian at universities in Goettingen and Paris, said Frederick should not be held responsible for his misuse by the Nazis.

Frederick's Prussia, von Thadden said, was no different from other 18th century European nations in its absolutism and its desire to expand. It was, however, one of the era's most tolerant, admitting political refugees and guaranteeing the rule of law.

The controversy comes on the heels of a series of events that proponents see as necessary to building a sense of history and pride in Germany but that critics view as dangerously nationalistic.

In June, for example, the parliament decided to move itself and the government to Berlin, and two weeks ago the country celebrated the 200th anniversary of Berlin's famous landmark, the Brandenburg Gate, which is topped with a Prussian eagle and iron cross.

Lichtenberger doesn't view these events as dangerous. "The French honor Napoleon and the British still love their Empire. A bit of pride in one's history is normal and doesn't necessarily mean a turn to nationalism or militarism."