AUSTIN, Texas—Michael S. Dell, chairman and chief executive officer of Dell, the computer company he founded in 1984 with $1,000 and built into a multibillion-dollar global corporation, will give the commencement address for the 120th spring commencement at The University of Texas at Austin on May 17.

The university-wide commencement event at 8 p.m. on the South Mall is free and open to the public. It will be preceded at 7 p.m. by a carillon prelude and a commencement concert. Ceremonies will include a variety of music performances and a fireworks display from the university Tower.

“The University of Texas at Austin is proud of its history and strong relationship with Michael Dell and we’re very pleased that he has agreed to be our commencement speaker this year,” said Dr. Larry R. Faulkner, president of The University of Texas at Austin. “His many contributions have had a monumental impact on productivity and communication in the age of information technology. And the outstanding community involvement of Michael and his wife, Susan, has made our city and our world a better, more caring place.”

Dell, who attended The University of Texas at Austin during the 1980s, said he is very pleased to deliver this year’s commencement address at his alma mater.

“The University of Texas at Austin has been a foundation for generations of people who have gone on to make a positive difference in the world,” said Dell, who built his success in the computer industry on the idea of selling computer systems directly to customers. “I’m proud to be a part of this year’s celebration of the infinite possibilities that these students represent.”

In 18 years, the company’s sales have grown to $35.4 billion. Today, Dell has more than 39,000 employees in offices and manufacturing facilities worldwide to serve its customers around the globe.

Dell, born in Houston in 1965, became the youngest chief executive officer ever to earn a ranking on the Fortune 500 and he is the longest tenured chief executive officer in the computer systems industry.

In 2003, Dell was named as the number four “Most Admired Company” by Fortune magazine, and among the top 10 “most trusted and respected” companies according to a Wall Street Journal poll. Dell was named as the number four “Most Respected World Leader” by the Financial Times, the “Best CEO” in the information technology hardware industry by Institutional Investor magazine, and in 2001, “Chief Executive of the Year” by Chief Executive magazine.

In 1999, Dell wrote the best-selling book, “Direct From Dell: Strategies That Revolutionized an Industry,” his story of the rise of the computer company. He is chairman of the Computer Systems Policy Project and serves on the President’s Council of Advisers on Science and Technology.