Ollie Cahill is the oldest winger in town at 42, but one of Irish football’s most decorated players will be reeling in the years on Sunday when non-league Home Farm are pitched into FAI Cup battle.

Cahill won three League of Ireland titles with Shelbourne, another with Drogheda United and a further one with Shamrock Rovers in 2010.

He also holds the record for most European appearances (41) for a League of Ireland player.

But he only tasted success in the FAI Cup on one occasion - 1998 - and it just so happened to be for Cork City who Home Farm host in Whitehall this weekend.

City boss John Caulfield was a team-mate of Cahill’s during his stint on Leeside, so too Phil Harrington and Liam Kearney who form part of Caulfield's backroom staff.

Rebel stars Damien Delaney, Alan Bennett and Mark McNulty have a combined age of 110 but were youngsters making their way at the club when Cahill was there.

Nowadays, Cahill bats on these players’ behalf - and those throughout the league - in his role as senior Player Liaison Officer with the PFAI.

“I wasn’t expecting to be back playing Cork City in the FAI Cup - that’s for sure,” Cahill said.

“We got a run in the Intermediate Cup but it was disappointing to get knocked out in the quarter-finals by Letterkenny Rovers.

“But the bonus is that we qualified for the FAI Cup and low and behold here we are, pulling out Cork City at home which is an incredible draw.”

Cahill looks as fit now as he did in his heyday when he zipped down touchlines and tortured fullbacks with his sensational pace and trickery.

He retired from League of Ireland football after the 2011 season with Bohemians but knew that flaking out on the couch wasn’t for him.

A former Tipperary minor footballer, he retained a grá for GAA and soon joined forces with the renowned Dublin club St Vincents where he played from 2012 until last year.

“It’s my wife’s club and she’s dyed in the wool Vincents - I didn’t get a say,” he laughed.

But Cahill’s seven-year-old son Sonny was playing for Home Farm’s academy and being around that environment on a regular basis gave Cahill the goo.

“A team-mate is my son’s coach and I also got talking to the manager, John Hand, and he invited me down to train last year,” Cahill explained.

“I just said I’d see if I could add anything to it. I played a couple of games and ended up signing last year and now we’re playing Cork City in the FAI Cup - it’s mad.”

Cahill continued: “Winning the Cup with Cork is still one of my best memories in football. It went to a replay with Shels and we won it at Dalymount.

“I remember getting the train back the following day, onto an open top bus down through Cork. There was a massive buzz around the city.

“But when I went into Home Farm last year, the last thing on my mind was getting into the FAI Cup never mind playing the double champions in our own backyard.

“Take me out of it and it’s a fairly young team we have. A lot of them would have aspirations of playing professionally in the League of Ireland so this great for them.

“It’s a chance to see where the bar is at. Cork have been unbelievable, along with Dundalk, and that’s what they have to aim for.

“But I’ve loved being a player again, even though it’s a different dynamic from the world of professional football.

“You might not know which players are available any given week or, at this time of year, are some lads on holidays or whatever.

“But I’m not one for sitting on the couch. I love training, I love the fitness side of it and I love being a player again.”