Speaking for Success

March 9, 2012

Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

In support of a fundraiser for the CAPS Foundation, I was invited by colleague, Bob “Idea Man” Hooey, to co-present with him at the Speaking for $uccess Boot Camp on Friday, March 9th in downtown Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. CAPS-Edmonton is one of esteemed Chapters of the Canadian Association of Professional Speakers, in alignment with the National Speakers Association (US and abroad), based in Tempe, Arizona.

It was a PACKED meeting room for the full-day event! One attendee, Ved, commented at the end of the day “We walked in strangers, and are now Family.”

In additional to the 90-minute training sessions Bob and I conducted, the day also showcased four 18-minute TEDx-style bonus sessions over the day:

Barbara May: Microphone Techniques: 7 Mistakes Speakers Make and How to Avoid Them

Nadine Riopel: Making Slides Work for You

Shirley Borrelli: Business Casual Made Easy: Look Polished and Put Together

Greg Gazin: Gadgets for Speaking & Your Speaking Business

After a lunch break – complete with working assignment – the class of 50 reconvened for on-the-spot speaking and authenticity coaching – following my lead. Attendee-after-attendee had brilliant breakthroughs – right before our eyes! Here is a partial group shot of the Boot Camp’s Graduates!!!

PRESENTERS:

Bob ‘Idea Man’ Hooey, CKD-E: The current President of CAPS-Edmonton, Bob proudly serves in leadership, and was recently honored with “The Spirit of CAPS” Award – the highest honor bestowed on a member in all of Canada. In 1998, in Palm Desert, Toastmasters International recognized Bob “for his professionalism and outstanding achievements in public speaking.” He was the 48th speaker in their history, and only the 5th Canadian, to earn the prestigious designation of Accredited Speaker. He has served Toastmasters with distinction. He is the prolific author of 35 business and career success publications and his content rich articles have been featured in association, corporate, on-line, consumer and trade journals across the globe. In addition to speaking colleagues and fellow Toastmasters, he has coached leaders from Canada’s Top 50 best managed companies. A few of Bob’s clients include, Subway, Intuit Canada (Quick Books), The Brick, OK Tire, Indigo/Chapters Bookstores, Saputo Foods (Dairyworld), SKF Canada, Grand & Toy, Agruim, CN Rail and SimplexGrinnell. Speaker information.