Ex-DeepMind researchers secure $17 million CAD to bring generative AI to video games with Artificial Agency

Toyota and Radical-backed startup aims to transform NPCs, game systems with AI.

Emissions Reduction Alberta commits $44.4 million to 21 cleantech projects

Startups such as Wyvern and Arolytics received funding from ERA’s Emerging Innovators Challenge.

Intuit closes Edmonton office as company-wide layoffs impact 10 percent of employees

Some roles are being consolidated to its Toronto office to “better align” resources, company says.

Zero Point Cryogenics secures $2.67 million to help cool quantum computers

The non-dilutive funding came from PrairiesCan and the City of Edmonton’s Edge Fund.

Toronto’s lead over other Canadian cities continues to widen in new startup ecosystem rankings

Canada retains fourth place in global rankings, but slips further from the three leading nations.

Accelerate Fund III backs Care Group as it looks to expand mental healthcare platform into new markets

The startup is looking to expand across Canada and the United States starting later this year.

Ecosystem Spotlight: Alberta tech is striking gold

CIBC Innovation Banking’s Joe Timlin on the province that’s punching above its weight.

Amii secures $3 million from PrairiesCan to fuel AI adoption in the Prairies

Alberta AI hub aims to give SMBs tools and knowledge to leverage AI.

Tech hub watch: Genesis loses its CEO, Edmonton Unlimited welcomes a new one

Tom Viinikka joins Edmonton Unlimited, Michelle Simms to depart Genesis.

Google Canada provides $2.7 million in research grants to major Canadian AI institutes CIFAR, Amii, CEIMIA

The funding is aimed at supporting research into sustainability and responsible AI development.

PrairiesCan invests $3 million to kickstart Edmonton Unlimited’s new innovation space

The funding will provide “a space for all innovators to start and scale their companies,” mayor says.

CAAIN appoints former Edmonton Unlimited VP Darrell Petras to lead AgTech innovation agency

The new CEO previously co-founded a livestock-management software startup.

Alberta Technology Minister’s mandate letter appears to support reducing restrictions on title ‘software engineer’

Startups, regulator have been embroiled in a dispute over the title for years.

Here’s how Canada’s top 10 cities rank in the global startup ecosystem

StartupBlink’s report shows Canada maintains fourth place in global ranking.