Edmonton, AB – May 16, 2019 | Today, Startup Canada joined forces with Startup Edmonton, TEC Edmonton, and Edmonton Economic Development to celebrate and recognize the top entrepreneurs, businesses, and support organizations across the Prairies at the 2019 Startup Canada Awards – Prairies Regional ceremony. The ceremony was hosted by two of Edmonton’s finest – Tiffany Linke-Boyko, CEO of Startup Edmonton and Jennifer Sheehan, Director of Marketing and communications of TEC Edmonton.

Ten winners from across the province were announced at the highly-anticipated ceremony held at The Edmonton Convention Centre. The ceremony also featured a special announcement by Preston Manning, the Board Trustee of the Ernest C. Manning Awards Foundation (ECMAF). ECMAF and Startup Canada will bring together their celebrations of entrepreneurs and innovators – an exciting feat that will help amplify the work that entrepreneurs and innovators are doing in Canada.

The evening’s guests included leading Canadian investors, innovators, anchor company executives, and government officials including David Shepherd, MLA for Edmonton-City Centre.

The 2019 Prairies Region Winners are:

Marney Stapley (Winnipeg, MB)

Entrepreneur Promotion Award

sponsored by Intuit Quickbooks

Valhalla Private Capital (Calgary, AB)

Entrepreneur Support Award

sponsored by Intuit Quickbooks

Local Laundry (Calgary, AB)

Entrepreneur’s Choice Award

Champion Pet Foods (Edmonton, AB)

Global Entrepreneurship Award

sponsored by UPS Canada

Ukkö Robotics (Winnipeg, MB)

Innovation Award

sponsored by Intuit Quickbooks

Drizzle Honey (Calgary, AB)

Social Enterprise Award

sponsored by Sovereign Insurance

DrugBank (Edmonton, AB)

High-Growth Entrepreneurship Award

sponsored by Mastercard Canada

Bobbie Racette (Calgary, AB)

Woman Entrepreneur Award

sponsored by Business Development Bank of Canada

Claire Du (Calgary, AB)

Young Entrepreneur Award

sponsored by Scotiabank

Brent H. Zettl (Saskatoon, SK)

Entrepreneur of the Year Award

sponsored by Scotiabank

In addition to the regional winners, the Startup Canada Awards Adjudication Committee also recognized eight other outstanding entrepreneurs, businesses and organizations as honourable mentions during the ceremony. Honourable mentions went to Alice Reimer, The A100, Startup Edmonton, TEC Edmonton, Funding Change, Nicole Bourque-Bouchier, James Boettcher, and Pura Botanicals.

The regional winners will now be evaluated by the National Adjudication Committee; comprised of some of Canada’s leading entrepreneurship and industry experts. The national winners will be celebrated at the Startup Canada Awards Grand Finale in Toronto in October 2019.

The Startup Canada Awards are supported by organizations from across Canada

The Startup Canada Awards are proudly supported by presenting sponsors Intuit Quickbooks and Sovereign Insurance; in partnership with Business Development Bank of Canada, UPS Canada, Scotiabank, and Mastercard Canada; with special supported by African Bronze Honey, Abeego, Firebean Coffee, Newfoundland Chocolate Company, Drizzle, Manitobah Mukluks, Her Braids, and Purdy’s Chocolatier.

Quotations:

“Congratulations to the 2019 winners of the Startup Canada Awards,” said Victoria Lennox, Co-Founder and President of Startup Canada. “Each and every one of these outstanding recipients has an immense impact on the future of Canada and they all represent the greatness and diversity of our nation’s entrepreneurship community. We are proud to celebrate excellence and impact across Canada by recognizing the entrepreneurs, innovators and support ecosystem making it happen.”

“Congratulations to all of the nominees and winners of the Prairies Regional – Startup Canada Awards. Entrepreneurs, founders, and their hard-working teams put incredible effort and passion into the products and companies they build. The quality of the nominations this year is a testament to the growth and depth of startup communities across Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba,” said Tiffany Linke-Boyko, CEO of Startup Edmonton. “It’s a pleasure to support entrepreneurs and tech founders year-round through our work at Startup Edmonton, and I look forward to celebrating their continued success at next year’s celebration!”

“This is an exciting time for technology companies in our region. The quality of companies, service providers and community partners is exceptional,” said Chris Lumb, CEO, TEC Edmonton. “Based on the number of award winners and nominees, it’s clear that the role of innovation and entrepreneurship is a strong one. While great work is being done year round, this event is a great way to come together and celebrate the successes that make our region, and our people, unique.”

For more information and to schedule interviews, please contact:

Maddie Stiles

Media Relations, Startup Canada

maddie.stiles@startupcan.ca

613-295-4590

ABOUT THE STARTUP CANADA AWARDS

The annual Startup Canada Awards are the hallmark event that celebrates and recognizes those driving impact and demonstrating excellence in Canada’s entrepreneurship and innovation community. The objectives of the Startup Canada Awards are to:

Celebrate those working to advance entrepreneurship in Canada;

Increase awareness of the importance of strengthening Canada’s entrepreneurship ecosystem and culture; and,

Incentivize efforts and elevate the ambitions of the Canadian entrepreneurial and innovation community.

For more information, visit www.StartupAward.ca.

ABOUT STARTUP CANADA