WAS CALABAR REALLY THE FIRST OFFICIAL CAPITAL OF NIGERIA? Abuja has been the capital city of Nigeria since 1991, but prior to that, there have been other official and unofficial capital cities. Lagos was the first official capital of Nigeria before the capital was moved to Abuja. Here are all the cities that have laid claim to the title of Nigeria’s capital at one time or the other and why: 1. Calabar Calabar is the capital city of Cross River state and the tourism capital of Nigeria. The city was originally named Akwa Akpa in Efik, but was renamed during the Atlantic slave trade era. The area had some of the first interactions and it was named Calabar by the Spanish. On September 10, 1884, England signed a Treaty of Protection with the King and Chiefs of Akwa Akpa, known to Europeans as Old Calabar, taking control of the entire territory of Calabar. Calabar is considered as the first capital of Nigeria because it served as the first capital of the Southern Protectorate, the Oil River Protectorate and Niger Coast Protectorate. This was until the late 19th century, when the administrative centre of the Southern protectorate was moved to Lagos in 1906. 2. Lagos After Lagos served as the capital of Nigeria for many years, religious and ethnic divisions caused the Nigerian government to begin searching for a capital that seemed neutral to all major ethnic parties. Also, Lagos was becoming very overcrowded, with Nigeria needing a capital that was in close proximity to all other regions and was geographically central. 3. Asaba Asaba, the current capital of Delta state, is believed to have been where the British colonial masters started their administration. It was also where the British Royal Niger Company preferred to hold its treaties before incorporation. 4. Lokoja Lokoja is the current capital of Kogi state and was where the first Governor-general of Nigeria, Lord Frederick Lugard, ruled from, after the Southern protectorates and Northern protectorates were amalgamated to form one Nigeria. It was also where Lady Flora Shaw came up with the name Nigeria. 5. Abuja Abuja was chosen as the ideal place because it is located in the centre of the nation. Due to Nigeria's ethnic and religious diversity, the government deemed the then-sleepy area a neutral place for all groups and persuasions. On December 21, 1991, the city officially became the country's administrative capital. But the move came at a huge cost to local inhabitants. CTA: What criteria do you think should determine a country’s capital city?