Calabar is one of the oldest trading centres in Nigeria. The city is set on a natural hill overlooking the Calabar River. Calabar was established as a centre of the slave trade by the British in the 17th century. It became the biggest colonial administration in Nigeria in the 18th, 19th and early part of the 20th centuries. At the end of the slave trade, the city was a major port for palm oil trade and commodities exports and imports from the South East region of Nigeria. It became the capital of Niger Coast Protectorate and later the Southern Protectorate capital of Nigeria. Currently, Calabar is the capital of Cross River State, Nigeria. The city is a major centre of tourism in Nigeria. The Calabar Carnival is the largest street cultural festival in Africa. The carnival holds annually in December attracting thousands of visitors from all parts of the world.

On 10 September 1884, Queen Victoria signed a treaty of protection with the king and chiefs of Akwa Akpa, known to Europeans as Old Calabar. This enabled the United Kingdom to exercise control over the entire territory around Calabar, including Bakassi. Since the 16th century, Calabar had been a recognized international seaport, shipping out goods such as palm oil. During the era of the Atlantic slave trade, it became a major port in the transportation of African slaves and was named Calabar by the Spanish. By the 18th century, most slave ships that transported slaves from Calabar were British, with around 85% of these ships being owned by Bristol and Liverpool merchants.

Calabar is often described as the tourism capital of Nigeria, especially due to several initiatives implemented during the administration of Donald Duke (1999–2007), which made the city the cleanest and environmentally friendly city in Nigeria. Administratively, the city is divided into Calabar Municipal and Calabar SouthLocal Government Areas. It has an area of 406 square kilometres (157 sq mi) and a population of 371,022 as of the 2006 census. Today, Calabar is a large metropolis with several towns like Akim, Ikot Ansa, Ikot Ishie, Kasuk, Duke Town, Henshaw Town, Cobham Town, Ikot Omin, Obutong.

Calabar has three principal landlord kingdoms, namely the Qua Kingdom of Ejagham (Ekoi)/Bantu origin, the Efut and the Efik Kingdoms. The Qua Kingdom has the Ndidem of the Qua nation as the Grand Patriarch, the Efut have the Muri mundane as the Grand Patriarch, and the Efik Kingdom patriarch is known as the Obong. Before the colonial period, Calabar, originally known as Akwa Akpa, was a kingdom with the City of Calabar as the site of government. Calabar has three different monarchs, the Obong of Calabar as the ruler of the Efiks and the Ekpe. The Ndidem of Calabar is the ruler of the Quas and the paramount ruler of Calabar Municipality which is the seat of government. The Muri Munene of the Efuts is the ruler of the Efuts and paramount ruler of Calabar South.

Written by O.A

Please subscribe to this blog to get alerted when new posts are published. Follow us on facebook, instagram, twitter, and pinterest. Shop for our products on Etsy.

If you liked this post, please SHARE for others to find it.