AJ Michalka is one half of the Michalka sisters. She is famous as an American actress, singer and songwriter, with many successful works in the film and music industry.

The Michalkas are often inseparablebe visibly present in everything that happens in the lives of others. Here we are going to find out what is the relationship between them and we will introduce you to AJ as much as we have gathered information about him.

Who is AJ Michalka

AJ Michalka (Amanda Joy Michalka) was born on April 10, 1991 in Torrance, California, to Mark who runs a contracting company and his wife Carrie, a professional musician and performer at JC Band.

Growing up, she spent some time in Seattle and then Milwaukee at a later date. AJ attended Mack Elementary, where she had a leading role in several musical productions. She started playing arts very early in artistic life at the age of 5, learned to play the piano at 6 and the guitar much later. His life would eventually boil down to music and acting.

AJ Michalka made her film debut in March 2006 with a Disney Channel Original Movie titled Beautiful Cows where she portrayed the character of Courtney Callum alongside her sister Aly Michalka who played Taylor Callum. A few years later, she found a role in The Beautiful Bones, a Peter Jackson film released in early January 2015.

Other films and TV series she has under her belt include MTV film, Super Sweet 16: The Movie, 2011 JJ Abrams film titled Super 8, 2013’s Grace Unplugged which became her biggest on-screen role. as she was the main character, and ABC The Goldbergs where she acted as Lainey Lewis. Next came Weepah Way for Now which she co-produced in 2015, Dirty Lies (2016) where she played Tiffany’s character Apple of My Eye (2017) as Kai and Krista in Supporting the Girls (2018 ).

AJ’s musical career began in 2009 when she formed the musical duo 78violet with her sister Aly. 78violet lasted until 2015 before deciding to revert to their original names, which they have kept ever since. Among his notable musical works are “It’s Who You Are”, released in 2010 in the album “Secretariat”, “You Never Let Go” in the album “Grace Unplugged” in 2013 and “Walking on Sunshine” with Hayley Orrantia in the album “The Goldbergs Mixtape” (2017).

Indeed, AJ Michalka has had a lot of success during his career. She notably won the 2014 Movieguide award for Best Inspirational Performance in Cinema. It was for her Grace Unplugged work. She also won a Napa Film Festival award in 2015, which she shared with her sister for their Weepah Way for Now movie.

What is his relationship with Aly Michalka?

Wherever AJ Michalka is mentioned, Aly Michalka’s no doubt that any early career success in her career in the entertainment business is closely tied to the work she did with it.

AJ Michalka is the younger sister of AlyMichalka, half of the former music duo 78violet. Both girls grew up under the watchful eyes and caring hands of their music-loving parents. They were both raised Christians and have remained the same since becoming adults. Their parents, however, are divorced.

Since their 2013 song “Hothouse,” almost nothing has been heard musically, but judging by the tweets the duo performed in 2016 and 2017, we’re sure we’re expecting something from Aly & AJ Music Wait.

According to records, Aly was born on March 25, 1989. She is now married to independent film producer Stephen Ringer. Aly had met him on the set of his film Sequoia after which they fell in love. The two decided to take action, they became lovers and finally settled down in marriage on June 6, 2015. It was a small Christian wedding ceremony in Portofino, Italy.

Despite Aly’s marriage, the relationship between the sisters has remained as close as it has always been, not only are they professional musicians and actresses, but also sisters who have lived their entire lives being mindful of each other. others and achieving career success together. Their bond is unbreakable.