1984-2023

It is with profound sadness that we announce the passing of Nestor at London Health Sciences on Monday November 27th, 2023 at the age of 39.

Born in Mexico to parents Miguel and Hortensia, Nestor and his family moved to Canada when he was a baby. Nestor was raised in the city of Kitchener and attended St Mary’s high school.

Nestor loved everything about cars which later led to him opening his own business Cutom Auto Styling with his older brother Miguel. Nestor always had a love for soccer. He played as a kid and as an adult played in his work Toyota League. He loved nothing more than to watch all three of his kid's soccer games. Backyard soccer games are a daily occurrence in the Sanchez home.

Nestor was a kid at heart and a very proud dad. His kids were everything to him. Many hours were spent playing Superheroes, a living room game of fun he would set up and play for hours with his boys Enzo and Max. He was also a Lego master and passed on the art building to Aiva, Enzo and Max. From him they have learned to be doers and that no problem is too big to be fixed. He believed that it was important to know how to change a tire even if you’re a girl and recently taught Aiva to change the tires on his car. His Fur baby Porsha is the best trained dog around and learned all of her tricks from her dad. Nestor would spend hours training her and she would listen to him like no other person. He was also the best unofficial dog groomer in town and perfected her teddy bear look in a way that makes her even more adorable than she already is.

Nestor was a self-taught Mr. Fix It. Whenever faced with a household challenge Nestor was your man. From energy efficient lightbulbs to full home renovations, he could do it all. Nestor loved the beach, pina coladas and the heat. Family vacations were a top priority and brought him great joy. Just don’t take him to Disney - that was not his happy place on Earth. If you haven’t heard the beats of DJ Nesty Kwik you have truly missed out on great music. His turn table was often playing House and EDM. Nestor DJ'd a few weddings over the years and more recently his Las Vegas Fun Night.

During his illness Nestor developed a love of cooking. The food network was one of his favourite things and he loved to try new recipes for his family. Ribs, steak and waffles were his forte. He enjoyed cooking for celebrations and was very possessive of his grill.

Beloved husband and best friend of Andrea, they were each other's persons. They met in high school and have been devoted to each other ever since. Nestor was kind and patient and thought of the little things. You would often see flowers on their table that he had brought for her just because. Lunch dates were their thing. Any moments they could have together they cherished. After 22 years together he became the happiest man on earth when the tied the knot in August of this year. The love they have for each other will live on in Andrea's heart. Nestor is a loving father of Aiva, Enzo and Max, all at home. Cherished brother of Miguel (Mary), Daisy (Oscar), and Eber and brother -in-law of Cheryl, Chris (Monika). He also was looked up to by his nieces and nephews, Mila, Daniel, Noah, Luca, Miguel, Christian, Tia, Alexis, Eli and Saphira. You could often find Nestor putting together toys for the kids or helping them sort out electronic challenges. Family was his everything. Holiday dinners were always hosted at his house. Birthday party pinatas were always a hit and you could find him rigging them up in the back yard.

He will be fondly remembered by his Mother and Father-in-law Brenda and Dan Munroe. To them he was like a son, who would always lend a helping hand. He will also be remembered by cousins, aunts and uncles and other relatives, friends, Toyota co-workers, and neighbours.

Cremation will take place. A Celebration of Nestor’s Life will be held on Sunday December 3, 2023, from 12-4 at Rockway Golf Course, 625 Rockway Drive Kitchener.

Special thanks to Dr. Inculet of London for always thinking of Nestor as person and doing everything in his power to provide the best care he could for him. Special thanks to Dr. Bindlish for her loving support of Nestor and Andrea during this difficult time.

In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to the Go Fund Me to help support Andrea and the kids as expressions of sympathy.