Update (March 15): Tracee Ellis Ross is setting the record straight. The Black-ish star has made it clear a Girlfriends reboot isn’t happening after Persia White met with executive producer Kelsey Grammer last month.

She told Vibe in an article published on Thursday (March 14),

“The cast has always wanted to do it, but I’ll be honest with you, the ship has sailed. I don’t think it’s ever going to happen. I think it would be a miracle.”

Still, she and her fellow Girlfriends are still close over 20 years after the show debuted in 1999.

Original Story (Feb. 23): Persia White is giving Girlfriends fans something to smile about.

Actress and musician Persia White seems to be suggesting that there might be something in the works when it comes to the beloved early-2000s hit TV series, Girlfriends following a meeting Kelsey Grammer.

On Thursday (Feb. 22), the actress took to Instagram and shared a video of herself and her husband, actor Joseph Morgan walking around the Paramount Pictures lot in Hollywood, California.

In the clip, Persia White can be heard saying,

“Girlfriends walked down this street a lot together, but now I’m walking with my husband.”

The actress continued,

“We’re still walking in Paramount Pictures and had a great meeting with Kelsey Grammer, and this is our old stomping ground for Girlfriends.”

The video caption is likely to be one of the biggest hints dropped by White in the IG post. She wrote,

“Hello Girlfriends! Just got out of a meeting with KELSEY GRAMMER on the Paramount Pictures lot! Good thing are brewing.”

White tagged her Girlfriends co-stars, including Tracee Ellis Ross, Jill Marie Jones, and Golden Brooks. She also tagged her husband as well as Kelsey Grammer.

Girlfriends was created by Mara Brock Akil and debuted on September 11, 2000, on UPN. It later transitioned to The CW, UPN’s successor network, before its cancellation in 2008, with the concluding episode airing on February 11, 2008.

As previously reported, there have been talks of a Girlfriends revival. In an interview last year, Kelsey Grammer, the executive producer of the series, was questioned about the status of a potential reboot of the show. He said,

“I would love to reboot Girlfriends. Of course, it would probably be a different kind of show, but we got The Game back on and that was wonderful. I don’t know if Paramount+ is gonna grab another season of that but you never know. I think they should because I know many people who love that show and love those characters and would like to see them continue. We’ll see what happens.”

Persia White also posted the video along with an additional video to her IG stories.

In the second video, White appears to be leaving the Paramount Pictures lot and shares a short story with her followers. She makes reference to being a young teenager dreaming of one day working as an actress at Paramount Pictures.

She stated,

“One of the coolest stories is that when I was 14, this was the first time I visited California, I drove by these huge Paramount Pictures gates. And I went, ‘What’s that?!’ And my brother said, ‘That’s Paramount Pictures lot.’ And I was like, ‘I wanna work there one day.'”

White added,

“And when I got Girlfriends and I had to drive in this lot every day to the nicest security… it was kind of surreal.”

The actress concluded her statements by saying,

“Just hold onto your dreams, man. No matter how wild and outrageous they might seem. Hold onto your dreams.”