Disclaimer: The lyrical content of many of the linked songs and videos makes use of racist, misogynist, and homophobic language. I do not endorse any of the ideas contained therein, and would like to issue a blanket trigger warning for any of the links for Eminem’s music for abuse and violence.

Cultural appropriation sure as hell is not a modern problem. Fetishization, exploitation, and cherry picking the “exotic” flavors and styles and even people that we “just have to have” has been going on since before the phrase “tribute state” was even formulated. It’s arguably what drove the spice trade, popularized sequins in Europe, and well before Miley Cyrus parodied Nicki Minaj (link contains explicit image), it quite possibly gifted us with the bustle. There’s a certain something always missing in our humdrum, localized lives, and when that lack can’t be sated by bungee jumping or hard drugs, we seem to instead fill it by decorating our world with the trophies of cultures that we’ve explored, studied, or conquered.

The ills of cultural appropriation have been a hot topic of discussion as of late, and it’s a conversation that is absolutely worth having, but it does lead to a tendency to cry wolf whenever we see others “accessorizing” themselves with the trappings of cultures to which they intuitively, superficially don’t belong, especially when those cultures are in some way historically oppressed or disadvantaged. This can make discussions about cultural appropriation from a historical perspective feel at times anachronistic or messy, and at times like a very weak substitute for a more violent rhetoric of cultural looting, pillaging, or expurgating.

Is it cultural appropriation, though, when rather than having casually taken a physical trophy from one of these cultures, you’ve— in a sense— earned an intangible but recognized accolade by truly committing to and mastering their arts? Can a single culture lay claim to a single mode of expression? These are questions that are highly relevant to the history of Arabic poetry and the rap/hip-hop scene for not dissimilar reasons. A dominant or recently dominant culture senses their hegemony being eaten out from under them, a symptom of which is the pioneering of new and divergent art forms (often that act as vectors for resounding political messages, cultivate economic institutions, and command huge fan bases), and rather than sticking with the same-old, decides it wants in. More than that, the agents of that dominant culture seemingly organically fall into a behavioral pattern that belies their desires for dominance. In the Arabic literary context, this specific type of culture war has a name, and that name is “shu’ubiyya.”

What is Shu'ubiyya?

Shu’ubiyya is basically the poetic output of first Persian and later Iberian, Berber, and Jewish frustrations with their nouveau riche rulers, the Arab Muslims, and represents these populations’ attempts to vie for a share in the new cultural canon of the Islamic world by alternately dissing the Arabs and talking up their own, distinct civilizational achievements. Arabs had a pretty salient “right to rule” claim once the 600s rolled around— they were the first Muslims and had uncontested native stewardship of Arabic, the language of the holy Qur’an. Moreover, they snuck up on the Persians at a weak point in their history, after protracted wars with the Byzantines during which time the Arabs living in the Arabian Peninsula remained stuck in the geographic middle, and divided broadly into two camps (the Ghassanids in the West and Lakhmids in the East). They spent most of their time reaping the benefits of controlling trade routes and supply lines and lending troops and a geographic buffer zone to both the Byzantines and the Persians. By the time Islam was revealed to the Arabs, many had done well capitalizing off of wars that had depleted Persian coffers and were capped off by a succession feud among the Persian princes in the late 620s (during the life of Mohammed). The Arab Muslims won a fair fight, and by the 650s most of Persia was conquered and converted. But by the 9th century, when shu’ubiyya started to really take off, many of the various ethnic groups that had accepted Islam thought that perhaps the Arabs had outlived their privileged position.[1] There is an argument to be made, then, that shu’ubiyya isn’t cultural appropriation because, in the eloquent words of another blogger, “cultural appropriation cannot happen horizontally when power is not distributed horizontally,” and the Persians were in a state of power disadvantage relative to the Arabs at the time that shu’ubiyya began. But, looking carefully at some of their early work, it becomes clear that shu’ubi authors making use of Arabic literary forms often did so in a way that was meant to be co-optative, not complicit.

Early shu’ubiyya poetry is often characterized by an outpouring of indignation at the fact that a bunch of Arab tribesmen had the gall to try to best the elite civilization of the Persians, though even this is hard to pin down as much of what we know about early shu’ubiyya literature comes from its Arab critics like this kinda well-known guy (al-Jahiz)

rather than the works themselves, few of which survived.[2] Later, in the hands of both Persians and writers from al-Andalus and North Africa, this mellows a bit and authors instead seek to prove that they deserve pedestals that are level with the Arabs, but not necessarily higher. One of the more noted of the early shu’ubiyya poets, Bashshar ibn Burd (714-783), would take the crudest meters in Arabic and use those very meters to write elaborate screeds against the Arabs. Ferdowsi, the author of the Persian Book of Kings, a masterwork chronicling Persian heritage and mythology, penned some insults popularly associated with shu’ubiyya sentiment. He refers to Arabs as uncouth “lizard-eaters” and “camel’s milk drinkers.”[3]

The irony of Bashshar packaging these ideas in low-brow Arabic poetic media was likely intended to show that he could take the most vulgar of the classical forms and elevate it to a true art because of his talent and the advantages of his heritage. The Arabs fired back against shu’ubiyya, as was bound to happen, with their own artworks denigrating Persian pretensions and mocking Zoroastrian doctrine (or, what they thought Zoroastrian doctrines were). Bashshar ibn Burd, for his own part, was condemned as a heretic by the ‘Abbasid caliph al-Mahdi, whose dogged persecution of perceived blasphemers and extension of executive powers to that effect arguably set the stage for the infamous inquisition (mihna) that occurred during the rule of Ma’mun in the early 800s. Whether Bashshar’s espoused love for his Zoroastrian and polytheistic Greek forebears (he refers to Caesar as his “uncle”) had anything to do with this verdict remains in question. Here’s a taste of his poetry (translated by A.F.L. Beeston):

Is there a messenger who will carry my message to the Arabs,

To him among them who is alive and to him who lies hid in the dust?

To say that I am a man of lineage, lofty above any other one of lineage:

The grandfather in whom I glory was Chosroes, and Sasan was my father,

Caesar was my uncle, if you ever reckon my ancestry […]

One splendidly attired in ermine, standing within the curtains,

The servitors hastening to him with golden vessels:

He was not given to drink the thin milk of a goatskin, or to sup it

In leather vessels

Never did my father sing a camel-song, trailing along behind a scabby camel

Nor approach the colocynth, to pierce it for very hunger […]

Nor did we roast a skink, with its quivering tail,

Nor did I dig for and eat the lizard of the stony ground […]

We are kings, who have always been so through ages past […]

And the horses brought us past Tangier, place of wonder,

So that we restored sovereignty into the family of the Arabian Prophet.

Who is there that has fought against guidance and religion without being stripped?

Who, o who, has rebelled against it without being plundered?

For the sake of God and Islam we are wrathful with a most noble wrath

We are the possessors of crowns and of disdainful, stiff-necked kingship

^ I'm just mildly astounded that there was a google stock photo of a guy eating lizards in the desert...

So, what about the rap?

By now you’ve probably figured out where the analogy between shu’ubiyya and rap/hip-hop comes in: white rappers. Let’s leave aside newer examples like Macklemore and Iggy for now (she’s taking enough shit for other reasons lately) and contemplate instead the original and incomparable one-man phenomenon, Eminem. Born Marshall Bruce Mathers III to the seventeen-year-old Debbie Mathers, Eminem grew up with an absentee father, a theme that figures heavily in his work (especially his self-titled Marshall Mathers LP’s). His childhood is plagued by competing narratives, and his mother recorded her side of the story in a memoir in which she admits to being complicit in her son’s exaggeration about the hardships of their relationship in order to earn him attention from the music industry. I’m not about to verify or falsify any of this, but the main point is that Slim Shady’s issues with his mom weigh on his lyrics. Many of Eminem’s songs are multi-tiered calls for or condemnations of the acceptance and acknowledgment of others—be it familial, social, or commercial.

When other gangster rappers were talking about their inner city roots, Eminem wore his more ruralized “white trash” history on his sleeve, proclaiming the analogy proudly. He grew up moving between Missouri and Michigan, but mostly calls Detroit his home. He recalls in a Rolling Stone interview that he was one of the few white children on his block, and that run-ins with his black peers would occur frequently… basically, he confesses to getting the ever-loving shit beat out of him. Eminem confessing to various fantasies, geekery (as a kid he was obsessed with comic books), and criminal behavior is somewhat of an ongoing theme. Often, he leaves his perceived opponents with little to mock because he’s laid it all bare of his own accord. In a sort of reverse-braggadocio, Eminem declares that he is not a role model, that he doesn’t really know how to love himself, showcases his dependence on his early mentor Dr. Dre to keep him clean, and he keeps his struggles with mental illness and brain damage (some of which he actually incurred through cerebral hemorrhaging from getting beaten on as a kid) at the forefront of his lyrics.

Enter Slim Shady, which is less an alias than an alter ego for Eminem. In the middle of his career, Eminem tended to let Shady do the bragging for him, as well as the callouts. In his famous song “The Real Slim Shady,” for example, Eminem talks about the Grammy’s and mentions the disparity in the marketability and palatability of white rap vs. black rap, saying that “Will Smith don’t gotta cuss in his raps to sell records; well I do, so f*ck him and f*ck you too!” but at the same time exposing the irony of his Grammy nomination, saying that it’s mostly because he would look better sitting “next to Britney Spears,” but meanwhile “half of you critics can’t even stomach me, let alone stand me.”

Eminem’s rhyming talent is clear, though, and he is more than willing to critique what he views as the cheapening of the rap industry. In his song “Till I Collapse,” he lists his top rappers who are keeping the game the way it should be, “Reggie, Jay-Z, 2Pac and Biggie, Andre from Outkast, Jada, Kurupt, Nas, and then me/ but in this industry I’m the cause of a lot of envy/ So when I’m not put on this list, the shit does not offend me.” He declares in this same song that his spot in this imagined hall of fame is “forever reserved,” as if to say that even though Eminem’s name may not be on the lips of those who think he doesn’t belong there, he’s left an indelible mark on the rap scene. Whether you like him or not, the art and industry has responded to him.

Now, often when Eminem is pressed about his race, he remarks on how sick and tired he is of having to answer questions about what it’s like to be white in his chosen career, saying, “There was a while when I was feeling like, ‘damn, if I’d just been born black, I would not have to go through all this,’” and “I get offended when people say, ‘so, being a white rapper… and growing up white… after being born white…’ it’s all I ever hear!” Much as I’m sure many can sympathize with not wanting to answer the same damn questions all the time, allow me to quote Jon Stewart to illustrate my feelings on white people complaining about being made to talk and think about race: “You’re tired of hearing about it? Imagine how f*cking exhausting it is living it.” Eminem might stick out like a sore thumb amongst colleagues, but his colleagues are made to feel that way in the larger world, particularly with respect to their music, which, per Eminem’s own critique (as well as our friend Kanye’s), often is pigeonholed as not being mainstream enough to get hip-hop/rap artists recognized as members of the upper echelon of the music industry. You can be the best of the rappers, but too often that does not place you among the best musicians according to the “powers that be.” Moreover, in his career, Eminem has more than ensured that people ask questions about issues in his work that are much more pressing than his race. He himself has pointed out that his lyrics about abuse and misogyny have provided ample deflection away from questions about whether he “belongs” in the rap scene, and acknowledges that the more perverse he is, the more his fans love him.

Eminem frequently uses a medium that has also been used as a means of empowerment against violence and oppression (though, granted, sometimes by expressing desires to fight fire with fire) to talk about the violent revenge he wishes to take against wrongs in his own life which, while clearly full of struggle, stands apart from the systemic oppression that his black peers face. This may not be on the same level as the shu’ubiyya authors actively using an Arabic medium to criticize Arabs as a way of beating them at their own game, but it is still problematic in light of rap’s foundations to just shrug off the legacy and social role that the medium imparts, because of oh, you know:

Nonetheless, Eminem doesn’t seem to have drawn too much criticism from his peers in the industry (he's also notably absent from the above list). Perhaps because he demurs whenever people try to give him accolades and awards. He also avoids controversy by assiduously keeping racial slurs out of his music, but he often instead targets the LGBT community and women. With the face of the industry (slowly) changing to include more women and more out-and-proud performers, Eminem has at least begun to step up his collaborations with famous femmes, but some argue it’s just a more marketable way of peddling the same old problematic lyrics. So he’s mellowing out and diversifying just like the shu’ubiyya litterateurs did, but if the underlying sentiment is still the same, the question remains: why should we buy it?

Maybe because he’s got legit flow. Maybe because he’s earned the praise, and maybe because in spite of all his faults, Eminem didn’t take a thing in his career that wasn’t given to him—and he’s totally real about where he came from. Our shu’ubi brothers might seem a little more rose-colored on this count, but it’s worth remembering that with most calls for revival in a culture there’s an accompanying backhanded critique of the fact that you’re no longer on top.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XbGs_qK2PQA

[2] Ian Richard Netton, ed. “Shu’ubiyya,” Encyclopaedia of Islamic Civilization and Religion. New York: Routledge, 2008. pp. 603-604

[3] The Image of Arabs in Modern Persian Literature by Joya Blondel Saad