Multi-talented artist and one of People Magazine’s Emerging Artists Riley Clemmons has released her latest song “Miracle.” Co-written with Paul Duncan (Lauren Daigle, Leslie Odom, JR) and produced by Jeff Pardo (Lady A, CAIN), the pair have painted a picture of everyday miracles backed by delicate piano and strings which further highlight Riley’s powerful vocals. In addition to the debut of the song, Riley has shared an official music video for “Miracle.” The video was filmed at the romantic Two Rivers Mansion in Nashville, TN and directed by Mika Matinazad (Natalie Hemby, Ingrid Andress).

“It’s all too easy to get so busy and distracted that we forget to notice and appreciate the everyday miracles we get to experience in this lifetime,” shares Riley. “After sharing a snippet of the song on social media, I was moved by the ‘miracle’ stories being shared in love stories, miracle babies, family members, friends… the list goes on. I’m truly excited to watch a song that was born from such a sacred and personal season of my life continue to be welcomed into the lives of people all over the world.”

Riley Clemmons is a rising artist from Nashville, TN who has accumulated over half a billion global streams and 85 million YouTube video views since the beginning of her almost decade long career. After spending years refining her craft in writers’ rooms, Riley sky-rocketed onto the scene with her 2017 Capitol CMG debut single “Broken Prayers,” which has generated over 56 million global streams since its release. Her 2018 self-titled album debut quickly entered the Billboard Heatseekers chart, debuting at No. 13. Riley released her much anticipated sophomore, Godsend, in 2021 which cemented her place as an artist to watch with accolades from Rolling Stone and People Magazine as well as performances on the 2021 SHEIN X ROCK THE RUNWAY virtual fashion show, the TODAY Show, FOX & Friends, and debut at the Grand Ole Opry. The lead single, “Fighting for Me,” became her top performing song with 160 million worldwide streams and “Keep On Hoping,” became the fastest growing single of her career, breaking Top 20 on Billboard and MediaBase Radio charts and receiving over 5 million streams in its first 8 weeks. The follow up single “For The Good” has received over 40 million global streams to date and Billboard named her one of the Top Christian Artists for the year ending 2022. In 2021, Riley was nominated as Female Artist of the Year at the 9th Annual K-LOVE Fan Awards making her the youngest nominee in the show’s history. An accomplished composer, performer, producer, and recording artist, Riley draws inspiration from life experiences, blending musical influences ranging from pop to classic rock to create music that is as catchy as it is relatable.

Stream/Download Miracle