Published 15 January 2024

Shaznay Lewis, singer and lead songwriter for iconic pop group All Saints, who scored huge hits with songs such as ‘Never Ever’, ‘Pure Shores’ and ‘Black Coffee’, has returned with her first solo single in 20 years, ‘Miracle’.

After releasing her debut solo album in 2004, Lewis remained largely out of the limelight, until All Saints reformed in 2016. The release of ‘Miracle’ proves Lewis is still an artist of the highest calibre and showcases her ability to create stunning pop music.

Written with Emily Phillips and producer Anthony Whiting, ‘Miracle’ is a cinematic, atmospheric, layered and deeply connective slice of electronic pop with dashes of soul, R&B and trip-hop, with melodies that are both melancholic and inspiring. There are throwbacks to the electronica of the early 2000s, yet it remains utterly contemporary.

“‘Miracle’ was a journey, a relentless writing process between Emily Phillips and me,” Lewis says. “We pushed each other, we changed it a lot until, and when I finally listened to it, I realised it was a love song to myself, about the person I’ve been for the past 25 years and where I am now. It’s a message of encouragement to return to my love of writing with self-esteem, and confidence in the way that made me happy.”

Lewis started making new solo music again in 2022, around the same time she performed with Coldplay at Wembley Stadium. The sessions resulted in ‘Miracle’ alongside a clutch of new songs, more of which she promises will be with us soon. Alongside her return to the solo spotlight, Lewis will be appearing at the Mighty Hoopla festival in London on 2 June.

Lewis is one of pop’s greatest songwriters of her generation, responsible for not just the All Saints classics, but also writing for other artists including Little Mix, Sugababes and Stooshe. Her return in front of the microphone is one 2024’s first incredible musical moment, and her future releases will continue to be a highlight of this year.

‘Miracle’ is out now via 1.9.7.5. Recordings. You can buy and stream here.

Follow Shaznay Lewis on Instagram.