Cher is born Cherilyn Sarkisian in El Centro, California. She first records as "Bonnie Jo Mason," and then "Cherilyn." Teaming up with Sonny Bono in 1964, they record as "Caesar and Cleo," before changing it to "Sonny and Cher" the next year. When they hit it big with "I Got You Babe," she sticks with Cher.

Magazine magnate Jann Wenner, most famous for his work with Rolling Stone and for his role in establishing the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, is born in New York City.

Lemmy (lead singer for Motörhead) is born Ian Fraser Kilmister in Burslem, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, England. He would earn the nickname Lemmy from his classmates.

Neil Young is born in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. He is raised in the small, rural town of Omemee, Ontario, where the Youngtown Museum will be established in his honor.

Gary Lewis, future leader of Gary Lewis and the Playboys, is born Cary Levitch. His name is changed two years later when his dad changes his name from Joseph Levitch to Jerry Lewis.

John Fogerty is born, but not on the bayou; the Creedence Clearwater Revival leader claims Berkeley, California as his birthplace.More

Pete Townshend of The Who is born in Chiswick, United Kingdom.

Bob Seger is born in Lincoln Park, Michigan.

Eric Clapton is born in Ripley, England. He forms the bands Cream, Blind Faith and Derek & the Dominos. His birth name is often erroneously reported as "Eric Clapp," as Clapp is the surname of his grandparents who raised him.

Bob Marley is born Nesta Robert Marley in Jamaica. His mother is a native of Jamaica and his father an officer in the British military.More

Rod Stewart is born in London, England. He joins the Jeff Beck Group from 1967-69 and Faces from 1969-75, but makes his biggest impact as a solo artist.

Marvin Hamlisch is born in New York City. The composer will not only win a Pulitzer Prize for Drama for A Chorus Line in 1975, but will snag multiple Emmy, Grammy, Tony, and Academy Awards for his work for stage and screen (The Way We Were, The Sting).

James Patrick "Jimmy" Page is born in Heston, Middlesex, England. He is a session musician in England before forming The Yardbirds and Led Zeppelin.

Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards is born in Dartford, Kent, England.More

Randy Newman is born in Los Angeles, California.

Ronnie Spector of The Ronettes is born Veronica Yvette Bennett in New York City, New York.

Mick Jagger of The Rolling Stones is born Michael Philip Jagger in Dartford, Kent, England.

Carly Simon is born in New York City. Her dad is Richard L. Simon, co-founder of Simon & Schuster publishing. (Simon's birthdate is often reported as June 25, 1945, but birth records prove she was born in 1943.)

George Harrison is born in Liverpool, England. He becomes lead guitarist of The Beatles, a successful solo artist, and a member of The Traveling Wilburys.

Janis Joplin is born in Port Arthur, Texas.

Jim Croce is born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Harry Chapin is born in New York City. The folk rocker debuts in 1972 with the album Heads & Tales, featuring his first hit, "Taxi."

Soul superstar Isaac Hayes is born in Covington, Tennessee.

Jerry Garcia of the Grateful Dead is born in San Francisco, California.

Kim Fowley is born in Los Angeles, California. The flamboyant writer and record producer puts together the all-female rock band The Runaways in 1975 and later goes on to write for Kiss and Alice Cooper.

Roger McGuinn of The Byrds is born in Chicago, Illinois.

Brian Wilson (of The Beach Boys) is born in Inglewood, California.

Tammy Wynette is born Virginia Wynette Pugh in Mississippi.

Barbra Streisand is born in Brooklyn, New York City.More

Aretha Franklin is born in Memphis, Tennessee. More

Back to Categories