Charlene Choi & Ronald Cheng Divorce on Good Terms

Charlene Choi and Ronald Cheng allegedly got secretly married in Los Angeles in 2006. When reporters confronted the pair about the secret marriage, Ch…

Sammi Cheng Dating Andy Hui Again?

Sammi Cheng and Andy Hui are rumored to be dating again. The pair last broke up in 2004.

Tavia Yeung & Lai Lok Yi Dating?

Tavia Yeung rumored to be dating Lai Lok Yi against the wishes of Tavia's mother.

Yoyo Chen & Vincent Wong Caught Kissing by Poolside

Since breaking up with TVB actor, Vin Choi from “Best Selling Secrets,” Yoyo Chen has been dating Vincent Wong Ho Shun.

TVB Producer Confirms Myolie Wu & Bosco Wong Are Dating

TVB’s new series "Burning Flame 3" 《烈火雄心3》will be aired on Monday, July 6th. Cast members, Wong He, Kevin Cheng Ka Wing, Myolie Wu Hang …

Ekin Cheng & Yoyo Mung Dispel Cold War Rumors

A tabloid magazine recently published an article that claimed Yoyo Mung Ka Wai has been forcing boyfriend, Ekin Cheng to marry her over the last six m…

Kevin Cheng & Charmaine Sheh Take Picture with Daughter

Kevin Cheng Ka Wing, Charmaine Sheh Si Man, Moses Chan Ho, Tavia Yeung Yi, Michelle Yim Mai Shuet, Cheung Kwok Keung and Susanna Kwan Kuk Ying attende…

Stephen Huynh Praises Mandy Cho as a Good Girl

The 2008 Luxury Swiss Watch Expo was held two night ago. TVB artists, Stephen Huynh Wong Cheung Hing, Mandy Cho Man Lei, Suki Chui Suk Man, Tracy Ip C…

Charmaine Sheh and Kevin Cheng Spotted in Same Car Again

Rumored couple Charmaine Sheh Si Man and Kevin Cheng Ka Wing were filming an outdoor scene for “Beyond the Realm of Conscience” 《宮心計》.

Maggie Cheung Broke Up With Millionaire Boyfriend?

Maggie Cheung Ho Yee and her millionaire boyfriend, Tsang Anbang (who works as a fund manager in the financial industry) have been dating for 1 year.

Nnadia Chan Admits Arguing with Boyfriend

Reporters asked about Nnadia’s relationship with her boyfriend, Zhang Duo (who is 12 years younger than Nnadia). Nnadia admitted frankly, "Sometimes…

Stephen Fung is Currently Dating Vivian Hsu

Stephen Fung Tak Lun and his current girlfriend, Vivian Hsu attended the Asian Film Awards yesterday.

Joe Ma Reunites with Wife & Repairs Marriage?

Joe Ma and his wife make amends after Joe was caught vacationing with his girlfriend earlier.