Biography

Originally intending to work behind the scenes as a songwriter and a producer, Cheng did odd jobs at his father (Director of EMI Asia)’s company EMI— which included doing backing vocalist for the likes of Alan Tam and Priscilla Chan — during summers as a youth. The lessons were apparently effective, as producers started taking notice of Cheng’s voice and he was signed to a recording contract soon thereafter. Cheng first shot to popularity in Taiwan before returning home and enjoying some success in Hong Kong. However, his singing career went into a lull from 2000 to 2003 due to the infamous “air rage incident” and has only recently rebounded.

Cheng returned to the Cantopop market in 2003, however success for him did not arrive until 2005, where his signature song "無賴" (Rascal) was voted one of the Top 10 songs at various music award shows, notably TVB's Jade Solid Gold, where it was voted the most popular song of 2005.

Cheng won his first Best Supporting Actor award for his performance in Vulgaria (film) at the 32nd Hong Kong Film Award.

Personal life

His father, Norman Cheng (鄭東漢), is the chairperson and CEO of EMI, and formerly of the Asia Pacific division of PolyGram and then Universal Music.

Ronald Cheng started his relationship with Charlene Choi, a popular Hong Kong female singer and actress, in 2004, after starring as lovers in the film Hidden Heroes. In 2010, while Choi announced ending the relationship with Cheng, the press revealed that they had registered their marriage in Los Angeles, United States in 2006. Both Cheng and Choi recognized the marriage, but decided to divorce. Later, he dated with Sammie Yu, a former hostess in Cable TV Hong Kong and Sammie Yu gave birth to a daughter. They married in July 2011.

Discography

1996

左右為難 (In A Dilemma) - Mandarin Album

別愛我 (Don't Love Me) - Mandarin Album

1997

情深 (Deep Love) - Cantonese Album

最愛的人不是你 (You Are Not My Dearest Lover) - Mandarin EP

絕口不提！愛你 (Don't Say! Love You) - Mandarin Album

戒情人 (Abstain From Love) - Mandarin Album

1998

時間 人物 地點 (Time, People, Place) - Mandarin / Cantonese New + Best Selections

敵人 (Enemy) - Mandarin Album

1999

我真的可以 (I Really Can) - Mandarin Album

One More Time - Cantonese Album

2000

聲聲愛你 (Sounds Love You) - Mandarin New + Best Selections

緣份無邊界 (Love Without Borderline) - Cantonese Compilation

真朋友 (True Friend) - Mandarin Album

2002

Encore - Mandarin New + Best Selections

2003

唔該， 救救我 (Please Help!!!) - Cantonese Album

唔該， 救救我 “火紅火熱”版 (Please Help!!! - 2 AVCD Version) - Cantonese Album

2005

Before After - Cantonese Album

2006

正宗K (Karaoke Cheng) - Cantonese / Mandarin New + Best Selections

鄭中基演唱會二零零六 (Ronald Cheng Live in Concert 2006) - Cantonese / Mandarin Live Album

2008

怪胎 (Freak) - Mandarin New + Best Selections