(Hope this hasn't been posted already)

(Note: Paradise Valley n.e. area of Phoenix)

http://www.azcentral.com/arizonarepublic/news/articles/0124carsonlocal24.html

Carson kept Valley visits private

Kathy Shayna Shocket - The Arizona Republic - Jan. 24, 2005 12:00 AM

Johnny Carson will be remembered as an extremely private person. Few had the chance to know

him socially off camera. But Herman Chanen of Phoenix was one.

The Phoenix businessman was often invited with his wife to the star's Bel Air, Calif., home

in the 1980s for cocktails or a private dinner.

"He had a room in the house where he played his drums," said Chanen, who had the rare opportunity

to hear Carson informally pound away. "Playing the drums was a great way for him to relax."

Chanen and other noted Valley residents recalled personal anecdotes about the television legend

after he died Sunday at 79.

When Carson came to the Valley, he frequently called Chanen, whom he met through mutual friends.

The chairman and CEO of Chanen Construction Co. also became very close to the talk-show

giant's parents, Kit and Ruth Carson.

Most people never knew that Kit and Ruth Carson quietly moved to Paradise Valley from Nebraska

in the '80s. And Carson discreetly came to the Valley to see them. Chanen would sometimes give

him a lift from Scottsdale Municipal Airport to their home. It wasn't a business relationship,

but a personal friendship.

"He sought privacy all the time," Chanen said. "My wife at that time, Lois, and I went to the

Sands in Las Vegas on several occasions to have dinner with Johnny and his (former) wife,

Joanna," he said. "Once we had to eat in the hotel kitchen so he could have privacy."

And Lois recalled that when Carson flew in to the Valley, he wanted to stay out of the limelight.

"Joanna would pack a big lunch and bring it in with them on their plane and we'd eat at

Johnny's parents' house," she said.

Herman Chanen spoke with Doc Severinsen's wife, Emily, on Sunday night. He could hear Doc in the

background, busy on the phone as the news of Carson's death traveled across the country. From

his Santa Barbara home Severinsen, the Principal Pops conductor of the Phoenix Symphony, issued

a statement through his road manager, Bernadette Hillario.

"This is a huge loss for us. We are devastated. It was an honor and a privilege to know and work

with him," Severinsen said.

Carson was so private that even some of his favorite guests, such as Joe Garagiola Sr., who was

on the Tonight Show many times, only knew him publicly. "He wasn't rude, but we had a great time

on the air, he thanked you and then he was off," said the baseball player turned broadcaster.

"He was the Babe Ruth of the talk-show guys, " Garagiola said. "When you were a guest on his

show, he was genuinely interested. If you got on a roll, he would throw the questions out the

window his people gave him. There were a couple times I would be waiting in the green room and

never really made the show because Johnny was on a roll with the guy before me. And when I was

lucky, Johnny and I got on a roll and the next guy was bumped."

Garagiola, of Scottsdale, said his career also benefited from being in that famous chair on the

Tonight Show. "Whenever you did the Carson show it was as if all America was watching you,

everybody would know you," he said. "I still have people coming up to me, telling me they

enjoyed me on the show telling my Yogi (Berra) stories."

Garagiola was even asked to host the show when Carson was on vacation. Carson trusted him

enough to have him host on a night the Beatles were on.

Hugh Downs of Paradise Valley substituted for Carson five times during the first year and

a half of the Tonight Show. In fact, Downs was the sidekick and substitute host for the

Jack Paar show from July 1957 through September 1962. When Jack Paar left, Downs says he

thought he was being considered for Paar's replacement, but NBC asked him to host the

Today show, a position he held for almost a decade. "I asked them who would replace Jack Paar

and they told me Johnny Carson would be Jack Paar's replacement.

"Johnny's mark of greatness was that he put the spotlight on the guest," said Downs, who was

friendly with Carson before the Tonight Show. "I knew him when he was hosting a daytime show

called Who Do You Trust?," Downs said.