Carson Karol Kite age 16, passed tragically on January 9, 2021 after suffering major injuries in a a car accident and has left an unimaginable void in our lives and hearts.

Carson was born on September 21, 2004 in Shreveport, Louisiana. He lived in Louisiana, Arizona, Pennsylvania, Nevada and Colorado.

Carson is survived by his Parents, Gregory and Evelyn Kite; Siblings, Johnny Kite, Megan Kite and Grant Kite; Cousins, Cameron, Sophie, Lilly, Krystian, Natasha, Tymek; Grandparents, Wayne and Cathy Kite, Babcia Christina Opalinska; Aunts and Uncles, Madga, Ada, David and Leela Kite, Jeff Kite, Mike and Abigail Kite.

Time has come to an abrupt and full stop. Our hearts are truly broken, and we will miss him for the rest of our lives. There are no words for the pain we feel.

Carson was a junior at Northfield High School. His passion was home improvement projects and he wanted to be an Engineer. He enjoyed driving, skateboarding and spending time with his family, friends and his dogs Izzy and Chloe.

Carson had a big heart and was loved by many. Sixteen incredible years are never enough for a boy with so many talents, so much love to give, and gentle character. Although his time here on earth was short, he made a lasting impression on everyone he met. Carson will be missed by those he left behind on this earth, but will be forever remembered by all who had the privilege and honor to know him. He is at peace now and with his Grandfather and Uncle. Let the kindness and creativity he had within his heart spread light to make this world a better place.

We are overwhelmed with all the love and support that we have received from our friends and family. We thank you for all that you have done to honor our beloved Carson.

We love you Carson - until we meet again...

Please, see below for service information.

Due to COVID-19 masks are required. If you feel ill or have symptoms, we kindly ask you to follow the service online by following this link: https://bxcited.com/carsonkite/

In lieu of flowers please contribute to the GoFundMe account set up in memory of Carson. We thank you for all of your love, kindness and generosity.