Jay Leno paid a fond tribute to Johnny Carson last night, devoting his hourlong show to the legendary late-night talker, for whom he began guest-hosting in the 1980s before replacing him in 1992.

“It’s strange: After all these years, I still feel like a guest in his house,” a reflective Leno told his “Tonight Show” audience in Burbank.

Carson died Sunday from emphysema at 79.

“He built this place. Everyone who does this for a living owes it to him,” Leno said of the man who hosted the show for 30 years.

“Think about that. These days, some NBC shows don’t last 30 days.

“Johnny never went out of style,” Leno went on.

“As a performer, I don’t think I ever wanted to impress anyone more than Johnny Carson. He had that effect on comedians.”

And Carson was always topical, Leno stressed.

“People say this country is divided now. These people forget the ’60s and early ’70s. There were almost daily marches, there were race riots, there were assassinations, there were anti-war demonstrations all the time.

“But, throughout it all, no matter what the state of the world, it seemed to get its sanity back every night at 11:30.”

Leno last night dropped his monologue and opened with a montage of Carson clips.

Then he reminisced with Carson sidekick Ed “Heeeeere’s Johnny!” McMahon, Bob Newhart and Don Rickles, who were frequent “Tonight Show” guests.

Comedian Drew Carey introduced a montage of stand-up comedians – himself included – who were given their big break by Carson.

As much as Leno celebrated Carson’s legacy, no one protected that legacy better than Carson himself.

Although he virtually disappeared after his 1992 retirement, he kept working on anthologies of the show’s funniest bits. Yesterday, one of those compilations zoomed to No. 1 on the Amazon.com DVD chart. The anthology – “The Ultimate Johnny Carson Collection: His Favorite Moments From the Tonight Show (1962-1992)” – was originally released in 2000. Four other Carson videos spiked to Top 10 positions on the chart.

CBS “Late Show” host David Letterman, who credits Carson with giving him his start, is vacationing this week. Last night’s show included a disclaimer letting viewers know it had been taped a few weeks ago.

Letterman is expected to pay tribute to Carson when he returns with a new show on Monday.

Carson, who never appeared on the “Tonight Show” after he retired, did several guest turns on “Late Show” – including a 1994 walk-on to present his own “Top Ten” list.

Funeral arrangements have not been announced, but it’s certain Carson will be buried the way he lived – privately, without much fanfare.

He didn’t want a memorial service and his funeral will be “private,” a family spokesman said.

Barbara Walters, on “The View” yesterday, said she had spoken with Carson’s widow, Alexis, who told her, “The family knew about [Carson’s illness] – it wasn’t something that suddenly happened.”

With Post Wire Services

—

‘After all these years, I still feel like a guest in his house.’ – Jay Leno, on Johnny Carson