Greg Bear Books In Order

Book links take you to Amazon. As an Amazon Associate I earn money from qualifying purchases.

Publication Order of Ares Rising Books

Publication Order of Darwin's Radio Books

Publication Order of Eon Books

Publication Order of Forge of God Books

Publication Order of Quantum Logic Books

Publication Order of Queen of Angels Books

Publication Order of Second Foundation Trilogy Books

Publication Order of Songs of Earth and Power Books

Publication Order of Star Wars Legends Books

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Short Stories/Novellas

Publication Order of Jurassic Park Graphic Novels

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Publication Order of Halo: The Forerunner Saga Books

Publication Order of Star Trek: TOS (Numbered) Books

Publication Order of Anthologies

Greg Bear is one of the well known authors of America who is particularly famous for his novels based on the science fiction genre. The successful writing works of Greg cover a wide range of scientific descriptions such as galactic conflict, artificial universes, cultural and consciousness practices, and accelerated evolution. His latest writing work is based on the Halo Universe. Throughout his writing career, author Greg has written a total of 44 books. One of the other famous works of Greg other than being an author is being one of the co-founders of the San Diego Comic Con. Other than the science fiction genre, Greg also likes to write his novels based on the speculative fiction and fantasy genres. Greg was born as Gregory Dale Bear on August 20, 1951 in San Diego, California, United States. After the completion of his school studies, he joined the San Diego State University and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in the year 1973. While studying at the university, he used to work as a teaching assistant to the author Elizabeth Chater for her course related to science fiction writing. Later, the two went on to become good friends. As far as his writing is concerned, Greg was considered as a hard author of science fiction novels because of his habit of giving a lot of importance to the scientific details. Greg was able to sell his first book in the year 1967.

In most of his novels, author Greg gas tried to address the major questions with fictional solutions related to the contemporary science. He has also laid a great emphasis on examining guilt, crime, and punishment. One of his favorite themes is the reality as seen by the observers. In one of his later novels, author Greg has tried to give a detailed description about a near future society filled with nanotechnology. At one point of his writing career, Greg Bear collaborated with the authors, David Brin and Gregory Benford in writing the trilogy of the prequel novels of the Foundation trilogy written by Isaac Asimov. He particularly worked on the middle book of the series. For his excellent contributions in the field of English literature, author Greg has received numerous accolades such as the Nebula Award on 5 occasions and the Hugo Award on a couple of occasions. He has said in his interviews that Ray Bradbury is the most influential author in his life. He even got a chance of meeting him in the year 1967 and then continued to have a prolonged correspondence. Author Greg married Christina Nielson in the year 1975 and divorced her in the year 1981. Then he married Astrid Anderson in the year 1983, who is the daughter of the writer Poul Anderson. The couple has 2 children named Alexandra and Erik. The family lives in Seattle, Washington. Greg is a deist by religion.

Author Greg Bear has written around 5 novel series in his writing career, one of which is known as ‘The Way’ series. This series consists of a total of 3 novels published between the years 1984 and 1994. The first novel of the series was published under the title ‘Eon’. It was published by the Tor Science Fiction publishing house in the year 1984. The plot of the novel is set in a scientific world and depicts The Stone, which seems to have come from the space, but not the space that is known to humans. It has probably come from the future, which does not seem to be the future world of the human race. It is discovered that The Stone is hollow and contains the remains of an old and vanished civilization of the humans. The civilization tells the readers about the history of the Death and incredible catastrophes, which are about to happen on Earth. In the further novels of the series it is shown that the Stone yields some secrets that make even the survival of Earth pale in comparison. In the opening sequence of the first novel of the series, it is shown that the 21st century is about to witness nuclear confrontation as a 300 kilometer long asteroid called as The Stone has flashed out of nowhere into the orbit of Earth. After discovering the asteroid, the NASA, UN, and NATO send explorers to its surface, who discover several mysteries and marvels that could drive the researchers mad. It is found that the Stone has come from a future space that does not belong to the humans. It contains a vanished civilization named Thistledown in its hollow space. The civilization is discovered to be of the humans who speak, English, Chinese and Russian. The Stone also has 7 big chambers which contain the forests, rivers, lakes, hanging cities, etc.

There was also a museum which described the Death, a catastrophic war, which was about to occur on the planet Earth. It also depicted the long and horrifying winter that will follow the war. The politicians and the scientists on Earth seem to be in a dilemma on how to use the information in the Stone to stop the occurrence of Death. What made things even frightening was a secret which revealed that even the survival of Earth was pale compared to its significance. The novel went on to become highly successful and helped author Greg to be nominated for the Arthur C. Clarke Award in the year 1987. The second novel of the series was titled ‘Eternity’ and was published by the Aspect publishing house in the year 1987. In the this novel, the author has depicted a visitor who comes from the end phase of time and takes a handful of strangers from Earth to the space. There they are required to destroy science’s ultimate marvel. The novel is about the human race should stop manipulating space and time. In the novel, author Greg has tried to take humanity back and remind us that the gods don’t take our actions kindly. The interesting prose and clear descriptions make the novel even more interesting to read. The novel serves as the sequel to the first novel of the series and depicts the same set of characters and plots, including the multiple universes. This was followed by the third novel of the series, which was titled ‘Legacy’. This novel is also set in the same universe and serves as the prequel to both the initial novels of the series. The plot of this novel tells the story of Olmy, who tries to investigate certain illegal opening present in the Milky Way, which takes him to a strange new world.