At the beginning of the film, Thunderbolt is disguised as a preacher, living a life in hiding. He reads a sermon to his church – severe, pithy and deliberated.

“As under the redeemer’s gentle reign, the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid.”

We immediately cut to the insouciant Lightfoot’s carpe diem gait, buoyant upon the sultry Montana air, a blithe spontaneity to his every step.

Thunderbolt will repeat his same maxim to a new congregation many moons later, in the shape of an unfledged Lightfoot.

Lightfoot asks if it’s a poem.

“No.” Thunderbolt replies. “A prayer.”

Michael Cimino’s ’74 drama proffers the story of an irreverent drifter (Jeff Bridges), imbued with seasoned clichés, who strikes up a chance rapport with a catatonic case-hardened criminal (Clint Eastwood). But this is a world stepped in treachery and swindling, and the depraved Red (George Kennedy) and his driver Goody (Geoffrey Lewis) still hold a vindictive and blood-seeped hostility for Thunderbolt due to a presumed double-cross on a previous heist.

What this film manages to capture – quite beautifully, really – is an almost poetic story of crude male friendship – a theme rarely explored introspectively in a modern climate diluted by stereotypes and tradition. Thunderbolt and Lightfoot are just two strangers embraced by the same embosom of misfortune, but almost immediately there’s an abstract credence hovering in the air as they drift across America. A tenderness lingers here, intangible and unspoken of. The chemistry between Bridges and Eastwood are the strong sinews that connect a stony base of pathos to the untethered thrill of Cimino’s direction.

In Reservoir Dogs, despite all the beguiling and glamorous gore that pooled on its surface like oil, what tripped the heist up was that lack of onscreen connection between Keitel and Roth, the two pivotal cogs in an already economical machine. In All the President’s Men however, an acute Hoffman and flinty Redford naturally spark off one another, and as the story progresses we only see that unique bond grow tighter.

And yet Thunderbolt and Lightfoot goes one step further. Something is different. This is no normal bond; nay, this is no normal chemistry.

It’s love. Platonic love admittedly, although some may go even further in zest. When Bridges crossdresses in order to seduce an operator, there’s a stronger resonance threshing beneath the surface. Thunderbolt labours as he makes love to a prostitute, abashed, his face contorted with discomfort; Lightfoot objectifies, catcalls and sleazes, resolving to be as provocatively charming as possible in his campy prerogative, as if he’s nothing to lose. Is this a homosexual affinity being hinted at beneath the veneer? Certainly, but it seems more like man’s stilted inability to express true emotions that connects these two rather than interpersonal attraction.

George Kennedy’s Red is a further facet in the film’s established brand of toxic and perverted masculinity: a brave, fervent misogynist, and true voyeur as he raises his mask to get a good stare at some close-up teenage sex; he serves both as a counter to the more profound relation of Thunderbolt and Lightfoot, and as a show of lonesome, turbulent, insecure virility, swathed in denial and sadism. Just a playful peck on the lips from Lightfoot, and Red finds himself fantasising in cold blood – a fantasy he eventually fulfils, beating Lightfoot close to death.

But that only occurs after this group of repressed men plan to commit a heist – no doubt an excellent source of relief for their deep-rooted dysfunctions – instead of the expected Western shootout over the Southern plains the earliest scenes would seem to suggest. Because, while there’s an allure to Westerns films – the guns, the bars, the dust, the whiskey, the hats – it’s a dance with mythology. ‘Cowboys’ wallowed in squalor, slept in the same set of clothes for weeks on end and eventually died young from botulism, some plague or by shooting themselves in the foot.

Thunderbolt and Lightfoot does not dwell in mythology. Unlike Westerns, it isn’t based in its action – it’s really all character. But better still, its reflective nature does not compromise a purposeful plot, despite some fantasy levels, and a riveting climax.

The ending is what makes the film, the final stroke in a raw masterpiece. The actual discovery of the original aim – money – becomes something of an afterthought; after all, the heist is just a vehicle for the male bond. Thunderbolt and Lightfoot drive in a car towards the sun, the leather seats weighed down by bags of cash; Lightfoot claims he feels heroic for the first time in his short life – perhaps finally feeling he’s on par with his partner – a bitter-sweet moment underpinned by the tragic nature of this film.

He soon slumps down, fulling the full aftereffects of Red’s drubbing. Thunderbolt’s brow furrows with concern.

How much will you give for success? Lightfoot is dead here, but it doesn’t matter anyhow – he was being dragged into a dangerous and corrupting game that would surely quench his bohemian individuality. Thunderbolt knew the risk of a heist, but still succumbed. He also knew he’s probably the only man this boy has ever trusted, but still succumbed. In the end, he endangers not only himself, but lets Lightfoot become intertwined with amoral brutality.

Look back at the quote from the start:

“As under the redeemer’s gentle reign, the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid.”

Does the wolf protect the lamb? Does the leopard lie down with the kid? He tries. But he fails. Another famous biblical idiom is “a wolf in sheep’s clothing.” Thunderbolt tries to disguise himself, just like he did at the start as a preacher, but couldn’t repress his true fanged nature – his true lust for crime and money. In Thunderbolt and Lightfoot, we are not under the redeemer’s gentle reign. Thunderbolt’s prayer was not answered.

He drives away towards the sun, a dead man beside him, to Paul William’s melancholy gem ‘Where Do I Go From Here’. One line rings louder than the rest: “Where does a fool go, when there’s no one left to listen, to a story without meaning, that nobody wants to hear?”

Thunderbolt got the money, but he lost his love.

Certainly, this film truly captures something beautiful.