CAMP ROCK STRIKES A CHORD & HITS THE SWEET SPOT, AS A NEW FAN FAVOURITE... AND SO DOES AARYN DOYLE AS CAMP ROCK'S LOLA SCOTT

Photo Gary Yokoyama, Published The Hamilton Spectator

Youths and adults rocked out with the new Disney Original Movie, Camp Rock on June 20th, 21st, & 22nd. And it struck a chord of unifying consent that said Camp Rock rules and Camp Rock music hits the spot. Teens, tweens and kids alike can’t get enough of Disney’s “CAMP ROCK”. The majority consensus is that Camp Rock “ROCKS” and since the movie Aaryn Doyle’s solo song “What It Takes” seems to be going viral on YouTube. As evidence we’ve seen clones of the song popping up like radical cells out of control. It seems young fans can’t get enough of young singer Aaryn Doyle/Lola and her catchy hip-hop song, What It Takes. With hits in the multiples of hundred thousands on YouTube and the numbers keep rising by the seconds, WHAT IT TAKES, is being propelled into popularity and fuelled by a youth driven fan base that is internet savvy. They can decide a song’s popularity within days with mere keystrokes as they are connected across the globe by the worldwide web.

Camp Rock opened over the weekend on June 20th, to the second highest Nielsen Ratings ever for an original movie. Second only, to HSM 2, pulling in over 8.9 million viewers on the Disney Channel the first night it premiered, with a relatively unknown cast of newcomers. As the drawing card it starred Joe Jonas in the lead as teen love interest and his brothers Nick and Kevin of the rock star (platinum selling) teen boy band the Jonas Brothers in the co-star chairs. Then to give this new teen musical movie lots of momentum Disney had been putting forth a pretty brisk multi-media platform marketing/advertising and publicity blitz to promote their newest stars the Jonas Brothers and Joe's leading lady, new comer Demi Lovato who stars in Camp Rock with the Jonas Brothers, and it looks as though the investment paid off. Yes it is evident that Disney has a new fan favorite for the Disney vault... Can you say "CHA CHING", because that is the sound of Camp Rock's success. According to the most recent Nielsen Ratings numbers, Camp Rock pulled in viewers of 8.86 millions on June 20th (Disney Channel), 3.47 millions on June 21st (ABC), and 3.73 millions on June 22nd (ABC Family) for a grand weekend viewer-ship total of just over 16 million viewers. You can even count me among the viewing public on the Canadian side of the border, which I don't think is included in this Nielsen tally. And by the way… You can also count me among the Camp Rock fan base. Indeed, it was, “Not bad! It was good... But the music was better.” The strength of “Camp Rock” the movie if you ask me, lies within the movies catchy songs; with their memorable beats and well formulated hooks that bait the listener into remembering them. And why not, it is after all a musical. But this time Disney went outside of its wheelhouse by introducing hip-hop music to its young audience. For fans of hip-hop it was a quick sell and it was immediately welcomed; while for fans of pop rock, it took a couple of, or at most a few times listening to this alternate music style, "a la Disney" before they were hooked. This is evident on YouTube as you view the download numbers which translate to success and the accompanying comments of interest for both “Hasta La Vista”, and “What It Takes”, sung by Aaryn Doyle with their viewings each tallying at well over four hundred-thousand hits (& climbing); as well as the glut of positive comments posted. Wow! What a compliment to these young Artists/Talents and Disney for showcasing them in such a prolific and positive media format. We contacted someone close to Aaryn Doyle/Lola Scott (as she was not available to comment us directly), to find out if there has been any increase in her notoriety. The response was, “YES! Now she has many interview requests, and media interviews to do, but while she is out and about, random people/fans are now requesting her autograph and to have their pictures taken with her (when they realize who she is). Also her personal My Space has become flooded with fan/friend requests... CRAZY stuff for this down to earth teen.” So, yes, things have definitely changed in the way of recognize ability factor for Aaryn/Lola as she gains notoriety, and yet with all that is happening (according to our source), she still continues to be sweet and remains humble.

Look for pictures and feature article on Aaryn Doyle in the June 27 issue of The Standard or just Google it on the net by typing in, 'stcatharinesstandard june news feature photos', or to view the full story go to... http://www.stcatharinesstandard.ca/ArticleDisplay.aspx?e=1091884 (for complete story with picture below):

15-year-old Aaryn Doyle part of Disney's blockbuster teen TV musical Camp Rock Photos Denis Cahill, Published The Standard