Bangalore: Britannia Industries Ltd has restructured its top management for the second time in five months as it looks to aggressively expand its small international business with growth at its core biscuit business slowing.

add_main_imageManaging director Vinita Bali will now focus on expanding the company’s international operations, Britannia Nutrition Foundation and developing new business, and chief operating officer (COO) Varun Berry, who recently joined the company from PepsiCo Inc., will head its India business, Britannia said in a statement on Monday. The organizational changes will “enhance Britannia’s position to become an all-embracing foods company from a bakery/dairy company”, the maker of Good Day and Tiger biscuits said.

“This is a positive move. The India business is pretty much stable but their international business is currently a drag on their overall performance. Once their international subsidiaries start contributing, Britannia’s performance will be totally different,” said Bhaveshkumar Jain, analyst at Sushil Financial Services Pvt. Ltd. “They haven’t been able to scale up the international business. There’s huge scope for things like cheese, cake and rusk,” Jain said.NextMAds

The company’s international business, which contributes less than 10% of the company’s sales, comprises primarily of a unit in Oman and another in Dubai as well as products exported from factories in India. Britannia sells products such as biscuits, wafers, cake and rusk in the Gulf, Australia, North America as well as some African countries.

The growth in Britannia’s international sales dropped in the year ended March 2013, according to Jain’s analysis of Britannia’s financial statements.

This is the second management restructuring announced by Britannia this year. In January, the company named a new chief financial officer and said that Berry, who has 27 years of experience at companies such as PepsiCo and Hindustan Unilever Ltd, will replace Neeraj Chandra as COO.

Britannia, along with other biscuit makers, is seeing a drop in volume growth of biscuits. Rising prices of biscuits over the past two years have hurt demand and the Bangalore-based company is also facing increased competition from larger rival Parle Products Ltd as well as ITC Foods.

Britannia’s plans to expand its international operations is another step by the company to diversify its business.

The company, which gets 70-75% of its sales from biscuits, has been pushing faster into other food products such as milk and cheese that offer higher margins and faster growth than biscuits.sixthMAds

Sushil Financial’s Jain said that a change at the top was unlikely any time soon.

“Bali has a contract till 2016. She’s signed a five-year extension (in May 2011). I don’t think she’s going to leave anytime soon,” Jain said.

The stock rose 15.91% to ₹ 665.85 on Monday, after strong fourth-quarter results on Friday.