Alexander Conquers the Persians

Alexander took control of Anatolia after defeating Darious III, and then proceeded on to Egypt as apart of his camapign against Darius III. He defeated Darius once again, and took Egypt. He invaded the Indus Valley after the Persians, and canquered part of it. He died in his bed 10 days after a large dinner party where he drank heavily, and became very ill.

Peloponnesian War

There were many terrible battles in the Peloponnesian war. The Battles were the Atolian campaign, battle of abydos, Battle of Aegospotami, Battle of Amphipolis, battle of Delium, Seige of Syracuse, Battle of Sphacteria, Battle of Melos, and the Battle of Spartolos.

Athens Golden Age and Rule of Pericles

The prestige of victory over the Persians and the wealth of the Athenian empire set the stage for a dazzling burst of creativity in Athens. The city was entering its brief golden age.

Cleisthenes Takes Control in Athens

Broke up the power of nobility, and organized the citizens into 10 groups based on where they lived. Allowed all citizens to submit laws for debate, and made a council of 500, whose members were chosen at random.

Sparta Dominates Messinians

Messinians became helots, peasants forced to work the land. Spartans demanded half of the annual crops. They eventually revolted, and althought outnumbered 8/1, won and developed a stronger city-state.

Homer and His Epics

Homer was a blind man who wrote many epics, or poems about the journies of great heroes and their battles.

Trojan War

[ The Trojan Horse](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9RYGQQ_qybY)The Mycenaeans fought Troy for 10 years, because a trojan prince kidnapped Helen, the wife of a greek king. Troy was defeated when the greeks hid in a hollow wooden horse, and ambushed Troy.

Solon Takes Power in Athens

Outlawed slavery, organized Athenians into 4 social classes based on wealth. Only top 3 could hold political office, Any citizen could be in the Athenian Assembly, and anyone could bring charges against wrongdoers.

Persian Wars: Thermopylae and Salamis

When Xerxes fleet came to a narrow mountain pass at Thermopylae 7,000 Greeks including 300 Spartans blocked his way. The fleet was positioned in a narrow channel near the island of Salamis.