Notes from Performance Studies by Richard Schechner

Grotowski’s project essentializes. Action simultaneously enacts the intimate and the “origin” — what in Indian philosophy is the union of atman and brahman. Eugenio Barba has from at least 1980 onward developed a particular aspect of the Grotowski work, answering the question: Where does a performer’s “energy” and/or “presence” come from? Barba investigates this not only with his own group, Odin Teatret, but also in the sessions of the International School of Theatre Anthropology (ISTA).

At ISTA sessions, which last from a few days to a month, Barba brings together a team of performers and performance theorists to advance and demonstrate to a wider public his basic thesis: that there are movements, stances, and rhythms employed by the most accomplished performers in all cultures. These constitute the “pre-expressive” patterns of “extra-daily” behavior that spectator respond to as the performer’s “presence” or “energy”.

At a theoretical level, the search for universals of performance ancient or contemporary, finished or in formation, transcultural or intercultural, is dubious. Neither Grotowski’s performance archaeology in search of practices older and “deeper” (in both senses of the word) than today’s practices nor Barba’s comparative analysis of Asian and Western genres is likely to come up with anything other than preferences for, and techniques to acquire, specific styles of performing. These may be of artistic merit, but they are nor universal in themselves or founded on universal aesthetic principles. Aesthetics, like other aspects of human life, is culture-specific. That having been said, Barba is hardly unique. He is part of a long tradition reaching back more than a century. Many visionary Western theatre artists have, and continue to, look East: Antonin Artaud, Vsevelod Meyerhold, Bertolt Brecht, Paul Claudel, Peter Brook, Lee Breuer, Ariane Mnouchkine, and Julie Taymor to name just a row from a long list.

Some artists thoroughly metabolize what they learned in and from Asia, as in the grand spectacle of Mnouchkine’s Theatre dy Soleil or the peppery work and visual imagination of Taymor. Are these activities “Orientalist”? Certainly most of them would not have occurred except under the aegis of colonialism or its aftermath (even when the artist was actively anti-colonialist). Brook’s The Mahabharata, an attempt to stage the vast Sanskrit epic, and Mnouchkine’s I’Indiade(1987), a panoptic performance of a culture and subcontinent, bespeak both the artistic-cultural ambition of these individuals and a more general tendency to control or own the other that is specific to Orientalism. But the process is far from a one-way street.

Interculturalism is not a multi-way by Craig Latrell

Interculturalism is portrayed as something that can only be “explained” by inequities of power between East and West. The idea that artists in other societies might be using elements of Western culture for their own reasons is rarely entertained. But why should we deny to other cultures the same sophistication and multiplicity of responses to “foreign” influences that we grant to ourselves in viewing non-Western works? Why should we assume that intercultural transfer is primarily a politically based, one-way phenomenon? Why not start with the assumption that other cultures are not passive receivers of Western ideas and images, but active manipulators of such influences,and that intercultural borrowing is not simply a one-way process, but something far more interestingly dialogic?

— Jin