Eugenio Barba, Theatre. Solitude, Craft, Revolt, Aberystwyth, Black Mountain Press, 1996, pp. 92-98 THE TRANSMISSION OF A LEGACY Here Eugenio Barba reflects on apprenticeship, expressing in a complementary manner the two aspects on which it is based: on the one hand the technical side constituted by the training exercises, and on the other the ethical one constituted by the demands of a precise work context. Pedagogy becomes a dialectic between these two poles, directed not only towards the formation of the actor, but also towards the transmission of a legacy. Barba concludes his reflections on apprenticeship by evoking what <strong>Odin</strong> <strong>Teatret</strong>, after more than thirty years of work, shelters behind the label of "theatrelaboratory": the reality of a theatre which is an unending school. This text originates partly from "Exister avant de représenter", edited by Brunella Eruli in "Puck", 7, Les Ardennes 1994, and partly from the preface of La scuola degli attori edited by Franco Ruffini, La casa Usher, Florence 1981. How do you form an actor? In all cultures the art of the actor is rooted in variable elements such as individual personality and the performance genre chosen. There is, however, a constant factor which is fundamental: the materiality of their bodymind, that scenic "presence" which determines the relationship with the spectators. What processes, techniques or principles do actors have to employ to make their actions efficacious with respect to the spectator? Can these be learned? And how? An Amulet Made of Memory These questions have gone hand in hand with the formation of the actor in Europe since the time when Stanislavski, Meyerhold and their collaborators invented "exercises". These exercises were very different from the ones practised in theatre schools. Actors traditionally trained in fencing, ballet, singing and above all the recitation of fragments of texts from an international repertoire. But the exercises invented by Stanislavski and Meyerhold did not contribute much to the interpretation of a text or the creation of a character. On the contrary, they were elaborate scores, codified down to the last detail, and ends in themselves. Few people understood the point of these exercises which were so far removed from the tasks confronting the actor on stage. Our century's reformers ascribed a new social objective to the actor. Meyerhold, Copeau, Brecht and Artaud asked themselves about the function or