Novi Sad - Vojvodina Capital on the Danube

Saturday, September 26, 2015

Novi Sad, Serbia and Montenegro

When I visit a country I usually like to try to see more

than just the capital city . National capitals are normally not very typical and

often many of the interesting things to see in a country are out in the

countryside. I’m sure that’s true of Serbia too, but I hadn’t planned on

renting a car in this country and it late September is far enough out of season

that local tour operators are not getting the necessary minimum numbers of

passengers to run day trips or short two-day trips they do in summer.

The most practical day trip from Belgrade is to go by bus or

train to Novi Sad, the capital of the Vojvodina region located on the Danube about

60 miles north of Belgrade. Vojovodina is the region of Serbia that was part of

the Austro-Hungarian Empire until Yugoslavia was created after World War I. The

region has a semi-autonomous status within Serbia in Tito’s Yugoslavia. Despite

an overwhelming Serbian majority, the region has a significant Hungarian

minority and smaller populations of Slovaks, Romanians, Germans, and others

that set it as a place apart from the rest of Serbia.

Novi Sad is Kojvodina’s largest city and a very young one by

European standards having only been founded in the 1690s. The town originated

with the construction of the Petrovaradin Fortress on a hill on the other side

of the Danube. The Serbs call Petrovaradin “Gibraltar on the Danube”, but that’s

quite a whopper of a stretch. Like most towns in Eastern Europe, Novi Sad was a

quite small place until after World War II when industrialization took place

and Communist governments like Tito’s moved people from the countryside to the

cities . That means Novi Sad’s very pretty historic center is quite small but is

surrounded by a large sprawl of drab Communist-era housing that’s getting far

more western style commercial buildings and housing mixed in. I even noticed

two McDonalds in Novi Sad.

The center of Novi Sad looks far more like cities in Hungary

or Slovakia than any place else I’ve seen in the Balkans with pastel facades,

onion-domed churches both Orthodox and Catholic, and a large Synagogue. Unfortunately,

I was in town on a gray day with frequent drizzle, so I didn’t get the full

effect of the central Trgu Slobode (Liberty Square) or the surrounding

pedestrian streets. The weather was such that I tried to spend more time in

Novi Sad’s multiple museums. One of those, The Vojvodina Regional Museum,

turned out to be really quite good with a comprehensive history of the region

on the Pannonian Plain from pre-history through the 19th century,

including many folk costumes of the region’s ethnic groups, exhibits on country

residential architecture, instruments from farm life, and helmets of Roman

centurions found in the area.

Novi Sad is best known nowadays for the EXIT Festival, now one

of Europe’s biggest annual music festivals that was founded in 2000 by students

as a protest for Democracy in the same year as the revolution that overthrew Slobodan

Milosevich’s regime. My info says the festival is held at the Petrovaradin

Fortress, but I just don’t see how the fortress area is big enough for such a

supposedly huge festival . Maybe that was the original site and it’s moved

elsewhere. I’m not sure.

As I crossed the Danube to go up to the Fortress I noticed a

riverside restaurant that I thought I’d check out. The menu looked very good

and it was starting to get busy for Saturday lunch around 2:00 in the

afternoon. I couldn’t help but notice that the clientele was probably not

people of average means, more so by the number of black Mercedes, BMWs, and

Audis parked outside than by their own appearance, but even at a fancy local

restaurant in Serbia the food is plentiful and inexpensive – huge iron pots of

soup and big platters of mixed grilled meats and fried river fish served family

style. They’re not stingy with portions in Serbia the way they are in Western

Europe and places on the touristy Croatian Coast have learned to serve. I chose

a fish pate as an appetizer and one of the house specialties as a main – Vojdovina

Ribe Paprikas, a stew of local fish (I think it was carp) in a paprika broth

that came in a huge black pot. It cost less than $7 USD and could easily have

fed two, and came with a little side dish of extremely hot paprika paste so I

could spice it up to my heart’s desire. The waiter didn’t tell me, but I was

apparently supposed to order a bowl of homemade pasta along with it to put into

and thicken up the bright red paprika fish broth. At least that’s what everyone

else who was eating the dish seemed to be doing .

I decided to go for dessert as well when I saw the Slovenian

specialty Prekmurska Gibanica on the menu. This is a dessert for those who can’t

make up their mind about what dessert they want and can have it all, a

delicious layer cake of poppyseed, sweet ricotta, apple and cinnamon, ground

walnut, and cranberry fillings. One of the best desserts ever! Food coma!

And the background music was not the ubiquitous western

stuff they play in most restaurants in the Balkans but traditional Serbian folk

music and songs. Being probably the only foreigner there about Serbians, it was

one of those Old Europe meals you experience less and less frequently on a continent

where most good restaurants try to be hip, modern, international, and fusion in

their cuisine.