Zemun is the second largest Belgrade municipality which has been an integral part of Belgrade

since 1934.

Until then, Zemun used to be a separate town in the south-east part of Srem. However, due to its

historical, political and territorial ties, Zemun was integrated with Belgrade, which lead to even

more intensive development and interference of cultural, economic and other ties in the years that

followed. Despite all these ties, residents of Zemun even today like to insist that Zemun is an

independent and unique city which is connected to the Serbian capital only in political sense of

the word. Why is this so? The evidence that prove the existence of a settlement in the territory of

Zemun date back to the Neolithic age, which is a proof that first city settlers stayed in this very

location even so long ago.

The real settlement in the vicinity of today’s Gardos area existed even before the Romans arrived,

and Zemun’s first name dates back to this period of history – Taurunum. Once they settled here,

the Slavs changed this name and due to a large number of small river houses (Zemunice in

Serbian) nearby, they named the settlement Zemun (Zemlin). It’s interesting to know that in some

old historical records Zemun is referred to as – Malevila, which implies “an evil place”. Whether

this is due to a number of murders typically associated with this area, or even the diseases spread

by mosquitos, which were plentiful here because of the river and the specific swamp soil, it is still

unknown. Anyway, the name like this sounds quite intriguing indeed.

Living in Zemun is quite satisfying and interesting for both the residents and visitors who like to

spend time here. In addition to a lot of schools, Zemun also offers a faculty, important institutes,

hospitals and theatres. With immensely rich history and unique geographical location, Zemun

really has a lot of advantages as it is located on the Danube coast, near the confluence of the

Sava and Danube rivers. Zemun is indeed a place that has it all. One of the former biggest hotels

is situated at the Danube promenade in Zemun. This is the Hotel Jugoslavia and is even today

one of the most recognisable gathering places in Belgrade.

To arrive in Belgrade for a few days without visiting the Zemun promenade or visit some of the

clubs near the Jugoslavija Hotel – this is something unimaginable. Zemun promenade offers a

whole range of restaurants, river clubs and night clubs, which is suitable for everyone’s taste.

Fantastic food, wine and other drinks, music for all generations – this is in a nutshell, Zemun

promenade for many of its visitors. Charming landscape, a view of the river, Great War Island,

Lido, are just some of the most distinctive features of this “city within a city”. The remnants of the

Old Town and the Millenium tower, the so-called Tower of Sibinjanin Janko at Gardos are

invaluable for the history and culture of this city and are definitely Zemun’s most recognisable

symbols.

If you’re planning to stay in Belgrade and you also belong to a group of river lovers who prefer a

more peaceful pace of life, Zemun can be an ideal place to stay in Belgrade. And if you’reparticularly fond of river fish that the Danube fishermen deliver to the well-known restaurants in

Zemun every day, then this is the proper location that you have to select as your base for further

exploration of Belgrade. We should also mention that Zemun is very well-connected to the city

centre and almost all parts of the city.

So, before you set out, do check out what our web site has to offer in the section Zemun

and pick an apartment which will suit you best.

Novi apartmani wishes you a pleasant stay in Zemun.