Italian giallo is a subgenre of horror as visually slicing as it is brutally bloody. But at the heart of giallo films is mystery. Bodies are mangled, sliced to bits, or to the police’s chagrin, disappear into thin air with nothing but missing posters and heartbroken hanger-ons. But as the body count grows, a hand will once again wield the knife. Eyes go wide. A shallow gasp before a blade slashes across the victim’s throat. Music swelling as candy apple red blood pools on the floor. Our killer, masked or shadow obscured, will circle our heroine, the music will crescendo, only for one last final battle before the detective close on the killer’s tail kicks down the door.

How Do Modern Horror Films Incorporate Giallo?

While there are many parallels between giallo and American slasher films, the latter often abandons that signature blend of horror and mystery so commonplace in giallo, instead opting for a high body count and choreographed kills. While giallo remains an influence for modern filmmakers like Luca Guadagnino and James Wan, modern parallels in non-slasher horror films and giallo provide intriguing information on how giallo shapes the stories we tell in horror.

Last Night in Soho (2021)

Edgar Wright’s 2021 film Last Night in SoHo follows smalltown dreamer Eloise Turner (Tomasin Mackenzie), a first year fashion student at a London fashion school, as she finds herself spiraling into a sparkling, neon nightmare as she inhabits the body of 1960s lounge singer Sandie (Anya Taylor Joy) as she desperately seeks fame. Visually, Last Night in SoHo’s giallo influences are clear. Glowing neon lights flood Eloise’s vision, eyes growing wide and even more unhinged as her grasp of reality becomes unsteady.

But the film draws parallels with the stories we’ve seen time and time again in giallo films. Notably, the trope of the giallo heroine being a fish out of water, often in a strange, foreign land. She’ll find herself at the heart of a mystery hidden beneath the façade of her own precious dream. Be it Susie Banon’s arrival at the famed dance academy at the center of Dario Argento’s Suspiria (1977) or Liza Merril’s lucky inheritance of a cursed inn in Lucio Fulci’s The Beyond (1981), giallo films frequently throw our heroines into the unknown, luring them with the promise of what they’ve always wanted. Eloise’s abandonment of her small-town life to achieve her fashion goals in London aligns with the tradition of giallo films while incorporating supernatural and psychological elements to modernize the film.

As Eloise becomes more enamored with this sexual, violent 1960s, she becomes attached to her avatar Sandie, developing an intense need to discover what happened to her. Eloise inhabits the role of your classic giallo detective and heroine in one world, while losing her grasp of reality in the other. Haunted by Sandie in the modern world, Eloise has no option but to find answers, even if that means putting herself in harm’s way. Edgar Wright creates a modern horror film that draws inspiration from giallo without trying to imitate it.

Advertisement

Giallo is a genre conveyed in pieces. The glaring shine of a knife. A gasp from a parted, lipstick-painted mouth. Manicured fingernails scratching at the floor as the knife pierces skin. Again. And again. The killer’s crime hidden from the viewer by the absence of all the details, the victim reduced to little more than a body for a disillusioned detective to ponder over. Giallo is a genre whose violence is incompressible in its entirety.

Under the Skin (2013)

Jonathan Glazer’s Under the Skin (2013) shows an alien invader whose malevolent appetite is concealed beneath the guise of a beautiful woman (Scarlett Johansson) stalking the Irish countryside for rides and the men who provide them to her. The alien invader draws the attention of the male eye, entices them to slow to a stop and let her into the car. When small talk proves tedious, she seduces them, drawing them in with sex. She undresses, a naked woman upon inspection. Her victim’s gaze falls upon the curve of a hip. An uncovered breast. She draws them in to consume their very essence.

Unlike a classic giallo where the lack of the whole obscures our killer, Under the Skin’s use of imagery in pieces is one grounded in the familiar. A naked body, no matter how beautiful, is something that we as human beings recognize. But the horrifying thing about Johansson’s portrayal is that even if we were to see her in her entirety, the thing that is deadly and violent about her is beneath the skin. Under the Skin may not be a giallo movie, but it engages with the visual styles so popular in the subgenre, creating a film that is hypnotic and erotic.

Intense and violent murders are frequently featured in giallo films, but giallo also juxtaposes brutality with beauty. Characters meet their ends in settings with striking, original architecture, neon lit backdrops, and exquisite, detailed set dressing only deserving of a gorgeously shot murder.

But modern horror films tend to be more fixated on the uniqueness of the kill. Be it a bread slicer or paper shredder, the settings in many modern slashers tend to just be dressing to set up the kill. However, Peter Strickland’s In Fabric manages to do both, juxtaposing violence with beautiful imagery as a beautiful dress causes her life to spin into a dizzying spiral.

Advertisement

In Fabric (2018)

Sheila (Marianne Jean-Baptiste) is a recently divorced mother of artistic hanger-on son Vince (Jaygann Ayeh). Caught up in the humdrum of her job as a bank teller and her uneventful social life, Sheila finds herself drawn in by a bizarre television advert marketing a new boutique. Enraged at the news that her ex-husband is dating, Sheila sets out to find her very own revenge dress, or more accurately, find something she can wear out on a date. And as a strange shop merchant walks Sheila through the boutique’s inventory, she comes upon a dazzling red dress.

Even as she finds her fingers flitting over the dress’s skirt, her eye adoring the red fabric demarcated by nothing more than a single black slash at the hip, she wonders aloud if it’s too provocative yet allows herself to be led to a dressing room. Even though Sheila admits she could never fit into a size 36, the dress fits. It’s almost like it was made for her, predestined perhaps.

While the date leads nowhere except disappointment, Sheila dreams visions of the dress’ twirling skirt, stirred by a ghostly wind. The garment constricts against her body as she gasps in, the red striking against the intricately designed interior of the restroom. When she removes the dress, it harms her too, leaving Sheila with a painful rash then later turning her washing machine into a bucking, feral interloper on Sheila’s domestic solitude.

In classic giallo fashion, the story behind the dress and its many victims threads through the film. Just when we come to know Sheila, she dies at the dress’ hands. She’s just another death for the dress’ next investigator and victim to stumble upon. In Fabric is a neo-giallo meets existential dilemma, as the dress mystifies and transforms its wearers to the point of madness and inevitable death.

Giallo is a genre of strange machinations and dangerous mysteries. A dream becomes entangled in a deadly plot, a question the only thing between a heroine’s redemption and her unfortunate death. Giallo is a tense & thrilling genre of horror, neon-soaked extravagance setting the scene for extraordinary violence. It’s no wonder that modern filmmakers find themselves drawn to take influences from giallo. After all, in an era where everyone’s eyes are on the next big thing, you need to find a way to catch your audience’s attention. Add a dash of mystery to your horror, and make it big, beautiful, and brutal all around, and you’re set.

Advertisement

Regarding film festivals, one of the unsung heroes is always the short films. Unfortunately, it seems most publications pay them little to no mind, and that’s a crying shame. Some of the best filmmakers got their start by making short films and so many future stars have short films on the festival circuit today. Let’s take a look at the short films of the Tokyo Horror Film Festival.

Stand Out Shorts Fresh From Tokyo Horror Film Festival

Kneading

Directed by Lulu & Augie Syracuse

Written by Lulu Syracuse

An office worker pisses their boss off when they forget to feed the office cat. Surely this will be a normal exchange!

Kneading is short, sweet, and to the point. Lulu and Augie Syracuse have crafted an incredibly weird and atmospheric short film with a stinger you won’t see coming a mile away. The practical effect work gets the job done and leaves a lasting impact. There’s a lot of potential within this two-and-a-half-minute short, and it will be interesting to see where they go from here.

Backward Creep

Written and Directed by Christopher G. Moore

Three friends are en route to an anime convention, but their plans are stopped in their tracks after they run over a pedestrian.

Delightfully campy, Backward Creep excels in one thing: giving audiences a good time. There’s not much to this short, and that’s fine. We have three friends who ran something over and it gets its revenge. It’s simple, in the best way possible. Some shorts try to overcompensate for their short runtimes; Moore doesn’t do that. He puts it all out there and lets you exist within this world for just a few minutes. Supposedly, there is a feature version of this in the works. If Moore keeps the feature fully practical and keeps the gnarly creature design, I’m sold.

Advertisement

Chateau Sauvignon: terroir

Written by David M. Night Maire and Allyssa Rivera-Cabrero

Directed by David M. Night Maire

A young boy and his father run a winery that might be more nefarious than it seems.

Like a fine wine, Chateau Sauvignon: terroir feels a bit pretentious. It takes itself very seriously and constantly withholds from the viewer. Night Maire and Rivera-Cabrero’s script ends up feeling a bit too smart for its own good. Michael Lorz charismatically, and creepily, leads this short with the exhausted vigor of a young adult resigned to a life of depravity. The practical effects in this short look gorgeous and impactful. It’ll make you think twice before going back to a winery, that’s for sure.

Ten of Swords

Written and Directed by Faye Jackson

What would happen if you woke up dead, destined to a life of forced labor? Would you take it on the chin, or fight back?

Let’s see a show of hands if you had no clue Ten of Swords was a tarot card reference. (Raises hand.) Ten of Swords has a lot to say. It comments on forced labor, predestination (to an extent), and the human condition. Jackson’s script does a decent job of getting the point across, but the short really feels like it just goes beat to beat without any real visual flow. Overall, it’s an enjoyable watch with some great action and practical effects. The set and production design is impeccable and provides excellent world-building for this dystopian future. Knowing now, what tarot card this short references feels a bit on the nose with some of the visuals, but that doesn’t mean it’s not impactful.

Grease Bunny

Written and Directed by Benedetto Cocuzza

After a long day of work, Stacy (Haley Hammonds) gets home and orders a pizza. What could go wrong?

Advertisement

The name Benedetto Cocuzza might ring a bell for a few of you. He is the founder of the indie horror video game studio Puppet Combo. I’ll be able to put my bias aside, but there isn’t a single Puppet Combo game I don’t consider a 5 out of 5. Cocuzza’s PlayStation 1 low-res style just tickles that nostalgic spot in my brain that reminds me of my childhood. If you think his short films would be stylistically different from his games, you’re wrong. Grease Bunny is a liminal body horror nightmare, dripping with grease, cheese, and pepperoni. Hammond’s campy acting perfectly embodies the Puppet Combo style, though it could possibly be a turnoff for those who aren’t familiar with Cocuzza’s style. If you’ve ever wondered what a giant pepperoni pizza monster nibbling on someone’s toes would look like, then Grease Bunny is the short film for you.

Also, go check out Puppet Combo’s games; they’re truly excellent.

Support indie game devs!

Beverly Hills Exorcist

Written and Directed by Rem Scobell

A group of exorcists in Beverly Hills attempt to exorcise a house from a giant-headed demon.

I’ll be upfront here, Beverly Hills Exorcist didn’t work for me. There’s a line of camp I can accept and enjoy…this short leaps over that line. The acting feels forced and unrehearsed and it all just happens too fast. Too much character development for too many characters happens in such a short amount of time and it feels overstuffed. Scobell’s idea is fun and could possibly work in a larger sense, but as a short film, it doesn’t.

Advertisement

Body

Written and Directed by Ronald Short

An electronic Frankenstein toy makes its way into a couple’s house…and it’s moving!

Body is incredibly cute. The entire short takes place in the kitchen with Dawn (Leila Anastasia Scott) and Jack (Aaron G. Hale). Scott and Hale are incredibly adorable together and exhibit one of the most believable relationships I’ve seen in a short film. Short has created a short film that should be studied by those who want to make short films. What he created with one prop, two actors, [presumably] one camera, and some fake blood is beyond impressive. Very little happens in this short, but it’s what happens and how it happens that makes this short film charming and exciting.

The Pencil

Written by Madina Schultz and Thomas Schultz

Directed by Thomas Shultz

Sara (Mika Saruar) is an artist struggling to make ends meet. One day she finds a pencil that brings her drawings to life; flowers, money…monsters.

One of my favorite things about festival coverage is when I see a good short at a festival, and then another festival, and another, etc. At this point, I think I’ve seen The Pencil at four different festivals, and it’s well deserved. Coming in at just over 10 minutes, The Pencil tells a harrowing tale of struggle and love. Schultz’s script is tight and precise, and it gets its point across with enough time to play around a little bit. After seeing this short for the first time, I had nightmares of the short film’s creature. Well, guess what’s back in my nightmares now! The Pencil is a perfectly crafted short film that NEEDS a feature-length version.

If you get a chance to see any of these shorts at a film festival near you, be sure you do!

Advertisement

Shudder is taking Hot Girl Summer to heart this August. This month’s press release was small but mighty, and I am canceling my plans to fit all these titles into my schedule. Before I tell you about the five movies I’m most excited to see on the streamer, I have to point out they are dropping a new original series called Horror’s Greatest on August 27th. It’s described as a deep dive into everything we love about horror. So, I expect it to be at least 1000 episodes long, and I love that for me. Anyway, here are the five movies I am not going to stop talking about this month.

And as always, if you don’t have a Shudder sub, get one here!

The Best Movies to Stream on Shudder This Month

A Nightmare on Elm Street (1984)

A serial killer with a bladed glove preys on teens as they sleep. I am a Petty Freddy stan account, so I live my best life every time the original film comes to Shudder. This remains one of the best films in the franchise. It is also arguably one of the most cherished films on Wes Craven’s resume.

You can watch A Nightmare on Elm Street on August 1st.

Advertisement

Dancing Village: The Curse Begins (2024)

A supernatural entity terrorizes a village. I have never seen an Indonesian horror movie that didn’t mess me up. So, of course, I will be hitting play on this new nightmare fuel the second it’s available on the streamer. I’m ready to see this spirit run through this town like the Tomb Raider.

You can watch Dancing Village: The Curse Begins on August 16th.

Advertisement

The Deeper You Dig (2019)

The line between the living and the dead collapses after a roadside accident. I was late to The Adams Family party, so I still need to see this one. I’m thinking I might double feature it because their new movie Hell Hole will arrive on the streamer fresh from the Fantasia Film Festival on August 23. Seems like a disturbing family night to me, and I am ready.

You can watch The Deeper You Dig on August 19th.

Advertisement

In the Mouth of Madness (1994)

An investigator realizes that there is more than meets the eye when it comes to an author’s horror stories. They had my attention because someone read a horror writer’s work. That’s the dream, even if some people are probably about to go through it in this movie. This John Carpenter movie stars Sam Neill, and I am surprised (and ashamed) that this will be my first watch. Thanks for helping a girl out, Shudder!

You can watch In The Mouth Of Madness on August 1st.

Wes Craven’s New Nightmare (1994)

An evil entity uses the character of Freddy Kruger as a gateway to our world. This is my other favorite movie in the franchise. It might also be where I started to learn the definition of meta. Seeing the cast, who made the movie I loved, come back to play versions of themselves terrorized by Petty Freddy is one of my favorite childhood memories.

Advertisement

You can watch Wes Craven’s New Nightmare on August 1st.

Shudder really didn’t come to play this month, and I’m here for it. I am probably parked on the app while you are reading this. To which, I say, close your mobile device and turn on your TV, friend. It’s time!