Giallo films are murder mysteries that emerged from Italy in the mid-1960s and peaked in popularity during the early 1970s. Gialli, as they are known collectively, belong to a unique movie genre that straddles a line between horror and crime thriller. A giallo film is typically characterized by

a convoluted plot laden with deceptions

lurid scenes of sex and violence

melodramatic music scores that mash up jazz, funk, and lush string arrangements.

How to pronounce giallo like the Italians do: say “JAH-lo” (not “gee-AH-lo,”) and soften the J a bit.

How to pronounce gialli, the plural form: say “JAH-li” (not “gee-AH-li”).

For a deeper dive into the giallo genre, read this post. A warning: it stirred controversy among fans on social media, primarily because of my assertion that true gialli cannot be “supernatural.” I made the statement because I had observed people describing Italian horror films like SUSPIRIA and THE BEYOND as gialli, which they are assuredly not. However, not everyone interprets the word supernatural the way I do. Let’s resolve the dispute with a quick FAQ:

What is a giallo?

Giallo films are mysteries. If there’s no mystery to solve, it’s not a giallo.

Why are they called giallo films?

The word giallo means “yellow” in Italian and is derived from the colloquial term for old Italian detective novels, which sported yellow covers.

Why is it wrong to call SUSPIRIA, INFERNO, THE BEYOND, and BLACK SUNDAY gialli?

Giallo stories do not incorporate zombies, werewolves, vampires, witches, living mummies, or demonic possession.

So, gialli are never supernatural?

A few gialli involve psychics or clairvoyants, but it’s important to note that extra-sensory perception/premonition was being studied as a real phenomenon at the time these films were made. To those who equate ESP with the supernatural, I offer my best shrug emoji and move on.

Are giallo films a sub-genre of horror?

Giallo films and horror films belong to two different genres, and neither is a subset of the other. It’s fair to say, however, they share DNA.

I’m confused. I’ve seen gialli that feature gory kills and scares.

Some gialli do a good job of also being horror films and have been marketed as such on home video. TORSO, EYEBALL, DEEP RED, and BAY OF BLOOD are popular examples. They’re still murder mysteries featuring the core elements described up top, though. Think of those titles as the overlapping area of a Venn diagram.

What gialli should I watch to get a feel for the genre?