Canada Place

Directions

Reviews

Gallery

Rated out of 5 Read Reviews

Canada Place is one of Vancouver's most iconic landmarks and a popular gathering place for celebrating in Vancouver

Canada Place is home to the famous and luxurious Pan Pacific Hotel and continues its function as a cruise ship terminal and convention centre to this day.

Visitors to Canada Place can enjoy a variety of free activities. You can stroll along the west promenade called The Canadian Trail and enjoy incredible views of Vancouver’s spectacular harbour, Stanley Park and the North Shore mountains. You'll find interactive exhibits and displays highlighting Canada’s geography, people, heritage, sports and major innovations. Best of all, admission is free. In and around Canada Place you'll find coffee shops, restaurants and bars. There's often free entertainment including music and dance.

After dark the five 'sails' of Canada Place are bathed in a mesmerizing display of constantly changing colourful light. This is best viewed from the plaza on the west.

Canada Place is where those powerful horns that play the first four notes of O Canada every day at exactly 12 noon are located. These Heritage Horns have announce the arrival of noon for over 20 years and can be heard through most of downtown and across the harbour in North Vancouver.

In addition to the free activities, you’ll want to visit the incredible FlyOver Canada attraction. You’ll find this thrilling 4D experience in the old IMAX theatre at the north end of the promenade.

Nearby, you can see the 2010 Olympic Torch. It's located west of Canada Place on the far side of the Vancouver Trade and Convention Centre. The torch is only lit on special occasions, but the transparent pillars are bathed with changing colours of light every night.

If you're visiting Vancouver on Canada Day (July 1st), Canada Place is an exciting place with live entertainment during the day and spectacular fireworks at night.

Since it's conveniently located right beside Waterfront Station, there's no reason not to visit Canada Place during your stay in Vancouver.

Directions

SkyTrain Line Nearest Station Walking Time Expo Line or Canada LineWaterfront Station1 Minute

How to get to Canada Place by SkyTrain

Canada place is located on the waterfront immediately west of Waterfront Station.

Map & Instant Route Finder

Click&Go Map and Route Finder with public transit, walking, driving or cycling directions. Get up-to-the-minute transit times for your route.

1. Choose Mode

Finding Your Route - Please Wait