Curiosity is proving to be a wonderful elixir for "M*A*S*H" star Alan Alda, who will receive a lifetime achievement tribute at the SAG Awards on Jan. 27.

Alda, 82, who also has starred in numerous films and made an appearance this month on Showtime's "Ray Donovan," will receive A-list treatment at the Screen Actors Guild ceremony, with Tom Hanks presenting the life honor to the acclaimed actor.

Alda, in an interview with People magazine, says his life hasn't changed that much, despite a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. In 2015, Arlene, his wife of 61 years, noticed his arms weren't moving when he walked and he was acting out dreams in his sleep, early signs of the disease. He publicly revealed his condition last year.

Although the news was at first "scary," Alda educated himself about the nervous system disorder and developed an exercise program, including boxing, a version of tai chi and marching to John Philip Sousa music, in response to the progressive disease.

Woody, meet Hawkeye: Tom Hanks will present Alan Alda with Screen Actors Guild lifetime achievement award

Celebrating a career:Alan Alda to receive SAG Life Achievement Award in 2019

“I just applied my curiosity to it. I’m constantly reading and trying to figure out the best approaches. So far it’s really interesting. I think it’s helped me understand a little better that everybody has something they’re coping with,” he says.

Alda, who played surgeon Hawkeye Pierce for 11 seasons on hit Korean War comedy "M*A*S*H," tells people he stays busy. The actor, who has a podcast, "Clear+Vivid," sounds a bit like silver-tongued Hawkeye in describing his activities.

“I do occasionally do nothing and sit around. But I believe in doing everything in moderation, including moderation. So far it’s working,” he says.

Alda says he is fortunate to have Arlene – they have three daughters – and that he has been served well by a life philosophy: "Adapt, adjust, revise … Because the only thing you can be sure of is that everything is going to change."