Steven Campbell, who has died aged 54 after suffering a ruptured appendix, rose to fame after making an extraordinary impression on the New York art scene in the early 1980s. On his return to Scotland he became the dominant figure in a renaissance in the visual arts, his influence and achievements as a painter setting new standards, and helping to place Scottish art in an international context.

A flamboyant figure, often outlandishly attired, Campbell looked as if he had arrived from the Paris or Vienna of the late 19th century. Behind the mask, however, lay a fragile, sensitive human being, consumed by existential doubt. His paintings were spaces or theatres of the mind where the viewer would meet and experience bizarre utopias and dystopias, and which created the feeling that the artist's own life and personality were only screened from us by the thinnest of veils.

Campbell was born in Glasgow. After leaving Rutherglen Academy at the age of 16, he worked as a maintenance engineer in the steelworks at Cambuslang. On his arrival at the Glasgow School of Art in 1978, he was a man in a hurry to make up for lost time.

Just as the early 1980s were a turning-point in the history of Scottish art, the ideological and aesthetic debate within the art school during this period made exceptional creative work possible. Campbell thrived in the apparent anarchy of the situation. His fierce energy and appetite for hard work were astonishing, he asked questions of painting on a daily basis, he took risks, he spent a year investigating performance art, wrote a perceptive dissertation on Picasso and ultimately produced a body of work way beyond the student norm. His degree show was, however, met with a mixture of incredulity and hostility.

Undeterred, he won a Fulbright scholarship to study at the Pratt Institute in New York. Campbell, accompanied by his wife Carol, arrived in New York in the autumn of 1982. He locked himself in his studio in Brooklyn for a whole year, declining invitations to take part in exhibitions and to socialise. His dedication, allied to his hunger and desire to reach the top, was to pay off handsomely when, in the summer of 1983, Barbara Toll selected several of his works to show in her gallery. Within days, the doyen of the New York art critics, John Russell, fully endorsed the painterly qualities of a young, unknown Scottish artist in his New York Times review.

From this point on, Campbell's career took off in sensational fashion. His work appeared in exhibitions throughout the US and Europe, and major museums such as the Hirshhorn in Washington (part of the Smithsonian Institution) and the Art Institute of Chicago acquired paintings. He was pursued by several big-name galleries before signing a lucrative contract with Marlborough Fine Art. Then in 1987, he surprised everyone by returning to Glasgow. As he said, "I wanted to give myself more space coming back to Scotland ... In New York it was all happening so fast. You could get yourself in an awful mess."

In 1985 the exhibition New Image Glasgow brought Campbell together with Ken Currie, Peter Howson and Adrian Wiszniewski. The huge impact made by the exhibition, especially in London, resulted in the media's branding of the four artists as the New Glasgow Boys. What was really important was the fact that Campbell had competition, and had to raise the bar accordingly. At the same time, Currie, Howson and Wiszniewski had to respond to the pace Campbell was setting. The rivalry that existed between Campbell and the others was without doubt a major factor in the development of their work.

Campbell's reputation was already established in America before he made his debut in Scotland at the Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh, in 1985. His monumental paintings - vivid in imagery, complex in detail and rich in formal invention, depicting intriguing narratives inspired by the novels of PG Wodehouse and Bram Stoker - stunned Scottish audiences and artists alike. Never apologetic about his identity - "I'm the only one doing Scottish Painting" - he proceeded to explore and confront the varied extremes of the national psyche.

In On Form and Fiction at The Third Eye Centre, Glasgow, in 1990, Campbell created a remarkable range of images to cover all the available wall space. Three years later, with the exhibition Pinocchio's Present at the Talbot Rice Gallery, Edinburgh, he demonstrated he was one of the major figurative masters of our time.

Campbell lived dangerously - by the late 1990s his health began to fail and he faded from view. In 2002 he staged a comeback with The Caravan Club, again at the Talbot Rice Gallery, and in 2004 with an exhibition entitled Jean-Pierre Léaud - after ideas portrayed by the French actor in films directed by François Truffaut - at the Glasgow Print Studio, where his longstanding dialogue with film noir was at its most apparent. Both exhibitions showed he had lost nothing in terms of painterly inventiveness and imaginative power.

Campbell was not an easy man to get on with. Prickly and abrasive, he did not suffer fools gladly and made no attempt to cultivate the "movers and shakers" of the art world. He was never likely to become a Turner Prize candidate. Certainly, he felt isolated in his later years, and one feels he was never properly used, as he might have been, say, in the the new Scottish Parliament building.

Changing fashion meant that Campbell's influence had waned somewhat by the early years of the new century, but his belief in painting never wavered. By returning to Glasgow, he demolished the received opinion that ambitious Scottish artists had to leave in order to pursue successful international careers, and the current vanguard of Scottish artists led by Christine Borland, Roddy Buchanan, Douglas Gordon and Ross Sinclair, among others, remain indebted to him for showing the way.

With his death it seems appropriate to seek out Samuel Beckett's tribute to his fellow Irishman, the artist Jack B Yeats: "What is incomparable in this great solitary oeuvre is its insistence upon sending us back to the darkest part of the spirit that created it and upon permitting illuminations only through that darkness. Hence this unparalleled strangeness which renders irrelevant the usual tracing of a heritage, whether national or other."

Campbell is survived by Carol, his two daughters Lauren and Greer, and his son Rory.