Celebrated Name:Timothy DaltonReal Name/Full Name:Timothy Leonard Dalton LeggettGender:MaleAge:80 years oldBirth Date:21 March 1944Birth Place:Colwyn Bay, United KingdomNationality:BritishHeight:1.87 mWeight:80 kgSexual Orientation:StraightMarital Status:MarriedWife/Spouse (Name):Vanessa Redgrave (1971–1986), Oksana Grigorieva (1995–2003)Children/Kids (Son and Daughter):Yes (Alexander Dalton)Dating/Girlfriend (Name):NoIs Timothy Dalton Gay?NoProfession:ActorSalary:N/ANet Worth in 2024:$12 millionLast Updated:July 2024

British actor Timothy Dalton is a trained Shakespearean actor who has achieved a lot of success in his career in theatre, television, and film. He has worked in some of the most popular movies of his era, including “Flash Gordon” and “The Tourist,” and was known for his extreme acting talent. He also played a significant role in depicting James Bond in “The Living Daylights” and “Licence to Kill.”

Maybe you know about Timothy Dalton very well, but do you know how old and tall is he and what is his net worth in 2024? If you do not know, we have prepared this article about details of Timothy Dalton’s short biography-wiki, career, professional life, personal life, today’s net worth, age, height, weight, and more facts. Well, if you’re ready, let’s start.

Early Life & Biography

Timothy Dalton was born March 21, 1946, in Colwyn Bay, Denbighshire, Wales, to his parents Peter Dalton Leggett and Dorothy Scholes. His father was stationed in Colwyn Bay while World War II, and after this, he moved the family to Manchester, where he was working as an advertising executive.

He completed his schooling from Herbert Strutt Grammar School. Then he became one of the members of Air Training corps at LXX Squadron. He was later given a role to play at the production of ‘Macbeth.’ In 1962 at the age of 16, he dropped out of school and joined the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. He later engaged in a tour with the Birmingham Repertory Theatre.

Personal Life

Although Timothy Dalton has had a string of relationships and breakups along with several rumors, the actor is single at present and living elegantly. He was initially in a relationship with the reporter Kate Adie. Then in 1971, Timothy got engaged to English actress Vanessa Redgrave with whom he appeared in the 1971 film, Mary. They continued this relationship for almost 15 years until 1986.

Then he was dating Denice D. Lewis and Whoopi Goldberg for quite some time, and then they broke up. Later on, he was in a relationship with Oksana Grigorieva from 1995. Together, they had a child named Alexander, who was born in 1997. Over the years, he has been a very loving and supportive father to this son. However, currently, he is not seeing anyone and living a luxurious life.

Age, Height, and Weight

Being born on 21 March 1944, Timothy Dalton is 80 years old as of today’s date 20th July 2024. His height is 1.87 m tall, and his weight is 80 kg.

Career

Timothy Dalton started his professional career when he landed with an opportunity to work in the film The Lion in Winter. After his incredible performance, he got a chance to work on other projects as well. Then he started performing with Royal Shakespeare Company.

He then worked in popular films such as Mary, Queen of Scots, and Permission to Kill. The breakthrough in his career came in 1980 when he starred in the science fiction Flash Gordon, and then the BBC series Jane Eyre. Since 1986, he began to play as James bond in a couple of movies, which changed his whole identity.

He came into the spotlight for playing as James Bond in the Living Daylights and Licence to kill. Followed to this, he has appeared in a couple of famous movies, including Flash Gordon and The Tourist.

After his bond career, he was featured as Nazi spy in the Disney action-adventure The Rocketeer in 1991. His talent and classic charming looks landed him in the television and were starred in numerous series.

Awards & Achievements

Though Timothy is regarded as one of the greatest actors of his era, he has failed to lift many awards in his career. Timothy Dalton has won the Golden FIPA Award for Framed and TV Guide Award For Chuck.

Net Worth & Salary of Timothy Dalton in 2024

Timothy Dalton is a British actor who is earning a net worth of $12 million as of July 2024. Timothy Dalton has attained wealth by starring in many classic movies and television shows. He is best known for playing James Bond throughout the 1980s, where he was cast in two films, namely The living Daylight and license to kill.

Timothy Dalton is a welsh actor of film and television and became one of the finest actors of the century. His fan base touched heights after playing the role of James Bond. All the name and fame that he gained was not served on the plate. Instead, he has earned all that. Thus he has proved himself to be a great actor with his outstanding talent.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7uLHApauhsaCav7S7zaxlnKedZMGquc6tn7JllJa5tbvNZqWerF2svLPAx2ZpaWpgYn9xfpBo