Monsieur Ibrahim

Written and directed by François Dupeyron

Starring Omar Sharif and Pierre Boulanger

Classification: 14A

Rating: **½

A warm, if somewhat wooly, coming-of-age fable set in Paris of the early sixties, Monsieur Ibrahim explores the friendship between a Jewish teenager (Pierre Boulanger) and an elderly Muslim shopkeeper (Omar Sharif), who teaches him wisdom from the Koran. (The original French title translates as "Monsieur Ibrahim and the Flowers of the Koran").

Moses is a teenager who lives with his severely depressed and critical father (Gilbert Melki) on Rue Bleue in the working-class Pigalle district. He finds solace in listening to American pop music (the soundtrack is plastered with songs like Rock Around the Clock, Wooly Bully, Green Onions). He's also starved for intimacy, and the movie begins on his 13th birthday, when he takes his savings from his piggybank to buy sex from one of the prostitutes, Sylvie (Anne Suarez), on his street.

He buys, or more often shoplifts, dinner from the "Arab" storekeeper - the assumption is that anyone who is open until midnight must be Arab - Monsieur Ibrahim. Ibrahim (his proper name) inhabits his long dark store like some mythical creature and is, in fact, not Arab but Turkish, a Sufi Muslim with a mystical bent. He ignores Moses's thefts and gradually develops a friendship with the boy. Soon, Ibrahim is advising Moses on his love life and culinary skills.

After the boy's father's death - the mother left years before - Monsieur agrees to adopt his young friend, whom he calls Momo, a diminutive for Mohammed.

Director François Dupeyron (director of Cannes entry The Officer's Ward) wrote the screenplay from a novel and play by Eric-Emmanuel Schmitt, though it never feels stage-bound. There are unmistakable echoes of François Truffaut in this coming-of-age tale. (Isabelle Adjani even has a cameo as a Brigitte Bardot-like movie star who visits the street and later inspires Ibrahim to buy a jaunty red convertible.)

Pierre Boulanger, who plays Moses, has an intelligent, awkward boyish charm, but most of the interest comes from Omar Sharif (Lawrence of Arabia, Dr. Zhivago), who plays Ibrahim. The character, as the wise and humble old shopkeeper, may be a sentimental contrivance, but Sharif, now 71, still brings a lightness to the role that never feels predictable or showy.

Among the lessons that Monsieur Ibrahim conveys to Moses, and the most appealing aspect of the film, is to delight in sensual pleasure. He tells him how to make a gourmet meal out of cheap goods (cat food, stale bread, vin ordinaire). The pair go on a Sunday walk beside the Seine, and pass the prostitutes on Rue Bleue who look like a row of multicoloured exotic birds.

The film takes a decidedly different direction in its final third, as Monsieur Ibrahim takes Moses on a car trip across Europe, visiting various churches before arriving in his native Turkey. There the landscape turns from the colour of the cities to an ochre, mountainous landscape, but there are still quick magical moments: The two friends witness a trio of whirling dervishes, who demonstrate the Sufi ideal of freeing us from "the burden of balance," as Ibrahim explains. In a way, that's what the movie is about: Thrown into a unbalanced life, Moses learns to find a calm centre in the unpredictable flow of experience.