If you are aware of the antivirus software available on the market, you must have come across the name Kaspersky. Eugene Kaspersky laid the company’s foundation in 1997. Now, he is the CEO of the company. The headquarter of the company is situated in Moscow, Russia. Till today, it has offered millions of small and big firms safety from cybercrime and viruses. Plus, the company provides its services across the world.

Apart from Eugene Kaspersky, some other people have also contributed to establishing the company. And their names include Natalya Kaspersky, Alexyv De-Monderik, and Vadim Bogdanov.

Kaspersky Highlights

It is a computer security software company that came into existence in 1997.

The founder of the company is Eugene Kaspersky.

The headquarter of Kaspersky is located in Moscow, Russia.

In 2022, the estimated worth of the company is around 752.28 million dollars.

Brief History

In response to the Cascade Virus, Eugene Kaspersky created the first version of the software in 1989. Working at KAMI in 1992, he released the Antiviral Toolkit Pro (AVP). This became famous in 1994 when Humberg University (HU) gave this software first place.

To work in the Kaspersky lab, Mr. Kasperksy, his wife Natalya Kaspersky, and Alexy De-Monderik left their previous company in 1997. They developed an antivirus software AVP. However, they had to rename it Kaspersky Antivirus after one US company registered a trademark for the same name.

By the year 2000, the company had started selling its products in around 40 countries. In 2009, Kaspersky Lab's antivirus products retail sales touched the mark of 4.5 million copies per year. The company's unaudited per year was $667 million by the year 2012. In March 2022, it received the registered trademark of cyber immunity in the U.S.

What are the benefits of using Kaspersky’s Antivirus Services?

Below are some of the perks you are going to get if you use the Kaspersky antivirus services.

It is one of the most prominent computer security software companies.

Its software have firewall services.

It allows you to use VPN services of 300 MB per day. Also, you can upgrade the plan if you want.

Its software are compatible with Mac, iOS, Windows, and Android.

The software has a few drawbacks as well, but they do not keep much weight on the quality of its services.

What are the Software and Services Offered by Kaspersky?

Kaspersky is considered the sixth-largest overall IT security company in the world. It is known for developing and marketing password management, antivirus, cyber security, and endpoint security. The total number of users of this software is about 400M. And, the consumer software that it offers includes Internet Security, Total Security, and many others.

Antivirus products offer malware protection, give warnings about the potential risk from a website, and keep an eye on suspicious behavior of a program.

The Internet Security product help in providing parental control, security features, anti-phishing tool, and privacy features. On the other hand, Total Security works by restricting your computer from adult websites, giving parental control, password manager application, diagnostic tools, and various other features.

Moreover, Kaspersky Endpoint Security for business suits offers security services to the large firms. It provides companies with its Security Center management application and centralized UI. Plus, it has Kaspersky Small Office Security (KSOS), which offers services to businesses of 25 staff or fewer. The products of the suite include virtual security, fraud protection, mobile security, and various others. Apart from that, it develops a free tool that is helpful in getting access to Windows devices attacked by ransomware.

Malware Discoveries

Over the years, it has found a large number of malware threats. So, below are listed some of them.