Kaspersky Lab, a leading developer of secure content management solutions that protect against, malicious software, hacker attacks and spam, announces the expansion of its worldwide network of offices with the opening of a representative office in Seoul, South Korea.

The establishment of Kaspersky Lab Korea is a logical next-step of the company's strategy of expanding its presence in Asia. This is the third Kaspersky Lab office to open in Southeast Asia following the opening of local offices in Japan and China.

"Our mission is to deliver the best and fastest protection against existing and new IT threats, since today computer threats are multiplying rapidly and becoming more complicated. We feel that Korean users are in need of good security solutions, and we are here to help", - emphasized Natalya Kaspersky, Kaspersky Lab CEO. - "We also were very lucky to have found a strong and accomplished team with experience of work for Korean antivirus vendors. Together with the team we hope to provide Korean customers with the highest level of protection".

The Korean representative office has a functioning business infrastructure including a sales, technical support, distribution and marketing and PR departments. All of the company's employees have extensive experience in Korea's antivirus industry.

"Kaspersky Anti-Virus is a high quality product that far exceeds competitors' products in terms of the protection level it offers. We are certain that there will be steady demand for it among Korean users," said CG Lee, Head of Representative Office of Kaspersky Lab in Korea. "We hope that within two years the company will become a leading player in Korea's market for information security systems. We will do everything possible to provide our customers and partners with the best protection and service."

Kaspersky Lab has already localized all of its main products into Korean to offer protection to a broad range of customers, from home users to corporate clients. These products include Kaspersky® Anti-Virus Personal, Kaspersky® Anti-Virus Business Optimal and Kaspersky® Administration Kit.

"The company is going to concentrate its efforts first and foremost on the medium and large enterprise market segments," said Maxim Mitrokhin, Kaspersky Lab's Director for Business Development in China, Korea and Vietnam. "We hope that during the market entry phase, focusing on this will help us achieve market share and ensure rapid promotion of our brand on the Korean market. At the same time, we will devote much of our attention to developing a network of business partners."

Contact Information for Kaspersky Lab Korea.

About Kaspersky Lab

Kaspersky Lab (www.kaspersky.com) develops, produces and distributes secure content management solutions that protect customers from IT threats. Kaspersky Lab's products protect both home users and corporate networks from viruses, spyware, adware, Trojans, worms, hackers and spam. For many years now, the company has waged a battle against malicious programs, and in doing so has gained unique knowledge and skills that have resulted in Kaspersky Lab becoming a technology leader and acknowledged expert in the development of secure content management solutions. Today, Kaspersky Lab's products millions users worldwide and its technology is licensed by leading security vendors globally. To find out more about Kaspersky Lab, visit www.kaspersky.com.