To support the expansion of its business in Asia Pacific, Kaspersky Lab announced the opening of a new location in Singapore for its regional HQ.

With a growing landscape of cybersecurity in the APAC (Asia-Pacific) region, Kaspersky Labs announced establishment of a new APAC headquarter. Now, located at Harbourfront Tower One, is known to provide more office space for the growing global cybersecurity company. And as well keep closer proximity to the partners it collaborates with frequently.

The relocated APAC headquarters also aims to better serve the requirements of its growing numbers of partners and customers across the region.

The strategic expansion is an effort to bag perennial growth across commercial and enterprise businesses with a solid focus on critical verticals such as ‘industrial cyber security’.

“The move to our current location will allow us to grow and will deliver greater efficiencies. It will enable us to deliver key results to the company. Settling into our new space in this strategic location will meet our business needs for accessibility and more. Harbourfront will cater all these needs,” says Stephan Neumeier, Managing Director of Kaspersky Lab Asia Pacific.

Neumeier welcomed Kaspersky Lab Chairman and CEO Eugene Kaspersky to the opening ceremony of the new office.

There are currently 37 Kaspersky Lab offices in 32 countries around the world.

Not only serving as a hub for administrative, sales, marketing, and channel departments, the new Singapore office will also represent the regional base of the company’s research and development team headed by Vitaly Kamluk, Director of the Global Research and Analysis Team (GReAT) at Kaspersky Lab APAC.

The Kaspersky Lab APAC headquarters was opened in 2015 to oversee its regional business development and to become an extension of the company’s research and development (R&D).

Choosing Singapore for the location of its regional headquarters was a strategic decision of the cybersecurity company, based on the city-state’s favorable status as a top global financial hub.

Commenting on the opening of the relocated office, Eugene Kaspersky, chairman and CEO of Kaspersky Lab, said: “There is so much positive energy about this move. We’re glad to be staying in Singapore which has been our home in the region since we reallocated from Hong Kong two years ago. Moving to a bigger office after just two years is soon but we’re ushering in a new chapter for the APAC team. Being in the fastest growing region in the global economy, we’re determined to explore the APAC market’s full potential and we’re ready to move ahead with greater achievements.”