Celebrated Name:Carly Rose SonenclarReal Name/Full Name:Carly Rose SonenclarGender:FemaleAge:25 years oldBirth Date:20 April 1999Birth Place:New York, United StatesNationality:AmericanHeight:1.52 mWeight:46 kgSexual Orientation:StraightMarital Status:SingleHusband/Spouse

(Name):N/AChildren:NoDating/Boyfriend

(Name):N/AProfession:Singer and ActressNet Worth in 2024:$500 thousandLast Updated:July 2024

Carly Rose Sonenclar is an American singer and actress. She became famous in her teens as a singer who impressed both judges and the audience of the TV series ‘The X factor USA’ by her singing. She was runner-up in the second season of the show.

Her inborn talent in singing had begun to show early when she was only two years old. Her talent was very well-honed and nurtured by her parents, who made her join singing and dancing classes. Her teachers guided her to a career in singing.

Maybe you know about Carly Rose Sonenclar very well But do you know how old and tall is she, and what is her net worth in 2024? If you do not know, We have prepared this article about details of Carly Rose Sonenclar’s short biography-wiki, career, professional life, personal life, today’s net worth, age, height, weight, and more facts. Well, if you’re ready, let’s start.

Early life:

Carly Rose Sonenclar was born on April 20, 1999, at New York City to Terri Edelman Sonenclar and Bob Sonenclar. She has one brother named Russel Sonenclar. She started imitating singers very early as a kid. Her parents noticed her talent and tried to nurture her singing talent. Her first singing videos were made when she was two years old.

She was put by her parents in singing and dancing classes. She learnt to play the piano early. As her singing developed, her teachers noticed and guided her to a New York City talent agency that signed her. Besides singing, Carly Rose also composes songs.

Age, Height, and Weight

Being born on 20 April 1999, Carly Rose Sonenclar is 25 years old as of today’s date 20th July 2024. Her height is 1.52 m tall, and her weight is 46 kg.

Career

In the year 2006, Carly Rose Sonenclar played a lead role in Pearl in the “The Night of hunter’ at the New York Musical Theatre Festival. This marked the start of her professional career. Later in 2006, she acted in Broadway production ‘Les Misérables’ in the role of young Cosette.

In the year 2009, she joined a musical group ‘Little house on Prairie, ’ which toured the country and was starring Melissa Gilbert. Carly Rose was in the role of Carrie. Her first television appearance was on the TV series ‘The Electric Company’ in the role of Gilda Flip.

In the year 2011, she was cast in the role of Chloe in the musical ‘Wonderland’ on Broadway. She was well-received by the audience and garnered good reviews. The New York Times Theatre critic Charles Isherwood described her as an ‘almost preternaturally skilled singer.’ In October 2011, she was cast in the lead role of Parsley in a musical ‘The Big bank.’ She appeared in ‘The Nanny Diaries,’ a movie in which she acted as the child of Nanny.

In the year 2012, her singing career started in earnest with her participation in the TV series X Factor USA. She rose from initial audition to the final round and achieved a runners-up position.

In July 2013, she performed at the opening ceremony 0f the 19th Maccabiah Games at Teddy Stadium in Jerusalem.

Awards and achievements:

In 2102 Carly Rose Sonenclar finished second in the highly competitive X-Factor USA TV series.

In 2013 she was called to perform at ‘Stand up for cure’ concert in Times Square.

In July 2013 she performed at the opening ceremony of 19th Maccabiah Games at Teddy Stadium in Jerusalem

In 2014 she performed in a concert in Pomona in New York, where she sang all of her hit songs.

He was ranked fifth by Fox Weekly on their list of most influential X-Factor USA contestants for her performance of the song ‘Feeling Good.’

Net Worth & Salary of Carly Rose Sonenclar in 2024

As of July 2024, Carly Rose Sonenclar’s net worth is estimated as $500 thousand. She has earned by her singing and acting career. She was called to act and sing in Broadway shows, films, TV series, and special performances, all of which added to her steady income. As her popularity grows, she continues to earn a decent income.

Carly Rose Sonenclar is a born singer who started singing at the age of two. Her talent was recognized and nurtured by her parents and teachers who arranged for her proper initiation and training in music, dance and acting. She gave her best shot to her singing talent in the X-factor USA TV show, and from there, she was a well-known teen face of music who was called upon to perform at many mega-events. She has a very bright future in music with her fans waiting for her first album.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7uLHApauhsaCav7S7zaxlnKedZLCivsuyZKuno5p6tLvNnqWcpJGneq%2Bx02auqKqknXpzfJFpZGtoYmZ8