If you watched the second season of the X Factor singing competition series, you must be wondering what happened to Carly Rose Sonenclar. She finished in second place behind Tate Stevens, and she wowed the judges and viewers with her powerhouse vocals. So, did the talented songstress take her music career to the next level?

Carly Rose was born on April 20, 1999, in New York City. She is 22 years old as of 2021. Rose is a famous singer who has written several tracks. Music aside Carly is also a famous actress renowned for her appearances in TV shows such as The Night of the Hunter, The Electric Company, Les Miserables, The Nanny Diaries, and The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 2.

What happened to Carly Rose Sonenclar?

During the second season of the X Factor singing competition series, fans were blown away by a 13-year-old contestant who auditioned for the competition. The name of the 13-year-old was Carly Rose Sonenclar. Week after week, she wowed the judges and viewers with her powerful vocals.

During her tenure in the competition, she performed songs such as Rolling in the Deep, Hallelujah, and As Long as You Love Me. It seemed from the very beginning that Sonenclar would be the frontrunner to win the competition because she had a powerful voice. Unfortunately, she did not win the competition, but she came in second place behind Tate Stevens.

Why did Carly Rose Sonenclar lose?

The final decision on who wins the competition lies with X Factor judges. However, Sonenclar's family thinks country star LeAnn Rimes is the reason why she did not win. When Carly and Rimes performed a duet of Rimes' hit song titled How Do I Live, Rimes' performance seemed strange to fans.

She seemed to struggle during the song, often overlapping with Sonenclar's words and singing louder than the finalist. Carly's family thinks that the botched performance overshadowed their daughter's reputation on the show.

Carly Rose Sonenclar's songs

You must be wondering if the songstress has taken her career to the next level after X Factor. Well, you will be surprised to know that she stayed for seven years before she released her debut single. This does not mean that she was not actively pursuing her music career.

After the X Factor show came to a close, she performed two original songs, Fighters and Unforgettable. The following year, she performed three more original songs Aliens, Weekend, and Everybody's Watching. Unfortunately, none of these songs was ever released.

At this point, she made the decision to take a break from her music career to complete her high school and college education. The songstress made a comeback in 2019. She released her debut single Birds and Bees on June 19, 2019. Carly dropped two other singles, Getaway Car, Twenty One, and Warned You.

Acting career

Music aside, Carly has also stepped into the world of acting, and she has featured in numerous movies and TV shows. Even before she stepped into X-Factor, she had already landed a lead role in a stage adaptation of The Night of the Hunter at the New York Musical Theatre Festival. From 2009 to 2011, she featured in Little House on the Prairie, The Electric Company, and Wonderland.

Since the curtains came to a close on X-Factor, she has landed several other roles on television. The songstress was cast to play the role of the child of nanny in The Nanny Diaries. She also landed a small role in The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 2. Carly has made numerous guest appearances on TV shows.

What is Carly Rose Sonenclar net worth?

Carly Rose boasts of a successful career as a singer and actress. So, how much wealth has she amassed since she debuted her career? Carly Rose Sonenclar's net worth is estimated at $500 thousand. Music and acting are her primary sources of net worth. She is still young, and her net worth will continue to increase in the future as she continues with her career.

Where's Carly Rose Sonenclar now?

Carly is still living in New York City, where she was born. She is actively pursuing her career as a singer and actress and continues to kill it with original tracks.

The songstress is fully grown up now, and she has become a social media sensation. You can check out Carly Rose Sonenclar's Instagram to see her transformation from thirteen-year-old Carly, who grabbed the second position on the X-Factor.

Carly Rose Sonenclar is a force to reckon with in the entertainment industry. She has become a household name thanks to her appearances in movies and TV shows. The songstress is also renowned for her notable works in the music industry. Going forward, her fans hope that she will take her career to the next level.

Tuko.co.ke published an article on what happened to Ryan Haywood. Ryan is an American actor, voice actor, and video game journalist. Ryan Haywood has been trending for the wrong reasons, tainting his former glory as a professional and exceptionally experienced video game journalist, Twitch streamer, and more.

When Ryan Haywood apologized for mistakes in a vague tweet in October 2020 while announcing his Rooster Teeth exit, many fans were perplexed. Months after his departure, fans have understood the urgent need to fix his relationship upon his ousters from Rooster Teeth, where he had become a staple.

Source: TUKO.co.ke