Former X Factor contestant Carly Rose Sonenclar has claimed that Britney Spears' former manager Larry Rudolph attempted to take "full control" of her personal life and career while she was on the show.

Now aged 23, Sonenclar placed as runner-up on The X Factor Season 2 in 2012. The singer impressed judges during the auditions round with her rendition of "Feeling Good" by Nina Simone and was mentored by Spears.

"Another story I have from my days on The X Factor is one of Britney Spears' managers trying to manage me," Sonenclar said during a fan Q&A posted to TikTok.

"You would think that would be really exciting, but you got to know how they did it," she began.

"This was, I think this was before the end of the show, so before like the was final results came in and Britney Spears' managers at the time, one of them, his name is Larry Rudolph—infamous manager—brought my parents into a room and said that he wanted to manage me."

Sonenclar said that the "one condition" of this management "would be that my parents would have to basically give me to him."

"Give him full control over what I do, what I wear, everything. Where I live, everything," she said. "Everything you'd think would happen with, you know, Britney Spears' manager wanting to manage another young girl."

Newsweek has contacted Rudolph for comment.

After managing Spears' career for more than two decades, Rudolph stepped down from his role in the summer of 2021 during the pop star's court battle to end her 13-year conservatorship.

The 40-year-old delivered harrowing court testimony in June 2021 about her life under the conservatorship and Rudolph stepped down as manager shortly afterward.

In a letter, published by Deadline, Rudolph says he hadn't communicated with Spears in more than two years and was supporting her wish to retire.

"As her manager, I believe it is in Britney's best interest for me to resign from her team as my professional services are no longer needed," Rudolph wrote.

Rudolph also explained that he has "never been a part of the conservatorship nor its operations, so I am not privy to many of these details."

Sonenclar said that her parents left the decision up to her and she ultimately decided not to work with Rudolph.

"I said no," she said. "Because I was seeing firsthand the results of that from being able to spend time with Britney during the show and I felt like for my well-being as a human, this wouldn't have been the right call. And then they parted ways."

Rudolph's other clients include Steven Tyler and Aerosmith, Pitbull and Kim Petras.

He had guided Britney Spears' career since 2005 and was her manager during many of her biggest successes, such as her chart hits with "Baby One More Time" and "Toxic."