Carly Rose Sonenclar

Carly Sonenclar is an American-singer. Born in New York City . She performed in " The X Factor" with her parents. She felt confortable singing solo infront of lots of people before she was signed up for the NYC's childrens talent management.

Carly's First Stage Performance

Carly had her first stage performance in New York "The Night of the Hunter" music festival. She uses all of her confindence on stage to be a real kid.

Carly Sonenclar Singing at the 2012 American Cancer Society Concert

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-jNM4ltu4g&feature=player_embedded Carly Rose Sonenclar sings at the 2012 American Cancer Society Benefit Concert in New York City. She have won the awards after she was making her vocal jazz performance. Her awards she have won is "The Rising Star" on the conpetition.

The X Factor

In 2012, Carly Sonenclar auditioned for the second season of The X Factor USA with the song "Feeling Good" which it is famously covered by Nina Simone . Sonenclar received a standing ovation from all four judges (Simon Cowell awarded her "4,833 yeses"), and she advanced to the next round.[

The X Factor

Carly Sonenclar sangs the song called "Feeling Good" by Nina Simone. Making the judes feel what they have experience about her. She have made the judges stunned and they didnt noticed she is a young teen. For only 13 years old.

The Bootcamp

Carly Sonenclar uses into a high strong voice she have with her by singing " Runaway Baby" by Bruno Mars. And made herself be confident on stage by concentrating what she have gone through so far.

The X Factor Semi Finals

In the Semi Finals, Carly Rose Sonenclar is sings 2 related songs called " Your Song" by Elton Johns and "Imagine" by John Lennon. She made all of the judge shocked and imspired by how she improve.

Carly Rose Sonenclar's Final Result in The X Factor.

Carly have made up to the Finals. As she sings a duet with LeAnn Rimes on the stage performance, she chooses to make it on 1st place of how far she had dreamed. But then she became 2nd place. Although Carly was thankful to the fans of hers from making her day lighten up.

Carly's Family Blamed LeAnn Rimes

Carly Rose Sonenclar's family is royally pissed off at LeAnn Rimes is trashing their daughter's "X Factor" performance Wednesday night. LeAnn Rimes is drunk on stage circulated after the wobbly rendition, with the troubled singer's rep initially blaming Sonenclar for his client's woes, telling TMZ Rimes was trying to help a "nervous" Carly Rose.

Carly Rose Sonenclar's recording option

Carly Rose's fans rejoice. Because of that Carly began to feel really excited and happy of what they announced that her recording option has been picked up by Syco Music

Carly is ready to to make her debut album

Britney Spears referred to Carly Rose Sonenclar as "the little girl with the big voice." Simon Cowell, impressed by the teen's preternatural vocal performances of songs such as Rolling in the Deep and Hallelujah on The X Factor

The Kids in the Hall

After The X Factor, Sonenclar returned to seventh grade at her school in New York. But she's probably not the person you'd want to draw as a partner for your science project. "Like this week, I had a lot of projects, and I could barely work on them with the people in my group because I had to keep going to the city every day after school," she says.

Record Deal & Working with Britany Spears

Carly Rose Sonenclar is about to release a new cover, which they will be working on a new album, and even performing at Best Buy theater! She visited Hollywoodlife.com’s offices to talk about how X Factor judge and mentor Britney Spears inspired and helped her on what she has planned for her exciting future.