This continues a series of tours of churches in cities by letter: see previous posts on Birmingham, Alabama; London, England; and Newport News’s neighbor, Hampton, Virginia. While Hampton dates itself to 1610, the City of Newport News was incorporated in 1896 with the development of its downtown area beginning with the arrival of the railroad in 1881 and particularly with the founding of Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Company in 1886. Thus most of its “first churches” were founded in the mid-1880s. The major exception being First Church of Newport News (Baptist) which was founded by newly freed African American in 1863. Its current building was erected in 1971. It kicks off our tour and is one of two “bonuses” in this alphabet.

Winter the Bear, my companion in this series did not make the bonus photo above, but she’s in the rest. I choosing churches, we’ve prioritized denominational diversity and alteration.

A is for Augustine and A-frame: St. Augustine’s Episcopal Church

B is for Brethren: Ivy Farms Church of the Brethren

Newport News is a long narrow city, its landmass is about nineteen miles long and at its narrowest less than a half mile wide. In this first version of my alphabet, all the churches are in the middle or lower sections of the city. I have plans to include some further up, but since I’m bicycling to them all from my base in Hampton, I haven’t made it there.

In their place I’ve included churches from southern reaches of the city. Please comment on which churches should stay and which that aren’t here should be included.

C is for Christian, Church and Chestnut: Christian Union Church on Chestnut Avenue

D is for Dominion: Dominion Outreach Worship Center

E is for Evangelistic and Ella: Bibleway Evangelistic Temple on Ella Fitzgerald Way

F is for First: First United Methodist Church

G is for Gospel: Gospel Spreading Church of God

H is for Huntington: Huntington Mennonite Church

I is for Ivy: Ivy Baptist Church

J is for Joy & Jefferson: Zion of Joy Church of Deliverance on Jefferson Avenue

K is for Kingdom: Kingdom Church

L is for Living: Living Waters Redeemed Apostolic Church of Christ

M is for: Mountain Moving Faith Outreach Ministries

N is for New . . . in Newport News: New Beginnings Outreach Center, Church of God in Christ

O is for Of on Oak: First Church of God on Oak Avenue

P is for Parkview: Parkview Baptist Church

Q is for Quaker: former First Friends Church now True Vine Church of Jesus

R is for Resurrection: Resurrection Lutheran Church

S is for Saint: St. Paul’s Episcopal Church

T is for Trinity: Trinity United Methodist Church

U is for United: United House of Prayer for All People

V is for Vincent: St. Vincent de Paul Roman Catholic Church

W is for Wesley: Wesley Grove United Church of Christ

X is for ex-church: The former Saints Constantine and Helen Greek Orthodox Church

Y is for Yellow: Rivers of Life Fellowship Church

& is for &! Sts. Constantine & Helen Greek Orthodox Church

Z is for Zion: Greater Walters African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church

Map of Churches

Share this:

Like Loading...