Contributed by Erica Beatty, Denise Hansen, & Debbie Gibson

CHAPTER XVI

CHURCH HISTORY

Trinity Catholic Church —St. Patrick's Church —St. Peter's Church —St. Matthew's Church — St. Mary's Church — St. Dominic's Church — St. Aloysius' Church — Other Catholic Churches — St. Paul's Episcopal Church — Christ Church — St. John's Church, Georgetown — St. John's Church, Washington--Other Episcopal Churches—Dunbarton Avenue Methodist Episcopal Church, Georgetown — Fourth Street Church— Foundry Church — Wesley Chapel -Ryland Chapel —Other Methodist Episcopal Churches — Methodist Protestant Churches — West Street Presbyterian Church, Georgetown — First Church — F Street Church — Second Church— New York Avenue Church — Fourth Church—Other Presbyterian Churches— Congregational Churches — First Baptist Church — Second Church — E Street Church —Other Baptist Churches— German Evangelical Lutheran Church —St. Paul's English Lutheran Church — Trinity Church—St. John's (Johannes') Church— Other Lutheran Churches — The Reformed Churches — United Brethren Church— Unitarian Churches — Vermont Avenue Christian Church — Ninth Street Church— The Washington Hebrew Congregation —The Adams Israel Congregation — The Church of the Holy City.

TRINITY CATHOLIC CHURCH, of Georgetown, was established prior to 1795; for on April 6 of that year, according to the church records, a marriage was solemnized, and on the 14th of May a baptism. These records were signed by Rev. Francis Neale, S. J., the first pastor. The lot had been purchased some years before by Bishop Carroll, and the church edifice was paid for by contributions from the people of the adjoining counties. It was erected at least no later than 1797, by Andrew Boyle, who contributed of his own means, according to some, donating the lot. On this lot stood a blacksmith shop, in which mass was said until the means for the erection of the church could be collected. The donation of the lot appears to have been upon the condition that two of Mr. Boyle's sons should be educated in Georgetown College; for when the last son left that institution, there still remained an unexpired term of tuition due the estate, which was paid by the college in money.

Rev. Father Neale was succeeded in 1818 by Rev. C. de Thoux, a Belgian preacher, who conducted the first confession in the church. During his charge, accessions were numerous, rendering the enlargement of the church a necessity. Arches were opened through the side walls and sheds were erected, and galleries were reached from the outside by means of staircases. The next pastor was Rev. Stephen Duboison, formerly private treasurer to Napoleon. He was succeeded by Rev. James F. M. Lucas, the founder of St. Peter's Church. Next came Rev. Philip A. Sacchi, an exile from Russia on account of his religion. He was, in turn, succeeded by Rev. Peter P. Kroes, and he by Rev. Peter O'Flannagan, whose pastorate of eleven years closed with 1852. In 1852, Rev. Joseph Aschwanden became pastor, taking charge of the new church erected in 1849-50. The church was dedicated on Sunday, June 15, 1851.

The next pastor was Rev. Anthony Ciampi, who remained one year. He was followed by Rev. Thomas Mulledy, who remained until 1858. Rev. Aschwanden returned and remained until the time of his death, in 1868. In this year Hippolyte Gache, becoming pastor, erected a pastoral residence near the church. After two years, he was succeeded by Rev. Charles H. Stonestreet, who continued until 1874. Rev. John S. P/eWolf, the next pastor, made an addition to the church for the benefit of the parochial school for boys, which for several years had occupied a building on the opposite side of the street. In 1877, Rev. J. J. Murphy, S. J., became pastor again, but continued only one year, when Rev. Anthony Ciampi returned. Subsequent pastors have been Rev. Julius Maitrugrees, Rev. S. A. Kelley, Rev. Robert W. Brady, and Rev. William J. Scan Ian, S. J., the present incumbent. The membership of the church is now about three thousand.

St. Patrick's Catholic Church was organized in 1797, some of the original members being Thomas Carberry, Ennis Casenaves, and families by the name of Young and Clarke. The first pastor was Rev. Andrew Caffrayes, and the second the Rev. William Matthews, from 1800 to 1854, fifty-four years,— one of the longest pastorates in the history of this country.

The first church building erected by this congregation stood on F Street, near Tenth Street, and was erected in 1810. It was one hundred and twenty by eighty five feet in size, and was a plain brick building in the form of a Latin cross. It was furnished with a handsome pulpit of rich foreign wood, presented to the church organization by Mr. Ribello, then representative in Washington of the Empire of Brazil. This church was used until near the beginning of the War of the Rebellion, when a new and much larger church was erected and completed. Its erection was provided for at a meeting held May 10, 1857, upon a lot received as a bequest from Eev. William Matthews, located on Tenth Street, between F and G streets. This church has cost up to the present time $120,000, and though not completed, it was dedicated in 1884. After the death of Rev. Mr. Matthews, which occurred in April, 1854, the pastor was Rev. Timothy J. O'Toole, who, on April 8, 1860, severing his connection with the church, was succeeded by Rev. J. A. Walter, of Baltimore, who is still the pastor.

St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church was organized May 10, 1820, some of the original members being as follows: Rev. William Matthews, Daniel Carroll of Duddington, William Brent, James Hoban, Nicholas L. Queen, James Scallan, Ed. Mattingly, James Spratt, and James Barry. The church building, erected in 1821, after being enlarged from time to time, was torn down in 1889, and the present marble building erected on the site of the old church, at the corner of Second and C streets Southeast, and it was dedicated November 23, 1890. It cost over $100,000. Out of the territory assigned originally to St. Peter's Church, two other parishes have been formed. The present membership of the church is four thousand. The pastors of this church have been: Revs. James F. M. Lucas, first pastor; M. P. Deagle, James Hoener, S. Sheiber, Joseph Van Horscigh, Edmund H. Knight, F. E. Boyle, Desedenus DeWulf, J. O. Sullivan, George W. Devine, and J. M. O'Brien, the present pastor. An event of unusual interest to this congregation occurred in October, 1885, in the elevation of its pastor, Rev. J. O. Sullivan, to the vacant See of the Diocese of Mobile, and his consecration in the venerable sanctuary.

St. Matthew's Catholic Church was established in 1841 or 1842, the church building being consecrated May 15, 1842. The first pastor was Rev. John P. Donelan, who was succeeded by John B. Byrne. Afterward, Rev. James B. Donelan became pastor of the church. September 28, 1856, an addition was made to the church building, upon which occasion high mass was said by Rev. E. Lyman, of Baltimore, who had formerly been an Episcopal clergyman, Mrs. C. Young, of Baltimore, being the singer. In 1858, Rev. Charles J. White, D. D., was pastor, with Rev. E. Q. S. Waldncr as assistant. Since then the pastors have been Rev. Francis Boyle, Rev. P. L. Chapelle, D. D., and Rev. Thomas L. Lee.

St. Mary's Catholic Church, Fifth Street, near H, Northwest, was organized in October, 1844, with some twenty families. The ground on which the church stands was furnished by General Van Ness. The corner stone of the first house — a brick structure — was laid March 25, 1846, and the house was completed early in 1847, the first services being held August 15. The structure cost $45,000. The present commodious brick edifice was erected in 1891, at a cost of $81,000. On the grounds are a fine brick parsonage and a good, two-story brick building, the lower story of which is used for school, and the upper for ladies' dwelling, purposes. The last-named building was erected in 1866. The membership of the congregation includes one hundred and fifty families.

St. Dominic's Church was organized in 1856, and was situated on F Street, between Sixth and Seventh streets. Rev. J. A. Wilson was pastor. In 1858 Rev. N. D. Young was pastor, and in 1862 Rev. Father Sherman, who died that year. In April, 1865, this church erected a great bell weighing 3,145 pounds, which was then by far the largest bell in the District of Columbia. The fine church edifice belonging to this congregation was destroyed by fire March 12, 1885, a sad blow to the members and friends of the parish. The great bell tolled its doom just before the walls fell in. Scarcely had the smoke ceased to rise from the ruins when plans were matured, for the erection of another church edifice, which within a short time stood in place of the old one. Nearly all the Catholics of southwest Washington belong to St. Dominic's, and hence its membership is very large. The pastor at the present time is V. Rev. P. A. Dinahan.

St. Aloysius' Catholic Church is located at the corner of North Capitol Avenue and I Street. It was organized in 1859, and its fine church edifice erected during that year. It was so far completed as to be dedicated on Sunday, October 16. The introductory services were conducted by Rev. Mr. Villager, S. J., and the sermon of the occasion was delivered by the V. Rev. John Hughes, Archbishop of New York. The dimensions of the church building were one hundred and sixty by eighty feet, and the height of the interior of the audience room was fifty-seven feet. Over the main altar there was hung a portrait representing the first communion of St. Aloysius, by Mr. Brimidi, who had done so much of the decorative work of the Capitol building. There were also busts of St. Ignatius Loyola and St. Francis Xavier. The seating capacity of the audience room was about one thousand two hundred. The building was planned and the plan carried out by Rev. B. Sestini, S. J., the cost of it when completed being about $50,000. The pastor of the church at that time was the Rev. C. H. Stonestreet, S. J. St. Aloysius, the patron saint of this church, was born in March, 1568, in the Castle of Castiglione, in Lombardy, very near the spot upon which was fought the great battle of Solferino, in June, 1859, and died in Rome, June 21, 1591. In connection with the church, and under direction of its pastor, Rev. C. Gillespie, is Gonzaga College, a brief sketch of which is given elsewhere.

The Church of the Immaculate Conception, located at the corner of Eighth and N streets Northwest, was begun in 1864. The edifice erected in 1865 was a two-story structure, forty-three by seventy-five feet in size, and was dedicated Sunday, July 2, 1865, by Archbishop Spaulding. A schoolhouse was erected at the same time, and a second one for girls within the last few years, the latter building heing a fine brick structure four stories in height, on P Street. The present pastor is Rev. S. F. Ryan.

St. Stephen's Catholic Church, located on the corner of Pennsylvania Avenue and Twenty-fifth Street Northwest, was organized October 22, 1865, at which time it was decided to erect a church worth $30,000. The corner stone of this new structure, built in the Byzantine style of architecture, of pressed brick, and fifty-three by one hundred and fifteen feet in size, was laid June 3, 1866, by Rev. C. L. White, and on December 29, 1867, the basement story was completed and dedicated. The church edifice, finished at a cost of 160,000, was dedicated December 27, 1868, hy V. Rev. Thomas Foley. The membership of the church is now about three thousand three hundred. The pastors of this church have been Revs. John McNally and John Gloyd.

St. Augustine's Catholic Church commenced in a two-story brick building erected for school purposes, with less than one hundred communicants, in the year 1866. Their new church building was erected in 1874. The building is sixty-five by one hundred and thirty-five feet, and the ceiling is fifty-five feet in the clear from the floor. There were placed high up around the altar likenesses of three of the patrons of the church, the most prominent of which is St. Augustine, after whom the church was named. On the right is the portrait of Martin de Porras, after whom the church was originally named, the change of name being made according to the necessities of canon law, which declares that only saints can be patrons of the churches. On the left is the portrait of Peter Claver, whose memory is revered by all good Catholics. The seating capacity of the church is one thousand five hundred. The building was dedicated June 11, 1874. This has been a prosperous church organization, and its pastor at the present time is Rev: Michael J. Walsh.

St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Church is located at the corner of C and Second streets Northeast. The parish was organized by Rev. B. Wiget, October 25, 1868, and the corner stone of the church building was laid the same day by Bishop Gibbons, of North Carolina, who also delivered an address in English, after which an address was delivered in German by Rev. F. X. Weininger, S. J. The church, which was designed only as a temporary structure, was partly of brick and partly of wood, and was of the Gothic style of architecture. The projector of this enterprise was Rev. Mr. Wiget, president of Gonzaga College. The plan of the building was copied from the Cathedral of Cologne. There were also erected a parochial schoolhouse and a pastoral residence. Rev. V. F. Schmitt, who had been pastor at Frosthurg, Maryland, for over eighteen years, was appointed to St. Joseph's Church October 7, 1886. To aid him in the reorganization of this parish, which from a German congregation had become an English one, the Rev. J. F. Donahue, of St. Peter's Church, was assigned as his assistant. A new parochial schoolhouse, forty feet by one hundred feet in size and two stories high, was erected in 1887. In the spring of 1888 the present fine brown-stone church edifice was begun, finished in January, 1891, and dedicated on the 18th of that month by Cardinal Gibbons, the Rev. J. J. Keane, rector of the Catholic University, preaching the dedicatory sermon, and Rev. Dr. Chappelle, the present coadjutor Bishop of Sante Fe, New Mexico, celebrating the first solemn high mass. The present fine Gothic church building, with its elegant interior finish, new marble altars, and a large three-manual organ, is second to none in the city of Washington. The building is seventy-five feet by one hundred and fifty-six feet in size, has a seating capacity of twelve hundred persons, and cost $80,000. The church is at the present time very prosperous.

St. Paul's Roman Catholic Church, located at the corner of Fifteenth and V streets Northwest, was organized December 25, 1880. The first pastor, who is still pastor of the church, was Rev. James F. Mackin. The brick chapel cost $15,000, and was dedicated May 19, 1887, by Cardinal Gibbons, Archbishop of Baltimore. The original membership was about six hundred, and the membership in February, 1892, was about one thousand, nine hundred and fifty. The church was begun as a mission of St. Matthew's Church in 1886, and became an independent church September 1, 1889.

The Holy Name Catholic Church was organized in a private house, 716 H Street Northwest, February 1, 1891, by Rev. J. T. Delaney. It is a colony from St. Aloysius' Church, and the membership at this time is one thousand. A two-story brick church edifice was erected in 1891 on a lot on the corner of Eleventh and K streets. The dedication of this new building took place June 12, 1892.

St. Paul's Episcopal Church, Rock Creek Parish, is the pioneer Episcopal church of this region. Its origin is traced to 1719, when Rev. John Frazier, rector of St. John's Parish, was instrumental iu erecting a small chapel on the site of the present structure. One of the contributors to this enterprise was John Bradford, of Prince George's County, Maryland, who gave one hundred acres of land and one thousand pounds of tobacco for the purpose. In 1729, St. Paul's Parish was formally separated from St. John's, and Rev. George Murdock was chosen rector. The second rector was Rev. Alexander Williamson, who served from 1761 to 1776. About this time, or prior (perhaps 1775), the present edifice was begun, the size being forty by sixty feet. The succeeding pastors were: Rev. Thomas Reed, 1776-1814; Rev. C. C. Austin, 1820; Rev. William McCormick, 1828; Rev. R. Ash, 1830; Rev. Christian Wilthurger, 1831; Rev. B. M. Miller, 1837; Rev. K. J. Stewart, 1839; Rev. W. A. Harris, 1841; Rev. Wood, 1849; Rev. Kerr, 1851; and Rev. James A. Buck, present incumbent, since 1853. The original building was decided, in 1820, to be too large, and walls were erected within the walls; in 1850, however, the interior walls were removed, and the house restored to its original size. During the rectorship of Mr. Buck, many changes and improvements have been made to the property, adding artistic to historic interest.

Christ Church, Protestant Episcopal, of Washington Parish, was organized in 1794; or, stated more precisely, Washington Parish was then organized, and covered the entire territory of the city. During the continuance of the Revolutionary War, there was a modest frame building standing on what is now New Jersey Avenue, near D Street Southeast, which had been used as a barn. In this frame building religious services were held, and the little congregation was attached to St. John's Parish, in Prince George's County, Maryland. It was known as Christ's Church, and many of the prominent men of this part of the country worshiped therein. This little building was used for nearly thirty years, and Rev. A. T. McCormick held services in it as late as 1807, the year in which the present Christ Church was organized. The church on the present site, however, was not used until August, 1809, nor formally dedicated until October 7, following, the building being dedicated by Rt. Rev. Thomas John Clagget, Bishop of Maryland. On May 25, 1795, the first vestry was elected, and the Rev. George Ralph chosen rector. In electing Mr. Ralph rector, the vestry reserved the right to elect a rector for that portion of the parish within the limits of Georgetown, and subsequently elected Rev. Edward Gant to that position. In 1795, James Greenleaf presented the vestry with a lot on Square 456, east of the post office, and Samuel Blodgett presented the church with the timber necessary for the erection of its building. On May 11, 1806, Mr. William Prout gave the land on which the present church is situated,— Nos. 6 and 7, Square 877, on the north side of G Street, between Sixth and Seventh streets, Southeast, the condition being that the church should be erected within a year. On May 4 Rev. A. T. McCormick was elected rector, and the church was opened for services on Sunday, August 9, 1807. The name was then changed from Christ's to Christ Church, the old one on New Jersey Avenue being known by the former name. Square 1,026, on H Street, between Thirteenth and Fourteenth streets, Southeast, was purchased for a burial ground; but proving too low for such purpose, its use was abandoned, and in March, 1808, Square 1,115, between E and G, and Eighteenth and Nineteenth streets, Southeast, was purchased for $200, and named "Washington Parish Burial Ground." According to the original rules, no person of color, nor anyone "known to deny a belief in the Christian religion," is allowed to be buried therein. In 1816, the vestry set apart one hundred grave sites for members of Congress, and subsequently three hundred more, and the privilege was extended to heads of departments and their families, and to the families of members of Congress. Rev. Mr. McCormick officiated as pastor until 1823, when he was succeeded by Rev. Ethan Allen, who resigned in 1830. Since then the rectors have been Rev. Henry H. Bean, who resigned in 1835; Rev. W. Hodges, who resigned in 1855; Rev. Joshua Morsell, Rev. Mark Olds, 1865; Rev. C. H. Shield, to 1869; Rev. William McGuire, until 1872; Rev. C. D. Andrews, until 1887, and then Rev. Gilbert F. Williams, until the present time. The church is in a very prosperous condition. It has one general society, called "Christ Church Guild," and the Sunday-school is remarkably large and active in its work.

St. John's Protestant Episcopal Church, of Georgetown, was organized as early as 1796, through the efforts of Rev. Walter D. Addison, assisted by Rev. Dr. Balch, a Presbyterian divine. Rev. Mr. Addison was then settled in the parish of Broad Creek, Prince George's County, opposite Alexandria. Upon visiting some Episcopalians living in Georgetown, he was invited to hold services in Dr. Caleb's church, and was by him assisted to organize this church. Colonel William Deakins donated a lot for the church edifice to stand upon, and SI,500 was collected toward its erection. This sum carried up the walls to the first range of windows, and it remained in an unfinished condition for six or seven years, and it was not until 1803 that a meeting of the citizens of Georgetown was held to take measures for completing the building, which resulted in sufficiently finishing the building to allow of public worship therein. Early in 1804 the trustees advertised for a rector, and in April Rev. Mr. Sayres was chosen rector, and at once entered upon his duties. The church was in excellent condition until 1809, when Rev. Mr. Sayres died. It was attended through his ministry by the fashionable -people of the place.

In January, 1809, Rev. Walter D. Addison became rector of this church, at which time it was as largely attended from Washington as from Georgetown, there being at that time no church in Washington except Christ Church, at the Navy Yard. In 1811, owing to the large congregations, it' was deemed necessary to enlarge the building. The plan failed, however, because of the difficulty of raising the necessary means, and because the pew holders would not consent to retain their pews at the same price as they had been paying and at the same time be at a greater distance from the pulpit, as would be the case in consequence of the enlargement of the church. From this period until 1817, the church continued in operation, but with a moderate measure of prosperity. Rev. Mr. Addison was furnished with an assistant in May, 1817, in the person of Rev. Ruel Keith, who remained in this position until the organization of Christ Church, Georgetown, when he was chosen rector of the new organization. From this time, St. John's was in a feeble condition, and in 1821 Mr. Addison resigned, and took charge of. Rock Creek Church and Addison Chapel, near Bladensburg, and was succeeded in the rectorship of St. John's by Rev. Stephen S. Tyng, who remained until 1823, and then removed to Queen's Parish, Anne Arundel County, Maryland. Rev. Mr. Addison was then recalled and remained rector until 1827, when, owing to the complete failure, he again resigned. He was succeeded by the Rev. Mr. James, who remained with the church between one and two years. Then came, for a short time, Rev. Sutherland Douglass, who was succeeded by Rev. Mr. Addison, who, though totally blind, held an occasional service until 1831, when the church was finally abandoned to the possession of a sculptor and the birds, and thus acquired the name of "The Swallow Barn."

In 1838, the property was sold for taxes, $50 being paid; it was repurchased and refitted for church purposes. Rev. Dr. Alexander M. Marbury was chosen rector, remaining until 1841, when he was succeeded by Rev. C. M. Butler. Governor Cooke and his brother, Jay Cooke, contributed largely toward the rebuilding of the church, the organ being a present from the Governor. Rev. Mr. Butler's successor was Dr. John S. Lindsey, who officiated until 1888, when he was succeeded by the present rector, Rev. J. A. Regerter.

St. John's Protestant Episcopal Church, of Washington, was proposed in 1814 or 1815, the corner stone of the building laid with public ceremonies February 16, 1816, the parish organized and set off from that of Christ Church, Washington, July 17, 1816, and the first wardens, W. W. Seaton and David Easton, were elected August 5, 1816. The original edifice was erected from designs furnished by Benjamin H. Latrobe, one of the architects of the Capitol, in the form of a Greek cross, but so arranged as to admit of enlargement on the plan of a Roman cross. This building cost $25,000, and was opened for religious services in December, 1816. This church was lighted by means of a lantern on the dome, and by means of semicircular windows in each arm of the -cross, and by windows above and below on each side of each arm. In 1821, the west transept was added, and also a portico and steeple; and in 1883, the building was enlarged and improved. The church as originally erected was consecrated December 27, 1816, by Rt. Rev. James Kemp, D. D., Bishop of the Diocese of Maryland. Rev. William H. Wilmer was the first rector, serving until April, 1817, when he was succeeded by Rev. William Hawley, who remained rector until his death, which occurred January 23, 1845. He was succeeded by Rev. Smith Pyne, who had been his assistant rector, and who was rector until November, 1864, when Rev. John Vaughn Lewis succeeded him. He, in turn, was succeeded by Rev. William A. Leonard, who resigned when elected bishop, and was succeeded by Rev. George William,Douglass, who entered upon his duties November 1, 1889. He was assistant rector of Trinity Church, New York City, when called to this rectorship. This church is very prosperous, and contributes annually for all purposes about $50,000. The President's pew, set apart December 7, 1816, was occupied by every President of the United States down to the time of President Lincoln, and subsequently by President Arthur.

Trinity Protestant Episcopal Church, at the northeast corner of Third and C streets Northwest, was established in 1828, and its church edifice erected the same year. It was located on Fifth Street, between D and E streets, facing Judiciary Square, and was dedicated in 1829. Rev. Henry Vandyke Johns was the first rector. As time passed, the membership of the church grew to large proportions; the church on Fifth Street became too small, and it was decided to erect a new building. In the meantime, however, there had been several rectors, succeeding Rev. Mr. Johns, who, on February 16, 1832, accepted a call to a church in Rochester, New York. He was succeeded by Rev. Chauncey Cotton; and on December 1, 1833, Rev. William F. Chesley, the successor of Rev. Mr. Cotton, preached here for the first time. Rev. John Owens was rector of this church in 1839, and Rev. H. Stringfellow in 1844 and 1846. At the time the present site of Trinity Church "was chosen, the rector was Rev. Clement Butler. The corner stone of the new building at this location was laid April 2, 1850, by the rector, and interesting addresses were delivered by Rev. Mr. Tillinghast, Rev. Mr. Gilliss, and others. An address was also delivered by Hon. Mr. Berrien. The new building was opened for religious services March 9, 1851, Rev. Dr. Butler preaching the sermon. Rev. Dr. Butler remained with this church until September, 1854, his rectorship having lasted seven years. He was succeeded by Rev. G. D. Cummins, who remained until July, 1858. After Dr. Cummins left, Rev. Henry J. Kershaw acted as rector for several months. About January 1, 1859, Rev. Dr. Butler was recalled, and was succeeded by Rev. R. J. Keeling, who was rector during the War. He was succeeded May 12, 1867, by the present rector, Rev. J. G. Addison, D. D. There are about four hundred communicants in this church, and it has a large and flourishing Sunday-school, of which Dr. Hickling is the superintendent. Henry Clay and Daniel Webster were both communicants of this church.

The Church of the Epiphany originated in a mission enterprise in 1841, under charge of Rev. John W. French, formerly chaplain to the House of Representatives, and afterward city missionary. On January 6, 1842, the day of the Feast of the Epiphany, at a meeting of about thirty persons held at the house of Mrs. Easton, on the corner of I and Nineteenth streets, it was decided to organize a new congregation and to adopt the name of Epiphany Church. A vestry was elected August 10, 1842, and the new parish admitted by the Convention of the Diocese of Maryland in May, 1844. The corner stone of this church building was laid August 12, 1843. The edifice erected was a plain, rectangular structure, with low ceiling and pointed windows, upon a lot given by Miss Harrison, and dedicated in June, 1852. After the retirement of Rev. Mr. French, in 1856, he having been appointed chaplain to the military academy at West Point, various ministers preached occasionally tor this church, among them Rev. Dr. Harold, acting missionary of the Protestant Episcopal Church in Washington; but on Christmas day of that year, Rev. C. H. Hall began his ministry as the regular successor of Rev. Mr. French, He remained until 1869, when he left to take charge of Holy Trinity Church, Brooklyn. In 1857 and 1858, the transepts, tower, and a chancel were erected, and a new altar and a new font provided. In 1869, Rev. Dr. Hall was succeeded by Rev. Thomas A. Starkey, D. D., now Bishop of Northern New Jersey, who remained until 1871. During his ministry, a recessed chancel was erected. Rev. Wilbur F. Watkins succeeded Dr. Starkey, being installed January 5, 1873, and remained until 1875. During his ministry, the building was so rebuilt and remodeled that but little of the original structure remained, the cost of the improvements being more than $50,000. In 1875, Rev. William Paret, D. D., became rector, remaining until 1884, when he was consecrated Bishop of Maryland, but during his ministry here the remainder of an old building debt was paid off, and his first act as bishop was to consecrate the reconstructed church, January 14, 1885. Rev. Dr. Samuel H. Giesy then became rector, and remained until his death, in 1888, when he was succeeded by the present rector, Rev. R. H. McKim, D. D., who was called from Trinity Church, New Orleans. A mission house and chapel was erected in 1891 at the corner of Twelfth and C streets, at a cost of $30,000.

The Church of the Ascension, standing at the corner of Massachusetts Avenue and Twelfth Street, was organized in May, 1844, Rev. L. J. Gilliss, then acting as missionary in that part of the city, being called to the rectorship. The trustees at the time were T. H. Gilliss, William J. Darden, John M. Duncanson, William A. Bradley, A. Holmead, James Reeves, and Samuel Butt. This organization was given a site for its building by General and Mrs. John P. Van Ness, a short time previous to the death of Mrs. Van Ness, but until able to build, they occupied Mr. McLeod's academy, on Ninth Street. The corner stone of the new church building was laid September 5, 1844, on H Street, near the Orphans' Asylum, by Rt. Rev. Bishop W. R. Whittingham. The edifice erected here was fifty-four by eighty-five feet in size, and of the Gothic style of architecture. The church was opened for public worship December 14, 1845, many distinguished persons being present, among them Major-General Scott. Rev. Dr. Stanley, after being associated with Dr. Gilliss, succeeded him to the rectorship, and was himself followed by Rev. William Pinckney, who began his ministry here October 11, 1857. Upon the resignation of Dr. Pinckney, Rev. Orlando Hntton, D. D., became rector, and at the close of bis ministry, Rev. Dr. Pinckney returned on the condition that he should have an assistant. In 1873, Rev. John lI. Elliott, D. D., became associate rector. In 1874, the corner stone of a new church building was laid on Massachusetts Avenue and Twelfth Street. In December, 1875, the congregation took possession of the new building. The entire cost of this building was $205,000, of which sum Mr. Corcoran gave $100,000. Improvements, including a new pipe organ, have recently been added. On the death of Bishop Pinckney, Dr. Elliott became rector, and is still in the position. This church has two missions, one for colored people near the Freedmen's Hospital, and the other for Chinamen.

Grace Episcopal Church was established in 1851, in the Seventh Ward, a separate parish having been laid off by the Convention of the State of Maryland. A Sunday-school has been maintained for several years by the exertions of ladies of the vicinity, but church services had been only occasionally enjoyed. Rev. Alfred Holmead was elected pastor, and regular services held. Measures were then taken looking to the erection of a new church building, and the corner stone was laid October 7, 1851, Rev. Smith Pyne being the principal actor in the ceremonies, assisted by Rev. Mr. Holmead. The church was erected at the corner of D and Ninth streets Southwest, and was seventy by thirty feet. The present rector is Rev. J. W. Phillips.

St. Alban's Protestant Episcopal Church, on the turnpike leading from Georgetown to Rockville, was established in 1854. Its present pastor is Rev. Neilson Falls.

St. Andrew's Episcopal Church, on the corner of Fourteenth and Corcoran streets, was established as a parish in 1857, and began to erect an edifice on the site of the Lutheran Memorial Church, on Fourteenth Street, near Thomas Circle. The War coming on, the parish became demoralized, and the site, which had been donated by Hon. Caleb Gushing, was sold for taxes. By decree of court, the property re verted to Mr. dishing, who sold it and divided the proceeds between several parishes.

For a number of years after this loss of site, St. Andrew's was maintained as a mission station by the Rev. Harris. In 1881, the present site was acquired, and Rev. Josiah B. Perry became rector. The chapel was erected at the time, and has been enlarged several times since. The church has over four hundred communicants, and is in a prosperous condition.

The Church of the Incarnation (Episcopal), at Twelfth and N streets Northwest, was founded in 1865. The corner stone of the present church edifice was laid June 18, 1866, and on December 24, 1867, the first service was held in the completed building, Rev. Charles Hall delivering the discourse. The church cost $21,000. The first rector was Rev. James R. Hubbard, who served from July 16, 1871, to May 31, 1874. He was succeeded by the present rector, Rev. I. L. Townsend, on October 18, 1874. The present membership is three hundred and twenty-five.

St. Paul's Episcopal Church, located on Twenty-third Street, between Pennsylvania Avenue and I Street, Northwest, was organized in 1866, when it was separated from the parish of St. John's. The St. Paul Parish is geographically small, extending from Twenty-second Street to the boundary, thence around on the borders of Rock Creek to Twenty-fifth Street, to H, and thence to Twenty-third again. The number of its communicants is over four hundred and fifty.

Immediately after the founding of the church, work began on the edifice, which is one of the neatest and coziest in the city. The first rector of the parish was Rev. Augustus Jackson, who retained his position fourteen years. His successor was Rev. William Barker, who, in 1887, was followed by the present rector, Rev. Alfred Harding. This congregation has given special attention to music, it being the first in the city, it is alleged, to introduce the choral service.

St. Mark's Protestant Episcopal Church, located on Third Street, near A, Southeast, was organized in May, 1869, with thirty-five members, by Rev. A. Floridus Steele, the only rector. The first building was a wooden one, standing in the rear of the present structure, and was thirty-five by sixty-five feet. In 1889, the present brick edifice was erected, at a cost of $21,000. The new house has not yet been consecrated. This congregation is a colony from Christ's Church. It is sustaining the Mission of the Good Shepherd, with forty attendants, at 312"K Street Northeast. The congregation has grown to two hundred and forty.

St. James' Episcopal Church, on Eighth Street, near Massachusetts Avenue, Northeast, was organized June 26, 1873, from Washington Parish. The building, not yet finished, is constructed of Potomac blue stone, with interior lining of brick. The part first built was occupied March 2, 1884. Thus tar the structure has cost $15,000.

The membership at the date of organization numbered twenty-seven; at present, two hundred and ten. The rectors from the first have been Revs. James A. Harrold, J. M. E. MeKee, F. W. Winslow, I. L. Townsend, and J. W. Clark, the present incumbent.

The Dunbartou Avenue Methodist Episcopal Church, of Georgetown, was founded in 1792, and was the first church of this denomination established in the District of Columbia. The doctrines of this Church were preached in Georgetown as early as 1772, and it is reasonably certain that the first sermon was preached here by Robert Williams, an Englishman, who came to the United States in 1769, and that this first sermon was preached in October, 1772, when Mr. Williams was en route to Norfolk, Virginia, accompanied by William Walters, a young native preacher, who was received into the regular ministry the following year, 1773, and who became the first native American itinerant, "having honor never to be shared, never impaired."' This first apostle of Methodism was also the founder of the same denomination in Virginia and North Carolina.

Three of the most prominent pioneer preachers — Robert Strawbridge, who built the first Methodist chapel in America; Richard Owiiigs, the first American local preacher, and William Walters, the first native American itinerant, were all connected with Methodism in Georgetown. They were followed by Philip Gatch, who was born in Baltimore County, Maryland, and was the second native American itinerant. Philip Gatch suffered much persecution. At one of his appointments near Bladensburg, he was seized by a mob and tarred. The last stroke made with the paddle with which the tar was applied, was drawn across his naked eye-ball, causing severe pain, and from the effects of which he never fully recovered. Of this event Mr. Gatch wrote: "If I ever felt for the souls of men, I did for theirs. When I got to my appointment, the spirit of the Lord so overpowered me that I fell prostrate in prayer before him for my enemies. The Lord, no doubt, granted my request, for the man who put the tar on, and several others, were afterward converted."

It is not certain where the first place of public worship of this denomination in Georgetown was located, but it is considered tolerably safe to say that the first meetings were held in a cooper shop belonging to a Mr. Williams, and standing near the intersection of Gay and Congress streets. It is probable that the first house built especially for religious purposes by this organization was erected on Abel Stevens Montgomery Street in the early part of 1795. Bishop Asbury speaks of this building under date of November 2, 1795, as a "new chapel." The building was a small brick one, and the ground upon which it stood was conveyed to the society March 22, 1800, for five shillings. In 1806 the building was enlarged, and in 1849 it was sold for a school building. In 1849, during the pastorate of Rev. Henry Sheer, the present edifice was erected. Funds from abroad to the amount of $2,500, and from the home field to the extent of $7,000, were collected. In 1868 the church was thoroughly repaired and refurnished; and in 1882 it was refrescoed, repainted, and provided with new doors, carpets, and cushions. The site of the present church edifice was purchased from David English for $500, the deed bearing date of May 16, 1849.

From this congregation a number of colonies have sprung. In 1828, forty-four members withdrew and organized the "Associate Methodist Church," now known as the Protestant Methodist Church, elsewhere described. In 1854, a mission school was established in West Georgetown by Edward H. Brown and James A. White. In 1855, a church was built, of which the first pastor was Rev. William F. Speake, now pastor of Fourth (Ebenezer) Church, Southeast. This congregation is now known as the "Calvary Methodist Episcopal Church."

A colored church was in existence at a very early date. It was, until 1855, under the control of the white congregation, the junior preacher of the charge usually looking after the interests of the colored congregation.

Inasmuch as this is the parent congregation of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the District, the list of preachers from the first is appended: Robert Strawbridge, Richard Owings, Philip Ehert, Edward Drumgole, Philip Gatch, Robert Strawbridge, William Walters, Freeborn Garrettson, Martin Rodda, Samuel Spraggs, Caleb Peddicord, Richard Garrettson, William Glendenning, William Walters, Thomas Foster, Charles Scott, Jonathan Forrest, Reuben Ellis, Philip Cox, Michael Ellis, Ignatius Pigman, William Phoebus, John Magary, Isaac Smith, Jonathan Forrest, William Ringgold, Samuel Breeve, Michael Ellis, Joseph O. Cromwell, Jonathan Forrest, Benton Riggin, Benjamin Roberts, Robert Green, John Allen, James' Wilson, John Childs, George Haggerty, John Regan, John Rowen, Aquilla Garrettson, Joshua Wells, Thomas Bell, Morris Howe, Rezin Simpson, F. Garrettson, Jr., Edmund Wayman, John Chalmers, William Bishop, John Bloodgood, D. Martin, Aquilla Garrettson, Thomas Lucas, Lasley Matthews, Joseph Rowen, Wilson Lee, and John Potts, to 1800; Thomas Lyell, William Walters, John Potts, Seely Bunn. From 1801 to 1804, the society in Washington at the "Point" was supplied by the preachers stationed in Georgetown. In 1805, the pastor in Georgetown, after the first quarter, changed every other Sabbath with William Walters, stationed in Washington. John Bloodgood, Enoch George, Thomas F. Sargent, Stephen George Roszel, Nicholas Snethen, Robert R. Roberts, Asa Shinn, Stephen G. Roszel, William Ryland, Thomas Burch, John Davis, Beverly Waugh, James McCann, Job Guest, to 1825-26; Norval Wilson, Robert S. Vinton, John L. Amiss, Henry Furlong, James M. Hanson, Charles B. Tippitt, Henry Slicer, William Hamilton, William B. Edwards, Littleton F. Morgan, James S. Uansberger,1 Stephen Asbury Roszel,1 Stephen George Roszel,1 Alfred Griffith, William Wicks,1 Henry Tarring, William Taylor,1 Thomas Sewell, Henry Slicer, William H. Wilson,1 Charles McElfresh,1 John Lanahan, Samuel Rodgers,1 to 1850; Andrew J. Myers, 1 Samuel Brison, John C. Dice,1 John Landstreet,1 Benjamin F. Brooke, B. Newton Brown, William B. Edwards, N. J. B. Morgan, William H. Chapman, William B. Edwards, James A. McCauley, John H. Dashiell, B. Peyton Brown, to 1875; Richard Norris, J. McKendree Reiley, J. J. G. Webster, William I. McKenney, W. S. Edwards, M. F. B. Rice, J. Edwin Ames, and George Elliott. Of this long line of esteemed pastors, four were elected bishops: Enoch George, Robert R. Roberts, Beverly Waugh, and William Taylor.

The Fourth Street Methodist Episcopal Church, on Fourth Street, between South Carolina Avenue and G Street Southeast, is the pioneer organization of this denomination in the city.

All Methodist history connected with Washington prior to 1802 is largely inferential. At the Baltimore Conference, held that year, William Walters was appointed pastor at Georgetown and Washington. At that time the nucleus of Methodism was Greenleaf's Point, in the southern part of the city. At the corner of what is now South Capitol and N streets, stood the "Twenty Buildings," in one of which the Methodists, under the direction of Mr. Walters, held their first services. Of the attendants at the Point may be mentioned Mrs. Elizabeth Lipscomb, Joseph Wheat, Peter Miller, and George Collard. Mention is made of these members in connection with a church meeting at Georgetown, April 7, 1803, in which it was stipulated that the "friends at the Point" agreed to pay one-third of the salary and one-fourth of the board of the preacher in charge, Rev. John Potts.

1 Junior preachers in charge of the colored church. About 1807, the congregation changed from "the Point" to Dudley Carroll's barn, which stood on New Jersey Avenue, south of E Street. It was the home of the Methodist congregation from 1807 to 1811. During this period (1807-11), the membership increased from one hundred and two to one hundred and fifty-nine.

On the 5th of October, 1810, the trustees, consisting of Henry Foxall, John Brashears, Electius Middleton, Ambrose White, James Vauzenette, John A. Chambers, Leonard Machall, John Eliason, and Jacob Hoffman, bought a lot of William Prout, for the sum of $227.64. Under the pastorate of Rev. Beverly Waugh, they began the erection of the first church edifice owned by the Methodists in Washington. It was a brick structure of modest pretensions, and was dedicated in November, 1811. A chapel was erected by its side for school purposes a few years later. The church was not supplied at first with benches or chairs, and the sexes were separated by a partition. This church was called Ebenezer.

In 1830, a number of members, seceding, established what is now called the First Methodist Protestant Church, on the corner of Fifth Street and Virginia Avenue Southeast.

The present house of worship was erected in 1857, under the pastorate of Rev. W. H. Chapman.

Foundry Methodist Episcopal Church was established in 1814 and organized in 1815. The man who above all others was deserving of credit for its establishment was Rev. Henry Foxall, whose foundry is mentioned in the "Manufacturing" chapter. In 1814, Mr. Foxall purchased a lot at the corner of Fourteenth and G streets, erected a church edifice upon it, and presented it to the society. The first trustees of this church were Isaac Owen, Leonard Machall, John Eliason, William Doughty, Joel Brown, John Lutz, and Samuel McKinney. This first church building was dedicated September 10, 1815. Soon after building the church, Mr. Foxall went to England, and in his absence the congregation built a parsonage, a two-story frame building, which displeased Mr. Foxall, as it was his intention to erect a fine parsonage for the church at his own expense. He died near his native village in England in 1823. With regard to the name of the church, it was supposed to have been adopted from the fact that John Wesley and his associates, when driven out of the English church, first occupied an old foundry, and to the additional fact that Mr. Foxall established this church with money made in his own foundry. The building at the corner of Fourteenth and G streets was used without repair until 1835, when it was repaired. It was again repaired iu 1849, when the galleries, till then occupied by the colored members, were taken down, and the floor of the church raised so as to make a basement, which was then used for a Sunday-school. A separate church was erected for the accommodation of the colored members on Eleventh Street, named Anbury Methodist Episcopal Church, organized, at that time, with about three hundred members. The Foundry Church, as improved according to the plan last mentioned, was used until May, 1864, when it was torn down and a new building erected in its place, the corner stone being laid July 20, 1864, with Masonic ceremonies. This church edifice was dedicated November 4, 1866, Rev. D. W. Bartine, D. D., of Philadelphia, delivering the address. The first pastor of this church was Rev. Thomas Burch, an Irishman, and the second was Rev. William Ryland, in 1816; Rev. Mr. Burch in 1817; Rev. John Emery, 1818-19; Rev. William Ryland, 1820-21; Rev. Samuel Davis, until September, 1822, when he died, and then Rev. Joseph Baer; Rev. William Hamilton, 1823-24; Rev. William Ryland, 1825-26; Rev. John Davis, 1827-28; Rev. Stephen Roszell, 1829-30; Rev. James M. Hanson and Rev. George Nildt, 1831-32; Rev. John Baer, 1833; Rev. Samuel Bray son and Rev. Thomas B. Sargent, 1834-35; Rev. William Hamilton and Rev. Charles B. Tippet, 1836-37; Rev. Henry Sheer, 1838-39; Rev. Thomas C. Thornton, 1840 and half of 1841; Rev. John A. Robb, remainder of 1841; Rev. John Davis, 1842-43; Rev. Henry Tarring, 1844-45; Rev. Nicholas J. B. Morgan, 1846-47; Rev. John Lanahan, 1848-49; Rev. Littleton F. Morgan, 1850-51; Rev. Jesse T. Reck, D. D., 1852-53; Rev. Elisha P. Phelps, 1854-55; Rev. Samuel Register, 1856-57; Rev. B. H. Nadal, D. D., 1858-59; Rev. William B. Edwards, D. D., 1860-61; Rev. William Hearst, to August, 1862; Rev. J. R. Effinger and Rev. Joseph B. Stitt, remainder of 1862; Rev. W. M. D. Ryan, 1863-65; Rev. B. Peyton Brown, 1866-68; Rev. Alexander Gibson, D. D., 1869-71; Rev. Samuel A. Wilson, 1872; Rev. Horace A. Cleveland, 1873-75; Rev. B. Peyton Brown, 1876-77; Rev. John Lanahan, D. D., 1878-80; Rev. Frank Ward, 1881-83; Rev. Henry R. Naylor, D. D., 1884-86; Rev. George Elliott, 1887-1891.

Wesley Chapel, of the Methodist Episcopal Church, located at the southwest corner of Fifth and F streets Northwest, was organized in 1823. In its earlier years, it was visited, at times, by the prominent members of the denomination. Rev. Bishop McKendree occupied its pulpit on the 17th of May, 1829. In 1838, Rev. G. S. Cookman became pastor, and remained until 1841.

Some of the pastors who came after Rev. Mr. Cookman were: John Davis, 1841-43; W. B. Edwards, 1843-44; Norval Wilson, 184448; H. Slieer, 1848; Dashiell, 1855; W. Krebs, 1856-58. The first house of worship, erected about the time of the organization of the church, served its purposes until 1856, when it was taken down and replaced by a new and larger one, with a seating capacity of two thousand five hundred, and at a cost of $16,000, which was dedicated December 26, 1856, during the pastorate of Rev. Mr. Krebs. In March, 1858, Rev. E. D. Morgan, D. D., became pastor. Its present membership is four hundred and thirty-four, under the pastorate of Rev. L. B. Wilson.

Ryland Chapel is on D and Tenth streets Southwest. It was organized in 1843. Its house of worship was not completed for a year or two later. Rev. F. S. Evans was pastor. The conference report for 1891 shows four hundred and seven members, and a church property valued at $25,000. Rev. J. A. Price is serving as pastor.

McKendree Methodist Episcopal Church is on Massachusetts Avenue, near Ninth Street, and was organized in 1844. A house was begun, but not finished, that year. In 1845, Rev. William G. Eggleston was pastor; in 1847, Rev. T. M. Reese; in 1856, Rev. George Hildt; in 1857, Rev. Dabney Bale; in 1859, Rev. William Hamilton; in 1861, Rev. Dr. Ryan; in 1863, Rev. J. Thrush; in 1868, Rev. Mr. Krebs. It is now one of the large churches of the denomination. Its membership for 1891 was reported as four hundred and thirty-one. The pastor is Rev. L. T. Widerman.

Union Chapel Methodist Episcopal Church was organized in 1846. It is situated at the corner of Pennsylvania Avenue and Twentieth Street. It has a membership of two hundred and eighteen, and Rev. Joel Brown is pastor.

The Metropolitan Methodist Episcopal Church was organized in 1853, at a time when Rev. R. L. Dashiell was agent for the District of Columbia. The idea connected with its establishment was that it should give increased accommodations to strangers visiting the metropolis, and hence it was intended to build it on the free-seat plan. The trustees of the church were C. W. Boteler, Sr., T. H. Havenner, W. G. Deale, T. Pursell, C. H. Lane, Samuel Fowler, F. Howard, S. Normeut, and Z. W. McKnew. The bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church, under date of March 16, 1853, had issued a circular strongly recommending the enterprise, and in compliance with a request from the Baltimore Annual Conference, appointed Rev. Henry Slicer agent for the new church. The church building which it was then designed to erect, was to be situated on the corner of C and Four and a Half streets, and was to be seventy-five feet front on C Street, and one hundred and eight feet deep on Four and a Half Street. The corner stone was laid October 23, 1854, the address of the occasion being made by Bishop Simpson. The walls of this building were erected to a height of a few feet above the surface of the ground, and then, on account of want of funds, caused by the impractibility of making collections in the Southern States because of the breaking out of the War, were permitted to remain in that condition until 1868, when a determined effort was made to complete the edifice. Rev. Francis S. De Hass was appointed general agent, and he succeeded in raising over $100,000 toward its completion. The church erected in part with this money is a brown-stone structure in the Gothic style of architecture. At the time of the dedication, March 7, 1869, it had cost $225,000, the tower and steeple not then being completed nor the chimes put in. To do this would cost, as was then supposed, $25,000 more, bringing the entire cost of the church up to $250,000. The main entrance to the building is on C Street, and from the vestibule rise commodious stairways to the galleries, besides which three doors admit to the main audience room. This room is sixty-four by eightyfive feet in size, seating comfortably one thousand two hundred persons, and being at that time considered the finest room in the District. In the gallery is a superb organ, manufactured by Johnson, of Westfield, Massachusetts, and presented to the church by Carlos Pierce of that State, at an expense to him of $15,000. In the auditorium there were set apart pews for each State and Territory, the President, and the Cabinet officers. The rest of the pews were rented, except those in the gallery, which were free. The fountain in bronze was designed by Clarke Mills. It represented Hagar in the Wilderness. The trustees at that time were President U. S. Grant, S. P. Chase, M. G. Emery, S. Norment, S. Fowler, F. A. Lutz, F. Howard, T. L. Tullock, and D. A. Burr. The dedicatory exercises were of a most interesting nature. The morning address was delivered by Bishop Simpson, the afternoon address by Rev. W. Morley Puushon, one of the greatest pulpit orators of England, and the evening address by Rev. I)r. T. M. Eddy, of the Northwestern Christian Advocate. Fifteen thousand dollars were raised on the day of the dedication.

Subsequently to this time, the steeple was erected, carried to a height of two hundred and twenty-five feet, and a chime of bells, sixteen in number, put in. On the wall west of the pulpit, beneath the gallery, are two mural tablets, erected respectively to the memory of General U. S. Grant and General John A. Logan, both of whom were regular attendants at this church. Since this time, the ministers of this church have been: Rev. J. P. Newman, D. D., elected bishop in the midst of his term; Rev. T. M. Eddy, D. D., elected missionary secretary at the beginning of his term; Rev. O. H. Tiffany, D. D.; Rev. H. R. Naylor, afterward presiding elder of this district; Rev. R. N. Baer, D. D., Rev. E. D. Huntley, D. D., and Rev. George H. Corey, D. D., the present pastor.

Fletcher Chapel Methodist Episcopal Church was established in 1853. It is situated at the corner of Fourth Street and New York Avenue Northwest. At first it was a mission in charge of McKendree Chapel. Its membership is ninety-nine, and Rev. W. C. Griffin is pastor.

Waugh Chapel, corner Third and A streets Northeast, was first known as Capitol Hill Methodist Episcopal Church. It was organized in 1853, and September 5, 1854, the corner stone was laid, Rev. Beverly Waugh, bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and Revs. N. Wilson and A. Griffith officiating. In March, 1857, Rev. R. R. S. Hough became pastor, during whose ministry the structure was completed. The dedication occurred February 7, 1858. At this time, the indebtedness on the church was $2,000, steps for the liquidation of which were taken. It was on this occasion, too, that the name was changed from Capitol Hill to that of Waugh Chapel. In March, 1858, Mr. Hough was succeeded by Rev. Theodore Carson. Without attempting to give the full list of intervening pastors, it may be stated that the present pastor is Rev. Alexander J. Gibson. The church has a comfortable parsonage attached, and is in a flourishing condition, its membership being five hundred and sixteen.

Grace Methodist Episcopal Church is located at the corner of Ninth and S streets Northwest. It had its origin in a mission Sunday-school in 1863, sustained by teachers from Wesley Chapel. George W. Riggs gave the ground for a building site, and a temporary frame structure was erected, and a mission church organized. At the session of the Baltimore Annual Conference for 1871, this mission church was erected into a station, and Rev. M. F. B. Rice appointed pastor. He desired a new church building, and, the membership endorsing the suggestion, raised $4,000 for the purpose. The corner stone of this new church was laid October 14, 1872, the building when complete costing about $20,000. Its present membership is reported at one hundred and sixty-two. Rev. Samuel Shannon is the pastor.

Fifteenth Street Methodist Episcopal Church is located at the corner of Fifteenth and R streets Northwest. It was organized in 1872. According to the conference report of 1891, it has two hundred and nineteen members, and the pastor is Rev. L. A. Threlkeld.

North Capitol Methodist Episcopal Church was organized in 1876, with seventy-seven members. The first church building was a frame one, standing at the corner of North Capitol and K streets Northeast, and cost about $1,000. This building served the purposes of the congregation until 1891, when a new brick building was erected on the same site, costing $18,000. This new church has not as yet been dedicated, but will be sometime during the year 1892. The pastors of this church have been as follows: Revs. D. M. Browning, Charles T. Wiede, Harry Boggs, James McLaren, F. H. Havenner, W. H. Reed, J. Clarke Hagey, Charles T. Wiede, and Charles O. Cook, present pastor. The membership in 1878 was eighty-one, and in 1891 one hundred and forty-six.

Hamline Methodist Episcopal Church, corner of Ninth and P streets Northwest, was organized in 1867. It is the largest church of the denomination in the city. Its membership is eight hundred and thirty-seven, and the property of the church is worth $75,000. The pastor is Rev. Henry R. Naylor.

Independent Methodist Episcopal Church, located on Eleventh Street, between G and I, Southeast, was organized in 1887, by Rev. Jacob D. Wilson. The congregation is not under the jurisdiction of any conference, but is guided and guarded by its pastor, Rev. Wilson.

Douglas Memorial Methodist Episcopal Church, corner of Eleventh and H streets Northeast, was organized with a few scattered members in 1878, and named in honor of Miss Flora Douglas, who subsequently married the Rev. George Markham. It was then a mission chapel. It has grown rapidly in consequence of the growth of the city in that vicinity, and its membership is now more than four hundred, with a Sunday-school enrolling over six hundred. The little brick chapel is consequently too small to accommodate the congregations that attend, and steps have been taken to erect a commodious building. The pastorate has been filled by W. H. Reed, W. M. Hammack, Charles T. House, William Rogers, D. M. Browning, and E. O. Eldridge. The latter has just entered upon his work.

Twelfth Street Methodist Church, corner of Twelfth and E streets Southeast, is a small congregation, having, in 1891, seventy-four members, with a church property valued at $9,000. Rev. Henry Baker is pastor.

Mount Vernon Place Methodist Episcopal Church, South, corner of Ninth and K streets Northwest, was organized in 1869. The pastor is Rev. J. D. Weightman.

Grace Methodist Episcopal Church, South, was organized in 1886. The first services were held in the Odd Fellows' Hall, on Pennsylvania Avenue Southeast. Not long afterward, the church at the corner of Seventh and A streets Northeast was purchased, and has ever since been used as a place of worship. At the time of the organization of the church, there were twenty-seven members, while at the present time there are one hundred and twenty. Its first pastor, Rev. J. C. Jones, was appointed in 1887, and served four years. He was succeeded by Rev. Harry C. Febrey in March, 1891.

Mount Olivet Methodist Episcopal Church, South, is at the corner of Seventh and C streets Southwest, and the pastor is Rev. John K. White.

Congress Street Methodist Protestant Church, located on Thirty-first Street Northwest (Georgetown), was organized in 1828. In 1829, the lot on which the church structure stands was purchased for $1,035. The first edifice was erected in 1830, during the pastorate of Rev. W. W. Wallace. In 1857, it was replaced by another, which in 1867 was enlarged and improved, and in February, 1868, dedicated, the sermon being preached by Rev. Augustus Webster. The parsonage was built in 1841, during the pastorate of Rev. L. H. Reese, at a cost of $4,000, on a lot purchased in 1839 for $615.

The list of ministers includes the following: Revs. W. W. Wallace, Dennis B. Dorsey, Frederick Styer, Thomas H. Stockton, John W. Porter, Josiah Varden, Augustus Webster, Bignal Appleby, Levi R. Reese, John G. Wilson, Joseph Warden, William Collier, John Everest, J. J. Murray, S. R. Cox, J. B. Sutherland, Dr. Murray, David Wilson, Washington Roby, Daniel E. Reese, Daniel Bowers, D. A. Shermer, Dr. Bates, T. D. Valiant, J. T. Murray. This list extends to 1878. The present pastor is Rev. W. R. Graham.

The Central Methodist Protestant Church was organized April 3, 1829, with members from the Foundry Methodist Episcopal Church who joined the movement resulting in the Methodist Protestant Church. Its first class leader was Rev. W. C. Lipscomb.

On April 14, 1836, at the annual session of this denomination held in Washington, the number of members reported as belonging thereto was about four thousand, with eight hundred children in the Sunday-schools. The appointments for Washington and Georgetown were: Georgetown, Rev. Josiah Varden; Ninth Street, Rev. Levi R. Reese, and East Washington, Rev. Thomas G. Clayton. In 1838,

there was no regular minister in the pulpit of this church, but Rev. William Lanphier preached occasionally. Rev. A. Webster became pastor April 14, 1839, and in 1844 it was Rev. U Ward. Following is a list of the pastors from that time to the present: Rev. William Mitchell, 1845-46; Rev. S. K. Cox, 1846-47; Rev. L. R. Reese, 184749; Rev. William Collier, 1849-50; Rev. William T. Eva, 1850-52; Rev. Daniel E. Reese, 1852-55; Rev. T. Light Wilson, 1855-57; Rev. F. Swentzel, 1857-59; Rev. L. W. Bates, 1859-60; Rev. P. Light Wilson, 1860-62; Revs. W. Roby and W. M. Strayer, 1862-63; Rev. C. T. Cochol,-1863-64; Rev. J. T. Ward, 1864-66; Rev. Dr. E. J. Drinkhouse, 1868-74; Rev. Dr. W. S. Hammond, 1875-76; Rev. Dr. David Wilson, 1877-80; Rev. P. T. Hall, 1880-81; Rev. J. T. Smith, 1882; Rev. Dr. J. T. Mills, 1883-87; Rev. S. Reese Murray, 1887 to the present time.

The first building erected by this church was a frame structure, called "The Tabernacle," at Twelfth and H streets, forty-nine by twenty-one feet in size, with a seating capacity of two hundred and fifty, and dedicated by Rev. Levi R. Reese, December 23, 1832. In April, 1835, a new brick church on Ninth Street, between E and F streets, was erected, sixty-five by fifty feet in size, and dedicated July 9 by Rev. Josiah Varden. In 1879, this church was remodeled and enlarged by Rev. Dr. Wilson, at a cost of $11,000. In 1887, under the pastorate of Rev. S. Reese Murray, the congregation erected a chapel at Twelfth and M streets Northwest, paying for the ground $33,000, and for the erection of the chapel $10,000.

This church differs from other Methodist churches in many particulars: It has no titled bishops; it admits lay men in equal numbers with clergymen in the annual and general conferences; it elects its officers annually; and it has no time limit to pastoral appointments.

The First Methodist Protestant Church, corner Fifth Street and Virginia Avenue Southeast, was organized in 1830. It was a colony of the Fourth (Ehenezer) Methodist Episcopal Church. The house of worship is a frame structure of good dimensions. A frame parsonage adjoins the building. The property is valued at $17,000. The pastor, Rev. J. E. Nicholson, has recently removed to New Jersey, and his successor has not been installed.

The North Carolina Avenue Methodist Protestant Church was organized in 1872, with seventeen members. It is located at the corner of North Carolina Avenue and Eighth Street, on Capitol Hill. Its pastors have been Revs. S. G. Valiant, J. Shreve, J. W. Trust, P. T. Hall, W. J. Neepier, J. W. Tomb, A. W. Mather, and David Wilson, the present pastor. For the last four years, the membership has been about one hundred.

Mt. Tabor Methodist Protestant Church, on Thirty-second Street Northwest, was organized in 1874. Rev. H. C. Gushing is pastor.

The first presbytery organized for this region was the Presbytery of Baltimore, in 1786. In 1823, the Presbytery of the District of Columbia was formed by the Synod of Philadelphia, on the petition of the Presbytery of Baltimore, and the new presbytery held its first meeting at Alexandria, May 11, 1824, with Rev. J. Breckenridge as moderator, the churches represented having at that time a membership of two hundred and seventy-seven. The General Assembly of 1836 transferred this presbytery from the Synod of Philadelphia to that of Virginia, the membership of the churches being then one thousand, two hundred and fifty-nine. In 1837 and 1838, the Presbyterian Church was separated into two branches,— the Old and Kew schools, and in 1839, when a vote was taken on receiving a mandate from the Synod of Virginia, requiring adherence to the acts of the Assembly of 1838 exscinding several of the Northern synods from the Church, the Presbytery of the District of Columbia divided,— Messrs. Laurie, Harrison, Bosworth, and Breckenridge representing their churches, and Revs. I. L. Skinner and J. McVeau, without pastoral charges, withdrawing from the body, and declining to recognize its further jurisdiction. The Presbytery of the District of Columbia thereupon dropped their names from the rolls, the General Assembly, Old School, recognizing them, however, as the true body of that name. They retained this name until 1841, when they were merged into the Presbytery of Baltimore. In 1858, they were set off from this presbytery to form the Presbytery of the Potomac.

From 1839 to 1870, therefore, the condition of the churches in the District of Columbia with reference to the two schools into which the Presbyterian Church was divided, was as follows: From 1839 to 1841, some of them were under the Presbytery of the District of Columbia, Old School, while the others were under the Presbytery of the District of Columbia, New School; from 1841 to 1858, some were under the Presbytery of Baltimore, Old School, while the others were under the Presbytery of the District of Columbia, New School; and from 1858 to 1870, some were under the Presbytery of the Potomac, Old School, while the others were under the Presbytery of the District of Columbia, New School.

In 1870, when the union of the two schools was effected, these two presbyteries were united in one, the union being effected June 20 of that year, under the name of the Presbytery of Washington City. At this time, the membership of the churches belonging to the two presbyteries was two thousand, eight hundred and ninety-three, and in 1888 it had increased to four thousand, seven hundred and seventy-six. In 1892, the membership of the churches belonging to the Presbytery of Washington is about six thousand.

The West Street Presbyterian Church, Georgetown, was the result of a movement begun in 1780, when Rev. Stephen B. Balch, a native of Maryland, and a licentiate of the old Donegal Presbytery, of Pennsylvania, on his way to make a missionary tour of the Carolinas, preached to a few persons' in Georgetown, who were of Scotch and New England descent. Some of them were descendants of .Colonel Ninian Beall, who, at an earlier date, had liberally befriended the old Marlborough Church in Maryland. The next year Rev. Mr. Balch, under his commission as an evangelist, organized a church. This congregation worshiped for two years on the site of the present Presbyterian mission on Market Street, and then built a small church edifice, thirty feet square, at the corner of Washington and Bridge streets, a location fitly chosen to accommodate those who desired to attend. In 1821, this building was replaced by one of much larger dimensions. Toward the latter part of Rev. Mr. Balch's pastorate, he had as an assistant Rev. John C. Smith, who, upon the death of Dr. Balch, September 7, 1833, became pastor, and remained in this position until called to the pastorate of the Fourth Presbyterian Church of Washington, April 9, 1839. He was succeeded by Rev. R. T. Berry, October 3, 1841, to August 28, 1849; Rev. J. M. P. Atkinson, March 12, 1850, to February 12, 1856; Rev. J. H. Bocock, D. D., February 17, 1857, to May 27, 1861; Rev. F. T. Brown, June 9, 1861, to February 6, 1865; Rev. A. A. E. Taylor, June 21, 1865, to May 3, 1869; Rev. D. W. Moffat, May 6, 1870, to April 10, 1872; Rev. S. H. Howe, May, 1872, to 1883; Rev. T. S. Childs, a short time that year, and then Rev. Thomas Fnllerton, D. D., the present pastor.

In 1871, the question of a removal became a question for discussion, and the present site, on P Street, near Thirty-first Street, was selected. The new edifice was dedicated June 8, 1879, and Rev. Dr. Howe installed pastor. The roll of membership in 1887 contained the names of two hundred and ninety individuals, and numerous additions have since been made. The membership of the Sundayschool is upward of four hundred. The church properties, the building, chapel, manse, and mission, are worth $60,000, and they are free from debt. The chapel, with its lot and that of the church, was the gift of Messrs. Darby and Cissel, when residents of Georgetown.

The First Presbyterian Church, located at the present time on Four and a Half Street, had its origin as early as 1795; for the records of Baltimore Presbytery for April 29, that year, show that a call was presented "from the churches in Washington for the services of Rev. John Breckenridge"; and on the 24th of June of the same year, at a called meeting at Bladensburg, on the report of "a committee respecting the churches in said town and its vicinity," measures were taken for the future installation of Rev. Mr. Breckenridge. The first services of this new congregation were held in a carpenter shop erected for the use of the workmen engaged in building the Presidential Mansion, and when this shop was taken down, a frame chapel was erected on F Street, near St. Patrick's Church. In 1803, this small congregation was weakened by the withdrawal of several of the members to form F Street Presbyterian Church by those who had previously belonged to the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia, who had removed to Washington when it became the seat of government of the United States; but for a time, the services of Rev. Mr. Breckenridge were continued with what remained of the congregation under his appointment from the General Assembly, and he also preached to the Presbyterians at Bladensburg, the Washington services being held in the Eastern Academy building. In 1810, George Blagden, Elias B. Caldwell, John Coyle, Daniel Rapine, and John McClelland formed themselves into a committee to attempt the building of a house of worship; but until this church edifice was completed, religious services were held in the basement of the north wing of the Capitol. On June 25, 1812, the church erected by this building committee was entered for the first time, and its dedicatory sermon preached by Rev. Mr. Breckenridge. It was situated on South Capitol Street, and among the contributors toward its erection were President Madison, Hon. James Munroe, A William R. King, John Lambert, and Josiah Quincy. Its first cost was $4,000, but it was afterward enlarged at a cost of $3,000. Rev. Mr. Breckenridge was installed July 4, 1813, and was pastor of the church until May, 1818. After his resignation, the pulpit was supplied by John McKnight, Andrew Hunter, and John Clark, until the call, in 1819, to Rev. Reuben Post, who was installed June 24 of that year. On account of the persistent growth of the city toward the west, the congregation did not grow as it had been hoped. The site of the present building on Four and a Half Street was selected and a contract for a new church thereon entered into for $8,000. The corner stone of this church was laid April 10, 1827, and the building was dedicated December 9 of the same year. Rev. Dr. Post remained pastor until June 24, 1836. The next regular pastor was Rev. W. McLain, who was installed January 11, 1837, and remained with the church until failing health compelled him to resign, in 1840. He, however, remained in the service of the presbytery as stated clerk, and also held the office of secretary of the American Colonization Society until his death, February 13, 1873. Rev. Charles Rich was installed pastor of this church November 30, 1840, and remained three years, when he resigned on account of ill health. Rev. William T. Sprole was called to this church in the fall of 1843, and was succeeded March 1, 1848, by Rev. Elisha Ballentyne, who remained until 1851, resigning on account of ill health. The next regular pastor was the present one, Rev. Byron Sunderland, D. D., who was installed April 21, 1853. Soon after Dr. Sunderland became pastor, it became necessary to enlarge the church building, which was accomplished by raising it and extending it over the rear portion of its grounds, increasing the seating capacity to one thousand. The building, as thus enlarged, was dedicated December 9, 1860, the services being by the Rev. Dr. Spring in the morning, Rev. C. H. Read in the afternoon, and Rev. J. Jenkins in the evening. These three ministers represented the Old School, the New School, and the Southern School of the Presbyterian Church as it existed at that day. Dr. Sunderland's pastorate has been a remarkable one, extending from April, 1853, almost continuously to the present time, a period of thirty-nine years, the only intermission or break in it being while the Doctor was abroad in Paris during a portion of the years 1864 and 1865, as pastor of the American Chapel in that city. It could not be expected that perfect harmony should exist in such a church during its entire existence. On several occasions there has been misunderstanding, which has tended to weaken the church by a withdrawal of a portion of its members. In 1866, one of these occasions occurred, because of dissatisfaction on the part of some that Frederick Douglass was permitted to deliver a lecture in the church for the benefit of the National Home Association of colored orphans, the lecture being upon "The Assassination and its Lessons." Chief Justice Chase presided, and the audience was a very large one, part of whom being negroes. The use of the church for this purpose was very distasteful to many of the members, and they protested against it in vigorous terms. But the lecture having been delivered in spite of the protest, many of the members withdrew, and even some of those who insisted on its delivery. Numerous other embarrassments have been encountered, but, notwithstanding all of them, the First Presbyterian Church has continued to grow, and it is strong and active in all directions to-day.

The F Street Presbyterian Church, as has been stated in the sketch of the First Church, was organized in 1803, from members retiring from that church. At a meeting of the Synod of Philadelphia in 1823, this church was ordered to be enrolled in the Presbytery of the District of Columbia. At the time of the organization of this church, Rev. James Laurie, of Edinburgh, then visiting here, was invited to assist in the collection of a congregation, and he was installed pastor in 1804. A church building was erected in 1808, and Mr. Laurie remained the sole pastor until 1841. He was then affected with a protracted illness, and was assisted in his duties by Rev. Dr. Van .Rensselaer, then by Rev. Dr. Septimus Tustin, then by Rev. Ninian Bennatyne, then by Rev. L. H. Christian, and by Rev. D. X. Junkin, who remained until after Dr. Laurie's death, which occurred April 17, 1853. March 2, 1854, Rev. Phineas D. Gurley was installed pastor as the successor of Rev. Dr. Laurie, and remained the pastor until the consolidation of this church with the Second Presbyterian Church in 1859.

Second Presbyterian Church was organized May 9, 1820, with forty-one members, and constituted October 13, following. June 6, 1821, Rev. Daniel Baker was elected pastor, who remained until called, in 1828, to the Independent Presbyterian Church of Savannah, Georgia. Rev. Luther Halsey, of Princeton, having declined a call to this church, Rev. J. N. Campbell served as stated supply until the fall of 1830, from which time to 1845 the church was supplied by the pastors, Revs. E. II. Smith, P. H. Fowler, George Wood, R. W. Clark, W. W. Eels, and J. Knox. Then there were temporary supplies until 1849, when Rev. James R. Eckard became the pastor, remaining until 1853. A short supply followed, by Rev. J. D. Matthews, and then the church was supplied by Rev. Dr. James G. Hamner until the union with the F Street Church, above referred to.

New York Avenue Presbyterian Church resulted from the above consolidation. Rev. Dr. Gurley, who had been largely instrumental in securing the union, merged his pastorate of F Street Church into that of the united congregations. The building of the F Street Church was sold for something more than $12,000 to the Messrs. Willard, and is now known as Willard Hall. Rev. Dr. Gurley died September 30, 1868, and in November, 1869, was succeeded in the ministry of this church by Rev. S. S. Mitchell, of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, who remained until 1878, when he accepted a call to the Reformed church in Brooklyn, aud was followed here by Rev. J. R. Paxton, who remained until February 19, 1882, when he was succeeded by the present pastor, Rev. Dr. William Alvin Bartlett, who was installed October 24, 1882. The estimated value of all the property held by the trustees of this church is in excess of $100,000. The new building on New York Avenue was dedicated on Sunday, October 14, 1860, the discourse of the occasion being delivered by Rev. Dr. Board man, of Philadelphia.

The Fourth Presbyterian Church was established in 1828. In November of that year, the "Central Presbyterian Society of Washington" was formed by twenty members at a meeting held at Jacob Gideon's house, on Seventh Street, and Rev. J. N. Danforth was invited to take charge of the congregation. November 24, the "Fourth Presbyterian Church of Washington" was organized at the same place, D. M. Wilson being the presiding elder. At first the new organization worshiped in Z. D. Brash ear's schoolroom, on the southeast corner of Ninth and H streets. A woman's prayer-meeting was organized under the guidance of Mrs. Jacob Gideon, and was held in her house every week for twenty-five years, until her death, in 1853. The first church edifice erected by this church was a one-story structure, and was without seats or chimneys. It was erected on a lot purchased of John P. Van Ness, and was dedicated March 1, 1829, by Rev. John Breckenridge, D. D. Great success attended the ministry of Rev. Mr. Danforth, the number of communicants being sixty-three at the time of the dedication of this building. In 1832 Mr. Danforth was succeeded in his pulpit by Rev. Mason Noble, from Troy, New York. He was succeeded September 27, 1839, by Rev. J. C. Smith, who had preached in Georgetown seven years. On March 1, 1840, Dr. Smith preached from Nehemiah 2:18, "And they said, Let us rise up and build," the result of which sermon was that the corner stone of a new structure was laid June 24, 1840. The building was sixty-one feet by eighty feet in size, the largest church edifice then in the city. It was dedicated June 20, 1841, the dedicatory sermon being preached by Rev. E. N. Kirk, D. D., of Boston, Massachusetts. Rev. Dr. Smith, on September 10, 1864, preached the twenty-fifth anniversary sermon, stating that at that date there were three hundred and thirty-seven names on the rolls, and that he had baptized six hundred and twenty-one persons. Dr. Smith was succeeded by Rev. J. T. Kelly January 23, 1878, who remains pastor at the present time.

The Fifteenth Street Presbyterian Church was organized May 14, 1842, as the "First Colored Presbyterian Church of Washington." Forty communicants of this organization worshiped in Cook's schoolhouse, at H and Fourteenth streets, until they were enabled, by the assistance of the First, Second, and Fourth churches, to erect a small frame building on the site of their present church, on Fifteenth Street, between I and K streets, in 1853. Rev. John F. Cook was the pastor. Rev. W. Catto was installed pastor in 1858, and Rev. B. F. Tanner in 1861. In 1864, the pulpit became vacant, and was thereafter supplied by Rev. W. B. Evans and others, until the installation of Rev. II. H. Garnett, who remained until October 3, 1866, when he was followed by Rev. J. H. Muse. Rev. Sella Martin was pastor from December 27, 1868, until February 18, 1870. From this time until the settlement of Rev, G. Van Deurs, in 1874, the pulpit was supplied by Rev. Septimus Tustin. Rev. Mr. Van Deurs was succeeded in 1875 by Rev. J. Brown, and he, in 1878, by Rev. F. J. Grimke, who remained until 1885. From this time until 1887, the pulpit was filled by Rev. C. II. A. Buckley, D. D., one of the professors of Howard University. Rev. J. R. Riley was installed pastor January 18, 1887, and is the present pastor. The building is worth $55,000, and was erected and furnished largely by other Presbyterian churches in Washington.

Assembly's Presbyterian Church was organized March 1, 1853, as the Fifth Presbyterian Church, and was the result of work done by Rev. John C. Smith, D. D., pastor at the time of the Fourth Presbyterian Church, by Rev. A. G. Carothers, and George S. Gideon. The corner stone of the building was laid September 1, 1852, at the corner of Fifth and I streets, and the church edifice was dedicated November 6, 1853. Rev. Mr. Carothers preached January 30, 1853, and accepted the call to the pastorate in March following, being installed on the 20th of that month. After the completion of the dedicatory ceremonies, Rev. John C. Smith gave a short history of the church, and stated that it had received assistance from twenty-three States, and the Choctaw nation of Indians, besides being substantially assisted by the heroine of Tampico. The land was donated by Silas H. Hill and Joseph D. Varnum. The edifice cost $13,000, being turned over to the church free from debt. In 1860 Rev. Mr. Collins became pastor of this church, and in 1861 Rev. T. B. McFalls, remaining until 1868, when he was succeeded by Rev. William Hart.

As a result of the War, and of the withdrawal of members to form a Southern Presbyterian Church (Central Presbyterian), this church in 1870 had become greatly reduced in numbers and strength. The Central Congregational Church, which had been formed from the First Congregational Church by those who had withdrawn therefrom some two years before, together with their pastor, Rev. Dr. Boynton, were without a building. They dissolved their organization, and joined Assembly's Presbyterian Church by letter in August, 1870. The present pastor, Rev. Mr. Little, was called in 1873. Since the consolidation above mentioned, the church has been most prosperous and united, and has shown a steady and encouraging growth.

The Sixth Presbyterian Church was the result of the labors of Rev. Mason Noble, who, in 1851, held a series of prayer-meetings in private residences in South Washington. The first public services were held August 28, 1852, in "Island Hall." On January 23, 1853, at a meeting presided over by Dr. Noble, thirty-two members were enrolled and John Knight elected ruling elder. Dr. Noble served the church from the date of its organization until 1855, and again from 1858 to 1862, and also from 1870 to the time of his death, October 24, 1881. During his first absence, the pulpit was filled by Rev. B. F. Morris. Rev. George H. Smyth was pastor from 1864 to 1869, and Rev. George P. Noble was stated supply from 1869 to 1870. On September 27, 1882, Rev. Frank H. Burdick was elected pastor, and served until 1887. Rev. Scott F. Hershey, Ph. D., the present pastor, was installed October 5, 1887. The membership of the church is about one hundred and seventy-five.

The Western Presbyterian Church was organized in 1853, and worshiped temporarily at the corner of E and Twenty-second streets. On July 3, 1854, Rev. C. Smith, the pastor, purchased of Silas B. Hill and Joseph B. Varnum, Jr., a lot on H Street, near Nineteenth Street, and received from them a donation of $600 toward the payment therefor. Rev. T. N. Haskell was the pastor of this church at the time. A church building was erected on this lot which was dedicated June 7, 1857, Rev. Mr. Haskell preaching the dedicatory sermon. At night Rev. Byron Sunderland, D. D., preached the closing sermon of the day. At the time of the dedication of the church there had been expended $16,000, and all debts had been paid but about $2,000. The church was built in the Elizabethan style of architecture. On May 18, 1858, an important meeting was held in this church, the Presbytery of the District of Columbia convening on that day to pass upon the dissolution of the pastoral relations of Rev. Mr. Haskell with the church, and the authorization of his acceptance of the ministry of the Congregational Society of Boston, Massachusetts. The presbytery also reported favorably upon the attainments of Dr. James M. Wilson, M. D., of Washington, and declared him qualified to preach. Rev. J. R. Bartlett was installed pastor August 31, 1859, but removed to the South at the beginning of the War of the Rebellion. In March, 1862, Rev. J. N. Coombs, formerly a Methodist minister, was received and installed, and remained pastor until December 27, 1874. Rev. David Wills became pastor March 1, 1875, and remained until January 28, 1878, and was succeeded by the present pastor, Rev. T. S. Wynkoop, who was installed October 23, 1878. The membership of this church is about three hundred.

Westminster Presbyterian Church was organized June 14, 1853, by the name of the Seventh Street Presbyterian Church of Washington. The site on Seventh Street was donated to the church by Charles Stott. In December, 1873, by a vote of the congregation, the name was changed to "Westminster." Rev. John M. Henry, installed in 1853, remained pastor until 1855, when he was succeeded by Rev. E. B. Cleghorn. Rev. Dr. B. F. Bittinger was installed pastor March 12, 1857, and remained until 1863, when Rev. William Y. Brown became stated supply, followed by Rev. W. W. Campbell, the latter being installed pastor in 1865. Dr. Bittinger succeeded him, being installed January 5, 1868, and remains pastor at the present time.

Capitol Hill Presbyterian Church was, at the time of its organization, the only church of that denomination in its section of the city, including the Capitol and the Navy Yard, the territory under consideration comprising more than a third of the area of the city and a population of more than fifteen thousand. The initial steps toward this organization were taken in the fall of 1863. Rev. John Chester, son of Rev. William Chester, secretary of the Presbyterian Board of Education, by invitation came to Washington to labor in this promising field. In February, 1864, a small number of persons met in a small building known as the mission schoolhouse, in which on the 28th of that month Rev. Mr. Chester preached to them his first sermon. This mission schoolhouse stood on First Street East. The Capitol Hill Presbyterian Church was organized April 11, 1864, under the sanction of the Presbytery of Potomac, with thirty-two members of other churches and two by profession of faith, Rev. Mr. Chester being installed pastor on the same day. A lot was purchased and a chapel was completed so as to be dedicated February 12, 1865, the new society having been assisted in its efforts to raise the money by other Presbyterian churches in Washington and by the Board of Church Extension, which contributed $1,000 toward the result. When the little chapel was dedicated, it was entirely free from debt. It stood on Fourth Street East, near Pennsylvania Avenue.

In February, 1866, the corner stone of the present building was laid, and then the Presbytery of Potomac proposed to the General Assembly to incorporate with the church the proceeds of the property on E Street Northwest, which had been held for a long time with the view of establishing there a Metropolitan church, and the transfer was accordingly ordered by the General Assembly in 1868. After considerable delay, the property was transferred and the church erected, and the name changed to the Metropolitan Presbyterian Church. The church edifice, which stands at the corner of Fourth and B streets Southeast, was dedicated December 8, 1872, and by the spring of 1878 it was entirely free from debt. Rev. John Chester is still pastor of this church, which, a few years since, spared a colony for the establishment of a mission in the eastern part of the city.

The North Presbyterian Church was organized December 10, 1865. Under the care of Rev. L. R. Fox, the church was organized with twenty-three members, and Mr. Fox was installed pastor December 31, 1865. The church edifice had been dedicated on the 3d of the same month. Rev. Mr. Fox was succeeded by Rev. Charles B. Ramsdell, who was installed December 13, 1875. In 1878, the original building was enlarged, and at the present time the estimated value of the church property is about $30,000. The seating capacity of the church is about five hundred, and the membership about two hundred.

The Central Presbyterian Church was organized May 31, 1868, with twenty-nine members. The movement resulting in this organization began in the preceding January, when twelve individuals favoring it held a meeting in the old Trinity Church, then the Columbia Law building, the reut of which was guaranteed by General Thomas Ewing. The members present at once inaugurated plans for the selection of a site for a church edifice, one of the leading members being Mrs. Ellen Adair, who contributed nearly $2,000 toward the enterprise, and another being Miss Mary E. Coyle. By November, 1871, a lot was selected, and in December, 1871, it was purchased. It has a front of fifty-eight feet on I Street and one hundred and forty feet on Third Street. The chapel erected thereon was completed January 1, 1873, and dedicated January 19, 1874. The main edifice was completed November 14, 1885, and dedicated December 6, 1885. The seating capacity of the audience room is seven hundred, and with the chapel thrown into it, which can readily be done, it is one thousand two hundred. The architecture of the building is Gothic. Rev. A. W. Pitzer, D. D., the founder of the church, is still its pastor, and the membership is at the present time about two hundred. This is the only Presbyterian church in Washington connected with the Southern General Assembly.

The Eastern Presbyterian Church was organized May 9, 1875. The lots on Eighth Street, upon which a frame chapel was erected, were donated to the enterprise by Moses Kelly. Rev. J. T. Kelly supplied the pulpit for a time, and then Rev. George B. Patch was installed, November 1, 1875. Rev. Mr. Patch resigned in 1881, and Rev. S. S. Walien was installed his successor April 10, 1882, and remained pastor until the fall of 1883, when he was succeeded by Rev. Eugene Peck, who was installed February 13, 1884. The present pastor, Rev. M. N. Cornelius, D. D., succeeded Rev. Mr. Peck. The present membership is about one hundred.

Unity Presbyterian Church was organized with fifty members, March 15, 1882. Rev. G. B. Patch was the first, and has been so far the only, pastor of the church. The first place of worship was Clabaugh Hall, located on Fourteenth Street, between Corcoran and Riggs streets, which was rented for • religious services until such time as a church building could be erected. The second and present place of worship was and is the brick chapel located on the corner of Fourteenth and R streets, which cost $8,000, and was dedicated November 15, 1884. At this time, the membership was one hundred and ten, and on April 1, 1891, it was two hundred and seventy-four. This church organization is out of debt, and owns the edifice and grounds upon which it stands and the vacant lot on the corner of Fourteenth and R streets.

The origin of the Church of the Covenant was as follows: In the spring of 1883, a meeting was held at the house of Justice Strong, who had interested himself in the apparent necessity for the building of a Presbyterian church in the northwestern portion of the city, for the purpose of discussing the feasibility of organizing such a church. Those present at this meeting were, besides Justice Strong, Justice Matthews, James G. Blaine, Gardiner G. Hubbard, M. W. Galt, William M. Galt, Admiral Colhoun, Admiral Carter, Samuel Shellabarger, James Fitch, Otis Bigelow, and William Ballantyne. Soon after this meeting was held, the site now occupied by the church, at the corner of Connecticut Avenue and Eighteenth Street, was selected. At a subsequent meeting, a committee, composed of Justice Strong, James G. Blaine, Gardiner G. Hubbard, William M. Galt, William Ballantyne, and James E. Fitch, was appointed to solicit subscriptions and secure the lot by making a payment. Among the early subscribers to the fund for the purchase of this lot were Senator Cameron, James G. Blaine, William Walter Phelps, Colonel John Hay, Ex-Senator Yulee, Judge Strong, and Gardiner G. Hubbard.

The Covenant Presbyterian Church was organized October 13, 1885, with fifty-three members. The church building is one of the largest and most unique of the church edifices of Washington. The walls are of stone, but the main feature of the exterior is the tower or campanile, which is twenty feet square and rises to a height of one hundred and forty-eight feet to the top of the finial. The body of the church forms a parallelogram. The front is on Connecticut Avenue. It is flanked on one side by the tower, and on the other by a low projection, forming the vestibule for one of the main entrances, the other entrance being in the tower. The interior of the church is very handsome. Semicircular arches, springing from four large pillars, support the lantern with its domed roof. The walls and ceilings are decorated in plaster in low relief, from cartoon designs, in the Italian style. The pillars are bronzed. The windows are filled with cathedral glass, with the exception of the- large double window on the north side, which is filled with stained glass. The design represents the extreme scenes in the life of Christ — the annunciation to the shepherds and the appearance after resurrection. This window was the gift of Mrs. Martha M. Read as a memorial to her father, Admiral Dahlgren.

The organ made for this church is enclosed in an oak case, enriched with carving. It has three manuals and has thirty-nine stops. It is one of the best organs made. The pulpit and communion table are of unique design, and were the gift of the pastor, Rev. Teunis S. Hamlin, D. D., the first and only pastor of this church, who had the wood of which they are made imported in the log from the Holy Land. In both pulpit and table there are three varieties of wood — olive, oak, and cedar. The top of each is a solid piece of olive, which is susceptible of a high polish. The chandelier, which was presented by the children of the Sunday-school, cost $800. It is a copy of the chandelier in the mosque of St. Sophia in Constantinople. The chapel was occupied for public worship October 11, 1885, and the principal edifice about a year afterward, but it has not yet been dedicated. The membership of the church when organized was fifty-three; January, 1892, it was four hundred and thirty-five.

This church supports the Peck Memorial Chapel, located at the corner of Twenty-eighth and M streets, besides Sunday-school, industrial school, reading room, etc., Rev. Charles Alvin Smith being in charge.

The First Congregational Church of Washington, corner of Tenth and G streets Northwest, was organized November 12, 1865, and recognized by council November 15. Long before this time, however, there had been made several attempts to establish a church of this denomination. The first of these attempts was on August 3, 1847, when a few gentlemen met in the law office of Bigelow & Peugh, on the corner of E and Seventh streets, and resolved to organize a Congregational church essentially on the plan of the Cambridge platform, whose standard of piety should be high, whose doctrines should be evangelical, and which should favor the leading reforms of the day, including Bible, missionary, tract, anti-slavery, Sunday-school, and temperance efforts. It has been stated by some that this was the first religious body in the city and indeed in the entire South, to insert an anti-slavery plank in its creed, though anti-slavery work had been done by the Methodists in Tennessee at least forty years before.

Meetings were held in many different places, and there was occasional preaching and a Sunday-school. At length, one of their members offered to build a church and rent it to them. This offer of Mr. Cookman was accepted and the first Congregational church building was erected, and afterward twice enlarged. It was on Eighth Street, is still standing, and is now, and for many years has been, used as the Jewish synagogue. The church, however, was not popular in Washington, as it was not always easy to distinguish between anti-slavery principles and abolitionism. Besides this, there was a still greater difficulty in their way — division among themselves on the slavery question; some being extreme in their convictions as to the sin of slavery, and at the same time intolerant of opposite opinion. On account of these internal quarrels, the council refused to constitute them a church, and gradually thinning off in numbers, they quietly dissolved, and as an organization have never been heard of since.

The next attempt to organize a Congregational church was made in 1852. This organization was to be both anti-slavery and Congregational. The difficulty still was abolition. Rev. Dr. Charles B. Boynton, of Cincinnati, twice declined to fill the pulpit. J. B. Griunell, who had just graduated from an orthodox theological school, and who was warranted sound on the slavery question, came and preached a short time, but could not hold the congregation. Then came the Rev. Alexander Duncanson, who had just arrived in the United States from Scotland. At this time the old Trinity Church property came into market, and Mr. Grinnell went to New York and New England to raise the money with which t