Everyone know that there are many songs that we consider Christmas songs that have absolutely nothing to do with Christmas. "Jingle Bells", "Winter Wonderland", "My Favorite Things", etc.

So how many songs are out there that actually mention Christmas in the lyrics, but aren't ever considered Christmas songs. I can think of only one, perhaps two. The one I'm sure of comes from the A&M world - Carpenters "Those Good Old Dreams". Lyrics say "...like a child's eyes, on a Christmas night...", yet the song was never considered a Christmas tune. The only other possibility I can think of is Joni Mitchell's "The River", but that may have gotten some Christmas airplay over the years.

Any others?

It just so happens I put together a non-Christmas Christmas CD last year so I have a bunch for you.

I Wish I Had A River-Joni Mitchell (Blue)

I Saw My Baby Wearing Santa's Beard-They Might Be Giants

Blood on the Rooftops-Genesis (Wind and Wuthering)

Father Christmas-The Kinks (Misfits Bonus cut)

I Believe In Father Christmas-E.L.P. (Works Vol 2)

I Believe In Everything-John Entwistle (Smash Your Head Against The Wall)

Pretty Boy Floyd-Bob Dylan

Christmas In Prison-John Prine

Christmas With The Devil-Spinal Tap (Break Like The Wind)

Glad Tidings-Van Morrison (Moondance)

Solstice Bells, Christmas Song and Another Christmas Song-Jethro Tull

By the way, there is a whole album of Christmas music just released by Jethro Tull featuring classic songs plus re-recordings of his older Christmas-related tunes.

Dan

Sade - - Promise - "The Sweetest Taboo"

"...You've got the biggest heart

Sometimes I think you're just too good for me

Every day is Christmas, and every night is New Year's Eve"

Sparks - Kimono My House - "Thank God It's Not Christmas"

"Thank God it's not Christmas

When there is only you

And nothing else to do

Thank God it's not Christmas

Where there' just you to do

The rest is closed to public view"

Attached Files:

sparks.jpg

File size:

56 KB

Views:

97

Colin,

None of the songs I suggested are traditional Christmas songs. Even if they have the word Christmas in the title, they aren't the usual Christmas fare. Blood on the Rooftops, for instance, only mentions Christmas once in passing.

And The Kinks Father Christmas is about a store Santa being mugged by a bunch of kids.

I thought that was what the poster was looking for.

Dan

Christmas In Prison actually was put on a Christmas CD by John Prine. .

How about Fairy Tale of New York by The Pogues:

Happy Christmas your ****

I pray God

It's our last

or Another Lonely Xmas by Prince - probably the most depressing Christmas song ever