1 While shepherds watched their flocks by night,

all seated on the ground,

an angel of the Lord came down,

and glory shone around.

2 "Fear not," said he for mighty dread

had seized their troubled mind

"glad tidings of great joy I bring

to you and all mankind.

3 "To you, in David's town, this day

is born of David's line

a Savior, who is Christ the Lord;

and this shall be the sign:

4 "The heavenly babe you there shall find

to human view displayed,

all simply wrapped in swaddling clothes

and in a manger laid."

5 Thus spoke the angel. Suddenly

appeared a shining throng

of angels praising God, who thus

addressed their joyful song:

6 "All glory be to God on high,

and to the earth be peace;

to those on whom his favor rests

goodwill shall never cease."

Psalter Hymnal, 1987

Text:

This paraphrase of the story of the shepherds and angels from Luke 2 first appeared in A Supplement to the New Version of Psalms by Nicholas Brady and Nahum Tate in 1700. It is usually ascribed solely to Tate, though it may have been written as a collaboration.

There are six stanzas, but some hymnals omit the fifth (“Thus spake the seraph and forthwith”). The first and fifth stanzas, as well as the first half of the second, are narrative and describe the appearance of the first angel and then of the host of angels. A paraphrase of the first angel's speech to the shepherds takes up the second, third, and fourth stanzas. The sixth is a doxological version of the song of the host of angels, with some variance in the wording of the second half between different hymnals.

Tune:

Tate and Brady indicated that their text was to be sung to ST. JAMES, though this recommendation has been ignored. Many old American hymnals used SHERBURNE, but that has also fallen into disuse. Two tunes are commonly used with this text – often both in the same hymnal: WINCHESTER OLD and CHRISTMAS.

When this text is sung to CHRISTMAS, the last line of each stanza must be repeated for the text to fit the music. This tune is also named SIROË because it was adapted from an aria in the 1728 opera Siroë by George F. Handel. This melody was first published as a hymn tune in S. Arnold and J. W. Callott's The Psalms of David for the use of Parish Churches in 1791.

WINCHESTER OLD most likely was adapted by George Kirby in 1592 from Christopher Tye's Acts of the Apostles of 1553, and was published with Psalm 84 in Thomas East's Whole Booke of Psalmes, where it was named SUFFOLK. In Thomas Ravenscroft's 1621 Whole Booke of Psalms, it was named WINCHESTER, after an English cathedral, even though that place had nothing to do with the composition of the tune. Nevertheless, the name has persisted ever since, and it became WINCHESTER OLD to distinguish it from WINCHESTER NEW by Bartholomäus Crasselius.

When/Why/How:

This hymn is a well-known Christmas song, and can be sung in narrative fashion, with a soloist or group singing the narration, another soloist representing the first angel, and the entire assembly joining on the final stanza to represent the host of angels. The third carol medley in “Follow the Star, Follow the King” features a combination of Tate's hymn set to WINCHESTER OLD with two other Christmas hymns in a narrative function. “While Shepherds Watched Their Flocks” is a sprightly and varied handbell setting of CHRISTMAS. Through five stanzas, different musical techniques are used to keep the tune interesting.

Tiffany Shomsky, Hymnary.org