The skyline of Naples is dominated by the ever threatening presence of Mount Vesuvius, the only volcano on the European mainland to have erupted within the last 100 years. It is considered to be one of the most dangerous volcanoes in the world due to a population of 3 million people living nearby, making it the most densely populated volcanic region in the world. Mount Vesuvius is best known for its eruption in AD79, which led to the destruction of Pompei and Herculaneum, both popular tourist destinations and Unesco World Heritage sites.

Naples, which means 'New City', is actually one of the oldest, continuously inhabited cities in the world. An important city to the ancient Greeks and Romans, it became the capital of 'The Kingdom of Naples' and then the capital of 'The Two Sicilies' before falling to Garibaldi during his campaign to unify Italy in 1860. The historic city centre is the largest in Europe and is also a Unesco World Heritage site.

The city and its surrounding area are rich in tourist attractions which include: The Palace of Caserta, the Bourbon Tunnels, Castel Nuovo, Piazza del Plebiscito and the Capodimonte Museum and Park. Naples was heavily bombed during World War II but has seen extensive redevelopment since.

Castel Nuovo - Photo: www.understandingitaly.com

In the meantime, investment in a high speed rail link, a modernised airport and the development of an extensive underground network have all contributed to the economic development of the area.

Naples has a rich musical tradition, and is particularly associated with solo male singers and songs such as 'O Sole Mio', 'Funiculì, Funiculà' and 'Santa Lucia' which have become famous around the world.

The city is also home to a 'Serie A' football team, 'Napoli', who are based at the San Paolo stadium. The team has won the 'Serie A' championship twice, once in 1986–87 and again in 1989–90, both times with the help of Diego Maradona, who was brought to the club from Barcelona in 1984. They have also won the 'Coppa Italia' four times and the UEFA Cup in 1988–89.

Pizza - Invented in Naples

Photo: www.understandingitaly.com