The Halo Method is Ben Moody (We Are the Fallen/ex-Evanescence), Lukas Rossi (Rockstar Supernova), Miles McPherson (ex-Paramore) and Josh Newell (ex-In This Moment).

Long time friends, Ben Moody and Dave Buckner (ex-Papa Roach) were brought back together by manager Danny Hill in Summer of 2012 by chance. The two began talking and decided to get back together and jam just for fun. Moody states, "We didn't set out to do anything serious. We were just going to jam some covers for fun, but it was evident very quick that there was something special being created. After a few writing sessions, it was obvious that we had something different than we had ever done before. A phone call later, Lukas Rossi enters the picture and the rest is soon to be history.

The band has been very elusive with the concept and details of what The Halo Method is and what will be. They have played outside normal industry lines by giving away their pre-production writing sessions to fans and dropped videos with artistic and dramatic story lines that hint to what is to come with little or no warning.

Moody states, "We know some feel the process is taking too long, but we are putting our full mind, body and soul into what we are creating. There is a story to what we are creating. This is our art and is possibly the most personal thing we've ever done. When we release everything in late 2015, it will be in a way nobody was expecting. Stay tuned..."

On the right side of the stage you see David, lead vocalist and guitarist. Chopped black hair around piercing eyes that bleed black mascara. Sleeveless, torn, kean-jacketed, a vision of a classic era, spirit of '77. On the left side of the stage Lee Marie swings her bass high above her jet black maelstrom, supported by white stilletto heels. She screams with lipstick-laden vocal yelps and finger points to the sky. And behind, Seth, a showman you must see bashes in rhythm to complete the whilwind that is... Children 18:3.

Then come the sounds, cutting your face like glass shrapnel. Classic song structure, Marshall guitar crunch, and fast driving beats. Just the right blend of melody and muscle, exchanged between the male and female voices on stage. You hear songs, not just riffs with outfits. The words are defiant, poetic and communial. Just the type of thing a starving musical climate needs: A reminder of everything that was once right about punk and rock n' roll.