Greetings! One more day and I’m off on the amazing Shiprocked 2012! I am sooo excited to be on this boat with some of our favorite bands like Korn, Godsmack, Five Finger Death Punch, P.O.D., Sevendust, 10 Years, Filter, In This Moment, Pop Evil, Fuel and a new band called The Halo Method, which is Ben Moody (formerly of Evanescence), Dave Buckner (ex-Papa Roach) and RockStar SuperNova winner Lukas Rossi. Their show will be their very first on Shiprocked and they’ll be joined on stage by Clint Lowery of Sevendust and Jonny Hetherington of Art of Dying! I will be checking in from the boat so please return on Wednesday once I am up and running online. I wonder what other surprises there could be??!!!! And I will be getting out of town just in time for a rain/snow event! Yeah!…..Pulse Content reports Foo Fighters frontman Dave Grohl spoke with BBC Radio One about getting back behind the drums again for Queens Of The Stone Age, for whom he last played drums on 2002’s Songs For The Deaf. Grohl said about the group, “When you walk into a festival backstage with Queens Of The Stone Age, it’s like, the record stops. People stop and they stare, and it’s like Queens Of The Stone Age are, without question, the baddest rock and roll band in the world! And they still are, and when Songs For The Deaf, when that came out, it blew people’s minds, man, for real.” Grohl said about recording the sixth Queens album, “There were no boundaries with that band, there were no limits with them . . . I’ll do something so completely ridiculous, I’ll just, like, ‘There’s no way that that Josh (Homme, Queens mainman] is going to let me do that,’ and he’ll say, ‘Do that for forty-five seconds, over and over again, that’s become, like, part of the song, that is a big part of the song,’ and that’s the way they work.”….Green Day has announced Quatro!, a documentary about the making of the band’s three new albums — Uno!, Dos! and Tre!— will arrive next year, with highlights from the film premiering on Wednesday (Nov 28th) at midnight. The film will show the day-to-day creative process behind the albums, along with a look at the shows Green Day played around the U.S. last year while fine-tuning the material. Bassist Mike Dirnt said, “Over the last year while we were recording our trilogy, we posted multiple clips every week so fans can see parts of the recording process of Uno!, Dos!, Tre!. Quatro! brings our fans one step closer by giving them even more access and revealing what it was like for us to make these records.” The Quatro highlights will also premiere on MTV2 and Palladia on Friday, Nov 30th, and will run several more times on Palladia throughout December….Speaking of Godsmack & Palladia, I watched Sully Erna‘s The Journey to Avalon documentary that aired on Palladia last week. It was interesting to see Sully out of his hard rock environment and taking us through this etherial trip through his other musical passion. I saw the Avalon tour (his solo project with 7 other extremely talented musicians) and was blown away. It’s not for everyone, but it’s cool none the less. Check Palladia’s listings to try to catch it when it re-airs. And Sully will release a massive box-set Avalon Live, which includes this documentary, a live performance DVD and a ton of other items like jewelry, incense, a t-shirt, an updated version of his book The Paths We Choose, guitar pick, backstage pass, on Dec 19th. You can pre-order it now for $199 now. In addition, 5 of the limited edition boxes will have a hidden “golden ticket” for trips to Napa, Boston, NY, Las Vegas and Catalina/Avalon Island. Wicked cool! Pre-order here…..AC/DC‘s classic 1980 album Back In Black is one of 27 albums selected to enter the Grammy Hall of Fame this year, according to an announcement by the Recording Academy. Back In Black, AC/DC’s seventh studio album, will join more than 900 recordings already in the Grammy Hall’s collection. Other records going in at the same time include works from Paul McCartney & Wings, Elton John, Billy Joel, Bob Dylan, Frank Sinatra and Whitney Houston….The Ozzfest Japan bill is now set: May 11: Slipknot, Slash and Deftones. May 12: Black Sabbath, tool and Stone Sour. Sick! We need that bill in the states, people!….Kid Rock wants control of his catalog. Smart man. He told Billboard he plans to re-record his 1998 Devil Without a Cause and release it in August next year on it’s 15th anniversary. He explains, “Some of [the songs] will be exactly like they were an some of them will have the sensibilities of what we’ve learned playing those songs live for 15 years. I’m not going to say they’re going to be better than the originals. That’s tough to top. But I think there’s something special about them that people will dig, whether it’s ‘Bawitdaba,’ ‘Cowboy,’ ‘Only God Know Why,’ ‘…Bullgod,’ ‘Welcome 2 the Party,’ … We’ve twisted them up so much to where it’s very interesting, very cool.”…Pure Volume is streaming a Rage Against the Machine demo from way back in tha day called “Auto Logic.” Check it out here!…..RockAccess reports Device, the new project from David Draiman and Geno Lenardo, will be release in April, with a single “Vilify” coming in Feb. I have heard a couple of tunes….And finally today, Cold is planning to record a acoustic album next year with a tour to follow later in the year. Have a great week! As mentioned I will check in from sea as soon as my internet connection is established!