DAVE BUCKNER, BEN MOODY, LUKAS ROSSI AND JOSH NEWELL JOIN FORCES FOR MUCH ANTICIPATED NEW ROCK GROUP ‘THE HALO METHOD’

(LOS ANGELES, CA…MAY 2, 2013) – Four of rock music’s most successful and influential musicians are combining their talents to create the much anticipated rock group The Halo Method. Evanescence/ We Are the Fallen guitarist Ben Moody, former Papa Roach drummer Dave Buckner, former In This Moment bassist Josh Newell and frontman Lukas Rossi’s new project has found the four working side-by-side for the last few months recording their debut EP, Reset, which will be released on May 28, 2013. The band has joined forces with the ESP Guitar Company to release the EP for free via the ESP website. Full length album to release fall 2013.

Long before these four came together to form The Halo Method, they already had made their own unique mark in rock history with enough credits to write a book. Moody has taken home Grammys and sold millions of records in Evanescence and We Are the Fallen; Dave Buckner drummed for the world renowned rock band Papa Roach from Infest through the Paramour Sessions; Josh Newell is not only known for his studio work, but also held down bass for In This Moment and Lukas Rossi blew away millions including Tommy Lee and Jason Newsted by winning a spot in the supergroup Rockstar Supernova.

Through mutual friends, the guys found themselves together at Moody’s Hollywood studio and the rest is history. Moody states, “We didn’t set out to do anything serious. We were really just going to get together and play some covers for fun, but it was evident very quick that there was something special going on. After a few songs, it was obvious that we had something different than we’ve ever done before.”

Jon Wiederhorn of Revolver calls the band’s first track Beauty Is the Beast, “Ethereal and euphoric, a haunting anthem about unrequited love that combines elements of hard rock, goth, alternative metal, industrial, and pop. Beauty is flush with striking sonic juxtapositions and gripping layers of sound.”

ESP is one of the world’s leading manufacturers of high quality guitars and basses.

Now a world-renowned, highly respected instrument manufacturer, the ESP Guitar Company had its humble beginnings as a custom shop in the rear of a Tokyo music store. It was 1975 when ESP founded a chain of retail stores called Electronic Sound Products, or ESP for short. In 1983, ESP began making replacement parts and accessories for the booming guitar market.

By 1986, ESP’s guitars had gained such an excellent reputation that the company opened an office in New York City to meet the increasing demand among players in the US. Shortly thereafter, Dokken’s George Lynch and Metallica’s Kirk Hammett chose ESP to build new guitars to their respective specifications, and the company quickly became the first choice for rock and metal players who wanted more than an off-the-shelf axe could deliver.

With ESPs detail-obsessed custom design and manufacturing, the company has since attracted a tremendous artist endorsee roster, and some of the custom guitars created for these artists have become top-selling signature models. These include models by George Lynch, Kirk Hammett, James Hetfield (also of Metallica), Ron Wood (Rolling Stones), Jeff Hanneman (Slayer), George Lynch (Dokken/Lynch Mob), Stephen Carpenter (Deftones), Will Adler (Lamb of God), and many others.

With the desire to maintain their status as a high-end, custom guitar maker, but wanting to offer a more moderately priced brand for wider distribution, ESP added the LTD brand in 1996. Offering many of the superb features of ESP guitars, the LTD brand has allowed a much broader range of musicians (including first-time buyers) to affordably take advantage of the companys products. In 2003, their X-Tone series of semi-hollowbodied guitars debuted to rave reviews, and opened the door for an entire new group of players to consider ESP as a serious choice.

Related