Birthday: May 16, 1966

Birthplace: Gary, Indiana

Zodiac Sign: Taurus

The Beginning

Janet Jackson was born into a musical family and was the youngest of nine children. Janet Jackson's brothers, including mega-celeb Michael Jackson, made up the '70s pop group the Jackson 5. Janet Jackson began performing when she was a child and opened for the Jackson 5 in Las Vegas. But at the time Janet Jackson was known more for her acting, rather than her singing. Janet Jackson appeared on the TV shows Good Times, Diff'rent Strokes and Fame. When Janet Jackson was 16, her father forced her to follow in her brothers' footsteps by singing professionally.

Janet Jackson's Big Break

In 1982, after signing to A&M Records, Janet Jackson released her first album called Janet Jackson, which she followed up with Dreamstreet in 1984. In 1986, Janet released Control, which was wildly successful. Control introduced the hit What Have You Done For Me Lately?

Janet Jackson Is A Diva

Janet Jackson has firmly established herself as one of the biggest pop artists of all time. MTV has even honored Janet Jackson as one of the most influential artists in contemporary pop and R&B. Destiny's Child, Macy Gray, Outkast and *NSYNC have all paid tribute to Janet Jackson by performing her songs. With other majorly successful albums like Janet, Rhythm Nation, All For You and Damita Jo, Janet Jackson's career is still going strong. But, just like her brother, Janet has managed to stir up controversy.

Janet Jackson is a legendary Diva

Janet Jackson, Justin Timberlake and The Super Bowl Flash

During the 2004 Super Bowl, Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake performed together during the halftime show, put on by MTV. MTV, the home of the Britney-Madonna kiss, is known for controversial stunts. This Super Bowl halftime show ended up being no different. At the end of Justin Timberlake's song Rock Your Body, he reached over and removed part of Janet's leather bustier top, leaving her breast revealed for 90 million football fans to see. MTV, CBS, Janet Jackson and Justin Timberlake have all sworn up and down that it was a total "mistake." However, no one seems impressed and MTV is no longer hosting the halftime show, while Janet did not attend the Grammys later that same week.

20 Y.O to Unbreakable

Janet has been making music since the '80s, and one look at her discography will tell you that she always comes back - she loves her work! In 2006 she released 10 Y.O, followed up by Discipline 2008. Fans went wild when they heard she was making a comeback in 2015 with the album Unbreakable. The single is called "No Sleep."

Listen to "No Sleep by Janet Jackson below!

Did You Know?

Janet Jackson was secretly married to actor/producer Rene Elizondo for nine years.

Janet Jackson will play legendary actress/singer Lena Horne in the film Lena, released in 2004.

Janet Jackson's full name is Janet Damita Jo Jackson.

Janet Jackson Says...

"I kinda see everyone as competition. I'm a very competitive person. But I think that's good. Competition is great. And as long as it's friendly and not a malicious thing, then I think it's cool."

Related Stories: