Alliance Boots is confident that it will secure another year of double-digit profit growth, the health and beauty giant's pharmaceutical wholesale division chief executive Ornella Barra has revealed.

Ms Barra told the European Pharmacists Forum in Paris last week (March 11) that Alliance Boots executive chairman Stefano Pessina was bullish over a sixth year of double-digit growth and that there was no discussion about failing to achieve it.

Last year, Alliance Boots posted a 12.4 per cent increase in trading profit, driven by its pharmaceutical wholesale division. And, in June, announced a £4.27 billion merger with US pharmacy giant Walgreens.

Ms Barra said the initial period of the merger focused on making efficiency gains, which were "of great importance".

"We'll be focusing on six very important workstreams and there's a lot of work to be done," Ms Barra told the conference – naming generics, front-of-store growth, merchandising and own brands, branded pharmaceuticals, branded non-pharmaceuticals and goods not-for-resale as key areas.

Ms Barra also forecast a positive future for pharmacy as a whole. "I'm convinced pharmacy will remain at the heart of health," she stressed. "There will be tough times but there are tough times for everybody, and our sector is one that has had less of a problem than others. But we need to be proactive, invest and not be scared of change," Ms Barra argued.

But Planet Retail senior retail analyst Stephen Springham warned that, although the merger with Walgreens could drive efficiency savings for Alliance Boots, in order to maintain its success in the UK, Walgreens must not force its own model on the market.

"Boots does what it does pretty well and it will make certain synergies [from the deal], but for Walgreens to completely impose its ideals on Boots would be fundamentally wrong," he told C+D. "Boots is very much a health and beauty specialist and Walgreens is very much a general merchandise player that happens to be in health and beauty."

Alliance Boots is expected to announce its results for the 2012-13 financial year in May.