Though singer-songwriter Chris Carrabba, founder of the Florida-based emo band Dashboard Confessional, has certainly enjoyed his popularity over the better part of the past 15 years he said that there are times that he starts to feel a little distant from his fans.

As the band, which was originally Carrabba’s solo side project as he was still fronting Further Seems Forever, rose to fame thanks to tracks such as “Screaming Infidelities,” “Hands Down” and “Vindicated,” which appeared on the soundtrack for the 2004 summer blockbuster, “Spider-Man 2,” the venues and stages it performed on got bigger and the barricades began to push the audience further away.

“I still like that connection from the early days, when I started out and it was just me in a room filled with some people that I was surprised to find knew my songs, let alone cared about them enough to sing along,” he said during a recent phone interview.

To get the best of both worlds – being able to rock a sold out amphitheater stage and still get cozy with fans in more intimate 300-capacity or less venues – Carrabba has embarked on numerous club tours in between big amphitheater jaunts.

In 2015, Dashboard Confessional co-headlined the 16,000-capacity Irvine Meadows Amphitheatre with Third Eye Blind by playing a makeup show since the original date was postponed due to a random torrential downpour that caused flash flooding at the venue. The band was back again earlier this year for a more intimate gig, this time playing the 1,000-capacity Observatory in Santa Ana in February.

The group will return to the area on Thursday, July 13, this time playing the 8,000-capacity Pacific Amphitheatre in Costa Mesa during the kick off of its co-headlining run with fellow rock band All-American Rejects. The show is part of the a special pre-OC Fair series at the venue, which will officially start its 2017 Summer Concert Series on Friday, July 14 and continue to run in tandem with the annual OC Fair through Sunday, Aug. 13.

In an effort to maintain some intimacy with his fans during this tour, Carrabba said the band came up with some special VIP packages that will not only grant fans access to the main show, but they’ll be invited to a private pre-show performance and exclusive Q&A session.

“As the number (of fans) has grown so large, the only thing lost in translation is the physical immediacy,” Carrabba said. “Sometimes I just crave being closer to the audience and being able to talk directly to them and have conversations in between songs. During the pre-show thing, it’s generally just me and the band sits that out, but I never know what I’m going to play until I start talking to the people that choose to come. We just have a good time and talk about music and then I’ll start playing something. It’s how I figured out how to really have both types of shows on the same day.”

The 42-year-old singer-songwriter said he remembers his days coming up in the emo rock scene and how cool it was to just be able to walk up to musicians he admired and geek out over specific songs or records.

“I was really lucky to have gotten to meet a lot of the bands that I really loved and was able to say ‘Hello’ and ‘Thanks,’” he said. “What I was surprised to find out is that they were just regular people who would talk to you like a human being. I always liked that duality where they seemed otherworldly in a rock star sense, but as soon as they were off stage they were just a guy or a girl who just also loved music.”

It has been eight years since the release of “After the Ending,” Dashboard Confessional’s last full-length album. In January the band surprise dropped the EP, “Covered and Taped,” which features four covers including “Sex” by The 1975, “Sprained Ankle” by Julien Baker, “Love Yourself” by Justin Bieber and “Using” by Sorority Noise. These recordings were really the result of Carrabba’s tinkering on a slow day in the studio, but upon hearing the finished product his manager, Cam, encouraged him to release them to the public.

As he does every Sunday, Carrabba makes time to sit and listen to two or three new albums on vinyl and that’s when he discovered “Sex” by The 1975.

“The rest of the week, I just kept singing that song,” he said. “I have listened to that record 1,000 times now and I’m a massive fan of The 1975, but that song in particular it just kept ringing in my ears and I kept singing it so I had to record it.”

Carrabba said he wasn’t really a fan of Bieber until he finally heard the top-selling and Grammy-nominated song “Love Yourself,” which was co-written by Ed Sheeran.

“It’s so bare and there’s nothing ornate, it’s just raw and his voice is so good,” he said. “He’s able to express emotionally something so powerful because his voice is that good. The lyrics are all at once incisive, revealing and kind of funny and that grabbed me. I have a much deeper appreciation for his music. It’s not usually the style of music I’d listen to, but the best songs are invitations to the rest of the catalog and that’s the one that got me.”

Carrabba said the band will be sure to put a few covers into the set and there’s a strong possibility that a couple of brand new songs will be debuted as well. When asked if new full length was on its way, Carrabba replied simply, “Yep!” When asked if he knew when, he replied with a quick “Nope!”

“We’re very excited about the songs we’ve written,” he said. “As much as I like to road test new music as a fan going to shows, I’m very interested in hearing a new song, maybe interested in hearing two new songs, but that’s about where my limit is. As a fan I want to hear songs I’ve come to embrace already. In time I’ll want to hear those other songs too, but that’s once I’ve owned that record, I guess.”

Dashboard Confessional and All-American Rejects

When: 7:15 p.m. Thursday, July 13

Where: Pacific Amphitheatre, 100 Fair Drive, Costa Mesa