"Man and the Moon" is an episode of Disneyland which originally aired on December 28, 1955. It was directed by Disney animator Ward Kimball, and is about the Moon. It begins with a humorous look with Man's fascination with the Moon through animation. This segment features the Moon's usage in everything from William Shakespeare and children's nursery rhymes to lunar superstitions and scientific research. Then Kimball comes on with some information on the moon, supplemented by graphics. Kimball then introduces Dr. Wernher Von Braun, who discusses plans for a trip around the moon. Dr. Wernher Von Braun was employed as a technical consultant on this film by Walt Disney, and on a number of other Disney films. He had a great knowledge of rockets, as he had helped to develop the V-2 rocket while working for Nazi Germany.

Finally, a live action simulation from inside and outside the manned Lunar Recon Ship RM-1 dramatizes what such an expedition might be like, including an almost-disastrous hit by a very small meteor. This episode later reaired in 1959 under a new title: Tomorrow the Moon.

This episode was preceded by "Man in Space" and followed by "Mars and Beyond."

Cast[]

Walt Disney - Host

Edgar Barrier - Narrator (First sequence)

Frank Gerstle - Captain

Richard Emory - Frank (Navigator)

Frank Connor - Bill (Radio)

Leo Needham - Joe (Engineer)

Ward Kimbell (uncredited)

Dick Tufeld Narrator (uncredited)

Wernher von Braun (uncredited)

Additional crew[]

Producer: Ward Kimball

Music: George Bruns

Layout artists: Ken O'Connor, Frank Armitage

Cartoon Animation: Julius Svendsen, Art Stevens, Joe Hale, Jack Boyd, Charles Downs, Conrad Pederson

Space Paintings: Al Dempster, William Layne

Technical Advisor: Dr. Wernher von Braun

Production Supervisor: Harry Tytle

Script Supervisor: Edle Bakke

Photography: Charles P. Boyle, Edward Colman

Art Director: Marvin Davis

Set Decorator: Bertram Granger

Assistant Director: Robert H. Justman

Special Processes: Ub Iwerks, Eustace Lycett

Special Instruments: Maxwell Smith

Models: Wathel Rogers

Film Editors: Sam Horta, Lloyd Richardson

Sound: Robert O. Cook

Sound Engineer: George Lowerre (uncredited)

Gallery[]

[]

"Man and the Moon" at the Internet Movie Database