Rarely is a film improved massively by a single element, but Man on the Moon is one of those films. This is a 5/10 movie with a 10/10 performance. The film itself is a mess, it's scattershot, uneven, and not as inventive as it seemingly thinks it is. But Jim Carrey is amazing.

Carrey's performance is meticulous and precise, his acting makes every moment as enigmatic and as memorable as Kaufman himself. Carrey captures doubts, eccentricities, and beliefs as a grand canvas of personality. I'll say it before and I'll say it again, Jim Carrey is truly one of the greatest actors alive even if his career has dwindled into pretty much nothing. Around the turn of the century he…

Originally I was finally going to get around to watching Man on a Wire, which I've been putting off watching for a while now, and when I went to search it up on Netflix I saw this as well. As you can tell, I choose to watch this instead. That was a very wise decision.

When I started watching this I expected another Jim Carrey goofy comedy, but instead was rewarded with a well crafted dark comedy based on the late Andy Kaufman. Carrey does a fantastic job portraying Kaufman, and I don't think any other actor could have played the part as well. The rest of the supporting cast also does a great job. One of my favorite things…

I was lucky enough to get to talk a little with Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski at Ebertfest. At one point while we were chatting, the subject of magicians came up and Scott said he was a fan of magic. I didn’t make much of it. Then a day later, the festival screened Man on the Moon, about the life of Andy Kaufman.

If you asked most people who Andy Kaufman was, they’d say he was a comedian. But in Man on the Moon, Andy hates being called a comedian. When he’s referred to that way, he bristles. He calls himself a “song and dance man.” Really, though, he’s a magician. He tricks people. He uses bombing the way an…

Jim Carrey stars as cult entertainer Andy Kaufman in this biographical comedy-drama about his life, directed by Miloš Foreman from a script by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, with Danny DeVito, Courtney Love and Paul Giamatti in supporting roles.

Carrey manages to completely disappear into the role, and gives an amazing performance that came from never breaking character on set, spot on in capturing the mannerisms and personality of his comedy hero. The film is a great look at Kaufman and his elaborate practical jokes, with Alexander and Karaszewski once again exploring the life of an offbeat and unconventional figure after Ed Wood and The People vs Larry Flynt.

Many people from the time play themselves, including wrestler Jerry Lawler (who…