Eddie Peng Yu-Yan, born 24 March 1982 is a Taiwanese actor, singer, and model.Peng was born in Penghu, Taiwan.

He moved to Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada at the age of thirteen. In 2000, he graduated from Sir Winston Churchill Secondary School. Subsequently, he was admitted to the University of British Columbia and majored in economics, but later dropped out to begin his acting career.

In March 2021, Peng announced support for cotton from Xinjiang in mainland China, after some companies had expressed concerns about human rights abuses.

Here are some amazing facts about Eddie Peng;

1. He began his career when he was cast in Tomorrow

Peng began his career when he was cast in Tomorrow by director Yang Daqing during a summer vacation in Taiwan.

The drama is adapted from the Japanese manga series Asunaro Hakusho, written by Fumi Saimon. Peng built a teenage fan following after the romantic comedy gained popularity.

In 2003, he took on his first leading role in the Taiwanese drama Scent of Love, which tells the story of two star-crossed lovers who transcend life and death to find one another in their many reincarnations.

2. Peng took one month to learn how to interact with dolphins for a movie

In 2005, he starred in the idol drama When Dolphin Met Cat, portraying an autistic youth. To prepare himself for the filming, Peng took one month to learn how to interact with dolphins.

The training was from a trained instructor. He then starred in the Chinese xianxia drama Chinese paladin and wuxia drama The Young Warriors, which were extremely popular during their run and led to increased recognition for him in the Mainland.

3. Peng was nominated for Best New Actor in 2007

Thereafter, Peng made his big screen debut in the movie Exit No.6 (2006), directed by Yu-Hsien Lin. The film put him on the radar of many film directors, including Tsui Hark who cast him in his 2008 romantic comedy, All About Women. In 2007, Peng was nominated as Best New Actor at the 44th Golden Horse Film Festival and Awards for his performance in My DNA Says I Love You.

4. He produced a movie that became the highest-grossing locally produced movie at Taiwan’s box office.

In 2009, Peng was involved in a contract dispute lawsuit against his former manager, reaching the nadir of his career.

However, during this period, Peng starred in the movie Hear Me , directed by Fen-Fen Cheng. It entails about a delivery boy who falls for a hearing impaired girl and communicates with her using sign language.

The film was released a week before the opening of the 21st Summer Deaflympics and became the highest-grossing locally produced movie at Taiwan’s box office.

5. He was nominated in the Best Actor category at the 2nd Macau International

After winning the lawsuit in 2010, he released his debut EP titled It Has To Be You, which featured 5 songs under the management of Avex Group.

The same year, he starred as the male lead in the movie Close to You. To portray his role as a boxer, Peng trained for three months before filming.

He was nominated in the Best Actor category at the 2nd Macau International Movie Festival for his performance.

6. Eddie studied at the University of Colombia

As the only male offspring in the family, Eddie was loved and doted on dearly so his personality turned out to be optimistic and pure.

His maternal grandmother used all her savings on migrating to Canada with him. Having lived in Canada with his mother and his two older sisters for many years, Eddie originally pursued tertiary education at the University of British Columbia, majoring in Economics.

However, in order to enter the showbiz industry, he was willing to give up his academics and leave his family to develop his career in Taiwan.

7. Peng starred in Rising of The Legend

In 2014, he starred in Rising of The Legend as the new generation Huang Fei Hung, following Jet Li and Vincent Zhao who also played Huang Fei Hung before.

The romance film Fleet of Time, which Eddie starred in, which was based on a famous novel, the television drama Sound of The Desert, and the film <Rise of The Legend> all received high attention.

His movies and dramas were released back to back in October, November, and December of 2014, marking the peak of his career so far.

8. Eddie also makes money from commercial advertisements

This handsome has remarkably imprinted his name in the Chinese entertainment world. With a lot of movies and campaigns on hand, Eddie has amassed a lot of fans and fortunes at the same time.

There is no doubt that he sits on an estimated net worth of $100k to $ 1 million. And this net worth is going to increase in no time.

Furthermore, he makes extra money from several ad campaigns, brand endorsements, commercials, and many more. Although Eddie is pretty open about his love affairs, his income and assets are yet to be known.

9. Eddie contributes to charity work and is an ambassador

Off camera, Peng devotes time to causes close to his heart. He partnered with the international organization WildAid to encourage the protection of sea turtles.

It was appearing in a campaign and documentary aired on World Wildlife Day in 2019. He is well-known for his charity work for children with cancer.

Peng is also an official ambassador for international brands Longines and Berluti.

10. Eddie is the most loved and prolific performer of his generation