3.2. Divergence time estimation and biogeographical reconstruction

The divergence time estimates based on nrDNA+cpDNA datasets were here reported and used for further biogeographical analysis. The BEAST analysis indicated that the crown group age of Callicarpa was estimated at 36.23 Ma (95% HPD: 18.81–60.39 Ma) around the Late-Eocene and diversification within most clades concentrated in the Miocene and continued to the Pleistocene ( , node 1). Our dating suggested that C. americana was the first to split from the remaining species in the Middle-Oligocene, ca. 27.9 Ma ( , node 2). The crown age of the tropical occurring, small trees species of Callicarpa was inferred to be ca. 17.03 Ma (95% HPD: 7.35–28.3 Ma) ( , node 3). There was an early middle Miocene crown age for several native species in Southeast Asia, ca. 16.51 Ma (95% HPD: 3.42–33.78 Ma) and ca. 16.14 Ma (95% HPD: 6.88–26.98 Ma), respectively ( , node 4, node 5). The ages of the crown nodes of the two great groups were estimated to be at a similar time, ca. 16.51 Ma (95% HPD: 9.48-25.16 Ma) ( , node 6) and ca. 13.53 Ma (95% HPD: 6.46-22.37 Ma) ( , node 7). Furthermore, the divergence time of major species are listed in Table S4. The LTT plot for Callicarpa overall is shown in . Before about the middle-Miocene (ca. 14 Ma), there was a relatively stable diversification rate and then a subsequently rapid diversification (accelerated lineage accumulation). This upward trend was maintained during the Pliocene and the Pleistocene.

The statistical dispersal extinction cladogenesis (S-DEC) model reconstructed a composite area of both East Asia and Southeast Asia as the likely ancestral areas for the recent common ancestor (MRCA) of Callicarpa at approximately 36.23 Ma in the Late-Eocene ( , node A). There was one dispersal event from East Asia to Southeast Asia and one extinction event in East Asia. The early diversification of a Callicarpa ancestor occurred at 30.86 Ma (95% HPD: 17.37-48.34 Ma) and the first extinction event was inferred to have occurred in East Asia ( , node B). During this period, this genus may have undergone an eastward dispersal from Asia to Pacific Islands and subsequently there could be dispersal, vicariance, and extinction events resulting in the split between the Old World Callicarpa clade and the New World Callicarpa clade ( , node C). Subsequently, there was the first dispersal from Southeast Asia to East Asia ( , node D, ca. 26.63 Ma). During the early-middle Miocene, there were the first dispersal event which led to the successful colonization of the genus in Oceania ( , node F, ca. 17.03 Ma) and similar dispersal events also occurred after middle Miocene. The dispersal from Asia into the Mascarene Islands and Reunion Island took place at 8.01 Ma (95% HPD: 0.68-17.71 Ma) ( , node G). After several vicariance and extinction events, some species endemic to China arose. The diversification of C. luteopunctata occurred around 23.75 Ma (95% HPD: 13.12-36.09 Ma). Callicarpa hainanensis, a new species discovered from Hainan, China, diverged at 3 Ma (95% HPD: 0.1-7.35 Ma) with a vicariance event during the boundary period of the Miocene and Pliocene. The RASP analysis suggested that the ancestral area of these species was East Asia and Southeast Asia, and under the influence of these events they were only occurring in China or Southeast Asia. In summary, multiple dispersal and vicariance events have occurred over the evolutionary history of Callicarpa.

4.1. Phylogenetic inference

The combined analysis indicated that Callicarpa was monophyletic (PP=1.00, BP=100) with respect to the groups considered, and within Callicarpa, eight main subgroups were recognized (clade I-VIII) ( ). Clade I, located at the bottom of the phylogenetic tree of Callicarpa, was composed of some Malaysian and Thai species: C. poilanei, C. angustifolia, C. maingayi, and C. furfuracea. After examining and comparing the type of specimens of C. angustifolia and C. poilanei, Leeratiwong et al. (2007) regarded C. poilanei as the synonym of C. angustifolia because they bear a resemblance in having a prominently interpetiolar woody ridge at the stem nodes, grey to brownish-grey hairs on the abaxial surface of leaves, and being glabrous or with sparsely hairy ovary. In the present study, our result supported Leeratiwong’s treatment (PP=1.00, BP=100). Callicarpa furfuracea and C. maingayi formed a robust clade, which suggested their closer relationship. Evidence from morphology (Leeratiwong et al., 2007; Leeratiwong et al., 2009) seemed to favor this clade. Clade II contained several small tree species, with tropical occurrences (Thailand, Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Guinea), although C. candicans, C. yunnanensis, and C. arborea also occur in some narrow areas of southern China (south of Hainan Island and Xishuangbanna, Yunnan). In Bramley’s study (Bramley, 2009), C. candicans formed a clade with C. furfuracea, C. maingayi, C. angustifolia, and C. poilanei (assigned into section Clade I in our study) without support rate. However, in the present study, C. candicans exhibited a closer sister relationship with C. erioclona and C. yunnanensis (PP=1.00, BP=71). Morphologically C. candicans is most easily confused with C. erioclona, but the indumentums on the outer surface of the ovary and fruit may be effective morphological markers to distinguish them. In C. erioclona, the ovary and fruit are covered with branched hairs while that of C. candicans is glabrous. In addition, the black fruit (when mature) of C. candicans ( ) allows it to be distinguished from C. erioclona (maturing purple). Within clade II, C. arborea ( ) appeared at the top of the clade and as the sister of other tree species. Although C. arborea and C. yunnanensis are extremely similar and share an overlapped distribution, they appeared in different branches in clade II. Geographically, C. arborea is one of the most common species of the genus with a wide distribution (almost everywhere in Southeast Asia, Leeratiwong et al., 2009; Bramley, 2013), while Yunnan (Southwest China) is the edge of its northernmost distribution (Fang, 1982; Chen and Gilbert, 1994). Contrarily, C. yunnanensis is just narrowly distributed in the mixed forests of valleys in southern Yunnan and northern Vietnam (Fang, 1982; Chen and Gilbert, 1994). For palynology, two species can be distinguished from each other by their different types of pollen exine ornamentation: the pollen of C. yunnanensis has an exine sculpture of rugosely reticulate while C. arborea has regulate exine ornamentation (Ma et al., 2016). Callicarpa luteopunctata ( ) formed an independent branch (Clade III) and this species has an extremely narrow geographical distribution, only found in high altitude mountains of the Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau located in Southwest China. Their branchlets are cylindrical and there are no ridges or hair ring between the two petioles, and the peduncle is usually shorter than the petiole. In particular, both sides of the leaves have densely yellow glades. Clade IV contained several Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand distributed species originally described as Geunsia ( ). Our results indicated that the ‘Geunsia’ group formed a well supported clade (PP=1.00, BP=100). The New World group was composed by C. americana ( ) and C. acuminate, which are ranging in North America and they formed a clade (Clade V, PP=0.89, BP=83). Old World and New World lineages also shows a complex phylogenetic relationship. In the present study, C. integerrima var. chinensis and C. dichotoma formed Clade VI, which represented the few lianas or slender-climbing species of Callicarpa mainly distributed in China ( ). When carrying out a palynology study on Callicarpa in China, Ma et al. (2016) suggested that the distinct coarsely reticulate exine sculpture was found only in certain species – those that represented the climbing shrubs species of Callicarpa native to China (C. integerrima, C. integerrima var. chinensis and C. pilosissima). Based on the distinct, strongly curved hairs on the stem and extremely simple cymes (only 1–3 flowers, or one dichotomous, ), Fang (1982) treated C. peichieniana as a monotypic subgenus (Subgen. Peiantha Chun et S. L. Chen) and other species constituted the subgenus Callicarpa. However, our phylogenetic result from ML analyses showed that C. peichieniana was mixed with other species (Subgen. Callicarpa), which does not support Fang’s classification system (Fang, 1982). The traditional subgenus classification system of Callicarpa based on only two characters is unpredictable. Clade VII was further divided into two main subclades: subclade VIII and subclade VIIII. Subclade VIII consisted of C. nudiflora and C. macrophylla ( ; ), and both species share a series of common characteristics. However, inflorescence width and peduncle length are different between the two species, while the most significant difference to distinguish the two species is that the calyx, corolla, and ovary of C. macrophylla are covered by stellate tomentose, while those of C. nudiflora are glabrous. In addition, it is worth bearing in mind that the leaves of C. nudiflora turn black after being dried while those of C. macrophylla do not. Subclade VIIII contained several species characterized by a conspicuous interpetiolar ridge resembling a stipule scar, and a white baccate drupe with an obviously softer fleshy exocarp than other species of Callicarpa. Yet the color and textures of the exocarp have never attracted the attention of previous taxonomic researchers working on Callicarpa. In Subclade VIIII (PP=0.98, BP=97), these species are primarily distributed in China, although C. longifolia is considered as a broadly distributed species ( ), and C. angusta is endemic in Vietnam. Based on C. kochiana tubular calyx ( ), Fang (1982) assigned C. kochiana as a monotypic section Tubulosae, and divided other species of the subgenus Callicarpa into Section Callicarpa. In the present study, C. kochiana is embedded in C. longifolia and C. loboapiculata, and together form a clade (PP=0.43, BP=56), which shares a series of synapomorphy: a conspicuous interpetiolar ridge and white baccate drupe. Increasing the number of samples of C. kochiana and more genetic data is all needed to confirm its species status (Chanderbali et al., 2001; Small et al., 2004; Guo and Ge, 2005; Liu et al., 2021). Clade VIII could be recognized as one broader clade which was strongly supported as the largest group of Callicarpa investigated in the present study (PP=1.00, BP=100), and comprised of some taxa with a broad range of morphological variation. The Subclade VIIII was formed with good support (PP=1.00, BP=100). Among them, C. hainanensis and C. brevipes formed a small clade (Figures S2-1, S2-2, PP=0.96, BP=84) characterized by their lanceolate or obovate-lanceolate leaves ( ), and the two species share a series of typical characters of Chang’s (1951) section Verticirima, such as larger, oblong, apical pore dehiscent anthers and short filaments. However, C. hainanensis is obviously distinguished from the latter by its obovate-lanceolate leaves, long-cup-shaped or subtubular calyx dehisced as the fruits mature, and sharp triangular lobes (Ma and Zhang, 2012). Callicarpa bodinieri is easily distinguished by its red subsessile glands on stem, leaves, and flowers from other species ( ), and Leeratiwong et al. (2009) found that C. bodinieri and C. glandulosa are conspecific by examining their specimens. Therefore, Leeratiwong et al. (2009) reduced C. glandulosa to be a synonym of C. bodinieri. In this study, they also formed a very close relationship (Figures S2-1, S2-2, PP=1.00, BP=92). Within subclade VIIIII, C. pedunculata, C. formosana, and C. pedunculata var. longifolia clustered into one subclade (Figures S2-1, S2-2, PP=1.00, BP=100). During the taxonomic revision of Philippines Callicarpa, Bramley (2013) treated C. formosana as one of the numerous synonyms of C. pedunculata, a species with an extensive distribution and significant variation in leaf shape. As our molecular results suggest, C. pedunculata from Australia was nested within C. formosana, so we supported reduction of C. formosana to the synonym of C. pedunculata according to the rules of nomenclature. Bramley (2013) indicated that C. pedunculata was most likely to be confused with C. rubella, from which it differed by its typically relatively narrow leaves and lack of glandular hairs but with abaxially stellate tomentose, adaxially minute hispid, and an obtuse or rounded base. Their close relationship was also verified in the present phylogenetic study as two species appearing in close sister clades. It was unexpected that C. kwangtungensis ( ), designated as a typical species of section Verticirima in the Chang (1951) system, formed a sister clade to C. prolifera and C. pauciflora (Figures S2-1, S2-2, PP=0.95, BP=99). For C. rubella, morphologically, we found in our field investigation that white fruit populations of C. rubella always mix with purple fruit populations in the coinhabiting areas ( ). As a broadly distributed species, C. rubella is variable morphologically, especially in terms of its indumentum and the size and shape of the leaves. The significant difficulty in determining the identity of the complex group of C. rubella based on morphology and phylogenetic placement suggests this group may potentially represent hybrids, although we are unaware of the specific parental origin. It makes sense that identical repeated interspecies hybridization may occur in C. rubella and its infraspecific taxa. In Japanese Callicarpa, Tsukaya et al. (2003) reported the hybridization and introgression occurring between C. japonica and C. mollis in central Japan with molecular data, observing that both species were pollinated by bees (Kawakubo, 1990; Momose et al., 1998; Kato et al., 1999; Kato, 2000). Xu et al. (2013) investigated the cross breeding between C. dichotoma and C. bodinieri in China and their result indicated that there was no crossing barrier between the two species, and they observed a high fruit setting ratio. Callicarpa longipes and the complex group of C. rubella formed a group morphologically well delimited with other species by a cordate leaf base (Figures S2-1, S2-2, PP=0.73, BP=94) ( ). The complex group of C. rubella has troubled researchers for a long time in terms of distinguishing each species due to their extremely ambiguous morphological circumscription. We have to pay attention to C. japonica which formed a close relationship with C. rubella f. crenata (Figures S2-1, S2-2, BP=100, PP=1.00). In Bramley’s revision of Bornean Callicarpa (Bramley, 2009), the sister clade of C. japonica and C. rubella was also represented.

4.2. East Asia and Southeast Asia as the ancestral area and Callicarpa’s lineage diversification within Asia

The ancestral range reconstruction analyses indicated that Callicarpa most likely originated in East Asia and Southeast Asia ( , node A). With our time estimates, the S-DEC model inferred that the main diversification events in Callicarpa were dated to the Middle-Oligocene, mainly concentrated to the Miocene ( ). Multiple dispersal events were likely responsible for the current biogeographic patterns of the genus. This biome began to rise in the early Miocene (ca. 20 Ma) and further diversified in the late Miocene, driven probably by the intensifying East Asian summer monsoon during these two periods (Guo et al., 2002; Sun and Wang, 2005). In later branching lineages the genus might have experienced more rapid diversification in the Middle-Miocene ( , LTT plot). It probably corresponded with one of the major uplifts of the QTP and subsequent aridification events (Yu et al., 2014). Before about 14 Ma, there was a relatively stable diversification rate and subsequently an accelerated lineage accumulation. This upward trend was maintained during the Pliocene and the Pleistocene, which had been attributed to topographic and climatic circumstances (Qian and Ricklefs, 2000). Since the middle-late Oligocene to the Miocene, the coverage of Antarctic glaciers shrunk owing to global warming, and there was a high point of temperature in the middle-Miocene (Gao et al., 2020). Donoghue and Smith (2004) once proposed that the Miocene was one of the active periods of species diversification. The occurrence of the monsoon was characterized by changes in the prevailing wind direction and severe precipitation. It was often accompanied by the rapid strengthening of atmospheric-energy and the water cycle, which directly affected the global hydrothermal cycle and heat distribution, and regulated global climate change (Webster et al., 1998; An et al., 2000; Jiang et al., 2017). Numerous studies have suggested that Southeast Asia is a ‘museum’ of early angiosperms, harboring tropical rain forests with the most pronounced monsoon climate and acting as an ‘evolutionary front’ for some tropical taxa, given that it has the largest archipelagos and probably has the most complex geological history in the world (Van Welzen et al., 2011; Tan et al., 2020). The extremely rich biodiversity in Southeast Asia hints not only to one of the birthplaces and refuges of early angiosperms (Buerki et al., 2014), but also to a meeting point for the long-distance spread of species (Gunasekara, 2004; Lohman et al., 2011), which profoundly affects the formation and evolution of global flora. The Sunxdaland (Malay Peninsula; Borneo; Sumatra) and the Philippines are two acknowledged biodiversity hotspots in Southeast Asia (Myers et al., 2000) and there appear to be two major centers of diversity in terms of numbers of Malesian species for Callicarpa: Borneo and the Philippines (Bramley, 2013). Moreover, our findings likewise suggested that East Asia and Southeast Asia are main sources of biodiversity of Callicarpa.

Around 23.75 Ma (95%HPD: 13.12-36.09 Ma), there occurred the third extinction event in Southeast Asia resulting in Callicarpa luteopunctata splitting from the remaining species ( , node E). This species has an extremely narrow geographical distribution and is found only in high altitude mountains of the Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau located in Southwest China. Coincidentally, C. kinabaluensis and C. clemensorum were also reported to be narrowly distributed at high altitude (1600–2500 m) on the peaks surrounding Mount Kinabalu in Malesia (Bramley, 2011). A set of common features shared by C. kinabaluensis and C. clemensorum was speculated to be an adaptation to the frigid environment: so dense hairs and an interesting inflorescence structure with distinct peduncles and almost globose cymes. In addition, their twigs have scattered warty growth and the lamina surface occurred vesiculose (Bramley, 2009). However, C. luteopunctata has the indumentum on the petioles and cymes obviously sparser than that of C. kinabaluensis and C. clemensorum. It is a pity that this study failed to contain the two Malaysian species and we still lack an understanding of the unambiguous mechanism of these specific high altitude species in the genus Callicarpa of typical near tropics originated (Bramley, 2009; Bramley, 2013; Ma et al., 2016). Further studies on how the mechanism developed are urgently needed in the future. However, the onset of the Asian monsoon around the Oligocene-Miocene transition created a connection between forests from the low to high latitudes of East Asia (Sun and Wang, 2005; Ji et al., 2019), which might provide some insights. Subsequently, more frequent exchanges took place in the Asian interior among species we investigated in the present study. At 36.23 Ma (95%HPD: 18.81-60.39 Ma) there was the first dispersal from East Asia to Southeast Asia ( , node A; , line 1) and subsequently, after the Oligocene, several similar dispersals (from East Asia to Southeast Asia) happened again with higher probability in Callicarpa. At the Oligocene-Miocene boundary, the Tibetan Plateau experienced a rapid uplift and previous geological evidence indicated that different areas of the Plateau have experienced different degrees of uplift at different times (Neogene and Quatemary) (Royden et al., 2008; Wang, 2017). These uplifts since the early Miocene have created high mountains and deep valleys within the plateau, which could have accelerated the production of new allopatric species, and been partly responsible for the high local and regional species richness (Liu et al., 2006) and induced extreme drying and desertification in the Asian interior, strengthening the Asian monsoons with a shift occurring from arid/semi-arid in the Asian continental interior (Guo et al., 2002; Sun and Wang, 2005). These factors probably effected the expansion of Callicarpa species within Asia regions later on ( , line 3, 5). Our study indicated that at 26.63 Ma (95%HPD: 14.72-41 Ma), there was first migration from Southeast Asia to East Asia ( , node D , line 3) and during the Miocene-Pliocene boundary, two vicariance events occurred between Southeast Asia and East Asia, which influenced C. brevipes f. kiruninsularis, C. hainanensis, and C. giraldii all endemic to China. Under the influence of tectonic motion and climate fluctuation, dispersal and vicariant events occurred alternately, and habitats periodically isolated and merged, which may accelerate species differentiation in this process (Thomas et al., 2012). In Asia, East Asian monsoons, South Asian monsoons, and Northwest Pacific monsoons prevailed in summer (Jiang et al., 2017), which might have promoted the rapid differentiation and spread of Callicarpa and facilitate tropical species to spread northward (mainly to the area now China) by regulating rainfall. Apparently, the climate of Asia was controlled mainly by the monsoon system due to intense land-ocean thermal contrast, and the dynamics and thermal effects of the Tibet Plateau (Sun and Wang, 2005). The monsoon climate intensified from the late-Miocene, simultaneously bringing an East Asian subtropical humid climate and promoting the floristic expansion of Asia (Ji et al., 2019). We speculated that climatic change and global cooling since the mid-Miocene might have played a crucial role in the inferred onset of diversification of Callicarpa in Asia. During this time, several independent vicariance events between East Asia and Southeast Asia occurred, which accelerated some endemic species to form in China. Also, the S-DEC model revealed the divergence of C. dichotoma and C. japonica, two species distributed in Japan. The divergence times of them were 8.19 Ma (Miocene) and 3.9 Ma (Pliocene), and our results speculated that the opening of the Japan Sea corresponded roughly to their spread from continental East Asia to the Japan islands (Santosh and Senshu, 2011; Ji et al., 2019). Sea levels fluctuating alternately enabled alternate conditions for population fragmentation and admixture of temperate biota in this East China-Japan-Korea region (Qiu et al., 2011). It has long been recognized that the climatic changes of the Quaternary caused repeated shifts in the distribution of plants and animals presently found throughout the SJFR (Sino-Japanese Floristic Region). The RASP analysis also suggested the last ancestral area of C. giraldii was East Asia and Southeast Asia, and under the influence of one vicariance event, the species occurred only in China. C. giraldii seems able to tolerate a relatively cool climate and is widely distributed from subtropical Southeast China (Jiangxi, Fujian, Hunan) to temperate areas (Henan, Shanxi). Morphologically, they are small shrubs with cabined, tight cyme.

4.3. The disjunct pattern between the Paleotropics and Neotropics in Callicarpa

Callicarpa also presents an amphi-Pacific distribution pattern. Our results revealed that during the Middle-Oligocene, floristic exchange in Callicarpa occurred between Southeast Asia and the Temperate North America-Neotropical region ( , node C). Nevertheless, our inferred date for migrations of Callicarpa from the Paleotropics to Neotropics is too young to have been caused by the breakup of Gondwana (Lomolino, 2010; Jin et al., 2020). The oft-stated view is that the North Atlantic Land Bridge (NALB) or Bering Land Bridge (BLB) has played a major role in this process (Wolfe, 1975; Tiffney, 1985; Tiffney and Manchester, 2001; Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020b). The NALB generally functioned as a famous migration route for thermophilous plant taxa between Europe and eastern North America (Tiffney and Manchester, 2001; Ian, 2006; Jin et al., 2020). Tiffney and Manchester (2001) summarized biogeographic continuity across the North Atlantic Ocean during the Tertiary and pointed out that the bridge was broken by late Eocene. According to the lack of records of the extant or fossil species of Callicarpa from Europe, the route (by the NALB) seems infrequent for this originally tropical genus and it is also believable that the NALB was no longer available at the time for the dispersal of Callicarpa. Likewise, the way via Beringian connections seems unlikely owing to the mostly tropical affinities of Callicarpa (Chen et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020a). To explain this amphi-Pacific tropical and subtropical disjunction occurring in Callicarpa, the ‘Long-distance migration across the Pacific Ocean’ route was speculated herein, combined with our S-DEC inferences. Yang et al. (2018) reported that Kingsboroughia alba (Sabiaceae), with an amphi-Pacific tropical disjunct distribution, migrated from Central America to tropical Asia via long-distance dispersal during the time of the Neogene and Quaternary boundary. Similar transoceanic biogeographical patterns have been found in other plant groups, such as Nettles (Urticeae, Urticaceae) (Huang et al., 2019), Lardizabalaceae (Wang et al., 2020), and polystichoid ferns (Dryopteridaceae) (Le Pechon et al., 2016). In our results, owing to the taxa discovered from Western Pacific Islands and Hawaiian islands, a hypothesis could be proposed that during the Middle-Oligocene the ancestor of C. americana and C. acuminate dispersed for the first time from Southeast Asia to the Neotropics by trans-ocean routes ( , line 2) and subsequently further migrated northward to temperate North America and southward to South America ( , line 2), resulting in the amphi-Pacific disjunction pattern of the genus Callicarpa. The achievement of plant migration between North America and South America was also partly related to taking advantage of island stepping-stones (island hopping) and stochastic long-distance dispersals (Gentry, 1982; Bacon et al., 2015). In late Tertiary, the colonization of Callicarpa in Pacific Islands, Temperate North America, and the Neotropics occurred again. Physical connections between affected areas provide inference about the biogeographic history. The uplift of the northern Andes and the rising of volcanic islands may have provided the conditions responsible for the exchange of Callicarpa between Central and South America (Li and Wen, 2013), and these islands eventually coalesced into today’s lower Central America with a substantial land connection across the Isthmus of Panama (Gentry, 1982). The Panama Isthmus as the narrow strip of land connected North and South America and offered a channel for migration in the Pliocene after it closed (Keigwin, 1978). In the New World, 33 species of Callicarpa were recognized, particularly on the Caribbean Islands (24 species currently recognized in Cuba) (Bramley, 2013). Cuba possibly has broadly similar climates and floristic components to Southeast Asia (they are at similar latitudes) (Milne and Abbott, 2002) and Cuba appears to be another center of diversification of Callicarpa. In sum, a trans-Pacific dispersal between two regions is plausible (Wang et al., 2020) to explain the establishment of a New World distribution of Callicarpa, and this hypothesis requires further analysis and testing. Callicarpa successfully reached the Hawaii Islands, other oceanic islands and the Neotropics, to some extent reflecting efficient seed dispersal by birds, usually attracted by small and brightly colorful fruits (especially purple fruits) (Popp et al., 2011). Interestingly, in the progress of tracking the extraordinary migratory journeys and broad-scale habitat use of sooty shearwaters, Shaffer et al. (2006) found that this small seabird can fly right across the Pacific Ocean. Biotic seed dispersal is possibly correlated to large species range sizes and most biotically dispersed species with colorful berries (fleshy fruit) and endozoochorous seeds embedded in juicy pericarp were regarded more suitable for frugivorous birds to spread over long-distance (Loiselle and Blake, 1999; Kessler-Rios and Kattan, 2012; Tan et al., 2020). When the mode of dispersal of Cornus was studied, Lindelof et al. (2020) reported that ‘Island hopping’ was a possible mode of dispersal in bird-dispersed genera (producing fleshy, nutritious fruits). However, what kinds of birds are involved in the spreading of Callicarpa is still unknown, and further studies about dispersal agents and other driving factors are required to gain more insights into the patterns of diversification of Callicarpa.