Priyangu – Callicarpa macrophylla is an Ayurveda coolant herb used for the treatment of headache, diarrhea mixed with blood (Ulcerative colitis), general debility, fever, pain in the joints, skin diseases etc.

Latin name- Callicarpa Macrophylla Vahl.

Family- Verbenaceae (nirgundi kula)

Table of Contents

Vernacular names

Names in different languages:

Hindi name : Phalini, Daya

English name : Beutyberry

Bengali name : Matara, Mathara

Gujarati name : Priyangu

Kannada name : Priyangu

Malayalam name : Gawhla, Nalal, Jativruksha

Marathi name : Garhala

Punjabi name : Priyang, Sumali

Tamil name : Ittauduga, Vettilai pattai, Seembakulthu

Telugu name : Kodauduga

Sanskrit synonyms

Gandhaphali- The fruit has a strong odor

Phalini- The plant bears many fruits

Asthibandhana- Binds the bones together

Gochandana, Shyama, Pitatandula, Karamba, Priya, Durjara, Kanta, Priyahva, Vanita, Lata, Shyama, Godantini,

Kanguni, Kangu,

Priyavalli, Vrutta, Govandani, Karambha, Varnabhedani, Mahilahvaya, Vishvak Senangana Priya, Bhangura, Mangalya, Shreyasi

Morphology

Morphology of Callicarpa macrophylla:

Priyangu is a perennial shrub growing up to 2m height found in North eastern parts of India and at 3000 ft in Himalayan region. Branches have a hairy cotton structure. The leaves are 18 to 30 cm long ovate as lanceolate, smooth from upper surface and hairy from ventral surface. The flowers are small, pink appears in fluorescence, some are purple or pinkish purple in color. The fruits are fleshy white divided into 4 compartments, each having a single seed, ripe fruits look spongy.

Properties, part used, dosage

Callicarpa macrophylla medicinal properties:

Rasa (Taste) – Tikta (Bitter), Kashaya (Astringent), Madhura (Sweet)

Guna (Qualities) – Laghu (Light for digestion), Ruksha (Dry in nature)

Vipaka – Katu (Undergoes Pungent taste after digestion)

Veerya (Potency) – Sheeta (Cold)

Karma (Actions) – Tridosha shamaka (Balances down all the three doshas)

Pharmacological actions – Anti inflammatory

Part used- Flower, Bark, Root

Dosage-

Powder- 3 to 5 g

Decoction- 30 to 40 ml

Chemical constituents

Callicarpa macrophylla Chemical constituents:

Oil from root is aromatic and stomachic. Calliterpenone (3-0X0-13β – Karane- 16α , A –diol) and its acetate are seen in seeds, leaves and aerial parts. Crategolic acid, 2α – hydroxyursolic acid, ursolic acid, β-Sitosterol, β-D-glucoside, apigenin, luteolin, their 7-0-glucuronides 3, 3’-7 trime thoxy-4’, 5- dihydroxy-flarone (CNF-1) L(t)- α- amino- β-(P-methoxyphenyl), Propronic acid, C22 –C24 fatty acids, ethyl ester of C23 fatty acid are obtained from leaves. A new diterpenoid- Isopropylidenocalliterpenone is isolated from essential oil of leaves along with calliterpenone and its monoacetate and characterized as 16α, 17-Isopropylidene-3-oxo-phylloclade.

Uses

Medicinal Uses of Priyangu:

The berries are highly astringent but are made into wine and jelly.

The paste of the bark is applied over the forehead to treat headache.

The powder of the bark of Priyangu is used for rubbing the gums to treat gingivitis and used in face packs to improve the complexion of the face.

The powder of the bark is used as dusting powder to control the bleeding from wounds.

The decoction of the bark of Callicarpa macrophylla is given in a dose of 30-40 ml to stop internal bleeding in cases of peptic ulcer, internal piles.

The cold infusion of the bark or root of Callicarpa macrophylla is given in a dose of 50 ml to treat fever and burning sensation of the body.

The dried powder of Priyangu is given with milk to improve the strength of the body.

The paste of the bark is applied externally to treat skin diseases.

The cold infusion of the bark or root is given in a dose of 40 ml which acts as blood purifier.

Oil processed with the leaves or bark of Priyangu is applied over the joints, causing swelling and pain

THERAPEUTIC USES:

Shitada : Priyangu + Musta+ Triphala are made into paste applied over gums. – Cha. Chi-4/70

Parinama shula: Vomiting is induced with leaf decoction of Priyangu. – Cha. Su-26

Jvara: Priyangu is best for Jvara, which contains Madhur rasa, Shita virya –Dha. Ni/Cha. Su-26

If bleeding does not stop, methods to stop it should be adopted, orifice of wound should be smeared with powder of Priyangu, Yasti, Masha etc. –A. H. Su 27/48.

Decreases Pitta. It comes under the group Which mitigates pitta. –A. H. Su 15/6

It cures chronic diarrhea, heals fractures, good for pitta, healing ulcers –A. H. Su- 15/37

It helps in unification of broken parts, fractures of bones, makes the body stout, and hard to digest. –A. h. Su- 6/12

Priyangu is Shitala, tikta cures delusion, burning sensation, fever, vomiting and dyspepsia.- Cha.chi.

It is also used in rheumatic pain, colic tumors, dysentery, loss of appetite, blood disorders, bleeding disorders, Pittaprameha, skin disorder, general debility and poison.

Sanskrit verse

Indications

Uses as per Ayurveda:

Bhagnasandhana Krut – useful in healing fractures

Brumhani – nourishing, nutritious

Indicated in –

Daurgandhya – bad odor

Sweda – excess sweating

Daha – burning sensation, as in gastritis, neuropathy, burning sensation in eyes etc

Jwara – fever

Gulma – Tumors of the abdomen

Trushna – excessive thirst

Visha – Toxic conditions, poisoning

Moha – delusion

Vanti – vomiting

Bhranti – dizziness

Fruit:

Madhura – sweet

Rooksha – dry

Kashaya – astringent

Sheetala – coolant

Guru – heavy to digest

Vibandhakrut – causes constipation

Adhmanakrut – causes bloating

Balakrut – improves strength

Sangrahi – absorbent, useful in diarrhea, IBS

Kaphapittajit – Balances Kapha and Pitta Dosha.

Adverse effects

No known adverse effect is reported or known after the use of Priyangu

Interaction with medicines, supplements

Can this be used while taking Homeopathic medicine?

Yes. This product does not react with homeopathic medicine.

Can this medicine be continued while taking supplements like multivitamin tablets, Omega 3 fatty acids etc?

Yes. Generally, this product goes well with most dietary supplements. However, if you are taking more than one product per day, please consult your doctor for an opinion.

With western medicines

Seek your doctor’s advice if you are taking this product along with other western (allopathic / modern) medicines. Some Ayurvedic herbs can interact with modern medicine.

If both Ayurvedic and allopathic medicines are advised together, then it is best to take Allopathic medicine first, wait for 30 minutes and then take the Ayurvedic medicine.

Ayurvedic medicines

Ayurveda medicines containing Priyangu:

Devadarvarishta: Devadarvarishta is an Ayurveda medicine, traditionally used to treat skin diseases especially occurring due to complications of diabetes, difficulty in passing urine and digestive diseases.

Ushirasava: Ushirasava is a liquid Ayurveda medicine used in treating bleeding disorders, skin diseases, intestinal worms, inflammatory conditions and piles.

Pippalyasava: It is a liquid Ayurveda medicine used in treating cough, asthma, anemia, piles and irritable bowel syndrome.

Amroid ointment: This is a proprietary Ayurveda medicine useful to treat piles, bleeding per rectum and local inflammation around the anal opening.

Research

Research articles on Callicarpa macrophylla:

Anti- bacterial activity: In this study, researchers investigated the ex vivo antibacterial activity of C. macrophylla stem ethanolic (SEE) and aqueous extracts (SAE) against various gram positive and gram negative strains. SEE has fairly growth inhibitory activity against all the bacterial strains, but exceptionally SAE was inactive against all except Salmonella typhimurium.

Wound healing action: In this present study ethanolic polyherbal extract including that of C.macrophylla is screened for its phytochemical evaluated in wound healing activity in Wister rats by excision wound model using povidone iodine as a reference standard. From the results it was found that Polyherbal ethanolic extract possesses significant wound healing action when compared to control and equipotent wound healing activity when compared to standard povidine iodine.

Classical categorization

Charaka –

Mutravirajaniya – group of herbs that color and cleanse urine

Purisha samgrahaniya – group of herbs that increase bulk of stools

Sushruta – Priyangvadi gana, Anjanadi gana

Astanga sangraha – Anjanadi gana

Bhavaprakash Nighantu – Karpooradi varga

Dhanwantari Nighantu –Chandanadi varga

Kaiyyadeva Nighantu- Dhanya varga, Oushadhi varga

Raja Nighantu- Chandanadi varga

Scientific classification

Kingdom – Plantae

Subkingdom – Phanero gamia

Division – Angio spermae

Class – Dicotyledons

Subclass – Gamopetalae

Family – Verbanaceae

Genus – Callicarpa

Species – Macrophylla

Literary review

The drug Priyangu is first mentioned in Charaka samhita, useful in Raktapitta.

In Astanga sangraha, mentioned as Priyangvadi gana, Anjanadi gana.

In Sushruta samhita, mentioned under the same. It is Shitada, Kaphapittahara. It is useful in Jvara, Daha, Trishna, Gulma, etc.

By Nighantus:

Dhanwantari Nighantu, it pacifies kapha and pittadosha. Useful in burning sensation, headache, excessive perspiration, ulcers, rheumatoid arthritis.

Bhavaprakasha Nighantu: Includes Raktatisara, Jvara, Daha, Gulma, it is Kapapittajit and Balakrita.

Madanpal Nighantu, also described as Raktasangrahaniya gana, Pittanashini for Vrishya etc.

Raja Nighantu, also includes gana’s as Mutra-virajaniya, Purish sangrahaniya.

In Nighantu Ratnakar, described the varieties as named Gandhpriyangu it is Shita in nature, useful in Keshya, Dahapitta, Raktaruja, Vatagulma, visha, meha, meda, malastambhakar also kaphanasha.

Also considered as Srotogamitva and also Adhmanakara, it is Guru in nature Shita, Ruksha.

Varieties

According to classical reference of Bheda:

Two types:

1. Dhanyapriyangu – Setaria italica is the source of food grain. Dhanya means grain. Hence, this is considered as Dhanya Priyangu (also called Aushadha priyangu).

2. Gandhapriyangu – Prunus mahaleb, Algaia roxburghiana mig, Callicarpa tomentosa (L.) murray

Acc. to Bh. Pr – Priyangu, Gandha priyangu

Habitat

It is found in North -eastern parts of India and at 3000 ft in Himalayan region. Found in village shrubberies and gardens throughout north -east India, west Bengal – abundant plants.

Author: Dr.B.K.Prashanth M.D (Ayu), Ph.D

E mail: drprashanthbk@gmail.com

Sthanika karma (Action on different system)

External application – Relieve pain, burning sensation and bad body odor. indicated in Headache, excessive sweating, Amavata (Rheumatoid arthritis) .

Nervous system – Analgesic. Indicated in joint pain, neuromuscular diseases etc.

Digestive system – Carminative, Absorbent. Facilitate normal movement of doshas. Indicated in loss of appetite, colicky pain, rectal bleeding, Malabsorption syndrome.

Circulatory System – Indicated in bleeding disorders

Excretory system – Indicated in pittaja prameha