Filmmaker Kirby Dick and producer Amy Ziering in person at June 18 & 20 screenings! Subjects Ariana Klay and Ben Klay in person June 20!

Note: The June 20 screening is currently standby only. A standby line will form at the Walter Reade box office prior to the show.</em>

The Invisible War is a groundbreaking investigative documentary about one of the United States’ most shameful and best kept secrets: the epidemic of rape within the US military. With stark clarity and escalating revelations, The Invisible War exposes the rape epidemic in the armed forces, investigating the institutions that perpetuate it as well as its profound personal and social consequences. We meet characters who embraced their service with pride and professionalism, only to have their idealism crushed. Focusing on the powerfully emotional stories of survivors, the film reveals the systemic cover up of the crimes against them and follows their struggles to rebuild their lives and fight for justice. The Invisible War features hard-hitting interviews with high-ranking military officials and members of Congress that reveal the perfect storm of conditions that exist for rape in the military, its history of cover-up, and what can be done to bring about much needed change. Screening followed by discussion with filmmakers Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering and film subjects Ariana and Ben Klay. Discussion moderated by Meghan Rhoad, Researcher, Women's Rights division, Human Rights Watch.

NESTOR ALMENDROS AWARD

Renowned cinematographer and filmmaker Nestor Almendros (1930 — 1992) was a founder of the Human Rights Watch Film Festival, actively involved in the selection of films and the promotion of human rights filmmaking. Even while deeply immersed in his own projects, he took the time to call the festival team to mention a strong documentary or promote a work-in-progress. Believing in the power of human rights filmmaking, Nestor devoted himself to becoming a mentor to many young filmmakers. It is in loving memory of Nestor and our desire to celebrate his vision that the festival proudly bestows this award to filmmakers for their exceptional commitment to human rights.

The Festival is delighted to present Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering—filmmakers of The Invisible War—with our 2012 Nestor Almendros Award for courage in filmmaking.