Jigidi

Jigsaw Puzzle Categories

Animals

Racey Helps 6

Racey Helps 6

Bookmarked Bookmark Solve this jigsaw puzzle later

ShareShare with your friends

ReportReport as inappropriate

100

64

Solve puzzle

100 pieces

64 solves

Solve puzzle

Social Media

E-mail

Embed

Pinterest

Reddit

Recipient's email address Your name Your email address

Write a nice message

The information you provide will be used solely to send your invitation. Please refer to our Privacy Policy for more details.

Send e-mail

Your email has been sent

Send to another recipient

Server error

Large

Square

Small

Include title

Thanks for sharing. Here is your html-code:

Why are you reporting this puzzle?

It's inappropriate (see guidelines) Infringes my rights

Use this form if you’re holding the copyright to the image or representing an artist who does. Please note that the information provided may be forwarded to the person responsible for the allegedly infringement.

Artist name: *

Please fill out this field

Artist website: Other relevant information that can help us verify ownership of the image: Your email: *

Please make sure your email is correct

It's advertising a product or service It has missing or leftover pieces

Hold on! All the pieces are there. Look for the dots along the edge of the screen to find missing jigsaw pieces. If there are leftover pieces, try to change the background color to make the holes easier to spot!

I’ve read the guides and done as suggested but still cannot find them.

Please fill out this field

Other reason

Please note that we usually do not reply to reports. If you experience technical issues, have questions, or feel unfairly treated, please contact us through support instead.

Thanks for reporting!

Angus Clifford Racey Helps was an English children's

author and illustrator. His books were written in a simple style and featured woodland creatures and birds, with illustrations by the author. He is known for illustrating postcards, greeting cards, jigsaw

puzzles, playing cards and wrapping paper.Helps was born in Bristol in 1913 of English-Scots descent,

and spent his childhood in the hamlet of Chelvey,

Somerset.

He was privately educated at a vicarage and

later at Bristol Cathedral School.

Leaving school he entered the antiquarian book

business and attended the West of England

College of Art.

If you are the copyright holder to any of the photographs herein do not hesitate to contact me.

They will be swiftly removed if desired so. Thank you!

Leaderboard

big_joe7:02

karen607:05

Cthill8:36

billfj9:08

juffie9:16

jmowell4410:49

CancunOrBust10:59

ChrissyT11:10

lynettebaker29811:20

Danieljzimmerman11:22