Angus Clifford Racey Helps was an English children’s author and illustrator. His books were written in a simple style and feature woodland creatures and birds, with illustrations by the author. He is known also for illustrating postcards, greeting cards, jigsaw puzzles, playing cards and wrapping paper.

Racey Helps was born on January 1, 1913, in Bristol, England, United Kingdom. His birth geographical coordinates are 51° 27’ 19” North latitude and 2° 35’ 48” West longitude. Racey Helps passed away at the age of 56 in 1970.

Astrologically, Racey Helps falls under the Sun sign of Capricorn, with Aries as his Ascendant, Scorpio as his Moon sign, and Aquarius as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Capricorn Moon Scorpio Ascendant Aries Midheaven Capricorn Mercury Sagittarius Venus Aquarius Mars Sagittarius Jupiter Sagittarius Saturn Taurus Uranus Aquarius Neptune Cancer Pluto Gemini Ceres Scorpio Chiron Pisces Eros Pisces Hygiea Pisces Juno Capricorn Pallas Scorpio Vesta Sagittarius Black Moon Lilith Aquarius North Node Aries South Node Libra Part of Fortune Aquarius Vertex Libra

Sunin Capricorn10° 30’ 12”

The Sun in Capricorn in a Natal Chart is a placement associated with patience and reliability. You are consistent and preserve tradition. You look to […] Read more »

Moonin Scorpio0° 56’ 58”

The Scorpio Moon in a Natal Chart makes you intense and passionate. You have a gift for revealing hidden wisdom and are obsessed with discovering […] Read more »

Ascendantin Aries18° 38’ 40”

Aries Ascendant in the Natal Chart indicates a dramatic personality. You have a passionate appearance and often go to extremes to show your individuality. You […] Read more »

Midheavenin Capricorn7° 17’ 6”

The Capricorn Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stoic and observant. You are patient and down to earth. You have a practical and determined […] Read more »

Mercuryin Sagittarius18° 34’ 31”

Mercury in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a gregarious and loving personality. You are idealistic and have a strong sense of conviction. You are […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius23° 18’ 33”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Sagittarius23° 18’ 13”

Sagittarius Mars in the Natal Chart makes you focused and expressive. You can be spiritual and philosophical. You are eager to follow your ideals and […] Read more »

Jupiterin Sagittarius29° 42’ 28”

Sagittarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that values spiritual growth and expansion. You are a truth-seeker and are […] Read more »

Saturnin Taurus27° 50’ 40”

Taurus Saturn in the Natal Chart is a placement shared by people born within three years of each other. They are part of a cohort […] Read more »

Uranusin Aquarius2° 12’ 22”

Aquarius Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to bring technological breakthroughs and social change. You are part of […] Read more »

Neptunein Cancer25° 0’ 27”

Cancer Neptune in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that impacts people born within fourteen years. You are born to help society awaken to […] Read more »

Plutoin Gemini28° 48’ 50”

Gemini Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation born to change how people communicate. Your generation shifts the power and helps […] Read more »

Ceresin Scorpio12° 45’ 28”

Ceres in Scorpio in the Natal Chart is an ideal generational placement for growth and perception. You are intense and can be obsessed with nurturing […] Read more »

Chironin Pisces7° 23’ 49”

Chiron in Pisces is an ideal placement for a generation committed to healing. You are passionate about showing others you care. You can be self-sacrificing […] Read more »

Erosin Pisces5° 24’ 26”

Eros in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes it easy for you to explore your fantasies. You are attuned to your lover’s subconscious desires, and […] Read more »

Hygieain Pisces20° 2’ 19”

Hygiea in Pisces in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for an intuitive healer. You can be a spiritual guide who encourages others to […] Read more »

Junoin Capricorn18° 28’ 30”

Juno in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you a supportive partner. You prioritize your family and work diligently to provide for your loved ones. […] Read more »

Pallasin Scorpio0° 42’ 40”

Pallas in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about rebirth and transformation. You have a gift for encouraging others to create power and […] Read more »

Vestain Sagittarius14° 23’ 26”

Vesta in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart brings passion and energy. You are excited about adventure and freedom. You can be loving and devoted to […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Aquarius23° 30’ 8”

Black Moon Lilith in Aquarius in the Natal Chart is an intense and erratic placement. You go through dramatic ups and downs. You can be […] Read more »

North Nodein Aries7° 42’ 16”

Aries North Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about your purpose and break habits by developing confidence in yourself. You are driven […] Read more »

South Nodein Libra7° 42’ 16”

Libra South Node in the Natal Chart makes you affectionate and loving. You are attuned to other people’s needs and can learn to open up […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Aquarius9° 5’ 26”

Aquarius Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you bright and charming. You are expressive and inspired by unconventional ideas. You use your individualistic […] Read more »

Vertexin Libra6° 25’ 29”

Libra Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you intelligent and friendly. You are charming and can easily manifest love and romance. You can be peaceful […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Seventh House Mercury Eighth House Venus Eleventh House Mars Ninth House Jupiter Ninth House Saturn First House Uranus Eleventh House Neptune Fourth House Pluto Third House Ceres Seventh House Chiron Twelfth House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Twelfth House Juno Tenth House Pallas Seventh House Vesta Eighth House Black Moon Lilith Eleventh House North Node Twelfth House South Node Sixth House Part of Fortune Eleventh House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 29 major aspects, alongside 12 minor aspects, as well as 8 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Mercury Trine Ascendant Venus Sextile Mars Moon Sextile Jupiter Moon Square Uranus Jupiter Opposite Pluto Moon Trine Pluto Venus Quincunx Neptune Mars Quincunx Neptune Jupiter Quincunx Saturn Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Quincunx Saturn Saturn Sextile Neptune Uranus Quincunx Pluto Saturn Trine Uranus Venus Sextile Ascendant Mars Trine Ascendant Mercury Sextile Venus Mercury Conjunct Mars Venus Square Saturn Mars Quincunx Saturn Jupiter Quincunx Neptune Moon Square Neptune Neptune Square Ascendant Venus Trine Pluto Mars Conjunct Jupiter Mars Opposite Pluto Uranus Opposite Neptune Moon Trine Venus Jupiter Conjunct Midheaven

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Racey Helps’s life journey.

Venus Sextile Marsorb: 0°

Venus sextile Mars in a chart typically indicates that a person is highly social and energetic. They love being around other people, gaining new experiences, […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Jupiterorb: 1°

When the Moon is sextile Jupiter in a Natal Chart, this typically makes a person more generous and optimistic. The way they express their feelings […] Read more »

Moon Square Uranusorb: 1°

The Moon square Uranus in a Natal Chart creates a tie between emotions and chaos. Someone with this square in their chart likely seeks out […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Plutoorb: 1°

Jupiter opposite Pluto in a chart creates the potential for growth, transformation, success, and abundance. It is not always easy to get those things due […] Read more »

Moon Trine Plutoorb: 2°

The Moon trine Pluto in a chart typically indicates that someone can develop profound connections with themselves, others, and the universe. Someone with this trine […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Neptuneorb: 2°

Venus quincunx Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person may struggle with a negative self-image. They don’t always have a good perception of […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Neptuneorb: 2°

Mars quincunx Neptune in a chart can create an overinflated sense of self. An inability to set realistic goals and follow reasonable boundaries causes someone […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Saturnorb: 2°

Jupiter quincunx Saturn in a chart indicates that a person may struggle to prioritize and find work-life balance. People with this aspect in their charts […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 3°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Saturnorb: 3°

If the Moon is quincunx Saturn in a Natal Chart, this typically indicates that a person may struggle to meet their emotional needs while fulfilling […] Read more »

Uranus Quincunx Plutoorb: 3°

Uranus quincunx Pluto in a chart can create powerful, rebellious, and transformative energy, but this can be difficult to work through. There is a lack […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Venusorb: 5°

Mercury sextile Venus in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person is friendly, personable, and social. They are likely affectionate and have no problem communicating […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Marsorb: 5°

Mercury conjunct Mars in the Natal Chart makes you outspoken and dramatic. You are intense and speak passionately. You are demanding and can be focused […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Saturnorb: 5°

Mars quincunx Saturn in a chart typically indicates that someone struggles with perfectionism. Their perception of themselves tends to be off, and they are often […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Neptuneorb: 5°

Jupiter quincunx Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person has a vibrant, lively personality. They are optimistic and tend to dream big. They […] Read more »

Moon Square Neptuneorb: 6°

The Moon square Neptune in a chart typically indicates a tie between emotional satisfaction and fantasy. This aspect could be positive or negative, depending on […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Jupiterorb: 6°

Mars conjunct Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person is strong-willed and has a lot of sexual energy. They are generally a positive […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Plutoorb: 6°

Mars opposite Pluto in a chart typically indicates a lot of internal conflict regarding goals, how to express emotions, and how to deal with setbacks […] Read more »

Uranus Opposite Neptuneorb: 7°

Uranus opposite Neptune in a chart can create a lot of chaos in someone’s life. Uranus and Neptune’s energies blend negatively sometimes, especially when they […] Read more »

Moon Trine Venusorb: 8°

When the Moon trines Venus in a Natal Chart, this can create an open, honest, and nurturing personality. Someone with this aspect in their chart […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Midheavenorb: 8°

Jupiter conjunct the Midheaven in a chart can give a person an open mind and a desire to learn as much as possible to succeed. […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Conjunct Pallas Juno Square Ascendant Chiron Sextile Midheaven Midheaven Square North Node Midheaven Square South Node Venus Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Mars Sextile Black Moon Lilith Midheaven Square Vertex Mercury Square Hygiea Jupiter Sextile Pallas Uranus Square Pallas Pluto Trine Pallas

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Racey Helps’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Moon Conjunct Pallasorb: 0°

The Moon conjunct Pallas in a Natal Chart makes you insightful and intuitive. You are driven to pursue progressive change that empowers families and children. […] Read more »

Midheaven Square North Nodeorb: 0°

The Midheaven square of the North Node in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and insecure about your career. You seek success and recognition related […] Read more »

Midheaven Square South Nodeorb: 0°

The Midheaven square of the South Node creates challenges related to your career path. You struggle to find your focus and may feel insecure about […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Quincunx South Node Chiron Quincunx Vertex Eros Quincunx Vertex North Node Sextile Part of Fortune North Node Opposite Vertex South Node Trine Part of Fortune South Node Conjunct Vertex Chiron Conjunct Eros

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Racey Helps’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

North Node Opposite Vertexorb: 1°

The North Node opposite the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you doubt your instincts. You are comfortable and set in your ways. You wait […] Read more »

South Node Trine Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The South Node trine the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you comfortable and secure with your past. You avoid change and seek […] Read more »

South Node Conjunct Vertexorb: 1°

The South Node conjunct the Vertex in the Natal Chart is an indicator of easy advancement. You recall wisdom from your past lives and this […] Read more »

Chiron Conjunct Erosorb: 2°

Chiron conjunct Eros in a chart aligns Chiron’s potential for healing and growth with Eros’ inner desires and need for intimacy and connection. Wounds may […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.