BEVERLY HILLS, CA — The six-episode Amazon series Woody Allen is starring in, directing and writing will be titled "Crisis in Six Scenes" and premiere Sept. 30, the streaming service announced.

The series is described by Amazon as "a comedy that takes place in the 1960s during turbulent times in the United States when a middle class suburban family is visited by a guest who turns their household completely upside down."

The cast also includes Miley Cyrus and Elaine May, with Rachel Brosnahan and John Magaro as recurring guests.

The project was initially announced in January 2015.

Amazon also announced the premiere dates for the half-hour series "One Mississippi" (Sept. 9) and "Fleabag" (Sept. 16) and the hour series "Goliath" (Oct. 14) and "Good Girls Revolt" (Oct. 28).

"Transparent" and "Mozart in the Jungle" will begin their third seasons Sept. 23 and Dec. 9 and the second season of "Red Oaks" Nov. 11. All three are half-hour series. The second season of the alternate history hour series "The Man in the High Castle" will begin Dec. 16, Amazon announced.

Amazon bills its series as half-hour and hour. "One Mississippi" is billed by Amazon as "a traumedy inspired by comedian Tig Notaro's life," dealing with her leaving Los Angeles to return to her hometown in Mississippi upon her mother's death.

"Fleabag" is written by award-winning playwright Phoebe Waller-Bridge who also stars as Fleabag, a dry-witted, sexual, angry, grief-riddled woman living in London.

"Goliath" stars Billy Bob Thornton as down-and-out lawyer Billy McBride who pursues a wrongful death suit against the biggest client of his former firm. The cast also includes William Hurt as McBride's former legal partner.

"Good Girls Revolt" is inspired by the landmark sexual discrimination cases chronicled in the book by Lynn Povich and stars Anna Camp, Genevieve Angelson and Erin Darke as young female researchers at a New York news magazine who seek to become reporters.

The series also stars "Parenthood" alumna Joy Bryant as the researchers' attorney, Eleanor Holmes Norton.

The announcements were made in connection with Amazon's portion of the Television Critics Association Summer Press Tour which is being held in Beverly Hills.

— City News Service, photo courtesy of Amazon