When Adam Stansfield died at the age of just 31, his family were inundated with stories.

Everyone seemed to have one, whether they had bumped into him in a Sainsbury’s in Hereford or had just had a chat while he signed a shirt after a match. They kept on coming, stories of Adam that the family never knew.

One story above all resonated and helped to turn grief into purpose. Stansfield’s son Jay, now forging his own path in the game at Fulham, was taking part in a summer holiday tournament at Twyford Spartans in Tiverton, Devon. It was an under-six tournament and Adam was looking after one of the teams. His team performed well during the week and they reached the finals, which were set to be held on the Friday. Adam had taken a shine to a little lad in his side, and the youngster vice versa. He noticed the player would play in trainers and, with the final set to be played on grass, he told the youngster to try and wear boots the next day. “I don’t have any boots,” the young lad told Adam. His family could not afford them.

That evening, Stansfield went out and bought him a pair of boots, and brought them with him the next day. He didn’t tell a soul and that story inspired Adam’s family to turn their tragedy into something positive in the years that followed.

“We thought, ‘That’s what we’re going to do’,” says his sister, Andrea. “We’re going to help in Adam’s name. That’s what he was about. He loved helping others.”

After his passing, the Stansfield family set up the Adam Stansfield Foundation, and it has aimed to help other young people simply to play football. Adam, who only turned professional at the age of 23 after plying his trade in non-League, was once just a kid who wanted to make it in the game. He did that and lived the dream. But he always wanted to share that joy with others.

Today, the charity has raised more than £300,000 and, in the process, it has helped the family to hold Adam’s memory close. It has built on his legacy, one that has now impacted so many more families in the south west.

“There is not a day that goes by, because we have done the foundation, where Adam’s name doesn’t get mentioned,” says his mum, Gig. “You see something, or pictures are given to us.

“You don’t sit and think about the bad side. You only think about the good. It has given us such happy times.”

There is a photograph sitting on the window ledge of Gig and Roger Stansfield’s home in Exmouth. It is of their son, Adam, and his siblings Paul, Andrea and Wayne. They are standing outside Wembley Stadium, Adam in his matchday suit and the others clad in Exeter shirts. It’s a beautiful day, the kind where the warmth of the day fills the image and gives it almost an ethereal quality. It is fitting of what it captures, the afterglow of another high moment in Adam’s football career, another starring performance in a promotion play-off.

But now, for Gig, as she recalls the support her family received more than a decade ago, it holds a deeper resonance. Over the shoulder of Adam, standing imperiously with his arms folded and a boot almost on his shoulder, is the late England captain Bobby Moore.

“This photo has sat there for years,” Gig says, sat in the Cat and Fiddle Inn in Exeter with her husband Roger, daughter Andrea and son-in-law Shaun. “It’s Adam and Bobby Moore, who both died of bowel cancer, they are together in this photograph. It’s just one of those weird things that you suddenly look at and didn’t realise for ages and then suddenly…”

The Stansfield’s world changed in March 2010. Adam had complained of a stomach bug on the phone to his mum before training because he wanted to avoid passing anything on. “It was typical Adam,” Gig recalls. At first, they checked for just indigestion, and then doctor’s appointments progressed to tests, seeking to find out the cause of the pain and check perhaps for irritable bowel syndrome, or Crohn’s disease. And then, after being sent for a scan, the phone rang.

“We were walking in Exeter with the boys while Marie (Adam’s wife) and Adam went to the hospital,” Gig says. “We met outside WH Smith and they just broke down. He said he had cancer. That was it.”

Adam was operated on and the cancer was found to have spread beyond just one part of the bowel. But after surgery and chemotherapy, he was determined to get back to training. “He started one round of chemo, and he suddenly looked really well again,” says Gig. “His first words were, ‘I’m going to beat this, and I’m going to be back at training on July 1’. Which he did. He made it back.

“And then, all of a sudden, he got a back pain. They took him back in for more tests but it had spread to his liver. He died in August.” Adam was 31 when he died, less than six months after his first diagnosis. He left behind his wife Marie and young sons Cody, Taylor and Jay, then aged two, five and seven.

The outpouring of support was immediate and overwhelming. Plans to hold Adam’s funeral at St Paul’s church in Tiverton, where he and Marie married, were quickly shelved in favour of Exeter Cathedral due to the sheer number of people wishing to pay their respects. Flowers swamped the Big Bank stand at St James Park. “The undertaker came to see us and he said, ‘Do you want flowers or donations?’,” recalls Gig. “Our eldest son Wayne said: ‘I don’t know if this is the right time to say, but it’s been in my mind, should we perhaps start a charity in Adam’s name? To help children with football or something around that.’ We all looked at each other and thought that was a good idea.”

For Adam, football was everything. His dad Roger, a retired train driver, is a huge Nottingham Forest fan and that footballing passion was passed on. While his siblings Andrea, Paul and Wayne took up roles in the RAF, Adam held off, eager to make it in the game. “Adam was always football,” says Gig. “He just kept plugging away.”

It was playing for Elmore FC in Tiverton that he got his break. Former Yeovil manager Gary Johnson came down to watch his reserves side face Adam’s team. “Adam had a cracking game that night,” says his dad, Roger. “He spoke to him that night. In two days he was down at Yeovil on trial.”

“He said he couldn’t take his eyes off him, he ran our players ragged,” adds Gig. “He said he had a foot like a wet fish!” Gig reaches down and takes a copy of the Non-League Football Magazine that she has brought with her. Adam is the cover story and the feature includes a picture of him striking a ball against the wall. He is caked in mud. “He would do that after training every day,” she says. “To get his strike right. He’d be there, just kicking a ball against a wall.”

Adam broke into the first team at Yeovil and spent three years at the club, helping them to promotion from the Conference in 2004 before joining Hereford United, where he won promotion again via the play-offs. In 2006, he moved to Exeter, initially recruited by Alex Inglethorpe but with the paperwork completed by Paul Tisdale. Here he helped the team to promotion again via the play-offs in 2008, and then from League Two in 2009. He became a fans’ favourite.

“You’ve watched Jay play, and Jay doesn’t stop running,” says Shaun, Adam’s brother-in-law. “And that was the same with Adam. He wouldn’t give up the ball or chasing players.”

When Adam passed away, hundreds of fans lined the streets of Exeter to pay their respects in the rain. The club retired the No 9 jersey for nine seasons, renamed a stand after him and made sure to honour the rest of his contract to his family. Airline Flybe painted him onto one of their aircraft, while his name is still sung on the terraces and a massive shirt banner with Stansfield’s number is still unfurled for the big games.

“They got to this ground once and the steward said it’s a fire risk,” recalls Roger. “So Flybe, who were shirt sponsors at the time, heard about it and had it fireproofed. It must have been £600. They said you shouldn’t get any more issues.”

It was at the funeral, though, that donations first came flooding in and opened a new door for Adam’s legacy. “We said we’d call it the Adam Stansfield Foundation and will work out the details afterwards,” says Gig. “We started with more than £5,000!”

“We gave it five years really, with Adam being a local footballer,” says Andrea. “But here we are, 12 years this year.”

The aim of the foundation is primarily to help young people into football, while raising awareness about bowel cancer. The support it provides is wide-ranging, whether it be providing kit or equipment for primary or secondary schools, or sports goggles for those with glasses. “The cheapest are £175, depending on the prescription,” says Gig. “So the local Specsavers know if someone goes in, they will pass our details onto them.”

It is not always easy to help individuals in the subtle way that Adam did with a young lad with his boots, as many are reluctant to come forward, but that story forms the basis of their ambitions. So far, the charity has helped thousands of young people across Devon, Hereford and Somerset. It has bought bumpers for powerchair football, supported Down’s syndrome football as well as helped youngsters in deaf football. It has helped under-16s get onto the coaching ladder, supported the FA Junior Football Leaders awards in Devon and is assisting youngsters who can’t afford to do a football refereeing course. It paid the fees for two young girls to have trials at county level after their parents could not afford the travel expenses and kit.

Recently, it teamed up with another charity, Jay’s Aim, to help contribute to the often prohibitive cost of buying a defibrillator for youth teams. It also receives referrals from social services, helping them to find those needing support. “It’s all about enabling the kids to play football,” says Andrea. “That’s what we want to do.”

The fundraising has continued at pace. From taking part in the Great West Run to skydiving, as Andrea herself attempted, they have found different ways to raise funds.

Two young people, in particular, have made an extraordinary impact. Exeter fans and brothers Tom and Jack Vickery, both now ambassadors for the foundation, have individually raised more than £140,000 through innovative fundraising ideas. They run regular auctions with clubs, coaches and players from all sports from across the country for donated signed equipment and kit. It has been a huge success.

“We’re massive Exeter fans, so the minute Adam left Exeter, it was like we had lost our star, our legend,” says Tom. “For us, it was, ‘What can we do after what he’s given us as fans? What can we give back?’.

“My highlight of Adam would be after every single game, whether it be a win or we got hammered, he would be the last one around the pitch clapping the fans. He gave us fans all the goals, all that happy times and (now) it’s our time to do something. We never thought it would do so well. Our target was £3,000.”

At The Cat and Fiddle, Gig has a brought bag of vintage Exeter shirts to be passed on, ready for auction. From signed shirts to jockey breaches, all kinds of equipment has been sent their way. “The poor postman,” says Jack. “The stuff just piles through the letterbox.”

The foundation continues to raise awareness of bowel cancer too. As we meet, four men from Devon are rowing across the Atlantic, seeking to do so in a world-record time. On the side of the boat is a huge logo of the foundation, and the boat itself is called Stanno.

Onboard are Ryan Tipping (Fire and Rescue), James Bevan (Exeter City Academy sports scientist), Dom Thorne (rugby club Exeter Chiefs’ conditioning coach) and Mick Turner (Exeter City academy coach). Turner has played a key role for the family since Adam’s passing, particularly too with Jay, who went on to play in the Exeter academy.

“He was a mentor for Jay, and a good shoulder to cry on, an arm around the shoulder,” says Andrea. “When we met him in August time to talk about this initiative, the way he spoke then about Adam and Jay… he welled up several times because it still meant so much to him.”

The work of the foundation has all helped to further Adam’s legacy. After helping provide equipment to secondary schools in Yeovil, one recently named its sports science testing laboratory after Adam. An Alternative Provision academy, providing an education for those outside of the mainstream system, chose to name its school after Adam.

“They said Adam was our hero,” says Andrea. “He never got a red card, and his values and ethos on the pitch were how we would like to live our lives.”

It has also helped the family too, particularly the young ones who were so young when Adam passed.

“Little Cody was only two when his dad died,” says Andrea. “He didn’t really understand, because every day Adam was still on the news after he’d passed, and Cody would say: ‘When’s my daddy coming home from playing football?’.”

“They’ve done really well,” says Gig. “The three lads, I’m really proud of them, with what they have coped with.

“I suppose in a way, for us to be doing this foundation, it’s always there. They have seen that their dad played a lot, they have all got their phones and see the social media. But the ongoing stuff with Adam, with the foundation, you are conscious of it, it’s almost like he’s still with us.”

On the field, Adam’s legacy also now lives on through Jay, who has taken the step into the professional game and is in the first-team set-up at Fulham. He left Exeter’s academy at 16 to move to west London and is now impressing the senior head coach Marco Silva.

“All three of them love football,” says Gig. “If they’re not playing football, they’re playing FIFA. In a way it must be in their genes because Adam left them so young, he could not be too much of an influence… Jay got a little bit of kicking a ball around in the living room with him. He went when they were so young. The legacy of their dad spurs them on.”

“It drives Jay, I think,” says Shaun. “He wants to do it for his dad.”

Like Adam, Jay is a striker and known for his work rate and excellent technique in front of goal. It’s hard for the family to avoid the similarities. “He’s just so much like Adam in the way he plays,” says Gig. “His style and everything. We’ve got pictures of him doing poses just like Adam did.”

Roger and Gig never had the chance to see Adam play for England’s C team during his career, where he scored during the semi-professional Four Nations tournament. They did, though, watch Jay pull on the shirt for the England youth sides. “That was amazing,” says Gig. “To go up to Chesterfield and see him for England. It was lovely when they called him on.”

Andrea and Shaun were travelling around Europe when Jay got his first England Under-18s call-up. “We were in our camper van,” says Andrea. “And we were up in northern Spain, heading home. Then mum phoned and said: ‘Jay has just had an England call-up! He’s flying to Spain tonight!’. He was six hours south of us. So it was, ‘OK, turn the car around!’. There’s no way we were going to miss that!”

All at Exeter keep a close eye on his progress, and while there is hope, there is no expectation. It is all about enjoying the sport and doing what he loves in the same way that Adam did.

“To us, Adam was just our lad playing football, and struggling so hard to make it and wanting it so much and then finally getting there,” says Gig. “He’d given us all that excitement of getting there and watching him, and the ups and downs of football. But he was always just our Adam.”

To find out more about the Adam Stansfield Foundation and where you can donate, visit www.adamstansfieldfoundation.com

(Graphic design: Sam Richardson)