The Adam Stansfield Foundation – Website Terms of Use

Agreement to terms of use

These terms and conditions of use (the “Terms of Use“) apply to your use of this website; The Adam Stansfield Foundation. Please read the Terms of Use carefully before you start to use the Site. By using the Site, you indicate that you accept these Terms of Use and that you agree to abide by them. If you do not agree to these Terms of Use, you do not have permission to use the Site.

Linking to the Site

You are allowed to have links directly to pages hosted on the Site as long as the link, when activated by a user, displays that page full-screen in a fully operable and navigable browser window and not within a frame on the linked website.

The appearance, position, and other aspects of the link must not create the false impression that an entity or its activities or products are associated with, endorsed or approved by or sponsored by The Adam Stansfield Foundation. Also it must not damage or dilute the goodwill associated with the name of The Adam Stansfield Foundation. You may not link directly to or embed any Adam Stansfield Foundation image files in your web pages.

If you wish to link to pages on the Site, you are responsible for maintaining those links. The Adam Stansfield Foundation reserves the right to remove or move pages on the Site at any time without notice.

Links from the Site

Where the Site contains links to internet sites maintained by others (“third-party sites”). These links are provided solely as a convenience to you and not as an endorsement by The Adam Stansfield Foundation of the content on those third-party sites. The Adam Stansfield Foundation is not responsible for the content of linked third-party sites or for any loss or damage that may arise from your use of them and does not make any representations regarding the content or accuracy of materials on such third-party sites. The Adam Stansfield Foundation cannot guarantee that these links will work all of the time and has no control over the availability of the linked pages.

Ownership of the Site Content

All rights in the content, materials and software which are made available via this Site including, without limitation, the design and arrangement of such content and software (the “Content”) are owned, controlled or licensed by or to The Adam Stansfield Foundation and are protected by all applicable English or international intellectual property laws.

Your Contributions

There are many opportunities within the Site for you to actively participate. In the process of doing so, you may provide certain comments, suggestions, data (including personal data), or other information to The Adam Stansfield Foundation (collectively “Information”). You acknowledge that you are solely responsible for any Information that you choose to disclose and make publicly accessible via the Site, and that under no circumstances will The Adam Stansfield Foundation be liable in any way for the disclosure and public accessibility of such Information. You acknowledge that any Information posted to publicly accessible areas may remain publicly accessible indefinitely.

In consideration of your continuing use of the Site, The Adam Stansfield Foundation shall be entitled, without further obligation, to retain, disclose or otherwise use the Information for any purpose. Also, in consideration of your continuing use of the Site, you hereby assign all your interest in intellectual property rights in such Information to the , The Adam Stansfield Foundation, as a continuing obligation, with full title guarantee for the full duration of such rights, wherever in the world enforceable. You shall execute all documents and assignments and do all such things necessary to ensure that The Adam Stansfield Foundation is able to enjoy the benefits of the rights under this condition. You shall refrain from any action prejudicial to the subsistence of the intellectual property rights in the Information and from any action prejudicial to the assignment pursuant to this condition.

Use of Material

You may freely download material from the Site. Any and all downloaded materials may be used by you for personal, non-commercial use. You may not, however, distribute, modify, transmit, reuse, repost, or use any of such materials for public or commercial purposes without the express written permission of The Adam Stansfield Foundation. All copyright and other proprietary notices contained in downloaded materials must be retained. Unless otherwise noted all material on this Site may not be used except as provided herein and without the express written permission of The Adam Stansfield Foundation. Images of people or places displayed on the Site are either the property of or used with permission by The Adam Stansfield Foundation. The use of these images by you is prohibited without the express written permission of The Adam Stansfield Foundation. Unauthorized use of the images may violate copyright, trademark, privacy, and/or publicity laws, as well as communications regulations and statutes. Your use of the Site is at your own risk. Neither The Adam Stansfield Foundation nor any other party involved in creating, producing, or delivering the Site is liable for any direct, incidental, consequential, indirect, or punitive damages arising out of your access to, or use of, the Site.

Prohibited Use

You may only use the Site for lawful purposes. You may not use the Site:

in any way that breaches any applicable local, national or international law or regulation;

in any way that is unlawful or fraudulent, or has any unlawful or fraudulent intent purpose or effect;

to transmit, or procure the sending of, any unsolicited or unauthorised advertising or promotional material or any other form of similar solicitation (spam);

to knowingly distribute any material that contains viruses, Trojan horses, worms, time-bombs, keystroke loggers, spyware, adware or any other harmful programs or similar computer code designed to adversely affect the operation of any computer software or communications network or hardware.

If you breach these Terms of Use, we may terminate any applicable licences and/or block your IP address from accessing the Site and/or withdraw your right to use the Site (or any part of the Site), with immediate effect.

You also agree:

not to reproduce, duplicate, copy or re-sell any part of the Site in contravention of these Terms of Use;

not to access without authority, interfere with, damage or disrupt:

any part of the Site;

any equipment or network on which the Site is stored;

any software used in the provision of the Site; or

any equipment or network or software owned or used by any third party.

Disclaimers

Your use of the Content is entirely at your own risk. We make no warranty, representation or guarantee that the Content is error free or fit for your intended use.

Your correspondence or dealings with, or participation in promotions of, advertisers whose advertisements are found on or through the Site, including payment and delivery of related goods or services, and any other terms or representations associated with such dealings, are solely between you and the relevant advertiser. The Adam Stansfield Foundation does not endorse, recommend, or make any representations about any products or services provided by advertisers. The presence of advertisements found on the Site, or the inclusion of the words alongside advertisements such as “official sponsor” or “partner” do not imply any exclusive arrangement between the , The Adam Stansfield Foundation and such advertiser. To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, you agree that The Adam Stansfield Foundation shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any kind incurred as the result of any such dealings or as the result of the presence of such advertisers on the Site and/or any reliance placed by you on the completeness or accuracy of such advertising.

Limitation of Liability

To the fullest extent permitted by applicable law The Adam Stansfield Foundation hereby disclaims any and all liability for loss, injury or damage (direct, indirect, consequential, incidental or special) arising out of or in connection with use of the site including without limitation any and all liability:

Relating to the accuracy, completeness, reliability, availability, suitability, quality, ownership, non-infringement, operation, merchantability and fitness for purpose of the content;

Relating to its work procuring, compiling, interpreting, editing, reporting and publishing the content;

Relating to any interruption, failure or cessation of operation or transmission;

Resulting from any acts or omissions of any third parties in connection with your use of the site;

Resulting from reliance upon, operation of, use of or actions or decisions made on the basis of, any facts, opinions, ideas, instructions, methods, or procedures set out on this site;

Arising out of or relating to the misuse of or inappropriate reliance on the content of the site; and

Resulting from any virus, worm, trojan, time-bombs, keystroke loggers, spyware, adware or any other kind of malware or contamination of computing equipment.

You should carry out your own evaluation / verification exercise before choosing to rely upon any of the content in any way.

This does not affect The Adam Stansfield Foundation’s liability for death or personal injury arising from The Adam Stansfield Foundation’s negligence, nor The Adam Stansfield Foundation’s liability for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, nor any other liability which cannot be excluded or limited under applicable law.

Viruses, hacking and other offences

You must not misuse the Site by knowingly introducing (or transmitting data, sending or uploading any material that contains) viruses, Trojans, worms, time-bombs, keystroke loggers, spyware, adware, logic bombs or other material, programmes or similar computer code which is malicious, technologically harmful or designed to adversely affect the operation of any computer software or hardware of the Site. You must not attempt to gain unauthorised access to the Site, the server on which the Site is stored or any server, computer or database connected to the Site. You must not attack the Site via a denial-of-service attack or a distributed denial-of-service attack.

By breaching this provision, you would commit a criminal offence under the Computer Misuse Act 1990. The Adam Stansfield Foundation will report any such breach to the relevant law enforcement authorities and will co-operate with those authorities by disclosing your identity to them. In the event of such a breach, your rights to use the Site will cease immediately.

The Adam Stansfield Foundation will not be liable for any loss or damage caused by a distributed denial-of-service attack, viruses or other technologically harmful material that may infect your computer equipment, computer programs, data or other proprietary material due to your use of the Site or to your downloading of any material posted on it, or on any website linked to it.

Operation of the Site

The Adam Stansfield Foundation aims to update the Site regularly, and may change, modify or remove the Content or any part of the Content at any time. The Adam Stansfield Foundation shall be entitled at its sole discretion at any time without notice to modify, interrupt or terminate the operation of or access to the Site or any part of the Site. Any of the material on the Site may be out of date at any given time, and The Adam Stansfield Foundation is under no obligation to update any such material.

Changes to these Terms of Use

The Adam Stansfield Foundation shall have the right, at its sole discretion and at any time, to change or modify these Terms of Use, such change shall be effective immediately upon posting to the Site. You are responsible for regularly reviewing these Terms of Use to obtain timely notice of any such changes, as they are binding on you. The Adam Stansfield Foundation will post a last amended date at the bottom of this page to assist such review. Your continued use of this Site after such posting shall constitute your acceptance of these Terms of Use as modified. Some of the provisions in these Terms of Use may also be superseded by provisions or notices published elsewhere on the Site.

Assignment

You may not assign or delegate your rights or obligations under these Terms of Use without the prior written consent of The Adam Stansfield Foundation

Severance

If any provision of these Terms of Use (or part of any provision) is found by any court or other authority of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable, that provision or part-provision shall, to the extent required, be deemed not to form part of these Terms of Use, and the validity and enforceability of the other provisions of these Terms of Use shall not be affected

Waiver

No failure or delay by The Adam Stansfield Foundation to exercise any right, power or remedy will operate as a waiver of any of them nor will any partial exercise preclude any further exercise of the same or some other right, power or remedy.

Information about you and your visits to the Site

The Adam Stansfield Foundation processes information about you in accordance with The Adam Stansfield Foundation Privacy Policy. By using the Site you consent to such processing and you warrant that all data provided by you is accurate.

The Adam Stansfield Foundation has obligations under law, including the Freedom of Information legislation, to disclose information including confidential information held by us. The Adam Stansfield Foundation will always endeavour to consult with you before making a decision to disclose confidential information held by us.

Governing Law and Jurisdiction

These Terms of Use and any and all claims, disputes or proceedings of any kind (whether relating to contractual or non-contractual obligations) arising out of or in connection with them shall be governed by and construed in accordance with English law.

These Terms of Use shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of Courts located in the United Kingdom in respect of all proceedings (whether relating to contractual or non-contractual obligations).

Your Concerns

If you have any concerns about material which appears on the Site, please contact info@adamstansfieldfoundation.com.