Today marks seven years since Exeter City legend Adam Stansfield passed away from bowel cancer.

His death, when aged just 31, sent shockwaves through the football world, with the striker having been a popular figure when playing for Yeovil Town and Hereford United.

Stanno’s image has since adorned a plane and the Exeter pound, but his legacy also lives on in the work of the Adam Stansfield Foundation, set up in the wake of his death.

The Foundation focuses on the areas around where Stansfield played his football, in Devon, Herefordshire and Somerset, and aims to raise awareness of bowel cancer issues and to help give young people the unique opportunity to develop life skills through the power of football and to assist them in their goals of living the dream, as Adam did by playing football.

“Adam was always very grateful that he had the opportunity and our aim is to try and help young players get the same opportunity at some level,” the Foundation says.

It has also committed to providing charitable funds for young people and youth football teams that need assistance, such as Dawlish Town’s girls team.

The Foundation has joined forces with The Bobby Moore Foundation, Mr Brightside and Bowel Cancer UK to raise awareness of the disease that also took the legendary England captain and Stephen Johns, son of former Millwall, Charlton and QPR goalkeeper Nicky Johns.

During Bowel Cancer Awareness Month in April each year, the four charities are involved in a campaign called Know the Score, with all 92 EFL clubs wearing Know the Score shirts to raise awareness of the disease, with Exeter Chiefs also getting involved in this year’s campaign.

The Foundation’s latest venture is providing funding for the FA Football Leaders Award, a coaching course for 12 to 16-year-olds, considered to be the first rung on the coaching ladder.

It is ideal for aspiring football coaches or those taking GCSE PE at school, with Exeter City Community Trust tutoring the six-hour course on the Foundation’s behalf and helping over 180 young people in the city to pass the course, with another 100 completing it in Yeovil and Hereford.

They are also keen to get involved in funding bowel cancer screening but at present the NHS would be unable to cope with the increased workload.

None of this would have been possible were it not for the hundreds of supporters who have helped to raise money for the Foundation in the past seven years and, in the words of the City fans’ song, have not let him go.

Adam’s family have led from the front, completing skydives, half marathons, ultra-marathons and 2.5-mile sea swims, with others having walked, run and jumped their way across the UK, Europe and even Australia in the striker’s name.

City, Yeovil and Hereford’s supporters’ teams, along with Great Western Railway, continue to play matches in order to raise money for the foundation.

Stansfield’s legacy truly lives on in some amazing ways – for more information about the foundation and to see whether you are eligible for a grant, visit www.adamstansfieldfoundation.com.