Chris Graythen/Getty Images

The Utah Jazz have one of the best frontcourts in the NBA. Al Jefferson, Paul Millsap, Derrick Favors and Enes Kanter form one of the best young group of big men in the league despite their unheralded reputation.

In Utah's case, they may try to bolster their biggest strength through the free agent market. They drafted Kevin Murphy in the second round of the NBA Draft and traded for Mo and Marvin Williams earlier this offseason.

They may not be done.

According to ESPN's Ric Bucher, the Jazz are one of the teams interested in free agent center Chris Kaman.

Source: teams still w/ a shot at Mayo (Mavs, Rockets, Pacers, Clippers, Knicks and Suns) + Kaman (Mavs, Pacers, Spurs, Kings and Jazz)

— Ric Bucher (@RicBucher) July 5, 2012

This move may not seem wise to Jazz fans, but why? The Jazz don't have the money to sign a marquee playmaker on the wing. According to the Salt Lake Tribune, the Jazz may not have enough to money to sign Kaman.

Utah's $5 million mid-level exception is expected to be below Kaman's price range.

Either way, it's certainly worth a try. Just because it's "expected" to be below his price doesn't mean you shouldn't court his services for next season.

Kaman will never be mistaken for a superstar, but he would provide a great backup to Jefferson in the middle. Favors is more suitable as a power forward, and Kanter isn't a sure thing just yet.

Kaman averaged 13 points and nearly eight rebounds per game last season. He is a big presence in the paint, and he understands how to play down low. The Jazz could sell him on the idea of playing with other dynamic forwards down low.

I would like to see the Jazz get creative to sign Kaman. This team isn't far away from competing in the Western Conference. They shocked people by grabbing the No. 8 seed last season, and they have improved (albeit marginally) so far this offseason.

Kaman may like the idea of playing with the Jazz's up-and-coming blend of forwards. He could work magic with Favors on the Jazz's second unit, and he could play a vital role in Utah's rebuilding effort.

People will scoff at this idea, but money isn't the only motive for players. Utah is a great basketball atmosphere, and they are a proud franchise. Their fans love this team, and Kevin O'Connor runs a very sound organization. They could make Kaman feel comfortable and he would receive vital minutes.

Things are far from certain, but the Jazz would be smart to sign Kaman. He's a solid presence, and he would give them the best frontcourt in the Western Conference without a doubt.