SALT LAKE CITY - Omari Johnson looked over to Cliff Alexander in the stall next to him in the visiting locker room in Sacramento. They can both hear Chris Kaman yelling from the showers.

"Kaman is crazy," Alexander says.

"He just has no filter," Johnson agrees.

Johnson, 25, and Alexander, 19, have only been around Kaman for a few weeks, but in their short time with the Portland Trail Blazers they've quickly realized that Kaman is a unique character.

He drinks whole milk after games, he reads car and truck magazines at his locker and he says whatever is on his mind. Even if Kaman wasn't an oddball, he'd still be the odd man out of this Blazers team. He's 33-years-old entering his 13th season while playing on the third youngest roster in the league with an average age of 25.3 and only one other player with more than five years of experience in the league.

Last season, his first with the Blazers, he was a key contributor on a playoff team. This year he's unlikely to get much playing time, but he still serves an important role mentoring the Blazers young roster.

"I still feel like I can provide a lot on or off the court for this team," Kaman said. "If my role is to be the guy that's helping guys off the bench and I get a little bit of minutes here and there, I'm going to play as hard as I can."

Kaman is on the outside of the Blazers frontcourt rotation, behind Meyers Leonard, Mason Plumlee, Ed Davis and Noah Vonleh in pecking order. Al-Farouq Aminu is likely to get time at power forward this season, too, pushing Kaman further down the depth chart. It's a reality the veteran has to deal with after the Blazers pivoted from Western Conference contender to youth-driven rebuild in a matter of months over the summer.

"I don't know if I necessarily anticipated this role for him when we got him," Stotts said. "But he's been terrific in the role last year and this year as far as (being) a mentor."

Kaman and Leonard developed a close relationship last season as Kaman became a key voice for Leonard as he tried to take the next step in career.

"He's hard on me sometimes, but he cares and wants me to succeed," Leonard said. "As I mature and grow into a leader and more of impact player having him there to help me and push me when I need it is really key."

Kaman doesn't limit his advice to the big guys. You can spot him pregame instructing rookie Luis Montero or heckling Damian Lillard on how the All-Star point guard came off a screen.

"Chris has opinions and he's not afraid to expound on them," Stotts said, trying to remain political about his outspoken big man.

Kaman is brash and unfiltered, but willing to help and share when he can. That willingness to be a mentor wasn't always part of his personality. It has developed over his 13-year career.

"I've been there and done that thing where you're the bad guy all the time and I don't want to be that guy," Kaman said. "I'm just looking to have a positive influence on anybody that I can in any way that I can."

While the roster was getting a full makeover in the summer, Kaman stayed in touch with Blazers President of Basketball Operations Neil Olshey. He saw the direction the franchise was headed and that at 33-years old he didn't necessarily fit the mold. But Kaman has a good relationship with Olshey and deeply respects Stotts. After some discussions over the phone with Olshey, he decided he wanted to be in Portland and not bolt for more playing time and another franchise.

"This is the best organization I've ever been a part of from top to bottom and I don't say that lightly," Kaman said. "I've been a lot of places with a lot of good people."

Despite his positive influence on the roster and good relationship with the organization, uncertainty looms over the veteran center. He'll be a free agent next summer and a season of sitting on the bench watching won't do much for his leverage when negotiating a new contract. He says he'd rather "earn my money playing" than mentoring behind the bench, but he's taking a mature approach into a season that presents a plethora of unknowns.

"I just think it's something that you can't worry about. You got to do what's best for you. What's the most professional for the team and try to be positive," he said. "It can go a lot of different ways. I don't know what's going to happen this year. I don't know if I'll be here the whole year. I don't know if I'll be here for another two weeks. I don't know what the future holds. I have no clue. I can't control any of that. So I don't think about that."

-- Mike Richman