Lamar Odom played for the Dallas Mavericks last season but didn’t enjoy it much because they never understood him or his game.

Chris Kaman used to play for the Clippers but now is a member of the Mavericks. He likes his new team but apparently not his old one.

There will be scores to settle tonight when the Clippers play host to the Mavericks.

Odom didn’t have much to say about his old employer Tuesday. He stayed on the practice court to work on his jump shot and then hustled past reporters for a team meeting. Kaman pulled no punches when asked by a Dallas reporter if the Clippers could evolve into a league powerhouse.

“If (team owner Donald) Sterling sold the team, they might be able to,” Kaman said.

So, yeah, tonight’s game ought to be interesting, and not only because the Clippers will be trying to extend their winning streak to four in a row after victories over the Utah Jazz, Sacramento Kings and Minnesota Timberwolves.

All eyes will be on Odom, who landed in Dallas after the Lakers tried and failed to deal him to the New Orleans Hornets as part of their proposed Chris Paul trade. The Lakers then granted his request to be dealt, only to spend a lost season with the Mavericks.

Odom clashed openly with Dallas owner Mark Cuban and essentially was told to go home and stay there late in the season. The Mavericks then traded the former NBA Sixth Man of the Year to the Clippers last June 29. He arrived every bit as out of shape as he did last season.

The difference this time is he’s found a comfort zone that includes unwavering support from Clippers coach Vinny Del Negro. Slowly but surely he’s become a useful member of the team’s second unit. He had a season-high seven points in Monday’s win over Utah.

“I just want Lamar to stay the course right now,” Del Negro said. “He’s in here early working out. He’s in here late working out. You can see his timing coming back a little bit. You can see his lift coming back just a little bit. He’s here every day. He’s grinding it out.

“He knows he has a ways to go, but you can tell when he’s out there he makes a difference for us and it’s only going to get better if he stays with the process. I think he’s very comfortable where he’s at.

“He’s not very comfortable with his game and that’s why he’s out there,” Del Negro said. “We have a lot of faith in him and I think it’s going to pay dividends down the road.”

Winning ugly

The Clippers rallied from a 31-19 deficit to start the second quarter and defeated the Jazz 105-104. Del Negro said he liked the way the team finished the game, but he wasn’t satisfied with the energy or execution of his starting lineup to start the game.

“I was pleased we finally showed up in the second half,” he said. “Our starters got us off to a terrible start. Their energy, their ball movement wasn’t good. Everything they were doing. …

“Our second unit did a good job. We can’t bury ourselves in a hole like that.”