From left: Dr. Della Bell, Mrs. Simone Massingill and Ms. Zorah Taylor (Simone’s sister). Thank you to STEM-Ma Jacqueline Brannon Giles for this post. Grandma Got STEM is touching the lives of many young women and a former student of Dr. Della … Continue reading →

Photo credit: Stanford University This page at the AMS website is collecting tributes to Maryam Mirzakhani, May 3, 1977-July 14, 2017 “Maryam Mirzakhani, the only woman to win a Fields Medal, died on July 14 at the age of 40. … Continue reading →

You may be inspired by this NY Times obituary for Marina Ratner. It opens our eyes not only to who can do math, but also to WHEN we can do work that is of value to the profession. The … Continue reading →

by Jacqueline Brannon Giles Sometimes you have to take time out to mingle with others and to learn more about the challenges and struggles of other women. During my youthful days, I never attended a Women’s Conference, but today I … Continue reading →

Iris Runge: A Pioneer in applied mathematics and electronics By Else Hoyrup, Danish mathematician and historian of science elsehoyrup@mail.dk This image of Runge appears on the Humboldt University Site. Iris Runge (1888-1966) was a German applied mathematician, physicist, and inventor. … Continue reading →

Thank you to mathematician Peter Kuchment, who suggested “this wonderful book of Constance Reid about her sister Julia Robinson.” Here’s a couple of really nice Amazon reviews of the book: 5.0 out of 5 starsConstance Reid was a wonderful biographer … Continue reading →

Connecting from Generation to Generation: Testimonies of Perseverance Thank you to Dr. Jacqueline Brannon Giles, who contributed this post. Those who love to study often find themselves alone, with their subject, paper, pen or computer. In order to reach excellence, … Continue reading →

Our Groans, Glory and Great Achievements By Professor Jacqueline Brannon Giles, Adjunct Professor of Mathematics; Region C Representative/National Association of Mathematicians Board of Directors. Foreword I am a grandma who loves STEM. The love for mathematics was instilled in me … Continue reading →

Emmy Noether (1882-1935) By Else Hoyrup Introduction This is a non-technical introduction to Emmy Noether, a German mathematician and physicist; one of the greatest mathematicians and physicists of the 20th Century. I first heard her name while an undergraduate studying … Continue reading →