Rohit Dhamankar in conversation with Physicists: Dr. Bhamathi Sudarshan, Dr. Radha Gourishankar and Amba Raghavan in Austin, TX, Feb 25, 2018. Early 1950s. Presidency College, Chennai, India. (Left to Right) Amba Raghavan, Dr. Radha Gourishankar, Dr. Bhamathi Sudarshan Three young … Continue reading →

Iris Runge: A Pioneer in applied mathematics and electronics By Else Hoyrup, Danish mathematician and historian of science elsehoyrup@mail.dk This image of Runge appears on the Humboldt University Site. Iris Runge (1888-1966) was a German applied mathematician, physicist, and inventor. … Continue reading →

Photo provided by Tom Schmit for this newspaper article. Caption: Patricia Weber Schmit, Sophia Schmit’s grandmother, working at an electron microscope in 1948. Thanks to Bill Messer who sent this story. Bill says: this was emailed to me by a … Continue reading →

Thank you to Pangratios Papacosta, Professor of Physics at Columbia College Chicago, who suggested two women in Astronomy he says contributed much to science, despite gender discrimination. Papacosta brings our attention to Henrietta Leavitt, whose 1908 discovery of using Cepheid … Continue reading →

Thank you to Pangratios Papacosta, Professor of Physics at Columbia College Chicago, who suggested two women in Astronomy he says contributed much to science, despite gender discrimination. Papacosta say he was very fortunate to have met one of them who … Continue reading →

Thanks to Andrew Ross, who wrote to say: “I just came across this notice from Upworthy via Facebook:” Happy birthday, Katherine Johnson! You may know her as the incredible NASA scientist and physicist who guided the trajectory of Project Mercury … Continue reading →

Emmy Noether (1882-1935) By Else Hoyrup Introduction This is a non-technical introduction to Emmy Noether, a German mathematician and physicist; one of the greatest mathematicians and physicists of the 20th Century. I first heard her name while an undergraduate studying … Continue reading →

While many women of color have made significant contributions to STEM fields for generations, some firsts are rather recent and worth acknowledging. This means that the women who pave the way and lead by example, are grandmothers in a broad … Continue reading →

Thanks to Darryl Yong, who shared this article about Emmy Noether by Lee Phillips. Please also see this updated GGSTEM article by Else Hoyrup.

Photo from the Smithsonian Institution Archives Acc. 90-105 – Science Service, Records, 1920s-1970s, Image # SIA2009-1326 Thanks to @STEMWomen, who noted on twitter that “Cecelia Payne-Gaposchkin discovered that the sun is mainly composed of hydrogen,” citing this Facebook page from … Continue reading →