Withers Lumber Meets the Needs of Homeowners and Contractors

Why go to Withers Lumber? That's simple- it's the people! Homeowners and contractors both appreciate the same things. They want reliable, caring people to help them accomplish their goals. From the foundation to the roof and everything in between... small project or large... new deck or pole barn... it's the experienced and knowledgeable crew at Withers Lumber that makes the difference. YOUR needs come first and we adapt ourselves to you. In life as well as in business, people are happiest when they serve others and forget about themselves. With an average of 15 years with the company, you'll love seeing the same faces at Withers Lumber Yard that you saw the last time you came in. Below are just a few examples of projects on which we've partnered with local customers in our communities.

Partners on Dwelling for Kenton's Women's Village

Elite Development NW and Withers Lumber collaborated to create a POD(Partners on Dwelling) for the Kenton's Women's Village. The village is designed to offer safety, security and community to women who are in need of emergency housing. The village houses offer residents the privacy and comfort of having their own home while they work torwards more permanent housing, education, and employment. Withers Lumber was happy to join the team of volunteers, businesses, and community organizations that work to make the Kenton Women's Village possible.

Apartment Complex

"Withers Lumber allows me to treat their place like it's my own," says John Knebes from Big Sky Construction. "Because I had limited room at my job site, my guys had to panelized the walls of this apartment complex in the huge gravel parking area at the Withers' Brooks/Salem lumber yard. Then we trucked the finished walls to South Salem. Withers Lumber really bends over backwards for their contractors - from the day I started working with John Gooley over 20 years ago it's been that way. I get my paneling, lumber and lots more from Withers Lumber Yard."

Partners with the Mt. Angel Abbey Benedictine Brewery

Mt. Angel Abbey Benedictine Brewery

Starting in 2015, Withers Lumber had the honor of partnering with the Mt. Angel Abbey to develop the Benedictine Brewery, one of only three breweries in the United States owned and operated by Monks. Over 100 volunteers gathered, including VP of Sales at Withers Lumber and multi-generational Mt. Angel samaritan, John Gooley. No equipment was used in the actual building process; only the hands of monks, seminarians, and other volunteers to lift beams and other materials in constructing the brewery were used. "In the course of the brisk Saturday, what started as a bare concrete slab quickly became a structural frame with building blocks that defined the overall shape of the Brewery and Taproom. The frame was built from 14,000 board feet of Douglas fir harvested from the Abbey tree farm. It now serves as a welcoming place to gather, taste and believe.

- Our Story

Benedictine Brewery.com

Extreme Makeover Oregon School for the Deaf

Withers Lumber partnered with Rich Duncan Construction and Extreme Makeover to rebuild the boys' dorm at the Oregon School for the Deaf in Salem. At the same time, the school's haunted house was rebuilt, which brings in a major source of funds for the school each Halloween. The entire project was donated- every bit of labor, lumber, nails, plywood, siding, hardware and more. John Gooley, Withers Lumber V.P. Sales coordinated the donation of $54,000 in materials with local companies such as Big Sky Construction, Freres Lumber, Hampton Lumber, Boise Cascade, Mary's River, and many, many more generous suppliers. Withers Lumber also provided the space at our Brooks/Salem lumber yard where over-sized 20-foot wide panels were first built by Big Sky Construction, then transported by Freres Lumber's trucks to the school. A tremendous team effort!

Commercial Framing Project

"Our projects are highly competitive and require our suppliers to be aggressive on their price. Withers Lumber provided a competitive bid and service package that was unmatched. Constructing this McDonald's in Fort Vancouver, Washington was a fast track project and Withers provided our materials on time and on budget!" -Rich Duncan Construction and sub-contact framer Don Drulinner.

Doctor's Office

"Withers Lumber was instrumental in value engineering our materials and making great recommendations on products and applications for the chiropractor's office we were building in Salem. We had a tight budget and without Withers' service it would have been a challenge to make it." -Rich Duncan Construction

Street of Dreams

"Withers Lumber was instrumental in value engineering our materials and making great recommendations on products and applications for the chiropractor's office we were building in Salem. We had a tight budget and without Withers' service it would have been a challenge to make it." -Rich Duncan Construction

Want to talk to our experienced and knowledgeable outside sales staff about your next project? Withers Lumber is here to answer your questions about building materials, make suggestions on how best to accomplish your construction and remodeling goals, and help you stay on budget.

2020 Tour Of Homes

We are honored to be apart of NW Natural's Tour of Homes. Thank you to the builders who partnered with us on their 2020 Tour Home! Visit tourofhomes.net/homes to check out the 2020 Tour Entries