The Withers Winery

The Withers Returns! Thursday 09.27.18 at 6:30pm

Chefs Nick & Christine Kondra | Andrew and Kathleen Tow of The Withers Winery

Join us in welcoming back The Withers Winery for another Winemaker Dinner Series event! Their cool climate wines originating from the Sonoma Coast, Mendocino County, El Dorado County, and the Sierra Foothills have garnered extreme praise from sommeliers, wine critics and high end restaurants the world over. Husband and wife team, Andrew and Kathleen Tow, lend their passions not only to quality wine production, but also to social and environmental responsibility and philanthropy – being only the second winery in the world certified as a B Corporation. All eight of their wines have recieved multiple scores of 90+ points and above from publications such as Wine Spectator, Wine Enthusiast, Burghound, and more. Likewise, they are being poured in Michelin Star winning establishments including The French Laundry, Jean Georges, Marea, Aquavit, and many others. Don’t miss your chance to experience these special selections with our carefully crafted tastings and pairings!

Don’t miss your chance to experience these highly acclaimed wines, poured by the winemakers themselves, and paired with a customized Cornerstone menu. As if it couldn’t get any better, our friends at The Lincoln Motor Company will be providing a complimentary bottle of The Withers’ 2016 In Hands Red Blend to each Winemaker Dinner Series reservation (1 bottle per 2 guests), plus a few more special surprises planned for that evening!

Thursday, September 27th at 6:30pm

$175 per person, sold in groups of 2

includes tax and gratuity

————

All wines will be available for retail purchase after the dinner at 10% discount.

reserve seats

Free rosa exquisite restaurant wp theme on inithemes.com

aunt dotty oysters.

About: The Aunt Dotty’s are the newest member to the Island Creek portfolio. They are grown about a mile from the Island Creeks right off of Saquish Beach (technically a part of the town of Plymouth) on the tidal lands next to Skip’s cottage. The cottage has been in the family since the days of the pilgrims, and he actually has a deed that proves that he owns the tidal area (only an oyster farmer would really care about this!). Anyway, the Aunt Dotty’s are also grown in trays, but are much more exposed at low tide, and for a longer period of time. They are named after Skip’s great aunt Dotty who was the last relative to live in the cottage year round.

Tasting Notes: The Aunt Dotty’s are the most savory of the bunch. While still salty, they have a complex acidity and fullness to them. They have the most intense flavor of the lot and we love them. Aunt Dotty oysters are the most petite oysters that we carry.

×