Written by Lia Hobel

Virginia’s Hunt Country brings tourists and locals together for its equestrian events, quaint towns, award-winning wineries, and exceptional restaurants. With majestic Blue Ridge Mountain views, sprawling pastures, and old estates, the area offers tranquil and peaceful countryside escapes deserving of more than a day trip.

Whether it is a weekend getaway or an extended stay, here are several unique cottages to consider booking this summer.

Photos by Gracie Withers.

Littlefield Cottage, Middleburg

At this sweet, historic cottage, you can experience Middleburg like a local. The home is conveniently located near town and next door to Greenhill Winery & Vineyards. The three-bedroom home was built in 1942 and seamlessly combines historic charm with modern day touches. It can accommodate four guests. Owner Jeannie Littlefield and her husband purchased the property in February 2020. They lived in it for eight months while lovingly restoring it to its former glory.

“It was actually originally a log cabin that is now covered over with stucco which we came to find out when we were doing renovation on one of the bathrooms,” Littlefield explains.

“Guests love the décor inside,” Littlefield says, adding that “it is reminiscent of the past but useful today.” Littlefield took inspiration from all of the different equestrian pastimes that the community in Middleburg is built around and strove to pay tribute to the area’s history with various antique finds. “I think people appreciate that. It’s super charming. Well appointed,” she says.

Guests have full access to the property including the private driveway, front porch, and back patio.

For more on Littlefield Cottage visit Vrbo.

Alpacas & Stars at Night Cottage, The Plains

The 1,800 square foot cottage offers a cozy and peaceful retreat, but it is the alpacas that steal the show on this 130-acre countryside property. Visitors will wake up with morning views of rolling hills and grazing alpacas.

Photos by Gracie Withers.

“If they want to interact with the alpacas, I am happy to give them exclusive tours if they are staying here,” shares Mary Forte, host and owner of the alpaca farm. Families, particularly smaller children, are fascinated by the experience of walking among the animals. There are also horses and a donkey on the farm.

The three-bedroom cottage is near the Great Meadow Field Event Center and can accommodate up to six guests. It offers comfortable and inviting furnishings. Pets are welcome, including horses and alpacas for boarding, and there is a swimming pool for warm summer days. There is also a farm store onsite with alpaca products. Once a year the alpacas are sheared and the wool is sent to mills to make sweaters, scarves, and more.

Marshall and The Plains are only minutes away for quick trips into town. And, guests who like to stargaze will enjoy this hillside gem with its dark skies and absence of distractions.

For more on Alpacas and Starry Night visit Vrbo.

Hayes Cottage, Bluemont

“It’s just like a warm hug — you immediately relax,” says Amy Whyte, host and owner of Hayes Cottage. This is the feeling she had when she first walked into the home in 2019. “I could tell this house was loved. It was so sweet and charming,” she adds.

Located in Bluemont, Virginia, in the Blue Ridge Mountains, the cottage is fully renovated and offers two bed rooms making it a charming escape for couples or friends. The home is impeccably decorated with no detail forgotten. Warm earth tones offer a soothing touch. From wall accessories to an antique clawfoot tub to soak the worries away, every inch of décor highlights the host’s attention to design and adds to the cottage’s allure.

Photos courtesy of Hayes Cottage.

From maintaining the original shelving inside the home to preserving the garden design of the previous owners, updating the cottage while maintaining its historic charm was of the utmost importance to Whyte and her husband. “The flowering shrubs and ferns planted years ago all add to the beauty surrounding the cottage,” Whyte says. “They’re just lovely. They’ve all matured and it’s just part of the charm of the property as well.”

Hayes Cottage is only minutes from the Appalachian trail, the Shenandoah River, wineries, breweries, and restaurants.

For more information on Hayes Cottage visit Vrbo.

Stoney Cobbler Hill, Delaplane

Photos courtesy of Stoney Cobbler Hill.

In this spacious, open, tri-level floor plan, guests will immediately feel right at home. Host Martha Williamson always has fresh flowers and a bottle of wine waiting to greet visitors. The house is situated on a little over two acres nestled in hunt and wine country and minutes from I-66.

“This house has incredible space with all new flooring throughout [and] bright and cheery furnishings,” Williamson says. Furthermore, the home boasts three fully renovated bathrooms as well as a modern kitchen with aesthetically pleasing granite and high-end appliances. The kitchen is spacious for cooking and gathering with friends and family.

The four-bedroom home is suitable for eight guests. At the center of the house there is a great room with vaulted ceilings, plenty of seating, and a dining area perfect for making memories around the dinner table. Guests can also enjoy a private nook with a queen-size pull-out couch and television upstairs. “It’s the perfect getaway to read a book, send the children when entertaining, or [use as a] separate office space. It’s just a great bit of extra space no matter how you choose to use it,” Williamson adds.

Additional entertaining and relaxation spaces include a screened-in porch and deck.

For more information on Stoney Cobbler Hill visit Airbnb or Vrbo. ML

This article first appeared in the July 2022 Issue.