RATP Dev’s parent company, RATP Group, has operated the Paris metro network for over 120 years. The state-owned French company delivered the first high-capacity driverless line on the Paris metro in 1998.

Today the Group operates public transport services through more than 100 subsidiaries in 15 countries, transporting 1.5 billion passengers a year.

Now RATP Dev is growing its footprint in Australia. It is part of the Parklife Metro Consortium contracted to deliver the new Sydney Metro transport line to service the Sydney Metro – Western Sydney Airport. Once the line is operational, RATP Dev will operate the metro line for 15 years.

Operator-led designs for accessibility

RATP Dev is an equity investor in the Sydney Metro project and is involved in the design phase.

‘Since we will be responsible for running the line, it is important that we are not just waiting for the project to be delivered,’ says Denis Masure, RATP Dev’s General Manager Australia & New Zealand. ‘We want to positively influence the whole delivery of the metro line. We have considerable skin in the game.’

Since metro lines are fully automated, reliability issues such as on-time running are largely taken care of. This allows the operator to focus on other issues affecting customer experience. That includes improving customer information, passenger flow management and accessibility.

‘For us, accessibility is not just about compliance with accessibility standards,’ Masure says. ‘You need to bring design engineering expertise and all the lessons learned through experience. This will ensure customers can genuinely access the service, even when it is degraded or under pressure.’

Every project and location is different, agrees Masure. ‘But we have an amazing opportunity with the Sydney Metro – Western Sydney Airport because it’s the highest international level of service that is expected. Customers will be tired, they will have luggage, some will have language and mobility challenges. It will be a very interesting project to bring all our experience and technical innovations to welcome customers.’

Emissions reduction and sustainability

Efficient public transport service will be important for reducing carbon emissions. The project has committed to achieving carbon-neutral certification from construction to operation.

Measures will include offsetting carbon emissions during construction. The electric metro trains will use regenerative braking to minimise energy usage. Stations and depots will be covered in photovoltaic cells.

RATP Dev looks forward to introducing the technical innovations it and project partner Siemens Mobility have developed in working together. Their recent projects around the world include Paris lines 1, 4 and 14 and the Riyadh Metro.