View waymark gallery

Grattan Bridge - Dublin - Ierland

in Arch Bridges

N 53° 20.727 W 006° 16.061

29U E 681880 N 5914180

There was already a bridge on this spot in 1676, rebuilt around 1753 and further improved and renamed in 1874

Waymark Code: WM1AE6E

Location: Dublin, Ireland

Published By: pmaupin

Views: 0

"Grattan Bridge (Irish: Droichead Grattan) is a road bridge spanning the River Liffey in Dublin, Ireland, and joining Capel Street to Parliament Street and the south quays.

History

1st Essex bridge of 1676

The first bridge on this site was developed by Sir Humphrey Jervis in 1676 with William Robinson acting as adviser and contractor. It was named as Essex Bridge to honour Arthur Capell, 1st Earl of Essex, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland who had also provided the finance for the construction of the bridge. It joined several of Jervis' developments (including Capel Street and Jervis Street) to the opposite side of the river and to Dublin Castle.

Essex Bridge was an arched stone structure with seven piers, and apparently partly constructed from the ruined masonry of nearby St. Mary's Abbey, Dublin on the northside.[1] In 1687 the bridge was damaged by a flood resulting in the loss of a hackney and two horses. The damage to the bridge was only partially repaired.

2nd Essex bridge of 1753

Essex Bridge, Dublin (built 1753-55) - replacing an earlier Essex Bridge

1755 illustration by Daniel Pomerade

In 1751 the second most northerly pier collapsed and damaged the adjacent arches.

Between 1753 and 1755 the bridge was rebuilt by George Semple, to correct flood and other structural damage and as one of the first initiatives of the Wide Streets Commission. The new bridge included stone alcoves or niches on either side of the bridge in a similar manner to London Bridge.

In 1764, John Bush, an English traveller, visited Dublin and had the following to say about the bridge:

"Over this river there are five bridges, one only of which deserves any notice, Essex-bridge, the lowest of all, which is really a well built, spacious and elegant bridge, with raised foot-paths, alcoves, and ballustrading, on the plan of Westminster-bridge, and about the same width, but not above one-fifth part so long"

For much of the 18th century, Essex Bridge was the most easterly bridge on the Liffey and marked the furthest point upriver to which ships with masts could travel. Many ships needed to travel this far upriver in order to berth in front of the old Custom House, the centre of merchant activity in the city from 1707 until 1791.

During this construction, some original features were removed, including the equestrian statue of George I, by John van Nost the Elder,[9] which was moved in 1798 to the gardens of the Mansion House. In 1937 it was bought by the Barber Institute of Fine Arts in Birmingham, in front of which it still stands as of 2023.

Grattan Bridge of 1874

From 1872, the bridge was further remodelled (on Westminster Bridge in London) by Parke Neville with further modifications by Bindon Blood Stoney, being widened and flattened with cast iron supports extended out from the stonework so as to carry pavements on either side of the roadway. The bridge was (and is still) lit by ornate lamp standards also in cast iron.

The bridge was reopened as Grattan Bridge in 1874, being named after Henry Grattan MP (1746-1820).

Later development

From 2002, Dublin City Council undertook a reconstruction of the bridge deck, with granite paving for the footpaths and a set of benches with wooden seats and toughened glass backs.

As part of what was intended to be a "European-style book market", in 2004 several temporary kiosks (prefabricated in Spain) were also controversially built on the bridge. Originally intended to create "a contemporary version of an inhabited bridge, such as the Ponte Vecchio in Florence", these kiosks were later removed."

(visit link)

What type of traffic does this bridge support?: all traffic except trains What kind of gap does this bridge cross?:

Rivier LiffeyIs the bridge still in service for its original purpose?: jaName of road or trail the bridge services: Capel Street en Parliament StreetLocation:

Dublin, IerlandLength of bridge: Not listedHeight of bridge: Not listedDate constructed: Not listed

Visit Instructions:

Please submit a photo(s) taken by you of your visit to the location (non-copyrighted photos only). GPS photos are also accepted with the location in the background, and old vacation photos are accepted. If you are not able to provide a photo, then please describe your visit or give a story about the visit. If the bridge location prevents you from taking a safe photograph, then please do not stop to take the photo. Safety is more important.

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest Arch Bridges

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point

Recent Visits/Logs:

Date Logged Log User Rating 08/05/2024 Andre 61 visited it