Ayesha Faridi is a well-known anchor. She works at Indian Business news channel named, ET NOW. She is born in Delhi and grew up with her parents and a younger brother. She completed her schooling at Delhi Public School, Delhi. Since her childhood, she was more into reading books and taking part in debates and group discussions.

She was among the toppers of her class. She has won various awards in academics and also in non-curricular activities as well. She has taken part in many school-level debate competitions and has won many awards too. She is also a national level tennis player. After completing her schooling, she decided to pursue her college-level education in Mass Media Communication.

She completed her graduation at Delhi University. She graduated with top grades in her class. While she was in her college, she used to work as a freelancer for many bloggers as well. Ayesha Faridi worked for many prominent news bloggers when she was in her college. After completing her graduation, she started working as a reporter at BBC World Service.

She started her career in 2003 and worked as an anchor and a reporter at BBC’s weekly half-hr show named BBC Extra Formulated. She also worked as a presenter at India Market Updates for CNBC’s Global network for various shows, named CNBC Cash Flow, CNBC Capital Connection, and Worldwide Exchange. Later, she worked as an Anchor and Research Analyst at CNBC-TV18. She has also hosted various TV shows such as Power Breakfast, Your Stocks, Bull’s Eye, Bazaar, India Market Wrap, Midcap Radar in the 7:00 AM-4:30 PM show.

She also conducted a one-hour show named, Your Stock, Bull’s Eye, and Movers & Shakers. She coordinated, planned, edited, as well as anchored this show. At CNBC, she also worked as an anchor at lifestyle shows which includes CNBC’s “Get a Life,” Business with Pleasure, Showtime India, and Storyboard. She also hosted CNBC’s award shows namely, Mutual Fund Awards, CFO Awards, Trade Awards, and CNBC Fee Best Bank Awards. After working at CNBC, she was offered a job of an anchor as well as a producer at MTV India. In 2010, she moved to work at ET Now, and she is currently working there.

At ET Now, she works as an anchor for morning flagship shows such as The Market and First traders. She also conducts afternoon shows such as Markets @ Lunch, Riding the Bull, and The F&O shows. She is authorized to analyze macro/micro market trends, company fundamentals, general financial news, and liaisons with traders, investigate & sector-based reports, economists for reports, and bankers.

She has also hosted many well-known shows such as India Economic Claves, ET Now’s Market Summits, Market Sense & Closing Trades, Investor Camp, and Chartbusters.