'A Million Ways to Die' (laughing) in the West

Like Blazing Saddles, A Million Ways to Die in the West has a slew of comic set-ups and one-liners that kill. And, as with Mel Brooks' classic 1974 film, it steps unabashedly into vulgar terrain.

Seth MacFarlane's bawdy absurdist comic Western (*** out of four; rated R; opening Thursday night in some theaters and Friday nationwide) boasts a clever high concept, with lots of knowing jokes about the American frontier. It entertainingly spoofs the era, offering a satirical take on movie Westerns. The only hitch in its giddy-up is how much it incorporates sophomoric and scatological humor. As directed, produced and co-written by Ted's MacFarlane, the premise is humorous and the performances winning, so the reliance on raunch seems unnecessary and its gross-out gags off-putting.

MacFarlane pokes fun at an epoch in American history routinely romanticized in film. Sure the sunsets were striking, but the Wild West was a minefield of murderous hazards.

If the snakes didn't get you, the bandits, cholera, tumbleweeds or county fair would.

"We should all just wear coffins for clothes," says Albert (MacFarlane), a nerdy sheep farmer living in Old Stump, Ariz., in 1882. Albert finds life both dangerous and dull. He lives with his sullen, aging parents who make the farming couple in Grant Wood's American Gothic painting seem warm and cuddly.

They glower when he comes through the door. "You're late," snarls his ornery dad (Christopher Hagen).

"For what?" Albert asks.

"Fair enough," his dad replies.

The locals are a dim lot.

Albert reminds his best friend Edward (Giovanni Ribisi) that the mayor has been lying dead outside the saloon for days and no one seems to notice.

Meanwhile, Edward is in love with Ruth (Sarah Silverman), who puts in long hours at the local house of ill repute, but he wants to wait to consummate their romance until after marriage.

The opening credits make the most of Western vistas and a familiar Bonanza-style score, and the film opens on a particularly bad day for Albert. A man he owes money to shoots him, and then his girlfriend Louise (Amanda Seyfried), the town schoolmarm, dumps him.

When a vicious brawl breaks out at the local saloon, Albert and Edward trade rhythmic fisticuffs in a comically choreographed tussle. Amid the mayhem, Albert spots Anna (Charlize Theron), a mysterious stranger, and saves her from the melee. They strike up a friendship based on their mutual hatred for frontier life.

An ever-impressive dramatic actress, Theron shows she's equally adept at sassy comedy.

The next day, Albert finds out that Louise has become romantically involved with Foy (Neil Patrick Harris), a smug shopkeeper who runs a "moustachery." The notion that a mustache makes the man is lampooned hilariously, particularly at a barn dance where the joys of the mustache are set to music.

When Albert foolishly challenges Foy to a gunfight — and instantly regrets it — Anna, an expert marksman, teaches him how to shoot. They grow closer. But unbeknownst to Albert, Anna is the unhappy wife of the area's most infamous outlaw, Clinch Leatherwood (Liam Neeson). When Clinch learns that Albert and Annie have kissed, he goes ballistic. The only thing that will make Clinch's day is to shoot Albert.

Plot details can be scattershot, but it succeeds thanks to an outrageously comical deconstruction of Hollywood Westerns and an appealing cast of characters.