Embark on a comedic journey through the untamed West in A Million Ways to Die in the West (2014). Directed by Seth MacFarlane, this film humorously navigates frontier perils, blending wit, romance, and an irreverent take on the Old West. With sharp humor and an unconventional narrative, the movie promises an entertaining escape that’s sure to tickle your funny bone.

Here’s how you can watch and stream A Million Ways to Die in the West via streaming services such as Peacock.

Is A Million Ways to Die in the West available to watch via streaming?

Yes, A Million Ways to Die in the West is available to watch via streaming on Peacock.

The film is a comedic Western drama that follows sheep farmer Albert Stark, a reluctant hero. The film balances romance and humor, offering a satirical take on the perils of frontier life. Fans can expect witty dialogue, unexpected twists, and a hilarious exploration of the challenges of the Old West.

The cast of A Million Ways to Die in the West includes:

Seth MacFarlane as Albert Stark

Charlize Theron as Anna Barnes-Leatherwood

Amanda Seyfried as Louise

Liam Neeson as Clinch Leatherwood

Giovanni Ribisi as Edward

Neil Patrick Harris as Foy

Sarah Silverman as Ruth

Wes Studi as Chief Cochise

Alex Borstein as Millie

Ralph Garman as Dan

John Aylward as Pastor Wilson

Rex Linn as the Sheriff/Narrator

Christopher Hagen as George Stark

Evan Jones as Lewis

Watch A Million Ways to Die in the West streaming via Peacock

A Million Ways to Die in the West is available to watch on Peacock.

Peacock is an American streaming service that features video content from NBC Universal Studios and other video content providers. It comes with various subscription levels, where the free tier contains limited content, and the paid premium tier allows access to the entire library of content.

You can watch the movie via Peacock by following these steps:

Go to PeacockTV.com

Click ‘Get Started’

Choose your payment plan

$5.99 per month or $59.99 per year (premium)

$11.99 per month or $119.99 per year (premium plus

Create your account

Enter your payment details

Peacock’s Premium account provides access to over 80,000+ hours of TV, movies, and sports, including current NBC and Bravo Shows, along with 50 always-on channels. Premium Plus is the same plan but with no ads (save for limited exclusions), along with giving users the opportunity to download select titles and watch them offline and providing access to your local NBC channel live 24/7.

The synopsis for A Million Ways to Die in the West is as follows:

“As a cowardly farmer begins to fall for the mysterious new woman in town, he must put his new-found courage to the test when her husband, a notorious gun-slinger, announces his arrival.“

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

Marvel Studios Gives Blade, Deadpool 3 and More New Release Dates

With the SAG-AFTRA strike officially over, Marvel Studios has announced new release dates for a number of its upcoming movies.…

Movies Noah Dominguez 4 hours ago

The Killer Review: A Calculated Bore

“Execution is everything.” These three words make up the tagline for The Killer, a new thriller film starring Michael Fassbender…

Movies Jonathan Sim 8 hours ago

Daryl Dixon Season 2: The Resident’s Manish Dayal Joins The Walking Dead Spin-off

Following a six-season series regular spot on Fox’s now-canceled medical drama The Resident, Manish Dayal has found his next major…

TV Maggie Dela Paz 9 hours ago

Live-Action Avatar: The Last Airbender Trailer Previews Netflix’s Take on Aang

After the poster was revealed yesterday, the first live-action Avatar: The Last Airbender trailer has been released online by Netflix.…

TV Spencer Legacy 9 hours ago