Wayne Ellis Frazier Sr. was born to Anthony and Isabell Gail Frazier on Friday July 13th, 1933 in American Falls, Idaho. He was welcomed into heaven on April 29th, 2012. Wayne was one of eleven children and was preceded in death by eight of his siblings: Hazel, Ralph, Paul, Gladys, Jack, Ray, Dick and Lee. He has two living sisters Jewel and her husband Bill Hall as well as Isabell Gail Newsom, all currently living in Pocatello, Idaho. Wayne married Judy Rae McManigal on November 18, 1960 in Reno, Nevada. They moved to Grants Pass in 1965 to raise their children Wayne Frazier Jr. and Kristi Ramsey. Wayne has six grandchildren Heather and Joe McDougal, Kandi Frazier, Ryan and Barbara Frazier and Brittney Ramsey. As well as seven great grandchildren Tyson Handy, Gavin Frazier, Alexis McDougal, Kaitlyn Handy, Carter McDougal, Bryce Hobbs and Braydon Hobbs. Wayne loved having a big family and spending time with his loved ones, he was also known to give out a sucker or two from time to time to his great grandchildren.

Wayne served his country in the United States Air Force in the secret service division where he was stationed throughout Germany from 1952 until 1957 when he was honorably discharged. Upon moving to Grants Pass with his family, Wayne had a passion for making a difference in his community as well as caring for those around him. Wayne worked in a management position at Mock’s Ford for many years, he was also an owner and operator of the Rogue College Market and Drive-In Restaurant where he was able to pursue his first true love, cooking. Along with other leading community members, Wayne began the Grants Pass Horse Racing Association and helped to get the Grants Pass Downs started.

Wayne was a 45 year member of the Fraternal Order of Eagles of Grants Pass of which he is a past president as well as a past Oregon State president serving from 1997 to 1998. While the State president, he raised over 40,000 dollars to purchase a 15 person van for the boys and girls club of Wolf Creek. In 1998 he was recognized by the governor of Oregon as a “community champion for children” for his work on this project as well as others. Also while in the Eagles, Wayne began a Christmas food basket program for needy families around Josephine County during the holidays. Approximately 38 years later the program has grown from 10 food baskets to 60 as well as Christmas presents for 142 children.

As a strong Christian man, Wayne read the bible seven times from cover to cover and didn’t hesitate to refer back to it and read it daily. He will be remembered for many things, some of which are his personality and humor as well as his intelligence and musical abilities in his younger days, he and his brothers would sit around and play their guitars and sing. He enjoyed playing cards as well as working on his daily crossword from the Daily Courier Newspaper. He will be dearly loved and missed by all those around him, he was a great man and did many great things, as many have said before, “It’s not goodbye but I’ll see you later.”

A graveside service will be at 11:00 a.m., Friday, May 18, 2012 at Eagle Point National Cemetery followed by a reception at the Grants Pass Eagles Club.

In lieu of flowers a donation to the Grants Pass Eagles Christmas Basket Program may be made in Wayne's name and sent to Grants Pass Eagles Lodge at 130 SE J Street, Grants Pass, Or 97526.

Written by Brittney Frazier, Granddaughter for the Frazier Family