David Gordon Handy

Chesnee, SC.

David Gordon Handy, 88, passed away December 15, 2021 at Spartanburg Medical Center. Born March 9, 1933 in Fort Wayne, Indiana, he was the son of late Dr. Russell F. Handy and Irene Drummond Handy. He was predeceased by his brother, Dr. R. Franklin Handy, Jr.

He is survived by his wife, Emily Easler-Handy, his son, Thomas F. Handy, daughter in law, Martha H. Handy, granddaughter, Madison Raye Handy, sister, Catherine H. Elkiss of Catonsville, MD, sisters in law, Delores Handy of Tallahassee, FL, Judy Casey and Dana Stepp of Spartanburg and numerous nieces and nephews.

David attended Franklin College in Indiana and graduated from the University of Miami in Florida with a degree in Radio-Television and Journalism. He served two years with the Armed Forces Radio Network at the 38th Parallel in Korea.

He joined Spartan Radiocasting Corporation/ WSPA-TV in 1960 and was the News Anchor and editorial presenter for many years. During the 70’s he hosted WSPA’s “Dialogue” program during which he worked hard to promote racial understanding. He retired from WSPA management in 1986 and purchased an AM/FM station in Georgia. On his return to South Carolina and during his retirement years he worked part time for Gilbert Motor Company in Chesnee.

David served on the boards of many nonprofit organizations and was a past president of the Spartanburg Civitan Club. An avid Atlanta Braves fan he watched every game and was delighted with their 2021 wins. He was always kind and respectful to everyone and is greatly missed by family and friends.

A celebration of life memorial service conducted by Reverend Joey Turner will be held Wednesday, December 22, 2021 from 7:00 to 8:00 PM at Harris-Nadeau Mortuary with receiving of friends from 6:00 to 7:00 PM.

In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions may be made to the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network, 1500 Rosecrans Avenue, Suite 200, Manhattan Beach, CA 90266, www.pancan.org.

Online condolences may be expressed by visiting www.harrisnadeaumortuary.com

Harris-Nadeau Mortuary

Chesnee, SC.