Mukkulathor or Mukulathaar (Tamil: முக்குலத்தோர்) is used to refer to the trinity of ancient Tamil royal lineages. It can be roughly translated as "people of the three clans", a reference to the three aristocratic clans (Kallar, Maravar and Agamudayar) which have supplied the Tamil country with most of its royal dynasties and warriors.

Clans

The Kallar, Maravar and Agamudaiyar communities constitute the Kshatriya or warrior class of Tamil Nadu, South India. They are all believed to have originated from an ancient people called Kalabhrar.

[edit] Kallar

Kallar (Tamil: கள்ளர்) is one of the three communities which constitute the Mukkalathor confederacy. European eyewitnesses of the 18th century have made mention of Kallars as "a fearless tribe show many signs of independence and non-submission to any form of subjugation". They were expert soldiers and constituted the bulk of Chola and Pandya armies.

One of the principal weapons of the Kallars is the boomerang. This has evoked comparisons with the Australian aborigines and vouch for the theory that Kallars were one of the earliest people to inhabit the Indian subcontinent. The principal occupation of Kallars is farming.

Kallars are found largely in Madurai, Sivagangai, Pudukkottai, Thanjavur, Trichy, Theni and Ramanathapuram districts of Tamil Nadu. One of their popular deities is Kallazhagar who is a warrior form of Lord Thirumala or Venkadavan.

There are various sub-castes of Kallars, amongst whom the Ambalakarar is the most important. They were a warlike people who strongly resisted every British attempt to subjugate them. They are found in Madurai and Sivaganga districts. In these districts, each village is headed by an Ambalakarar (president of an assembly) and the Ambalakarars took upon themselves the power to adjudicate disputes that arose among the inhabitants in the "nadu", belonging to different castes. They used to hear complaints, hold inquiries and punish the offenders. They wielded considerable powers to intervene in any kind of transaction or transfer of property among the people. No land could be alienated from one man to another without the permission of the Ambalakarars. Another important Kallar subcaste is the Piramalai Kallar. They are highly conservative and have preserved their customs and traditions to the present day. They are also believed to be the oldest inhabitants of the Tamil country with reports of their presence going back to Tamil literary works of the 4th century B.C. They are found mainly in the districts of Madurai and Theni. Their popular deity is Amman, the Mother Goddess.

It is believed that the Maravar, Agamudayars, Thanjai Cholarkula Kalla Nattars, Pandiya Vellalars, Chola Vellalars, Chera Vellalar, Vellala Mudaliyars, Agamudaya Mudaliars, Conjeevaram Mudaliars and, Udayars have all descended from Kallars.

[edit] Maravar

Maravar (Tamil: மறவர்) are one of the oldest social groups to be mentioned by the Sangam Tamil literature. This indicates an association with the Tamil land which is at least 2,000 years old. The writers of the Sangam Age place them in rural settlements withdrawn from cities. Maravar, in Tamil, means a warrior. Maravars are the courageous breed and were involved in the major wars that Tamilnadu witnessed.

Other historians postulate that Maravar is derived from Tamil language term Marutham (called as Thinnai). They originally lived in (See Ancient Tamil country). The name of the city Madurai is also postulated to be derived from Maruthai and honorific title of local Pandya kings.

[edit] Agamudayar

Agamudayar (Tamil: அகமுடையார்) also known as Agam Padaiyar or defending soldiers (or in pure Tamil, Agam udayar meaning: Agam - prestige, Udayar - having) indicating a specialization as soldiers or rulers. Agam can also be compared with heart, (as in "Agathin Azhagu Mugathil Theriyum"), and can be interpreted as, "people with a good heart". Although their name is attested later in literature, they and the culture is indigenous to the area and are ancient in origins. Thevars of Ramanthapuram district are given the title Servai.

Some believe these castes formed as part of military formation of Kallap-Padai or hustlers, Marap-Padai or soldiers and Agap-Padai or defenders, There is lot of evidence has been put forward towards this theory. One among this is chola king raja raja who has udayar surname married a vellala girl of kodumbalur velir there son was called as rajendra chola.

'கள்ளர் மறவர் கனத்ததோர் அகமுடையார் மெல்ல மெல்லவே வெள்ளாளரானார்'

[edit] History

[edit] Origins

There are diverse theories with regard to the origin of Mukkulathors.

Dr Spencer Wells and Dr. Pitchappan have found an ancient DNA marker in the blood of Kallar that links them to the very first modern humans who migrated out of Africa about 60,000 years ago and travelling through the southern coastline of Asia had eventually reached Australia. Based on this theory, it is assumed that the Piramala Kallars are the oldest human inhabitants of the subcontinent. Yet, this is an isolated case found only among the individuals of the Kallar caste.[citation needed]

[edit] The Nayak Period and the Polygars

The downfall of the Mukkulathors occurred in 1345 with the fall of Vira Pandyan IV and the subsequent conquest of Madurai by the Delhi Sultanate. However, the southern territories of the Sultanate soon asserted their independence and the Mukkulathors recovered under the Vijayanagar Empire and later under the Nayak dynasty during whose period they served as Polygars or chieftains. The Nayaks were actually governors appointed by Vijayanagar kings and were Naidus of Telugu origin. Later, after the fall of Vijayanagar, they established some measure of independence in the provinces which they governed and appointed individuals from the warrior Mukkulathor clans as their military chieftains and governors. After a century of peace and prosperity, the Nayak kingdom disintegrated and regional Polygar chieftains most of whom were from the Mukkulathor communities, making use of this opportunity, established their dominance and rule in the areas which they governed. However, just as their sun was in its ascendancy there arose a serious obstacle in the form of the British East India Company who desired to force the Polygars into submission and annex their territories to the Madras Presidency.

[edit] Freedom Fighters and the Polygar Wars

There was a clash of interests between Mukkulathor Polygar chieftains seeking to recover their lands after 400 years of foreign rule and the British East India Company, an emerging power seeking to expand its influence and power into new territories and to arrest the growth of French influence in India ahead of the Seven Years War.

The first direct challenge was thrown by Puli Thevan in 1755. This was precipitated by the support the British East India Company lent to Puli Thevar's enemy, the Nawab of Arcot. Puli Thevar is remembered as the first king to have fought and defeated the British in India. His exploits have since become legendary.

Resistance to British rule was also offered by Padal Vellaiya Devan who fought the British along with Kattabomman. His son Desakaval Senbaga Devar is also remembered for his exploits.

Queen Velu Nachiyar, Queen of Sivaganga, is another noted personality who fought with the British during early British Era.

The Maruthu Pandiyar brothers are notable for their role in the Polygar Wars. They were eventually captured by the British and hanged in 1801.

[edit] Surnames

The surnames used by the kallar people are Ambalakarar, Servai, Vandaiyar, Thalaivar, Nattaar (not Nadar), etc. Women use the title Nachiyaar and it is a general practice in Southern Tamil Nadhu to address a Thevar woman as "Nachchiyaar".

The Kallars of Dindigul, Trichy, Thanjavur, Theni, Madurai, Sivaganga, Pudukottai and Ramnad Districts have very distinct surnames. Some of the most common names are Sendapiriyar, Alathondamar, Ambalam, Aarsuthiyar,Kaadavaraayar, Kalingarayar, Vandaiyaar, Thanjaraayar, Chozhangaraayar, Kandiyar, Pursaar, Vaanavaraayar, Mazhavaraayar, Pallavaraayar,Ponnapoondar,Pullavaraayar, Servai, Karaimeendar,Vanavarayar,Vairayar,Ponpethiar,Gopalar, Thondaimaan, Thevar, Kandapillai, Vayaadiyar, Vanniar, Nattar, Alankara Priyar, Munaiyatriyar,Keerudayar, Saaluvar, Manraayar,Kaadavaraayar, Madhavarayar, Onthiriyar, Serumadar, Vambaliar, Thenkondaar, Mankondaar, Kaaduvetiyaar, Sozhagar, Chozanga Nattar etc. There are over 700 surnames in use.

There is a group of Agamudayars in Northern Tamil Nadhu (Thiruvannamalai, Vellor, Arani, Arcot).They migrated from Madurai in 17th century. They have other surnames like Udayar,Mudhaliyar, Arcot Mudhaliyar[1] and Thuluva Vellalar. Not That much Marriages happen between people with the same surname.

[edit] Religion

They are traditionally Hindus although some have become Christians. Today they constitute a significant part of the Tamil community in India, Sri Lanka, and in other parts of the world.

[edit] In Inscriptions

Inscription, from 1655, records an accord between the Sthanathar, the Chetti merchant community, and the Nattar to contribute fifty Kalanju of gold to the Elunattu Mutt at Chidambaram. Link [2]

[edit] Current Status

Although a great many of the members are still agriculturalists, many have also progressed up the social ladder as doctors, engineers, entrepreneurs, politicians and civil servants. Large number of people from the community are serving the nation as military men. Large number of people serving the tamilnadu police department.

[edit] The code of suicide by warriors or maravars in ancient tamilnadu

Avippali, Thannai, Verttal, Vallan pakkam, Pun Kilithu Mudiyum Maram and Marakkanchi: the forms of martial suicide and suicidal battle of the warrior as the ultimate expression of his loyalty to his commander. These six forms of martial suicide are defined as described by the works referred to above.

Pulla Vazhkai Vallan Pakkam – the martial attitude of the warrior who goes forth into suicidal battle is mentioned by Tholkappiyam. The other works refer to it as Thannai Verttal. Duarte Barbosa describes the practice among the Nayar (of the Chera kingdom). It was later noticed by British officials as well. It was also prevalent among the Maravar (of the Pandya kingdom) from whom the suicidal Aapathhuthavi bodyguard was selected. Thannai Verttal also refers to the suicide of a warrior on hearing that his king or commander has died (Purapporul Venpa Malai). Punkilithu Mudiyum Maram is the martial act of a warrior who commits suicide by tearing apart his battle wound.

Another form of martial suicide mentioned by all the works except Veera soliyam, is Avippali. Tamil inscriptions speak of it as Navakandam. Inscriptions found in many parts of Tamilnadu provide greater information on the practice. Navakandam is the act of a warrior who slices his own neck to fulfil the vow made to korravai – the Tamil goddess of war – for his commanders’ victory in battle. The Kalingathu Parani(10) – a work which celebrates the victory of the Chola king Kulotunga and his general Thondaman in the battle for Kalinga, describes the practice in detail. “The temple of korravai is decorated with lotus flowers which bloomed when the warriors sliced their own necks”(106); “they slice the base of their necks; the severed heads are given to the goddess”(111); “when the neck is sliced and the head is severed, the headless body jumps with joy for having fulfilled the vow”(113).

The epics of Chilapadikaram (5: 79-86) and Manimekalai (6: 50-51) mention the practice. To ensure the complete severing of the head, the warrior tied his hair to a bamboo bent taut before he cut his neck. Hero stones depicting this practice are found all over Tamil Nadu, and are called Saavan Kallu by locals. The warriors who thus committed suicide were not only deified in hero stones (saavan kallu) and worshipped but their relatives were given lands which were exempted from tax(11).

An area handbook (Tharamangalam) of the Tamilnadu archeology department notes that “the Nava Kandam sculpture which is found widely all over Kongu Nadu (Coimbatore, Salem) is to be seen at the Tharamangalam Kailasanathar kovil also. The people call it Saavan Kallu. “The practice of Nava Kandam existed in Kongu Nadu till the early part of this [i.e., 20th] century.”(12)

A Saavan Kallu at Thenkarai Moolanatha sami Kovil in Madurai, depicting the act of a warrior holding his hair with his left hand and slicing his neck with his right – 14th century – is said to be annually worshipped by the Conjeevaram Mudaliyars.(13) The Conjeevaram Mudaliyars are Kaikolar, a presentday weaving caste which was militarized under the Chola empire and was made into a special military body; there are indications that Kaikolar warriors practiced Nava Kandam(14).

Apart from these codified forms of martial suicide, a method called Vadakkiruththal is mentioned in Tamil heroic poetry. It is the act of a warrior king fasting to death, if some dire dishonour were to come upon him(15). The Tamil teacher, and the Dravidian propagandist, turned the song of the legendary Chera king Irumborai who committed suicide when he was taken captive by his enemies into a compelling theme in Tamil renaissance.

The Avippali form of martial suicide as the ultimate expression of loyalty to one’s commander, is deeply embedded in the Tamil psyche. Senchorru-kadan (the debt of red rice) is a phrase that is widely used today by Tamils as an expression of loyalty. One frequently hears of it in a popular Tamil song. The phrase sands for the ritual of partaking of rice by which Maravar and other Tamil military caste warriors bound themselves to their king or commander to die in suicidal battle for him, or to commit suicide on the day he was slain. Of Avippali, the Puraporul Venba Malai ([verse] 92) says, “thinking of nothing but the red (blood) rice the Maravar give their life as offering in battle.”

The ritual of red or blood rice was described by two Muslim travellers who had visited the Tamil country in the 9th century. “A quantity of cooked rice was spread before the king, and some three or four hundred persons came of their own accord and received each a small quantity of rice from the king’s own hands, after he himself had eaten some. By eating of this rice, they all engage themselvesto burn themselves on the day the king dies or is slain; and they punctually fulfill their promise.”(16) In modern times it has been observed that “when a Maravar takes food in the house of a stranger, he will take a pinch of earth and put it on the food before he commences his meal.”(17) This act freed him from the debt of blood rice.[3]

Some also committed suicide by eating bricks.

[edit] Other version

Kallar, Maravar, Agamudaiyar basically are the Pandiya and chola caste who ruled the pandiya nadu and chola nadu.

Kallar mainly lived and are still populas on the northern pandian territory or Thanjavur, Thiruchirappalli, Dindugal, Madurai districts.

Agamudaiyar formed the police force and did security jobs. They bascially stood guard for Temple, Farm lands, Nadan hamlets. They are called servai in Thirunalveli, Thoothukudi districts. Maruthu Sagothararkal are marked for their guard of Kalayar koil against the war with British. They are scaterd all thro Pandiyan Territory mainly to all temple cities.

"In Madurai - West Masi Street,their community people formed a AGAMUDAIYAR ARAN(Maruthu pandiyar mandram)"

Maravar are brave warriors who met head-on. They lived and are still populas on the northern Pandian Territory next to Kallar belt in the districts of Ramnad, Madurai, Raja Palayam, Thirunelveli. They shared the ruling titles of Pandiyans for their bravery. Raja of Ramnad is the fact for this.

When the pandian suffered defeat at the hands of Nayaks and Muslims of Vijayanagar Empire, These 3 castes stood guard and gave their life in protecting the assets of Madurai Meenakshi temple and its chain of temples down south. They retained the pandian control and still are dominant in the southern pandiyan districts of Tamilnadu.

[edit] Movies

Many Tamil movies have portrayed the royalty, valour, pride, culture and practises of the Mukkulathor and most of the movies did well at the box-office. Some of them includes

Thevar Magan

Pasumpon

Madurai Veeran

Sivagangai seemai (film about Maruthu Pandiyar)

Virumaandi

Murattu Kala

Vedham Pudhithu

Kizhakku cheemayilae

Man vaasanai

Sandakozhi

Paruthiveeran

Sivalaperi Paandi

Muthal Mariyathai

Panchalankurichi

Thimiru

Karuththamma

Sillunu oru kadhal

Veyil

Kaalai

Vel

[edit] List of Prominent Mukkulathors

Although this list attempts to enlist the prominent Mukkulathhors, this is to state that this list is not exhaustive and is hence bound to miss-out the 'more' prominent Thevars as well.

[edit] Royalty

Arulmozhi Thevar @ Rajaraja-I, South Indian Emperor, who ruled entire south India, Orissa, Part of the Bengal, Maldives, Srilanka, Malaysia, Java, Sumatra, Indonesia, Andaman. Who controlled a largest navy in the world. The world still remembers him for his best administration & his Big Temple

Most Pandiya kings (e.g., Nedunchezhiyan)

Most Chola kings (e.g., Rajaraja Chola)

Vallal Paari

Earlier Chera Kings

Sethupathis of Ramnad

Vaalukku Veli Pandiya King

Thondaimans of Pudhukottai

[edit] Present day kings and queens

Charubala Thondaiman of Pudukottai

Maduranthaki Nachiar of Sivagangai

Duraichi of Nerkattum saeval

Sivagnana Pandian of Sayalgudi

[edit] Writers and Journalists

Pandithurai Thevar,Founder of fourth tamil sangam

Thirugana Sambantha Kavirayar(poet of Ramanathapuram)

Thirumangai Azhwar

Thiruvalluva Thevar(alias Mailai Kilar)

Arunmozhi thevar(alias chezkilar(Mudali) or uthama chola pallavaraiyar)

Nakkeera thevar

Meikanda thevar

Thiruthhakka thevar

Pulavar Na. Mu. Venkadasamy Nattar - Tamil language & History Researcher

Devaneya Paavanar - Tamil Scholar & Researcher

Ilakuvanar-Tamil scholar

Kavi Perrasu Vairamuthu,famous Tamil poet and star lyricist

Dr.Maraimalai,M.A.,Ph.D.,Tamil Scholar and researcher

Pattukkottai Kumaravel-written more than 1000 dramas.

M.Natarajan, Puthiya Parvai Editor

Pulamai Pithan

[edit] Freedom Fighters

Puli Devar- First person in India to fight and win over the British

Valivitta Thevar

Maruthu Pandiyar brothers - The legendary Tamil warrior brothers stand as an epitome for bravery and courage in Tamil Nadu.

Pasumpon Muthuramalinga Thevar - Freedom fighter, social reformer, a descendant of pandiya kings and known for his relationship with Nethaji

Muthu Vaduganathar

Bahadur Vellaiyathevar

Queen Velu Nachiyar

Many unknown warriors from the community participated in the Indian war for freedom.

P. K. Mookayya Thevar (1923 – 1979)

Janaki Thevar

[edit] Politicians and Administrators

late P.Manickam (Vandaiyar)Ex.MLC (two terms) State Secretary, communist party of India, Editor Janasakthi, Tamarai Weekly

Late Ayyanan Ambalam, Leader of Forward Block Party

LG (Break away MDMK)

Nallakannu, Communist leader

Sasikala Natarajan

Natarajan

Late.G.M.Premkumar Vandayar, Founder Mooventhar Munnettra Kazhagam,Chidambaram.

Dr. N. Sethuraman, MMK, Founder of Meenakshi mission hospital, Madurai

Sridhar Vandaiyar, Mooventhar Munnettra Kazhagam

Dr.BT.Kumar, founder,Dravida Vizhipunarchi Kazhakam

Actor M.R.Karthik Leader,TN AIFB

Thamizhachi thangapandian,poet and a budding politician

Late V.Nadimuthu pillai Ex MP,Ex MLA,Dt Board Chairman. Pattukkottai

Azhagu Thirunavukkarasu, Ex-Minister,

C. Mahendran, Communist Party of India

SDS @ SD Somasundaram Gopalar, Ex Minister

Gopalswamy Thenkondar, Ex. M.P.

[edit] Ministers of Central Government

T.R.Baalu, Honorable Minister for Shipping and Road transport of India

S. S. Palanimanickam, Minister for finance, India

[edit] Ministers of State Government

O. Panneerselvam Former Chief minister of TN

Late, Anbil Dharmalingam

Mannai Narayanasamy Former

Alagu Thirunavukkarasu

K.C.Mani Minister for Cooperation

I.Periyasamy, Minister of Law

Thangam Then Arasu, B.E

Suba. Thangavel

Pon. Muthuramalingam, B.A, B.L, Ex-Minister.

Late thiru Pasumpon Tha Kiruttinan - Ex-Minister

MR.Thangapandian Ex-minister

S.Thirunavukkarasan M.P

N.Nainar Nagendran M.A Ex Minister

K.Ayyaru Vandaiyar Former

A.M.Paramasivam Former

Durairaj Former

R.Vaithiyalingam Ex Minister

[edit] Members of Parliament (M.P)

E. M. Sudarsana Natchiappan M.P

L.Ganesan BA, BL, MP,

T.T.V. Dinkaran, M.P.,

R.V.Swaminathan Ex M.P

Dindigul Seenivasan Ex M.P

O.S.Manian Ex Rajyasabha M.P

Thanga Tamil Selvan M.P

R.Kamaraj Ex M.P

Poondi K.Thulasi Ayya Vaandaiyar Ex M.P

Singaravadivelu Ex M.P

Tiruchi Siva M.P

Rajan Chellappa Ex M.P

K.Maaya Thevar From Ex M.P Usilampatti

P.V.Rajendran Ex.M.P

Dr.V.Rajeshwaran Ex.M.P

Shri V.N.Swaminathan Ex MP

[edit] Members of Legislative Assembly (M.L.A)

Chellapandian (former tn assembly speaker 1962-1967)

Sedapatti Muthiah (former tn assembly speaker 1991-1996)

K.Kalimuthu (former tn assembly speaker 2001-2006)

R.Avudaiyappan B.L.( tn assembly speaker 2006 onwards)

S.Kathar Batsha (a) Vellaisamy Thevar (Ex-MLA Muthukulathur)

P.Moorthy (M.L.A, Sholavandan)

V.Karupasamy Pandian

N.MalaiRaja M.A.

A.K.Bose

Rama. Subhuramaniyam B.Sc

Thiruvadanai KR.Ramaswamy

A.Tharmalingam Ex

Atthani S.Kalaimugan

M.S.K. Satyendran Ex M.L.A

Late M.S.K Rajenthiran Ex M.L.A

V.G.Manimegalai Ex.M.L.A

Late, Anbil Poyyamozhi

S.Gurunathan Ex

K.Kittu Ex M.L.A

K.Thangamuthu Ex M.L.A

P.V.Rajendran Ex M.L.A

M.Dhandayuthapani Ex

Late. P.N. Vallarasu, MLA

Late P.U.Shanmugam Ex-Minster

R.Singaram Ex M.L.A

T.Vediyappan Ex-M.L.A.

R.Sridharan Tiuvannamalai Municiple Chairman.

J.Anbazhagan Ex-M.L.A

Kalairajan B.A,B.L.,M.L.A

Late S.Angamuthu Naicker Ex M.L.A

N.R.Rengarajan,MLA

M.Meenakshi sundaram vedaraniyam

M. Ramachandran B.A, B. L Ex MLA

[edit] Mayors of Tamilnadu

Smt. Charubala thondaiman, Mayor, Trichy

M. Anbalagan B.A., Deputy Mayor

P.M.Mannan, Deputy Mayor, Madurai

K.Muthu RamaLingam, Deputy mayor, Nellai

karate thiyagarajan ex. deputy mayor of chennai

S.Viswanatha Pandian, Ex Depty Major,Nellai

[edit] Judges

Justice RathnaVel Pandian, Supreme court Judge and Chairman of V pay commission

Justice A.Ramamurthy, High Court of Madras (retired)

Justice Ramalingam , High Court of Madras (retired)

Justice S. Rajeswaran, High Court of Madras

Justice S. Suguna, High Court of Madras

Justice Nagamuthu, High Court of Madras

[edit] Civil services

Malaichamy, I.A.S, also served as State Election commission officer in India.

Palanichamy, Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner

Ponnu Swamy , DSP Vegilenence and AntiCorrecption Tamil Nadu

Rajendran, I.A.S, Tamil Development, Hindu Religious and culture & Information public relation

Ayyar Sollai, I.A.S

Ramalingam I.A.S

Vivekanadan I.A.S

Ramramasundaram I.A.S

Arumugam, I.A.S

S.Rajarathinam I.A.S

Karpurasundara Pandian I.A.S

V.Palanisamy I.A.S

S.Karuthaya Pandian I.A.S

N. Sivanesan, I.A.S

U.Subramanian, I.A.S

Sivasubramanian, I.A.S

N Balachandran, I.A.S

S.N.Karupanan, I.A.S

A.N.Dhyaneswaran, I.A.S

V.S.Rajhan, I.P.S

D.S. Panjabagesan I.P.S

Pon Paramaguru, I.P.S

Sivanandi.P I.P.S

Periyaiya, I.P.S (villupuram S.P)

Velladurai, Encounter specialist

ThamaraiKanan, IPS

Patcha Thani Manickam S.P retired

E.Masanamuthu, I.P.S

Sankara Vadivelu, IRS, Customs & C.Excise

Xavier ,DSP Nellai

K.Palanichamy, ADSP, Tiruvallur

Chandra Bose, DC

Pon Manickavel, S.P

Kaliyamoorthy, S.P.

[edit] Scientists and Academicians

Dr.I.Singaram, Registrar, Madurai Kamaraj University

Late Dr.Vedaiyan,B.E.,(Hons),Ph.D.,Dean of Technology, Anna University

Late Shri.S.Sitaram B.A.,Bsc(hons).,LTM.,AMCT., Director National Textile corporation,coimbatore.

Dr. (Major) D. Raja, Former Vice-Chancellor of the TN Dr. MGR Medical University

Dr. M.Rajagopal M.S Ortho {former dean kilpauk medical college}

Dr. N Mohandoss, IMA President, Thanjavur

Prof.Dr. V.Varadarajanjan,pioneer surgeon,Former IMA,IMC,ASI President, Thanjavur

[edit] Business

S.Sivakumar,Industrialist& Director-LGB,Coimbatore

S.Karthikeyan M.S.,MBA Director in Engineering, Yahoo India.

P.Palanisamy (PRP groups-granites,roadways,exports)

Paul Pandian, Founder of Axes Technologies

Avudayanikottai P.Karuppaiya

M.V.Muthuramalingam, Chairperson, Velammal Engineering College

Solaimalai thevar, Ambiga groups

MJF.Ln.Leo Muthu Sri Sai Ram Engineering college

K.Maruthupandiyan, Chairperson Maruthupandiyar College of arts and Science

Arunachalam (chairperson -Student Xerox)

S.Murugan,Vasan's & Om Group of Companies, Thiruvanaikoil, Trichy

Prof. P. Murugesan, Chancellor, PRIST UNIVERSITY, Thanjavur

[edit] Movies, Film and Arts

[edit] Artists

Late Sankarathaas Swamikal Naadaka Thanthai

Actor Chevalier Sivaji Ganesan

Chinnappa Thevar, Producer, Founder of Thevar films

Late actor R. Muthuraman

Actor S.S.Rajendran

Actress Manorama,Guinness World Record holder for acting in the maximum number of movies [More than 1500]

Late actor O.A.K. Thevar

Thiru. A. Ramiah Thevar, President - Indian Film Chamber of Commerce

Music director Chandrabose

Actor Karthik Muthuraman

Actor Prabhu Ganesan

Actor Arunpandian

Actor S. S. Chandran

Actor Rajesh

Actor Sangili murugan

Actor Chandrasekar

Actor Manoj bharathiraja

Actor Periyakaruppu thevar

Actor J.K.Rithesh

Actor 'Kakka' Radha Krishnan

Actor 'Kallapart' Natarajan

Actor Late. Nagaraja cholan

Actor Vivek

Actor Senthil

Actor,director S. J. Suryaah

Directors

Director Bharathiraja

Director Bala

Director Kathir

Director Susi Ganesan

Director T.P. Singampuli

Director T.P.Gajendran

Director Krishna

SFX Director Trotsky Marudu

Painter Pugalendi

Director Viji

Rambo Rajkumar

Cinematographer Chezhiyan

Art Director Late. A. Chella

References

On Tamil Militarism- The suppression of Tamil military castes

Genetic structure of four socio-culturally diversified caste populations of southwest India

http://www.thevarcommunity.com/

http://www.varalaaru.com/Default.asp?articleid=113

http://www.varalaaru.com/Default.asp?articleid=124

http://www.varalaaru.com/Default.asp?articleid=93

http://www.varalaaru.com/Default.asp?articleid=154

http://www.varalaaru.com/Default.asp?articleid=252

See also

Kshatriya‎

Pandyan Kingdom

Chola Dynasty

Puli Thevar

Maruthu Pandiyar

U. Muthuramalingam Thevar

External links