Constitutional framework

On December 22, 1990, the constitution of the Republic of Croatia was promulgated. In addition to such classic civil rights as freedom of speech, religion, information, and association, the equality of nationalities is guaranteed in a number of constitutional articles. Cultural autonomy, along with the right to use one’s own language and script (the latter specifically intended for the Serb minority), is also guaranteed.

Audio File: National anthem of Croatia

Head Of Government:

Prime Minister: Andrej Plenković

Population:

(2024 est.) 3,696,000

Currency Exchange Rate:

1 USD equals 0.937 euro

Head Of State:

President: Zoran Milanović

The 1990 constitution changed the structure of the Sabor (parliament) from a tricameral body under the Yugoslav system to a bicameral body consisting of the House of Representatives (lower house) and the House of Districts (upper house). Constitutional amendments in 2001 abolished the upper house, thereby rendering the Sabor a unicameral body. Members are elected from party lists every four years. In addition, a small percentage of seats are reserved for national minorities and for representatives of Croats living outside the country.

Recent News

Aug. 16, 2024, 4:46 AM ET (ABC News (U.S.))

Croatia to reintroduce compulsory military draft as regional tensions soar

Aug. 12, 2024, 8:06 AM ET (The Guardian)

Serbia revel in win over bitter rivals Croatia for third successive water polo gold

Aug. 11, 2024, 5:53 AM ET (BBC)

Paris Olympics: Serbia beat Croatia for third straight water polo gold

Aug. 6, 2024, 2:44 AM ET (NBC)

U.S. men's water polo heads to quarterfinals with momentum win over Croatia

The president of the republic is elected directly by popular vote for a period of five years and is limited to two terms. The 1990 constitution originally granted the president very broad powers; this “superpresident” appointed and could dismiss the prime minister, who was nominally responsible to both the parliament and the president but was actually directly dependent on the president. Constitutional amendments in 2000 reduced the importance of the president, who thenceforth served solely as head of state, and increased the power of the parliament and of the prime minister, who assumed the role of head of government. The president continues to nominate the prime minister, but the Sabor must confirm the appointment. In addition, the prime minister is typically the head of the leading party in the Sabor.

Local government

Below the national level, Croatia is divided into 20 administrative districts called županije (counties). One city, Zagreb, has an administrative status equivalent to that of the counties. Within the županije are hundreds of općine (municipalities).

Dijana Pleština Liz David-Barrett

Justice

The Supreme Court, county courts, and municipal courts constitute the three-tiered judicial system. The Supreme Court is the highest legal authority in all matters but constitutional questions, which are decided by the Constitutional Court. Justices on the Supreme Court are appointed by a judicial council, which is elected by the Sabor. The independence of the judiciary has been questioned, largely because many of the judges who were politically appointed in the 1990s remained in office well into the 21st century. However, there have been significant reforms to the judiciary, largely under EU pressure.

Political process

Suffrage is universal from age 18, although employed individuals may vote beginning at age 16. Multiparty elections have been held in Croatia since independence. The Croatian Democratic Union (Hrvatska Demokratska Zajednica; HDZ) and the Social Democratic Party (Socijaldemokratska partija Hrvatske; SDP) are the predominant political parties. The HDZ dominated politics in the first years of the post-Yugoslav era, having come to power in the parliamentary elections of 1990. The party leader, Franjo Tudjman, served as the first president of independent Croatia. The HDZ initially based its ideology on Croatian nationalism and the struggle for independence, but it began to lose favour after the war ended in 1995 and the population felt the pain of economic collapse. In 2000, the year after Tudjman died, the HDZ was resoundingly defeated in parliamentary and presidential elections. A multiparty centre-left coalition, led by the SDP, then governed until 2003, when the HDZ, having repositioned itself as a typical centre-right party, returned to power. The HDZ and the SDP continued to be the main contenders in subsequent elections. Both parties favoured Croatian accession to the EU.

Security

Croatia’s armed forces—comprising an army, a navy, and an air force—were created in the early 1990s with significant support from the international community, particularly the United States. Although Croatia had no army to speak of when it declared independence in 1991, within a few years an army had been trained and equipped sufficiently to be able to conduct two major operations to reclaim territory from Serb paramilitaries in 1995. However, Croatia is not a militaristic country, and it relies on the security of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which it joined in 2009.

The Croatian police force, under the authority of the central government, has been reformed since independence. Reform efforts have focused on improving service and stamping out corruption. In 2023 Croatia entered the European Union’s Schengen area, which eliminated border controls between Croatia and other signatory states.

Health, welfare, and housing

The health of Croatians is good compared with that of the populations of neighbouring countries. Life expectancy at birth is higher than the eastern European average, and the infant mortality rate is significantly lower. The rate of HIV infection is low, reflecting competent prevention efforts. However, the health care system is in need of investment and far-reaching reform because, being almost entirely state-provided, it imposes a substantial burden on the budget. The social welfare system is also burdensome, partly because Croatia has a large number of retirees and unemployed individuals. In urban areas, large portions of the population live in concrete tower blocks built during the Yugoslav era, which are in dire need of investment.

Liz David-Barrett

Education

During its 45 years in power, the communist Yugoslav regime reduced illiteracy in Croatia from 16 percent of the population over 10 years of age to less than 4 percent. By the early 21st century, the literacy rate for Croatians over age 14 was nearly 99 percent. In addition to thousands of elementary schools, secondary schools, commercial and technical institutions, and vocational schools, the Yugoslav emphasis on education led to the founding of universities in Rijeka in 1973, in Split in 1974, and in Osijek in 1975. The oldest university in Croatia is the University of Zagreb (1669), which traces its beginnings to a Jesuit school of moral theology founded in 1632.