There are 254 counties in Texas.

We've grouped these counties into the 24 regions used by local government councils and regional planning commisisions.

County Map of Texas

Alamo Area, Ark-Tex, Brazos Valley, Capital Area, Central Texas, Coastal Bend, Concho Valley, Deep East Texas, East Texas, Golden Crescent, Heart of Texas, Houston-Galveston Area, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Middle Rio Grande, Nortex, North Central Texas, Panhandle, Permian Basin, Rio Grande, South East Texas, South Plains, South Texas, Texoma, West Central Texas.

01 - Panhandle

There are 26 counties in the Panhandle region.

Armstrong, Briscoe, Carson, Castro, Childress, Collingsworth, Dallam, Deaf Smith, Donley, Gray, Hall, Hansford, Hartley, Hemphill, Hutchinson, Lipscomb, Moore, Ochiltree, Oldham, Parmer, Potter, Randall, Roberts, Sherman, Swisher and Wheeler.

The largest cities in the Panhandle region are: Amarillo, Pampa, Hereford, Borger, Dumas, Canyon, Dalhart, Perryton and Childress.

02 - South Plains

There are 15 counties in the South Plains region.

Bailey, Cochran, Crosby, Dickens, Floyd, Garza, Hale, Hockley, King, Lamb, Lubbock, Lynn, Motley, Terry and Yoakum.

The largest cities in the South Plains region are: Lubbock, Plainview, Levelland, Brownfield, Littlefield, Slaton and Muleshoe.

03 - Nortex

There are 11 counties in the Nortex region.

Archer, Baylor, Clay, Cottle, Foard, Hardeman, Jack, Montague, Wichita, Wilbarger and Young.

The largest cities in the Nortex region are: Wichita Falls, Vernon, Burkburnett, Graham, Iowa Park, Bowie and Jacksboro.

04 - North Central Texas

There are 16 counties in the North Central Texas region.

Collin, Dallas, Denton, Ellis, Erath, Hood, Hunt, Johnson, Kaufman, Navarro, Palo Pinto, Parker, Rockwall, Somervell, Tarrant and Wise.

The largest cities in the North Central Texas region are: Dallas, Fort Worth and Arlington.

05 - Ark-Tex

There are 9 counties in the Ark-Tex region.

Bowie, Cass, Delta, Franklin, Hopkins, Lamar, Morris, Red River and Titus.

The largest cities in the Ark-Tex region are: Texarkana, Paris, Sulphur Springs, Mount Pleasant and Atlanta.

06 - East Texas

There are 14 counties in the East Texas region.

Anderson, Camp, Cherokee, Gregg, Harrison, Henderson, Marion, Panola, Rains, Rusk, Smith, Upshur, Van Zandt and Wood.

The largest cities in the East Texas region are: Tyler, Longview, Marshall, Palestine, Jacksonville, Athens, Henderson and Kilgore.

07 - West Central Texas

There are 19 counties in the West Central Texas region.

Brown, Callahan, Coleman, Comanche, Eastland, Fisher, Haskell, Jones, Kent, Knox, Mitchell, Nolan, Runnels, Scurry, Shackelford, Stephens, Stonewall, Taylor and Throckmorton.

The largest cities in the West Central Texas region are: Abilene, Brownwood, Snyder, Sweetwater, Breckenridge, Coleman, Ballinger, Colorado City and Comanche.

08 - Rio Grande

There are 6 counties in the Rio Grande region.

Brewster, Culberson, El Paso, Hudspeth, Jeff Davis and Presidio.

The largest cities in the Rio Grande region of Texas are: El Paso, Socorro, Horizon City, Anthony and Presidio.

09 - Permian Basin

There are 17 counties in the Permian Basin region.

Andrews, Borden, Crane, Dawson, Ector, Gaines, Glasscock, Howard, Loving, Martin, Midland, Pecos, Reeves, Terrell, Upton, Ward and Winkler.

The largest cities in the Permian Basin region are: Midland, Odessa, Big Spring, Andrews, Lamesa, Pecos, Fort Stockton and Monahans.

10 - Concho Valley

There are 13 counties in the Concho Valley region.

Coke, Concho, Crockett, Irion, Kimble, McCulloch, Mason, Menard, Reagan, Schleicher, Sterling, Sutton and Tom Green.

The largest cities in the Concho Valley region are: San Angelo, Brady, Big Lake, Junction, Mason and Sonora.

11 - Heart of Texas

There are six counties in the Heart of Texas region.

Bosque, Falls, Freestone, Hill, Limestone and McLennan.

The largest cities in the Heart of Texas region are: Waco, Hewitt, Bellmead, Woodway, Robinson, Marlin, Mexia and Lacy-Lakeview.

12 - Capital Area

There are 10 counties in the Capital Area region.

Bastrop, Blanco, Burnet, Caldwell, Fayette, Hays, Lee, Llano, Travis and Williamson.

The largest cities in the Capital Area region are: Austin, Round Rock, San Marcos, Cedar Park, Georgetown, Pflugerville, Taylor, Lockhart, Kyle and Leander.

13 - Brazos Valley

There are 7 counties in the Brazos Valley region.

Brazos, Burleson, Grimes, Leon, Madison, Robertson, and Washington.

The largest cities in the Brazos Valley region are: Bryan, College Station, Brenham, Navasota, Giddings, Hearne, Madisonville and Caldwell.

14 - Deep East Texas

There are 12 counties in the Deep East Texas region.

Angelina, Houston, Jasper, Nacogdoches, Newton, Polk, Sabine, San Augustine, San Jacinto, Shelby, Trinity and Tyler.

The largest cities in the Deep East Texas region are: Lufkin, Nacogdoches, Jasper, Crockett, Center, Diboll and Livingston.

15 - South East Texas

There are 3 counties in the South East Texas region.

Hardin, Jefferson and Orange.

The largest cities in the South East Texas region are: Beaumont, Port Arthur, Orange, Nederland, Groves, Port Neches, Vidor and Lumberton.

16 - Houston-Galveston Area

There are 13 counties in the Houston-Galveston Area region.

Austin, Brazoria, Chambers, Colorado, Fort Bend, Galveston, Harris, Liberty, Matagorda, Montgomery, Walker, Waller and Wharton.

The largest cities in the Houston-Galveston Area region are: Houston, Pasadena, Sugar Land, Baytown, Missouri City, Galveston, League City, Pearland, Conroe, Texas City, Huntsville, La Porte and Friendswood.

17 - Golden Crescent

There are 7 counties in the Golden Crescent region.

Calhoun, DeWitt, Goliad, Gonzales, Jackson, Lavaca and Victoria.

The largest cities in the Golden Crescent region are: Victoria, Port Lavaca, Gonzales, Cuero, Edna, Yoakum.

18 - Alamo Area

There are 12 counties in the Alamo Area region.

Atascosa, Bandera, Bexar, Comal, Frio, Gillespie, Guadalupe, Karnes, Kendall, Kerr, Medina, Wilson.

The largest cities in the Alamo Area region are: San Antonio, New Braunfels, Schertz, Seguin, Kerrville, Universal City, Converse, Fredericksburg, Leon Valley, Live Oak, Pleasanton and Hondo.

19 - South Texas

There are 4 counties in the South Texas region.

Jim Hogg, Starr, Webb and Zapata.

The largest cities in the South Texas region are: Laredo, Rio Grande City, Roma, Rio Bravo, Zapata.

20 - Coastal Bend

There are 12 counties in the Coastal Bend region.

Aransas, Bee, Brooks, Duval, Jim Wells, Kenedy, Kleberg, Live Oak, McMullen, Nueces, Refugio and San Patricio.

The largest cities in the Coastal Bend region are: Corpus Christi, Kingsville, Alice, Portland, Beeville, Robstown, Ingleside, Mathis, Sinton and Falfurrias.

21 - Lower Rio Grande Valley

There are 3 counties in the Lower Rio Grande Valley region.

Cameron, Hidalgo and Willacy.

The largest cities in the Lower Rio Grande region are: Brownsville, McAllen, Harlingen, Edinburg, Mission, Pharr, San Juan, Weslaco and San Benito.

22 - Texoma

There are 3 counties in the Texoma region.

Cooke, Fannin and Grayson.

The largest cities in the Texoma region are: Sherman, Denison, Gainesville and Bonham.

23 - Central Texas

There are 7 counties in the Central Texas region.

Bell, Coryell, Hamilton, Lampasas, Milam, Mills and San Saba.

The largest cities in the Central Texas region are: Killeen, Temple, Copperas Cove, Harker Heights, Belton, Gatesville, Lampasas, Cameron and Rockdale.

24 - Middle Rio Grande

There are 9 counties in the Middle Rio Grande region.

Dimmit, Edwards, Kinney, La Salle, Maverick, Real, Uvalde, Val Verde and Zavala.

The largest cities in the Middle Rio Grande region are: Del Rio, Eagle Pass, Uvalde, Crystal City, Carrizo Springs and Cotulla.

Texas Counties and County Seats

The capital of Texas is Austin.

Texas State Association of Counties.

Texas State Website.

Largest Cities in Texas

Houston, Dallas, San Antonio, Austin, El Paso, Fort Worth, Arlington, Corpus Christi, Plano, Garland.

Texas Travel Notes:

Texas tourist information with details about travel to and around the state.

Texas Weather:

7-day forecasts and weather videos for Texas.

Add a Business Listing - Add a Destination Guide - Add a Place to Stay.

If you find Travel Notes useful, please take a moment to like us on Facebook and share with your friends on social media.