For a reassessment of relations between ‘Barbarians’ and the Roman Empire, we have to ask first of all one crucial question that in the past was always answered affirmatively: Was the Roman Empire doomed since the 3rd century AD? The problem with this crucial question is virtually the same as with nearly all questions of the kind: there are still no definite answers. But with our approach we want at least to try to raise awarenessv of some of the intriguing issues of Late Antiquity that can help to reassess Imperial politics from the 3rd and 4th century in a context of rational and well reflected foreign policies. We cannot deal with all aspects of this complex matter in this short introduction, so we will focus only on three aspects.

The increasing evidence for common ground between Romans and “barbarians, in areas ranging from grave goods to religious affiliation to intermarriage, makes it necessary to take a new look at the “barbarian invasions” and the “fall” of the western Roman Empire. This paper therefore argues that barbarians were not hostile outsiders but rather an integral part of the Roman world. It creates a “unified theory,” more consistent with the evidence, for how and why the western empire ended. It suggests that “barbarian invasions” might better be understood as civil wars and infighting among generals in Roman service, and that a focus by Roman and barbarian elites on local interests led to the end of the western empire. If barbarian kings had not created independent enclaves, Roman warlords would have.

Undergraduate option (2nd/ 3rd year) at UCL Institute of Archaeology. This module examines the fate of the later Roman empire from the fall of Rome through the establishment of the barbarian kingdoms in the west and the rise of Constantinople in the East to the eve of the Arab conquests (AD400-700), interrogating models of decline, catastrophe and transformation through the most recent archaeology. There is, however, much more to the study of the late antique world than the problem of how and why the Roman empire collapsed. We will explore key themes such as decline and fall, barbarians and ethnicity, urbanism, rural settlement, Christianisation, the army and the economy and compare the different trajectories of Europe, Northern Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean in this period.

Edward Gibbon’s masterpiece, which narrates the history of the Roman Empire from the second century A.D. to its collapse in the west in the fifth century and in the east in the fifteenth century, is widely considered the greatest work of history ever written. This abridgment retains the full scope of the original, but in a breadth comparable to a novel. Casual readers now have access to the full sweep of Gibbon’s narrative, while instructors and students have a volume that can be read in a single term. This unique edition emphasizes elements ignored in all other abridgments—in particular the role of religion in the empire and the rise of Islam.