[This article was published 17 years ago in 1998, in the online journal Screening the Past: http://www.screeningthepast.com/2014/12/composing-the-past-music-and-the-sense-of-history-in-hollywood-spectacles-of-the-1950s-and-early-1960s/ ] The sound of history has long been a neglected area in the study of historical film. This is somewhat surprising when we think about the fact that historical films have always made auditive comments on the past, not only on how people spoke in the ancient times but also how the bygone period sounded, what kind of auditive elements did that particular historical era have: in ancient spectacle we hear noisy marketplaces of Jerusalem, roaring masses of Roman circuses, echoing catacombes of Rome. Films have not only given an illusion of seeing but also of hearing the past. This article emphasizes three specific questions. The first one is: How did composers themselves conceive the problem of historicity, the difference between ancient music and our modern perspective. Historical narration, no matter written or audiovisual, is always a dialogue between historical horizons, past and present. How was this dealt with in the case of film music? This problem is illuminated by analyzing Miklós Rózsa’s methods of composing. The next question is: How did film music encompass the interplay of historicity and universality, especially in the case of Biblical films that wanted to stress their ever-relevant message. Third question is: Did music have any real commentative role in these filmic historical narratives or did it only have a supporting function? To this end, Dimitri Tiomkin’s score for The Fall of the Roman Empire will be examined to consider whether music can make a serious contribution to the historical interpretation within a film.

Epic Films, which is an important genre in cinema, have always won the appreciation of the audience and have been most popular in the 1950s and 60s with their samples that depict the "Antique Age". The samples of this genre, that educate while entertain are still being made today. After the 2000 movie "Gladiator", many Epics have being produced. One of the best Epic Films, director Ridley Scott's 2000 film "Gladiator" is successful not only in terms of cinematic point of view but also in terms of its reflecting archaeological facts correctly. The film successfully transferred history to the pellicule in terms of venues, art design, accessories and the story line. In "Gladiator", director Ridley Scott gathered all the elements of Gladiator Films,-a subgenre of Peplas made in Italy in the 1960s-and reflected them in one film only. "Gladiator", combines the themes of Peplas, such as Rome, gladiators, arenas, slaves and cruel rulers in a single work. The starting point of the movie is the competitions held in the Arena in the Ancient Age. Arenas are a platform not only individuals show themselves, but also the rulers to prove their power. In our study, starting from the formation of Amphitheaters, we examine the Arena Phenomenon, Gladiator Films and the place of "Gladiator" in between the similar works, respectively.