Let your goodness, Lord, appear to us, that we, made in your image, may conform ourselves to it.

In our own strength we cannot imitate your majesty, power, and wonder nor is it fitting for us to try. But your mercy reaches from the heavens through the clouds to the earth below.

You have come to us as a small child, but you have brought us the greatest of all gifts, the gift of eternal love. Caress us with your tiny hands, embrace us with your tiny arms and pierce our hearts with your soft, sweet cries.

—St. Bernard of Clairvaux

Jesus, the Light of the World, as we celebrate your birth, may we begin to see the world in the light of understanding you give us. As you chose the lowly, the outcasts, and the poor to receive the greatest news the world had ever known, so may we worship you in meekness of heart. May we also remember our brothers and sisters less fortunate than ourselves in this season of giving. Amen.

— Karen L. Oberst

Round this table, here to pray. First, we thank you for the day. For our family and our friends. Gifts of grace that heaven lends. Living water, daily bread. Countless blessings our God sends. Thank you, Jesus, for them all. For the great ones and the small. When we're happy, when we're sad. On the good days and the bad. We are grateful, we are glad. Amen.

— Mary Fairchild

In a world where worry, not peace, prevails, stir up that good news again. This Christmas, make it real in our hearts. Never have we needed Your joy and peace more than now. Thank You for the gift of Jesus, our Immanuel, the Word made flesh. Forgive us for forgetting—that Your love never changes, never fades, and that You never abandon the purpose for which You came: to save us from our sinful condition, and to give us life eternal, the joy of relationship with a holy God. Your birth—and Your death—sealed Your promise to us forever.

— Rebecca Barlow Jordan

Love came, held safely within a gentle womb

All the truth, majesty, and creativity of a living God

Poured into a tiny heart

Making a quiet entrance in a dark and uninviting shack

Just one star shone anew as a handful of people were brought

Led by angelic voices, and open hearts

A young mother

A faith-filled father

Men of wisdom who searched for truth

And a group of humble herdsmen

They came to bow before a new life

And acknowledge that the rescuer had arrived

That the Word of God had come alive

And that the extraordinary transformation of heaven and earth

Had begun

— Julie Palmer

Dear Lord, Don't let us miss You this Christmas season. Help us to simplify our activities and traditions so we can focus our celebration on Your birth. Thank You for being the Prince of Peace, and I ask You for that supernatural peace to reign in our hearts. Thank You for the simple but life-changing message of Your love for us. In Jesus' name, Amen.

— Melanie Chitwood

Loving Father, Help us remember the birth of Jesus,

That we may share in the song of the angels,

The gladness of the shepherds,

And worship of the wise men.

Close the door of hate

And open the door of love all over the world.

Let kindness come with every gift

And good desires with every greeting.

Deliver us from evil by the blessing, which Christ brings

And teach us to be merry with clear hearts.

May the Christmas morning make us

Happy to be thy children

And Christmas evening bring us

To our beds with grateful thoughts

Forgiving and forgiven

For Jesus sake

Amen.

— Robert Louis Stevenson

Lord, in this holy season of prayer and song and laughter, we praise you for the great wonders you have sent us: for shining star and angel's song, for infant's cry in lowly manger. We praise you for the Word made flesh in a little Child. We behold his glory, and are bathed in its radiance. Be with us as we sing the ironies of Christmas, the incomprehensible comprehended, the poetry made hard fact, the helpless Babe who cracks the world asunder. We kneel before you shepherds, innkeepers, wise men. Help us to rise bigger than we are. Amen.

— Author Unknown

Almighty God, grant that the new birth of your Son in the flesh redeems us from the old slavery under the yoke of sin, so we may receive him with joy as our Redeemer, and that when when he comes to judge we may see Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with you in the unity of the Holy Spirit, forever and ever. Amen.

— Wilehelm Loehe

God, our Creator, we offer this humble prayer on Christmas Day. We come to worship with a song of thanks in our hearts—a song of redemption, a song of hope and renewal. We pray for joy in our hearts, hope in our God, love to forgive, and peace upon the earth. We ask for the salvation of all our family members and friends, and we pray your blessings on all people. May there be bread for the hungry, love for the unlovable, healing for the sick, protection for our children, and wisdom for our youth. We pray for the forgiveness of sinners and abundant life in Christ. Holy Spirit, fill our hearts with your love and power. In the name of Jesus Christ we pray. Amen.

— Rev. Lia Icaza Willetts

Dear God, we give thanks for this time when we can all be together. We give thanks for this food which is bountiful and delicious. We give thanks for this joyful holiday when we can celebrate our Savior and his love for us. With joy we pray, Amen.

— Beth McLendon

O sweet Child of Bethlehem, grant that we may share with all our hearts in this profound mystery of Christmas. Put into the hearts of men and women this peace for which they sometimes seek so desperately and which you alone can give to them. Help them to know one another better, and to live as brothers and sisters, children of the same Father. Reveal to them also your beauty, holiness, and purity. Awaken in their hearts love and gratitude for your infinite goodness. Join them all together in your love. And give us your heavenly peace. Amen.

— Pope John XXIII

Lord and Giver of all good things, the magi travelled for miles to bring the Christ child the first Christmas presents. So may we, too, remember with thankful hearts the love that comes with each present we open. We also thank you for the love you have for each of us, and we thank you for the many gifts that you give us, especially the gift of live itself. Amen.

— Author unknown

My prayer for you this Christmas

Is like a special gift

I choose to ask for peace and joy

And there's more on this list!

I know you need both hope and love

To fill your life anew

And so I take these precious things

And wrap them up for you.

I ask that you would know how much

You're loved and held so dear

As I take a ribbon of grace

And tie a bow this year.

And on the label I will write

My promise new to you:

“You're in my prayers this Christmas time and the whole year through.”

— Author Unknown