She was a young actress on the Disney Channel starring in some of the most iconic films and television series on the network.

Not only does the San Francisco native act but she can also sing as she was able to land multiple roles in musicals.

Orange Is The New Black star Uzo Aduba was the maid of honor at her wedding.

Some of her famous co-stars included Miley Cyrus, Demi Lovato, and The Jonas Brothers.

Who is this actress?

It is Anna Maria Perez de Tagle-Kline!

The 32-year-old Filipina-American actress looked unrecognizable as she posted stunning snaps from a wedding she had attended over the weekend.

The Camp Rock actress looked absolutely stunning in a sheer light blue dress featuring a large bow at the chest.

The frock featured an intricate design of different sized roses in blue and white around the skirt.

She teamed the dress with a pair of black open-toed heels which showed off her black nail polish.

Anna certainly has an eye for details as she accessorized with a shimmering black clutch and diamond encrusted silver jewelry including bracelet, rings, and earrings.

Her raven colored locks were put in an elegant updo with bangs hanging just above her eyebrows.

The stunner's make-up accentuated her porcelain skin as it was topped off with pink lip and contrasted with smokey eye.

Anna's adorable two-year-old daughter Amelia played a pivotal role at the wedding as she served as flower girl for the festivities.

The actress even shared a sweet snap of her only child dancing the night away.

Anna captioned the gallery to her 177K followers: 'I love love [blue heart and butterfly emojis]. Had an amazing time celebrating the wedding of @jbliles & @jeffenriquez.

'It was such a magical and beautiful night to remember! Swipe to see Amelia as a flower girl and dancing the night away! [woman dancing and smiling face with hearts emojis]'

Anna was made for stardom as she is the daughter of television personality Arche Perez de Tagle and Evelyn Enriquez.

Her grandmother Sylvia La Torre is also an actress and a singer.

She began her acting career at the age of 14 starring in 2005 drama film Bee Season alongside Richard Gere and Juliette Binoche.

One year later she got her big break on the Disney Channel as she joined Miley Cyrus on highly-popular series Hannah Montana.

She starred on all four seasons of the teen sitcom.

Anna became a Disney Channel staple as she starred on favorite teen musical films Camp Rock (2008) and Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010).

The films featured Demi Lovato and all three Jonas Brothers; Kevin, Joe, and Nick.

In 2009 she starred in the revival of American teen musical drama Fame which was directed by Kevin Tancharoen.

Anna went on to have a few roles in film and television since her Disney days with her last role being in a 2020 film called The Message.

She was engaged to boyfriend Scott Kline Jr. in November 2018 and were later married on June 29, 2019 where actress Uzo Aduba was her maid of honor.

The 42-year-old Orange Is The New Black star and Anna both starred in Stephen Schwarz musical Godspell on Broadway back in 2012.