As Camp Rock's flawless fashionista, Ella Pador (played by Anna Maria Perez de Tagle) is the ultimate girly-girl! And just like her Camp Rock 2 character, Anna Maria admits that she too is a totally sucker for clothes and accessories! When Teen Mag sat down with Anna Maria, she was eager to talk all about her plans for the future (hint: they include fashion design!) and her favorite moments from set! According to Anna Maria, some of the Jonas Brothers can get a little competitive when it comes time to play Catch Phrase! Check it out!

Teen Mag: Tell us all about the Camp Rock 2 tour!

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle: Touring has been something that I've always wanted to do, so when Kevin Sr. asked me, I jumped [at the chance.] I even saw an "I Love Anna Maria" poster the other day and I was like, "Aw! That's so sweet!" I'm having the time of my life!

TM: Aw, that's adorable! What's been your favorite part of playing Ella?

AMPT: Well, she becomes the fashionista of Camp Rock this time around, so she's obsessed with lip gloss, glitter and sparkle. I can relate to her! I'm a total girly-girl, I love fashion and I love to design. In fact, I'd love to design in the future.

TM: What kind of clothes would you like to design?

AMPT: Well, I'm petite so I wear heels all the time. I'd love to design for that kind of body type. And my shoe size: I'm a four and a half/five so that's hard to find. I have to be unique. I like to cut stuff up and add things to clothes.

TM: Did you have a favorite Camp Rock 2 costume?

AMPT: Yes! In "Brand New Day" there's a dress - it's peach, kind of summer-y and flowy. I had to wear that dress at least once a week because "Brand New Day" was shot in almost all locations. What was nice about my wardrobe was that I got to pick out a lot of it. And of course, I was always wearing heels - even at camp!

TM: So pretty! Okay, what about when the cameras weren't rolling - what did you guys do for fun?

AMPT: Well, the boys were very big on sports so they brought ping-pong tables. We played kickball and softball. We also used to play Catch Phrase together. One night, Roshon [Fegan], Nick [Jonas], Alyson [Stoner] and I were all on one team and Kevin [Jonas], Chloe [Bridges], and a couple of other cast mates were on the other side - and our team won! Well, we like to say our team won but Kevin and Nick are a bit defensive [about that]. They're very competitive with each other. Being in a trailer with them can be a little scary! [Laughs]

TM: They told us all about their ping-pong challenges! So then, who would you say is the "class clown" of Camp Rock?

AMPT: Jordan [Francis.] He's a character. Even on tour, he makes me laugh so hard. He's like my brother! One take, he wasn't supposed to say a line the way that he did. It was supposed to be, "Oh! Graham crackers!" And he goes, "Ooooh! Grahamz crackas." He was always the funny guy on set.

TM: What would you say is the hardest part of being in the spotlight?

AMPT: Well, you can't be walking out of hotels looking out of it. As a role model, fans look up to you. Being part of the Disney Channel and Camp Rock, I have a younger fan base. So, there's a little bit of pressure there, but I knew how I grew up and how I'm going to live my life. I just try to be the best that I can be.

TM: You're so sweet! And for our last question, since it's back-to-school time - what's your favorite BTS memory?

AMPT: On the first day of school, I remember being the new girl. I was so nervous because I didn't know anyone and it was a new city! But then, one of my [now] best friends came up to me and was like, "Hi, are you new? I could show you around." It was really nice of her! And I remember on the first day of high school, there was this really cute guy. I was trying to look cute walking down the stairs but it turns out that my over-the-shoulder bag's straps weren't latched on. My bag fell and everything spilled out. It was a really embarrassing moment. And he didn't even help me out! I was like, "Okay! Over it!"