Anna Maria Perez de Tagle is an American actress and a singer, well-known Camp Rock. She is taking over the legacy of her grandparents who were also artists. She has worked in music videos such as We Rock, Remember December, and Roses. They are all part of her music albums. It was her appearance in the popular musical film Camp Rock that the audience began to recognize her. She was portrayed as a attendee and Tess’s friend in the film. Besides, she has participated in reality shows like Disney Channel Games and So You Think You Can Dance.

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle was born in 23 December 1990 (Age: 31 Years, as in 2022) in San Francisco, California, United States. She completed her schooling at LACHSA (Los Angeles County High School for the Arts). Anna Maria Perez de Tagle is 5 feet and 2 inches tall, and her body weight is around 46 Kg.

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Biography, Lifestyle, Wiki, Height, Weight, Birthday, Age, Movies, TV Serials, Instagram, Salary, Net Worth, Income, Boyfriend, Family, Father, Mother, Husband, Affairs, Marriage Life, Phone Number, Photos, House, Cars, Awards & Facts

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Biography/Wiki

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Personal Life

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Education

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Physical Statistics And More

How tall is Anna Maria Perez de Tagle?

How much does Anna Maria Perez de Tagle weigh?

How old is Anna Maria Perez de Tagle?

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Body Measurements

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Eye Color

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Family & Relationship

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Parents & Siblings

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Boyfriend & Husband

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Career

What is Anna Maria Perez de Tagle’s Salary?

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle’s main source of income is Acting, Modeling, and Brand Endorsements.

What is Anna Maria Perez de Tagle’s Net Worth?

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle has an estimated total Net Worth of $1.6 Million.

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Cars And Bikes Collection

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle has a lot of luxury Cars collection including :

Not known

Some Lesser Known Facts About Anna Maria Perez de Tagle

• Since her childhood, she has shown immense interest in creative fields like singing, dancing, and acting. She is currently following the path of her parents and grandparents.

• Among her other interest include working in association with health institutes for the children’s health and well-being.

• Her creativity and artistic personality helped her bag the title ‘ Best Featured Female Artist’ for musical films at the Broadway World Awards in 2012.

• She is fortunate enough to tour with popular stars like Hannah Montana and Jonas Brothers as an opener and performer.

• She was married to the love of her life Scott Kline Jr and currently has a beautiful daughter.

• Her linguistic abilities are excellent as she can speak Irish, English, Spanish, Chinese, and Filipino.

• How interesting it is to know that the film ‘Fame’ in 2009 helped her rose to fame.

FAQ

1. What is the current Net Worth of Anna Maria Perez de Tagle?

At present, the Net Worth of Anna Maria Perez de Tagle is $1.6 million.

2. Where was Anna Maria Perez de Tagle born?

The birthplace of Anna Maria Perez de Tagle is San Francisco, California, United States.

3. What is Anna Maria Perez de Tagle’s true ethnicity?

She believes in Christianity.

4. What is the educational qualification of Anna Maria Perez de Tagle?

Not known

5. Is Anna Maria Perez de Tagle Married?

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle is married to Scott Kline Jr In 2019.