BIRMINGHAM, Alabama, U.S.A. -- Jan. 8, 2007 -- EBSCO Information Services announced today that it has included Live Search Academic as one of the OpenURL-enabled sources for its LinkSourceTM link resolver; this allows EBSCO A-to-Z ® (A-to-Z) customers to activate their online resources through the Live Search Academic search engine.

As a result, end users at participating schools who use Live Search Academic will see article-level links displayed for items in their institution's online collection. These links will lead to the library's LinkSource menu from which the user can access the appropriate copy of the article, bringing the licensed electronic full-text to just a click or two from the Live Search Academic search results.

"Like many of our customers, we recognize that many end users initiate their research in online services like Live Search Academic, and the challenge is to get these users to the appropriate library resources," said Oliver Pesch, chief strategist of e-resources, EBSCO Information Services. "We are pleased that Microsoft has supported this need by providing the technologies to bring library resources into the Live Search Academic search experience."

"We recognize the important role of the library in providing its patrons with the relevant and appropriate content for their research," said Mike Buschman, program manager, Live Search Academic, Microsoft Corp. "We are pleased to be able to make optimal use of OpenURL technology to give our users the best possible experience by connecting the quality content in Live Search Academic with the library collection and library services."

In recognition of the value this program extends to libraries, EBSCO is pleased to provide this service at no additional charge to all A-to-Z customers. Libraries interested in participating in this program need only contact A-to-Z Customer Care at atozfeedback@ebsco.com.

About EBSCO's LinkSource

LinkSource is an OpenURL link resolver that enables the library to control item-level linking among their various online resources (databases, e-journal sites, etc.). As an add-on to the EBSCO A-to-Z journal list service, which functions as the knowledge base for LinkSource, set up of your link resolver is a quick and easy process. Librarians can select the appropriate resources to be linked and apply the conditions that determine when the links display. LinkSource presents the user with links to the full text to which the user has rights or to other relevant services such as the library catalog, an ILL request form or document delivery order form.

About EBSCO Information Services

EBSCO Information Services is the leading service provider for e-journal, e-journal and e-book package and print subscriptions, a suite of e-resource management tools, full-text and secondary databases and related services for all types of libraries and research organizations.

As the "e" agent of the industry, more than half of the subscriptions handled by EBSCO have an electronic component. EBSCO's comprehensive solutions include proven systems to consolidate ordering, invoicing, claiming and renewals as well as assistance with licensing and registration requirements for our e-journal and e-package customers worldwide. EBSCO's 32 Regional Offices, located in 21 countries around the world, serve customers in more than 200 countries and are staffed by information professionals who speak the local language and understand the particular challenges faced by librarians in their areas.

In its seventh decade of business, EBSCO upholds relationships with more than 79,000 publishers globally. These publisher relationships uniquely position us to streamline many aspects of the e-resource life cycle. EBSCO maintains a Dun & Bradstreet financial strength rating of 5A1, the highest awarded, which underscores the importance placed on providing outstanding, ethical service.