What I'm about to suggest will depend on such things as budget & the size of the library, of course, adrastriae.

As a starter, though, my advice is 180 degrees different to Danny's. Most libraries put Fantasy & SF together as one subsection - in fact, SF/Horror/Fantasy, because although they are often different, and as Danny says, not everyone likes all, most fans tend to like them. You could subdivide within that into separate shelves should you wish. But, confusingly, there are books that overlap genres: see Space Fantasy, for example, or HP Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos, which combines Horror with SF.

Classics: Depends on how far back you want to go. Frankenstein?

Traditionally in SF the classics come from the 1930's/40's/50's. Try the so-called 'Big Three' - Asimov, Heinlein, Clarke. Ray Bradbury.

From the 60's: Alfred Bester, (The Stars My Destination), Frank Herbert's Dune, New Wave authors.

These days, however, classics can come from anything up to the 1990's - Bear, Brin, LeGuin.

Look at the Hugo & Nebula Award Winners, though there is debate over their importance these days.

This list might help. It is, however, mainly old books, and as the genre at the time would suggest, male-centred and WASP heavy.

Suggest you look at the re-release of books based on movies/tv. They often generate interest.

The Yearly collections of short stories are quite a nice way in with what's going on at the moment. For example: https://www.amazon.com/Years-Best-Science-Fiction-Thirty-Third/dp/1250080843

For more recent books, look at the Awards lists as they appear. There are a lot of them, though! Year lists are often great. I would recommend the Locus Magazine lists as a start.

Hope this helps.

If you haven't already been doing so, the schools are going to be very helpful on this. They assign quite a bit of SF and fantasy in the curriculum and while students are given or buy a lot of the books, you're probably going to want to be stocked with what they need to do papers on. But possible ones to look at in science fiction, which hits some of them:

Isaac Asimov -- Foundation; I, Robot; The Gods Themselves; The Stars Like Dust; Fantastic Voyage; Nightfall(with Robert Silverberg)

Ray Bradbury -- The Martian Chronicles; The Illustrated Man; Fahrenheit 451

Arthur C. Clarke -- Rendezvous with Rama; 2001; The Fountains of Paradise; Islands in the Sky; Childhood’s End

Robert Heinlein -- The Moon is a Harsh Mistress; Stranger in a Strange Land; Starship Troopers; Red Planet

Ursula Le Guin -- The Left Hand of Darkness; The Dispossessed; The Lathe of Heaven; The Word for World is Forest

Kurt Vonnegut Jr. -- The Sirens of Titan; Slaughterhouse Five; Cat’s Cradle; Mother Night

Octavia Butler -- Kindred; Parable of the Sower; Wild Seed; Dawn

Phillip K. Dick -- Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?; A Scanner Darkly; The Man in the High Castle; We Can Remember It for You Wholesale

George Orwell -- 1984: Animal Farm

Aldous Huxley -- Brave New World

Samuel Delaney -- Dhalgren; Babel-17; Triton

J.G. Ballard -- The Drowned World; High-Rise

Alfred Bester –The Demolished Man; The Stars, My Destination

Hal Clement -- Mission of Gravity

R.A. Lafferty -- Fourth Mansions

Frederick Pohl -- Man Plus; Gateway; Jem

Joanna Russ -- The Female Man; And Chaos Died

Roger Zelazny -- Isle of the Dead; Lord of Light

Gregory Benford -- In the Ocean of the Night; Timescape

Andre Norton –The Stars are Ours; No Night Without Stars; The Beast Master; Iron Cage

Richard Matheson -- I Am Legend;The Shrinking Man

John Wyndham -- The Chrysalids;The Day of the Triffids

C.J. Cherryh -- Downbelow Station; The Faded Sun: Kesrith; Serpent’s Reach; The Pride of Chanur

Barry B. Longyear -- Enemy Mine

Daniel Keyes -- Flowers for Algernon

James Tiptree Jr. -- Ten Thousand Light-years from Home; Up the Walls of the World; Her Smoke Rose Up Forever; The Girl Who Was Plugged In

Edwin Balmer & Phillip Wylie -- When Worlds Collide

George R. Stewart -- Earth Abides

Zenna Henderson – No Different Flesh

Frank Herbert -- Dune

Vonda N. McIntyre -- Dreamsnake; The Exile Waiting; Starfarers

Margaret Atwood -- A Handmaid's Tale

Doris Lessing -- Shikasta

Clifford D. Simak -- A Choice of Gods; A Heritage of Stars; All Flesh is Grass

Ira Levin -- The Stepford Wives

Marge Piercy -- Woman on the Edge of Time

John Christopher -- The Death of Grass (No Blade of Grass)

Judith Merril – The Tomorrow People

Harry Harrison -- Make Way! Make Way!; The Stainless Steele Rat

C.L. Moore– Doomsday Morning

Gordon R. Dickson –Dorsai!

Suzy McKee Charnas -- Walk to the End of the World

Robert Silverberg -- Tower of Glass

Sherri Tepper– Grass; The Gate to Woman’s Country; Six Moon Dance

James P. Hogan -- Inherit the Stars

Leigh Brackett –The Sword of Rhiannon; The Long Tomorrow

Julian May –The Many Colored Land; Jack the Bodiless

Arkady Strugatsky -- Roadside Picnic

Marion Zimmer Bradley –Darkover Landfall

Pat Frank -- Alas, Babylon

Katherine McLean -- The Missing Man

Poul Anderson -- Tau Zero

Tanith Lee– The Silver Metal Lover; The Birthgrave; Electric Forest

Olaf Stapledon -- Nebula Maker

Madeline L'Engle -- A Wrinkle in Time

Walter M. Miller -- A Canticle for Leibowitz

Kate Wilhelm -- Where Late the Sweet Birds Sang; Juniper Time

Stanislaw Lem -- Solaris

Pamela Sargent -- Earthseed

David Gerrold -- The Man Who Folded Himself

Elizabeth A. Lynn -- A Different Light

Christopher Priest -- The Inverted World; The Prestiege

Diana Wynne Jones– Archer’s Goon; A Tale of Time City

Theodore Sturgeon -- Venus Plus X; The Synthetic Man

John Brunner -- The Sheep Look Up

Joe Haldeman -- The Forever War; All My Sins Remembered

Phillip Jose Farmer -- To Your Scattered Bodies Go

Thomas M. Disch -- The Genocides; 334

William F. Nolan & George Clayton Johnson -- Logan's Run

Gene Wolfe -- The Shadow of the Torturer

James Edwin Gunn -- The Listeners

Anne McCaffrey -- Dragonrider; The Ship Who Sang; Restoree

Larry Niven -- Ringworld; The Mote in God's Eye (with Jerry Pournelle)

Harlan Ellison – I Have No Mouth, and I Must Scream; Strange Wine

Douglas Adams -- The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy

William Gibson -- Neuromancer; Mona Lisa Overdrive

Connie Willis -- Doomsday Book; Blackout; Lincoln’s Dreams

Kit Reed – Little Sisters of the Apocalypse; Armed Camps

Pat Cadigan -- Synners

Michael Bishop -- No Enemy But Time

Brian Aldiss -- Heliconia Spring

P.D. James -- The Children of Men

Janet Morris– High Couch of Silestra; Dream Dancer

John Varley -- Titan

Chelsea Quinn Yarbro – Cautionary Tales; False Dawn

Orson Scott Card -- Ender's Game

Brian M. Stableford – The Halcyon Drift; The Face of Heaven

Joan D. Vinge -- The Snow Queen; Psion

Alan Dean Foster -- Nor Crystal Tears

Maureen F. McHugh -- China Mountain Zhang

David Graham -- Down to a Sunless Sea

Iain M. Banks -- Consider Phlebas

David Brin -- Startide Rising; The Postman

Gardner R. Dozois -- Strangers; The Visible Man

Julie E. Czernada -- A Thousand Words for Stranger; Beholder's Eye

Lois McMaster Bujold -- Shards of Honor

Harry Turtledove -- The Guns of the South

Patricia Anthony -- Brother Termite

George Alec Effinger -- When Gravity Falls

Mary Doria Russell -- The Sparrow

Bruce Sterling -- Schismatrix

Dan Simmons -- Hyperion

Greg Bear -- Blood Music; Moving Mars

Kim Stanley Robinson -- Red Mars

Neal Stephenson -- Snow Crash; The Diamond Age

James K. Morrow -- This is the Way the World Ends

Vernor Vinge -- A Fire Upon the Deep

Nancy Kress -- Beggars in Spain

Ian Watson -- The Embedding

Jonathan Lethem -- Gun, with Occasional Music

John Barnes -- Mother of Storms

Nicola Griffith -- Slow River

Robert J. Sawyer -- The Terminal Experiment

Nalo Hopkinson -- Brown Girl in the Ring; Midnight Robber

There are two issues in choosing which books to stock in a library that haven’t been mentioned.

One is that there are many series of SF books. A good example would be the Vorkosigan series by Bujold, which has won four Hugos. If a library decides to buy a book from such a series, there remains the difficult question of which book to buy. For us private readers, it is sensible to buy the omnibus editions rather than the originally published storis but I do not know if there are any problems in a library buying the omnibus editions. However, which omnibus editions? The two obvious choices are either Cordelia's Honor, which contains Shards of Honor and Barrayar, or Young Miles, which contains The Warrior's Apprentice, The Mountains of Mourning, and The Vor Game. The advantage of Cordelia's Honor is that those are the earliest stories in the time line as Cordelia is Miles’ mother whilst the advantage of Young Miles is that it introduces Miles, who is probably the main character of the series. Barrayar, The Mountains of Mourning, and The Vor Game all won Hugos, which is a further argument for those editions. It would clearly be a very bad idea to chose a book from the series such as Gentleman Jole and the Red Queen simply because it was the most recently published.

A possibly more controversial idea is that it might not be a good idea to buy books which are freely available as epubs, even if they are only available to individuals rather than to libraries. I am not sure how many of the “classics of SF” are now freely available but a quick search for a book before buying might save some money.

You should really check out the lists by James Wallace Harris. He lists the defining classic science fiction books from the 50s to the 90s. He begins each article with a top ten of the decade and then a top ten year by year.

Just search for James Wallace Harris The Defining Science Fiction Books of the 1950s, and so on...

For example, for the 60s his top ten (or top twelve, in this case) of the decade list is:

Solaris by Stanislaw Lem (1961)

Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (1961)

A Clockwork Orange by Anthony Burgess (1962)

The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (1962)

A Wrinkle in Time by Madeleine L’Engle (1963)

Dune by Frank Herbert (1965)

Flowers for Algernon by Daniel Keyes (1966)

The Moon is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein (1966)

Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick (1968)

Stand on Zanzibar by John Brunner (1968)

Slaughterhouse Five by Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. (1969)

The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin (1969)

Then he has lists by year, some discussion, and his list of personal favorites of the decade.