HORICON, N.Y. — Here in the heart of the Adirondacks, the slender Schroon River, meandering through dense stands of hemlock and white pine, is so narrow that you could easily hurl a polished rock from one bank to the other. But ever since a century-old bridge nearby closed several years ago, crossing the river by car here can take up to 10 minutes more.

Local officials had the federal and state money in place to build a replacement bridge about two miles to the north. There was just one problem: The river is flanked by state forest preserve land. Using only 20 feet on each side would have required amending the State Constitution, with voters from Rochester to Ronkonkoma deciding the project’s fate.

In November, voters statewide will face a more expansive question — whether to amend the State Constitution to allow towns to use small pieces of land in the “forever-wild” preserves in the Adirondacks and Catskills for small, but critical public projects like straightening a dangerous curve in a road or drilling a drinking well.

The proposal, one of three ballot questions in New York, would create a 250-acre land bank for the purpose. Under the plan, which was worked out by local officials, state lawmakers and environmental advocates, the State Department of Environmental Conservation would purchase 250 acres of private land, to be added to the state forest preserve, to offset an equal amount of land that towns and villages could access for modest projects alongside local and county roads.

“This makes much more sense,” said Matthew Simpson, supervisor of the Town of Horicon, where the new bridge across the Schroon would be built. “Amending the Constitution for an individual project is risky. How are you going to convince Buffalo or New York City? Their first reaction would be ‘No.’”

Yet at least two dozen such projects have gone to the voters statewide in the past century; most have passed. But getting a proposal on the statewide ballot requires approval by two successive state Legislatures, tying up scant resources on the part of rural towns and villages that must press their case in Albany. In those cases, the towns typically compensated the state by adding more forest preserve land than they took.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.