Robert Jenrick MP

Robert Edward Jenrick was born on 9th January 1982 and is the Conservative Party Member of Parliament for Newark (July 2014) He was educated at Wolverhampton Grammar School and read History at St John’s College, Cambridge, gaining a 1st Class degree. A solicitor by profession and a director of Christies, the art business, he was […]

Lunch with Robert Jenrick MP – 8th August 2014

At The Falcon Hotel, Uppingham.

Lunch with Godfrey Bloom – 13th June 2014

At The Lake Isle Restaurant.

Emma McClarkin MEP

Emma is the youngest Member of the European Parliament representing the UK. Having been an activist for the Party from a young age, Emma has always been passionate about politics. After working in Law, Emma decided to become more involved in Politics, and has been working for the Conservative Party in the East Midlands Region […]

Matthew Elliott

Chief Executive, Business for Britain Founder, TaxPayers’ Alliance Founder, Big Brother Watch Follow Matthew on Twitter: @matthew_elliott Matthew Elliott is one of the foremost political campaigners working in Westminster, having led the hugely successful ‘No’ campaign against the Alternative Vote in the 2011 referendum, and founded groups as diverse as the TaxPayers’ Alliance, civil liberties […]

Sir Edward Garnier

Edward Garnier has been the MP for Harborough since the general election in April 1992. Born in October 1952, he is married to Anna and they have a daughter and two sons. Edward Garnier was educated at Wellington College, Berkshire, Jesus College, Oxford, and the College of Law, London. He was called to the Bar […]

Andrew Robathan MP

Biography Andrew Robathan was appointed Minister of State for Northern Ireland in October 2013. He is the Conservative MP for south Leicestershire. Education Andrew was educated at Merchant Taylors’ School in Northwood and studied modern history at Oriel College, Oxford. He later attended the Army Staff College in Camberley. Political career Andrew was previously Minister […]

Stuart Wheeler

(Born 30 January 1935) is a British businessman and politician. He made his fortune as the founder of the spread betting firm IG Index in 1974, but is best known for his political activism, being formerly a major donor to the Conservative Party and, since 2011, treasurer of the United Kingdom Independence Party. Business life […]

Peter William Bone MP

(Born 19 October 1952) is a British Conservative Party politician and Member of Parliament (MP) for Wellingborough constituency. Bone was educated at Westcliff High School for Boys until 1971 then Chart Tutors – now part of Kaplan – until 1974. Bone is quoted as playing cricket as a left arm bowler for Cambridge Methodists Cricket […]

Admiral Sir James Perowne KBE

Admiral Sir James Perowne KBE left the Royal Navy six years ago following a full and varied 37 year career. He specialised in submarines and commanded a diesel boat, HMS Opportune 1976-77, and a nuclear powered fleet submarine, HMS Superb 1981-83. He was awarded the OBE after his second command. Later he was placed in […]