What is the currency in Hungary?

The official currency in Hungary is the Hungarian Forint, which is issued and overseen by the Hungarian National Bank. If you’re buying your travel money online you may also see the official code being shown - HUF. In stores and restaurants, Hungarian Forint prices are likely to use the currency symbol Ft.

Once you’re in Hungary you’ll see costs of items shown in HUF and you’ll need to start paying for things in local coins and notes which are often found in the following denominations:

banknotes - 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10000, 20000 HUF and coins - 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200 HUF.

Can you officially pay in GBP when you are in Hungary?

You’re unlikely to be able to officially transact in GBP in Hungary, which is why it’s time to start getting used to HUF and learning more about the currency exchange rates so you’ll know what you’re spending on your trip.

This guide will walk through all you need to know, including British pound/Hungarian Forint rates and where best to get your travel money from.

Hungarian ForintCurrency nameHungarian ForintISO codeHUFSymbolFtSubunitFillérCentral BankHungarian National BankBest travel cards to take to HungaryWise

HUF coins and banknotes

Here’s a full rundown of the HUF coins and banknotes you’ll need to be familiar with when you’re in Hungary.

HUF banknotesHUF coinsbanknotes - 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10000, 20000 HUFcoins - 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200 HUF

History of Hungarian Forint currency

The Hungarian Forint (HUF) was introduced in 1946 after World War II, replacing the pengő, which had become worthless due to hyperinflation. The forint's stability was crucial in post-war reconstruction and economic reform. It has remained Hungary's currency as the country transitions to a market economy.

Is GBP accepted in Hungary?

As we’ve seen, the official currency in Hungary is HUF. If you carry GBP with you on your trip, you’ll probably need to exchange it before you can spend.

Sometimes when you’re away on a trip abroad you’ll find that merchants will take payments in a selection of major foreign currencies. However, the chances are that where this is offered, you won’t get a good exchange rate for your GBP. Planning smart and convenient ways to spend in HUF when you’re away is likely to mean you save on costs in the end.

Usually, having a few different ways to pay and get cash is the best option for travelers and tourists. That’s because you’ll have a back up plan in case one payment method isn’t accepted for any reason, and you can pick the method that’s best suited to the specific transaction. Having a multi-currency card from a provider like Wise or Revolut, plus your normal bank debit card, and some local cash in HUF should mean you’ve always got options. You can use your cash for small purchases and tipping, and make low cost payments and cash withdrawals with your multi-currency card, while keeping your bank card in reserve for emergencies.

Use a travel card on your next trip to Hungary

Using a travel debit card in Hungary is usually cheap, safe and convenient. A few providers in the UK offer multi-currency cards which come with a linked payment account that lets you convert, hold and spend in HUF. That allows you to add a balance in GBP and switch over to HUF to lock in the exchange rate and set your travel budget.

Once you have HUF in your account there are no extra fees to make payments, and you’ll not have foreign transaction charges to worry about, either.

Here’s a quick overview of a couple of handy travel debit cards you may want to order and use in Hungary.

What is the currency exchange rate for £ 1 GBP/HUF?

It’s helpful to get to know the live GBP/HUF rate so you can easily calculate how much things are costing you while you’re on your trip abroad.

The rate you need to focus on is the mid market rate, which is the one banks and major currency services get when buying and selling currencies. This rate isn’t always passed on to customers. Instead you may find that the GBP/HUF rate you get when exchanging travel cash includes a markup - an extra fee.

Find the GBP/HUF mid-market rate from a currency conversion site or a website like this, so you can keep an eye on the market and compare the rates you’re offered as you travel against the mid-market rate easily.

Should I exchange GBP to HUF before traveling to Hungary?

It’s a good idea to exchange GBP to HUF before you head off to Hungary, as you can often find a better exchange rate and lower overall costs before you travel.

When you’re in Hungary you’re going to need HUF in cash for some of your spending - particularly when tipping or making smaller value purchases. Buying your HUF travel money in advance can get you better GBP/HUF exchange rates, and saves you wasting precious time shopping around for a good deal once you arrive in Hungary.

Tips for exchanging money in Hungary

Cards are widely accepted in Hungary, but you’ll still need to watch the exchange rate given when making a transaction from GBP to HUF. Some merchants offer to let you pay in GBP instead of HUF, but this will usually mean paying more because of dynamic currency conversion costs.

Best place to exchange currency in Hungary

You can get your HUF in Hungary in a couple of ways.

You’ll be able to use a travel debit card from a provider like Wise or Revolut to make convenient payments and cash withdrawals and to convert funds online.

Or if you prefer an offline solution you can carry some cash in GBP to exchange when you arrive. Currency exchange providers are often in airports and hotels, although the exchange shops in a city center are likely to be cheaper overall.

How to pay in Hungary?

You’ll need to have HUF to spend in Hungary. However, generally having a few different payment methods is a good plan. That means that if a merchant won't accept one, you’ve got a back up. It’s also reassuring to know you have a different way to pay if you were unlucky enough to have a card or some travel cash stolen. Here are your key payment options in Hungary.

1. Debit or credit card

Card payments can be helpful in shops, restaurants and hotels but there will be places where cash is also important. Order a travel card from a provider like Wise or Revolut for cheap and fast transactions, including card payments and cash withdrawals as and when you need travel money in HUF.

2. HUF cash

It’s worth having some cash with you at all times. You may want to exchange money to HUF before you leave, but it’s also usually convenient to make ATM withdrawals locally once you arrive in Hungary.

You’ll usually find you can use a card to make payments in Hungary, but carrying some cash in HUF is also reassuring. It’s often easier for tipping and making smaller purchases, plus you’ve got a nice backup if your card is ever out of action for some reason.

It’s a smart idea to have both a card and some cash in HUF when you’re in Hungary. Some merchants will prefer cash, but having a card for higher value payments and in busier more tourist places is also convenient. Consider using a travel card from a provider like Wise or Revolut alongside your cash for flexibility.

Paying for the trip in GBP

If you’re paying for things in Hungary with a GBP bank card you might find a foreign transaction fee is added. This pushes up your costs when you spend in a foreign currency, and can be tricky to calculate.

Travel debit cards don’t always work this way. When you make purchases in Hungary using the Wise card you can either choose to convert your account balance to HUF in advance in the Wise app, or just leave your balance in GBP and let the card handle the transaction when you pay. You’ll always get the lowest available fee and there are no extra foreign transaction charges.

Conclusion - Currency in Hungary

You won’t be able to pay in GBP when you visit Hungary - so learning about the currency you need is essential. Whether you decide to use a travel debit card from a service like Wise , or stock up on HUF in cash in advance, knowing the mid-market exchange rate can help you get the best available deal. Use this guide to learn all you need to know about the options, rates and fees for exchanging GBP to HUF, and make your money go further while you’re away.

The official currency in Hungary is HUF. You can’t usually pay in GBP in Hungary, so you’ll need to plan in advance to get your travel money sorted. Consider ordering a travel debit card from a service like Wise, for low cost conversions to HUF and convenient spending and withdrawals - and remember that knowing the GBP to HUF mid-market exchange rate is essential to check you’re getting a fair deal on currency exchange.

FAQ - Currency in Hungary

What is the currency in Hungary called?

The official currency in Hungary is the Hungarian Forint. You may also see the code HUF and the currency symbol Ft.

What's the currency in Budapest?

The official currency in Budapest is the Hungarian Forint. You’ll only be able to spend in HUF while you’re there.

What is the old Hungary currency?

Today the currency in Hungary is the Hungarian Forint. If you’re worried about currencies changing, why not get a travel debit card from a service like Wise which will automatically pick the currency needed in your destination when making a payment - with no penalties or inflated fees.

What is the best currency to take to Hungary?

You’ll only be able to spend in HUF while you’re in Hungary. Carrying some money in cash and using a travel debit card from a service like Wise is usually the best way to spend while you’re away from home.