Zhang, Guozhen (2012) Computational Studies of Chemical Systems: I. A Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Methane Hydrate; II. Theoretical Investigation of Water Loading on a Pyrophyllite (001) Surface. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh. (Unpublished)

Preview

PDF (dissertation)

Primary Text

Download (3MB) | Preview

Abstract

This dissertation consists of two independent parts: Part I. methane hydrate, and Part II. water loading on a clay surface. In Part I (chapter 2-3), we conducted molecular dynamics simulations with non-polarizable force fields to study structural and thermal properties of methane hydrate. We show that the TIP4P/Ice and TIP4P/2005 model potentials do well in the description of the lattice constant and radial distribution functions. Yet they, together with SPC/E and TIP4P models, overestimate the thermal expansion coefficient due to the inadequate description of the non-linear response of lattice constant to temperature. We also show that TIP4P/Ice and TIP4P/2005 overestimate the decomposition temperature of methane hydrate from the experimental value by 50 K and 30 K respectively, while SPC/E gives a good estimation deviating by about 5 K. All these force fields are found to overestimate the thermal conductivity of methane hydrate, but they are able to describe the weak temperature dependence from 100 to 150 K and 225 to 270 K. It is also found that all initial structures used in the work have a proton ordering tendency, suggesting a potential role of proton arrangement in the temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity. In part II (chapter 4), we conducted dispersion-corrected density function theory (DFT-D) and classical force field calculations to study the water loading on a pyrophyllite (001) surface. We disclose low-energy binding motifs from one water molecule to six water molecules and reinterpret the hydrophobic nature of the pyrophyllite surface from the point of view that a water molecule prefers to interact with other water molecules than to be bound on the surface. The force field approach, while providing a similar trend of the water binding to the DFT-D result, predicts some low-energy binding motifs which are not confirmed by the DFT-D calculation. It suggests a refinement of the force field to better describe the interfacial orientation of water on a clay surface.

Share

Citation/Export: Social Networking:

Details

Item Type: University of Pittsburgh ETD Status: Unpublished Creators/Authors:

CreatorsEmailPitt UsernameORCID Zhang, Guozhenpitt.zhang@yahoo.com

Date: 9 October 2012 Date Type: Publication Defense Date: 15 June 2012 Approval Date: 9 October 2012 Submission Date: 17 August 2012 Access Restriction: No restriction; Release the ETD for access worldwide immediately. Number of Pages: 132 Institution: University of Pittsburgh Schools and Programs: Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences > Chemistry Degree: PhD - Doctor of Philosophy Thesis Type: Doctoral Dissertation Refereed: Yes Uncontrolled Keywords: molecular dynamics, thermal conductivity, methane hydrate, density functional theory, clay surface, hydrophobicity Date Deposited: 09 Oct 2012 14:06 Last Modified: 15 Nov 2016 14:02 URI: http://d-scholarship.pitt.edu/id/eprint/13633

Metrics

Monthly Views for the past 3 years

Plum Analytics

Actions (login required)