Syrskyi reported this on Facebook, according to Ukrinform.

"I worked in the Donetsk region. I visited combat brigades holding defense in one of the hottest areas of the frontline. Our courageous defenders here repel dozens of attacks by Russian invaders every day," noted Syrskyi.

In particular, he said, these are the soldiers of the 25th Separate Airborne Brigade.

"Heroic people who skillfully and decisively destroy the occupiers. The brigade has been defending our land since the first days of Russian aggression. Now, in the course of fierce fighting, the paratroopers continue to confidently hold back the Russian invasion in one of the most important sections of the contact line," the Commander-in-Chief noted.

He also recognized the soldiers, sergeants, and officers of the 110th Separate Mechanized Brigade. Syrskyi emphasized that they are desperately fighting against the superior forces of the invaders and are a true example of courage and patriotism.

The Commander-in-Chief presented awards to the personnel of the 47th Separate Mechanized Brigade. He emphasized that the Magura warriors skillfully repel enemy attacks, effectively use firepower against enemy equipment and personnel, and steadfastly hold their lines and positions.

Read also: Zelensky awards soldiers in Donetsk region and listens to reports on operational situation

The Commander-in-Chief also thanked the personnel of the 59th Separate Motorized Infantry Brigade, who, according to him, are "strong in spirit, motivated and skillful warriors, reliably holding the defense and resolutely beating the aggressor."

"I thank all Ukrainian defenders who are now fighting for our freedom and independence. I recognize the dedication of everyone who bravely defends Ukraine, our home, and our people," Syrskyi summarized.

As reported, on June 26, President Volodymyr Zelensky, together with the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Oleksandr Syrskyi and the new commander of the Joint Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Andrii Hnatov, visited the Donetsk region.