Bell Media has found a buyer for three of the AM stations it announced it wanted to divest itself of during a June reorganization that saw the company shutter six other AMs. CINA Radio Group founder and CEO Neeti P. Ray is making a play to buy CHAM and CKOC Hamilton and CKWW Windsor, pending CRTC approval. The proposed sale, which would see Ray acquire the assets of the stations for $445,000, is one of three matters set to come before the commission at a Feb. 8 hearing in Gatineau. CHAM-AM Hamilton is currently branded as Funny 820, CKOC-AM Hamilton as BNN Bloomberg Radio 1150, and CKWW-AM Windsor as oldies station, Motor City Favourites. Ray’s application says he plans operate the stations on the same terms and conditions to ensure continuity. Read more here.

Rogers Sports & Media has launched a national talk show on its CityNews radio stations, helmed by Ottawa broadcast veteran Rob Snow. “Now You Know with Rob Snow” is airing from 1 – 4 p.m. ET on CityNews 570 (CKGL-AM) Kitchener, CityNews 95.7 (CJNI-FM) Halifax, CityNews 660 (CFFR-AM) Calgary, CityNews 1130 (CKWX-AM) Vancouver, and online at CityNews.ca. It will also be released as a daily podcast through Frequency Podcast Network. The move marks the first time talk is airing on the Vancouver and Calgary stations, which up until now have broadcast a round-the-clock “news wheel” format. Read more here.

Evanov Communications has rebranded Lite 88.5 (CKDX-FM) Newmarket, ON as Hot Country 88.5, a new country radio station serving the Greater Toronto Area. Making the flip at 9 a.m. Friday morning, Evanov cited the exploding popularity of country music, particularly with a new generation of younger listeners. Hot Country 88.5 joins Evanov’s other Country format stations in Ontario, Hot Country 93.9 Brantford (CFWC-FM), Hot Country 107.7 (CKHK-FM) Hawkesbury, and Hot Country 92.5 (CHRC-FM) Clarence/Rockland. All four stations will share a simulcast morning show, Hot Country Mornings with Tracy Lynn. Nashville-based country DJ Katie Neal’s syndicated Katie & Company is being heard in middays, and Cruise in afternoon drive (who is also heard across the Hot Country brand). Read more here.

Golden West Broadcasting has made a series of format flips in its Saskatchewan markets, introducing Country 106.1 (CKSE-FM) in Estevan (formerly Rock 106), Country 106.7 (CHWY-FM) in Weyburn (formerly BIG 106) and Country 94.1 (CIMG-FM) in Swift Current (formerly The Eagle). Additionally the AM stations in those markets flip to Classic Hits, featuring the best of the ‘70s, ‘80s and ‘90s, including CJ 1150 (CJSL-AM) Estevan, AM 1190 (CFSL-AM) Weyburn, and CKSW 570 Swift Current.

Rob Carnie is expanding the reach of his morning show across Golden West Broadcasting’s stations in southern Saskatchewan. “Rob Carnie in the Morning” is now being heard beyond 800 CHAB Moose Jaw, on CKSW 570 Swift Current, CJSN 1490 Shaunavon, CJ 1150 (CJSL-AM) Estevan, AM 1190 (CFSL-AM) Weyburn, 1210 CFYM Kindersley and 1330 CJYM Rosetown. Carnie has been with Golden West for more than 36 years. Saskatchewan Program Manager and Western Association of Broadcasters’ Hall of Famer Barrie Vice will helm afternoon drive across the AM network.

CP24 and CHUM 104.5 have launched the 57th annual CP24 CHUM Christmas Wish toy drive campaign. The city-wide initiative runs until Dec. 24 at 12 p.m. This year, The Wish introduces an innovative way to donate with a new tapping campaign. Individuals can contribute by simply tapping their credit or debit cards to donate $2, $5, or $10 at all toy drop-off locations. New, unwrapped toy donations for newborns and children up to 18 years (with preference given to toys with an outer package or cover) are being accepted at the official Wish drop-off locations, including: The Wish Warehouse (1366 Blundell Road, Mississauga) and the Main Lobby of Bell Media Studios (299 Queen Street West, Toronto).

SiriusXM Canada has been named the Toronto Raptors official audio music streaming partner under a new multi-year partnership that encompasses halftime shows, a DJ duel, and a new branded arcade game fans will be able to play through the Raptors official mobile app, as well as a state-of-the-art projection game. SiriusXM will also present the Raptors Warm-up Playlist at every home game this season. SiriusXM subscribers can get access to live broadcasts of every NBA game through the post-season on SiriusXM NBA Radio (channel 86 and on the SiriusXM app).

CBC Podcasts and the BBC World Service are set to launch a new podcast, hosted by Oona Chaplin (Game of Thrones), on Jan. 22. Hollywood Exiles is the story of how Chaplin’s grandfather, Charlie Chaplin, became a key figure in a decades-long FBI campaign aimed at rooting out communism from Hollywood. The podcast unravels the real-life events that led to the notorious House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) hearings and the era of the infamous “Hollywood blacklist.” The 10-part series will be available on BBC Sounds, CBC Listen, and most global podcast platforms. It will also be broadcast on BBC World Service radio. Earlier this year, BBC and CBC released the award-winning Love, Janessa and have another show planned for later in 2024.

Chris Connor, an alum of Fredericton radio stations, CFNB, CIBX and CKHJ, and a former play-by-play announcer for the American Hockey League’s Fredericton Canadiens, is the subject of a new GoFundME campaign. Connor, who has been battling MS since 2005, now requires a motorized wheelchair to help him get around. The fundraiser has set a goal of $40,000.

Canada Black Music Archives (CBMA) is officially launching a digital repository dedicated to preserving and celebrating the musical heritage of Black Canadians. Founded in 2020, the CBMA aims to fill a crucial gap in Canada’s historical narrative by providing an accessible digital platform highlighting the contributions, stories, and legacies of Black musicians across various genres.

LISTEN: Durham Radio President and Founder Doug Kirk is the recipient of this year’s Ontario Association of Broadcasters (OAB) board-nominated lifetime achievement honour, the Hall of Fame Award. Kirk, who has grown Durham Radio from a single station in Ajax, ON in 1994 to seven stations today, used his acceptance speech to take aim at the CRTC – which was notably absent from this year’s gathering, as well as big broadcasters practicing widespread consolidation. Broadcast Dialogue – The Podcast caught up with Kirk following this year’s awards presentation to talk about everything from the current regulatory environment to industry viability and strategic decision-making.