A Majority of American Smartphone Owners Say Using Apps Saves Them on Average More Than an Hour Each Day, Adding Up To More Than 500 Hours a Year

BURLINGTON, Mass.--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- Smartphone addicted Americans have something to feel good about. Findings from a new ClickSoftware (NasdaqGS: CKSW) poll show that American smartphone owners paid an average of $174 for their current smartphone, however, the ubiquitous accessory could actually put up to $12,000 in time-saving value in its owner's palm. This dollar amount represents the 97 percent of American smartphone owners who use apps and report that such usage saves them up to 88 minutes a day. Equivalent to as much as 22 days' worth of free time per year, smartphone owners should open that calendar app and schedule a vacation to celebrate.

The online survey of 2,120 U.S. adults (among whom 971 are smartphone owners) was conducted by Harris Interactive in April 2013 on behalf of ClickSoftware, the leading provider of automated mobile workforce management and enterprise mobility solutions.

"This survey calculates a concrete value of the benefits that mobility brings to everyday life and it is apparent that the smartphone-toting masses are, in reality, carrying quite a high ticket item, far more valuable than the price they paid to purchase the device," said Gil Bouhnick, vice president of Mobility, ClickSoftware. "Beyond being a five-figure personal accessory, the smartphone can afford its owner, on average, more than 500 hours per year in savings accrued by using popular apps like email, text and GPS as tallied from our survey data."

97 percent of smartphone owners who use apps report saving time each day by using at least one of the 16 types of apps listed in the survey. Key findings include:

1. Surprise! People do more with a smartphone than snap pics of their food.

Email, text and social networking apps lead the pack for frequency of use, followed by games and web browsing, with weather, GPS and calendar apps also making it onto the leaderboard.

2. Now we know why men don't ask for directions.

Men (17 percent) are more likely than women (10 percent) to identify GPS apps as one of the three types of apps they use most often. More than half (59 percent) of people who use GPS (either most, second-most or third-most) consider themselves to be extremely or very productive when using GPS and 72 percent say GPS saves them up to 30 minutes per day, versus completing the same task without the app, for instance, using a paper map.

3. You can swipe and type your way to a more productive self, saving more than an hour of your day.

After selecting the top three types of apps they use most frequently, the smartphone owners who use apps collectively attribute a total savings of as much as 88 minutes per day to app use—up to 10 hours per week or 535 hours (22 days) per year—as opposed to functioning without the use of those smartphone apps.

4. Like a fine wine, your smartphone actually appreciates in value.

According to Social Security Administration data1, the average U.S. annual wage is $45,790, which makes the average cost of an hour of an American worker's time $22 based on a typical 40 hour work week. Multiply that by the up to 535 hours per year in time savings simply realized from smartphone owners' use of their top three apps and the true value of the smartphone emerges at approximately $12,000 ($11,777) for just one year of use.

5.Personal and professional crossover use may contribute to the $12,000 value.

Email and GPS seem to be the apps with the most balanced split between work and personal use by employed smartphone users, with about one in five saying they use these for mostly work use, and one third saying they use them equally for both work and personal use. One in five email app users designate their productivity level as extremely productive when using mobile email on their smartphone.

6.Whether you care more about Facebook status updates or weather updates depends on your age.

People ages 35+ are far more likely to list weather apps among their top three most-often used, while the younger 18-34 crowd plays on social networking sites with more frequency. Interestingly, 79 percent of smartphone owners say they save up to an hour per day by using weather apps, perhaps to avoid running late after ransacking the house for that lost umbrella or sitting in weather-related traffic delays.

7. You're probably leaving untapped productivity potential in your pocket.

While smartphone owners report feeling productive when they use apps on their phones, the survey also reveals a majority (82 percent) feel they are probably not using all the features and apps on their smartphones to the fullest. And 77 percent of them feel it is important to be able to access their information from multiple devices (e.g. smartphone, laptop and tablet).

"Given the world's massive immersion in mobile computing, it has been an eye-opening exercise to measure a facet of its influence on modern America, and certainly, specific professions that rely on mobility to support job performance have the potential to derive an even higher dollar figure than $12K," added Bouhnick. "As powerful as our survey results prove the smartphone to be, the exciting reality is today's mobile technology innovation has only scratched the surface of its potential to propel success, both in personal life and in business. The trend of "consumerization of IT" is sure to make workers demand this productivity in their workplace. As the lines continue to blur between work and non-work mobile device use, organizations will seek out cost-effective solutions that empower their mobile workforce and enhance their bottom line while supporting complete workflows required in the enterprise market."

Survey Methodology

This survey was conducted online within the United States by Harris Interactive on behalf of ClickSoftware from April 1-3, 2013 among 2,120 adults ages 18 and older, among which 971 are smartphone owners. This online survey is not based on a probability sample and therefore no estimate of theoretical sampling error can be calculated. For complete survey methodology, including weighting variables, please contact clicksoftware@schwartzmsl.com.

About ClickSoftware

ClickSoftware (NasdaqGS: CKSW) is the leading provider of automated mobile workforce management and service optimization solutions for the enterprise, both for mobile and in-house resources. As pioneers of the "Service chain optimization" concept, our solutions provide organizations with end-to-end visibility and control of the entire service management chain by optimizing forecasting, planning, shift and task scheduling, mobility and real-time management of resource and customer communication.

Available via the cloud or on-premise, our products incorporate best business practices and advanced decision-making algorithms to manage service operations more efficiently, in a scalable, integrated manner. Our solutions have become the backbone for many leading organizations worldwide by addressing the fundamental question of job fulfillment: Who does What, for Whom, With what, Where and When.

ClickSoftware is the premier choice for delivering superb business performance to service sector organizations of all sizes. The company is headquartered in the United States and Israel, with offices across Europe, and Asia Pacific. For more information, please visit www.clicksoftware.com. Follow us on Twitter.

1http://money.cnn.com/2013/04/01/news/economy/jobs-wages/index.html.

Photos/Multimedia Gallery Available:http://www.businesswire.com/multimedia/home/20130521005593/en/

ClickSoftware

Kristin Amico, 781-272-5903 ext. 2364

kristin.amico@clicksoftware.com

or

Schwartz MSL

Tiffany Darmetko, 781-684-0770

clicksoftware@schwartzmsl.com

KEYWORDS: United States North America Massachusetts

INDUSTRY KEYWORDS:

The article Your Smartphone Could Be Worth $12,000, New Survey Finds originally appeared on Fool.com.

Try any of our Foolish newsletter services free for 30 days. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy.