Amazon.com

Discover the world of Focal sound quality with the 100 CA1. This 4-inch coaxial speaker with 6dB/octave built-in crossover delivers extremely dynamic sound, high power handling, and an expansive soundstage to fill your vehicle with the Focal sound. The woofer boasts a one-inch voice coil, a high-sensitivity magnet, and butyl rubber surround for durability and powerful bass. The aluminum inverted dome tweeter provides clear and accurate treble, and is adjustable for optimizing your sound staging. Experience Focal's "Spirit of Sound" with uncommon detail and dynamics.

About the Access Line

Discover the world of Focal sound quality via a range that reconciles technology, performance and affordability. The same Focal character and our philosophy of "The Spirit of Sound" is displayed by the extreme attention to detail found at every development stage for the various transducers and crossovers.

The essential component in terms of quality of reproduction, richness of timbre plus image detail is the inverted dome aluminum tweeter whose inclusion represented a true challenge: how to bring a unique Focal technology into a more affordable market segment. At the same time, the woofers and subwoofers combine high sensitivity and high power handling.

The humidity resistant woven glass fibre cone combines the dynamics and precision of the mid-range while offering a deep and articulated bass.

The woofer's power handling and reliability are remarkable thanks to deliberately oversized voice coils, resulting in deep and accurate bass. Click to enlarge.

Aluminum inverted dome tweeter technology offers significant rigidity and lowers distortion. Click to enlarge.

Focal's All weather woven glass fiber cone material ensures dynamic bass and precise midrange.

Access Woofer

The 4-inch 100 CA1 Access woofer is built with a light and stiff cone, coupled with a butyl rubber surround, offering a degree of quality never before encountered at this price level. The special all weather cone will perform in hot and humid environments without distortion or warping. The woofer's power handling and reliability are remarkable thanks to deliberately oversized voice coils, resulting in deep and accurate bass.

Painted DIN chassis, 20% glass fiber filled ABS material

This strong, rigid chassis is non-magnetic and nonresonant.

Butyl surround

Butyl rubber is a resilient surround material, promoting long life and delivering strong bass.

All weather woven glass fiber cone

The durable, humidity-resistant cone provides dynamic bass and precise midrange.

Phase plug

Phase plug designs control midrange out of the listening axis, for added accuracy.

25mm (1") voice coil

Larger voice coils provide excellent power handling, which in turn provides a tight, well-defined low-end.

70mm (2-13/16") magnet

High sensitivity where everything begins.

Voice coil cooling system

Provides reliable, consistent performance, no matter what kind of abuse your system dishes out.

Aluminum Inverted Dome Tweeter

Aluminum inverted dome tweeter technology offers significant rigidity and lowers distortion. Ideal air coupling, the main advantage of the inverted dome shape, allows a very wide soundstage and very accurate image, unlike a convex (traditional) dome that is moving more on its periphery than on its center, causing a weak coil/dome energy transfer.

Aluminum inverted dome tweeter

Provides accurate treble with the utmost efficiency.

20mm (13/16") ferrofluid voice coil

Excellent power handling and heat dispersal.

Built-in Crossover

A 6dB/octave crossover (4.7kHz) is built-in, delivering the right frequencies to each driver. Get accurate, detailed sound without an external crossover.

100 CA1 Technical Specifications

Frequency response: 90Hz - 20kHz Nominal power: 40 W Maximum power: 80W Sensitivity: 89 dB Cone: Braided glass fiber Surround: Butyl Nom. impedance: 4 ohms DC resistance: 3.3 ohms VC diameter: 25mm (1 inch) VC height: 11 mm (7/16 inch) Former: Kapton Layers: 2 Wire: Copper Xmax: 2.5mm (1/16 inch) Magnet Dimensions (D x H): 70 x 15mm (2-3/4 x 9/16 inches) Magnet weight: 0.25 kg (.66 lb.) Flux density : 1.1 T Gap height: 5.5 mm (3/16 inch) Net weight: 0.5 kg (1.1 lb.)

About Focal

Innovation is key to the Focal sound. For 25 years, through the pursuit of constant new advances in technology, Focal has been able to develop a harmonious research and production system that enables us to continuously improve our products and introduce new ones, all with the same goal: the most faithful reproduction of music. The latest example of this philosophy has been the introduction of Beryllium in our top products, which has become a new reference worldwide.

Constantly pursuing innovation is the embodiment of Focal's corporate strategy and that goal involves every facet of the company. From R&D to production to quality control, all our teams are fully involved and focused on this one objective: continual progress through innovation.

In today's world, where globalization and the pursuit of chasing cheaper production methods have tempted most companies to splinter their organizations, Focal has opted to be different. Though we have grown tremendously through the years, our R & D, headquarters and manufacturing facilities remain based in Saint-Etienne (France).

We have learned that true innovation is not simply work carried out at the research department, but is also a question of comprehensive management and the direct control of the different production phases. The example of Beryllium is a significant one. Only three years ago no one was capable of producing tweeters with a pure Beryllium foil dome. Focal innovated a solution based on research and the invention of specific in-house industrial processes.

Such an approach has given us an important advantage over our competitors: we develop our own technology, which allows us to consistently provide true quality production using our own methods. In 2008, the Focal Car range gets richer with a new amplifier line: Solid. This perfectly sums up Focal's commitment for high musical quality from the entry-level contrary to the general tendency that consists in looking for the cheapest prices in priority instead of performance.The result is music standardization and trivialization, which is highly prejudicial to sound quality. Focal cultivates this difference. This is the core strength of our brand and our company. This is the Spirit of Sound. We want to share this with you... It is our Utopia

What's in the Box

100 CA1 4-inch coaxial speakers (pair), Grilles, Installation hardware, Owner's Manual

Other Focal Coaxial Solutions

Focal Access 130 CA1 5.25-Inch Coaxial Speaker KitFocal Access 165 CA1 6.5-Inch Coaxial Speaker KitFocal Access 210 CA1 8-Inch Coaxial Speaker KitFocal Access 570 CA1 5 x 7-Inch Coaxial Speaker Kit