COMPANY OVERVIEW

Focal One (NASDAQ: EDAP) is the global leader in therapeutic ultrasound. Focal One is the first and only robotic platform designed for focal ablation of prostate tissue using HIFU (High Intensity Focused Ultrasound) controlled by the urologist. With a global presence in more than 50 countries, there is growing momentum in the use of our ultrasound-based technologies. We provide tools to fill an important treatment gap in prostate cancer for those patients with low to intermediate-risk disease.

The Focal One business is positioned for sequential growth and expansion. The company’s proprietary robotic technology is unique and solves an unmet need for prostate cancer patients. The technology is also positioned to expand beyond prostate cancer into other areas such as endometriosis and pancreatic cancer.

If you are looking to join a rapidly growing company with a revolutionary product, then this is a great opportunity to join our team!

POSITION SUMMARY

This is a field based position reporting to the Vice President, U.S. Sales. The Regional Business Dirctor (RBD) is responsible for building a strong pipeline of prospects, executing the company strategy and closing the sale of EDAP’s products per the agreed upon comp plan. The Regional Business Director must also manage the entire sales process from pre-sale activities through case revenue generation post-sale. The RBD works closely with Applications and Clinical team members to drive utilization and to build successful programs.

MAJOR RESPONSIBILITIES

Meet or exceed regional sales quotas in revenue and expense.

Develop an in-depth pipeline of leads used to push sales forward for meeting quotas.

Prepare monthly forecasts for all EDAP products.

Evaluate the region and potential leads therein to make efficient and effective sales call “swings” to provide maximum sales coverage within the region.

Make oral and written sales presentations, to potential buyers, to represent EDAP’s urology products.

Understand and communicate market dynamics of the region, including competitive activity and pricing, market trends, regulation updates and customer news.

Attend all trade shows and marketing events within the region.

Work collaboratively with sales, marketing, operations, clinical and service departments for successful delivery, setup and utilization of EDAP’s urology systems.

Work with mobile service providers in the various regions to develop & execute sales, and to increase utilization of the products.

Prepare and submit expense reports on a bi-weekly basis.

Assume additional responsibilities as assigned.

QUALIFICATIONS

Position-Specific Skills

Proven leadership and success introducing new therapeutic technologies to the market. Experience with driving new surgical indications through regulatory clearance (e.g. FDA) a plus

Ability to travel upwards to 75-80% (primarily domestic)

Solid knowledge in science and medical devices industry

Ability to adapt or change priorities as needed

Creative problem-solving skills and the willingness to take calculated risks and act decisively (but should communicate potential consequences to enable informed business decisions)

Ability and willingness to “roll up the sleeves” and become actively engaged in tactical execution

Excellent interpersonal and presentation skills with the ability to persuade in a credible and genuine fashion

Outstanding communication skills (clear and concise in all forms of communications)

Demonstrated success with selling high capital medical equipement, preferrerably in the early adoption phase and within the urology space

High level of professionalism and ability to build rapport with others

Results-driven attitude and a strong resolve to win. Proven self-starter with the ability to work with minimal supervision

Start-up experience selling innovation medical equipment a plus

Leadership Skills Required

Team player who enjoys working collaboratively as part of a high-performing team

Takes initiative to call out needed system changes, and shares recommendations for improvement

A strong internal and external customer focus and service orientation

Authentic and approachable personality that can connect with a diverse range of people

A motivated self-starter who can work well both independently and as part of a team

A high sense of integrity, professional courage, sound judgment and sense of urgency

Technical Skills Required

Computer proficiency in Microsoft Office products (Outlook, Word, Excel & PowerPoint)

Minimum 5 years of sales experience in a therapeutic medical device company preferred

Experience within ultrasound space a plus

Must be able to meet credentialing requirements of medical institutions

Education/Training Required

Bachlor’s degree required, degree in medical field or business administration a plus, MBA preferred

5+ years of urology sales experience required

5+ years high capital medical device sales preferred

WORK ENVIRONMENT AND PHYSICAL DEMANDS

The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

This is a remote based position which requires significant amount to travel within designated region and occasional travel outside of region to attend business meetings and conferences.

Ability to travel up to 75-80% of the time

Long periods of time sitting while working on a computer or while sitting in a car driving to meet with clients

Long periods of standing

Must be able to use a computer keyboard

Ability to pack and unpack packages

Able to lift and/or move up to up to 50 pounds

Able to push and pull pieces of equipment on wheels weighing up to 750 lbs.

Will frequently be exposed to clinical operating rooms, for which proper personal protection equipment will be assigned and worn

May be exposed to hazards including electrical sparking, and chemicals, for which proper protective equipment will be assigned and worn

EXPECTATIONS & DEVELOPMENT

As an employee of our EDAP Technomed, Inc. team we expect you to be accountable for your actions, to challenge existing processes and to grow both professionally and personally. This means having the willingness to claim 100% ownership for results, both individually and collectively with others and to “think outside of the box” when it comes to processes, policies, and strategies. It also requires seeking out new knowledge and skills and assisting others in growing similarly.