Dakota Fanning has fond memories of the late Brittany Murphy, who she worked with on the 2003 movie Uptown Girls.

'She just taught me to always have fun,' the 26-year-old actress said on Wednesday as she appeared on Watch What Happens Live.

The Georgia native and Murphy costarred in the comedy in which a then-eight-year-old Fanning played Ray, while Murphy portrayed her nanny Molly.

The Alienist star said Murphy 'was, like, such a ray of light and had such a playful spirit' that she appreciated as a child.

'I think, just, she made every day special for me,' Fanning said of Murphy, who was also known for her roles in films such as Clueless, Girl, Interrupted and 8 Mile. 'She was so wonderful.'

Murphy died at 32 on December 20, 2009 at her Hollywood Hills home after dealing with flu-like symptoms; her husband Simon Monjack died at 40 five months after she did.

In April of 2018, Fanning took to social media with a shot of herself and the late star working on the motion picture, which also featured Donald Faison, Jesse Spencer, Marley Shelton and Heather Locklear, with Boaz Yakin directing.

She wrote: '#fbf Brittany Murphy was a ray of sunshine that made every day of filming magical for me. #uptowngirls.'

Elsewhere in the appearance, Falling took part in a bit called Da-Gloat-A-Fanning, referencing her impressive resume and cast of costars in her career since breaking out as a child star.

Among them include Denzel Washington in the 2004 film Man on Fire, Robert De Niro in the 2005 movie Hide and Seek and Tom Cruise in War of the Worlds that same year.

Quizzed by Andy Cohen who gave off the most 'warm and fuzzy paternal vibes,' she said they all did 'in their own way.'

She noted how it was 'very fun' when she celebrated turning 11-years-old while working with Cruise and Steven Spielberg.

'It was when Cold Stone Creamery was just sort of a thing and Tom and Steven Spielberg, they like brought in the marble slab on set and had the people making the ice cream for my 11th birthday,' she said.