The Yayha Prize, an award for Iranian wardens hosted by ICS, featured in a popular family TV show on Iran’s National TV. A gift photo of Kushki, the Iranian male cheetah in captivity, by one of the ICS’ members was also shown in the show. The show, hosted by Iranian actor and comedian Rambod Javan, is believed to be one of the most watched TV shows in Iran.

Read more about the Yahya Prize here.

The ninth annual ceremony of the Cheetah National Day was successfully held in Tehran, as well as in several populated areas in periphery of the cheetah reserves across 13 Iranian provinces. The event included numerous educational and awareness activities for both adult and children focusing on the gloomy status of cheetahs in Iran, the last stronghold of the subspecies in Asia. The ceremony’s main slogan was #70survivors, referring to the total number of cheetah believed to exist in Iran.

The Cheetah National Day launches every year by the Iranian Cheetah Society, and Darkouba Game Company, Plan for the Land Society, Pars Herpetological Institute, ID & Aborz, The Environment Society of Rajaei University, Tehran Zoo were the active collaborators in this year.

The Iranian Cheetah Society (ICS) launched the first phase of the cheetah monitoring program across some key cheetah reserves in 2012. Abbas Abad Wildlife Refuge in Esfahan province, central Iran, is one of these key habitats. In collaboration with Esfahan Department of the Environment, Naeen Office of Department of the Environment, and Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah Project (CACP), ICS’ camera traps on water points in Abbas Abad have recently captured an array of large to medium-size mammal species, including the Endangered Persian leopard.

The camera trapping survey in Abbas Abad will continue throughout this summer and fall 2015 focusing on areas with high likelihood of cheetah occurrence.

In collaboration with Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah Project and Persian Wildlife Heritage Foundation, the Iranian Cheetah Society (ICS) launches training workshops for rangers in cheetah reserves of Iran. Rangers from four different cheetah reserves attended the first workshop at Kavir National Park, Semnan province. Last updates about the status of cheetahs in Iran, conservation efforts in different sites, preliminary results of the recent camera-trapping studies, and working with local people and community-based management of cheetah reserves were among the issues presented in the workshop. These series of workshops are going to be continued in other cheetah reserves during 2015/2016.

The event, jointly held by Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Iran Department of the Environment, celebrated collaboration of Iranian conservationists and athletes aiming for education and environmental awareness purposes. Iranian Cheetah Society’s CEO, Morteza Eslami, received the prize in the final ceremony from the national managers of the Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah Project. Additionally, the head of the Society’s documentary production unit, Fathollah Amiri, awarded as the best environmental documentary maker.

The Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports of Iran, deputies of Iran Department of the Environment, environmental NGOs and activists, and a number of Iranian top athletes attended the final ceremony.

Very recently a video of a captive cheetah has rapidly spread on the web, in which apparently the owner is talking with the animal in Farsi. The Iranian Cheetah Society is investigating the originality of the video and has tried to contact the video creator. It is not understood if the video is actually captured in Iran, or in one of the Persian Gulf countries where keeping exotic animals like cheetahs are common, and if the animal in this video is an Asiatic cheetah. It is not possible to draw any firm conclusion based on this video as Asiatic and African cheetahs are morphologically are almost look alike. The Iranian Cheetah Society encourages the public to contact us with any information about this video at: [email protected]

The manager of the Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah Project and the project vet presented the most recent news about the two Iranian cheetahs in captivity in the 22nd WildTalk seminar. Houman Jowkar, CACP, talked about the captive breeding program for the Asiatic cheetah in Iran and the steps has been taken to establish the program with two captive-raised male and female Asiatic cheetahs. Afterwards, Iman Memarian, the project’s vet, answered to questions by attendants.

The male cheetah, known as Koushki, was confiscated from a local herder in Touran National Park in 2008 at only 7-8 months old. Prior to moving to Tehran for the captive breeding program, Koushki, now 7 years old, was keeping at a large enclosure in semi-captivity conditions at Miandasht Wildlife Refuge. Delbar, the female cheetah, was recovered from a poacher from the same area in 2012 and kept at a small enclosure in Touran National Park. Both individuals are now closely monitored by a team of Iranian experts from CACP and international advisors in an enclosure in Iran’s capital Tehran.

The WildTalk seminars are held by Iranian Cheetah Society, in collaboration with Entesharat Fanni Publications and Zistboom News Agency.

The second Yahya Prize ceremony took place at Ezzatolah Entezami’s House Museum, Tehran, on the evening of July 25. Established by ICS in 2014 through a generous donation by an Iranian artist couple, Mojtaba Ramzi and Paridokht Moshkzad, the Yahya Prize recognises individual rangers who has suffered serious injuries to protect Iran’s wildlife and natural environment. This year the Award honoured six rangers from different provinces across Iran, who has been selected by the award committee through an intensive five-month effort.

The 2015 Yahya Prize ceremony was held in collaboration with University of Environment (UOE), Iran Environment and Wildlife Watch (IEW), and Zistboom Environment News Agency, and delegates from Iran Department of the Environment, Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah Project, Ezzatolah Entezami’s House Museum, Iran Wildlife Pictures Institute, and several Iranian NGOs and nature lovers attended the event.

photos by: Ehsan Janati