Mrs. Clarissa Fay White, age 67, transitioned from this life the evening. of Thursday July 11, 2024 with family close by Clarissa was born on December 16,1956, in Lima, Ohio to Elvin Ray and Amie Bevis; both parents preceded her in death.

On August 22 1987, she was united in holy matrimony to Robert White at St. Paul

A.M.E. Church. She and Robert later joined the Philippians Missionary Baptist Church, where she enjoyed attending Bible Study

Clarissa was a 1975 graduate of Lima Senior High School, where she excelled academically and participated in gospel choir. In 1977, she graduated from Lima Technical College with a secretarial degree. She spent over ten years working at Marathon Oil company and briefly at Peterson Construction. Clarissa later was the sole proprietor of Ashley's Market for nine years. She retired from Allen County Child Support Enforcement Agency after working there for twenty-three years in May of 2024 where she developed lasting and meaningful friendships.

Clarissa lived a simple and love-filled life. She devoted her time and energy to her husband, daughter and the rest of her family As she was sometimes referred to as Auntie Reesie Cup, she kept in touch with all her nieces and nephews. Clarissa was an avid Ohio State Football fan. She enjoyed attending concerts, ice cream, movie nights with her family and a man named Plugg. Who could always make her smile by asking her "What's your mama's name?"

Besides her devoted husband, Clarissa leaves to continue her legacy of love one daughter Ashley M. White of Lima; two stepchildren Kelli Wright and Stephane White, both of Lima; a grandson D'Vonte Wright-Lawrence; one brother Norris (Gwenda) Bevis Sr.; two sisters Debora Bevis and Audray (Saul) Allen, all of Lima, Ohio; a special niece LaToya (Joseph) Tyner of California, god-son Norris Bevis Jr.; several nieces and nephews, cousins and great-nieces and nephews.

In addition to her parents, she was preceded in death by a brother Clem Bevis, a niece Sonya Bevis-Thomas; and her parents-in-law James

and Carlene White Jr.

Funeral services will be held at 10 AM on Saturday July 27 th, 2024 at Philippian Baptist Church, 190 E. 8th St, Lima, Ohio 45804.

Visitation will be held from 9AM until the time of the service at the church.