Click here to watch Live-Stream

Mr. Floyd Baxter Williams, age 83 of Millers Creek passed away Monday, June 3, 2024, at Atrium Health-Wilkes Medical Center.

Graveside services will be held 2:00 PM Saturday, June 8, 2024, at Williams Family Cemetery with Pastor Tom Moore officiating. The family will receive friends from 12:30 PM until 1:30 PM prior to the service at Reins-Sturdivant Funeral Home. Burial will be in the Williams Family Cemetery.

Mr. Williams was born August 17, 1940, in Wilkes County to William Avery and Roxie Lankford Williams. He was a self-employed logger and business owner and prided himself on his negotiation skills. Mr. Williams was also a singer, songwriter and self-taught bluegrass artist who shared the stage with Doc Watson and played in various venues across the country.

In addition to his parents, he was preceded in death by his wife, Shirley Ann Roten Williams; three children, Tammy Lynn Roten, Sarah Ann Brown and Billy Shane Williams; grandchild, Dustin Williams; great grandchild, Lilia Benge; one sister, Reba Pearson; and four brothers, Coy Lankford, Richard Williams, Don Williams and Ernest Williams.

He is survived by grandchildren, Clarissa Mastin and spouse Matt of North Wilkesboro, Matt Reavis and spouse Sarah of Statesville, Jessica Prevo and spouse Randy of Winston Salem, Braxton Hill, Heather Vandorn, Brittany Benge, Kayla Church and spouse Jacob all of North Wilkesboro; great grandchildren, Leah Meeks and spouse Andrew of Eden, Tori Roten of Banner Elk, Mason Moody and Ava Prevo both of Winston Salem, Seth Hill, Aria Hill, Madi Walker, Savana Walker, Aspen Vandorn, Ethan Benge, Serenity Duran, Ashton Benge, Mollee Benge, Paisley Benge, Taylor Brown, Valerie Burton, Colton Church, Addy Church all of North Wilkesboro; and great great grandchildren, Dawson Meeks and Gemma Meeks both of Eden;

Flowers will be accepted, or memorials may be made to Mtn. Valley Hospice, 401 Technology Lane, Suite 200, Mt. Airy, NC 27030.

Online condolences may be made to www.reinssturdivant.com.