Postmedia may earn an affiliate commission from purchases made through our links on this page.

Article content

Quebec auteur director Robert Lepage is, once again, the toast of Toronto, having picked up two Dora Awards last night.

Lepage’s watery The Nightingale and Other Short Fables won best production honours in the opera category. (It was a Canadian Opera Company production.)

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

Try refreshing your browser, or

tap here to see other videos from our team.

Robert Lepage Wins Two Dora Awards in Toronto Back to video

And his Lipsynch, which was presented during the Luminato Festival, was singled out as the top touring production.

Michael Healey’s Courageous, produced by Tarragon Theatre, was chosen as Outstanding New Play.

For more on the Doras, check out the Toronto Star and Globe and Mail reports.

The Dora Award event was directed by former Montrealer Sandra Lefrancois.

Advertisement 2

Advertisement

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

There with you then. Here with you now. As a critical part of the community for over 245 years,The Gazette continues to deliver trusted English-language news and coverage on issues that matter. Subscribe now to receive:

Unlimited online access to our award-winning journalism including thought-provoking columns by Allison Hanes, Josh Freed and Bill Brownstein.

Opportunity to engage with our commenting community and learn from fellow readers in a moderated forum.

Unlimited online access to the Montreal Gazette and National Post, including the New York Times Crossword, and 14 more news sites with one account

Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.

Montreal Gazette ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, where you can share and comment..

SUBSCRIBE TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

There with you then. Here with you now. As a critical part of the community for over 245 years,The Gazette continues to deliver trusted English-language news and coverage on issues that matter. Subscribe now to receive:

Unlimited online access to our award-winning journalism including thought-provoking columns by Allison Hanes, Josh Freed and Bill Brownstein.

Opportunity to engage with our commenting community and learn from fellow readers in a moderated forum.

Unlimited online access to the Montreal Gazette and National Post, including the New York Times Crossword, and 14 more news sites with one account

Support local journalists and the next generation of journalists.

Montreal Gazette ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, where you can share and comment..

REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

There with you then. Here with you now. As a critical part of the community for over 245 years,The Gazette continues to deliver trusted English-language news and coverage on issues that matter. Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.

Access articles from across Canada with one account.

Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.

Enjoy additional articles per month.

Get email updates from your favourite authors.

Sign In or Create an Account

Email Address

or

Article content

Article content

Share this article in your social network