Robert LEPAGE (Actor, Playwright, theatre and movie Director)

[Canada]

Robert Lepage is an actor, stage director and playwright who leads the creative group Ex Machina, founded in Canada. Lepage's activities span a broad range of fields that include theater, opera, film and the circus. Particularly noteworthy, Lepage's unique productions that boldly incorporate the latest technology have earned high acclaim worldwide for overturning conventional wisdom.

Lepage has a deep connection with Japan and has had a significant influence on Japanese performing arts through public performances in Japan of productions such as the Hiroshima-themed work, The Seven Streams of the River Ota, and active collaborations with Japanese artists. His activities have contributed to the promotion of international mutual understanding.

Korean Japanese Association

[Korea]

The Korean Japanese Association was founded in 1971 to promote friendship, goodwill and mutual prosperity between Korea and Japan. During the 50 years that have passed since that time, the organization has continued its earnest future-oriented activities targeting youth in the field of Japanese-language education, which is the foundation of mutual understanding between Korea and Japan. The organization has been involved in programs to identify and develop young talent. These programs include holding the Japanese language studies achievement contest for Korean middle and high school students in Korea, a Japanese translation competition for university students and the Lee Soo Hyun Memorial Program every year. The organization is also working hard to support the future careers of youth by holding the Japan Education and Career Fair.

In this manner, the organization has contributed to mutual understanding, friendship and goodwill between Korea and Japan and to nurturing youth through its many years of diverse exchange activities for youth.

Goenawan Mohamad (Poet, Writer and Painter)

[Indonesia]

Goenawan Mohamad is one of the intellectual giants of his generation in Asia and is one of Indonesia's leading intellectuals who displays his extremely multifaceted talent as a journalist, citizen activist, poet and playwright. Goenawan launched the weekly magazine Tempo in 1971 through which he continued to stress the importance of freedom and democracy in Indonesia. Goenawan's activities are wide ranging, and he has demonstrated his diverse abilities in the fields of poetry, drama and fine arts and has contributed to art in general along with his writings. Goenawan has long-standing ties with Japan. Goenawan came to Japan in 1997 under the Asia Leadership Fellowship co-sponsored by the Japan Foundation and the International House of Japan and since then he has expanded his relations in a variety of fields. Goenawan is contributing to intellectual exchange between Indonesia and Japan within a global perspective focused on Asia.

Alece Takaoka

[Takaoka City, Toyama]

Alece Takaoka is an organization that promotes programs such as learning support for young people with foreign roots so that they can build bridges between Japan and their root countries and contribute to the local community. Additionally, the organization has gone beyond the framework of support for children with foreign roots by developing a citizenship educational program that enables all members of the community to become citizens who understand and respect their mutual differences and accept diversity. The organization is working hard to achieve a multicultural society and contribute to the revitalization of the local community as it addresses the issues faced by a community interspersed with residents with foreign roots.

Peace Culture Village

[Hiroshima City, Hiroshima]

Peace Culture Village operates a peace guide program and dialogue programs for visitors to Hiroshima from throughout the world. It leverages online tours and XR technology (a general term for technology that fuses the real world and virtual world) to develop new initiatives with youth participation at a time when many similar organizations struggle to continue operations due to the aging of their story tellers 77 years after the atomic bomb was dropped. The organization planned online tours and classes in partnership with a travel agency during the COVID-19 pandemic. They have also created a system by which youths can participate in paid work, and these initiatives offer new possibilities not only for peaceful cultural activities, but for international exchange as well.

Chiiki Support Wakasa

[Naha City, Okinawa]

Chiiki Support Wakasa is an NPO that was established through local resident cooperation in order to take over the management of the Naha City Wakasa Community Center when it was privatized. The organization has a reputation for unique, high-quality programs and detailed communications with artists, while also respecting self-government and supporting the autonomous activities of local residents. Under their motto, "leave no one behind", the organization serves as a safety net for individuals who are not a part of local community structures, such as single parent families, children from diverse family backgrounds and foreign residents. The organization also supports the activities of Nepalese residents, who have been increasing in number in recent years, playing a role in exchange and mutual understanding with local residents.