Article content

Robert Lepage, the Quebec City-based playwright, film director and actor, has been named the recipient of the 10th Glenn Gould Prize, an award worth $50,000.

Lepage, 55 and an officer of the Order of Canada, is best known for directing the films Le Confessionnal (1995) and Le Polygraphe (1997), and for the plays The Seven Streams of the River Ota (1994) and Elsinore (1995). Currently the artistic director of Ex Machina, a multidisciplinary troupe he began in 1994, Lepage was chosen by a jury, including Patti Smith, Sir David Tang, Bob Ezrin and Deepa Mehta, who appeared at a press conference in Toronto Thursday morning.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

Try refreshing your browser, or

tap here to see other videos from our team.

'Slightly insane' Robert Lepage awarded $50,000 Glenn Gould Prize Back to video

Article content

The Glenn Gould Prize, which was first awarded in 1987 to performance artist R. Murray Schafer, is given to a subject whose life’s work “enriches the social fabric of the culture.” Open to contestants from all over the world, but handed out in Toronto, where Gould spent his life, past recipients of the biennial prize have included Oscar Peterson (1993), Yo-Yo Ma (1999) and Leonard Cohen (2011).

In addition to the $50,000 cash award, the winner is also granted a $15,000 stipend to be given to an emerging artist of their choice. It has not yet been announced who Lepage will choose, and the artist has worked with such diverse talents as Peter Gabriel and Cirque du Soleil, but Bob Ezrin gave high praise to the winner’s taste.

“Like Glenn, Robert understands the power of the great wide open and has a ceaseless determination to get to the other side of things,” said Ezrin, who’s produced records for Alice Cooper and Peter Gabriel and helped make Pink Floyd’s landmark The Wall. “He’s never afraid to try new things and I think what he does is bring us closer to our true selves.”

Lepage wasn’t in Toronto for the announcement, but a statement was read on his behalf.

“I am deeply honoured by this prestigious and generous accolade,” it read. “As I know Glenn Gould did, I believe there is such a thing as a culture of the North and as I was walking to work this morning, trying to fight my way through the heavy blizzard that had invaded my fair city, I could somewhat sense his presence in the howling wind.”