Charlene Fowers Gilbert, mother, sister, grandmother and friend passed away peacefully on October 30, 2013, at the age of 82.

She was born in Hooper, Utah, November 22, 1930, the daughter of Joseph Paul and Fern Belnap Fowers, the sixth of nine children. She grew up in Hooper, Utah, graduating from Weber High School and attending Weber College.

She married Wendell Gilbert on February 28, 1964 in Ogden. The marriage was later solemnized in the Ogden LDS Temple. Wendell died September 8, 1975.

She was an active member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, holding many positions in her ward. She served two church service missions, one with the Lost Sheep Mission and another with the Indexing World Wide Support Mission. She had a passion for family history and in her later years volunteered numerous hours each day helping coordinate and encourage church-wide indexing activities. At last count, she had indexed over 300,000 names.

As a single mother, she worked numerous jobs to support her family. She retired from the Office of Hearings and Appeals for Social Security in 1994 and then continued to donate many volunteer hours in various good causes. She was a "five generation" member of the Daughters of Utah Pioneers, Camp Spinner.

Her greatest joy was her children, grandchildren and one great-grandson as well as her many lifelong friends. She often expressed her love for family through Sunday home cooked dinners which will be missed. Her life was extended to witness many significant family events that brought her great joy.

Her hobbies included all sports, both participating and watching. She loved knitting, crocheting, embroidering and cooking. She played softball for Weber College.

She was preceded in death by her husband, parents and 6 siblings.

She is survived by her children, Leisa (David) Glauser, Jeffrey (Lael) Gilbert and seven perfect grandchildren, Megan (Michael) Lefevor, Kendell, Jessica, and Jordan Glauser, Gabe, Leo and Benji Gilbert. She is also survived by her brother, Robert (Vicky) Fowers; sister, Virginia (Taylor) Becraft; a brother-in-law, Arnold (Janet) Gilbert; and sister-in-law, Glenna (Max) Grunig.

Funeral services will be held on Monday, November 4, 2013 at 11 a.m. at the Pleasant Valley 3rd Ward, 5640 South 850 East, Ogden. Friends may visit with family on Sunday from 6 to 8 p.m. at Lindquist''s Ogden Mortuary, 3408 Washington Blvd., and Monday from 9:30 to 10:30 a.m. at the church.