Facts and Events

Name[1] Gilbert Belnap Gender Male Birth[1] Port Hope, Northumberland, Ontario, Canada Alt Birth Port Hope, New Castle District, Upper Canada, Canada Marriage Nauvoo, Hancock, Illinois, USAto Adaline Knight Marriage Salt Lake City, Salt Lake, Utah, United StatesEndowment House

to Henrietta McBride Death[1] Hooper, Weber, Utah, United States

BIOGRAPHY: Conquerors of the West: Stalwart Mormon Pioneers, volume 1

Name: Gilbert Belnap Birth Date: 22 Dec 1821 Birth Place: Port Hope, New Castle, Upper Canada. (now Port Hope), Durham, Ontario, Canada Parents: Rosel and Jane Richmond Belnap Death Date: 26 Feb 1899 Death Place: Hooper, Weber, Utah Arrival: 17 Sep 1850, Warren Foote Company Spouse: Adaline Knight Marriage Date: 21 Dec 1845 Marriage Place: Nauvoo, Hancock, Illinois Spouse's Death Date: 10 Jun 1919 Spouse's Death Place: Salt Lake City, Utah Married 2nd: Henrietta McBride Date: 26 Jun 1852 , Great Salt Lake, Utah Died: 05 Sep 1899 , Hooper, Weber, Utah Gilbert 's father raised purebred race horses. Gilbert inherited a great love for horses from his father. Shortly before Gilbert 's 11th birthday, his father was killed and three months later, his mother died. Gilbert had been apprenticed to William C. Moore to learn the trade of wheel wright and wagon maker. In 1834 , Mr. Moore took Gilbert with him to New York . He was frequently abused and finally left to try to find his family. He found that his older brother had taken everything so Gilbert took his youngest five-year-old brother and struck out on his own. He found a home with a Christian preacher, where he remained until 1837 . His little brother was given to another family. After hearing about the Mormons, intrigued, he went to Kirtland where he became converted, but was not baptized until 1842 . He served a mission in New York and later moved to Nauvoo . He worked closely with the Prophet and church leaders. He eventually married and went west with the saints. Because of his wisdom and great faith, he was often called on in various capacities to give blessings and serve the church. He was active in community affairs and was loved and respected by everyone who knew him. His life history is filled with events of the strength of this good man and his love for the gospel.

Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia

[[1]] Volume 2 Biographies Boyce, John Belnap, Gilbert, Bishop of Hooper, Weber county, Utah, was born Dec. 22, 1821, in Hope, Newcastle district, Canada, the son of Rosel and Jane Belnap. He married Adaline Knight (daughter of Vincent and Martha Knight) Dec. 21, 1845. She was born in Cattaraugus county, New York, May 4, 1831, and became the mother of thirteen children. In 1840 Gilbert visited Kirtland, Ohio, for the purpose of becoming acquainted with the "Mormons" of whom he had heard a great deal. After being restored to health from severe injuries he had sustained in an accident, he became a member of the Church, being baptized Sept. 11, 1842. Soon afterwards he was ordained to the Priesthood and set apart for the ministry. He labored principally in the State of New York. He first met the Prophet Joseph in June, 1842, at Nauvoo, Ill., and subsequently passed through all the hardships and persecutions to which the saints in Nauvoo and vicinity were subjected. At the time of the exodus in 1846 he came west and arrived in Great Salt Lake Valley in 1850. He settled at Ogden, and Weber county thereafter became his permanent place of residence. Here he spent his time on the farm and in helping to redeem the desert and provide comforts for his family. In 1855 he was called as a missionary to the Indians on Salmon river (now in Idaho) and thus became one of the founders of Fort Limhi. Here he remained until the time of Johnston army troubles. He settled at Hooper in the spring of 1868 and was set apart as presiding Elder of that settlement June 27, 1868; and when the place was organized as a Ward May 28, 1877, he was ordained a Bishop and set apart to preside over the same, which position he occupied until April 20, 1888. He died at Hooper Feb. 26, 1899, after occupying many places of honor and responsibility in the civil government of Weber county, aside from ecclesiastical labors. Gilbert Belnap was a man of quiet demeanor, honest, exceedingly independent, a characteristic obtained from the varied conditions of his life. He was clear in judgment and full of sympathy for the struggling and the lowly. One of his leading traits was valor to what his good judgment considered justice and the right. He hated sham, dishonesty and oppression, was plain and outspoken and as brave as he was true to his convictions. He disliked simulation and condemned hypocrisy. He was always faithful to his trusts and could be depended upon as a true friend under all circumstances. Bishop Belnap was the father of a large family.

Levi Byram and Martha Jane Belnap Gold Medal Pioneers By Donald Levi Gale Hammon 1996 - Page 58

Progressive Men of Bannock, Bear Lake, Bingham, Fremont and Oneida Counties, Idaho Chicago A. W. Bowen & Co. 1904 - Page 47/48

MEDIA: Photos from the Belnap Family Organization Photo Section [2]Gilbert Belnap (Younger picture) [3]Gilbert Belnap (Older Picture)

Image Gallery

References