CLEARFIELD--Kenneth Lee Belnap, 73, passed away peacefully on July 15, 1999 in his Clearfield, Utah home. For more than 25 years he battled prostate cancer, heart disease, and diabetes praying that he could "endure to the end". He didn't just endure - he lead a full and active life returning from his latest vacation just 9 days before his quick death.

He was born April 12, 1926 in Salt Lake City to James Gilbert and Chloe May Beus Belnap. Ken was the youngest of nine children and had a close relationship with all his brothers and sisters. When his father died in 1936, the siblings rallied for many years to look after Ken and their widowed mother. During World War II, Ken's five brothers served in the military. Due to Ken's hearing loss he could not serve but dropped out of high school to work and support his mother. After the war, Ken graduated from high school and went on to serve in the Northwestern States Mission for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His success in completing both school and a mission were due to strong love and support from his mother and siblings.After his mission Ken returned to Salt Lake City and lived in Whittier Ward, Wells Stake until 1966. While playing the lead in a Stake play, he met and fell in love with Maurine Park. They were married September 7, 1949 in the Salt Lake LDS Temple by Ezra Taft Benson. Ken and Maurine both loved their time in Whittier Ward and it provided a solid foundation for their 46 year marriage.

As a teenager, Ken worked in a dental laboratory learning to make false teeth. He went on to pass national boards and become a Certified Dental Technician (CDT) and held numerous state and national leadership positions in that professional organization. Together in 1967, Ken and Maurine worked as a team to purchase their first dental lab in Ogden. Upon his retirement in 1990, after more than 50 years as a CDT, Ken had owned five laboratories serving northern Utah and southern Idaho areas.

Ken and Maurine were the parents of two children, Bev and Ric. Although the family income was modest, there was always money for music lessons, vacations, stage plays, concerts, and sporting events. These "necessities", along with church work and service to others were the Belnap family's values.

Work provided many travel opportunities for Ken and Maurine. They toured extensively throughout the USA often combining pleasure with historical and genealogical research.

A Clearfield resident since 1967, Ken and his old green pickup were always there to help Bev, Ric, friends, and relatives when they moved, did home improvements, and for church projects. He also served on the Clearfield City Planning Commission. Church callings included positions in the Bishopric, High Council, MIA, scouting, Sunday School, and missionary-related work. He and Maurine served in the Utah Salt Lake City Mission and loved the Elders, Sisters, and eternal friends they made doing the Lord's work.

Surviving are a daughter, Bev (Max) Garlock, Clearfield; a son, Ric Belnap, Grand Rapids, MI; three grandchildren, Jared, serving in the South Carolina, Columbia Mission; Andrea Garlock, Matt Garlock both of Clearfield; a sister Marian Williams, Salt Lake; three brothers Alvin (Marie), Arizona, Bob (Vesta), Bountiful, and Chet (Lucille), Salt Lake City; numerous nieces and nephews; family and friends. Preceding him in death were his loving wife, Maurine; parents; sisters Hilda and Erma; brothers, George and Woodruff; and granddaughter, Jennifer.

Funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. on Tuesday, July 20, 1999, at Clearfield Stake Center, 935 South State. Friends and family may call on Monday, from 6-8 p.m. at the Lindquist's Clearfield Mortuary, 1050 South State St., and from 9:45-10:45 prior to the services at the church. Interment at the Hooper City Cemetery. The family would like to express their thanks to James, his Hospice nurse; Dr. Leslye Ingersoll; and the High Priests of the Clearfield 11th Ward.

T 7/18N 7/18