The question of a human person, which is the starting point of every humanism, is the initial, fundamental, almost inevitable question of every culture. On the other hand, it is highly complex and practically impossible to delimit. If one sees humanistic thought as philosophical anthropology, its character is understandably transcultural, one that can appear anywhere in history, and is always radical: it reaches the very foundations of culture and civilization. In this sense, it can be seen as a universal human phenomenon. In its narrower sense, the origins of humanism are marked by the return of Western Europe to the forgotten sources of its cultural identity, hidden in classical antiquity. Moreover, its peak, the Renaissance, is defined by its artistic achievements, which are nevertheless founded in the sphere of intellect and in its new understanding of being human. In this perspective, humanism is one of the most significant and complex phenomena in European cultural history. It is difficult to imagine any research project ignoring its variety. This is the topic to which this particular volume is primarily dedicated. Both established as well as younger European scholars explore different literary, philosophical, ethical, aesthetic, religious, cultural, and social aspects of humanism. Most of the studies highlight its historical dimension: humanism was grounded in ancient literature and thought, and has shaped the conceptual framework of reception and interpretation of antiquity for centuries (Weiss, Kersten, Movrin, and Senegačnik). At the same time, its cognitive and ethical dynamics developed and upgraded its traditions, and thus directed the flow of European culture and, in some respects, even transformed the foundations of its civilization. However, humanism was not shaped exclusively by its relation to antiquity: a valuable source, as well as contrast to its anthropology, was medieval Christian anthropology, mainly as reflected in its supreme expression, Dante’s poetry (Širca). In the following chapters, history is analyzed from several perspectives: on the one hand, there are investigations of conceptual movements in the understanding of the world, time and human being, which have expanded the general, “global” horizon of humanistic thinkers (Szönyi, Molnár, Łukaszyk). On the other hand, there is research exploring national and regional luminaries (Marinčič on the influence of P. P. Vergerius on P. Trubar, Pobežin on P. P. Vergerius, and Hriberšek on Ž. Herberstein) and literary phenomena. These studies frequently redefine the established literary and historical image of the humanist period. The second thematic area of this volume is devoted to the challenges of humanism. To the influence of its central ideas on contemporary culture, particularly on literature (Kuret); to cognitive, ethical, and social dilemmas arising from the conflict of humanistic anthropology and the new patterns in understanding the human condition; and finally to the possibilities opened up by the fresh readings of the humanist tradition. The studies of this volume offer several original insights and new perspectives on the cultural issues of the present time, with contributions that analyze the fundamental experience of humanity in the horizon of humanistic self-understanding (Russo). With globalization as well as with the revolution in media and communication, humanistic culture faces radical changes, which require new reflections regarding the concept of individual disciplines (Zabel).

Humanism has a long and sophisticated history. Secular humanism encourages us to believe that humanism was born and faded in ancient Greece, then reborn in the renaissance as part of the narrative that includes the enlightenment and the modern era. This is only true if we take a very limited view of humanism. In fact, humanist philosophies that deny the supernatural and emphasise the human have been a central part of the development of civilisation over the last two thousand years. This paper unpacks an alternate, more historically accurate and inclusive history of humanism. In this history, humanism begins in ancient Asia and transmits to Europe, China, the Middle East, and back to Europe. In each case, there is a clear point of cultural and conceptual contact, as well as a significant development in the overall philosophy of humanism. NOTE: this paper is the first in a series tracing the development of humanist thought across Eurasia. Subsequent papers detail the development of humanist spiritual, ethical, legal and professional systems through Buddhist & Taoist Indo- China, Han China, Medieval Islam, and modern medical practice respectively.

It is my intention to contend that the disgraceful way in which present day Europe deals with migrant labour and with migrations in general, though certainly originating in a simple and raw instinct for survival, which is barbaric and axiomatic on her part, has taken its definitive shape and has taken root in modernity. From the latter comes its arrogance self-legitimised over centuries. The survival instinct could be "civilised" (Balibar). To be sure, the latter term is ambiguous, but useful. The fear, aggressiveness and violence accompanying the survival instinct can be overcome in order to accompany a gentler and more responsible relationship to others. But in this case, "civilising violence " has taken a murky turn, one morally authorising the preference of oneself over all others. The features of this " civilizational " move shaking modernity have been many, and the "others" have been diverse and often historically circumstantial. Modernity gives it the coloniality stamp and "legitimation" through the logic of sovereignty and exception, while the much older and in many ways more deeply rooted subordination of women gives it symbolic support by analogy with other forms of discrimination. There is a general consensus about the domination of all women by all men (Guillaumin), as well as about hegemony, which profoundly informs culture as an unquestionable and therefore invisible inequality. The solidity of the subordinate and thus selective inclusion of women into humanity comes from the fact that through it other subordinations are justified. There is solidarity between the different forms of subordination. The immunity-contamination mechanisms that are featured in all cases of rejection of the other are however more complicated and reach a limit – a life limit-in the sex/ gender relationships where they are also older. Namely, all life (human or other) doesn't necessarily need to protect itself through immunisation – for example in pregnancy. Life is not necessarily endangered by another life, even when it hosts the other at its expense. There is mutuality, commonality, shared living and a reciprocal gift of life. This solidarity relation is both life sustaining, nature friendly and trans-generational. But it has not become the blueprint of "civilisation" .