SYLVESTER - Jimmy Lee Gilbert, 67, of Sylvester died Thursday, Oct. 23, 2014, at the Rehabilitation Center of South Georgia. Mr. Gilbert will be laid to rest at a later date with private services. Mr. Gilbert was born on May 31, 1947 in Thomasville and was the son of Joseph Gilbert and Lois Sellars Gilbert, both deceased. He was a retired industrial electrician. Mr. Gilbert is survived by two sons and a daughter-in-law, Steve and Marlene Gilbert of Sylvester and David Gilbert of Warner Robins; a daughter and son-in-law, Cecelia and Jim Boyett of Warner Robins; a brother and sister-in-law, Robert and Mary Gilbert of Tifton; a sister, Betty Cottle of North Carolina; six grandchildren, Aaron, Lexy, Dustin, Angel, Ocean and Alan; and four great-grandchildren. Condolences may be sent to the family at the online guest registry at www.bowen-donaldson.com. Services for the Gilbert family are under the care and direction of Bowen-Donaldson Home for Funerals.

Published on October 25, 2014

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of JimmyHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Jimmy

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree