She was daughter of John II of Aragon and Blanche I of Navarre. Her marriage to the heir of Castile, her cousin the future Henry IV, was arranged as a consecuence of the peace treaty of Toledo of 1436 between Castile and Aragon-Navarre. The dowry included territories and villas that had previously belonged to Navarre but had been won by the Castillian side during the war. The marriage took place in Valladolid in 1440, when the prince was 15 years old. Blanche became Princess of Asturias. The marriage, however, produced no children. One of Henry’s detractors, the historian Alfonso de Palencia, wrote that the marriage had been a sham and accused Henry of despising his wife and planning to commit adultery to bear children. According to Palencia, Henry demonstrated “most extreme abhorrence” to his wife, and indifference to the confines of marriage.

In 1453, after thirteen years, Henry sought a divorce. He wanted to marry his cousin Joan of Portugal. The prince alleged that he had been incapable of sexually consummating the marriage, despite having tried for over three years, the minimum period required by the church. Two respectable and experienced women, probably midwives, testified that their physical examination of Blanche revealed that she was still a virgin. Other women, prostitutes from Segovia, testified that the prince frequently enjoyed perfectly normal sexual relations with them. The marriage of Henry and Blanche was annulled on the grounds of an impotence that was specific rather than general, an impotence that applied only to Henry’s relationship with Blanche. Yet such an extraordinary explanation amounted to a case of maleficium (spell), with the clear implication that Blanche was the guilty party, and in addition she was obliged to leave Castile and return to Navarre.

But home was not better. Indeed, Blanche never enjoyed any real freedom after her return to Navarre. Her father had been in conflict with her brother Charles, prince of Viana, ever since the death of her mother. John refused to hand of the government of Navarre to his eldest son and Queen Blanche I’s natural heir. Princess Blanche joined her brother against their father and they were both promptly disinherited.

Her father proclaimed her younger sister Eleanor, countess of Foix, the heir and the regent and general governor of Navarre. In 1458, John became King of Aragon because his brother Alfonso V having died without legitimate children.

After the death of her brother Charles of Viana in 1461, some Navarrese dissatisfied elements and some of the anti-Aragonese party regarded Blanche as the rightful monarch, as they had regarded Charles. They proclaimed her Queen. She would have thus become Blanche II of Navarre, but her father, who wanted to keep the government of Navarre, already had her incarcerated and thus not capable to act.

John II of Aragon tried to marry her to Charles, Duke of Berry, and younger brother of Louis XI of France to make an alliance, but Blanche refused, and her act irritated her father. She wrote several appeals for help. The unfortunate Blanche wrote to her ex-husband Henry IV of Castile telling him how they wanted to force her to relinquish her legitimate right of Navarre, and the pain suffered by the injustices and cruelties of her father, giving him the kingdom of Navarre if she died in prison.

Blanche was confined in the Castle of Orthez for two and a half years, under the custody of her ambitious sister Eleanor and her brother-in-law Gaston of Foix, where Blanche lived in extreme poverty. She died on December 2, 1464 under mysterious circumstances, possibly poisoned, but it is not confirmed. Both her father and her sister are suggested to have been responsible for her death. Upon her death, her rights to Navarre were inherited by Eleanor, who however was their father’s ally and supporter, and did not press her own claims until his death in 1479.

Sources:

Medieval Iberia: An Encyclopedia by E. Michael Gerli

http://www.historyofroyalwomen.com/blanche-ii-of-navarre/blanche-ii-navarre/

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blanche_II_of_Navarre