Michael Anthony recently opened up about the last time he spoke with former Van Halen bandmate David Lee Roth.

During a March 2024 session of Rock ‘N’ Roll Fantasy Camp, Anthony said he hadn’t spoken to Roth “in quite some time.” The last time he did was related to the highly-rumored reunion/tribute tour following the death of Eddie Van Halen.

Anthony said he’d be willing to jam with DLR if the opportunity arose, but he noted about Roth, “Dave’s kind of a crazy guy … I don’t have anything against Dave.”

A Brief Explainer on the Rumored Van Halen Reunion/Tribute

In 2022, there were a lot of headlines about a rumored Van Halen tribute tour. As previously reported, former Metallica bassist Jason Newsted said in an interview with The Palm Beach Post published on April 14, 2022 that Alex Van Halen contacted him for a “possible Van Halen tour.” Newsted also said Joe Satriani was selected by Alex to play guitar.

In the April 18, 2022 episode of Rock of Nations, Satriani said, “I’ve been talking with Alex and Dave for about a year about doing something — a tour, something like that — that was going to be a true tribute to Eddie and the Van Halen legacy…For me, it was a terrifying prospect of doing something like that, but I realized that it was something that would be a real labor of love for me. I was just so honored to take on the challenge.”

Following all of these quotes from Newsted and Satriani, David Lee Roth would issue a statement to Van Halen News desk saying, “In my mind ‘Van Halen 4K,’ in the age of covid is going to require two of us for every position. [Joe] Satriani and [Steve] Lukather, [Michael] Anthony and [Jason] Newsted, Al [ex Van Halen] or Tommy Lee. Probably the only one who could do my job today would be Pink.”

In May 2022, Michael Anthony told The Mitch Lafon and Jeremy White Show of the rumored tour, “The only thing that was kind of a surprise to me was the Jason Newsted thing when he came out and said that Alex [Van Halen] had talked to him last year or something like that, which is kind of interesting, because I actually had been talking on a conference call with [Van Halen manager] Irving Azoff, Alex and Dave [Lee Roth] last year, so I don’t know what the Jason thing was all about.”

Van Halen: Their 30 Best Songs, Ranked

Erica Banas is a news blogger who's been covering the rock/classic rock world since 2014. The coolest event she's ever covered in person was the 2021 Rock & Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony. (Sir Paul McCartney inducting Foo Fighters? C'mon now!) She's also well-versed in etiquette and extraordinarily nice. #TransRightsAreHumanRights