Iowa colleges — Amanda Platte of Mount Vernon was named to the Missouri Valley Conference scholar-athlete team as a member of the Drake volleyball squad ...

Zach Becicka of Cedar Rapids (Prairie) and Samuel Chalkley (West), Brent Mamm (City High) and Nathan Shank (Regina) of Iowa City are members of the Cornell wrestling team ...

Cyerra Hutchins of Cedar Rapids (Prairie) is a freshman and Peyton Bockholt of La Porte City (Union) a sophomore on the nationally ranked Kirkwood women's basketball team ...

Jeremy Cline (Prairie), Christian Hindt (Jefferson) and Daniel Healy (Jefferson) of Cedar Rapids and Jared Gosse of Vinton (Vinton-Shellsburg) are members of the Mount Mercy men's bowling team ...

Taylor Dicus of Mount Vernon is a member of the Cornell women's basketball team ... Matthew Lassen of Marion (Linn-Mar), Joseph Weeks of Solon, Jacob Olson of Cedar Rapids (Jefferson) and Chike Ukah of Iowa City (West) are members of the Kirkwood men's basketball team ...

Moran Lonning and Anna Madrigal of Decorah are members of the Luther women's basketball team ...

Terrance Brown of Iowa City (City High), Brian Nachtman of North English (English Valleys), Nick Shelma of Solon, Blake Murdock, Jake Misener and Ben Struss of Cedar Rapids (Kennedy), Kyle Lamaak of Hiawatha (C.R. Kennedy) and Derik Gogg of Marion (Linn-Mar) are members of the Mount Mercy men's basketball team ...

Allie McQuiston of Hiawatha (C.R. Kennedy) is a member of the Mount Mercy women's bowling team, along with Katlynn Palmer (Prairie) and Nicole Petersen (Jefferson) of Cedar Rapids, Tara Trcka of Swisher (C.R. Xavier) and Valerie Loudenback of Mount Vernon ...

J.C. Ditch of Anamosa, Josh Jirak of Center Point (Center Point-Urbana), Jacob Timm of Mount Vernon, Marshall Shedeck of Oxford Junction (North Cedar), Hunter Pflughaupt of Walker (North-Linn), Christian Fahey of Waukon, C.J. Nelson of Marion (C.R. Washington) and Jordan O'Neil of West Branch are members of the Coe men's basketball team ...

Madi Meier and Olivia Meier of Cedar Rapids (Kennedy), Ashley Rosentiel of Oelwein and Lauren Buck of Anamosa are members of the Upper Iowa women's basketball team ...

A.J. Losch (Kennedy), Josh Allen (Jefferson), Luke Kremer (Kennedy), Ryan Sheldon (Kennedy) and Trey Schuler (Washington) of Cedar Rapids, Andrew Holladay of Marion (Linn-Mar), Fletcher Green of Washington (Iowa), Jake Gotto of Epworth (Western Dubuque) are members of the Coe wrestling team ...

Libby Falconer of Coggon (North-Linn), Katie Sommer and Kristie Sommer of Cedar Rapids (Linn-Mar), Aryn Jones of Marion (Linn-Mar), Kailey Kladivo of Traer (North Tama) and Allison Emrich of Vinton (Vinton-Shellsburg) are members of the Wartburg women's basketball team ...

Blaize Cabell of Independence, Kyle Lux of Toledo (South Tama) and Zach Witte of Swisher (C.R. Prairie) are members of the Northern Iowa wrestling team.