Sacred Heart Academy senior Reagan Bender has been a starter and double-figure scorer on three straight state championship teams.

The 5-foot-11 Bender has helped the Valkyries to a 97-13 record during her first three seasons, will be one of the top candidates for Miss Basketball next season in Kentucky, and has been drawing a lot of college attention in recent years.

On Monday night, Bender landed a scholarship offer from University of Louisville women's basketball coach Jeff Walz.

"After a great conversation with coach Jeff Walz, I’m excited to receive an offer from Louisville basketball," Bender posted on social media.

Bender, who is the niece of Sacred Heart coach Donna Moir, has been on the radar of Walz and his staff for several years. She camped with the Cardinals and was one of the standouts during the camp after her freshman season and has continued to attend camps and games.

Bender plays summer ball for United 17U on the Adidas circuit and the U of L staff has seen her a lot in the offseason.

The offer from U of L is the fifth for Bender, joining Bellarmine, Western Kentucky, East Tennessee State, and Murray State.

Bender said she is also hearing a lot from Belmont, Mercer, Ohio U., and Miami of Ohio.

In three seasons as a starter at Sacred Heart, Bender has scored 1,319 points and grabbed 366 rebounds. She has hit 162 three-pointers during her career.

As a freshman, Bender averaged 10.1 points and 4.2 rebounds a game, while she hit for 11.4 points and 3.2 rebounds as a sophomore. Last season, Sacred Heart finished 36-3 for a second straight season and Bender averaged 15.2 points and 3.1 rebounds. She shot 48.8 percent from the field, 33 percent from three-point range - 64 of 194 - and hit 75.5 percent from the free-throw line. She was a first-team All-State selection as a junior.

Bender has connections to U of L. Her grandfather, Bob Bender Sr., graduated from the University of Louisville in 1957, where he lettered for four years in football as a defensive end and offensive lineman. He was inducted into the University of Louisville Hall of Fame in 1992.