Republican Robert Bender easily fended off a challenge from Democrat Myra Van Hoose in the Escambia County Commission District 4 race on Tuesday.

Bender won reelection with 16,989 votes or 63.57%, while Van Hoose captured 9,735 votes or 36.43% with all 19 precincts reporting, according to the unofficial results as of Wednesday morning.

Bender told the News Journal he thanked the voters and his campaign volunteers for the win Tuesday.

"I'm looking forward to continuing to represent Escambia County for another four years and continuing to move the county forward," Bender said.

Bender said his focus would continue to be improving county services for residents, especially public safety.

"I think the county overall is in a much better place than where we have been in the last couple of years," Bender said. "Of course, I'll continue to focus on public safety, which is continuing to improve some of the programs that we're instituting along with improved service."

Bender campaigned on his service for the citizens of District 4 over the last four years.

"People in the communities and the neighborhoods that we've done projects in and we've done the neighborhood cleanups for, I think they see that I focus on the policies over personalities," Bender told the News Journal in October. "And that I'm here to work for them."

Florida election 2022 live updates: Polls open in Pensacola, Escambia and Santa Rosa counties

Who are they?: Escambia, Santa Rosa County ultimate voter guide to 2022 general election

Van Hoose sought to unseat Bender, campaigning on a message of changing the dynamic of the County Commission and hitting Bender for his involvement in taking the county's controversial local retirement plan for commissioners.

"(The County Commission is) reactive, putting out fires and putting Band-aids on projects, instead of creating a strategic plan and looking at our future," Van Hoose told the News Journal in October. "Where do we want to be five years from now, or 10 years from now, or 20 years from now? No one ever is talking about that."

Looking for an upset: Myra Van Hoose looks to upset Robert Bender in Escambia County Commission District 4 race

GOP primary: Robert Bender wins Republican primary, will face Democratic challenger Myra Van Hoose

Bender was able to outraise Van Hoose in his campaign account, raising $74,250 but as of the last campaign reports Friday, Van Hoose had outspent Bender with a total $50,877 spent during her campaign.

Bender spent $45,435 in total, with most of that being spent in the closing weeks of the election.

District 4 covers the east and north sections of the city of Pensacola, along with the Ferry Pass area and all of Pensacola Beach.

Bender will take office for a second four-year term beginning Nov. 22.