In the main square of my hometown, in Vic (Barcelona, Catalonia), there was a neon that I saw from the balcony of my home. The word Bellmunt was drawn in a pinkish tone and corresponded to the name of a hairdressing salon located under the arcades. In a city where there was little color, that small burst of light that at night emerged under the fog, usual in those years, impressed me. Also, I was attracted by neon light when I saw it in American movies or in advertisements in Barcelona. I put music to neon light during my adolescence (1970s) when I was hooked on Simon & Garfunfel (I still am). One of the songs of the duo, The Sound of Silence, the best lyrics ever written about isolation, a gorgeous and sad song; in one verse they sing:

American landscape

Bruce Nauman. La Brea/Art Tips/Rat Spit/Tar Pits (1972). Tate Modern, London

His use of light as a medium is both sensual and contemplative, while messages and images change everything and create destabilizing environments. Light offered the artist a medium with which to explore how perception is shaped, and logic and meaning is conveyed. In Nauman’s hands, the playful carnival-like nature of neon is transformed into psychological, social, sexual and political inquiry, often presented with irony and humor. For example La Brea/Art Tips/Rat Spit/Tar Pits (1972), Violins Violence Silence (1982) or Double Poke in the Eye II (1985). All demonstrate Nauman’s witty and insightful exploration of the human condition with his word games or figures.

Neon’s potential allows him to confront and offer sharp comments in pieces in such pieces as and Run From Fear, Fun from Rear (1972) or the monumental One Hundred Live and Die (1984), his largest and most complex neon piece that overwhelms the viewer with strong sentences.

Bruce Nauman One Hundred Live and Die (1984). Naoshima Contemporary Art Museum, Kagawa, Japan

Chryssa, Athens, 1933-2013

Chryssa. Ampersand III (1965). Indianapolis Museum of Art

At the Indianapolis Museum of Art, is on display the work Ampersand III by Chryssa Vardea-Mavromichali, so called- Chryssa, an artist who uses neon light, that remains me some Bruce Nauman pieces. The label gallery describes it: “Here, colorful neon tubing is shaped into an ampersand symbol (&) that is repeated five times. The use of Plexiglas produces a mirroring effect due to its reflective surface. The glowing ampersand evokes the urban environment and its myriad advertising, but loses meaning through fragmentation and lack of context.”

Chryssa. Study for Gates N. 4 (1967). Tate Gallery. London

Chryssa, is a Greek-born American sculptor that in the 1960s was one of the first artist to transform neon lighting from an advertising vehicle into a fine art medium, even before than Bruce Nauman. About the exhibition of Chryssa’s neon sculptures at the Pace Gallery in Manhattan in 1968, The New York Times called one work, Study for the Gates No. 15 like “a pure, lyrical form. It transcends ‘neon-ness’ to become a sculpture of light devoid of pop or Broadway associations.” She created sixteen sculptures about the “gates” before and after the completion of The Gates to Times Square, her most ambitious work, an homage to the Greek-born artist’s experience of New York.

Chryssa. The Gates to Times Square. (1966). Collection Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo

In 1966, Chryssa completed The Gates to Times Square a brightly lighted sculpture. Built of cast stainless steel, plexiglass and neon tubing, it takes the form of an immense cube, 10 feet on each side, through which visitors can walk. Inside, after passing through an entrance in the form of a large capital A, visitors are met with a counterpoint of symbols, text and colors.

New York, where Chryssa first lived in the mid-1950s, furnished the literal spark for her work. She had long been fascinated with written communication and her early work, focused on writing — in particular on fragmentary bits of text — as a medium of art. She realized that neon tubing could provide the link of text, color and illumination she craved. She said: “I saw Times Square with its light and letters and I realized it was as beautiful and difficult to do as Japanese calligraphy.” She began incorporating neon into her work in the early ’60s and over time surmounted the fiendish technical difficulties the medium entailed.

Chryssa

Chryssa Vardea-Mavromichali was born in Athens in 1933. She grew up amid the Nazi occupation of Greece, a time when members of the Greek underground communicated with one another by writing furtive messages on the walls of buildings. It is said that this was the wellspring of her obsession with fragmentary text. Chryssa began her professional life as a social worker, assisting earthquake victims on the Greek island of Zakynthos. Growing disillusioned with what she saw as government intransigence, she left for Paris, where she studied art at the Académie de la Grande Chaumière and came under the influence of Surrealists like the poet André Breton and the artist Max Ernst. Moving to the United States, she attended the San Francisco Art Institute before settling in New York. Chryssa, who became an American citizen, moved back to Athens in the early 1990s but later returned to New York. Chryssa, whose work has been classified as Minimalism and Pop, is considered a significant presence on the American art scene in the ’60s and ’70s.

Joseph Kossuth. The Language of the Equilibrium (2007) Isola di San Lazzaro degli Armeni. Venice Biennale, 2007

The spectacular and outstanding installation The Language of the Equilibrium on the Island of San Lazzaro degli Armeni at 2007 Venice Biennale is my first contact with the work of Joseph Kossuth. It seems to me so significant that it is worth mentioning this artist as one of those who has used the neon with the result of a great artistic quality. I visited the island for the first time in July 1997. San Lazzaro could only be accessed by vaporetto one day a week to see the monastery only in four hours. The day I went, we were only visiting the island three people and an Armenian monk was our guide. The island of San Lazzaro is the headquarters of the Mekhitarian Order, founded in Constantinople, since in 1717. The order understood the implicit potential of the written word for the preservation of Armenian culture threatened by the vicissitudes of history; the Armenian people are among those who have suffered persecution and genocide. The monastery keeps a rich library, consisting of over 140,000 volumes such as the first complete dictionary of the Armenian language (1749–69), the first modern history of Armenia (1781-86) and the first translation of the Bible into Armenian. All it was made in the island by the monks which made it an early major center of Armenian printing. The library also custody 4,500 precious manuscripts, including many illuminated works by Armenian miniaturists and by the Greek and Syrian holy fathers. Now the monastery is open to the public every day, receives tourism and is the pavilion of the Republic of Armenia at the Venice Biennale. I visited the island again with my husband in 2015 and I celebrated that Armenia won the Golden Lion for the magnificent exhibition Contemporary Artists from the Armenia Diaspora with the artists works on display in the whole monastery and gardens.

Joseph Kossuth. The Language of the Equilibrium (2007) Isola di San Lazzaro degli Armeni. Venice Biennale 2007

Back to the The Language of the Equilibrium, Kossuth has intervened on different parts. So, long text written in yellow neon surrounded the church, the cornice of the bell-tower and the wall that marks the boundary between land and lagoon, and conveys the inexhaustible vital force of this element. He described the installation as follows: “This project, in yellow neon, has as its basis language itself. It is a work which is both a reflection on its own construction as well as on the history and culture of its location.” Language here is used as a symbol of the Mekhitarian order history but words, written in Armenian, Italian and English language, were related with water and the relationship between this key primary element and the intellectual and linguistic concepts associated.

Joseph Kossuth. Joseph Kossuth. The Language of the Equilibrium (2007) Isola di San Lazzaro degli Armeni. Venice. Biennale 2007

According to curator Adelina von Fürstenberg, yellow neon is chosen because of the symbolic understanding of yellow at the time of the founding of the monastery as meaning ‘virtue, intellect, esteem and majesty.” Its like if the words have been written in gold. According to hermeneutic and art critic Juan Eduardo Cirlot, gold is the image of solar light and hence of the divine intelligence and supreme illumination; gold is also the essential element in the symbolism of the hidden or elusive treasure. Armenia had no country, it had to hide its culture, its language, its art, for long time. It were preserved in San Lazzaro.

And to my dear stepdaughter Anaïs. She borrowed me the book “Let There Be Neon”. I could not have written this post without reading it.

Àngels Ferrer i Ballester