Charles Dickens Birthplace Museum is a writer's house museum in Landport, Portsmouth situated at the birthplace of the eminent English author Charles Dickens; and as such played a prominent part in the 2012 bicentennial celebrations. ortsmouth, the Home of Great Writing, has touched the lives and works of Britain’s most famous writers - from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle to Michelle Magorian, from H.G. Wells to Neil Gaiman. But the city’s most famous son is Charles Dickens – novelist, journalist, and social commentator. Although homes in London and Chatham would later claim him, Dickens’ early life was spent in Portsmouth.

When Charles Dickens was born in this modest house in Portsmouth, on 7th February 1812, Britain's Navy was still at war with Napoleonic France. Charles's father, John Dickens, a clerk in the Navy Pay Office, had brought his young bride Elizabeth down to Portsmouth in the summer of 1809, renting the house as the first home of their married life. The furniture, ceramics, glass, household objects and decorations faithfully re-created the Regency style which Charles's parents would have favoured, although their actual possessions have long since been dispersed. There are three furnished rooms: the parlour, the dining room and the bedroom where Charles was born. The exhibition room features a display on Charles Dickens and Portsmouth, as well as a small collection of memorabilia: the couch on which he died at his house in Kent, together with his snuff box, inkwell and paper knife, poignant reminders of an author celebrated for his prodigious talents and creative output.

In addition, the visitor can discover the area where the Dickens family lived and worked! These walks are led by Portsmouth Tourist Guides and take place on various dates over the year. They all start at the Victory Gate (the entrance to the Historic Dockyard) and finish at the Portsmouth Museum, Museum Road. This also provides an opportunity for you to see the "A Study in Sherlock" exhibition at the Portsmouth Museum, which showcases the largest collection pertaining to Doyle and his creation Sherlock Holmes in the world, making Portsmouth the home of great writing. Come and hear readings of Charles Dickens' work On the first Sunday of each month (April to September), come and hear readings from a selection of Charles Dickens' works, by members of the Dickens Fellowship. The readings are 'in the style of Dickens', and take place at 3.00pm, lasting around 45 minutes. Included in the usual admission price, no booking required.

Access to the six rooms in the Museum is via stairs only. The stairs between floors have handrails to assist those with reduced mobility and visual impairments. The museum is not wheelchair accessible. Assistance dogs are welcome. In each room there are information 'paddles' and these are also available on request in a range of languages. The information is also available on large print laminate sheets and in Braille. The male and female toilets both have grab rails in both compartments. There is a hearing loop for visitors with a hearing impairment.

Location : Charles Dickens Birthplace, 393 Old Commercial Road, Portsmouth PO1 4QL

Transport : Portsmouth & Southsea (National Rail) then bus (700). Bus Routes : 20, 700, SD7, Solent Ranger X4 and The Star 8 stop outside.

Opening Times : March 25th to September 25th - Friday to Sunday 10:00 to 17:30

Tickets : Adults £4.20; Children (under 18)/Students £3.20, accompanied Children free; Seniors £3.70

Tel. :023 9282 7261