I thought Joe Abercrombie's trilogy ruled. I can't get into Song of Ice and Fire - I just can't stomach the Dothraki and I don't like his names, although I think Martin's Fevre Dream is perhaps the best vampire novel I've ever read. I love Robert Howard's Conan stories. I thought the tone of Rothfuss's Name of the Wind was too smug - Kvothe seemed like a dick - and so I didn't enjoy that. I love Moorcock's Elric saga. I think Fritz Lieber's Fafhrd & The Gray Mouser tales are the greatest fantasy stories ever written, bar none (and that includes LOTR, which I love and put at #2). I cannot abide any story with names like "Shadowborn" or "Kingkiller" in it. I think R Scott Bakker's Prince of Nothing trilogy was a masterwork of genius and the best fantasy work of the new(ish) millenium. I did not like Wizard's First Rule. I loved Curse of Chalion. I did not love Bitterwood. I thought Bernard Cornwell's Arthurian trilogy (Winter King etc) was amazing, and recommend it to fantasy fans though it is more of a dark-age adventure novel (and perhaps the best one ever written, along with Frans Bengtsson's The Long Ships and Michael Chabon's Gentlemen of the Road) . I loved Tanith Lee's Dreams of Dark and Light. I think Robert Jordan was overrated. I love Neil Gaiman. I loved the first four books of the Dark Tower series. I loved Lawhead's Pendragon Cycle. The works of Tim Powers - especially Anubis Gates, Drawing of the Dark, On Stranger Tides and Declare - I recommend wholeheartedly, especially to fans of high-quality, very literate fantasy. They are EXCELLENT. And Thomas Ligotti out-Lovecrafts Lovecraft, for anyone who likes their Weird weird and their horror profound.

So, I ask you, apart from Brandon Sanderson and Scott Lynch, what can you guys recommend?

You sound like the opposite of me, I don't think my recommendations would suit you. I loved all of The Dark Tower but the last three books are my favorites, no one can out-Lovecraft Lovecraft, I absolutely love the Wheel of Time series as well as The Name of the Wind. Lieber and Moorcock are on my TBR list so I can't comment on them and perhaps I will come to love them more than LotR but I doubt it, it holds too special a place in my heart.

You sound like the opposite of me, I don't think my recommendations would suit you. I loved all of The Dark Tower but the last three books are my favorites, no one can out-Lovecraft Lovecraft, I absolutely love the Wheel of Time series as well as The Name of the Wind. Lieber and Moorcock are on my TBR list so I can't comment on them and perhaps I will come to love them more than LotR but I doubt it, it holds too special a place in my heart.

Then why even bother responding? The original poster (who unfortunately hasn't stopped by here in a while) asked for a specific recommendation. If you can't recommend what he's trying to find, what's the point?

I've been on a Swords and Sorcery kick for the past few years now, so I've de-lurked after low these many years to contribute what I can to the discussion.

The original poster seems to have gone the way but there was some definite overlap in our tastes, so hopefully those with similar tastes will find this helpful.

First, some foundation:

I'll start by going back to Lord Dunsany and recommending his short stories, and specifically the collection The Sword of Welleran and Other Stories (1908). Add in James Branch Cabell's picaresque Jurgen, A Comedy of Justice (1919) to see the origins of the modern rogue.

Next, since you mentioned Cornwell, Chabon, et al., I'll point you to Conan Doyle's Sir Nigel (1906) and The White Company (1891), Dumas' The Three Musketeers (1844) and virtually anything by Rafael Sabatini; I'm a fan of Bellarion the Fortunate (1926) but more popular titles include Captain Blood (1921), Scaramouche (1921), and The Sea Hawk (1915). Is it worth noting that Fritz Leiber, Sr. had a role in the film adaptation of The Sea Hawk?

I'm going to invoke the Clarke's Third Law ("Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic") and add in the Barsoom books of Edgar Rice Burroughs.

Fans of S&S should know and revere these authors the same way Hammett and Chandler are revered by the mystery crowd. Although their works span a large spectrum, I don't think S&S as we know it would exist without them.

But of course, that brings us to the authors we do revere: Howard, Leiber, Smith, Lovecraft. I don't think there is a strong Sword and Sorcery tradition without those four. Some other, slightly later writers who are sometimes overlooked, like C L Moore and Leigh Brackett. Still later writers like Karl Edward Wagner and Michael Moorcock.

My favorite is probably Jack Vance, and he's the main reason for this long post. His Dying Earth stories combine the best elements of the tradition with his own unique style. The Cugel stories in particular are just a joy for me, as a fan of the (sub-)genre. I couldn't let this thread stand without throwing in the strongest recommendation for his work. No Sword and Sorcery bookshelf is complete without it.

That said, I think Vance represents a little of why it's so hard to recommend specific modern Sword and Sorcery authors. I think writers are combining elements from different traditions, and not focusing on fitting into any particular niche. So modern novels contain glimpses of that past tradition, but they're not trying to adhere to it. For what it's worth, I do think we're beginning to see a resurgence of Sword and Sorcery's appeal and influence.

I've gone on long enough, so I'll wrap this up now.

You raise an important point Hobbit.

Gene Wolfe would be a great example of someone who has advanced the tradition of S&S in more recent years. I assume you mention him because of his acknowledgement of Vance's influence on the Severian books. From an interview with theologian James B. Jordan in 1992:

JJ: Was Jack Vance's style an influence on the style of the Severian novels?

GW: Oh, I'm sure. I'm sure. A lot of that was my deciding to rewrite The Dying Earth from my own standpoint.

JJ: Wonderful book.

GW: Yes it is wonderful. And of course when you read wonderful books sometimes you think, "Gee, I would like to do that"; and you go off and do it, trying to make it different enough that you are not really ripping off the author, but rather writing something in the same vein using some of the same ideas. I have never concealed a debt to Jack Vance and a debt to Clark Ashton Smith as far as that goes. I think Vance is very much in the debt to Clark Ashton Smith.

Another modern author who deserves a mention is China Mieville, for his high-octane blend of fantasy and the weird tale.

And while we're at it, some gross oversights in not listing authors: In the same category as Lovecraft, Robert W. Chambers, William Hope Hodgson, Algernon Blackwood, and Edgar Allen Poe. In the historicals section, add Robert Louis Stevenson and Sir Walter Scott.

While I don't think S&S can claim them, I think Mervyn Peake's Gormenghast books have definitely had an influence on later writers, such as Moorcock, Wolfe and Mieville.

In with the 50's/60's crowd, Poul Anderson for Three Hearts and Three Lions and The Broken Sword.

Finally, (at least until I have another bout of forehead slapping,) I think that Sir Terry Pratchett deserves a mention for being a satirist working in the genre. Particularly his earlier work drew far more from S&S than from any other fantasy tradition.

I would like to add Matthew Hughes to your list. His contribution to the Songs anthology was note perfect. Just absolutely spot on. I haven't read any of his Archonate books, but a certain "Hugh Matthews" has written a Pathfinder tie-in novel, Song of the Serpent, that sounds very much like a tribute to Vance and more specifically, Cugel. I have something of an irrational aversion to tie-in books but Matthew Hughes writing a Cugel story? Pre-ordered, and June can't come soon enough.

And while we're crediting Vance with inspiring so many, I would like to join Wolfe in acknowledging Vance's debt to Smith: Zothique is clearly the inspiration for the Dying Earth, and The Door to Saturn (1930) although a Hyperborea tale, can easily be read as the first Dying Earth story, right down to the dialogue:

"I have been conversing with one of the gods of Cykranosh," he said magniloquently. "The god, whose name is Hziulquoigmnzhah, has given me a mission to perform, a message to deliver, and has indicated the direction in which I should go. I suggest that you lay aside our little mundane disagreement, and accompany me. Of course we could slit each other's throats or eviscerate each other, since we are both armed. But under the circumstances I think you will see the puerility, not to mention the sheer inutility, of such a proceeding. If we both live we may be of mutual use and assistance, in a strange world whose problems and difficulties, if I mistake not, are worthy of our united powers."

To contribute more to the original topic of the thread:

Preceding all others, and uniting many of these authors (Stevenson, Dunsany, Lovecraft, Smith, among others) under one acknowledged influence: The One Thousand and One Nights.

Some other modern writers: Tanith Lee (Flat Earth books), Glen Cook (Black Company books), and David Gemmell (Drenai books).

I think you're right that the reprints of Le Morte that appear throughout the 19th century must have had some influence (as would Lady Guest's The Mabinogian and Lord Tennyson's Idylls of the King,) particularly on some of the more romantic writers, such as Scott, Doyle, and Stevenson. But the key word there is "romantic."

Part of what I see in Sword and Sorcery is a rejection of the Romanticism of the 19th century. Sword and Sorcery would seem to grow more out of another aspect of 19th century Europe: Orientalism. We see a series of stories start to appear that eschew romantic chivalry; the protagonists are seldom noble in their actions, there is a greater appeal to the exotic with an emphasis on strange cultures and customs; the doings are darker, the challenges more mysterious , and we get a greater dose of mystic masters and monstrous creatures.

Also, I especially invoked the Nights because writers such as Lovecraft, Smith, Poe, and Howard directly mention it as an influence or reference it in their work.

I think there's a PhD thesis in the origins of Sword and Sorcery for someone willing to undertake the research. Someone not me, preferably.

Once again, some additional recommendations:

If you're interested in some older texts I highly recommend the new translation of Amadis of Gaul, Books I and II (1508). It's a hoot. (But take notes! I made the mistake of setting it aside for awhile, and I've completely lost track of which character is which.)

Dungeon, by Joann Sfar and Lewis Trondheim

A series of graphic novels set during three different eras, chronicling the creation of the titular Dungeon, the running thereof, and the eventual destruction (along with the whole world.) And the authors are just getting warmed up. Steeped in S&S elements, I don't see how this could be classified as anything but. And as near as I can tell, this is their first mention here on SFFWorld. An injustice now corrected.

I see your point, to an extent. I should have confined my comments to the Romantic concept of chivalry. There are definitely some elements of the Romantic hero in the heroes of our Sword and Sorcery tales. I do not see much in the way of chivalry, however. Personally, I see more of the Byronic hero (en route to the Anti-Hero, and showing his roots in the Gothic villain), and while all Byronic heroes are Romantic heroes, not all Romantic heroes are Byronic heroes. Feel free to discuss that amongst yourselves; I'm moving on because I feel like I'm getting a little too pedantic here.

Of course, the best we could hope for --if we tried to talk to Conan about "romantic" or "byronic", (or "heroism" for that matter)-- would be a snarl. I think we all have sufficient imagination to picture what the worst outcome would be. Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser might let us have our conversation, as long as there was plenty of wine and we were buying. Oh. And Fafhrd as Lancelot? I don't see it. Fafhrd has always seemed a cross between Eric Brighteyes and Conan to me. See what I did there? That's right, we're back to recommendations!

Eric Brighteyes (1891) by H. Rider Haggard. Haggard in general, not so much for his writing, but for his themes and his great setpieces. This particular book holds up better than most of his others.

Tros of Samothrace (serialized 1925-1926, published in book form 1934) by Talbot Mundy. Absolutely a big influence on Howard.

Seconding Vathek (1786) as a great, great addition to the recommendations list. Big influence on Lovecraft and CAS.

And we could do a whole post on the picaresque tradition. I've never read Simplicissimus, but I see there's a new translation (2006) available so I think that might finally be going on my own list. Any others that you recommend?

Eric Brighteyes (1891) by H. Rider Haggard. Haggard in general, not so much for his writing, but for his themes and his great setpieces. This particular book holds up better than most of his others.

Tros of Samothrace (serialized 1925-1926, published in book form 1934) by Talbot Mundy. Absolutely a big influence on Howard.

Seconding Vathek (1786) as a great, great addition to the recommendations list. Big influence on Lovecraft and CAS.

And we could do a whole post on the picaresque tradition. I've never read Simplicissimus, but I see there's a new translation (2006) available so I think that might finally be going on my own list. Any others that you recommend?

In case anyone is interested: Eric Brighteyes, The History of Caliph Vathek, The Adventurous Simplissimus, The Mabinogion, Idylls of the King, and 1001 Nights are all available at Project Gutenberg. I didn't have any luck searching by title, though, so you might want to stick with author/translator searches (use Sir Richard Burton for 1001 Nights).

I'll start by going back to Lord Dunsany and recommending his short stories, and specifically the collection The Sword of Welleran and Other Stories (1908). Add in James Branch Cabell's picaresque Jurgen, A Comedy of Justice (1919) to see the origins of the modern rogue.

Next, since you mentioned Cornwell, Chabon, et al., I'll point you to Conan Doyle's Sir Nigel (1906) and The White Company (1891), Dumas' The Three Musketeers (1844) and virtually anything by Rafael Sabatini; I'm a fan of Bellarion the Fortunate (1926) but more popular titles include Captain Blood (1921), Scaramouche (1921), and The Sea Hawk (1915). Is it worth noting that Fritz Leiber, Sr. had a role in the film adaptation of The Sea Hawk?

edited to add -- I also found: The Sword of Welleran and Other Stories, Jurgen, The White Company, Sir Nigel, and bazillions of books by both Dumas and Sabatini, but oddly enough NOT Bellarion (I can't see it there, anyway).