Page 115 →Four Extraordinary Rendition A Human Rights Analysis

David Weissbrodt

On September 13, 1995, local police in Croatia seized Egyptian national Talaat Fouad Qassem, and then handed him to agents of the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Qassem had fled Egypt after the Egyptian government accused him of involvement in the assassination of Anwar Sadat, the former President of Egypt. The Egyptian government subsequently sentenced Qassem to death in absentia. The CIA agents took him on board a ship in the Adriatic Sea and interrogated him. Then, they delivered Qassem to Egypt, where he disappeared. A human rights reporter in Egypt believed he had been executed.

During the summer of 2003, Kurdish soldiers in Iraq captured Iraqi national Hiwa Abdul Rahman Rashul somewhere in Iraq.1 The Kurdish military handed Rashul over to operatives of the CIA who flew him to Afghanistan for interrogation. When a legal advisor for the CIA opposed the transfer, the CIA returned Rashul to Iraq. At the request of CIA Director George J. Tenet, United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld endeavored to hide the location and identity of Rashul from the International Committee of the Red Cross. According to the Washington Post, the status of Rashul is unknown.

In December 2003, Khaled El Masri, who had German nationality and who was originally born in Iraq, boarded a bus in his home of Ulm, Germany, to travel to Skopje, Macedonia.2 When he arrived at the MacedonianPage 116 → border on December 31, Macedonian police removed him from a bus, confiscated his passport, and detained him for three weeks. On January 23, 2004, a jet with tail number N313P, registered to Premier Executive Transport Services, a CIA front company, arrived in Macedonia from the island of Majorca. The CIA drove El Masri to the Skopje airport in Macedonia, where he was transferred to CIA officials. Men wearing black masks and black gloves, beat him, cut off his clothes, and then injected him with drugs. He was then placed on an airplane and flown, first, to Baghdad, and then to Kabul. When El Masri arrived in Afghanistan, U.S. officials interrogated him and held him in solitary confinement for nearly five months. On the order of U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice during May 2004, U.S. officials loaded El Masri on a plane, brought him back to Central Europe, and released him near a checkpoint on the Albanian border. His detention was apparently a case of mistaken identity. When El Masri returned home to Germany, he learned that his wife and children had gone to stay with her family in Lebanon; his wife thought he had abandoned the family.

The cases of Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri were part of the CIA practice of capturing suspected terrorists and sending them to countries, such as Afghanistan and Egypt, where the use of tortuous interrogation is commonplace. This strategy—commonly known as “extraordinary rendition”—was developed and refined by U.S. administrations during the past three decades, and has received assistance in its execution from dozens of countries, including Germany, Portugal, Austria, Sweden, and Finland. In total, more than fifty-four countries have participated in extraordinary rendition activities.

Due to the lack of relevant information and the use of secretive measures, the total number of cases involving extraordinary renditions is unknown.3 Accordingly, it is widely speculated that the use of extraordinary renditions has dramatically increased since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.4 The increased use of extraordinary rendition is in part due to President George W. Bush’s approval of expedited procedures giving the CIA more flexibility.5 The more lenient use of extraordinary rendition has evolved in response to the United States’ initiative to strengthen the “War on Terror.”6

Extraordinary rendition generally involves the officials of a particular nation who abduct a person not formally charged with a criminal offense but is transported to a third country for detention and interrogation. World War II served as a basis for the twentieth-century movement to establish international human rights standards.7 From these developments, Page 117 →extraordinary rendition has also emerged as an encouragement for human rights violations.8 Extraordinary rendition is often utilized by governments expecting to avoid legal and moral constraints by denying their involvement with the abuses of detainees.9 As more countries are now resorting to the use of extraordinary rendition as an alternative means of detaining and interrogating suspected enemies of the State, it is necessary to analyze how extraordinary rendition conflicts with the various international human rights instruments.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is the authoritative interpretation of the human rights obligations contained in the United Nations Charter.10 The provisions of the Universal Declaration have been widely accepted as customary international law11—affirming the right to life; freedom from torture; freedom of thought, conscience, and religion; as well as the right to a fair trial12— and have inspired constitutional and legislative authority in many nations, including the United States, Greece, Chile, Afghanistan, Sweden, Guatemala, Ethiopia, New Zealand, and the Netherlands.13

Accordingly, the articles of the Universal Declaration provide broad human rights coverage: article 3 guarantees the “right to life, liberty, and security of person”;14 article 5 prohibits torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;15 article 6 guarantees everyone a “right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law”;16 article 9 prohibits “arbitrary arrest, detention or exile”;17 articles 10 and 11 assure the right to a fair and public hearing on criminal charges along with a presumption of innocence until proven guilty by law.18

The use of extraordinary rendition clearly implicates violations of the Universal Declaration. The situations of Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri provide tangible examples of how extraordinary rendition subjects its victims to many of the most significant human rights violations, for example, abduction deprived these prisoners of their article 3 right to liberty and security. Further, article 5 violations were evident in each of these cases as the United States knowingly transferred these men to Afghanistan and Egypt—countries commonly criticized for systematic use of torture19—thus failing to protect against ill-treatment. During this process, U.S. agents and foreign police forces denied the prisoners proper access to counsel—violating the terms of article 6.20 In all three situations the U.S. government performed arbitrary arrests by failing to file official criminal charges against the detainees—violating article 9. Accordingly, the lack of judicial process through fair and public hearings and a presumption of innocence, illustrates a clear breach of articles 10 and 11.21 In sum, the use Page 118 →of extraordinary rendition as to Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri illustrates that many of the provisions of the Universal Declaration are directly violated, which is indicative of its malicious purpose in relation to recognized human rights instruments.

It is critical to know the status of the United States in regard to its acceptance of the respective human rights treaties. Currently, the United States has signed, but not ratified, the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights. When a State, such as the United States, signs but does not ratify a treaty, it is not officially consenting to be bound by the treaty source but is rather simply agreeing to accept ratification upon further review or approval. The United States has both signed and ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the Geneva Conventions; and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The United States has not signed or ratified the Convention for the Protection of All Persons against Enforced Disappearance, offering a legal explanation for its consistent use of extraordinary rendition.

While the Universal Declaration established a “common standard of achievement,”22 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (a.k.a., Covenant on Political Rights) codified many of its provisions.23 The Covenant has a broad territorial reach. The Human Rights Committee has determined that a person does not need to be within a State Party’s territory in order for that State to be subject to the terms of the Covenant—the person must merely be “within the power or effective control” of a State Party.24 Therefore, no matter where a State Party detains a person, the State Party is required to afford all persons the protections enumerated in the Covenant on Political Rights.25 The Covenant is especially important in relation to the use of extraordinary rendition by U.S. officials on Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri, because the detainees were never within U.S. territory.

The Covenant on Political Rights provides a broad range of human rights protections for detained persons: article 7 prohibits torture and other forms of cruel and inhuman punishments26 and article 10 requires all State Parties to treat detained persons with humanity and respect.27 Furthermore, the Human Rights Committee has broadly interpreted articles 2 and 7 to apply even when a State Party merely transfers a detainee to “another State where there are substantial grounds for believing he would be in danger of being tortured.”28 The guidance of the Human Rights Committee indicates that the protections of article 7 extend to cases of transfer.29

Again, the use of extraordinary rendition on Qassem, Rashul, and El Page 119 →Masri reveals that multiple provisions of the Covenant on Political Rights were violated. In regard to article 7, the United States transferred all three detainees to locations where there were substantial grounds to believe that torture would ensue, violating its protections against reckless transfers of detainees to locations utilizing torture. Article 2 also requires that persons claiming a violation of the Covenant on Political Rights has “a right to remedy,” however, the cases of Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri demonstrate that detainees rarely have a means of challenging their Covenant on Political Rights protections or transfers more generally.30

In 1966, the UN adopted the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights as an addition to the Covenant on Political Rights.31 Unlike the provisions of the Covenant on Political Rights, the protections enumerated in the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights are not immediately enforceable, but rather should be implemented by State Parties “to the maximum of their available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the full realization of the rights.”32 Another divergence from the Covenant on Political Rights is that the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights contains no jurisdictional limits.33

The International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights is violated when a government abducts and transports a person to a country where torture and other forms of inhuman or degrading treatment may ensue. Extraordinary rendition violates multiple provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights. Articles 11 and 12 are violated when detainees are denied their right to adequate standard of living for themselves and their families,34 and are further violated during transfer and interrogation if detainees are denied their right to be free from hunger,35 and their right to mental and physical health.36 An article 10 violation (protecting against separation of families) was demonstrated in El Masri’s extraordinary rendition because, as previously noted, his family left Germany with the thought that El Masri had abandoned them during his detention.37

The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment, or Punishment (a.k.a., Convention against Torture) defines torture as “any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person.”38 The Convention against Torture requires minimal State action to implicate its provisions—the pain or suffering must be “inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity.”39 The Convention against Torture is further broadened Page 120 →in scope by article 16, which requires that every State Party “undertake to prevent in any territory under its jurisdiction other acts of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment which do not amount to torture.”40

The protections enumerated in article 3 of the Convention against Torture are particularly important in relation to extraordinary rendition because it prohibits “refoulement” to a State where there are substantial grounds to believe that a person would be in danger of being tortured.41 To determine whether such substantial grounds exist, the article requires that authorities “take into account all relevant considerations.”42 Furthermore, article 2 explicitly forbids State Parties from attempting to justify the use of torture,43 while articles 4, 5, and 7 require State Parties to criminalize all acts and attempts to torture through prosecution or extradition processes.44

The history of the drafting of the Convention against Torture helps to put its provisions in context with extraordinary rendition.45 First, the drafters concluded that a State Party cannot use extraordinary rendition to circumvent the traditional methods of extradition,46 and that a country engaging in extraordinary rendition cannot rely on extradition treaty reservations to avoid implicating article 3 protections.47 As applied to the stories of Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri there is no evidence that traditional extradition procedures were used when transferring Qassem to Egypt or Rashul and El Masri to Afghanistan. Only Qassem was wanted on criminal charges.

Additionally, the history of the drafting of the Convention against Torture reveals that article 3 has a broadened extraterritorial scope.48 The term “return” (in French, refouler) was added to article 3 during the drafting process with the intent that the article would cover all situations in which a person is transferred to another country. In fact, the CIA’s transfer of Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri to third countries is prohibited by article 3.

The Committee against Torture has published two critical findings in regard to extraordinary rendition. First, in Khan v. Canada,49 the Committee determined that transferring a person to a country that is not part of the Convention against Torture constitutes a violation of article 3 because the transfer exposes the person to danger, and the person would not be able to seek protection under the convention.50 The Committee affirmed this ruling in Agiza v. Sweden, where it determined that the transfer of detainee Ahmed Agiza to Egypt constituted a violation of article 3 because Sweden’s officials “[knew] or should have known” that Egypt resorted to consistent use of torture.51

Second, extraordinary rendition may also constitute a conspiracy to commit torture, which also qualifies as a violation of the Convention Page 121 →against Torture. Countries that merely facilitate the practice by providing intelligence or material assistance may violate article 1’s prohibition on State “consent or acquiescence.”52 The U.S. officials involved in extraordinary rendition have admitted that they were aware that the transfers were likely to result in torture.53

The Geneva Conventions of 1949 enacted protections tailored toward persons involved in armed conflict.54 First, the Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (a.k.a., the POW Convention) protects prisoners of war (POWs) that are detained as a result of armed conflict.55 The POW Convention covers a broad range of persons, including members of the armed forces held in enemy hands,56 members of militias or voluntary forces, and members of organized resistance movements57 (members in this category are subject to additional requirements to be eligible for protection).58 Extraordinary rendition implicates grave breaches in the POW Convention’s protections against willful killing, serious bodily harm, and torture.59 Extraordinary rendition also violates the POW Convention’s protections against the separation of families, and “moral suffering” through sadistic punishment methods,60 and further protects POWs who are “willfully” transferred to a country that utilizes ill-treatment and torture.61

Article 4 of the Civilian Convention protects all civilians from ill-treatment and torture so long as they are not in the hands of their own government.62 Extraordinary rendition violates article 49 of the Civilian Convention, which protects all civilians against transfer or deportation out of an occupied territory, except if it is due to military evacuation.63 Article 49 is intended to prohibit all forms of forcible transfer of persons protected under the Civilian Convention, regardless of their legal status in the occupied territory. Therefore, the United States’ extraordinary rendition of protected civilians, such as Rashul, violates article 49 of the Civilian Convention.

More recently in 2006, the United Nations Human Rights Council adopted the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (a.k.a., Enforced Disappearance Convention).64 The Enforced Disappearance Convention was specifically created to prevent enforced disappearance, noting that the use of enforced disappearance qualifies as a crime against humanity.

Article 2 of the Enforced Disappearance Convention defines enforced disappearance as “the arrest, detention, abduction, or any other form of deprivation of liberty by agents of the State or by persons or groups of persons acting with the authorization, support, or acquiescence of the Page 122 →State, followed by a refusal to acknowledge the deprivation of liberty or by concealment of the fate or whereabouts of the disappeared person, which places such a person outside the protection of the law.”65 Article 1 prohibits the use of enforced disappearance without the possibility of justification from State Parties.66 The Enforced Disappearance Convention proactively prevents enforced disappearance by requiring State Parties to investigate all suspected activities pertaining to article 2,67 and mandating that State Parties hold anyone involved with the practice of enforced disappearance criminally liable.68

Article 17 pertains closely to extraordinary rendition by requiring all State Parties to maintain official registers of all persons who are deprived of liberty.69 The registers must promptly be made available to any competent authority at their request. The register must include information documenting the date and time of release or transfer to another place of detention, along with the authority that will be responsible for the transfer. Article 18 allows all relatives of persons who are victims of enforced disappearance to have access to the date and time of abduction and transfer, the location of detention, and all information regarding the health of the detainee.70

Extraordinary rendition implicates multiple violations of the Enforced Disappearance Convention and other human rights treaties. Qassem, Rashul, and El Masri were each abducted and placed outside of the control of the law while CIA officials failed to admit responsibility for the deprivation of liberty, breaching article 2. Furthermore, the U.S. government failed to uphold the protections of articles 6 and 7 by failing to maintain a record of Qassem’s, Rashul’s, and El Masri’s exact location and health status. As a result of these failures to maintain appropriate records, the location and health of Qassem and Rashul are still unconfirmed. In order to avoid the reoccurrence of extraordinary rendition, it is crucial that government officials, particularly within foreign intelligence agencies, keep accurate and extensive records of all abductions, while simultaneously ensuring that abducted foreign citizens are not placed in the hands of nations known to use torture Furthermore, the United Nations must encourage strict guidelines for all States that resort to the use of extraordinary rendition.