We've got you covered from a single-camera shoot to a complex multiple-camera set up. Need to do an interview, shoot a host on teleprompter, or capture an extreme sporting event? How about creating a multi-faceted, actor-driven commercial or industrial video? No problem! The Quantum Leap team always pulls together the best personnel for the job and utilizes the right technology giving you everything you need for successful shoots, smooth edits, and a stunning final product.

When it comes to shooting your project, there are many "flavors" of formats and cameras to choose from. Our technical team can provide the best solutions for your project and budget. Pre-Production to Post, we’re here to help you deliver your next TV pilot, series, feature film or documentary. If you can envision it, we can achieve it. It’s what we do.

We are proud that our documentary film, The Weight of a Feather has been awarded four Rocky Mountain Emmy® Awards! We won in the following categories:

Best Environment / Science Program (long form)

Best Writer, Kristin Atwell Ford

Best Editor, Bill Davis and Misty Wilson

Best Graphics Arts, Misty Wilson

The Weight of a Feather is narrated by Peter Coyote and produced by the Emmy® award-winning team at Quantum Leap Productions. This film was made possible by the Rob & Melani Walton Foundation and the Virginia G. Piper Charitable Trust. Distribution funding provided by Weese Foundation of Arizona, and other generous supporters.

WATCH THE FILM NOW ON AMAZON PRIME!

CHECK OUT WHAT ELSE WE HAVING STREAMING!

Wildlife reveals how all living beings are connected. In Arizona, Liberty Wildlife is a wildlife rehabilitation, education, and conservation center that benefits animals and people. To accomplish its goals, Liberty Wildlife works in concert with state and federal agencies, local municipalities, utilities, and other non-profits to ensure the survival of wildlife in the urban interface and throughout the region. These symbiotic relationships nourish animals, humans, and the place we call home.

Filmed on location in Arizona with a focus on the urban wildlife, “The Weight of a Feather,” features Tony Duncan, World Champion Hoop Dancer, and representatives from Liberty Wildlife, the Arizona Game and Fish Department, SRP, APS, The Peregrine Fund, and Verde Canyon Railroad. The film is directed by Arizona Governor’s Arts Award recipient Kristin Atwell Ford and the Emmy® Award winning team at Quantum Leap Productions.

“The Weight of a Feather” can be streamed on PBS Passport or checked out at the Tempe Public Library.

Rocky Mountain Emmy® Award Winner for Best Historical Documentary, “Castle Hot Springs: Oasis of Time” is about a landscape that inspires legends. The human history of “taking the waters” of Castle Hot Springs starts with the Yavapai Tribe. The First People gathered cactus flowers and grew mescal at the springs. As settlers came to the Arizona Territory, mining magnate Frank Murphy and his brother, Territorial Governor Nathan Oakes, saw in the springs the perfect mix of water, sunshine, and leisure travel that would drive the region toward statehood.

Arizona soon played host to the Rockefellers, Pews, and Vanderbilts. Some came for their health, others for adventure, but they were all enchanted by the majesty of the Bradshaw Mountains.

American Painter Maxfield Parrish discovered the saturated desert skies that would become the hallmark of his paintings. The ‘Father of American Cinema,’ Cecil B. DeMille staged his cast and crew at the resort during the Depression and filmed an early “talkie.” Over the 20th century “Castle Hot” became a mix of cowpunchers and captains of industry. It is a landscape of myth and memory.

The film features vintage film footage by Cecil B. DeMille and Senator Barry Goldwater; paintings by Maxfield Parrish and Olaf Weighorst; and music by Pearl Django, and singing cowboys Gene Autry and Dolan Ellis.

Now streaming on Amazon Prime Video, Apple TV and Google Play.

Opera’s hallowed traditions and America’s cowboy culture converge in a documentary film that celebrates the collaborative power of art. Riders of the Purple Sage: The Making of a Western Opera follows Zane Grey’s classic Western novel as it is re-imagined as a Grand Opera. Can the rugged American West fit in the genre of Verdi and Mozart? A challenge between the composer and his lyricist quickly expands into a creative posse of musical, visual, and digital artists as the fully orchestrated opera emerges from the page. From Arizona’s windswept desert canyons that inspired both Zane Grey and fine art painter Ed Mell, to onstage at Phoenix Symphony Hall, where scores, story, and performances are meticulously aligned, Riders of the Purple Sage: The Making of a Western Opera captures the process of making a legend stand up and sing.

From one-camera 4k interviews, and complex multi-camera and audio set ups for orchestra rehearsals and backstage access; to cinematic recreations on horseback with sticks, rail and drone; to a live switch of the world premiere in Phoenix Symphony Hall, Quantum Leap provided the pre-production, permitting, and planning to make each production day over several years come together to yield a complete story in the editing bay and on the screen.

Watch RIDERS OF THE PURPLE SAGE: THE MAKING OF A WESTERN OPERA (82 mins) is available to rent or purchase on Amazon and through Alexander Street for worldwide distribution, screenings, classroom use, and events. Executive Producers Billie Jo & Judd Herberger, Director/Producer Kristin Atwell Ford, Produced by Quantum Leap Productions in collaboration with Arizona Opera. To learn more, visit www.RidersOperaFilm.com.