The new single of Mylène Farmer, À tout jamais, was released on Friday 26 August 2022. It was released on September 30th on CD and vinyl with 4 additionnal remixed versions and the instrumental version.

The 6 versions are available on all platforms in stereo and also in 360 Reality Audio on Tidal, Deezer, Amazon and in Dolby Atmos on Apple Music.

This album was recorded (for the voice) and mixed by Jérôme Devoise. The mixes in Dolby Atmos and 360RA t were done in the DES studio by Jérôme and Poussin.

If you want to understand how the Dolby Atmos mixes are done, you can find all the informations in this report from Studio DES. The DES studio is now also equipped to mix in Sony 360 Reality Audio in addition to Dolby Atmos. The Sony 360 Reality Audio is also an Object format which allows to position the sounds in space like Dolby Atmos, the final result is encoded in MPEG-H for streaming.

We will review the Stereo Qobuz, CD, Vinyl, Tidal and 360RA Tidal versions.

Below you will find the description of the different editions, as well as the measurements of each edition in the following chapters.

The synthesis of the review and the samples are available here

This maxi single includes 6 tracks reviewed:

À tout jamais

À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen)

À tout jamais (D Remix – Distortion Remix by Vitalic)

À tout jamais (MM Remix – Master Manipulation Remix by Motherweshare)

Mylène Farmer – À tout jamais (CONTROL Remix by Fragrance)

À tout jamais (Instrumental Version)*

*only on digital release

Another review also available :

First we will analyze each edition in detail (technical and qualitative analysis), then we will compare the successive editions with their dynamics and assign a final score, and you will be able to listen some samples.

The streaming versions may evolve over time, those presented here correspond to the version tested at the date of publication, or update of the review.

Review of the editions:

Part 1: Presentation of the editions

Part 2 : Waveform and dynamique comparaison

Parts 3 : Spectrum comparisons

Part 4 : Spectrogram comparaisons

Part 5 : Spatialization

Part 5 : Summary, scoring and Sample

Part 1: presentation of the editions

Ed1: Qobuz Hi-Res – 2022

Presentation

This is the stereo version of the 6 tracks À tout jamais, the mastering was done in accordance with the studio’s request to provide a mix with a high sound level to match the other current production. For this purpose a dynamic range compression was applied and explains the measured value of the Dynamic Range.

Ed2: Tidal 360 Reality Audio Binaural – 2022

Presentation

This is the 360 RA version of the 6 tracks À tout jamais. The mix was made from the multitracks used to mix the stereo version (without dynamics compression).

Ed3: Vinyl ref : 196587400019 – 2022

Presentation

This is the stereo version of the 5 tracks À tout jamais (without the instrumental version), the mastering was done specificaly for the vinyl.

Ed4: CD ref: 196587399924 – 2022

Presentation

This is the stereo version of the 6 tracks À tout jamais, the mastering was done in accordance with the studio’s request to provide a mix with a high sound level to match the other current production. For this purpose a dynamic range compression was applied and explains the measured value of the Dynamic Range.

Ed5: Tidal Master – 2022

Presentation

This is the stereo version of the 6 tracks À tout jamais, the mastering was done in accordance with the studio’s request to provide a mix with a high sound level to match the other current production. For this purpose a dynamic range compression was applied and explains the measured value of the Dynamic Range.

Part 2 : Waveform and dynamic comparaisons

Waveform

The waveform represents the track.

The graphs below represents the waveforms of the 360RA binaural versions (Ed2).

This version is dynamic without the use of dynamic limiters as on the stereo digital editions.

The Qobuz Hi-Res (Ed1), CD (Ed4) and Tidal Master (Ed5) are strongly compressed in dynamic (yellow zone) as confirmed by its DR6.

The graph below represents the comparison between the CD, the vinyl and the binaural 360RA of the song “À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen)” adjusted to the same sound level. We can see the effect of the dynamic range compression which limits the sound levels, thus suppressing part of the signal. The dynamic range hierarchy highlights the 360RA version (DR14) then the vinyl (DR11) and the digital stereo versions (DR6).

Dynamic

Dynamic represents the ability to reproduce a wide range of sounds from the softest to the loudest. The target is to compare the dynamics of the music and not of the media (CD, digital files or vinyl).

For our 5 editions reviewed have obtained the following Dynamic Range (DR) :

We find the new hierarchy of modern recordings with the 360RA version which is the most dynamic (DR14) followed by the vinyl (DR11) and the digital stereo versions DR6).

As a reminder, the scale goes from 0 to more 20, but the dynamics are considered good from 12, quite good between 10 and 11, and deteriorate below 10.

Part 3 : spectrum comparisons

Spectrum

The Spectrum allows to check the tonal balance of the music (balance between treble, medium and bass sounds) and to detect process that may have been carried out during the recording, the mixing, mastering or manufacturing phases. It is also possible to detect frequency interference issues.

The curve represents the average frequency distribution over the sample of the track À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen).

The graph below shows the difference between the spectrum of the CD (Ed4) and the 360RA binaural version (Ed2). The two spectrums are very different, this is due to the difference in mixing and restitution between the stereo version and the 360RA Binaural version. The yellow arrow shows the 18.8 kHz limit for the 360RA binaural version, this is due to the MPEG-H encoding which reduces the high frequencies to allow for the smallest possible file size.

The graph below shows the difference between the spectrum of the CD (Ed4) and the vinyl (Ed3).

The two curves practically overlap over the whole spectrum, with a little less bass for the vinyl below 100 Hz (green zone) and a small attenuation above 15 kHz (yellow zone).

The yellow arrow shows the identical cutoff at 22 kHz representing the use of a digital master that is not in high resolution.

The graph below shows the difference between the spectrum of the CD (Ed4) and Qobuz (Ed1).

The two curves are completely superimposed. The yellow arrow shows that the limit is 22 kHz for the CD and 24 kHz for the Qobuz version which has a 48 kHz sampling rate. We can see that this track has been reworked in 44.1 kHz.

The graph below shows the difference between the spectrum of the Tidal Master (Ed5) and Qobuz (Ed1).

The curves of Ed1 Qobuz and Ed5 Tidal are perfectly identical up to 24 kHz.

Beyond 24 kHz, we find a signal for the Tidal version (red zone). Indeed, the decoding of the MQA is done at least in 96 kHz, even for a signal in 48 kHz as here.

The result is a signal above 24 kHz which remains very small. This is an aliasing phenomenon that occurs during decoding. It would have been simpler and more faithful to use a FLAC format without MQA for a resolution of 24 bits 48 kHz. You will find all the details here.

Part 4 : Spectrogram comparaisons

Spectrogram

Spectrogram is another representation of frequency versus time of a track. For each channel (right and left), horizontal axis represents time, and the vertical axis represents frequency. The amplitude is represented by the intensity (brightness) of the color of each point in the image.

The spectrograms of Qobuz Hi-Res (Ed1) and CD (Ed2) show a limit at 24kHz (22 khz for CD) (yellow arrow) due to the 48 kHz (44.1kHz for CD) sampling frequency and the absence of signal above 24 kHz (22 kHz for CD) (white arrow).

The vinyl spectrogram rises above 22 kHz (yellow arrow), but as the white arrow shows, there is a signal above 24 kHz, as the digital master does not rise above 24 kHz, this signal (white arrow) is due to the vinyl playback principle and therefore represents distortion.

The spectrogram of the Tidal Master stereo version shows a limit at 24 kHz (yellow arrow), and a signal due to MQA decoding (red arrow). There is no signal above 48 kHz (white arrow).

The spectrograms of Tidal 360Ra binaural (Ed2) shows a limit at 18.8kHz (yellow arrow) due to the MPEG-H encoding used for 360RA and the absence of signal above 18.8 kHz (white arrow).

Part 5 : Spatialization

Spatialization allows you to define the sound distribution of the music on all the channels. The spatialization indicator and the description of the graph are described here.

The mix here plays on the opening of the sound space, the rendering allows Mylène Farmer’s voice to be highlighted and the music to accompany it, creating a subtle sound bubble. The difference between the stereo and the 360 version is important, especially on the binaural version.

Part 6 : Summary, scoring and Samples

Ed1: Qobuz Hi-Res – 2022

As indicated in the presentation section, the stereo version is in line with the expectations of having a track that sounds strong in the current context, therefore with a significant dynamic compression but which preserves the timbre of Mylène Farmer’s voice.

Rating:

Dynamic: ●oooo (1/5)

Bandwidth: ●●●●o (4/5)

Restitution: ●●●oo (3/5)

Sample : “À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen)” 24 bits 48kHz:

Ed2: Tidal 360 Reality Audio Binaural – 2022

With the 360RA version, we enter another sound world. We find dynamics, space which gives a much wider and more enveloping listening. The voice perfectly matches the instruments which are no longer in front but also on the sides. Very nice mix that brings a listening to headphones or in 7.1.4 much more open.

Rating:

Dynamic: ●●●●● (5/5)

Bandwidth: ●●●●o (4/5)

Spatialization: ●●●●●ooooo (5) (average)

Restitution: ●●●●o (4/5)

Sample : “À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen)” 360RA binaural for headphone listening:

Ed3: Vinyl ref : 196587400019 – 2022

The vinyl version offers a good pressing and brings especially the dynamics which is not present in the digital stereo versions. We find then more space and more naturalness in the voice of Mylène Farmer.

Rating:

Dynamic: ●●●●o (3.5/5)

Bandwidth: ●●●●o (4/5)

Surface noise : ●●●●o (4/5)

Restitution: ●●●●o (4/5)

Sample : “À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen)” 24 bits 88.2kHz:

Ed4: CD ref: 196587399924 – 2022

No surprise for the CD version which is similar to the stereo streaming versions with a very marked limitation of the dynamics.

Rating:

Dynamic: ●oooo (1/5)

Bandwidth: ●●●●o (4/5)

Restitution: ●●●oo (3/5)

Sample : “À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen)” 16 bits 44.1kHz:

Ed5: Tidal Master – 2022

As for Qobuz, we find the limitation of the dynamics with a DR between DR5 and DR7 according to the tracks. We find the particularity of Tidal with the MQA which decodes in 24 bits 96 kHz and not 48 kHz, which, according to the DAC, can give a rendering a little different from the Qobuz version.

Rating:

Dynamic: ●oooo (1/5)

Bandwidth: ●●●●o (4/5)

Restitution: ●●●oo (3/5)

Sample : “À tout jamais (NPD’s Remix by Philip Larsen)” 24 bits 96kHz:

This new maxi single of Mylene Farmer brings 5 or 6 tracks (single, remix, musical version) of “A tout Jamais“. The 360RA version is distinguished by a spatial mix and especially the best dynamic of all editions. Listening to the 360RA on headphones or in 7.1.4 widens the gap with the stereo version in terms of dynamics and opening of the sound scene. If you listen to headphones, choose the 360RA version (or Atmos on Apple)! If you want a stereo version with dynamics and a nice rendering of Mylène Farmer’s voice, the vinyl version is the one to choose.

Subscribe to MagicVinylDigital

Get new content delivered directly to your inbox.

Detail of the ratings :

Dynamic :

Significant dynamic compression, DR less than 7

Compression of the present dynamics, DR between 7 and 9.

Correct piece DR >=10

No dynamic compression (DR >12), dynamic rendering

No dynamic compression, high DR and very dynamic sound rendering

Spectrum :

Spectrum cut and less than 15 khz

Spectrum cut at 15 khz

Spectrum not conforming to the original and cut (not HD) or original but limited bandwidth (but less than 20 kHz)

Spectrum conforming to the original (but not HD)

Spectrum conforming to the original with HD resolution (higher than 24kHz)

Surface noise (only for vinyl):

Continuous audible noise

Audible surface noise except on passages with a high level of noise

Reduced surface noise, barely audible on low level crossings

Low surface noise, very good quality

Very low surface noise, no defects, almost inaudible on the quiet passages (exceptional disc)

Spatialization :

Between 0 and 5 for 5.1 or 7.1 channels configuration

Between 0 and 10 for Atmos configuration (7.1.4)

For more information on spatialization, you can read the article describing this parameter here.

Restitution :

Low quality of the restitution mixing dynamics, clarity, separation of voices and instruments.

Average quality of the restitution mixing dynamics, clarity, separation of voices and instruments.

Quality of the restitution mixing dynamics, clarity, separation of voices and instruments. Good record.

High quality of the restitution mixing dynamics, clarity, separation of voices and instruments. Very high level disc.

Maximum quality of the restitution mixing dynamics, clarity, separation of voices and instruments. Exceptional disc.