Paul Baloche is probably one of the best known worship leaders / songwriters of the present day, having penned classics such as “Open the Eyes of my Heart” and “Praise is Rising” – songs I know I have sung on many occasions and which are sung in churches around the world every week. The first 12 tracks (co-written with some very big names in worship music such as Brenton Brown and Graham Kendrick) from the original album release were recorded live in 2006 at Paul’s home church in Texas. This is followed on the current release by 6 updated versions with new voices and varied arrangements. The tracks begin with ‘Hosanna (Praise is Rising)’, perhaps one of Paul’s best-known tunes which I have become used to being full of energy and sung with some gusto! However, this rendition is far more relaxed in its delivery – pleasant enough, but never really building up into the rip-roaring praise anthem I was expecting. Just when you think the drums and guitars are building, they drop back again and the song continues at pretty much the same pace all the way through. The mid-paced ‘Because of Your Love’ follows on with mainly piano, guitar and some very low-key drums. There’s nothing musically spectacular here but do have to make note of some great vocals on here from Paul’s wife which blend so well. The pace is wound even further back with the title track ‘A Greater Song’ where in the earlier part of the song, we see the vocals shine through as opposed to the musical arrangements, although the music does build in the latter half which helps lift the mood a little. In stark contrast, we then have ‘I Will Boast’ which cranks up the levels significantly and is more of a classic worship anthem which I can imagine being sung at many of the summer worship events/festivals. OK, today it may not be the most modern and funky arrangement, but it still holds its own and has stood the test of time well with bags of energy and enthusiasm in the vocals. ‘Your Name’ winds things back down again with subtle strings in the intro and throughout which work well in adding to the atmosphere of the track. We are treated to some build up in the chorus though, so it doesn’t fall flat. We don’t see much change in style and delivery until ‘Thank You Lord’ which is classic Country and Western in style, complete with train beat drums, Hammond style keyboards and steel guitar. I’m not generally a fan of the genre, but I did enjoy this rendition as it reminded me of some of David Crowder’s older work, especially ‘My Beloved’. The following 3 tracks are low to mid-paced numbers with ‘Just as I Am’ being a beautiful, albeit very brief rendition led by Mrs Baloche. ‘Rising’ brings us back to worship anthem territory with more upbeat instrumentation, good build up and some effective choral-style vocal backing. ‘Hosanna’ is the first of the “reimagined” tracks which to my mind beat the original into submission with much more of the build-up and gusto I have come to love in this song, so for me it’s the best of the remixes. Some of the reworked tracks I felt were better than others. ‘What Can I Do’ I found a little dull but ‘You Have Been So Good’ was an improvement on the original, with some good strings and subtly delivered vocals giving it the feel of a love song. Overall, a good well produced release with a few notable tracks, but not sure those with the original recording will feel massive benefits in updating their collection. 8/10 Simon Redfern

Legacy artist, worship leader and singer-songwriter Paul Baloche celebrates the 15th anniversary of his trailblazing album ‘A Greater Song‘ with the release of a deluxe version. The album collates some of Paul Baloche’s most well-known and loved songs in Christian and Church culture, such as ‘Hosanna’, ‘Your Name’, ‘Praise is Rising’ and ‘You’ve Been So Good To Me’ to name a few. “The songs on ‘A Greater Song’ were birthed in the midst of worship in my local church 15 years ago,“ he says. “I remember it being a season of intense and consistent prayer in our community and I can hear it in the voices on the original recordings. I can still picture the faces of our congregation as we lifted up these songs as prayers to God from our fellowship. Surprisingly, many of these choruses are still being sung in churches around the world.” Recorded live all those years ago, the album embodies the sound of a generation which still resonates today; Paul Baloche’s words and melodies capture the powerful message of the Gospel in a relevant and relatable manner. ‘A Greater Song’ is not only precious to Paul Baloche but also to the legacy of Integrity Music as we have been partnering with him for close to 30 years. Seizing the opportunity of this significant anniversary, he teamed up with songwriter and film producer Jon Guerra (previously with Vertical Worship.) Paul explains, “we sought to reimagine the best of these songs with fresh arrangements and new voices – while retaining the heart behind these musical prayers. I hope they inspire a new generation to lift a greater song to Jesus with their whole heart and lives.” ‘Hosanna’, ‘What Can I Do’, ‘Because of Your Love’, ‘A Greater Song’, ‘You’ve Been So Good To Me’ (featuring Australian artist Tenielle Neda) and ‘Your Name’ were remixed by the two artists. We hope that the deluxe version of ‘A Greater Song’ will bless and encourage all who grew up with these powerful songs all over the world and in various languages!

Selah‘s legacy has always been about both an international story and a large global following. Having toured all over the world, they are now telling that story in a new and unique way. The band released two singles celebrating various cultures and what God is doing around the globe in 2021; One Name (Ek Naam) from India and Glory Hallelujah (Glória Aleluia) from Brazil. Their third release in this series, ‘So Beautiful (Sungguh Indah)’, written by Indonesian songwriter Raguel Lewi, has been a blessing to the Indonesian Church the last few years, proclaiming the beauty of God’s love. The new single is filled with a sense of peace and boasts a soothing melody and a vintage feel. ‘So Beautiful (Sungguh Indah)’ is part of an upcoming project of original worship songs from around the world translated into English for the first time. Selah will be sharing the stories of the writers and why the message of these songs is larger than any nation or language could contain!

https://www.integritymusic.com