Venizelos in English dictionary

Meanings and definitions of "Venizelos"

A surname of Greek origin.

proper

A transliteration of a Greek surname.

more

Sample sentences with "Venizelos"

Declension Stem

Venizelos was elected as a PASOK MP in the Thessaloniki A constituency in the general elections of 1993, 1996, 2000, 2004, 2007 and 2009.

In June 1917, with the government of Venizelos having overcome King Constantine's favored policy of neutrality in World War I and Greece actively joining the war on the side of the Triple Entente, the King abdicated his crown in favor of his second son and left Greece for exile in Switzerland.

This change of policy was due to a German demand for the persecution of Ottoman Greeks to stop, after Eleftherios Venizelos had made this a condition of Greece's neutrality when speaking to the German ambassador in Athens.

For the massacres that occurred during the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–1922, British historian Arnold J. Toynbee wrote that it was the Greek landings that created the Turkish National Movement led by Mustafa Kemal: "The Greeks of 'Pontus' and the Turks of the Greek occupied territories, were in some degree victims of Mr. Venizelos's and Mr. Lloyd George's original miscalculations at Paris."

Venizelos, in self-imposed exile, represented Greece in the negotiations that led to the signing of the Treaty of Lausanne, and the agreement of a mutual exchange of populations between Greece and Turkey.

However, Venizelos declared "we are not against the King, but against the Bulgarians".

However the main goal was enosis with Greece which came after Eleftherios Venizelos's constant opposition to Prince George's rule over Crete.

In Greece, army officers had revolted in August 1909 and secured the appointment of a progressive government under Eleftherios Venizelos, which they hoped would resolve the Cretan issue in Greece's favour and reverse their defeat of 1897 at the hands of the Ottomans.

On the other hand, the surrender of Fort Rupel for Venizelos and his supporters meant the beginning of the destruction of Greek Macedonia.

Before the Balkan Wars of 1912–1913, Venizelos' catalytic role helped gain Greece entrance to the Balkan League, an alliance of the Balkan states against the Ottoman Empire.

On 27 April 1899, an Executive Committee was created, in which a young, Athens-trained lawyer from Chania, Eleftherios Venizelos, participated as Minister of Justice.

The officers found such a man in the person of Eleftherios Venizelos, a prominent Cretan politician, whose clashes with Prince George, the island's regent, seemed to confirm his anti-monarchist and republican credentials.

Heavy criticism was levelled at PASOK leader Evangelos Venizelos's choice to give a public speech at Syntagma Square in Athens, center of anti-government and anti-austerity mass citizen protests so far.

The Commission is aware of the opening of the new Athens Eleftherios Venizelos airport and the transfer of airport activity from two terminals of the old Athens airport.

For the following 25 years, the fate of the party would be tied to that of Venizelos.

Eventually Venizelos prevailed, and the Greeks captured the city only a few hours before the arrival of the Bulgarians.

However, after the American Senate rejected the Armenian mandate, its only hope was its inclusion in the treaty by the influential Greek prime minister, Eleftherios Venizelos.

The former Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos, who from the very beginning supported the Allies, established a provisional government in northern Greece.

It was named after Greek prime minister Eleftherios Venizelos.

Firstly Venizelos signed an agreement on 23 September 1928 with Benito Mussolini in Rome, and then he started negotiations with Yugoslavia which resulted in a Treaty of Friendship signed on 27 March 1929.

Measurements made by reliable bodies in areas of north-east Attica close to Eleftherios Venizelos airport (Artemida, Vari, Koropi, Nea Makri and Rafina) have shown that daily noise pollution from the airport varies between 80 and 86 dB, whilst on some days it reaches 105 dB, compared with the level of between 55 and 60 dB which the World Health Organisation considers admissible.

To the newly reelected Venizelos, it seemed obvious that no good would come of continuing to haggle over lost property.

Council and Commission statements: Need for the quick adoption of a broad-based Financial Transaction Tax (2014/2513(RSP)) Evangelos Venizelos (President-in-Office of the Council) and Algirdas Šemeta (Member of the Commission) made the statements.

In 1917, Zaimis served again as Prime Minister under King Constantine I, while Eleftherios Venizelos led a rival government controlling northern Greece.

Available translations

Macedonian

Authors