City of Tulsa crew worker Jason Allen drills in a temporary bridge-out sign at the 11th Street Bridge west of Mingo Road. Because of three holes, the usually four-lane roadway has been reduced to two lanes, with steel-plated patches bolted to the roadway to cover the holes. (Above left) Friday, a bid meeting will determine when repairs begin on this hole on the eastbound deck of the 11th Street Bridge.

Below: Orange traffic cones accent the roadway as traffic heads over the eastbound (right) portion of the 11th Street Bridge. Although it was temporarily closed, a single westbound lane (left) is also open to traffic.

Photos by CORY YOUNG/Tulsa World

City dealing with traffic over crumbling bridge

Doughnuts, tires and sipping straws are things associated with having holes in them -- not bridges.

Tulsa's 11th Street Bridge, which stretches across East 11th Street just west of Mingo Road, can be added to the list, too.

"There are a couple of holes in the deck," said Chris Cox, Tulsa Public Works transportation rehabilitation manager. "It has probably exceeded its life expectancy. We got our money's worth for getting it to last that long."

The 52-year-old bridge, which hovers above Mingo Creek, has been crumbling away, and now three creek-viewing holes are the visible result. Metal plates cover up the holes at the site.

The time span between when the bridge was built in 1950 and now may seem a little longer to residents that have to travel the bridge everyday.

Wayne Bohannan is one of those people.

"Oklahoma has a number of bridges that need repair. It sure makes you nervous when you drive over them," said Bohannan, president of the Wagon Wheel Neighborhood Association. "These bridges look like they're all about to collapse. After the disaster they had at Webbers Falls, you wonder what in the heck is holding them up. They make you want to detour."

Bohannan had a solution, "We're hopeful that the state will start a program to replace or rebuild these bridges. It brings out the awareness that these bridges do fall."

The 11th Street Bridge used to be a four-lane structure -- two lanes heading east on the south and two headed west on the north. Now there are two lanes -- one eastbound and one westbound.

"The bridge is old and worn out," said Tulsa Public Works community affairs spokeswoman Lara Christiansen. "It's so old that it needs repairs."

Tulsa got its first glimpse of the bridge's troubles in late March when a hole peeked through on the westbound side of the bridge -- one lane down, three to go.

Then on July 31, city workers found another hole -- again on the westbound deck of the bridge.

Because of the second hole, traffic in the entire westbound deck was shut down and restored on the eastbound deck, leaving two lanes -- one westbound, one eastbound. Two lanes down, two to go.

Then last Wednesday, a third hole formed. This time, the hole was in the eastbound deck, which has been reduced to one lane. Three lanes down, one to go.

Of the four lanes that started out, only one hasn't had a major hole in it.

Currently traffic has been restored on both decks temporarily, with steel-plated patches bolted over the 1- to 2- 1/2-foot holes.

Traffic traveling on the eastbound deck will continue to go east.

Westbound travelers will head west between the two patched holes.

Construction on a project to fix the bridge was originally planned to start in late October or early November, Christiansen said. But after the third hole, the time was moved up to early next month. Bids for the project will be taken Friday.

"Bids usually take about a month," said Christiansen who is confident drivers will be able to continue using the bridge.

"Regardless of what the contract has in it, drivers will maintain two-way traffic throughout the entire project -- 11th Street will not be closed in either direction," she said.

Cox said bridges are evaluated consistently, but the city does not have enough money to pay for all of its needs.

"It's inspected every one to two years," said Cox, who added that funding for the westbound side of the bridge was put into the budget with 1996 and 2001 sales tax funds. He said the eastbound deck will be treated as an emergency case.

"This is an emergency that was not anticipated. When they (holes) happen, you just have to fund them," Cox said. "We're rushing because it needs fixing."

Work on westbound lanes are expected to take four months. If contractors bid low enough and the eastbound is done, eastbound lanes will add 40 days to the project, said Paul Zachary, deputy director for Tulsa Public Works department.

"We're working on footing the north and south bridges. Then, we're going to replace the deck on the north bridge," Zachary said of the upcoming job. "Depending on the price, we'll do the south bridge. Some of those pieces are in pretty bad shape."

The new bridge will be a lot safer because the lanes will be newer, less bumpy and wider.

"We're putting in a new deck and widening the footings on the piers," Cox said. "We're just trying to keep it fixed, keep traffic flowing and make sure they have safe roadways to travel on."

The fate of the eastbound lanes will be decided during bidding for contractors Friday.

Money may be what has kept the eastbound lanes of the bridge from receiving work. "The rehabilitation and maintenance needs of the infrastructure within the city of Tulsa is greater than the funding that is available," said Cox, adding more money has improved for road construction in recent years for Tulsa. "I appreciate all the funding that we do get."

Cox was also grateful to the community. "We appreciate the public being patient during this process and we'll try to minimize their traveling inconvenience."

Cory Young, World staff writer, can be reached at 437-0150 or via e-mail at cory.young@tulsaworld.com.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.