The capital of Algeria is Algiers, which is located on the western shore of the Mediterranean Sea. It is the largest city in Algeria by population. This city has a population size of just over 3.4 million and a metropolitan population of around 5 million. It covers an area of 140 square miles and is separated into 2 sections: the old part and the modern part. The old part is situated within the hillside and surrounds the modern part of the city.

This city is recognized for its unique and ancient architecture, which includes a number of mosques, cathedrals, and villas. The oldest mosque in Algiers is the Great Mosque, which was built in the early 11th century AD. Various leaders have added to this structure over the years. The oldest cathedral in this city is the Notre-Dame d’Afrique, which was built between 1858 and 1872. It is unique due to its use of Byzantine and Roman architectural styles. One of the most famous villas here is the Villa Abd-el-Tif, which was built in the early 20th century. It is considered an example of Moorish architecture.

History Of The Capital City Of Algeria

Algiers was founded in 944 AD, although inhabitants had occupied the area as a trading post for several decades prior to its official foundation. It served as the political hub for the Berber Zirid-Sanhaja dynasty until the 12th century. By the 16th century, this city came under the rule of the Ottoman Empire. During this time, Algiers became a hub for piracy (primarily of the Barbary pirates) due to its strategic location between the European and Ottoman empires. The Barbary pirates disrupted trade and even took hostages for ransom.

In 1830, French forces invaded the city and took control of Algiers and the entire country of Algeria. From the moment the city and country fell, Algiers became known as the capital of French Algeria. Under French control, the country attracted a number of European residents, who eventually came to make up the majority of the population of Algiers. Algiers, with the rest of the country, gained its independence in 1962.

Demographics And Population Growth Of Algeria's Capital City

As previously mentioned, the population size of the urban area of Algiers is more than 3.4 million and the metropolitan area reaches around 5 million. This latter number represents approximately 12% of the national population.

The number of people living in this city has increased significantly since the 1930s, when it was under French colonial rule. In fact, between 1940 and 1960 the population size tripled, growing from 300,000 to 900,000. After 1960, however, it significantly decreased 600,000 by 1963 as a result of the Algerian war. By 1977, that number had increased to 1.35 million.

Today, the population of Algiers is made up of a diverse group of individuals from a number of backgrounds and countries. Arabic-speaking individuals comprise a majority of the population, around 53%. The next largest demographic, 44% of the population, is made up of individuals who speak Berber as a native language. Finally, around 3% of the population of Algiers was born in a different country.