Today, U.S. Congressman Henry Cuellar, Ph.D. (TX-28) announced $963,000 in Congressionally directed funding for Texas A&M International University’s (TAMIU) STEM Connector Project with Laredo College. The funds will be used to create a graduate certificate in Systems Engineering at TAMIU, develop a coordinated engineering curriculum at TAMIU and Laredo College, purchase high-performing computers and other computer lab hardware, and hire engineering lab staff.

The funding, administered by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), will provide cutting-edge STEM opportunities for Laredo students.

“An education is the great equalizer. I secured this Congressionally directed funding to provide Laredo students with the resources they need to succeed in the STEM field and push the technological boundaries of the 21st Century,” said Dr. Cuellar, a Senior Member of the House Appropriations Committee. “The STEM Connector Project will create a pipeline for Laredo students to pursue good-paying STEM jobs and achieve their American Dream. Thank you to Dr. Pablo Arenaz, President of TAMIU, and Dr. Minita Ramirez, President of Laredo College, for working with me to deliver for our students.”

“This collaborative and innovative STEM Connector Project will expand opportunities alongside our higher education partner, Laredo College. The Project provides LC and TAMIU students with the opportunity to study Data Analytics and incorporate these skills into their research,” said Dr. Pablo Arenaz, President of TAMIU. “Project students will be prepared to meet the needs of dynamic and in-demand professions. We are eager for TAMIU faculty to collaborate with LC faculty to teach our students the essential programming skills starting from students’ first year and continuing through graduate study. We are thankful to Dr. Cuellar for his shared vision and partnership, and believe that the project will greatly advance our community and region with brighter futures for all our graduates.”

“We are grateful for Dr. Henry Cuellar’s continued support and commitment to advancing higher education across South Texas,” said Dr. Minita Ramírez, President of Laredo College. “This innovative partnership with our colleagues from Texas A&M International University will bring countless opportunities to our transfer students and bridge the learning between both institutions’ pedagogical approaches.”

Dr. Cuellar is a strong supporter of educational opportunities. He recently secured $1,399,532 in federal funding for Texas A&M International University’s Preparing STEM Majors as Outstanding Certified Secondary Mathematics Teachers for South Texas program. Dr. Cuellar also secured $1,400,000 in Congressionally directed funding for Laredo College’s Veterans Center of Excellence.

###