but made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men;

but emptied Himself [without renouncing or diminishing His deity, but only temporarily giving up the outward expression of divine equality and His rightful dignity] by assuming the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the likeness of men [He became completely human but was without sin, being fully God and fully man].

But stripped Himself [of all privileges and rightful dignity], so as to assume the guise of a servant (slave), in that He became like men and was born a human being.

But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:

Instead he emptied himself by assuming the form of a servant, taking on the likeness of humanity. And when he had come as a man,

But he emptied himself by taking the form of a slave and by becoming like human beings. When he found himself in the form of a human,

On the contrary, he emptied himself, in that he took the form of a slave by becoming like human beings are. And when he appeared as a human being,

Instead he gave up everything and became a slave, when he became like one of us.

but emptied himself, taking a bondman's form, taking his place in [the] likeness of men;

but emptied Himself, having taken the form of a slave, having come in the likeness of humans. And having been found as a man in outward-appearance,

But emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and in habit found as a man.

Instead, he gave up everything, even his place with God. He accepted the role of a servant, appearing in human form. During his life as a man,

Instead, he chose to leave heaven. He took for himself the nature of a slave. He became like a human.

but he emptied himself by taking the nature of a servant. When he was born in human likeness, and his appearance was like that of any other man,

but emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men.

but made himself nothing, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men.

But he ·gave up his place with God and made himself nothing [L emptied himself]. He ·became like [L took the form of] a ·servant [slave; bondservant] and was born ·as a man [L in the likeness of humanity/men].

But he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man.

Instead, he emptied himself by taking on the form of a servant, by becoming like other humans, by having a human appearance.

Instead of this, of his own free will he gave up all he had, and took the nature of a servant. He became like a human being and appeared in human likeness.

Instead He emptied Himself by assuming the form of a slave, taking on the likeness of men. And when He had come as a man in His external form,

He gave up his place with God and made himself nothing. He was born as a man and became like a servant.

Instead, poured out in emptiness, a servant’s form did he possess, a mortal man becoming. In human form he chose to be,

Let Christ himself be your example as to what your attitude should be. For he, who had always been God by nature, did not cling to his prerogatives as God’s equal, but stripped himself of all privilege by consenting to be a slave by nature and being born as mortal man. And, having become man, he humbled himself by living a life of utter obedience, even to the extent of dying, and the death he died was the death of a common criminal. That is why God has now lifted him so high, and has given him the name beyond all names, so that at the name of Jesus “every knee shall bow”, whether in Heaven or earth or under the earth. And that is why, in the end, “every tongue shall confess” that Jesus Christ” is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, made in the likeness of men,

But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:

but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:

but emptied Himself, by taking the form of a slave, by being made in the likeness of men.

but emptied himself by taking the form of a slave, by becoming in the likeness of people. And being found in appearance like a man,

but laid aside his mighty power and glory, taking the disguise of a slave and becoming like men.

Think of yourselves the way Christ Jesus thought of himself. He had equal status with God but didn’t think so much of himself that he had to cling to the advantages of that status no matter what. Not at all. When the time came, he set aside the privileges of deity and took on the status of a slave, became human! Having become human, he stayed human. It was an incredibly humbling process. He didn’t claim special privileges. Instead, he lived a selfless, obedient life and then died a selfless, obedient death—and the worst kind of death at that—a crucifixion.

But He emptied Himself, taking upon Himself the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.

but emptied himself, taking on the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of man. And being found in appearance as a man

Instead, he emptied himself by taking on the form of a servant, by becoming like other humans, by having a human appearance.

Rather, he emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, coming in human likeness; and found human in appearance,

but emptied Himself by taking the form of a bond-servant and being born in the likeness of men.

but emptied Himself, taking the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the likeness of men.

Rather, he emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. Being found in appearance as a man,

But he gave up his place with God and made himself nothing. He was born as a man and became like a servant.

but emptied himself by taking on the form of a slave, by looking like other men, and by sharing in human nature.

Instead, he made himself nothing. He did this by taking on the nature of a servant. He was made just like human beings.

rather, he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness.

rather, he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness.

but made Himself of no reputation, taking the form of a bondservant, and coming in the likeness of men.

He put aside everything that belonged to Him and made Himself the same as a servant who is owned by someone. He became human by being born as a man.

Instead, he gave up his divine privileges; he took the humble position of a slave and was born as a human being. When he appeared in human form,

but made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and became like humankind,

but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. And being found in human form,

but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. And being found in human form,

but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. And being found in human form,

but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, assuming human likeness. And being found in appearance as a human,

Instead, he emptied himself, and received the form of a slave, being born in the likeness of humans. And then, having human appearance,

But poured out and emptied himself [2C 8:9], taking the demut of the mode of being of an eved [YESHAYAH 52:13- 53:12 [T.N. see the AVDI TZADDIK TZEMACH DOVID MOSHIACH YIRMEYAH 23:5; ZECHARIAH 3:8], and was born in the likeness of Bnei Adam [Yn 1:14; Ro 8:3; MJ 2:14-17], and having been found in appearance as an Adam,

But He emptied Himself and took on the form of a servant (and the likeness of a man, having been made).

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men.

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men.

But He emptied Himself— taking on the form of a slave, becoming the likeness of men and being found in appearance as a man.

But He poured Himself out to fill a vessel brand new; a servant in form and a man indeed. The very likeness of humanity,

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men.

He gave this up and became a servant. He was born a baby.

but he lowed himself [but he meeked himself], taking the form of a servant, and was made into the likeness of men,

but did empty himself, the form of a servant having taken, in the likeness of men having been made,