Law & Order Franchise

6 14 Equinox

DUN-DUN! Name a more iconic sound — we’ll wait. For over three decades, Dick Wolf has ruled the television landscape with the beloved procedural and its many spin-off series. With two “Law & Orders” on NBC’s schedule this upcoming fall season, this veteran franchise, which has been home to big-name guest stars and known for often ripping stories from the headlines, is showing no signs of slowing down.

Wolf Universe

3 40 wmulder

The term Wolf Universe is commonly used to describe American television programs created and/or produced by Dick Wolf and programs related to them. These are shows about crime and first responders. Executive producers are Dick Wolf, Peter Jankowski, Arthur W. Forney and Tom Thayer. Steve Zirnkilton has narrated many of the shows, both scripted and reality, while Mike Post wrote the music and/or theme for some of them.

EW's The 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time (1998)

1 120 Sr.Kin

We are what we watch-and over the last half century, we've watched some pretty fabulous TV. From Mary to Jerry, from Tonight to Today, from the sublime (Prime Suspect) to the ridiculous (Gilligan's Island), EW recalls everything you need to know about 100 shows that tell us who we are.

TV Guide's 50 Greatest Shows of All Time (2002)

1 50 Sr.Kin

Mike Wallace and a vampire slayer? Letterman and Oprah? Andy Griffith and the Sopranos? On one list? What were we thinking? Simply put, the best of the best, from Day 1 to last night: quality, innovation and the ability to stay in our lives year after year after year. A touch of sentiment? Sure, but nostalgia alone couldn’t make the cut (sorry, Beav). And TV-movies, miniseries and specials will have to wait. These are the series we watched regularly — and will watch again. And again.

Hollywood’s 100 Favorite TV Shows (2015)

1 101 Sr.Kin

What's the best TV show of all time? Who knows? This poll is strictly about favorite shows, the programs people in Hollywood hold nearest to their hearts — that remind them of better times or speak to their inner child or inspire their creativity or just help them unwind after a crappy day at the studio — even if one or two of the programs listed here aren't exactly masterpieces of the medium.

All TV Series Seen in Full Throughout Life

1 203 WatchTillTandava

A comprehensive list of all TV series seen and experienced throughout my life from early childhood to the present day. Usually full completion including all seasons, but at least a mandatory minimum of one full season. Will include live action and Western animation/cartoons, but exclude anime, which is on a separate list.

TV (The Book)

1 100 Sr.Kin

TV (The Book): Two Experts Pick the Greatest American Shows of All Time is a collection of essays written by television critics Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz. It was published in 2016. The main purpose of the book was to provide a canonical list of the top 100 greatest television programs in American history.

TV Guide Magazine's 60 Best Series of All Time (2013)

1 61 Sr.Kin

So many golden ages, so much brilliance from which to choose. In culling from the "60 Greatest" lists we've compiled during our 60th-anniversary year, we shook things up, blending drama, comedy and other genres to salute the shows with the biggest cultural impact and most enduring influence. What will the next 60 years bring? We can't wait to find out.

WGA's 101 Best Written TV Series Of All Time (2013)

1 101 Sr.Kin

The “TV 101” list honors classic, trailblazing series and miniseries, as well as current and critically acclaimed programs, from comedies and dramas to variety/talk and children’s programming. At their core, all of these wonderful series began with the words of the writers who created them and were sustained by the writers who joined their staffs or worked on individual episodes. “This list is not only a tribute to great TV, it is a dedication to all writers who devote their hearts and minds to advancing their craft.

American Legal Drama [Series]

1 21 toni kaku

A legal drama is a genre of film and television that generally focuses on narratives regarding legal practice and the justice system. The American Film Institute (AFI) defines "courtroom drama" as a genre of film in which a system of justice plays a critical role in the film's narrative. Legal dramas have also followed the lives of the fictional attorneys, defendants, plaintiffs, or other persons related to the practice of law present in television show or film. Legal drama is distinct from police crime drama or detective fiction, which typically focus on police officers or detectives investigating and solving crimes. The focal point of legal dramas, more often, are events occurring within a courtroom, but may include any phases of legal procedure, such as jury deliberations or work done at law firms. Some legal dramas fictionalize real cases that have been litigated, such as the play-turned-movie, Inherit the Wind, which fictionalized the Scopes Monkey Trial. As a genre, the term "legal drama" is typically applied to television shows and films, whereas legal thrillers typically refer to novels and plays.