Offering SUV, Van, Car and Shuttle Service

to Newark International Airport and More.

With Newark Liberty International in state, and LaGuardia and JFK just over the New York border, New Jersey has a wide variety of air travel options. Whatever your need is - whether it's a ride to Newark or a pickup from NYC - ETS Airport Shuttle is the most convenient and cost-effective option around. Our Newark airport shuttle services are convenient for everyone in northern New Jersey including New Brunswick, Elizabeth, Morristown, Princeton and Paterson. An ETS Airport shuttle is the best transportation option in New Jersey and a great way to transfer to/from Newark Airport to New York City.

Newark Airport Transfers

ETS Airport Shuttle operates 365 days a year in New Jersey, meaning we're ready when you are! For great rates, dependable drivers, and a focus on excellent customer service, you won't find a better Newark service and airport shuttle provider. We can provide shared ride airport transfer services from Newark to/from JFK airport or Newark to/from LaGuardia. If you're looking for a great deal on a airport transfer in Newark, look no further than ETS Airport Shuttles. Private airport transportation is also available. ETS can offer SUVs and sprinter vans in Newark to provide easy and personalized airport car services.

Our Newark shuttle vans are also great for college students. If you're flying through Newark Liberty International Airport, some of the nearby colleges include Princeton, Rutgers–Newark, the New Jersey Institute of Technology, and Seton Hall University's Law School.

Newark Hotel Shuttles

Whether you're flying out of Newark Liberty International Airport (EWR) or staying at a Newark hotel, an ETS Airport Shuttle is a great way to start or end your trip. We can provide shuttle services to Newark Hotels and more. Popular Newark Hotels include:

Newark Liberty International Airport Marriott, Newark (07114)

Hilton Newark Penn Station, Newark (07102)

Hotel Indigo Newark Downtown, Newark (07102)

SpringHill Suites by Marriott Newark Liberty International Airport, Newark (07114)

Crowne Plaza Newark Airport, Elizabeth (07201)

Renaissance Newark Airport Hotel, Elizabeth (07201)

...and more!