-https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexios_IV_of_Trebizond

-http://fmg.ac/Projects/MedLands/TREBIZOND.htm#AlexiosIVTrebizondB

ALEXIOS Megas Komnenos, son of MANUEL III Emperor in Trebizond & his first wife Gulkhan of Georgia (19 Jun 1382-murdered 26 Apr 1429, bur Trebizond, Church of the Golden-Headed Virgin). Ruy González de Clavijo records that "Qelex" son of "the emperor of Trebizond..Germanoli" was "about twenty-five years of age" in 1404[143]. Despotes 1395/1416. He succeeded his father in 1412 as ALEXIOS IV Emperor in Trebizond. He was murdered on the orders of his son Kaloioannes. The date of his death was discussed by Bryer[144].

m (after 14 Sep 1395) THEODORA Kantakouzene, daughter of THEODOROS Kantakouzenos, [protostrator] & his wife Euphrosyne --- (-12 Nov 1426, bur Trebizond, Church of the Golden-Headed Virgin). ... .... ... ... [nine] children:

Alexios IV had been associated in authority and given the title of despotes by his father as early as 1395. Nevertheless, the two quarreled as Alexios was impatient to assume supreme power; William Miller compared this to "the first three sovereigns of the House of Hanover" for whom "the heir-apparent always quarrelled with his father."

When his father died in 1417, Alexios was accused by some of having expedited his death.[citation needed] Alexios inherited a conflict with the Genoese, who defeated the fleet of Trebizond and seized a local monastery, which they converted into a fortress. By 1418 he had signed a peace agreement and paid reparations to the Genoese until 1422. A new dispute arose over the emperor's obligations in 1425 and was not resolved until 1428. Relations with the Republic of Venice were generally better.

After the death of Tamerlane, most of Asia Minor descended into chaos. Kara Yusuf, ruler of the Kara Koyunlu or "Black Sheep" Turks, devastated much of Armenia and defeated the Emir of Arsinga and the chieftain of the Ak Koyunlu or White Sheep Turks. Alexios sought to avoid hostility by marrying off daughters to his powerful Muslim neighbors. One daughter was married to Kara Yusuf's son Jihan Shah in c.1420, and Alexios agreed to pay his son-in-law the same amount of tribute that had previously been due to Tamerlane.[4] Another daughter was possibly married to Ali, son of Kara Yülük Osman, the ruler of Ak Koyunlu, though Osman himself was likely the groom. Alexios' marital policy also extended to his Christian neighbors, and his daughter Maria of Trebizond was married off to the Byzantine Emperor John VIII Palaiologos in 1428.

--------------------------------------------

In 1395, Alexios married Theodora Kantakouzene. They would have at least five children:

John IV of Trebizond (c. 1403 - 1459). Maria of Trebizond (c. 1404 - 1439). Married John VIII Palaiologos. Alexander of Trebizond. Co-Emperor with his father. Married Maria Gattilusio, a daughter of Dorino of Lesbos. David of Trebizond (c. 1408 - 1463). A daughter. Married Jahan Shah. Two further daughters have been attributed to Alexios by later genealogists; however, both have also been attributed to John IV by other genealogists. Michel Kuršanskis has argued these marriages never really happened, and their existence is based on a misreading of an interpolation to Chalcondyles. These daughters are:

Theodora of Trebizond, wife of Ali Beyg of the Ak Koyunlu. Eudokia-Valenza of Trebizond, wife of Niccolò Crispo, Lord of Syros.