Wabash College Athletics Hall of Fame

Choose a Hall Of Fame Member:

Andrew D. Luckey

Class

1993

Induction

2014

Sport(s)

Swimming and Diving

Andrew D. Luckey, your arrival at Wabash in the fall of 1989 — along with some incredibly talented teammates — ushered in a literal Golden Age for Wabash College Swimming and Diving.

A native of Brownsburg, you studied history and classics with Professors John Fischer and Joe and Leslie Day, and you even worked on an archeological dig with Leslie Day. Coach Gail Pebworth saw something in you right from the start of your freshman year. She says that you “exhibited the capacity to inspire and support your teammates to reach new heights.” Coach Pebworth was right on the mark: You rose to the presidency of your fraternity Phi Kappa Psi, and co-captained the swimming and diving team in your senior year.

You qualified for the NCAA Division III National Championships twice, including in your junior year when you were named Most Valuable Swimmer. Over the course of your four years, Wabash never lost a dual meet — going 37-0 — and won 20 major invitational titles. Your versatility was stunning. While you often swam the breaststroke in the medley relay, you were the team’s top performer in the 200 and 400 individual medley events in which you owned the school records.

In your senior season, the Little Giants went 11-0 in dual meets and swept the Notre Dame, Indiana Little State, DePauw, Indianapolis, and Liberal Arts invitational championships. Coach Pebworth remembers you as “a fierce competitor and extraordinary relay swimmer.” Indeed, you were a pivotal member of the College’s NCAA team in 1993 when you swam the breaststroke on the All-American 200 and 400 medley relay teams to power Wabash to eighth place in the final meet standings. You also swam on two All-American freestyle relay teams and another relay team that came home with Honorable Mention All-America hardware.

Today, over two decades after your graduation, you still hold top-eight times in the 200 and 400 individual medley events, and top-five marks in three different relays. Andrew D. Luckey, you embodied the best aspects of our “Wabash Always Fights” motto and provided exceptional leadership to the best Wabash swimming teams in history. Therefore, it is with great pride that the National Association of Wabash Men inducts you in the Wabash College Athletics Hall of Fame.