Wabash College Athletics Hall of Fame

Choose a Hall Of Fame Member:

Robert "Wedgie" Wedgeworth

Class

1959

Induction

1991

Sport(s)

Basketball

Robert "Bob" Wedgeworth has celebrated an outstanding academic career in the arena of Library Science. As a teacher and authority in the field, Wedgeworth's honors seem endless. He's the former President of the National Association of Wabash Men and he currently serves the College on its Board of Trustees. A native of Kansas City, Missouri, Wedgeworth graduated from Wabash in 1959 to an ongoing career in education. He earned his Masters Degree from the University of Illinois and has since earned Honorary Doctorates from Wabash, Park College, Atlanta University, and Western Illinois University. For ten years he served as Executive Director of the American Library Association and was the Dean of Columbia University's School of Library Sciences for six years. As a Little Giant athlete, "Wedgie" was a four-year basketball letterman who started 58 of the 73 games he played at Wabash. He was the cornerstone of two NCAA Regional Playoff seasons. For three seasons he was a big guard for Wabash, dishing out assists for the likes of Ben Fellerhoff, Tom Bennett, and Charlie Bowerman. He got his first taste of varsity action as a rookie against Xavier, scoring two points off the bench. As a sophomore, Coach Bob Brock put Wedgeworth in the starting lineup in every game but two, and though foul trouble hampered his season, he averaged 9.8 points per game. His biggest game came in a 15-point performance in a 70-68 win over Franklin. Wedgeworth gained size and strength in his junior season and his rebounding improved tremendously. He averaged 9.8 points and played an average of 35 minutes per game. He buried 18 points with eight rebounds in a key 88-66 win over Ohio Wesleyan. As a senior, Wedgeworth was moved to the forward position to make room for sharp-shooting guard, Charlie Bowerman. Wedgeworth responded by averaging 13.1 points and 8.0 rebounds in 21 games, leading Wabash to the NCAA playoffs. His big games as a senior included an 18-point, 16-rebound effort in a 78-61 win over Kalamazoo, and a 16-point, 14-rebound game in a 92-71 win over Washington University. He capped his career in the consolation game of the NCAA Playoffs by scoring 24 points with 10 rebounds in a 100-79 win over Loras College. An outstanding athlete and brilliant library mind, Wedgeworth and his wife, Chung Kyun, have one daughter, Cicely.