Dear Colleagues,

The Film Collaborative (TFC) is thrilled to be adding Kirby Dick's latest Sundance entry THE INVISIBLE WAR to our slate for North American Sales. This is an extraordinary story that Americans will want to know and do something about.

Information about THE INVISIBLE WAR and MOSQUITA Y MARI is below.

TFC is attending Sundance, Rotterdam and Berlinale and we look forward to seeing you at the fests!

2011 | USA | 95 min.

Writer & Director Kirby Dick

Executive Producers Regina Kulik Scully, Jennifer Siebel Newsom, Geralyn White Dreyfous, Abigail Disney, Maria Cuomo Cole, Sarah Johnson Redlich, Teddy Leifer, Sally Jo Fifer, Nicole Boxer-Keegan

Producers Amy Ziering, Tanner King Barklow

Co-Producer Kimball Stroud

Editors Doug Blush, Derek Boonstra

Cinematographers Thaddeus Wadleigh, Kirsten Johnson

ABOUT THE FILM:

Casualties of war rage beyond the battlefield. As ranks of women in the American military swell, so do incidents of rape. An estimated 30 percent of servicewomen and at least 1 percent of servicemen are sexually assaulted during their enlistment. And not by the enemy, but at the hands of fellow soldiers. With stark clarity and escalating revelations, The Invisible War exposes a rape epidemic in the armed forces, investigating the institutions that perpetuate it as well as its profound personal and social consequences.

We meet characters who embraced their service with pride and professionalism, only to have their idealism crushed. Their chilling stories of violent sexual assault become even more rattling as they seek justice in a Kafkaesque military legal system. As a courageous few defy victimhood, they face their most challenging fight yet: penetrating a closed circuit where officers collude, cases are routinely swept under the rug, and few perpetrators are tried or convicted.

—Sundance Film Festival

The Invisible War just made The Daily Beast's top 12 festival picks at Sundance 2012.

Click here for more information about this film.

WEBSITE:

invisiblewarmovie.com

For more information on North Americn sales,

please contact

Orly Ravid:

orly@thefilmcollaborative.org

t.323.207.8323

m.323.610.8128

For International sales, please contact

Annie Roney at Roco Films.