Susan Blakely, the Golden Globe award-winning actress, was a member of the ensemble cast of TNT's hit series Southland and recently starred in the sequel to Beverly Hills Chihuahua. She first gained international recognition as an actress for her award-winning role in the mini-series Rich Man, Poor Man for which she was nominated for an Emmy Award and won the Best Actress Golden Globe.

Among Blakely's most memorable roles was her portrayal of the 1930's film star, Frances Farmer in the CBS special film of her autobiography, Will There Really Be a Morning? for which she was also nominated for the Best Actress Golden Globe. She starred opposite Oscar winner Anthony Hopkins in The Bunker for CBS and Walter Matthau in The Incident and the sequel.

Blakely recently starred opposite Pauley Perrette (NCIS) in the Marc Saltarelli short film, To Comfort You, directed by Saltarelli and written by Tom O'Leary. It was a selection by film festivals worldwide. Blakely and Perrette shared the Best Actress Award for the film which won the Jury Prize as Best Picture at the 2010 Beverly Hills Short Film Festival.

This year, Blakely stars opposite Lee Meriwether and Leigh Ann Larkin in director Saltarelli's new short film, Remember to Breathe written by O'Leary with Saltarelli currently in competition at film festivals all over the world.

Blakely co-starred in Lifetime Television's comedy series, Side Order of Life and she recurred as a guest star in Two and a Half Men, CBS' mega-hit comedy by producer Chuck Lorre.

As a celebrated super-model, Blakely has graced the covers of Vogue, Bazaar, and many magazines and before becoming a full-time actress. She was so sought after for TV commercials that she was the subject of the only TV Guide cover story as the top actress in the history of advertising.

Blakely's films include Towering Inferno (starring Paul Newman, Steve McQueen and other greats), three films opposite Sylvester Stallone including the classic Lords of Flatbush with Perry King, Airport '79 with Alain Delon and she had the title role in My Mom's a Werewolf.