Yesterday, I went to see a film in the middle of the working day, something I’ve never done before. (If feature films were an hour, I’d do it more often!) It was another United Way fundraiser at work — this time about as far from a bake sale as one can get. As a bonus, the people who made the film (director/producer, CBC reporter, cameramen) were in attendance to answer questions from the audience afterwards.

To my surprise, I found the entire film on YouTube, which you can view here. The quality is quite low to meet YouTube’s file size limit, but it’s still watchable. I copied and pasted the synopsis from the YouTube page.

UPDATE JULY 2015: The original video is no longer available, but there’s an update video called “Lost In The Struggle The Next Chapter”

[The video was removed, so I had to embed the CBC preview.]

LOST IN THE STRUGGLE

The fifth estate wanted to know why young men in some neighbourhoods of Canadian cities are drawn to a culture of violence. A culture where drug sales are often a source of income, friendships are defended with weapons, and a deadly dispute can start with a disrespectful glance.

Rather than accessing this world through the police or social workers, producers wanted to document the lives of the young men in their own voices. To learn what options are available to a young person who grows up in a culture where loyalty is determined by whom you’re willing to protect. And to understand how they get left behind by the systems of education, social services and justice that are supposed to protect them.

Local filmmakers

To get the access needed to tell this story, producers enlisted two young filmmakers. Paul Nguyen and Mark Simms grew up in Toronto’s Jane and Finch neighbourhood, an area that has waged a decades-long battle against a reputation for violence and hopelessness.

Chuckie and Burnz met through their common love of rap music. Simms and Nguyen introduced producers at the fifth estate to three young men who have all lived with violence, at times as the victim, at times the perpetrator. Phong Nguyen, aka Chuckie, Andrew Burnett, aka Burnz and Albi Aziz, aka Freshy, all grew up in Jane and Finch.

One has lived by the gun from a young age. Another desperately wants to get out of the cycle of violence and retribution but doesn’t know how. The other aspires to a criminal life despite the better options available to him.

The fifth estate, together with Simms and Nguyen as film crew, spent 10 months following Chuckie’s, Burnz’ and Freshy’s lives, from their criminal exploits and encounters with the justice system to their relationships with family, friends, and each other.

The turns their lives took, the dilemmas they faced and the decisions they made formed the narrative of the story. The stories that unfold are of struggle: to succeed when poverty, lack of education and opportunity pull you down; to escape from the only life you’ve known; and to make positive choices in the face of anger and aimlessness.

To most people, this is a world as far from everyday life as a fictional movie, but to people who live in these neighbourhoods, it’s very real.

I’ve moved three times in Toronto, and before this last move I was given, by friends, a laundry list of neighbourhoods to avoid. Jane and Finch was too far to be a consideration, but I was advised to stay away from some of the East End neighbourhoods like Regent Park and Parliament/Church. There are similar neighbourhoods in Vancouver like the Downtown East Side, known for its proliferation of drug addicts and illicit activity — an ugly side of Canadian life that the municipal governments would rather shove in the proverbial broom closet.

Some of the images in the film, if you decide to watch it, are a little disturbing. It’s not particularly shocking in a graphic way, but I don’t believe anyone but the hardest of people enjoy watching others get beaten. I was more disturbed witnessing how easy it is for youth to obtain handguns in this country. It’s one thing to know about it, it’s another to actually see it.

It’s easy to characterise the youth in the film as animals who deserve prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, but I think the filmmakers did an admirable job of exploring the complexity of human lives and trying to offer a balanced picture of the forces that drive some youth to this lifestyle of gangs and guns. Some points made in the film:

law enforcement is far from perfect

once juveniles have broken the law, it is much harder for them to find work and be productive members of society because of social prejudice (eg., no-one wants to hire them)

the code of the street is a far more brutal punishment than incarceration

their parents (of these three youths, anyway) are involved in their lives

it’s not just about the environment (neighbourhood)

some of these youth genuinely want to break free, but have no idea how to go about it

Some points made during the Q & A period after the film:

the social services available to these neighbourhoods are not tailored to the individuals who live there

not everyone in these neighbourhoods live a life of crime (both cameramen live in Jane/Finch)

it is not easy to fully depict this lifestyle on camera, because it would be too incriminating (although I am very surprised at how much footage of criminal activity they did actually capture)

In my opinion, there is such a gulf between those people in power who develop the social programs and those who actually need the aid that it comes as no surprise that the programs don’t seem to work. These people are from such different worlds that it’s a miracle if there is any progress at all. It would be like asking a gang member to provide commentary on the Kentucky Derby.

If you don’t believe there is widespread prejudice against the demographics of the people who live in neighbourhoods like Jane and Finch, just take a look at the YouTube comments. I had to stop reading the latest ones because the slurs make me angry. I have over 80 videos on YouTube and none of them are controversial like “Lost in the Struggle”, but I still end up deleting hateful comments. It’s a side of the internet I don’t like, people hiding behind anonymity and not being held accountable for their words. I can only hope people aren’t that hateful face-to-face, but that would be naive of me to say.