Magazine. Condition: Good. First Edition. Offered is Issue No. 10 (Vol. 2 No. 4, 1976) of "Hot Wacks: Wack 'N' Roll" published by Wackadoo Publications out of Edinburgh, Scotland. This is the Second Anniversary Issue featuring Jackson Browne on the front cover. A left-stapled magazine containing 24 pages including front and rear covers. Contents include: lengthy article on Jackson Browne (with three photos and subtitles Orange County Incident and Jackson Finds Asylum: "Although his first solo album didn't appear until late in 1971, Jackson Browne had been around for a long time before that - mid 1966 as far as this story is concerned. So ten years on, why isn't he as famous as his better known songs? Hopefully the next few pages will help explain the mystery"); lengthy article on John Hammond (with four photos, discography, and subtitles Early Years: Vanguard and Atlantic Sessions); article on, and interview of, Bryn Haworth (with photo); lengthy article on, and interview of, Barry Melton, formerly of Country Joe and the Fish (with three photos, discography, and subtitles A Tale of the Coast; 'The Fish' and 'Ragbaby'; Flying High with Electric Music; Here We Are Together Again; From CJ to Castro; and Various Solo Escapades); article on Emmylou Harris; lengthy discography on Andrew Oldham's Immediate label. Condition: staples rusted (no bleeding); periodic light brown age spots to front cover; small chip to upper right corner of front cover.

Softcover. 8vo. Perfect bound. 168 pp. With cover photos of Betty Davis, Tina Turner and Sonia Kristina of Curved Air. One of a handful of editions of buyers guides to illicit rock, pop, soul, and punk bootleg recordings. Hot Wacks was first issued in 1975. The first edition, which consisted of two volumes, had a run of only 500 copies. Since then the press runs have steadily increased as has the size of the book. These guides were originally mimeographed and stapled, then semi-professionally printed, and sold by bootleggers and collectors, usually advertised in the back pages of rock and underground magazines. They list the titles, tracklists, and sources of the records, some cover illustrations, as well as commentary on the sound quality. These guides, with illustrations of impossible to find albums, are a critical piece of vinyl rock history. Good with offsetting to the covers and tape reinforcing the spine. In beige wraps.