Snoop Dogg is a very mini double doodle, he is just under 9 pounds. He is a Fergie/Jay Z puppy from their final litter May 30, 2019. Both parents are retired. Beyonce is his maternal grandmother, Blue Ivy is his aunt (mom’s side). He has Fergie’s loose coat and is really a small guy, just under 12″ tall. Snoop is “cleared by parentage” for genetic testing by Paw Print Genetics. That means if you go to my breeder profile and look at both Fergie and Jay Z you will see their profiles, both completely clear, not carriers so the “cleared by parentage” title is for the first generation of their offspring. If I hold back a Snoop Dogg puppy they should have their own testing done, meaning the cleared title is only for their children and doesn’t carry down to grandchildren, great grandchildren etc. He also has OFA clearances for eyes, hips and knees but photos can be edited so please head over to the OFA website and do a search there for my dogs. For dogs under 2 years old the results are considered preliminary so they do not report those to their site, sorry for that one you will have to trust my photo but hopefully I’ve earned some trust by now. If you have questions ask anytime. I’m happy to give a humble brag about this!

Prince retired in 2021. He had 4 GORGEOUS litters with Blue Ivy and I kept a girl from each litter to be a future mom. Ciara, Pink, Jewel and Sia are all Blue Ivy/Prince puppies. He spends his retired days with his family in Medina enjoying attention in a very active home with four kiddos.

This little muppet is a mini mulligan goldendoodle born in June 2017. Prince is about 16″ tall from the floor to his shoulder and he weighs about 19 pounds. Like most reds, his color has lightened with time. His Paw Prints health testing can be seen on my breeder profile HERE

This cutie I usually just refer to as “Gambino” but his guardian family calls him Teddy. He is a mini goldendoodle born in December 2016. He was supposed to be our back-up daddy, with Prince being our primary pup but since Prince had a low sperm count until he was almost 3 years old (sorry Prince, I know that is TMI) we ended up using Gambino for multiple litters and we had gorgeous minis with some nice abstract and parti markings. Gambino is about 17-18 pounds and he is lover! He currently lives in a guardian home about 3 miles from our house with 2 little boys. His Paw Prints report can be found on my breeder profile HERE

Retired, final litter was January 2021. She still lives with us and we are so in love with this girl. I was able to keep four girls from Blue Ivy and Prince – future moms Ciara, Pink, Jewel and Sia.

Blue Ivy is a Beyonce puppy. We think she is actually a little Beyonce mini me. She has a super soft coat and the tighter, poodle “wool” curls. She is about 16″ from the floor to her shoulder and she weights about 22 pounds. Her Paw Prints reports can be seen HERE