Springer is one of the world’s largest academic publishers with a vast catalogue of science and history of science publications. One might think that when Springer publishes a history of science book, for which they charge the princely sum of €246.09, that they would at least employ fact checkers before publishing; one would obviously be wrong!

I was searching the Internet for something else when I stumbled across Neil English’s Chronicling the Golden Age of Astronomy: A History of Visual Observing from Harriot to Moore (Historical & Cultural Astronomy), Springer, (2018), which contains a chapter, The Checkered Career of Simon Marius (pp. 29–­33).

Now readers who have followed me long enough will know that I am an active member of a group of historians of astronomy from the area around Nürnberg, who have spent several years rehabilitating the reputation of Simon Marius (1573­–1625), a local astronomer, astrologer, mathematician, who famously discovered the Moons of Jupiter one day later than Galileo, and whom the latter successfully labelled a plagiarist. We have intensively researched the life and work of Marius and made it publicly available in books and through a website, of which I am the English editor.

All of this being the case, I was naturally very interested in a publication about Marius that I hadn’t come across before and eagerly read the abstract. My inner HIST_SCI HULK immediately screamed, WHAT THE FUCK! I managed to acquire a pdf of the offending object and passed it on to my friend and colleague the HIST_SCI HULK to review for your delectation:

We start with that oh so provocative abstract, actually the first paragraph of the essay:

N.E: The phenomenal success of Galileo Galilei with the telescope spread like wildfire across the nation-states of Europe, with the result that nearly every astronomer was keen to get his or her hands on such an instrument to make new discoveries in the starry heavens. One of the earliest “wannabees” was the German astronomer Simon Marius.

Any historian, who had truly researched the history of astronomical telescopic observation would know that Simon Marius was very definitely not one of English’s “wannabees” swimming in the wake of Galileo’s “phenomenal success” but had acquired a telescope and begun astronomical telescopic observation well before Galileo went public with his own observations. There is even the possibility that he, like Thomas Harriot, began observing earlier than Galileo. I don’t really think that English could have made a worse start to his essay, but he continues as he started, badly!

Neil English is obviously only a wannabee historian!

N.E: Born Simon Mayr (later Latinized to Marius) on January 10, 1573, in Gunzenhausen in the region of the Markgrafschaft of Ansbach (Bavaria, south Germany), where his father served as mayor of the city in 1576. From 1586 to 1601, he studied on and off at the Markgrafschaft’s Lutheran academy at Heilsbronn. And it was during his studies here, beginning around 1594, that he became interested in embarking on a career in astronomy and meteorology.

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the Markgrafschaft of Ansbach was in Franconia and not Bavaria. Even today it is still in Franconia, which only became part of Bavaria in 1806! Marius was a pupil of the Fürstenschule (its correct name)* in Heilsbronn continuously, not on and off, from 1586 to 1601. Here with his “on and off,” I think, our wannabee historian is just making shit up because there is nothing in the sources to this effect.

*Lutheran academy would imply that the school was educating young men for the Church, whereas the Fürstenschule was educating young men to work on the margravial court.

N.E: In 1596 Marius wrote a tract on the comet that appeared in the sky that year, and in 1599 he published a set of astronomical tables. The quality of his researches resulted in his appointment as court mathematician of the Markgrafschaft of Ansbach in 1601.

That should, of course, be research and not researches but who am I to copyedit our wannabee historian’s text. Marius was first appointed Court Mathematicus (not mathematician, there’s a difference) in Ansbach in 1606, not in 1601.

N.E: One of his first acts as the Markgrafschaft’s mathematician was to travel to Prague to learn of Tycho Brahe’s observational techniques and to gain familiarity with his instruments. Unfortunately, Brahe died that same year, and Marius’ stay in Prague lasted only 4 months. But he did meet David Fabricius there, who helped consolidate his interest in the science of the heavens.

When Marius travelled to Prague he was not yet margravial mathematicus (see above). Although he didn’t meet him, Tycho was still very much alive during his visit and its length had nothing whatsoever to do with Tycho’s death. His interest in the science of the heavens was already consolidated before he went to Prague, which is exactly why he went there.

Our wannabee historian is making a real mess of this.

N.E: After this, he sojourned to Padua to study at the university there, where he quickly became politically active in the student association calling itself the “German Nation,” acting as its chairman from 1604 to 1605.

Our wannabee historian obviously has no idea what a Natio at a medieval university was and what its function was particularly at the University of Padua. Medieval universities were originally founded as corporations or guilds, Universitas was the medieval Latin for corporation or society derived from whole or entire. These corporations were either of students or of teachers. When it was founded Padua was a universitas of students. All students on matriculation were assigned to a Natio or Nation according to their place of origin or their mother tongue.

Student nations or simply nations (Latin: natio meaning “being born”) are regional corporations of students at a university. Once widespread across Europe in medieval times […] Students in the University of Padua were divided into 22 nations, which referred to the different territories ruled by the Republic of Venice, to the biggest states of Italy, and to the main states of Europe. Nations were: German (also called Alemannian), Bohemian, Hungarian, Provençal, Burgundian, Spanish, Polish, English, Scottish, Venetian, Overseas (Venetian Greek Islands), Lombard (East Lombardy and West Veneto), Trevisan (North and East Veneto), Friulian, Dalmatian, Milanese, Roman, Sicilian, Anconitan, Tuscan, Piedmontese and Genoan. (Wikipedia)

The Natio played an active role in the administration of the university and Marius played an active role in the administration of the German Nation. If English had used the term university politics I probably wouldn’t have commented but “politically active” has too many varying connotations for the context.

The management of the Nations business was carried out by two councillors, who were elected annually like the procurators. They were responsible for the most important university affairs, such as elections of the chancellors or appointments. […] From July 28th 1604, they were replaced by Caspar Hofmann and Simon Marius. Marius stayed in office until his departure in July 1605.[1]

N.E: In 1602 Marius extended his tutelage to Baldessar Capra, a wealthy student from Milan, in mathematics and astronomy, but there is also evidence that he supplemented his income by practicing medicine.

There is no evidence that Marius supplemented his income by practicing medicine, rather he matriculated to study medicine which he did from 1601 to 1605, but which our wannabee historian doesn’t appear to know.

Our wannabee historian hasn’t done his fucking research properly, has he?

N.E: Capra and Marius both observed the nova of 1604 together, and with Marius’s help Capra published a book on the new ‘guest’ star. In 1607 Capra published under his own name Galileo’s instruction manual on the sector, which was circulated in the form of a manuscript, and which led to Capra’s expulsion from the university. It appears that Marius played an important role in this plagiarism, but he had returned to his native land in 1605 and so temporarily escaped vilification. In Italy, however, Marius’s reputation was tarnished by this fraud, and by certain other questionable practices as head of the German Nation.

Galileo supplement his income by manufacturing a brass sector, or military compass. He earned more money by selling an instruction manual for the instrument and giving lessons in its use to the purchasers. The manual was initially in manuscript but in 1607 he had a limited number printed. It was, however, not published but distributed privately. Capra obtained a copy translated it into Latin, the original was in Italian, and published it in his own name. Galileo hauled him before the university authorities, where he was expelled from the university and his book was confiscated.

As noted Marius returned to Franconia in July 1605 and there is absolutely no evidence that he was involved in this plagiarism, although Capra named him in the pamphlet as his maths teacher.

The authorities confiscated his book and threw him out of the university. That did not satisfy Galileo, who published a brief, brutal rebuttal of the goat (la capra) who had got his goat.[2]

No accusation was made against Marius by Galileo in his anti-Capra diatribe in 1607.

In the middle of April 1605, Marius occupied another important position in the Nation. He became librarian. […] When Marius left Padua, Christian Rosian became the librarian. At his farewell the Nation unanimously decided to give Marius a small monetary gift for his loyal service.[3]

Questionable practices? Our wannabee historian is making shit up again!

N.E: Upon his return from Italy, Marius settled in the city of Ansbach and accepted the post of court mathematician, marrying Felicitas Lauer, the daughter of his publisher.

Didn’t our wannabee historian say that Marius was “appointment as court mathematician of the Markgrafschaftof Ansbach in 1601.” Now he’s saying it was when he returned from Padua, was Marius a quantum time traveller?

N.E: In 1609 he published the first German translation (from the original Greek) of the first six books of Euclid’s Elements.

More sloppy research from our wannabee historian. Marius’ translation was published in 1610 not 1609 and it was not the first German translation, that honour goes to Wilhelm Holtzman (Guilielmus Xylander), who published Die Sechs Ersten Bücher Euclidis in Basel in 1562.

N.E: But Marius’ most memorable (and controversial) research involved the telescope. In the fall of 1608, at the Frankfurt Fair, Marius met an artillery officer who tried to sell him a spyglass. Intrigued, the two set about reproducing the device by using spectacle lenses, but it was not until at least a year later that Marius obtained instruments good enough for astronomical observations.

Given how well documented this episode in the history of the telescope is, I find it fascinating how badly our wannabee historian mangles the facts here; it can only be described as a cluster fuck!

Simon Marius was not at the autumn Fair in Frankfurt in 1608. The officer, a general, who was there was the splendidly named Johan Philipp Fuchs von Bimbach, who was not in the artillery, but was at the time Privy Councillor to Joachim Ernst Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, Simon Marius’ employer.

He was in the situation not the seller but the potential purchaser. The potential seller was an otherwise anonymous Belgica (then the Latin for a Netherlander), who claimed to be the inventor. The telescope he was offering to Fuchs von Bimbach had a broken lens and the two couldn’t agree on a price. Returning to Ansbach, Fuchs von Bimbach told Marius what he had seen and the two tried to construct a telescope using spectacle lenses and although, they understood the principle they failed. They tried to get better lenses made in Nürnberg, then a major centre for the manufacture of cheap spectacles but that was also not successful. Eventually Fuchs von Bimbach imported a finished telescope from the Netherlands, and they began observing in summer 1609. Later they bought lenses from Venice and constructed a better telescope.

N.E: In 1614 Marius published the fruits of his research on Jupiter in a book entitled Mundus Iovialis anno M.DC.IX Detectus Ope Perspicilli Belgici (“The Jovian World, discovered in 1609 by means of the Dutch Telescope”), in which he claimed that he had observed Jupiter’s moons beginning as early as the end of November 1609 and furthermore had begun recording his observations on December 29. That said, Marius had adopted the Julian calendar and so the date corresponded to January 8, 1610, on the Gregorian calendar.

Since Marius did not publish any observations, as Galileo had done in his Sidereus Nuncius, it is impossible to verify Marius’s claim. His reputation was, however, not the highest.

Actually, wannabee historian, it’s the other way round:

Unlike Galileo, however, Marius provided detailed tables of his observations, part of what helped clear him to the Dutch panel. And on the cover of the Mundo Iovialis, Marius sketched the objects in orbit, a contrast to Galileo’s sketch using asterisks and the letter O, making what Pasachoff says was “arguably the first image of the orbits.”[4]

There are no observations in the Sidereus Nuncius but there are tables of observation in Mundus Iovialis.

In 1614, Marius had a perfectly good reputation, so why is the wannabee historian claiming that it wasn’t? He’s sort of justifying Galileo’s anti-Marius tirade in The Assayer (Il Saggiatore) from 1623. Before we take at look at this one should note that The Assayer was published nine years after Mundus Iovialis and sixteen years after the Capra plagiarism affair.

Like a lot of others our wannabee historian takes The Assayer seriously, appearing to think that what Galileo spouts in this evil piece of polemic must be true. It’s Galileo, it’s Holy Writ! People gush over what a brilliant a piece of polemic The Assayer is, what they ignore is that it’s in reality a stinking turd of a text. The Assayer was one text in a heated exchange between Galileo and the Jesuit, mathematician, and astronomer Orazio Grassi (1583–1654) on the nature of comets. What most people overlook or simple refuse to acknowledge is that in this dispute Galileo was horribly, utterly, and totally wrong. Grassi argued on the basis of observations and mathematical calculations that the three comets of 1618 were supralunar, Galileo, surprisingly, argued that they were merely sublunar optical effects. Surprisingly, because by 1618 virtually the whole of the astronomical community had long ago accepted that comets were indeed supralunar, and Aristotle was wrong on this. Despite being provably wrong, Galileo maintained his strange position including it in his Dialogo in 1632. Not content with arguing falsely against Grassi’s scientific viewpoint, Galileo poured a ton of vicious abuse on his head. Having built up steam Galileo also launched a vicious attack on the Jesuit astronomer Christoph Scheiner (1573–1650) with whom he had had a dispute over sunspots a decade before. Covering him in a torrent of abuse he also falsely accused Scheiner of having plagiarised his work on sunspots. This turned out to be more than somewhat ironical as Galileo would go on to plagiarise Scheiner on the topic in his Dialogo. This is the context in which one has to view Galileo’s attack on his third victim in The Assayer, Simon Marius:

Of such usurpers I might name not a few, but I shall pass them over now in silence, as it is customary for first offenses to receive less severe punishment than subsequent ones. But I shall not remain silent any longer about a second offender who has tried too audaciously to do me the very same thing which he did many years ago by appropriating the invention of my geometric compass, despite the fact that I had many years previously shown it and dis- cussed it before a large number of gentlemen and had finally made it public in print. May I be pardoned this if, against my nature, my habit, and my present intentions – I show resentment and cry out, perhaps with too much bitterness, about a thing which I have kept to myself these many years. I speak of Simon Marius of Gunzenhausen; he it was in Padua, where I resided at the time, who set forth in Latin the use of the said compass of mine and, appropriating it to himself, had one of his pupils print this under his name. Forthwith, per- haps to escape punishment, he departed immediately for his native land, leaving his pupil in the lurch as the saying goes; and against the latter, in the absence of Simon Marius, I was obliged to proceed in the manner which is set forth in the Defence which I then wrote and published.

This is quite extraordinary, firstly there is absolutely no evidence whatsoever that Marius wrote the said plagiarism published by Capra and Galileo raised no such charge in 1607 when he prosecuted Capra. As noted above Marius left Padua in July 1605 two years before Capra published his stolen text and there is not record of Marius and Capra having any contact whatsoever after his departure. It is patently obvious that Galileo is making shit up! Does our wannabee historian even question Galileo’s unfounded and obviously spurious accusation? Does he hell he simple prints it without comment leading any reader not aware of the true facts in the belief that Galileo’s accusation is true!

Galileo now ramps up his accusations claiming that Marius had plagiarised his Sidereus Nuncius in his Mundus Iovialis, going so far as to claim that Marius had never even observed Jupiter and its moons:.

Four years after the publication of my Sidereal Messenger, this same fellow, desiring as usual to ornament himself with the labours of others) did not blush to make him- self the author of the things I had discovered and printed in that work. Publishing under the title of The Jovian World, he had the temerity to claim that he had observed the Medicean planets which revolve about Jupiter before I had done so. But because it rarely happens that truth allows herself to be suppressed by falsehood, you may see how he himself, through his carelessness and lack of understanding, gives me in that very work of his the means of convicting him by irrefutable testimony and revealing unmistakably his error, showing not only that he did not observe the said stars before me but even that he did not certainly see them until two years afterwards; and I say moreover that it may be affirmed very probably that he never observed them at all.

After making an argument about the inclinations of the orbits of the satellites to the ecliptic, Galileo turned his attention to the date on which Marius claimed to have discovered the satellites:

Next, notice the craft with which he tries to show himself prior to me. I wrote in my Sidereal Messenger of making my first observation on the seventh of January, 1610, continuing then with others on the succeeding nights. Along comes Marius, and, appropriating my very observations, he prints in the title page of his book and again in the opening part of his work that he had already made his observations in the year 1609, trying to give people the idea that he was first. Now the earliest observation that he produces as made by him is the second one made by me; yet he announces it as made in the year 1609. What he neglects to mention to the reader is that since he is outside our church and has not accepted the Gregorian calendar, the seventh day of January of 1610 for us Catholics is the same as the twenty-eighth day of December of 1609 for those heretics. So much for the priority of his pretended observations.

Once again we have a strange timelapse in Galileo’s outraged response to the publication of Mundus Iovialis, this time of nine years. Galileo had been informed of its publication by two separate people already in 1614. He had already discussed it in his correspondence in that year. If he truly believed that Marius had plagiarised him why didn’t he respond, after all following the publication of the Sidereus Nuncius he had become the most famous astronomer in Europe and was also now mathematicus and philosophicus at the Medici Court in Florence. He could have crushed Marius, the insignificant court mathematicus in Ansbach like a flea. Vindictively crushing his perceived opponent was his favourite pastime in those years. It’s even what he was paid to do, as after diner entertainment in Florence as court philosophicus. So, why did he wait nine years?

Galileo’s claim his carelessness and lack of understanding, gives me in that very work of his the means of convicting him by irrefutable testimony and revealing unmistakably his error is, of course, pompous bluster.

As to Galileo’s notice the craft with which he tries to show himself prior to me. In his Mundus Iovialis Marius wrote:

This is the exact truth … In recounting all this, I am not to be understood as wishing to lessen Galileo’s reputation, or to snatch from him the discovery of these Jovian stars among his countrymen in Italy – far from it. My object rather is, that it may be understood that these stars were not shown to me by any mortal in any way, but were discovered and observed by me, by my own investigation, in Germany, almost at the very time, or slightly before it, at which Galileo first saw them in Italy. The credit, therefore, of the first discovery of these stars in Italy is deservedly assigned to Galileo and remains his.

Mundus Ioviales Prickard/Van Helden p. 6

Marius states that his first observation of the moons as moons was on 29 December by the Julian calenda, that’s 8 January by the Gregorian calendar, whereas Galileo’s was on the 7 January, so just one day later, more than justifying his almost at the same time. He also states that he had already been observing them for some days previously, assuming that they were stars, so his earlier is perhaps also valid. What is certain is that he is not trying to claim priority over Galileo by using the Julian calendar to date his observations. Anybody interested in astronomy at the time, who might have read both the Sidereus Nuncius and the Mundus Iovialis would have been well aware that the two astronomers, given their locations and religious affiliations, would be using two different calendars. In fact, many astrologers at the time, and Galileo and Marius were both astrologers, issued their writing calendars and prognostica with two parallel date columns one for Gregorian, new style, dates and one for Julian, old style, dates. Marius didn’t need to tell his readers, they already knew.

N.E: Nevertheless, at the behest of Johannes Kepler, Marius named the moons after the lovers of Zeus (the Greek equivalent of Jupiter): Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. Galileo, predictably enough, steadfastly refused to accept Marius’ names and instead invented the numbering scheme that is still used today, alongside proper moon names. In accordance with this scheme, the Galilean satellites were assigned numbers based on their proximity to their parent planet and increase with distance. Hence, the moons of Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto were designated as Jupiter I, II, III and IV, respectively.

If our wannabee historian had bothered to read Mundus Iovialis he would know that it was a suggestion of Kepler’s not a behest and was only one of four suggestions made by Marius in his Mundus Iovialis. I’ve written about this before, so quoting myself:

In the Mundus Iovialis Marius makes several naming suggestions. His first suggestion was, like Galileo, to just number the moons I to IV, a system that was actually used by astronomers. His second suggestion follows Galileo in that he wishes to name them after his employer/patron the Margrave of Ansbach’s family and call them the Brandenberger Stars. Marius’ third suggestion is more than somewhat bizarre as he suggests naming them in analogy to the solar system planets, so the moon with the smallest orbit would be the Jupiter Mercury, the next the Jupiter Venus, the third the Jupiter Jupiter and the fourth the Jupiter Saturn. His argument for leaving out Jupiter Mars is too long to include here. As I said bizarre. It is with Marius’ fourth suggestion that we finally arrive at Zeus’ lovers. After talking about Jupiter’s reputation for a bit on the side and describing his most notorious affairs Marius wrote the following:

In Europa, Ganimedes puer, atque Calisto,

Lascivo nimium perplacuere Jovi.

Io, Europa, the young Ganymede and Calisto

appealed all too much to the lascivious Jove

In the next paragraph Marius goes on to explain that the idea for using these names for the moons was suggested to him by Johannes Kepler when the two of them met at the Imperial Parliament in Regensburg in October 1613. He then names Kepler as co-godfather of these four stars. Marius closes his list of suggestions by saying that the whole thing should not be taken too seriously, and everybody is free to adopt or reject his suggestions as they see fit.

Please note the final sentence.

Nobody really used the names Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto before the twentieth century, so claiming that Galileo, predictably enough, steadfastly refused to accept Marius’ names is really a piece of bullshit from our wannabee historian.

N.E: In retrospect, Galileo probably went a bit overboard in these accusations, in much the same way as he had countered his critics within the Catholic Church, for it appears certain that Marius was independently observing Jupiter’s moons by December 1610.

A bit overboard? It’s like describing a drugged-up berserker in full battle rage as a bit over excited.

N.E: Mundus Lovialis (sic) does, however, contain a telescopic discovery the priority of which has never been disputed: On December 15, 1612, Marius was the first to observe the Andromeda Nebula, which could not be resolved into stars, describing it as a “flame seen through horn.” Apparently, Marius was not aware that this object had been seen previously by medieval Persian astronomers and described by Al Sufi as early as 964 a. d.

The comment about al-Sufi is quite frankly bizarre, to quote Wikipedia:

The Andromeda Galaxy has been visible to the naked eye, given dark skies, throughout history; as such, it cannot be said to have been “discovered” by any one individual [my emphasis]. Around the year 964 CE,the Persian astronomer Abd al-Rahmen al-Sufi was the first to formally describe the Andromeda Galaxy. He referred to it in his Book of Fixed Stars as a “nebulous smear” or “small cloud”.

Star charts of that period labelled it as the Little Cloud. In 1612, the German astronomer Simon Marius gave an early description of the Andromeda Galaxy based on telescopic observations.

I have a post on the history of the Andromeda nebula/galaxy here

N.E: Marius’ telescope showed that even the distant stars appeared as disks, and he interpreted them as such; a notion that persisted for much of the 17th century. Indeed, it was only after a proper theory of diffraction was formulated that these ideas were firmly put to rest. Nonetheless, Marius used this as evidence that the stars were not as far away as would have been required to bolster the Copernican worldview.

Our wannabee historian should read more Chris Graney.[5] The “big star” argument, as it is known originates with Tycho Brahe, who estimated the diameter of stars based on his naked-eye observations. He argued that if the stars were so far away that they displayed no stellar parallax, as required by the Copernican world system, then they must literally unbelievably immense. Marius’ correct observation of the solid star discs in his telescope supported Tycho’s big star argument and was accepted throughout the seventeenth century.

This argument based on star sizes was what Christiaan Huygens called Brahe’s “principal argument” against the heliocentric system.[6]

That the solid disc that Marius saw was an artefact produced by the optics of the telescope, now known as an Airy Disc, was unknown not only to Marius but to all other users of the telescope at the time. It was first dismissed as an illusion by Edmond Halley at the end of the century. Interestingly, Galileo also observed the Airy discs with his telescopes but, knowing that they lent support to the Tychonic system, deliberately didn’t publish the information.

I think the best way to describe what follow as “our wannabee historian has jumped the shark!”

N.E: From several remarks in his works, it appears that Marius was a militant Lutheran. He kept up his correspondence with David Fabricius and Kepler’s former teacher, Michael Maestlin, both of whom were self-proclaimed Lutherans. Furthermore, Marius even defended Tycho Brahe’s Lutheran world system on scriptural as well as astronomical and physical grounds.

By the time Marius was born, Lutheran Protestantism was an established religion, and he was born and brought up in a Lutheran area; Nürnberg, just down the road from Gunzenhausen, was the very first Lutheran city state. Unlike Kepler or Newton there is nothing in his work to suggest that he was particularly religious let alone militant. I hope David Fabricius and Michael Mästlin were Lutherans, although I don’t know what self-proclaimed is supposed to mean, as the former was a village pastor and the latter professor in Tübingen, a Lutheran university.

To described Tycho’s world system as Lutheran is a joke. Yes, Tycho was Lutheran, as was the whole of Denmark at that time, but his world system is in no way denominational. Would our wannabee historian call the Copernican system Catholic, just because Copernicus was a Catholic cathedral canon? What about Kepler? He was also a Lutheran, who had even worked with Tycho, but he propagated a heliocentric system! Maybe our wannabee historian is not aware that the Catholic Church in the early seventeenth century condemned Copernicus’ heliocentric system and the Jesuits adopted Tycho’s geo-heliocentric system as their official view of the cosmos around 1620, making it de facto the official position of the Catholic Church on cosmology. After all it’s a little-known episode in the history of astronomy!

N.E: It is interesting to note that while Marius was undoubtedly an observer of the most important astronomical discoveries of the early 17th century, he opposed the heliocentric view of the cosmos and favoured the Tychonic system.

There is a light disparaging undertone to all of our wannabee historian’s comments about Marius supporting the Tychonic system. He appears either not to know, or perhaps even worse refuses to accept, that in the early seventeenth century the available empirical evidence was clearly in favour of a Tychonic or semi-Tychonic system over a heliocentric one, and that is why the majority of astronomer, and not just Marius, supported one. Support of a heliocentric system, at that time, was an act of faith.

N.E: Perhaps it was Marius’ staunch belief in this system over that of the Copernican counterpoint that gave him pause to accept the reality of the eclipsing satellite phenomenon with Jupiter.

On the subject of Jupiter eclipsing its moons, what Marius actually writes is:

That when near Jupiter something similar happens to them, so that they not only appear smaller, but as seems probable are actually obscured or eclipsed, is clear from the following consideration. Jupiter is not a transparent body, any more than Venus or Mercury; therefore throws a shadow on the side turned away from the Sun. How far such a shadow extends, and whether all four pass into it and are eclipsed once in each revolution, I will now show in as few words as may be.

[There now follow extensive careful considerations and calculations, which I will spare my readers]

Therefore all four Jovian bodies are within the shadow of Jupiter at the beginning of their movement, and are eclipsed.[7]

None of his consideration or calculation have anything whatsoever to do with his acceptance of a Tychonic system or his rejection of the Copernican one.

Neil English does get some of Marius’s life and work right, which I haven’t included in this overlong review of his highly dubious essay. He does, however, end on a positive note, emphasising that Martius was not the villain that Galileo presented him as in The Assayer.

N.E: To this day, Marius’ work is overshadowed by the accusation of plagiarism, even though it was demonstrated by a jury convened in the Netherlands in the early 1900s that he had, in fact, conducted much of his research entirely independently of others. In more recent times, Simon Marius was honoured by the astronomical community by the naming of a lunar crater after him in 1935, the 41-km-diameter Marius Crater. And in 1979 a region on Jupiter’s moon, Ganymede, was named Marius Regio. In 2014, asteroid (7984) Marius was named in his honour, discovered on September 29, 1980, by Czech astronomer Zdenka Vavrova at the Kiel Observatory, and provisionally designated 1980 SM.

This doesn’t, however, excuse the badly researched garbage that precedes it.

Neil English’s article is four and a quarter-pages long and the quarter would fit easily into the large gap on the title page between title and text, so actually only four pages long has a grand total of 2071 words [this blog post has 5500 words!] For this extremely short collection of errors, false statements, and at times total hogwash Springer in their wisdom demand, for a pdf, the princely sum of €29,95. The abysmal quality of English’s Marius essay raises, for me, the question as to whether the other essays in his book are also as badly researched? If they are then the €249.09 for the entire book can only be described as a brazen rip off!

[1] Hans Gaab, Concerning the Biography of Simon Marius (1573–1626) in Hans Gaab & Pierre Leich eds., Simon Marius and His Research, Springer, 2018 pp. 91–92.

[2] J. L. Heilbron, Galileo, OUP, 2010 p. 103

[3] Gaab, Concerning the Biography…, p. 93

[4] Nola Taylor Redd, Who really discovered Jupiter’s four large moons?, Astronomy Magazine, December 15, 2016, quoting Jay Pasachoff.

[5] Christopher M. Graney, An Astronomer Too Excellent: Simon Marius, the Telescope, and the Problem of the Stars During the Copernican Revolution, in Hans Gaab & Pierre Leich eds., Simon Marius and His Research, Springer, 2018 pp. 239–247

[6] Graney p. 242