Title: Danish fungi as represented in the herbarium of E. Rostrup;

Identifier: cu31924000479281

Year: 1913 (1910s)

Authors: Lind, Jens Vilhelm August, 1874-; Rostrup, E. (Emil), 1831-1907

Subjects: Fungi

Publisher: Copenhagen, Gyldendalske Boghandel-Nordisk Forlag

Contributing Library: Cornell University Library

Digitizing Sponsor: MSN

View Book Page: Book Viewer

About This Book: Catalog Entry

View All Images: All Images From Book

Click here to view book online to see this illustration in context in a browseable online version of this book.

Text Appearing Before Image:

19

Text Appearing After Image:

PHYTOPATHOLOGY IN DENMARK BEFORE ROSTRUP. It is necessary to premise that by phytopathology in this connect tion I shall restrict this word to comprise the attack of the fungi on plants, this being the part of phytopathology with which Rostrup chiefly dealt; on account of circumstances he had not the opportunity of dealing so much with the noxious animals etc. From the very outset phytopathology — as is still the case — was, to a much greater extent than mycology connected with the interest of practical life, though each has several common relations with the other; at first phytopathology rela= ted to agriculture, and the first Danish book on phytopathology was written by Fabricius who, from 1770 to 1775, was Professor oecos nomiae of the University of Copenhagen i. e. he had to lecture on political and agris cultural economy etc. JoHAN Christian Fabricius was born at Tender in 1745 and died in Kiel on March 3. 1808. In fact he was neither an economist nor a pathologist but chiefly an entomologist. His works to this effect were fundamental to that science ("Systema entomologiae" Kbh. 1775 and several others) but in spite of this we cannot but admire his "Forsog til en Plantepatologi" (Essay of a Phytopathology) as a work marvellous in that age; from its whole scheme and all its details it is to be seen that Fabricius was an ingenious observer of nature, in possession of great observing power and correct understanding of his observations. He had studied with Linne at Upsala from 1762 to 1764 at the same time as his friend Johan Zoega; afterwards he had tra= veiled for five years almost all over Europe, visiting London, Paris etc. and in this manner acquiring all the knowledge of his age on the subjects in which he was chiefly interested. Although a pupil of Linne he protests against the thesis set forth by his master (in Mundus invisibilis) that smutted corn when mace? rated in water was transformed into small worms. He has the right understanding of the parasitic fungi being independent plants, and he will not assent to the opinion of Gleditsch, that the disease of the crop in the fields should be due to unripe grains and the like; he sets forth such sensible objections as that it is his experience that grains from a clean field will give a clean crop even if there be unripe grains among them and that Secale will never be smutted. Nor will 2* J. C. Fabriciu-s. From sn engraving.

Note About Images

Please note that these images are extracted from scanned page images that may have been digitally enhanced for readability - coloration and appearance of these illustrations may not perfectly resemble the original work.