Written by Michael Larabel in Free Software on 21 October 2011 at 08:45 AM EDT. 19 Comments

Nokia has announced this morning that the Qt Project is now live, which means as of today Qt will be governed as a "true open-source project."

The Qt Project is being hosted at Qt-Project.org. They have setup a Gerrit server on their new project infrastructure to handle code review, patches can be reviewed by anyone and "Approvers/Maintainers" carry the authority to accept or reject the patches. The approvers/maintainers aren't limited to Nokia personnel and more "non-Nokians" are expected to reach this status going forward. Some of the mailing lists are also migrating over to the Qt Project infrastructure. The bug reporting system for this tool-kit will also be migrating from Nokia to the Qt Project.

In terms of the true openness now of Qt, "The Qt project is a true open source project. We are inviting everybody to participate and help making Qt a better product. All development will happen in one central location, with access for everyone at the same time. No more separate code flow for 'Nokians vs others', and no more time delays! What you see is what we see. Discussions, decisions and roadmapping will all happen in the community, by the community, for the community. Anyone can be a Contributor, and even an Approver or Maintainer if they show enough merit."

The announcement of the Qt Project now being live was made by Lars Knoll in this Nokia blog post.

Qt Developer Days is next week in Munich, Bavaria where new Qt Project details should come to light.

Besides commit access being more open, the Qt Project will be under a full open governance model. These changes will be talked about coming up at Qt Developer Days, which is happening next week in Munich / Unterschleißheim. (Nokia's lover, Microsoft, also has offices in Unterschleißheim.) Sadly I did not realize until now that Qt Developer Days is taking place in the best city in the world, otherwise I would have happily been there... The travels for the Ubuntu 12.04 Developer Summit later in the week will also unfortunately interfere for attending this year.

Information on Qt Developer Days 2011 in Bavaria can be found on this Nokia site. Lined up for the event are various training sessions, keynotes by Nokia, Canonical/Ubuntu, and CNN's vice president for mobile. Also scheduled are sessions on Qt Quick, graphics performance, Qt WebKit, and other interesting topics. New details on Qt 5 are also likely to come out, which is slated for release in 2012.

About The Author

Michael Larabel is the principal author of Phoronix.com and founded the site in 2004 with a focus on enriching the Linux hardware experience. Michael has written more than 20,000 articles covering the state of Linux hardware support, Linux performance, graphics drivers, and other topics. Michael is also the lead developer of the Phoronix Test Suite, Phoromatic, and OpenBenchmarking.org automated benchmarking software. He can be followed via Twitter, LinkedIn, or contacted via MichaelLarabel.com.