The present study aims at tracing the historical evolution of the image of Longobardia and of the Longobards (as well as Lombardy and the Lombards) in the works of mediaeval Arab-Islamic geographers (9th-15th c.). Longobardia is... more

The present study aims at tracing the historical evolution of the image of Longobardia and of the Longobards (as well as Lombardy and the Lombards) in the works of mediaeval Arab-Islamic geographers (9th-15th c.). Longobardia is represented in different ways, depending on periods, contexts and perspectives; sometimes it is identified with the Italian Peninsula of the Longobards, and sometimes with the Longibardia or Lagobardia of the Byzantines. It was not until the 12th century that a clear distinction was made, from an onomastic point of view also, between Lombardy (Anbardiyah) and Longobardia (Ankubardah), with the latter under- stood exclusively in reference to the south, which derives from the geographical idea of the Byzantine thema of the same name. The Longobards, as a people, appear both in Langobardia Minor and in Langobardia Maior; the capital of the latter was Pavia, a city defined by its palace and a renowned equestrian statue: the Regisole. The Lombards too were undoubtedly pre- sent in the territory that extends from the Alps to the Po, well established in their main towns, in Pavia and Milan, but also in Monferrato and Ferrara.

Abstract: This very short essay introduces into the Langobard funerary Perticae (poles) debate a source previously overlooked by historians, at least in the author’s knowledge: a chapter of Charlesmagne Duplex Legationis Edictum (in the... more

Abstract: This very short essay introduces into the Langobard funerary Perticae (poles) debate a source previously overlooked by historians, at least in the author’s knowledge: a chapter of Charlesmagne Duplex Legationis Edictum (in the following: Duplex), dated 789. This chapter, while definitely referring to perticae and magical pagan practices, is not apparently relevant in itself, but becomes strikingly meaningful when confronted with the Vita Barbati relation of another Langobard pagan practice previously not believed to be connected with the perticae. Triangulation of these two sources with Paul the Deacon’s description of the funerary ritual of the poles provides a solution to the problem that seems more satisfactory than – while not in contrast with – traditional ones.