An unassuming single-story brick building on the campus of University of Maryland Eastern Shore in Princess Anne is the source of the Delmarva Peninsula's only traditional jazz radio station — WESM 91.3, an NPR affiliate and listener-supported public radio.

The music — punctuated by NPR news reports — is aired 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This is the 30th year WESM has been on the air, and it's seen quite a few changes in those decades.

For example, thanks to automation technology, radio staff members no longer need to argue about who will come in and work weekends or holiday shifts. It's all pre-recorded, and a generator makes sure the station is on-air even when the power goes out.

Gerry Weston recently came on-board as general manager, after Stephen A. Williams relocated in 2016 to a station at Western Michigan University.

Weston is no stranger to Delmarva, having served as general manager at WSCL from 2007-2011 before returning to his native Massachussetts for a few years.

"I've been here about six weeks now," Weston said. "Other stations play NPR programming, including WSCL and WAMU, but what separates us is the music. Jazz is what will propel us to greater success, as an alternative to everything else that's out there.

"Jazz is one of America's art forms," he said. "Not the only one, but perhaps the most popular. Somewhere on the dial, jazz should have a home. That's the reason I took this job, and I'm excited to be here."

Weston said he is planning to get out of the office and visit beach areas, Salisbury, Easton and coastal Delaware businesses, to establish personal relationships.

Background: UMES named a Top 20 HBCU by US News & World Report, its highest ever ranking

"Local advertising agencies should also take a look at us," he said. "Many businesses in the area would really benefit from underwriting WESM."

The station has a strong signal, he said, covering Easton and St. Michael's, through the Lower Shore and into Southern Delaware.

"Jazz is great for people who want to get away for a while from what's happening in the world, that's what I love about it," he said. In addition to its broadcast area, WESM is streamed from its website, www.wesm913.org.

That ability to stream anywhere in the world is the reason WESM is able to say it is heard around the world — in California, Chicago, New York City, and also in Japan, Canada, Germany, Spain and South America.

Yancy Carrigan, Brian Daniels and Angel Resto share on-air personality status with other key duties at the station.

Angel Resto, 61, is operations manager and has been with the station 17 years.

In addition to jazz programs, he hosts Radio Mundo, a world music show, on Sunday evenings. One of his shows features Latin jazz.

"I use the name Luisito Ortez for the Latin show," said Resto, "and people don't seem to realize it's me because I use a different name, even though the voice is the same."

Resto said he loves both aspects of his job — troubleshooting and hosting on-air music programming.

"I coordinate all the programming and station promos. And because I'm in charge of automation, I have to come in if it goes down and fix it," he explained.

"I love working here," he said, sitting in his small office in well-worn jeans and Converse sneakers.

READ MORE: Casting Crowns bringing 'church service with noise' to Salisbury

"I hope people here realize what a gem this is," he said. "I've had people visit from New York state who tell me they wish they had a station like this where they live. They do have a station, but it transmits out of Newark, New Jersey."

Resto's life has revolved around music and radio.

"I did radio in college, but when I was in high school in Pemberton, New Jersey, I would skip high school and go to the community college, where I hosted a radio show," he said. "I pretended to be a student at the community college and they gave me that show."

Carrigan, 72, has been with WESM full-time since June 1998; before that, he volunteered with the station for seven-and-a-half years before accepting a part-time position that led after a year or so to his full-time position as music director.

"We report our playlists to Jazz Week magazine, where we also follow what current jazz is being played and also talk with radio promoters who try to persuade us to play their CDs," said Carrigan, alternating between picking out the next CD to play, sporadically interjecting on-air messages about the album that just ended, and reporting the date, time and temperature along with a short station promo.

Carrigan doesn't work from a preplanned playlist when he's on air.

"I work off spontaneity," he explained. "When you make plans, things go awry. That's the way it works out a lot, so rather than spend time planning, I just go with it."

Once he's switched out a CD, he enters the previous CD in a playlist that appears online, enabling listeners to look up a number they may be curious about rather than call the station to find out.

"I know what kind of music we air here," Carrigan continued. "So far this year we've been given 470 jazz CDs. I go through and try to pick out the ones that are airable for us."

Carrigan is on the air five days a week.

On Saturday afternoons from noon to 5 p.m., he hosts the R&B show Music from the Wax Museum, followed by the Blues Train

Brian Daniels, 47, has been with the station 17 years. He started listening to WESM when he was in high school, back in 1987 when the station opened.

"One thing I remember is how different this station was compared to other stations I had heard on the radio," Daniels said. "The music I heard and the information it broadcast had a different feel to it compared to other stations I listened to."

Back then, the station would sign off at midnight and return to the air at 6 a.m., gradually transitioning to the 24-hour broadcast format it uses today.

He started as on-air host for several programs after a stint as a volunteer. His job title now is program specialist. He served as interim general manager for a little more than a year, until Weston was hired.

READ MORE: Embattled Md. oyster restoration program considered for Manokin, Nanticoke rivers

He hosted Music from the Wax Museum, Evening Jazz and is currently doing Afternoon Jazz Tuesdays through Thursdays.

"I was hired as local host for Morning Edition for NPR News," he said, adding that for him, just being on-air is the best job at the station.

"Several years ago," he said, "I ended up inheriting the job of curating our website and social media. I created a Facebook page for WESM probably about six or seven years ago. Currently we are up to 583 'likes' and about 548 followers."

He posts to social media, and also engages visitors to the page fairly regularly. Some of the followers are jazz artists, some nationally known, and he's struck up friendships as a result.

Daniels, like Carrigan, said the one thing that hasn't changed in three decades is the jazz, explaining the focus is on traditional (as opposed to urban or smooth) jazz, blues and a recent return to gospel music after a short hiatus.

"Those are the three things our listeners gravitate toward," he said.

The station also seeks out community partnerships, like one with a Rehoboth Beach organization known as True Blue Jazz that promotes mainstream jazz performances on Delmarva.

"Unfortunately, many people who live here still don't know we exist," said Weston. "We need to do a better job of marketing ourselves. That's one of the reasons I was hired, to get the word out."

Weston regrets the lack of development positions at the station.

"This is a challenge, having no membership or development staff at all," he said, "I would love to have a membership director."

Maybe someday.