Content CINEMA BULIMIA:

PETER GREENAWAY'S CORPUS OF EXCESS

by

Tracy Ellen Biga

A Dissertation Presented to the

FACULTY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOOL

UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA

In Partial Fulfillment of the

Requirements for the Degree

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

(Cinema-Television/Critical Studies)

May 1994

Copyright 1994 Tracy Ellen Biga

UMI Number: DP22280

All rights reserved

INFORMATION TO ALL USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.

In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript

and there are missing pages, th ese will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,

a note will indicate the deletion.

Dissertation Publishing

UMI DP22280

Published by ProQ uest LLC (2014). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.

Microform Edition © ProQ uest LLC.

All rights reserved. This work is protected against

unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQ uest LLC.

789 E ast Eisenhower Parkway

P.O. Box 1346

Ann Arbor, Ml 4 8 1 0 6 -1 3 4 6

UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA

THE GRADUATE SCHOOL

UNIVERSITY PARK

LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA 90007

This dissertation, w ritten by

Tfac^ E I ^

under the direction of h.*~S. Dissertation

Committee, and approved by all its members,

has been presented to and accepted by The

Graduate School, in partial fulfillm ent of re­

quirem ents for the degree of

p h . P ,

Civa

3222CJ.07

D O C TO R OF PH ILO SOPH Y

Dean of Graduate Studies

Date FEBRUARY 28th, 1994

DISSERTATION COMMITTEE

Chairperson

i i

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks to Marsha Kinder, David James, Leo Braudy, Jon

Wagner, Chris Lippard, Jan Biga, Kay Biga and Ricardo

Echevarria for all their assistance and encouragement.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i i i

CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION...............................1

CHAPTER TWO: HOW DO YOU FORGE A FILM?: CRIMINAL

CONSPIRACY IN A ZED AND TWO NOUGHTS.....24

CHAPTER THREE: EXCESS.................................... 46

CHAPTER FOUR: FILM AS BODY..............................61

CHAPTER FIVE: CONSUMING SUBJECTS AND CONSUMABLE

OBJECTS..................................102

CHAPTER SIX: THE LOST CHILD OF THE DRAUGHTSMAN'S

CONTRACT................................ 126

CHAPTER SEVEN: A MAP, A BOOK, A CEMETERY

CHAPTER EIGHT: RESURRECTION TELEVISION..

CHAPTER NINE: CONCLUSION................

147

170

186;

1

CHAPTER ONE

Introduction

During the final scene of Peter Greenaway's The Cook,

the Thief. His Wife and Her Lover, the wife, Georgina,

urges her husband, the thief Spica, to eat her lover,

grandiosely roasted at her direction by the cook. The

patrons and employees of Le Hollandais restaurant, where

the film is set, led by those characters most abused by the

boorish and cruel Spica, watch in fascination as a fork

moves hesitantly toward the lover's baked penis. Georgina,

the most tormented character, revenges herself by

threatening to gun Spica down if he refuses to eat. When

he succumbs and consumes, she calls him a cannibal and

shoots him dead.

The scene is remarkable in several respects.

Visually, its elements are stunning and excessive.

Georgina's cage-like black gown with its long train—

designed, like all the costumes, by Jean-Paul Gaultier—

parodies a wedding dress; she stalks the dining room like a

haute couture Miss Havisham, her bereavement inspiring

unusual behavior. The other characters sport less

elaborate, but no less peculiar, color-coded fashions and

are arranged to invoke the compositions of Dutch paintings.

Their elegant clothes and coiffures contrast with the

medical equipment— bandages, crutches, a wheelchair— which

2

are the marks of Spica's physical abuse. Astonishing, in a

mainstream film, is the extended male frontal nudity of the

lover. The fact that this character is dead and baked may

or may not make this nudity more surprising.

The true disruption of the scene resides not in the

exposure of the actor, but in the transgressive moment of

cannibalism— perhaps the ultimate crisis of consumption.

This scene is the paradigmatic moment in a film obsessed

with appropriate and inappropriate consumption. What

should be put into the body, the film asks, and what should

not? Punishment takes the form of forced consumption— of

dog shit, buttons, books, kitchen utensils, and human

flesh. Pleasure, on the other hand, does not necessarily

correlate with appropriate consumption. Despite the fact

that the film is set in a fancy restaurant, no one has a

satisfying meal; characters sneak off to the kitchen and

the bathroom to enjoy themselves. Only the production of a

meal or its expulsion can satisfy.

While these concerns with production and expulsion—

with a corollary anxiety about the act of consumption

itself— are features of what has come to be called

postmodernism, they suggest another contemporary crisis of

consumption: the eating disorders anorexia nervosa (self-

starvation) and bulimia (bingeing and purging). The

victims of these disorders ask the same questions: what

should be put into the body and what should not? Like the

characters in The Cook, the Thief, anorectics and bulimics

are described as having "an intense preoccupation with

food, which may result in bizarre patterns of behavior

related to food preparation and consumption" (Kennedy,

Garfinkel 76). Although anorexia nervosa was first named

by Sir William Gull in 1874, and has been retrospectively

deduced back to the Middle Ages, its incidence, or its

recognition, has more than doubled in the past 2 0 years

(Kennedy, Garfinkel 75). The contemporary prevalence of

this psychiatric illness along with the specific female

gendering of its victims— approximately 95 percent (Walker,

Brown 17)— make it a frustrating and provocative object of

study. These factors invite an analysis which would place

the syndrome in an historical, cultural perspective.

Aside from its actual clinical picture, anorexia

nervosa and bulimia provide a metaphor for a society

obsessed with consumption. Hilde Bruch begins Eating

Disorders: Obesity. Anorexia Nervosa and the Person Within

by noting: "There is no human society that deals

rationally with food in its environment, that eats

according to the availability, edibility, and nutritional

value alone" (3). The word hunger is used "as a symbolic

expression of a state of need in general, or a simile for

want in other areas" (47). One of those areas, the one

4

with which this study will deal, is the cultural. We can

speak of the production, consumption and even expulsion of

art. This analysis argues that the metaphors arising out

of the central fact of eating can be extended; the function

of eating disorders and distortions can usefully discuss a

crisis of artistic production.

With the term bulimic cinema, I refer not to the very

real afflictions of anorexia and bulimia, but to a set of

interrelated factors associated with the characteristics of

eating disorders. The bulimic text is: taxonomic rather

than unified; without borders or limits rather than

discrete; created by conspiracy rather than the Author/God;

resistant to judgment rather than interpretable; excessive

rather than moderate; a destruction rather than an

immortalization; a murder without a solution. These

qualities can be used as a framework to discuss a wide

range of cultural production: avant-garde, experimental or

alternative texts; more conventional, widely distributed

art cinema; texts which don't address issues of consumption

explicitly, but which use consumption metaphorically; and

texts which directly consider eating, food or digestion.

To varying degrees, Greenaway's work has operated in

each of these categories. Cinema and video, in which

Greenaway has produced his most compelling work, are the

sites of the bulimic text. His work reiterates a familiar

5

observation: that cinema is capable of consuming the other

arts. Other media— such as painting, the medium in which

Greenaway first worked— are vulnerable to cinema's

incorporation. Because of its history of production and

distribution, cinema, whatever its current manifestations,

is associated with mass consumption by a mass audience.

Cinema and video, in their reliance on the image (above the

word, logos), foreground the material nature of the

artwork.

Greenaway's films are also an apt field for an

analysis based on eating disorders because of his thematic

and formal concerns. His films frequently raise questions

associated with the consumable nature of the medium: What

happens to the artist when the art work becomes a

consumable object? What should go in the film and what

should be rejected? Who controls the work of art? What is

the significance of the filmic organization? What is the

nature of the filmic body?

Greenaway's concern with consumption is frequently

implicit, but just as frequently right on the surface. The

Cook. the Thief takes place almost solely in a restaurant;

the only detour takes the viewer to a biblioteque— a

location presented as superior to the restaurant, a place

where the mind can feed. These settings announce a concern

with consumption on the part of the film's characters which

6

can be seen in many Greenaway films: The Draughtsman's

Contract begins at a meal and ends when a character bites

into a pineapple; in A Zed and Two Noughts a character is

forced to eat a rotted prawn and ultimately the two main

characters will be left dead in a field experiment to be

eaten by maggots, worms and snails; Bellv of an Architect

has a long scene of restaurant feasting at the beginning

and a long scene of the same restaurant's destruction at

the end; Drowning by Numbers shows a woman being sexually

aroused by a popsicle. While this thematic concern with

consumption exists on a character and plot level, it is not

the characters who are anorectic or bulimic. Rather I

would argue that the features of anorexia nervosa and

bulimia help us to understand how Greenaway's texts

themselves— which fluctuate between starvation (minimalism,

structuralism) and gluttony (excess plot, visuals)—

operate. These films, like so many postmodern art objects,

are stuffed with references and allusions which they cannot

digest. In Greenaway's work, the female body, the most

common site of anorexia nervosa and bulimia, is replaced by

the body of an artist's work.

In Illness As Metaphor Susan Sontag analyzes the

metaphoric employment of tuberculosis and cancer and

suggests that it may not be "morally permissible" to use a

fatal illness in a metaphoric sense.

Since the interest of the metaphor is

precisely that it refers to a disease

[cancer] so overlaid with mystification, so

charged with the fantasy of inescapable

fatality. Since our views about cancer,

and the metaphors we have imposed on it,

are so much a vehicle for the large

insufficiencies of this culture, for our

shallow attitude toward death, for our

anxieties about feeling, for our reckless

improvident responses to our real "problems

of growth," for our inability to construct

an advanced industrial society which

properly regulates consumption, and for our

justified fears of the increasingly violent

course of history. (84)

Sontag implies that metaphor is connected to fantasy

or frivolity and somehow removed from everyday life, that

metaphoric intervention fosters "a shallow attitude" which

keeps us from knowing things as they are. For Sontag,

metaphor may lead to anxiety, recklessness and the

inability to think clearly. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson

challenge this view of metaphoric thought by arguing that

"metaphor is pervasive in everyday life, not just in

language but in thought and action" (Metaphors We Live Bv

3). Orientational metaphors, ontological metaphors, and

structural metaphors form coherent conceptual systems and

arise physiologically as well as culturally. In this view,

metaphoric concepts "structure what we perceive" and "play

a central role in defining our everyday realities." We can

identify the systemic coherence of the illness as

consumption metaphor in Sontag's account; she observes that

cancer was, without medical basis, thought of as consuming.

8

The metaphorically perceived function of disease extends

beyond what is actually known about a particular illness to

structure thought about all illness.

In this application, consuming is read negatively as

an action contained within but uncontrolled by the body.

This reading is consistent with the structural metaphor of

consuming as it applies to activities from eating to

buying. The food and eating basis of the "consumer" in

consumer culture structures our perception of the concept.

The expressions "I can swallow that" and "I'11 buy that"

both imply acceptance or acquiescence. Discomfort and

anxiety about eating translates into similar attitudes

towards material accumulation and, as we have seen, is

assigned to other phenomena, such as disease, which are

associated with the compromise of the body, lack of

personal control and mortality. In The Denial of Death.

Ernest Becker makes this connection in a discussion of

anality. Of the product of consumption, Becker says:

"Excreting is the curse that threatens madness because it

shows man his abject finitude, his physicalness, the likely

unreality of his hopes and dreams" (33). Human knowledge

is always ultimately a knowledge of mortality— a knowledge

which at its limit becomes associated with another kind of

eating: "What does it mean to be a self-conscious animal?

The idea is ludicrous, if it is not monstrous. It means to

9

know that one is food for worms" (Becker 87). The final

disposition of bodies— drowned in rivers, buried in

cemeteries, thrown in moats, eaten by worms, of course, and

even by human characters— is a prevalent theme in

Greenaway's work. This thematic obsession is inseparable

from the way in which the consumer in "consumer society"

functions metaphorically.

The metaphoric function of their disease is fully

recognized by many anorectic and bulimic patients, often in

their reaction to treatment. The therapist can propose an

interpretation which the patient may "swallow":

The contents would be good; they would be

expected to convey pleasure and interest.

But there would be a fury, too. The

contents were not to be refused. The

pleasure would be inflicted. Imposed

pleasure!. . . Then I imagined this all

turning upside down and backside front.

Now Ms. F. would switch her identification

from the projector of food-cum-truth-

pleasure into a fellow feeling with the

recipient of this infliction. How awful to

be forcefed— how helpless, how humiliating,

like the victim of a rape. (Boris 105)

In this case, the patient reduces the interpretation

metaphorically to the food which she has persistently

refused; she must refuse the interpretation as well. R.D.

Laing recognizes this anxiety and refusal in other cases of

psychotherapy and uses a variation of the same metaphor:

"To be understood correctly is to be engulfed, to be

enclosed, swallowed up, drowned, eaten up, smothered,

10

stifled in or by another person's all-embracing

comprehension” (Laing 45) . The strange resoluteness of

anorexia nervosa and bulimia patients which obscures

diagnosis and frustrates treatment is an often noted

feature of the disease. Although the anorectic may

outwardly agree with her therapist— may even appear to

comply with the diagnosis and treatment plan— with

intractable deception and resolution, she will persistently

not eat. In their symbolic refusal, these patients are

frequently described as "recalcitrant” (Boris 89).

The metaphoric function of eating disorders can be

compared to another malady primarily ascribed to women:

hysteria, which has been particularly resonant in

theorizing melodrama. The application of this psychiatric

category to film is based on Freud's description of

conversion hysteria "in which the psychical conflict is

expressed symbolically in somatic symptoms of the most

varied kinds" (Laplanche, Pontalis 194). Laplanche and

Pontalis' description stresses the economic and symbolic

aspects of this process: "through bodily symptoms,

repressed ideas 'join in the conversation,' although they

are distorted by the mechanisms of condensation and

displacement" (Laplanche, Pontalis 90). The excess

libidinal energy which cannot be expressed verbally is

11

translated into the body. The body "join[s] in the

conversation," speaking what the mouth cannot utter.

Geoffrey Nowell-Smith locates this process in the body

of the melodramatic film text. As these films strive for

realism and a happy resolution, they generate an excess

which "cannot be accommodated within the action" (73).

Music and mise-en-scene substitute for the emotionality

that the plot cannot convey. "It is not just that the

characters are often prone to hysteria, but that the film

itself somatizes its own unaccommodated excess ..." (74).

The film speaks indirectly, with its body so-to-speak, what

cannot be said directly through the plot or characters.

In a chapter that deals principally with characters

within films that feature a medical discourse, Mary Ann

Doane also argues that "the logic of the symptom might be

used to read the film texts differently" (44). Doane,

however, presents a more critical perspective on the

"association, within patriarchal configurations, of

femininity with the pathological" (38). Despite the fact

that men can suffer from hysteria, the syndrome, beginning

with its name, is read as feminine and links femininity

and aberrance. Doane locates the site of this association

in the woman's body. "Represented as possessing a body

which is overpresent, unavoidable, in constant sympathy

with the emotional and mental faculties, the woman resides

12

just: outside the boundaries of the problematic wherein

Western culture operates a mind/body dualism" (39). The

effect of the ensuing hysteria is a doubled relationship to

narrativity, "in its relation to its cause (excessive

daydreaming) and its treatment (the 'talking cure')" (66).

The solution to the body's participation in the

conversation lies in the discourse of confession. In

Doane's conception, the female spectator must give up

identification with the ill body (female) and take up

identification with the knowledgeable doctor (male).

This crucial moment of treatment is one of the points

at which eating disorders differ greatly from hysteria.

The hysterical patient allies herself with the doctor to

speak her cure; the "recalcitrant" anorectic patient

refuses to swallow food, advice or interpretation and

thereby refuses to be swallowed/understood.

In my theoretical application of anorexia and bulimia,

I will argue that eating disorders provide a better model

for contemporary film than hysteria. The shift from

hysteria to bulimia is compatible with what Brian MacHale

has mapped as the shift from the epistemology of modernism

to the ontology of postmodernism. MacHale argues for the

detective genre as the genre par excellence of modernism.

Freud, in his persistent analysis of clues and obdurate

determination to solve the case, acts as a detective. In

her discussion of medical discourse films, Doane notes:

"most of these films situate the psychoanalyst as a kind of

epistemological hero, as the guarantor of the final

emergence of truth. . ." (47). The description,

treatment, indeed the possibility of hysteria depends on a

truth about the symptoms which can be known. When the

patient knows what the doctor has discovered— when they

know together— the cure has been affected, the case has

been solved. This strategy, as noted above, has been

singularly ineffective in treating eating disorders. The

doctor can not simply persuade the patient to adopt his or

her knowledge. Bruch critiques what she calls "outmoded

concepts of psychoanalytic treatment" which are applied to

anorexia and bulimia:

Many [therapists] stress the symbolic

meaning of the non-eating and the

underlying unconscious problems, fantasies,

and dreams, and interpret their unconscious

meaning to the patient. When the

traditional psychoanalytic setting is

examined in transactional terms, one can

recognize that for these patients it may

signify the reenactment of some damaging

experience in their past ....

[Anorexics] experience 'interpretations' as

indicating that someone else knows what

they truly mean and feel, that they

themselves do not understand their own

thoughts. (The Golden Cage 123)

Not understanding her own thoughts is linked, for the

anorexic, with ontological confusion: "They act and talk

14

as if they and their body were separate entities" (Eating

Disorders 91).

This refusal of knowing with a focus on being can be

linked to MacHale's argument that "the dominant of

postmodernist fiction is ontological" (10). Here, the key

genre is science fiction, which features the creation and

intersection of alternative worlds. The postmodern

ontological fiction doesn't require a solution even if it

posits a mystery: Who killed Mr. Herbert? Was Caspasian

a criminal or a compassionate friend? Did the Colpitts

women drown their husbands and why? Greenaway's films

either offer no solutions or mutually-plausible solutions.

Unlike the ambiguity of modernism, here this lack of a

conclusive answer implies that an explanation is

unimportant.

The postmodern fiction accepts alternative worlds and

alternative states of consciousness existing

simultaneously. In The Cook, the Thief. Georgina's dress

changes color— from green to red to white— as she passes

from one room to another. The film never suggests a real

world; the dress has no one true color. The promise of

solution and cure through knowledge that hysteria presents

no longer has validity. The character of Georgina can't be

known or diagnosed. She has no psychological consistency—

no one true color.

15

The question of basic ontological insecurity raises an

issue crucial to a conception of bulimic cinema: control.

Whatever other explanations are presented to account for

the existence of eating disorders, one persists— from

Raymond Bell's description of anorexic medieval female

saints to Susie Orbach's investigation of contemporary

women: the issue of control. When asked by her doctor

whether she considered herself crazy, one patient answered,

"Am I what? Normal? No. Crazy? I don't know. Out of

control? Yes. Out of control so I'm not crazy? Maybe"

(Boris 96). Out of control feelings related to eating are

part of the condition's official description: "The DSM-

III—R criteria require the presence of recurrent binge-

eating episodes, a feeling of lack of control during eating

binges, and persistent overconcern with body shape and

weight" (Mitchell 94). Inability to maintain control over

what she eats and how her body appears leads paradoxically

to rigid and ritualized feeding. Anorectics will often

insist on eating the same items at the same times each day.

A stick of gum or a single grape may be divided into many

small pieces and doled out according to an inflexible

schedule. "In the early stages, this state of self-imposed

starvation seems to produce a sense of personal control not

previously experienced" (Kennedy 76).

16

The paradox of out-of-control feelings conquered

through excessive and ultimately uncontrollable control can

be seen on several levels of Greenaway's work. A Film

Quarterly review of The Draughtsman's Contract, sees

assertions of power in the film's absurdism, its structure

and its resolution:

The Draughtsman's Contract, by preventing

both protagonist and audience from, in the

broadest sense, 'understanding,' affirms

the power of the film-maker and, within the

text, the power of the socially dominant

class, which controls the 'true meanings'

behind the presented reality of the film.

(Malcomson 39)

Excessive control is also apparent in visual design, when

the work of other painters is faithfully recreated, and

through cinematic conceits: not moving the camera in The

Draughtsman's Contract. withholding close-ups in A Zed and

Two Noughts.

Rather than "affirm[ing] the power" of the filmmaker,

however, I would argue that this extremely realized formal

control demonstrates just the opposite. Artists and artist

figures in Greenaway's films almost inevitably come to an

unfortunate end. A sense of abundant autonomy is gradually

replaced by powerlessness; this powerlessness operates in

the realm of the self, the created art object and even

children. The artist's confidence in his artistry,

sexuality and paternity inevitably erodes. The tension

17

between control and powerlessness here functions in a way

similar to that in eating disorders.

We can see this loss of control, which is really an

abasement, in the shift from the creative role of the

artist to that of the father. The Deuce brothers, Storley

Kracklite and Mr. Neville begin by asserting creative

authority over a documentary, an architectural

retrospective and a series of drawings, respectively; they

end by grasping for the paternity of their children before

they die. Ernest Becker defines the causa-sui of the

creative personality as: "the narcissistic self-inflation

that denies dependency on the female body and on one's

species given role and the control and harboring of the

power and meaning of one's individuality" (119). To

succumb to the species imperative of biological

reproduction is a lesser feat than the god-like project of

creating the self. Beginning in aspiration, the artists in

Greenaway's films find themselves battling to maintain a

debased role. The metaphor of bulimic cinema— which

invokes a wild fluctuation between regulation and abandon—

provides a model to analyze this crucial issue of artistic

control.

Bulimic cinema also illuminates Greenaway's response

to a crisis of consumption in consumer society connected to

what has come to be called postmodernism, especially the

18

postmodern tendency to collapse oppositions. In this

context, the most prominent opposition is that between high

art and mass culture which, as Andreas Huyssen argues, is a

crucial feature of modernism:

Only by fortifying its boundaries, by

maintaining its purity and autonomy, and by

avoiding any contamination with mass

culture and with the signifying systems of

everyday life can the art work maintain its

adversary stance: adversary to the

bourgeois culture of everyday life as well

as adversary to mass culture and

entertainment which are seen as the primary

[focus] of bourgeois cultural articulation.

(Huyssen 73)

For a modernist sensibility, a collapse of high art into

mass culture can only mean indiscrimination. The ability

to identify valuable— transgressive, adversary— art and

distinguish it from pointless trash is compromised. Jurgen

Habermas— who seeks to continue the project of modernity—

interprets the collapse of high art into mass culture as

leading to political reactionism because of the inability

of the work to be transgressive and oppositional.

However the collapse of the high/low split is

interpreted in its effects, its basis can be identified in

a mind/body dualism from which an array of oppositions

flows including masculine/feminine, word/image. This is

one of the areas where a metaphor of anorexia and bulimia

can be useful in understanding art in a period of mass

consumerism. Consumerism is itself not a concept fully

19

understood because its basis is obscured. Eating confounds

the barriers between subject and object, perpetually

undermining a mind/body dualism. If you are what you eat,

and what you eat is invariably dead, inert matter, what is

the human subject? The function of eating in many art

works is simply displaced onto the problems of sexuality or

class, a movement which displaces the truly disturbing

aspects of eating. An examination of aberrant eating can

help us to understand the threat that all eating poses. As

Greenaway's films consistently illustrate, no act of

digestion is innocent whether the object consumed is an

apple, the seed of a pomegranate, or a portion of human

flesh.

Before I continue, I would like to clarify two points

about my use of a metaphor of eating disorders and my use

of textual material.

In Feminism Without Women. Tania Modleski raises a

warning concerning the increased use of anorexia in

cultural writing. She critiques some theorists for

"finding in anorexia a laudable feminine rejection of the

body" (110). Instead, she urges feminists to "refuse the

romantic impulse to celebrate a disease that only reflects

patriarchy's paradoxical image of woman ("transcendence in

immanence") back to itself. . ." (110). Modleski's refusal

to celebrate as liberating for women what is in fact a

20

painful, debilitating, often lethal illness is a position I

share. It may be satisfying to think of anorexia as

positive resistance, but it is less so when we consider why

women's struggle should take such a self-abusive turn.

Anorexia and bulimia as personal strategy lack a crucial

aspect of effective political resistance: autonomy. The

person in the grip of disease, even a disease about

control, is surely not in control. Instead of valorizing

mental illness as a technique, we need to analyze a culture

that foments this kind of response— that offers many women

a sense of control only in the form of the most profound

disturbance and denial.

But if the real historical incidence of eating

disorders in real historical subjects cannot be seen as

resisting or liberating, the conceptual use of these

problems poses a number of questions and suggests some

possible ways to consider them. What is the relationship

of eating and sexuality? What is the basis of our

discomfort with consumption? How can we understand

cultural cycles of incorporation? And why has the topic of

eating become so prevalent in contemporary art?

Although my discussion of bulimic cinema will be

primarily confined to film and video projects written

and/or directed by British filmmaker Peter Greenaway, I

will argue that what I identify as a quality of bulimia can

21

be found in a wide range of cultural products. No artist

works in a vacuum, and Greenaway has been particularly

forward in stuffing his work with references both explicit

and obscure to art, science and philosophy. Among the most

obvious influences are Jorge Luis Borges' essays and short

stories, and I have included some mention of these. I also

make use of other prose texts and films for which I do not

make a case of direct influence either on Greenaway or from

him. I include them because, I will argue, they share

qualities of what I will call bulimic cinema. By "bulimic”

I refer to the whole continuum of eating disorders which

includes anorexia, and by "cinema" I recognize the medium

most susceptible to these characteristics. It is the art

form which has eaten the traditional arts, and is now in

the process of being eaten itself, by television.

Finally, I would like to note the particular

challenges that Greenaway's texts offer to the critic and

how I have responded to them in my use of his texts. To

take just the example of the scene with which I began this

discussion: the cannibalism scene of The Cook, the Thief.

We could identify, we could even become entrapped in

identifying, how certain details of the scene reproduce

themes of Greenaway's work. The scene includes references

to: literature (John Ford's 'Tis Pity She's A Whore.

Dickens); pictorial art (17th century Dutch painting); the

22

French Revolution (the downtrodden rise up to slay their

oppressors); consumption (Spica, the man who can buy

anything and understand nothing, forced to eat his victim);

revenge; as well as interconnectedness to other Greenaway

films (Spica is the name of a star in Drowning By Numbers,

etc.).

Greenaway's references create a ceaselessly repeated

pattern. The whole is contained in a fragment; the same

tropes reappear on different scales. This quality

discourages horizontal analysis, just as a crystal would,

and instead spawns a series of endlessly spiraling lists.

A discussion of Greenaway's work can quickly devolve into a

pointless recitation of vertical categories. The issues I

discuss— forgery, excess, eating and nakedness, gender,

parent/child relationships, television, and interpretation-

-can be applied to all of Greenaway's films and videos.

Although I concentrate on one or two films in each chapter,

the same features perpetually re-occur across a corpus

which, in many ways, can't be clearly delimited into

separate art objects.

Within "cannibal," the final word in The Cook, the

Thief. is contained a range of associations that permeate

Greenaway's work. It also invokes one of the most crucial

ideas in that corpus: the problem of classification. How

do we classify cannibalism? As aberration? As punishable

23

crime? Or is it simply an extreme example of the fact that

all eating is highly ritualized, used for a variety of

social purposes, and never simply nutritive? With the

consumption of human flesh the problems of eating and

classification come together in a broad and impossible

question: What is the nature of humankind? Of what is it

made and how can it be classified? More specifically, but

just as impossibly, what is the nature of the artistic mind

that must eat and be eaten?

24

CHAPTER TWO

How do you forge a film?:

Criminal Conspiracy in A Zed and Two Noughts

Borges' short story Pierre Menard. Author of the Don

Quixote describes its hero, a 20th-century Frenchman, as

wanting to write the Don Quixote.

It is unnecessary to add that his aim was

never to produce a mechanical transcription

of the original; he did not propose to copy

it. His admirable ambition was to produce

pages which would coincide— word for word

and line for line— with those of Miguel de

Cervantes. (48)

The narrator offers this analysis of passages from

t

Cervantes' version and from Menard's— passages which are,

needless to say, identical:

Equally vivid is the contrast in styles.

The archaic style of Menard— in the last

analysis a foreigner— suffers from a

certain affectation. Not so that of his

precursor, who handles easily the ordinary

Spanish of his time. (53)

One way in which the story amuses is in the attempt to

wrest away the ownership of Don Quixote from Cervantes, but

a Don Quixote which is then no longer what it was because

it is no longer written by Cervantes. The work may be

richer or more impressive, but it is also less valuable.

In this strange case of plagiarism, as in the cases of

forgery and appropriation, a vital area of discussion is

the relationship between the artist and the work. Borges

here imperils that relationship to the extent that he makes

it a joke. Cervantes becomes a grouping system, a category

of analysis.

According to Michel Foucault:

An author's name is not simply an element

in a discourse (capable of being either

subject or object, of being replaced by a

pronoun, and the like); it performs a

certain role with regard to narrative

discourse, assuring a classificatory

function. Such a name permits one to group

together a certain number of texts, define

them, differentiate them from and contrast

them to others. (107)

This author function also acts to reduce the danger of

discourse:

The question then becomes: How can one

reduce the great peril, the great danger

with which fiction threatens our world?

The answer is: one can reduce it with the

author. (118)

By attributing the discourse to a single individual—

fallible and vulnerable as well as limited— it becomes less

powerful and less prolific. While Foucault recognizes the

"'ideological' status of the author" and how it disarms

discourse, he also suggests that the discourse might

endanger the author. The author "assumes the role of the

dead man in the game of writing" (Foucault 103). It is the

danger to the artist in the artist-*work relationship which

I would like to discuss, particularly how it is

conceptualized differently in forgery and appropriation.

Is it even possible to speak of forgery without the

presence of an original creative persona? In Umberto Eco's

The Limits of Interpretation, the "Fakes and Forgeries"

chapter minutely categorizes the forging of paintings,

documents, essays, the Parthenon, but not films. Cinematic

borrowings are described in another essay, "Interpreting

Serials." In this chapter, Eco points out that the

insistence on originality is a romantic— modernist idea;

that postmodern imitation realized in film and television

is entirely in the spirit of Aristotle's Poetics; and that

really one can't avoid correlations between Balzac and

Dallas. although, Eco implies, Balzac is more interesting.

But Eco's appreciation of postmodern appropriation is not

unambiguous. For Eco, the divide between high art/low art

has shifted from the art object to the reader. The reader

of aesthetic objects which imitate or borrow is either

naive— someone who doesn't understand from what sources the

work borrows— or critical— someone who does understand. Of

the first category, there is an "unhappy many," who fail

to understand that there is an original author much less

who he or she may be. Of the latter, a "happy few," who

enjoy "a neobaroque pleasure" by knowing the ancestry of

the aesthetic object (Eco 99).

It becomes clear why Eco discusses cinema and

television in terms of seriality rather than forgery, why

he opposes the name of the object, Dallas. to the name of

27

the creator "Balzac," why, in fact, if there is no Homer,

one must be invented.

Eco's organization implicitly recognizes the creator's

obliteration, or at least disconnection, from the body of

the film text, a disconnection established early in cinema

history. Directors, as well as actors, were not commonly

credited for their contributions to silent films until the

mid-teens. D.W. Griffith, for example, made more than 400

films for the Biograph Company without director credit.

When he left Biograph for Mutual in 1913, Griffith took out

trade ads to assert creative ownership over his work.

Although currently the director's name occupies a place of

honor closest to the body of the text, the extensive array

of names which accompany it in the credits emphasizes

cinema's traditionally collaborative nature, its multiple

authorship.

While Eco distinguishes the forging of paintings from

the appropriations of cinema— with the division of chapters

substituting for a clear rationale— Greenaway has collapsed

the two issues in several of his films and videos. In

particular, Greenaway's second feature, A Zed and Two

Noughts, deals explicitly with the forging of paintings and

the production of cinema and is, itself, an assemblage of

appropriated parts. Although the varieties of artistic

actions in the film are characterized by intent and

28

accomplishment, all artistic operations are carried out

under a dark cloud of criminal conspiracy. The

obliteration of the artistic personality appearing

simultaneously with the depiction and perpetration of

conspiracies may itself not be a coincidence.

Examples of forgery and appropriation with

conspiratorial intent appear in A Zed and Two Noughts so

frequently and variously that it is difficult to catalog

them. Most obviously, the presence of the seventeenth-

century Dutch painter Vermeer, an historical figure

associated with spurious reproductions, permeates the film.

The historical Vermeer had a maternal grandfather who

counterfeited Dutch coins in the Hague (Montias 17). Three

hundred years later Vermeer's paintings were involved in

the most notorious art history scandal of the twentieth

century. A Dutch art dealer named Hans van Meegeren forged

several Vermeers, some of which he then sold to the Nazis.

Later, fearing war crimes charges, he confessed his

forgeries to outraged critics who had accepted the

paintings as genuine. Some of these canvasses are still in

dispute (Bianconi 87). One character in Greenaway's film

is named for this famous forger. The film's Van Meegeren

is an evil surgeon and hobbyist painter who wants to paint

like Vermeer. Greenaway's "homage" to Vermeer, as he puts

it, also has a formal aspect: lighting and composition

29

mimic that found in Vermeer paintings, and Greenaway's

mise-en-scene includes objects— maps, trumpets, letters—

commonly depicted by Vermeer.

While Van Meegeren works at forgery, the heroes of the

film are just as obsessed with appropriation. Oliver and

Oswald Deuce— separated Siamese twins— lose their wives in

a freak car accident. To assuage their grief, they embark

on a project to discover— through cinema— what happens to

people after they die. Their "documentary” is based on the

influential BBC documentary by David Attenborough, "Life on

Earth" (1979), snippets of which.are shown, unnamed and

uncredited, but presumably recognizable. Attenborough

describes the process of evolution with segments showing

increasingly more complex forms of life. The Deuce

brothers appropriate the same organization, but show the

disintegration of increasingly more complex forms—

beginning with an apple and ending with themselves. The

act of creation leads, in their case, to the personal

annihilation of the artists.

The Deuce brothers' creative act of film production is

echoed by their creative act of fatherhood. One or both of

them impregnates Alba Bewick, and their struggle to produce

the film runs concurrently with their struggle to assert

paternal control over the prenatal twins.

30

The association of the art object with a child,

apparent in this concurrent struggle, is also implicit in

Greenaway's depiction of the character Van Meegeren, who

enters the story as a surgeon and appears, frequently,

attempting to paint the other characters, forcibly costumed

in seventeenth-century garb and arranged like the figures

in Vermeer paintings. The surgeon, in this way, lays claim

to Vermeer's posterity. He also conspires to adopt the

unborn children of Oliver and Oswald Deuce. With this

attempted usurpation, Van Meegeren lays claim to the

posterity of Oliver and Oswald.

Van Meegeren's mistress in the film shares a name with

Vermeer's wife, Catherina Bolnes, but unlike her

seventeenth-century model, who bore Vermeer fourteen

children, the film's Bolnes is barren. Their other common

mistress— painting— was also fertile for Vermeer, but

barren for his imitator. Van Meegeren can't create—

biologically or artistically. He must steal babies as well

as inspiration.

In A Zed and Two Noughts. Greenaway depicts the figure

of the forger as particularly destructive; when he is not

painting or bullying the Deuce brothers, Van Meegeren

performs unnecessary leg amputations. Forgery is aberrant

and criminal because it attempts to steal the posterity of

the artist and defile it. The undiscovered forgery

31

implies the potential to taint the artist's reputation— to

infect it with spurious meanings. As a category of

analysis, however, undiscovered forgeries don't really

exist. The revealed forgery, the only forgery we can ever

know, serves only to bolster the reputation and importance

of the originating artist. By striving for maximum

fidelity to the original, the forger reinforces the unity

and integrity of the art object and simultaneously the

unity and integrity of the artist. Pursuit of the greatest

"authenticity" leads inevitably back to the "author." The

artist's relationship with the work is therefore

reaffirmed.

In his analysis of the historical Van Meegeren's most

famous forgery, Alfred Lessing asserts: "Paradoxically, The

Disciples at Emmaus is as much a monument to the artistic

genius of Vermeer as are Vermeer's own paintings. Even

though it was painted by van Meegeren in the twentieth

century, it embodies and bears witness to the greatness of

the seventeenth-century art of Vermeer" (Lessing 76). This

conception of the artist-work relationship posits the

artist as the model for the work— as the parent is the

model for the child and the teacher is the model for the

pupil. A forgery recreates the artist, perpetuating the

original self-creation of artistic production. This

original causa-sui of the creative personality is, as

32

Ernest Becker points out, "independent of the female body

and on one's species given role" (Becker 119).

The possibility of non-biological reproduction is also

raised in Greenaway's presentation of appropriation,

particularly through the figures of twins Oswald and

Oliver. Otto Rank links the twin with the artist through

precisely this self-reproductive quality: "As the twins

appear to have created themselves independently of natural

procreation, so they were believed to be able to create

things which formerly did not exist in nature— that is,

what is called culture" (The Double 92).

Oliver and Oswald's artistic enterprise— a film about

decay— is presented as the recovery of loss, initially the

loss of their pregnant wives. Ultimately, their loss is

presented as an earlier separation; the plot reveals that

Oliver and Oswald were originally Siamese twins, separated

in babyhood. This separation replaces the more usual

trauma of the separation of mother and child, a loss that

also leads to the creation of culture. Like Becker's

artistic causa-sui. this substitution gives the brothers an

illusion of being "independent of the female body."

As in all of Greenaway's films, however, this illusion

of independence, as well as the illusion of artistic

control and autonomy is revealed to be a sham. A stable

attitude toward the art object becomes impossible. For

33

Oliver and Oswald, the art object is not associated with a

child or son; it is not an unambiguous object capable of

perpetuating the artist, instead, art is associated with

femininity. The art object is both venerated as an ideal—

madonna— and debased as a commodity— whore. The two major

female characters in A Zed and Two Noughts provide an

example of each of these roles. Alba Bewick functions as a

mother in her relationship with her daughter Beta and also

in her maternal attitude towards the Deuce brothers; she

also becomes the mother of Oliver and Oswald's children.

Alba consistently submits, although reluctantly at times,

to male authority when she poses for paintings and, at the

urging of her doctor, allows her second leg to be removed.

Where Alba represents a madonna, useful only for admiration

and reproduction, another female character— Venus de Milo—

is an industrious, capitalist career woman with several

professions. Milo's name suggests that she too is

limbless, but she is, instead, well-armed as a seamstress,

a prostitute, and a writer zealously pursuing publication.

Despite, or perhaps because of, her industry and

resourcefulness, she is treated throughout the film with

contempt.

In forgery, the extremes of admiration and contempt

come together when the economic value of art, the venial

motive, comes to the aid of veneration. The forgery "is as

34

much a monument to the artistic genius of Vermeer, as are

Vermeer's own paintings." It is only in the process of

cutting the imitated object off from its author that we

discover appropriation and, for this reason, appropriation

is far more damaging to the conception of the artist. The

simulacrum is not interested in "authenticity."

In a Zed and Two Noughts, the Deuce brothers— each the

simulacrum of the other— make no claims to authenticity,

because they do not recognize or admit that they have

sources, artistic or biological. Their film, which depicts

an apple, prawns, an alligator, a swan and a zebra

disintegrating in time-lapse photography, mimics in reverse

Attenborough's Life on Earth— but Attenborough is never

acknowledged or even mentioned. Oliver and Oswald are

appropriators in yet another sense: they obtain the animal

corpses needed for their film from a group of shady

characters. Not only do they refuse to do their own

killing, they refuse to acknowledge that the animals have

been slaughtered on their behalf.

Despite their differences, the singular forger and the

plural filmmakers have common interests and points of

contact. Although they express mutual animosity, Van

Meegeren and the Deuce Brothers come close to an uneasy and

impossible deal. When Oliver and Oswald are wounded by a

tiger they visit Van Meegeren for treatment. While trading

35

insults, the brothers and the doctor negotiate for what

they want and what they feel the other party could provide.

Oliver and Oswald want to be re-attached as Siamese twins.

Van Meegeren, more accustomed to amputating limbs, says he

will oblige if, in recompense, he could be allowed to adopt

Alba's unborn twins.

In this scene, as in the rest of the film, Greenaway's

visual references to Vermeer are obvious: two Vermeer

paintings hang on the wall; the floor is checkered; a low

light source emanates from the left side of the frame; the

human body is shown at a "full-shot" distance; figures hold

objects. Van Meegeren— "no Vermeer" as the brothers point

out— no longer strives for his own artistic or patriarchal

success. Oliver and Oswald are no better off. Their

desire to be re-attached— to annul their traumatic

separation— may indicate a need to abdicate the artist's

role. Greenaway's depiction of Oliver and Oswald makes his

own position extremely complex. Even as he destroys his

heroes, he has put himself in their place. The Deuce

brothers use another artist, Attenborough, for inspiration,

as does Greenaway with Vermeer. The Deuce brothers use

cinema to mourn their losses; Greenaway does as well. But

unlike his fictional characters, the director seems willing

to take responsibility for the dead bodies his acts of

creation generate.

36

In Greenaway's work, film and video become the media

through which the traditional arts become known—

architecture and sculpture in The Belly of the Architect;

drafting, painting and landscaping in The Draughtsman's

Contract: literature in A TV Dante. Cinema repositions

these other art forms and, in doing so, cuts them off from

their original authorization. Like the character Bolnes,

the mistress of the film's Van Meegeren, painting is now

barren. It can no longer lead to the re-creation of the

artist— the art object as child. Cinema has infected

painting's reputation, rendering it sterile. If we look at

it in an evolutionary sense, which A Zed and Two Noughts

seems to invite, cinema accomplishes the murders of both

painter and painting.

In "Introjection— Incorporation, Mourning or

Melancholia." Nicolas Abraham and Maria Torok consider two

responses to grief. Their distinction can be interestingly

applied to how cycles of appropriation create and destroy

art objects. Abraham and Torok consider the condition of

mourning by distinguishing between introjection— a process-

-and incorporation— a fantasy. Introjection allows a

topographical alteration in the psychic system, an

acknowledgement of loss. Incorporation uses fantasy to

conserve a secretly maintained topography. The difference

between the two corresponds to the difference between

37

"learning a language and buying a dictionary" (Abraham 5).

Or to put it in terms pertinent to Greenaway, the

difference between eating with digestion and without it.

Oswald avoids "swallowing" his loss by swallowing instead

shattered glass from his wife's fatal accident. Oswald and

Oliver fail to resolve their grief; but, I would argue,

Greenaway successfully introjects Vermeer— acknowledging

the loss of painting.

The introjection of Greenaway's film is perhaps

clearer when contrasted to Jon Jost's recent All the

Vermeer's in New York and the way it incorporates Vermeer.

The characters in Jost's film visit the Metropolitan Museum

and gaze reverently at the original framed Vermeer

paintings on the wall. These paintings are swallowed

whole. The admired canvasses represent an idealized

alternative to the venality which characterizes all the

other human relationships in the film.

The connection of swallowing and grief reaches its

apotheosis in Greenaway's feature The Cook, the Thief. His

Wife and Her Lover, where the cook explains that he charges

more for black food because patrons can then say, "Death, I

eat you." That film culminates in murder, mourning and,

inevitably it seems, cannibalism. Cinema, paradoxical in

so many ways, murders and mourns in the same instance.

38

Debates about forgery seem to devolve into one

question: if two objects are identical, how can one— the

original— be more valuable, in an aesthetic sense, than

another— the forgery? When film imitates, however, there

is no possibility of perfect identity, no point in striving

for authenticity and no need to remain loyal to the author.

By its nature, film rules out fidelity. The very

possibility of faithfulness has been obscured.

What are the implications of this impossibility?

Forgery, which perpetuates and validates the aspirations of

the creative persona, is, in fact, an activity necessary to

the conception of an artist. The loss of forgery is, for

the artist, the loss of one testimony to mastery, and this

is only one of many contemporary encroachments on the

artist's position.

Foucault has argued that the concept "author" is used

by readers to control the danger of the discourse.

Greenaway's films ask, and attempt to answer, Foucault's

other point. How do authors— authors not only of film but

of other arts such as painting— authors who are there, but

not there— how do these authors control their mortal danger

from the cinema discourse?

There is yet another related question lurking for the

readers of texts: do any repercussions or dangers— to the

reader— attend the annihilation of the author? Roland

39

Barthes— a prime suspect in, but hardly the sole

perpetrator of, the artist's annihilation— addresses this

issue in his influential essay, "Death of the Author?"

Barthes observes the father/artist, child/art object

metaphor at work:

The Author is thought to nourish the book,

which is to say that he exists before it,

thinks, suffers, lives for it, is in the

same relation of antecedence to his work as

a father to his child. (145)

The implications of this relationship extend beyond the

realm of either fathers and children or the production of

the work of art. The father/author becomes aligned with

the idea of God through his creative function. The death

of the Author then is also the death of God:

In precisely this way literature (it would

be better from now on to say writing), by

refusing to assign a 'secret', an ultimate

meaning, to the text (and to the world as

text), liberates what may be called an

anti-theological activity, an activity that

is truly revolutionary since to refuse to

fix meaning is, in the end, to refuse God

and his hypostases— reason, science, law.

(147)

But if the author didn't do it, who did? If God

doesn't exist, what consciousness orders the universe?

Barthes concludes that "a text's unity lies not in its

origin but in its destination" ("Death of the Author" 148).

This is, of course, the same shift to the reader that Eco

describes in his discussion of how high art and low art

have been replaced by the high or low skills of the reader.

40

Meaning resides in the reader, and "the birth of the reader

must be at the cost of the Author" (148). If we extend

Barthes' metaphor, is the birth of the human being at the

cost of the death of God? Certainly the birth of the child

is at the cost of the death of the father, but the prior

existence of the father seems to be a presupposition of the

operation. If the analogy holds, the Author does not

simply not exist, he must first exist so as to be killed as

a sacrifice to the reader's birth.

The same may be said of the notion of God who must

also, it seems, be dispatched with malicious intent. This

particular murder pervades contemporary society, as, for

instance, in the Death of God theology movement of the

1960s which:

claimed that meaningful talk about God is

impossible for two reasons: modern people

require empirical evidence and the idea of

a benevolent ruler of the world is morally

repugnant in light of such events as the

Holocaust. (Carse 212)

The specter of murder is crucial to this thinking which is,

after all, not the Non-existence of God movement.

Nietzsche's madman had much earlier announced this

important crime, the perpetrator and the resulting

emotions:

Do we not hear anything yet of the noise of

the grave-diggers who are burying God? Do

we not smell anything yet of God's

decomposition? Gods too decompose. God is

dead. God remains dead, and we have

41

killed him. How shall we, the murderers of

all murderers, comfort ourselves?

(Nietzsche 105)

Attempting to solve such a murder touches off an endless

chain of speculation which, perhaps, can never end, but

only get more convoluted. If God is dead, first, who

killed Him and, second, what entity can arise to fill the

vacuum of functions and qualities traditionally assigned to

a creative power?

In Greenaway's films, the controlling sensibility—

which can never belong to a single artist— belongs, not to

the reader, but to a conspiracy. Readers don't kill the

artist, although they may, perhaps, collude. Mysterious,

conspiratorial forces always perpetrate the worst crimes.

They trample the concept of a creative God through the

destruction of the artist, His structural equivalent. They

then usurp the controlling and ordering functions of a

deity.

In A Zed and Two Noughts, van Meegeren in league with

his mistress Bolnes creates his forgeries, but this is not

the only criminal conspiracy in the film. A band of zoo

workers run a black market operation in animal corpses.

While pulling a dripping crocodile corpse out of his

raincoat, Joshua Plate notes how easy such an operation can

be: "In a zoo community of seven thousand animals there

are deaths every day. Crocodiles are not immortal." The

42

conspiracy simply usurps the life and death powers of God;

the crime is easily concealed.

An etymological connection exists between the concept

of a deity and that of a conspiracy. To conspire means to

breathe with someone; the conspirators form a connection by

breathing together in their plots. The deity also forms

relationships through a breath, the spirit that enters the

believer (con spirito sanctus). This penetrating breath

might carry the inspiration to which the artist aspires.

The concept of conspiracy contains many of the same

functions and qualities that we ascribe to the concept of a

deity. Both create order and meaning. Possessing an

infectious quality, for good or ill, both have the ability

to inspire or provoke action. Although their presence may

be sensed indirectly, both remain secret and

incomprehensible. Unknowability is essential to the very

nature of God and serves to distinguish Him from His human

creation. Conspiracies hide their existence out of

criminal necessity, but this very disguise becomes an

important activity of the conspiracy and sometimes its main

rationale. The concepts of both God and conspiracy imply

an entity without known borders or limits.

The existence of a pervasive conspiracy figures in

almost every Greenaway film. A conspiracy is implied in

every atypical ordering pattern, and Greenaway's films are

43

designed around atypical ordering patterns. By shifting

the emphasis from one ordering pattern to another, the

meaning and interpretation of the narrative can shift

radically.

In the example with which we began, "Pierre Menard,"

Borges plays with the ordering pattern of authorship. In

"Three Versions of Judas," Borges provides another example

of an alternative ordering pattern, one that evokes

questions of authority, criminality and conspiracy. The

story purports to describe the New Testament research of

the "deeply religious" 20th century scholar Nils Runeberg.

Noting, as had others, that Judas' act was superfluous, but

that an act in such a crucial drama could not be haphazard,

Runeberg concluded that "the treachery of Judas was not

accidental; it was a predestined deed which has its

mysterious place in the economy of the Redemption" (152).

Runeberg assigns to Judas the ultimate heroic role, that of

the Word made flesh Itself, God made man Himself. Judas is

the character who ultimately sacrifices the most. "The

ascetic, for the greater glory of God, degrades and

mortifies the flesh; Judas did the same with the spirit.

He renounced honor, good, peace, the Kingdom of Heaven, as

others, less heroically, renounced pleasure" (154). Borges

transforms the great Easter drama from a simple, open

triumph of the Word over the flesh to a conspiracy, a

subterranean mystery the power of which depends on its

never being solved. The co-conspirators God, Judas, and,

perhaps, Jesus— are never found out; the conspiracy

theorist Runeberg is consigned to oblivion and dies of an

aneurysm.

A Zed and Two Noughts is not the only Greenaway film

rife with layers of secret, paranoiac, criminal patterns; a

catalogue of conspiracies would include examples from every

Greenaway film. In Dear Phone, mysterious forces cause the

text of the printed narration to break down into profound

sloppiness. In Vertical Features Remake, a conspiracy led

by Gang Lion impedes the reconstruction of Tulse Luper's

structuralist film. The Falls suggests an extraterrestrial

event which mysteriously, but definitively degrades the

lives of its uncomprehending victims. Mr. Neville, in The

Draughtsman's Contract. is murdered by members of the

nobility and every other character in the film, except

perhaps the murdered Mr. Herbert, is implicated. Storley

Kracklite, in Bellv of an Architect, is driven to suicide

by a variety of factors which includes a group of money-

laundering fascists and, perhaps, his own wife. The water-

tower conspiracy of Drowning Bv Numbers. although motivated

by a sincere desire to investigate the deaths of friends

and relatives, is presented as a betraying and malevolent

group, at odds with the film's heroines, the three cissie

45

Colpitts. In The Cook, the Thief, the downtrodden rise up

to trap their victim, and their leader, the wife Georgina,

literally wears a web of conspiracy.

Greenaway's films suggest that all film is a criminal

conspiracy. Cinema announces the impossibility of forgery

which is also the impossibility of fidelity to a creative

figure— artist or God. The creative persona is not single,

unified, inscrutable, all-powerful and omnipresent, but

rather multiple, conflicted, and without motive, having

variable and undetermined powers and borders. The

ontological status of the out-of-control figure of the

artist is in continual flux. This lack of control, this

uninsurability of being, is at the core of bulimic cinema.

46

CHAPTER THREE

Excess

An important feature of hysteria, both as a clinical

disorder and in the way it has been used to theorize film,

is excess. This concept is also crucial to the metaphor of

eating disorders that I propose. Nevertheless, as Kristen

Thompson has noted, "the critic is also faced with the fact

that excess tends to elude analysis" (Thompson 133).

Typically the concept of excess implies not a sufficiency,

but a superfluity. The opposite of excess is not absence,

or even paucity, but moderation, a concept that has proven

difficult to quantify in terms of cinema. Although the

concept of "excess" is used often in film theory, no one

has ever established how much "filmness" is normal, against

which standard, filmic superabundance can be read. In

practice, "excess" frequently denotes not-enough-ness as

well as too-much-ness.

In the theory of excess posited by bulimic cinema, the

insufficiency of anorexia exists at the opposite end of a

continuum to the excess of bulimia, but both can be

identified with the issue of control. In the clinical

afflictions of anorexia (not enough) and bulimia (too

much)— frequently exhibited sequentially— the woman's body

becomes the site of extreme fluctuations motivated by a

perceived lack of control. The central anxiety: who

47

controls the woman's body? In the films of Peter

Greenaway, there exist extremities of not-enough-ness and

too-much-ness on several filmic levels such as narration,

visual design, acting and the incorporation of other arts;

the issue is: who controls the body of the film?

In the analysis that follows, I will argue that we can

perceive Greenaway's films as excessive and that this

excess is related to other aspects of bulimic cinema— the

lack of artistic control, confusion over the boundaries of

the art object, rejection of interpretation; consumption of

other arts and anxiety about that consumption, the female

gendering of the art object, and the use of structuring

patterns which reject narrative. I will also examine how

this conception differs from other theories of excess, and

speculate on the reasons for this shift.

Due to the nature of film, definitions of excess are

particularly difficult to articulate. There exists such a

multitude of qualities to compare, with so many variables

to consider, in such a variety of contexts, that it becomes

impossible to define absolutely whether any single element

is excessive or not. Because of these difficulties, I

propose to start with two examples— from two of Greenaway's

films— that are clearly excessive and arrive at some

conclusions from their description. In The Bellv of an

Architect, the architect, Storley Kracklite, fears that his

48

wife has been poisoning him with tainted figs. In fact, he

suffers from terminal stomach cancer. He suffers as well

from an over-identification with both the architect

Boullee, whom he seeks to commemorate, and the Emperor

Augustus, whom he is about to follow into death.

Kracklite's fear of dying manifests itself in ceaseless

wandering through Rome, postcard writing, and a belligerent

attitude towards all the other characters. Most

obsessively, he repeatedly photocopies representations of

stomachs— his own, that of the statue of Augustus, that of

a putative drawing of Boullee. A museum display of

postcards— of Augustus and a building— shown early in the

film, foreshadows this reproduction. In this common

display, there is no longer simply a statue of Augustus,

but limitless multiples of a photograph of a statue of

Augustus, reduced in size, sold for a pittance, effectively

diminished. Kracklite steals one.

Later in the film, after he has begun to feel the pain

in his stomach, Kracklite photocopies and enlarges this

postcard until it is life-sized and holds it up to his own

stomach. He projects his discomfort onto the photocopy; he

uses it as a map, upon which he draws the guilty figs,

marks his pain, and guides the doctor's diagnosis. This

enlarged, stolen, reproduced stomach of Augustus becomes

Kracklite's main object of contemplation while

49

simultaneously collapsing many of the film's themes. These

include: the debased nature of the artwork as a result of

reproduction, and— reinforcing the link of debasement and

reproduction— the ambiguous nature of the engorged cavity.

This cavity may be a pregnancy or a cancerous stomach; it

may be Boullee's buildings or Augustus' tomb, birth or

death, artistic inspiration or annihilation. The postcard

of Augustus also demonstrates the tenuous control which can

be exerted over the artwork's circulation. In this case,

the postcard has been stolen. The original statue of

Augustus has already been reproduced as a postcard in a way

unanticipated and unsanctioned by its carver; now,

Kracklite manipulates the postcard in a way similarly

unanticipated and unsanctioned by the postcard's printer.

The excessive scene— representations of a belly

spewing out of a photocopying machine— is repeated

throughout the film. While Kracklite's reproductive act

serves a narrative function— it demonstrates that he is

worried about his stomach pain and is becoming increasingly

upset— its visual impact and repetition clearly transcend

this rationale. Both in their individual manifestations

and in their cumulative impact, the shots of the

photocopied bellies operate as excess.

This example of excess includes components of both

form and content. An example of excess from The Cook. the

50

Thief. His Wife and Her Lover relies more heavily on a

single formal element: a long, lateral tracking movement.

Early in the film, the camera tracks from a parking lot,

through the kitchen of Le Hollandais restaurant, past the

entry and cloakroom, and into the restaurant's dining room.

The rooms and hallways, in their vast scale and artful

decoration, themselves provide examples of excess which

contribute to the pleasure of the camera movement. What

visual delight will the camera reveal next? Where will

this journey end?

The extended tracking shot operates inter- and intra-

textually. It will be repeated several times throughout

the film, and it visually quotes from previous Greenaway

films— for instance, The Draughtsman's Contract— and

anticipates others— Prosoero's Books. The nature of the

shot signals a break with traditional cinema— Hollywood

cinema— which typically avoids such an extended camera

movement. But, despite the immensity of space revealed in

the shot, the one-dimensionality of the movement evokes the

two-dimensionality of painting rather than a space

constructed to suggest realism. The shot, in its duration,

its rejection of Hollywood three-dimensional space and its

repetition within and without the film, functions as

excess.

51

Where the example from Belly of an Architect is

reductive and isolating, the tracking shot from The Cook.

the Thief is comprehensive and all-encompassing. Kracklite

acts out a metaphor of self-absorption and inward, single,

focus: contemplating his own navel. Conversely, the mobile

camera of The Cook, the Thief, by investigating every

corner of the restaurant regardless of narrative action,

demonstrates all-inclusiveness. In their extremity, they

both operate as excess. How can we account for them?

Definitions of excess inevitably tend to be defined

against a standard of filmness set by pre-WWII classical

Hollywood Cinema, whether this standard is consciously

invoked or not. A Fritz Lang film noir can be read as

excessive by virtue of its stylized sets or exaggerated

lighting which exceed in some measure the classical

standard (too-much-ness). An Andrei Tarkowski drama, on

the other hand, may be excessive for the use of long takes

or restrained acting styles (not-enough-ness) in comparison

to the classical standard. At all times, this classical

standard is guided by a steady devotion to the development

of the story. This devotion is often repeated in

theoretical accounts of excess.

In "The Concept of Cinematic Excess" Kristin Thompson,

synthesizing the approaches of Stephan Heath and Roland

Barthes, connects excess to the materiality of film:

52

Style is the use of repeated techniques

which become characteristic of the work;

these techniques are foregrounded so that

the spectator will notice them and create

connections between their individual uses.

Excess does not equal style, but the two

are closely linked because they both

involve the material aspects of the film.

Excess forms no specific patterns which we

could say are characteristic of the work.

But the formal organization provided by

style does not exhaust the material of the

filmic techniques, and a spectator's

attention to style might well lead to a

noticing of excess as well. (132)

In this conception, "material aspects of the film" are seen

in opposition to narrative or plot elements— the word of

the father— pater— pattern— plot. What is not the father's

word, what is image, is the mater— material (Goux). All

imagery is therefore implicated in the struggle against

narrative pattern. Since the materiality of the image

always exceeds that of the written word, all film— in its

materiality— is excess.

A tension develops between narratively-motivated

elements which unify— words— and excessive elements which

lie outside and struggle against the narrative. Thompson

further implies that images function differently than words

in that there is less control over their deployment:

[N]arrative function may justify the

presence of a device, but it doesn't always

motivate the specific form that individual

element will take. Quite often, the device

could vary considerably in form and still

serve its function adequately. . . .The

actual choices are relatively

arbitrary. ..." (135)

53

Although Thompson approaches the question of excess

from a neo-formalist perspective, her discussion is

compatible with a psychoanalytic framework. Thompson's

conception of how the material functions accords with how

the clinical disorder of hysteria has been used to

conceptualize film. The hysterical symptom is not stable

in its manifestations, and it doesn't fall within the

patient's control. The hysterical symptom signifies

through representation rather than through the word. It

lacks, therefore, the unity, the linearity, and, most of

all, the fixity of words. The inability to communicate

with words/plot characterizes those films— melodramas,

women's films— most associated with hysterical expression

in visual design and acting. The inability to communicate

with words also appears within these films; muteness is a

particularly favored hysterical symptom in the hysterical

woman's film of disease (Doane 166).

Hysteria is excess, which "forms no specific

patterns," rather than style, because style "is the use of

repeated techniques which become characteristic of the

work." Through organized repetition, material aspects of

the film can express unity, wholeness, pattern. Lyotard

puts this idea into economic terms:

No movement, arising from any field, is

given to the eye-ear of the spectator for

what it is: a simple sterile difference in

an audio-visual field. Instead, every

54

movement put forward sends back to

something else, is inscribed as a plus or

minus on the ledger book which is the film,

is valuable because it returns to something

else, because it is thus potential return

and profit. (53)

This analysis leaves open the nature of the pattern, the

structure of return which is signaled by repetition. Some

elements, for example, displaying only narrative

significance when presented singly, can be repeated to the

point of excess. Thompson suggests a pattern based on

narrative motivation "by which the work makes its own

devices seem reasonable. At that point where motivation

fails, excess begins" (135).

In the case of Greenaway, the primacy of narration as

an organizing principle is frequently called into question.

It isn't that the films lack narrative elements— often

there is too much plot. However, organizing patterns,

other than narration, typically exert more control over the

films' development. Such patterns include: the numbers

from one to an hundred; the alphabet; the seven hills of

Rome; the twelve drawings of Mr. Neville; the first four

letters of a last name.

In Anatomy of Criticism. Northrup Frye posits a

category of fiction which, like a Greenaway film,

privileges taxonomy as an organizing principle. P. Adams

Sitney calls Greenaway's The Falls (1979) "an instance of

this rare genre in its purest and most extravagant form"

55

(45). Like Thompson, Frye analyzes the relationship of the

work's materiality to narrative drive as a way of drawing

distinctions between forms of prose. Frye doesn't describe

a perpetual tension between the narrative— unified and

stable— and the material manifestation— diffuse and

changeable. Instead, he uses the quality of foregrounded

materiality as a way of defining a category.

Separating and dividing critical categories, Frye

argues, makes it possible to properly appreciate a work in

a way not possible with a monolithic category of fiction in

which all works come to be judged by the standards of the

most dominant category (novel). In addition to novels,

romances, and confessions, Frye identifies what he at first

calls Menippean satire: extroverted and intellectual;

"deal[ing] less with people as such than with mental

attitudes" (309); most likely to be critically

misunderstood; and least likely to conform to narrative

expectations.

At its most concentrated the Menippean

satire presents us with a vision of the

world in terms of a single intellectual

pattern. The intellectual structure built

up from the story makes for violent

dislocations in the customary logic of

narrative. . . . (310)

Frye suggests Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy as the

paradigmatic example of this category and adopts the word

"anatomy"— defined as a dissection or analysis— to replace

56

"Menippean satire." The significance that Frye gives this

form, and a telling example, is provided by the title of

his own critical work: Anatomy of Criticism. By choosing

"anatomy" to designate the form, Frye connects the body to

the tendency to "expand into an encyclopedic farrago"

(311), a connection on which Greenaway obsesses.

The Falls is such a collection: encyclopedic in

length— 185 minutes— and a farrago of references—

i

Hitchcock's The Birds, avant-garde animation, documentary

cinema, the French Revolution, Genesis, Greenaway's other

films past and future, etc. The imaginary project which

The Falls pretends to depict is both isolating and

comprehensive. The film consists of ninety-two, almost

completely discrete, segments which provide a capsule

sketch of 92 "victims" of the VUE (Violent Unknown Event).

The subjects of the film's study, a portentous narrator

informs us, have been chosen because the first four letters

of their last names are F-A-L-L. A conceit of the film is

that the chosen letters are purely arbitrary, although of

course the word they form clearly evokes Adam and Eve's

fall from grace. The film studies the effects of the VUE

through changes traced on the bodies and speech of their

victims. They assume some physical characteristics of

birds and begin to speak in idiosyncratic languages. In

57

contradistinction to Adam and Eve, they realize that they

have been rendered immortal.

Greenaway provides another catalogue of bodies in his

short film Death in the Seine. Twenty-six corpses

represent all the bodies pulled from the Seine during the

French Revolution. Like the victims of the VUE, these

victims are isolated through a peculiarity: the discovery

of the corpse. But the video also demonstrates

inclusiveness. While the camera examines each naked and

inert character, a voice-over narration lists every thing

that is known about the person and how they came to be

found dead in a river.

The Falls and Death in the Seine synthesize isolation

and comprehensiveness, attributes that we have identified

separately in the two examples with which we began. These

opposing qualities are basic to the anatomy which strives

to be both discrete and all-encompassing.

Certainly, Greenaway could be that Menippean satirist,

who,

dealing with intellectual themes and

attitudes, shows his exuberance in

intellectual ways, by piling up an enormous

mass of erudition about his theme or in

overwhelming his pedantic targets with an

avalanche of their own jargon. (Frye 311)

The anatomy, through its very name, implies a taxonomy.

Aside from "overwhelming his pedantic targets," to what

58

purpose does the Menippean satirist put this "vision of the

world in terms of a single intellectual pattern"?

Taxonomy, in Greenaway's films, is associated with the

appearance of excess and motored by a demonstration of

control. One of the most powerful examples of taxonomy and

control can be seen in the story of Adam and Eve, a story

to which Greenaway, in films such as The Falls and The

Cook, the Thief, makes frequent and explicit reference. It

is interesting to note Adam's first chore:

So out of the ground the Lord God formed

every beast of the field and every bird of

the air, and brought them to the man to see

what he would call them; and whatever the

man called every living creature, that was

its name. (Genesis 2:19)

Having been granted dominion over "every creeping thing

that creeps upon the earth" (Genesis 1:26), Adam constructs

a taxonomy. As Lacan points out, this operation of naming

assumes a dual function:

Thus the symbol manifests itself first of

all as the murder of the thing, and this

death constitutes in the subject the

eternalization of his desire. (104)

Adam names to control all other entities, to fix them

(although they might be dead, decayed, or debased in the

process). This action is at once limiting— it reduces the

objects in the world to a single intellectual idea— and

infinite— it is capable of including everything and

anything.

59

Bulimic cinema disconnects what Adam's taxonomy

collapses. Anorexia reduces life to a single intellectual

idea: avoiding fat. Bulimia, on the other hand, can

encompass anything and everything, although all substances

must eventually be expelled.

In this conception of bulimic cinema and in Frye's

anatomy, the taxonomy is traced on a body, the symbolic

body of the work of art. Who names this body? Who

controls what can enter and what must be expelled, where

it begins and leaves off, who has access and who is denied?

In Bellv of an Architect and The Cook, the Thief, the

figure of the artist has been undermined to the point

where he can assert himself on none of these questions.

The architect Kracklite loses his exhibition and his baby

to the fascist moneyman Caspasian. The cook Richard can

make mischief in the kitchen, but the loquacious moneyman

Spica rules the dining room. Good intentions and good

taste don't accomplish much. In bulimic cinema, control

can only be achieved in extremity and outside the realms of

logic and capital.

What are the organizing patterns of Bellv and The

Cook, the Thief? We might say, a love triangle and a

revenge drama, but the material in the films which lie

outside these plots can't productively be classified as

stylistic excess. Systems other than plot, taxonomies and

60

lists, create their own single-minded meaning. With these

systems in mind, we can more interestingly consider some

features which occur in Greenaway's films as well as many

other contemporary films. These include: characters

lacking psychological plausibility; non-resolution of story

complications; a deficiency of plot motivation for formal

elements; a breakdown of borders between the film and other

artworks; and, finally, a general resistance of the film to

interpretation. These are all components of what I would

call bulimic cinema.

The paucity of the organizing pattern may seem opposed

to the exorbitance of the images, but both function as

excess and, like the problems of eating disorders, together

they lead us to the issue of control. These films react to

the barriers to achieving control without the benefit of

words, and without the appeal to reason and meaning,

fixedness and finitude, that a reliance on words implies.

61

CHAPTER FOUR

Film as Body

The body, as a symbol of organization, is crucial not

only to Greenaway's films, but to the concept of

postmodernity. Frye has suggested that the literary form

"anatomy" links the body metaphorically to a literary

organizational system. George Lakoff, a cognitive

linguist, argues that the body functions not only as a

metaphor but as the basis of metaphors. These metaphors of

the body are often realized more vividly and

straightforwardly than human bodies themselves whose

depiction and significance is often masked. Body

metaphors, according to Lakoff, also structure how we

organize and think about other objects in the world— all

other objects— but frequently in an unconscious or obscured

manner.

The significance of the body is central to Greenaway's

films, and he presents issues of the body on different

levels. Greenaway depicts the body as metaphor: as a

system of organization and as an analogy to art objects.

In this chapter I will consider how the postmodern body

operates as the basis of expanding conceptual metaphors.

But Greenaway also depicts actual human bodies; this

depiction emphasizes the materiality of bodies through the

revelation of nakedness and through an emphasis on physical

62

processes— particularly eating (with its digestive

corollary excreting). These concepts— eating and

nakedness— are both shown to intersect with sexuality, but

unlike their existence within a psychoanalytic account,

they are not subsumed within or explained by sexuality. In

Greenaway's films, eating and nakedness suggest a nexus of

meanings including knowledge, mortality and exclusion. The

second and third sections of this chapter will consider

these meanings through the concepts of eating and nakedness

in more detail.

Using Lakoff's discussion of metaphoric thought, we

can better understand the implications of naming an

artist's output his or her "corpus," body of work" or

"oeuvre." A body or bodies are always implicated when this

metaphor is applied to objects. What is of interest in

postmodernity is how explicit the embodiment of the work

has become. The corporality of the postmodern art object

contrasts with the disembodied nature of the modern art

object. Although it is often distinguished by a

foregrounding of the materials of production, the modern

art object transfigures those attributes associated with

materiality: mortality, transience, mutability,

contingency. The brush stroke, the flatness, the color of

painting; the tone, the tempo, the repetition of music; the

63

zoom, the grain, the sprocket of cinema: these qualities

are isolated and abstracted, propelled into transcendence.

I will argue, conversely, that the body of

postmodernity is not only explicitly mortal and mutable,

but has assumed the characteristics of the only body that

there ever has been in Western representation— the woman's

body: plural, conflicted, inconsistent, threatening, naked

and eating.

EXPANDING METAPHORS

In Women. Fire and Dangerous Things. Lakoff

contrasts a traditional view, which he terms objectivist,

with a cognitive approach, which he calls experiential

realism. Lakoff tries to deny a totalizing relativism,

which might be suggested by his rejection of objectivism,

by noting some shared characteristics between the two

views:

(a) a commitment to the existence of the

real world, (b) a recognition that reality

places constraints on concepts, (c) a

conception of truth that goes beyond mere

internal coherence, and (d) a commitment to

the existence of stable knowledge of the

world. (Women. Fire xv)

Despite these similarities, Lakoff argues that the

difference between the two approaches articulates a

substantial philosophical rift. One of the main

64

distinguishing characteristics between the two views is the

system of category formation:

On the objectivist view, things are in the

same category if and only if they have

certain properties in common. Those

properties are necessary and sufficient

conditions for defining a category. (xiv)

Alternatively, Lakoff's experiential realism, or

experientialism, depends on the idea that "thought

fundamentally grows out of embodiment. . . . reason is made

possible by the body. . . " (xv).

The capacity to reason is usually taken as

defining what human beings are and as

distinguishing us from other things that

are alive. If we understand reason as

being disembodied, then our bodies are only

incidental to what we are. (xvi)

Lakoff rejects this disembodiment, viewing the human body

as a central determinant of our conception of the world.

Along with the body, Lakoff would add imagination—

metaphor, metonymy, and mental imagery— as elements which

are vital to categorization, but which are often left out

of the process of reason.

As Lakoff makes clear, this argument has profound

implications for the project of categorization, a project

which is inseparable from reason. "To change the concept

of category itself is to change our understanding of the

world" (9). What also changes is the possibility of

expressing control over things in the world. An

objectivist approach to the problem of categories allows

65

some validity to Adam's project of domination through

naming and categorizing. However, in Lakoff's cognitive

view, no category exists absolutely, even within so-called

objective scientific language. What is a zebra? Lakoff

wonders. In an argument based on the conflicting standards

of biologists, Lakoff concludes that "There is no true

biological category that consists of all and only the

zebras" (119).

Like Lakoff, Greenaway sees the problem of

categorization as basic. The characters in Greenaway's A

Zed and Two Noughts are also stymied in their attempts to

categorize zebras. What is a zebra? A black animal with

white stripes, a white animal with black stripes, a black

and white animal for a special zoo, a type of horse, an

object of scientific study, a sexual partner, a suicide

machine? How is it possible to control the animals in this

category, or lack of a category, of zebras? In A Zed and

Two Noughts, animals persistently find their way out of

their assigned enclosures— through rescue, theft, and

death— and humans find their way in. Each character

eventually forms a personal menagerie based on some

personal idea: stolen black and white animals; animals in

pornographic stories; animals in children's songs; dead and

decomposing animals. Your zoo is a reflection of your

self. Oliver says of the child Beta's "brand new

66

taxonomy": "Only an innocent would put a spider and a fly

in the same cage because they were both brown." Categories

for Lakoff and for Greenaway— like zoo cages— are variable

and permeable, if not completely unstable; they are absurd,

not universally accepted, artificial.

If categories can't be fixed through an objectivist

view, how are they formed? Lakoff's model remains

fundamentally based on the human body. He argues that all

cultures refer to basic-level categories which are "human­

sized" (51) and which have "no objective status external to

human beings" (38). Abstraction arises out of body

experience in two ways: "By metaphorical projection from

the domain of the physical to abstract domains" and "By the

projection from basic-level categories to superordinate and

subordinate categories" (268). The body becomes the

ordering element of human reason: "It must be assumed that

our bodily experience itself has structure, that it is not

an unstructured mush" (267).

There are two apparent problems with this conception:

not only does it seem obvious to the point of

meaninglessness, there seems to be a dangerous appeal to

biologism. If we assign terms to concepts and objects

based on how our bodies are oriented in space— upright

while healthy and vital, prone in sickness and death— what

room is there for cultural determination or artistic

67

manipulation? The interest of the concept arises when we

consider how these metaphors extend beyond the body and

form connections which are not physically determined— the

"metaphorical projection from the domain of the physical to

abstract domains." Extended bodily experiences, for

instance "up" and "down," can create new categories of

perhaps strange conceptual bedfellows. Many of these

extensions are not obvious, but are embedded in a system

characterized by obviousness. Connections between

concepts— categories— are naturalized through the body as a

system of organization.

The problem of categories is one that also pervades

Greenaway's work. I have already mentioned the zoo cages

in flux of A Zed and Two Noughts. This film continually

evokes evolution, the theory of which seriously confounds

previous systems of categorization. Organisms in an

evolutionary scheme are all part of a vast continuum from

which one might distinguish branches, but never true

isolated character. "The very nature of the evolutionary

process ensures that the limits we set on each group of

related species are arbitrary" (Futuyma 59). In this

respect, the possibility of a creative, omniscient God—

whose categories could be, theoretically, clearly

determined— -is challenged on yet another front.

Greenaway demonstrates that even as it is impossible

to categorize all objects in the material world, it is as

impossible to assign stable categorization to subsets of

objects. The categories of individuals, for instance,

would seem to be obvious, but Greenaway consistently blurs

their boundaries. In Drowning Bv Numbers, three women bear

the same name— Cissie Colpitts— and use the same modus

operandi— drowning a husband. The character of Ariel, in

Prospero's Books, is played simultaneously by four actors—

identically dressed in red diapers and curly blond wigs,

but varying in age from a small boy to an adult man. In

The Falls, characters who have lost their identities are

advised to choose a new one from a group of ten which

includes David's Marat in the bathtub, Tippi Hendren in The

Birds and Greenaway's own recurring orthinologist character

Tulse Luper.

Another problematic category of categories is the set

of works of art. In Greenaway's films, a single

character's consciousness never determines every aspect of

any art object depicted. The category of a particular art

object is permeable, variable and subjective. Mr. Neville

of The Draughtsman's Contract includes in his drawings

objects which are not part of his design and which

eventually betray him by their presence. These

incriminating objects have invaded the limits of his

69

drawings. The death of the artist Neville at the end of

the film reflects the lack of power to which this incursion

attests. In Prosperous Books. Greenaway's primary

divergence from Shakespeare's Tempest provides another

example of how art works can exist with indeterminate

borders. The books Prospero treasures are re-created as

books of infinitude: the book of colors, of mirrors, of

movement, of minerals. These books include all the

infinite possibilities of the category they represent.

Within the finitude of a book, of course, this is an

impossibility. All books imply a selection and separation

performed by a reasoning consciousness. Prospero's books

could not have been written by any artist other than an

infinite God.

Greenaway's obsession with taxonomy intersects with an

obsession with bodily processes through what Lakoff has

suggested as the determining element of organization: the

human body. Greenaway explicitly invokes the same concepts

of bodily experience which Lakoff has identified as a

structural constant. However, Greenaway's use of the body

as system of organization is never absolute and is always

filtered through a tradition of Western culture. It is

through the body that Greenaway perpetually re-plays the

confusion of categories which are arbitrary, absurd,

variable and, ultimately, disintegrating.

70

The metaphor of up and down and the metaphor of the

body as container, are, according to Lakoff, two principal

structuring concepts that extend, or chain, through human

conceptual systems forming their own fluctuating categories

of meaning. Lakoff and Mark Johnson describe a cluster of

implications that attend the concepts of up and down:

happy is up, sad is down; conscious is up, unconscious is

down; health and life are up, sickness and death are down;

having control or force is up, being subject to control or

force is down, good is up, bad is down; virtue is up,

depravity is down; rational is up, emotional is down

(Metaphors We Live By 15).

Greenaway acknowledges the Western significance of the

up and down orientational metaphor through his use of a

specific image: Mantegna's painting of the Dead Christ.

Greenaway consciously invokes the painting: briefly in

Drowning By Numbers: as the main visual structuring element

in Death in the Seine: and again in Prospero's Books.

Mantegna's Christ lies on his back with his feet

prominently in the foreground. Because of the artist's

celebrated foreshortening technique, the feet appear large

and in the foreground, more prominent than the head. This

Christ, represented during the period after death, but

before resurrection, expresses the human, earthly aspect of

His dual nature— the capability to suffer and die— through

his foot. To assume this capability Christ had to descend

from heaven to earth. He will descend further, into hell,

and will eventually re-ascend. A chain of associations are

set in motion by these holy feet, a chain that ends in

death.

In his 1929 essay on "The Big Toe" Georges Bataille

comments similarly on the significance of the lower body

parts:

Although within the body blood flows in

equal quantities from high to low and from

low to high, there is a bias in favor of

that which elevates itself, and human life

is erroneously seen as an elevation. The

division of the universe into subterranean

hell and perfectly pure heaven is an

indelible conception, mud and darkness

being the principles of evil as light and

celestial space are the principles of good:

with their feet in mud but their heads more

or less in light, men obstinately imagine a

tide that will permanently elevate them,

never to return, into pure space. Human

life entails, in fact, the rage of seeing

oneself as a back and forth movement from

refuse to the ideal, and directed against

an organ as base as the foot. (20)

In Death in the Seine (1989) this back and forth movement

is articulated through a camera movement. This short film,

like The Falls, is segmented into capsule sketches of

individuals connected by a single criteria. The conceit in

this case is that the 26 characters profiled, or rather

their corpses, were pulled from the Seine during the French

Revolution. The camera tracks up their naked bodies from

the foot to the head— from refuse to the ideal— as the

72

video recounts what little is known about their lives and

the manner in which they died. These individuals

themselves demonstrate the oscillation from refuse to the

ideal. Found floating, discarded, unnamed and unmourned,

as refuse in the river, they are reconstructed as the

ideal, the human individual which is named, unique, and

socially connected. The video functions as memorial, a

remembrance of the dead. This in itself is an

immortalization or, in terms of up and down, an elevation.

Death in the Seine suggests those memorial photographs of

dead bodies which sought to arrest the body at the cusp of

decay. The agency of that arrest: representation and

remembrance.

The French Revolution, a prevalent theme in

Greenaway's work, here, as the film's setting, provides

another exa