EA takes the Burnout series to a new level with Burnout Revenge.

User Rating: 9.5 | Burnout Revenge PS2

EA manages to follow up on the success of Burnout 3: Takedown in Burnout Revenge and adds a few things to make the game more interesting and fun. As in Burnout 3: Takedown, there are races all over the world. Races are held in the United States, Europe, and Asia. There are regular races, eliminator races, road rage events, and crash junctions, just like Burnout 3: Takedown only with some changes made in Burnout Revenge. Burnout Revenge does have some significant differences compared to Burnout 3: Takedown. First, Burnout Revenge introduces a ranking system for the first time in the Burnout series. During races, your performance and aggression during a race determines your rank for the race, ranging from 1 to 4 stars. These stars add to your overall rank which goes on a scale from 1 to 10. As a bonus, if a gold medal is won and a 4 star rating is achieved, one extra star is awarded for a maximum of 5 stars. The second addition to Burnout Revenge is the use of Crashbreakers during certain races, eliminator events, and road rages. With the use of Crashbreakers in races, it is possible to take out all five racers at once. Also, the eliminator races have been changed slightly since Burnout 3. Instead of the last place car being eliminated after each lap as it was in Burnout 3, now every 30 seconds the last place car is eliminated. Finally, a new type of race, called traffic attack, is introduced in Burnout Revenge. In this mode, the goal is to hit as much traffic as possible before time runs out. Hitting traffic adds time, up to 20 seconds, and keeps you alive longer so you can hit even more traffic. My only problem is that it's hard to get golds on the Burning Laps, other than that, this game is just great. The graphics are just amazing and the only thing I see wrong with it is that the fire from the explosions it just a bunch or orange and not flames are distinguishable, but this is very easy to over look and I’m not too concern about it. In Burnout Revenge, Crash FM does make an appearance, but this time it’s a female voice and the only time it is heard is the opening movie and the tutorials about how each race mode works. The music in Burnout Revenge is not that bad either and without Crash FM interrupting the music, you can listen to a whole song during the race without some announcer cutting in and talking. Overall, Burnout Revenge is a great game and I recommend that anyone that is already a fan to the Burnout series and those who want to experience the Burnout series to get this game.

Other Helpful Reviews for Burnout Revenge

Rating:9

Burnout Revenge is better than Burnout 3 in some areas but worse in others.

Burnout Revenge has a more darker look to it compared to last years Burnout. The gameplay has not really improved a whole lot like the difference between Burnout 2 to 3. There are some new features which are great. The m... Read Full Review

7 of 7 users found the following review helpful

Rating:9.6

Sweet!!!

Ok this game was so much better then I thought it would be and I thought this game would be great but it is freaking sick.Well I loved the road rage in Burnout:3 Takedown but the road rage in Burnout Revenge is even bett... Read Full Review

6 of 6 users found the following review helpful