Don Davisis a Democrat running for a US House District 1 seat in North Carolina.

Biography provided by candidate:

Growing up working in the tobacco fields of eastern North Carolina, he learned the importance of hard work early. He beat the odds to become an Air Force officer, a professor, the youngest and first African American Mayor in Snow Hill’s history, and a 6-term State Senator. He said he has proven that he can fight the tough fights and deliver results for eastern North Carolina. In his six terms as State Senator, he wrote more than 90 pieces of legislation to cut taxes and utility costs, raise teacher pay, invest in education and HBCUs, and improve healthcare. Now, he is running for Congress to continue his fight for eastern North Carolina in Washington.

You can learn more about Don Davis on his webpage and social media:

All candidates running for the US House District 1 seat in North Carolina were asked to submit responses to a NewsChannel12 questionnaire. Below are his responses.

Why have you chosen to run for the US House District 1 seat in North Carolina?

I’m running for Congress to be a champion for eastern North Carolina. I’ve dedicated my entire life to public service, but we need a proven leader who has a track record of delivering for rural communities. I am a 94’ graduate of the U.S. Air Force Academy and served 8 years active duty. I saw firsthand the sacrifices of our military members and their families. I’ve been a champion for veterans affairs in the state Senate, fighting to make military pensions tax-exempt and resources for veterans suffering from PTSD - but there is more work needed on the federal level. When I came back to North Carolina during my service, I began teaching at East Carolina University and our local community college. I earned my doctorate in education, and have been teaching in eastern North Carolina for 20 years.

The day I hung up my uniform, I started my campaign for mayor of my hometown. I understand the struggles of rural communities because I spent the better part of a decade dedicated to fixing our potholes and expanding rural broadband access and leading local governance. When there was more work to be done beyond Snow Hill, I ran for state Senate and served 6 terms in the North Carolina Legislature fighting for eastern North Carolina. I’ve delivered for the east, by securing $1 billion to expand broadband access, $215 million to increase the number of rural health care providers, and teacher pay raises across the state.

NC-01 needs a proven leader with a track record of running and winning in tough districts. My leadership and service to North Carolina are unparalleled, but there is more work to be done on the federal level to ensure eastern North Carolina receives our fair share.

What differentiates you from your opponent(s)?

I’m running for Congress to be a champion for eastern North Carolina and I have an unmatched track record for delivering for our community. As a veteran, a minister, an educator, a mayor, and a state Senator, I've dedicated my life to public service to fight for eastern North Carolina. In my six terms as State Senator I have written over 90 pieces of legislation to cut taxes and utility costs, raise teacher pay, invest in education and our HBCUs, and improve healthcare and lower costs. I have secured billions of dollars in investments to eastern North Carolina all while running strong campaigns and out preforming President Biden and Governor Cooper on the ballot.

I have also built the strongest and most comprehensive coalition supporting my campaign. I am endorsed by over 100 state and local elected officials and communities leaders who are all fighting to protect eastern North Carolina. I am endorsed by Vote Vets and New Politics, for my service in the Air Force and my experience to govern as a veteran. I am endorsed by the Voter Protection Project because I am the strongest champion for voting rights and fought to protect access to the ballot box. And I am endorsed by the AFL-CIO, the Communications Workers of America, and the Sheet Metal Workers' International Association because they know I am the best champion to advocate for workers rights and lift our families out of hard times.

Not only am I the most qualified candidate on this ballot, I have built the strongest coalition to support eastern North Carolina when I go to Washington.

Explain what you see as the most important issue facing North Carolina.

The east has been left behind by years of underinvestment, and policies from Washington, D.C. that ignored the true needs of those of us who live in rural communities. We must take action to bring back good-paying manufacturing jobs, support our small businesses, and strengthen North Carolina’s agriculture—especially as farmers face increasingly unpredictable weather patterns due to global climate change. I am fighting for important investments that will allow eastern North Carolina to thrive by ensuring access to high-speed broadband, which drives investment in small businesses and industry; creating good-paying jobs and opportunities for our children who live in rural communities, and expanding 21st century infrastructure to rural North Carolina in order to connect businesses with the global market.

How are you uniquely qualified to address that specific issue?

Mine is a story of beating the odds. I was born and raised in Snow Hill, North Carolina where I worked in the tobacco fields to buy clothes and supplies for school. My grandmother instilled in me the value of hard work and the belief that education is transformative. I hold those values to this day.

I graduated from the United States Air Force Academy, and commissioned as an officer in the Air Force. As a 1st Lieutenant, I coordinated Air Force One operations at Andrews Air Force Base and supported families of military members killed in action as a mortuary officer. Although I loved serving my country in uniform, after 8 years I made the decision to return to eastern North Carolina and build a life here as a professor of Aerospace Studies at East Carolina University.

Back in Snow Hill I saw that eastern North Carolina was being left behind. I saw that the same potholes in the road that had been there when I was a child were still there. At age 29, I announced my campaign for mayor and ran on a platform of real change. I was elected the youngest mayor in Snow Hill’s history.

As mayor of Snow Hill I restored confidence in the government by re-building the economy and expanding high-speed internet. I’m proud of the work I did, but I knew I could do more. In 2008, I ran for State Senate and won. In my six terms as State Senator, I have passed over 90 pieces of legislation, which has resulted in raising teacher pay, securing historic investment to our HBCUs like Elizabeth City State University, increasing the minimum wage to $15 an hour for state employees, funding for the ECU Brody School of Medicine, protecting a woman’s right to choose, and standing up to attacks on the right to vote. I fought to bring billions of dollars in economic growth to eastern North Carolina and worked alongside our business leaders and our working families to ensure that the east is strong for everyone.

I’m a proven champion for North Carolina. I’ve dedicated my life to public service, and now I’m committed to fighting for North Carolina in Congress. Out East, we know leaders lead by example and by treating others with dignity and respect. As a veteran, a minister, and a state senator, I’ve rolled up my sleeves and gone to work for our neighbors and families. When I am sworn in as our next Congressman, we will focus on the fight ahead - transforming the future of our region and all of rural America.

What do you believe is the most significant issue regarding jobs and the economy and how would you address it?

Our rural economy is being left behind by politicians in Washington. We must build an economy that supports the next generations of leaders so that we can continue to grow the east. We are seeing time and time again, manufacturing jobs being shipped overseas and leaving eastern North Carolina, leaving behind fewer and fewer good paying jobs. Our small businesses are still struggling to recover from the COVID-19 crisis. And our farmers face unprecedented challenges with the global supply chain crises and the lack of support transitioning to 21st century farming techniques. I am fighting for important investments that will allow eastern North Carolina to thrive by ensuring access to high-speed broadband, which drives investment in small businesses and industry; creating good-paying jobs and opportunities for our children who live in rural communities, and expanding 21st century infrastructure to rural North Carolina in order to connect businesses with the global market.

Investing in rural North Carolina will ensure that all of North Carolina is able to thrive.

What do you believe is the most significant issue regarding education and how would you address it?

As an educator for 20 years with a doctorate in education, I’ve seen first hand how our schools and educators have struggled. The education gap in eastern North Carolina has a dramatic effect on the number of young people who believe they will be able to build successful careers in the east. A college degree will build a pathway to upward mobility for young people. There is a cultural epidemic of devaluing education that exists to undermine the essential support our communities need to create an even playing field. Ensuring college affordability will change the lives of families across the district. Programs designed to invest in the long term success of our young people like early college programs, workforce development and apprenticeship programs ultimately invest in our local economy and while investing in our communities’ future.

What do you believe is the most significant issue regarding healthcare and how would you address it?

With an aging population with less access to healthcare at all levels, eastern North Carolina has unique and pressing healthcare needs. Health care outcomes from birth to death are worse in NC-01 than they are anywhere else in the state. We have the highest rates of infant mortality and maternal mortality and morbidity, limited access to behavioral, mental, and dental healthcare, and high rates of chronic disease, heart disease, stroke, and diabetes. Closing the coverage gap in North Carolina is essential, but we need long term solutions to increase the number of and retain health care providers.

What is the best advice you have ever received?

While serving at Andrews AFB in Maryland, I asked US Rep Walter Fauntroy the best steps for getting elected and serving in the US Congress. I will never forget. After asking me a few questions, he encouraged me to move back to North Carolina and go to work for my home community. The Congressman said the foundation of political service is working in your community. He shared the passion to serve a community was the seed for growing the best elected leaders. I did exactly that.