LILYAN TASHMAN

Handwritten note authorizing her sister to place bonds in the safe deposit box of her husband, Edmund Lowe

Autograph Note signed: "Lilyan Tashman Lowe", 1 page, 6¼x8 with blank integral leaf. No place, no date, but receipt stamp on integral leaf: October 20, 1928. In full: "Kindly permit my sister to put some bonds into Mr. Lowe's safe deposit box - B. 23. Thank you." Ink note by a bank employee notes the bonds were placed. Lilyan Tashman (1896-1934) worked as a model in New York and by 1914 she had a job in vaudeville - ever trying to get to Broadway. In 1916 she met Florenz Ziegfeld and at age 20 made her first Ziegfeld Follies appearance and stayed with the show from 1917-1918. The Gold Diggers ran for two years and then she made her first film Experience in 1921. She moved to Hollywood, married fellow actor Edmund Lowe in 1925, and their careers took off! She was especially skilled at playing villainesses and the "other woman". Tashman had no problem transitioning to talkies, making eight films in 1931. She was a lesbian, whose lovers included Greta Garbo, and Lowe was gay; their marriage was an amicable, convenient pairing common in that era. She died at 38 from cancer. Edges frayed and worn. Multiple minor ink smears (not effecting signature). Nail size holes near top and bottom center. Mailing fold through center. Corners lightly worn. Ink stamp on verso. Otherwise, fine condition.

This website image may contain our company watermark. The actual item does not contain this watermark

See more listings from these signers

Following offer submission users will be contacted at their account email address within 48 hours. Our response will be to accept your offer, decline your offer or send you a final counteroffer. All offers can be viewed from within the "Offer Review" area of your HistoryForSale account. Please review the Make Offer Terms prior to making an offer.

If you have not received an offer acceptance or counter-offer email within 24-hours please check your spam/junk email folder.