Keanu Reeves may be known for his action roles, including ‘The Matrix’ franchise, ‘Constantine’, and most famously for playing John Wick in the franchise of the same name — but he is most well known for his kindness.

Both fans and fellow Hollywood stars have noticed Reeves’ kind and helping attitude, something he’s maintained throughout his career. Here’s a look at the reasons why he’s considered to be the nicest guy in Hollywood.

He gave up his seat on a crowded New York subway

In 2015 the ‘John Wick’ star made news when a bystander filmed the actor giving up his seat to a passenger on a New York Subway who was seen carrying a heavy bag.

The actor then stood up to give up his seat, standing the rest of the way. The train can be heard announcing that he was on a Brooklyn-bound Q express train.

Respectfully takes pictures with women

In 2019, fans noticed that whenever Reeves was photographed posing with women, whether fans or co-stars, he respectfully kept his distance and did not directly touch their backs to pose with them.

He instead appeared to hover his hands behind them, not interfering with their personal space. He then became dubbed a “respectful king”, with people noting his consideration for making sure women feel comfortable.

Treats workers on set

In the 1990s, when on set for the film ‘Chain Reaction’ with Morgan Freeman, a “grunt worker”, as he referred to himself in a Reddit post, explained that Reeves would treat the stage workers by taking them out for free breakfast and lunch every day during the production’s last weeks of filming.

This isn’t the first time he treated workers on set. He once bought Harley-Davidson bikes for the stunt team in ‘The Matrix Reloaded’, to thank them for their work in a difficult scene where his character Neo fights an army of Agent Smiths.

Waited to enter a party rather than use his fame to get him in

After filming wrapped up for his movie ‘Exposed’ in 2014, the cast and crew went out to celebrate. But when Reeves arrived at the club, the bouncer didn’t recognize him and wouldn’t let him in. Rather than cause a fuss and pull a “do you know who I am?”, Reeves went to the back of the line to wait.

“Keanu was really patiently waiting,” chauffeur Ronny Sunshine said to Page Six.