Average temperature in September

Santa Maria, CA

Average high temperature in September: 79.2°F

The warmest month (with the highest average high temperature) is August (79.3°F).

The month with the lowest average high temperature is December (61.9°F).

Average low temperature in September: 59.9°F

The month with the highest average low temperature is September (59.9°F).

The coldest month (with the lowest average low temperature) is February (46.6°F).

Average rainfall in September

Santa Maria, CA

Average rainfall in September: 0.08"

The wettest month (with the highest rainfall) is March (1.5").

The driest months (with the least rainfall) are June and August (0.04").

Average rainfall days in September

Santa Maria, CA

Average rainfall days in September: 2 days

The month with the highest number of rainy days is March (7.9 days).

The months with the least rainy days are June and August (0.8 days).

Average daylight in September /

Average sunshine in September

Santa Maria, CA

Average daylight in September: 12h and 2min

The month with the longest days is June (Average daylight: 14h and 30min).

The month with the shortest days is December (Average daylight: 9h and 54min).

Average sunshine in September: 11h and 2min

The months with the most sunshine are June, July and August (Average sunshine: 12h and 0min).

The month with the least sunshine is February (Average sunshine: 6h and 30min).

Average UV index in September

Santa Maria, CA

Average UV index in September: 5

The months with the highest UV index are June, July and August (UV index 6).

The months with the lowest UV index are January, February, March, November and December (UV index 4).

Average visibility in September

Santa Maria, CA

Average visibility in September: 6mi

The months with the highest visibility are January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November and December (6mi).

The months with the lowest visibility are January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November and December (6mi).