Santa Maria, CA experiences a mild and sunny climate throughout the year, with moderate temperatures ranging between 50-80 degrees Fahrenheit. Winters are generally mild, with occasional cold days in December and January. Summers are hot and dry, with temperatures between 80-100 degrees Fahrenheit. Precipitation is low throughout the year, averaging only 8 inches annually, with most of the rainfall occurring from October to March. The area also experiences very little snowfall each year.

Santa Maria (zip 93454), California gets 16 inches of rain, on average, per year. The US average is 38 inches of rain per year.

Santa Maria (zip 93454) averages 0 inches of snow per year. The US average is 28 inches of snow per year.

On average, there are 286 sunny days per year in Santa Maria (zip 93454). The US average is 205 sunny days.

Santa Maria (zip 93454) gets some kind of precipitation, on average, 45 days per year. Precipitation is rain, snow, sleet, or hail that falls to the ground. In order for precipitation to be counted you have to get at least .01 inches on the ground to measure.

Weather Highlights

Summer High: the July high is around 77 degrees

Winter Low: the January low is 39

Rain: averages 16 inches of rain a year

Snow: averages 0 inches of snow a year

YOU SHOULD KNOW

Many people confuse weather and climate but they are different. Weather is the conditions of the atmosphere over a short period of time, and climate is how the atmosphere is over long periods of time.

Weather is how the atmosphere is behaving and its effects upon life and human activities. Weather can change from minute-to-minute. Most people think of weather in terms of temperature, humidity, precipitation, cloudiness, brightness, visibility, wind, and atmospheric pressure.

Climate is the description of the long-term pattern of weather in a place. Climate can mean the average weather for a particular region and time period taken over 30 years. Climate is the average of weather over time.