Instead of a band, we have a solo artist for you today in the form of Julia Marcell…

Simple things first – where are you from?

Berlin or Warsaw, depending on the day.

How long have you been playing as a solo act?

Since the first time the need to perform overpowered my shyness and I’ve made a complete fool of myself playing an instrument in front of my entire school. I must have been eleven or twelve. My then boyfriend gave me an ultimatum – either him or music. We’re not together anymore.

Before you get sick of being asked… where does the band name come from?

I don’t remember. I must have suppressed that memory.

What are your influences?

Books, films, other people, other’s people’s music. I love art, I love looking at the world, I find something to learn in anything. My favourite things are mysterious, emotional, a little strange maybe, a bit darker on the inside and with humour on the edges.

Describe your music. What makes you unique?

I try to write good songs. In my opinion a good song communicates well, takes the listener somewhere, expresses what cannot be written in words or painted as a picture. And it can also be fun.

Do you have any particular lyrical themes?

I tend to write a lot about loneliness. My upcoming album “Skull Echo” is fully dedicated to it. It’s about the singular perspective of the human experience. Why do we see what we see, how do we construct the image of the world in our heads and does that make true communication impossible, such topics.

What’s your live show like? How many shows have you played?

Many, I think in hundreds. I did everything, from tiny one-woman-band gigs, to big festivals. My latest show is a full production, with an amazing band, lights, scenography. Its sound and look is a labor of love of many wonderful people I have the luck to work with, so I’m very excited about it.

What’s the wildest thing you’ve seen or done at a live show?

I smashed a violin on stage in a rock ‘n’ roll moment, climbed scaffoldings on a festival, surfed the crowd, surfed the wheeled PA speakers, accidentally drank a whole lot of vodka in one gulp (thinking it’s water), did a group hug with the entire audience, invited the entire audience onto the stage and they came, smashed a viola, improvised a calypso song when some of our instruments broke down, organized an impromptu limbo dance party, when the whole PA broke down, hugged and hi-fived more people than I can count and played a club gig in my pyjamas.

What kit do you use / guitars do you play / etc.?

I play Hagstrom Viking guitars with pedals from EarthQuaker Devices, a Korg SV1 stage piano and recently Dave Smith Prophet Rev2.

What, if anything, are you plugging/promoting at the moment?

My new album Skull Echo! Check it out, I’m very proud of it.

What are your plans for 2020?

I’m hoping to get back to touring as soon as possible. Who knows how long this pandemic lasts. Stay safe everyone!

If you were second on a three-band bill, which band would you love to be supporting and which band would you choose to open for you? A chance to plug someone you’ve toured with, or a mate’s band we’ve not heard of before!

I can’t name just two, let’s make it a festival. I’d love to play with Król, Miss Kenichi, And the golden choir, Kat Frankie, Kasai, Catt, MissinCat, Catself, Ina West, Oxford Drama, Dear Reader.

Julia Marcell: official | facebook | instagram | youtube | spotify