Name Peter Crone Age / Peter Crone how old? / Birthday / Date of Birth / DOB Born in 1969/1970. As of 2024, he is around 54 years old. Wedding & Marriage / Wife / Peter Crone Girlfriend / Partner Currently not married. Check the full bio for relationship details.

Wiki Biography / Profile Background

Introduction :

Peter Crone is a thought leader, speaker, and author in the field of human potential and performance. He is also an Ayurvedic practitioner and the Founder of The Mind Architect, a company that helps individuals overcome their mental limitations and achieve their life goals.

Notable for being the personal trainer to A-rated celebrities like Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Ben Affleck, and Kevin Spacey in the past, Peter emphasizes on a unique approach to fitness and training.

Personal Life, Parents and Family Details :

Peter was born and raised in the Home Counties of England, where he experienced the harsh realities of life at a young age.

As an only child, Peter’s world was shattered when his mother succumbed to cancer, when he was just seven. Peter’s dad started raising him, but tragedy struck again when his father, the sole pillar of his support, perished in the MS Herald of Free Enterprise ferry disaster in March 1987 when Crone was just 17.

The loss of both parents left Peter with a profound sense of loneliness, propelling him to strive for an extraordinary life in honor of his father’s wishes.

Peter is not married and does not have any children. He has a brother who lives in Australia.

Early Life and Education :

Peter has obtained a Bachelor’s degree in Human Biology and Exercise Physiology from Loughborough University, followed by a Master’s degree in Information Technology from the same institution. He was awarded the Sir Robert Martin prize at Loughborough for being an outstanding all-round student.

During academic breaks, Peter ventured into coaching, serving as a ski coach in Europe and a tennis coach in New York. Eventually, he made a decisive move to the United States, settling in Miami, where his career quickly gained momentum.

Career, Salary and Net Worth :

The glittering shores of Malibu, California, provided the backdrop for Peter’s ascent as a prominent figure among celebrity trainers. It was in this competitive environment that he caught the attention of Hollywood heavyweight Tom Cruise.

He then worked globally for five years as a personal trainer for Tom Cruise and his former wife Nicole Kidman, and later counted Ben Affleck and Kevin Spacey among his celebrity clients. After the Cruises got divorced, Crone moved on and started living in Paris for some time. Back then, his girlfriend was studying at the Sorbonne university.

What sets Crone apart was not just his physical training regimen but his distinctive spiritual approach. Refusing to be confined to the label of a mere fitness trainer, he has now styled himself as a “life consultant.”

Peter serves as the founder and CEO of The Mind Architect, a company that offers coaching, consulting, workshops, and online courses to help people transform their lives by changing their mindset. He works with individuals and organizations from various fields such as entertainment, sports, business and philanthropy. His list of clients include Hollywood celebrities like Gwyneth Paltrow, Adam Levine, athletes like Matt Ryan, Shane Victorino, Greg Norman, executives like Tony Robbins, Arianna Huffington, and organizations like Netflix, Warner Bros. etc.

Peter is also a speaker who travels around the world to share his insights and strategies on how to create an inspired life and find true freedom by awakening new levels of awareness. He has spoken at events such as TEDx San Diego, Mindvalley University, etc.

Besides speaking and coaching, Peter has been the author of books like “The Inside-Out Revolution: The Only Thing You Need to Know to Change Your Life Forever” and “The Space Within: Finding Your Way Back Home”. These books are based on the philosophy that the source of all human suffering is the illusion of separation from our true nature.

Crone’s Instagram account with over 350,000 followers reflect a curated life, blending golf, intense workouts, and profound wisdom.

Interesting Facts and Trivia :

One of Peter’s notable clients was the renowned actress and model Liz Hurley. Post-pregnancy, in 2003, she embarked on a challenging fitness journey under Crone’s guidance. Her commitment to an austere diet and a rigorous exercise regime, resulted in a remarkable weight loss of 53 pounds in just 12 weeks.

Peter has been featured in the 2017 Netflix documentary Heal, a Goop podcast, and Rangan Chatterjee’s Feel Better Live More podcast.

People have described Peter as having chiseled cheekbones, large blue eyes, gleaming white teeth, and exuding serene yet buoyant energy!

Body Figure / Physical Info

Eye Colour : Blue

Haircut / Hair Colour : Dark Brown

How tall is Peter Crone Height : 6′1″

Is Peter Crone Vegan / Vegetarian : No confirmed information is available.