1. Introduction to 'Citizen Kane'

Citizen Kane has long been acclaimed as a work of genius and endlessly dissected by critics. The film is so varied that it has been compared to a Russian novel; it has been called a detective story in which the detective never solves the case, a horror movie in which the monster is not killed or seen; it has been analyzed as a political study and a social document. Critics and cineastes as disparate as Andrew Sarris, James Naremore, Mary McCarthy, Kael, Leslie Fiedler, Bosley Crowther, and Time's Richard Schickel – who keeps an extensive, scrupulously balanced log of Citizen Kane books - have made it impossible to wrap the film in a secure package and say 'That's it'. None of these people yet realizes how various Citizen Kane is. For the subject of Citizen Kane is the coalescence of a meaning within a particular man's soul. If these people never exhaust the possibilities of the film, it is the boundlessly suggestive and beautiful things themselves that keep coming at them, its perception of the wagon (in Kael's phrase), in the wagon of movement, of life itself.

1.1. Overview of the Film

Citizen Kane is the first American film that made use of the newly developed deep-focus technique (in which both foreground and distant planes remain in focus). Combined with low-angle shots and a skillfully exaggerated art direction, the film has a Fauvist quality which tends to overshadow the more enduring elements of the plot and dramatic content. The story (written in large part by Herman J. Mankiewicz), in essence, is a rather straightforward, almost banal, account of the life and times of a newspaper tycoon modeled on the life of William Randolph Hearst: driven, isolated, haunted by ambition and a desire to be loved, the protagonist loses out on the personal relationships that might have brought happiness. To this, Mankiewicz (and Orson Welles, the director) added deliberately provocative overtones and the enigma of his dying word, "Rosebud". All these elements are presented as though awaiting a solution by a remorseless newsreel interviewer who interviews scores of aged acquaintances, who inevitably fail to throw light on the mystery, in spite of the narrative help they provide. The elaborate and novelistic structure serves both to transform the film's rather simple, highly transparent documentary guise into an enigma, like the hole at the center of Hoegel's famous play, which can be defined only by its consequences, and to create a spacious tempo that allows the essential internal contrasts of the narrative's political message to propound itself.

1.2. Historical Context

Orson Welles took on the role of screenwriter at a time when Hollywood writers were still down at the bottom of the heap, in charge of the film's final dialogues. His idea was to use, not the quality of the language, but the structure itself to demonstrate the decay of the main character through his childhood friends' interrogation about the word 'rosebud'. Hence, the at-first glance unconventional different views on the main character placing the crime at the beginning rather than the end of the film loyal to the sound principles attracted by a certain distance or limpness of fate. Insets offer the possibility of going back through various memories, cutting through stories and people. The entirely different perspectives locate a different personality of the main character, someone who's constantly changing without ever knowing himself. Hence, the film goes through a journey of discoveries to bid farewell symmetrically to the beginning and the end of the sequence that generates the movie. In 1940, when Welles was shooting I Married a Witch, Hollywood was turned upside down, and the 1930 Pact monolith crumbled. Having had trades leading the four films produced in 1944, between 3 of the same and the use of those prefab sets that he and Campanian had created. In those stages of quasi-experience that transformed him into a builder's mercenary craftsman when he sold Hollywood the King Kong, his RKO was in great condition. After Parnell's disaster, in September 1937, John J. Haney's bank publicly said once and for all that their "other 8 million debts" had turned them into speculators by lending them based on their own shares. The film didn't go down well with him. Even though the radio shows critics' reviews didn't do much to help, Welles came up with a new sequence, brighter and less dramatic than the old one, but no less stimulating. In Miranda, Hollywood saw a little of its Knapp Commission Report turning into a romantic film.

2. Narrative Structure and Storytelling Techniques

The narrative of 'Kane' takes on unusual significance in formally demonstrating the points that underlie the film. Besides using such a facile approach to storytelling innovation, it also provides abundant certainties. Citizen Kane is a visually striking work, and evidence can be found without resorting to unnecessary examination looking for meanings. Certainly the meaning is there, although the proposition would probably not have required critical investigation at great length if it were not for Citizen Kane having been the only work of its creator, Orson Welles, to have been generally invalid for widespread dramatic acclaim. The narrative of Citizen Kane, which presents the attempt by an established, media-dominant figure to document the life and meaning of that figure, questions the intrinsic values of material power. The film ultimately requires the full examination necessary to bring out an explanation of why and how its meanings are constructed. But these details need not anticipate the basic values. Welles' narrative shapes a cultured subversion of its printed, political, family and managerial authority and exposes personal elements that simply deny the media endorsement.

2.1. Non-linear Narrative

Initially, this does not seem particularly complicated. Thus, Rosebud is Kane's last word and, given that he was in his room alone when he died, nobody could have been aware of his having said it. So, how does the rest of the film learn about the sledge? This problem has been the object of varied speculation. The most obvious explanation is that Welles was trying to be clever and that his cleverness was to create the illusion that there was more to the revelation than there actually is. This explanation is difficult to sustain because of the tightness of the script of the film and the consistent forward drive of its narrative. However, this, in a sense, poses an even more serious problem. After making the sledge contribution to the puzzle, the voice of the newsreel interview is unable to provide one piece of extra information about who or what Rosebud is. The audience alone possesses this piece of information and this lack of reciprocity between the newsreel crew and the audience is not consistent with the cleverness hypothesis.

2.2. Flashbacks and Montages

If flashbacks have always been the best resource for those obsessed with the dissolution of memory, the recovery of memories, or the intrinsic totality of each character, the montage, on the other hand, besides delimiting space and time, provided a skeletal, dense, and penetrating black-and-white scan. Overlapping architecture, subduing assembly steps, triangulating expressive language to the rhythm of simplicity, effectiveness, capacity for truth, escalating virtues: Kane reveals itself in layers, uses a peeling page, works for the establishment of the fundamental elements: individual and universe, man and society, Kane and Xanadu. Kane, always Kane. Humbly we are before this sound jewel, superimposed facets on the outlines of what constitutes the genesis and decline of its holder. Precisely because of this, Citizen Kane remains as Kane Citizen, demanding, alive, demanding, wandering synonym for an ethical wandering, individual and collective. Kon Sobrei assim responda._release_ The Bogart, the John Wayne, the Cooper, so many others replied. They all signed RKO funding contracts refusing to hear Orson Welles' speech. Kane, by the way, was so uncomfortable. Personality, prestige, capacity for truth, how much was on the streets, in theaters, in enthusiasts. Kept in custody, symptomatic management refusal. Others took your place. The place is still there, only the sign changed. Always Kane, always.

3. Themes and Symbolism

As an addition, Citizen Kane made use of symbolism undreamed of by the casual moviegoer. With the perfect exploitation of the title, the picture suggested the methods, motives, and ultimate methods of greed and power. Xanadu could well be the castle of King Midas touching its peaks with a curse upon all that surrounded it. Leland pointed to the riddle that was Kane when he referred to the skylight which formed the only opening to a man gone bad. The solemn shattered glass was another brilliant suggestion of Kane's ultimate failure to understand the real meaning of life. Mrs. Kane's wonderful nod was the hint to the ending eat which hurled a light upon the psychological motives for the replay of Kane's first words. Guideline 1 - A film is a work of art. As such, its function is not merely to entertain. It also reflects the times. It admits the beauty and ugliness of life. More importantly, a film discusses ideas to a thinking audience. This is why it endures. Some films are better than others because its creator knows his time and limits. Some are better because they lend themselves to more than one interpretation. The greatness of a film is in relation to the emotions and thoughts it generates long after it is first shown. Viewers do not think and feel intensely alike, nor do the situations of all times concur. Hence the difference in opinion. With varying emotions and thoughts, therefore, the critic must see a film. Guideline 2 - Citizen Kane reinforces the inconsistencies of critics. It merits the numerous conflicting opinions, however. Indeed, the very element that makes for this inconsistency is the very essence of its durability. Never has a film portrayed better the nuances of materialism to mean much more than its dictionary definition. In no other film has capitalism been fodder for cannibals. Marketable commodities are not the only victims. Silent souls shatter through the creed of commercialism. The "Is" really is.

3.1. Power and Corruption

The third point of analysis is the film's definition of 'power' and 'corruption'. This could easily be seen to fit into the category of theme, as with the second point of analysis, but I think it is also specifically something to do with Kane's character. I think it is fitting to put this forth as a point, just as one could say that the attempt to define 'Rosebud' by the film's end results in another brief point. Now, again, when analyzing any film, it is not hard to make the feature of power figures. As I said in the first point, the film would seem to be promising enough when dealing with a megalomaniac who owns most of the world, but is it enough? Always, the shadings and hints are apparent that some deep mystery lies behind Kane's construction. Who would not be strengthened by the impulse to emulate the "Gettysburg speech"? But in the end, who is frustrated by Kane? Does he not die alone? Does it not turn out that having created 'Kane' life and soul, the real challenge should come in understanding the pitifully frail and damaged being named "Charles Foster Kane"? What is 'corruption'? Is it not the corruptibility of space, order, and time, as we defined in our 'zeroeth' point of analysis? In dealing with Kane, who always appears to own all three, and yet in the end seems strip himself of everything, is a fact not tellingly brought out? Are they not the very truths that Dante wanted the world reminded of? Because, once a man is noble enough to have circumnavigated those confines of convenience, once the top of the hill has been reached free, is it not the main aim of the journey to understand? Did not the phrase "Gnostic" mean the intellect understanding itself? When one reaches a vantage point in understanding does not the beauty of the view hold the purpose of existence? Is our very refusal to bow down to the physical world not terribly religious in itself?

3.2. Loneliness and Isolation

Often throughout Citizen Kane, characters are placed in isolated positions in the frame, especially with Kane. This is noted a great deal with Susan Alexander, because as she becomes more and more disillusioned with her husband, we see her become more confined in spaces. Typically, she is placed on the far right side of the screen amidst her large cavernous mansion as she desperately tries to escape these attempts for control. Her framing with the rest of the characters is completely separate from the environment and people around her. When her first attempt at freedom leads to her failure, we see her move farther away from everyone. Her isolation is complete; she is finally framed alone. The OSS uses montage as well early in the film to consistently emphasize Kane's loneliness. The early sequences with the jigsaw puzzle merry-go-round, shooting star, Mr. Thatcher reading to young Kane, etc., are all used to show the personal struggle and conflicts going on between the characters of Kane and Thatcher, particularly Kane's rebellion against his new school situation during Christmas. The OSS highlights the geometric shape of the areas they inhabit – the hallway of the stark, abused solitude vs. the time spent by the fire with Mr. Thatcher – emphasizing the type of psychological relationship being forged between the characters of Kane and Thatcher. This psychological montage consistently excludes Mr. Thatcher in the first third of the film when he's defined by the group of time-jumping Ren voyage sequences denoting when Kane's business becomes his only interest in remaining at the newspaper. When he moves into the second storyline with his new wife, it is little wonder that he loses her, as the company of eleven hidden within the dollar sign appears far more prominent than her in his thoughts.

4. Cinematography and Visual Style

One of the features of Citizen Kane that has made it such an influential film in history is its use of groundbreaking special effects and cinematography. Techniques such as the camera angles used were part of what made the film unique. Growing in popularity following the success of German expressionism and film noir in the 1940s, camera angles helped to create a mood instead of just capturing a moment in time. Much of the filming was done through the use of low and high angle shots. These shots created a sense of power and intimidation of some characters, while proving the insignificance of others. In the opening sequence, the use of low angle shots, which were something rarely done at the time, prevented the scene from being as interesting as it was. Creating a sequence that drew the audience in, the film used long dissolves in scenes, while using the cinematography seen in films like The Great Train Robbery to create a scene in the back of the train that is unlike any other part in the film. Standout shots exhort the use of the camera in the newsroom to show more than one character during a conversation. Through lighting, Citizen Kane was able to recreate ambiguity, suspense, and the personality of Charlotte's supposed family. This is achieved by having the characters sit together in a grand hall, to where they are almost blending in with the background, where their expressions could not be seen. Responding back to the scene in the train, we see the striking cinematography created by point of view shots and lights causing shadows on the bars of the train. These techniques caused the scene to become unrealistic, while reinforcing the fact that what the audience saw was socially undesirable. During Citizen Kane, deep focus shots were taken to an entirely new level. Simplified, deep focus is when everything in the shot, even in the foreground and the background, is in focus. The deep focus of Citizen Kane was then planned out by previsualizing the scenes, then through trial and error. Aware that it would take weeks to work out the details, and then days to shoot the scenes, the production team started filming the scenes months before they were needed.

4.1. Deep Focus Photography

The use of deep focus photography is a major technical innovation of Citizen Kane. Coordinated by the head of the studio's optical department, the film's innovations in deep focus photography owe much to cinematographer Gregg Toland, another of Welles's influences in his Mercury radio days Peter Bogdanovich. Deep focus photography allows the foreground, middleground, and background to be simultaneously in focus. This can be used to create a considerable psychological impact. For instance, in the scene where Kane signs the agreement to his first wife Emily that he won't interfere in her political career, a shot caresses the three people in the room at that time. Such a camera movement is to keep the three people in full view all the time. When Emily signs the political agreement, the camera tracks towards Kane, which gives an effect of her not being fully convinced about the correctness of her act. Such visual complexity is added to the scenes time and again through the application of deep focus photography.

4.2. Low-angle Shots

One of the most recurring techniques Welles uses is the low-angle shot. This technique consists of filming the subject from a lower position than the subject. It looks as if the camera would be looking somewhere from below the subject, but it is not because then most of the shot would be darkened entirely. In this case, his intention is to make the subject appear bigger, more important. It is a shot that tries to enhance the stature of the character or characters on the screen. He also uses it for big objects or buildings or places. This size exaggeration of the elements on the screen is used as a narrative resource by Welles in the film. For example, the first shot of the private room of Thompson is designed to be interpreted as the big "head" of the "Superego" behind the rest of the head represented by the other bosses, the wall of their luxury private room. He appears bigger than he really is. So, Wiseman's speech has to deliver things... This works in such a subtle way that could very well have betrayed this spring apartment. All that part is not seen when Thompson arrives at his room and the doors are opened, the chamber is revealed, but before it is fully seen, a plan is made of everything. The proper secretary tells us that Wiseman is the only one who is able to handle the boss, but without even seeing him, we can already imagine how big his shadow is, considering the fact that Thompson is only a shadow in front of Wiseman's attention. As for his statue, he takes the same posture he usually had on the treads when a standing position was in order, with his chest expecting that his "superior" is walking in his direction. At the same time, the foreground is filled by Mistress. She is the one who is even more eager to hear what people are saying about her lover because she assumes what is being said is good. Welles has cleverly used lines to talk about her and to regulate the volume of her speech. She knew that what was being heard was about her current home. She has to show herself off, show why she is the chosen one, try to get self-confidence that she really does not have. The editing in this case is made based on the lines. Ocean has its mysteries, but there is none bigger than man, and this is the background behind them all. At her house, she is already used to criticism about her, but she is having difficulty coping with all the gossip and the nicknames she is called during the campaign meeting. Girlfriend, performer, it keeps that noun for the "employer" to name her whenever she wants to see her or speak to her. Welles chose the low-angle shot. She tries to sit down, laugh a little when she learns that people were talking about the different lives her lover had, and she says that at home he used to be kind of mean, that she would not have changed anything if he was just for her and gets up when all the lights become focused on her, on them. On the other hand, she also tries the oblique shots, the stage shots, the blurred shots, the covering of tears with the sunglasses of power. In order to have some status, she stands alone on the table, speaks of her power, then stands beside him, and hugs him. She does not want to go even if he does have to. In fact, he is looking for the right time to get away.

5. Impact and Legacy of 'Citizen Kane'

It is no secret that 'Citizen Kane' was a box office failure. This is often attributed to the film’s lack of commercial appeal in its unflattering portrayal of a character that bears a remarkable resemblance to newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst. After the conclusion of the legal battle for release in 1941 and through World War II, the film largely languished in the public conscience. While its revolutionary narrative and cinematic technique caused a stir among critic circles, partisan opinions long overshadowed the film’s influence. Then in the late 1940s, the film’s rights were acquired by Time-Warner, who reportedly suppressed the film or allowed it to play in only non-key markets. The company also allowed many of the original negatives to disintegrate. Orson Welles’ rights to his films had long been complex and financially complicated. In 1970, Welles famously said it was a tragedy that 'Citizen Kane' “has grown to its present reputation entirely on the large number of terrible films that emerged from companies organized to try and create ‘another ‘Citizen Kane,’” all of which, he said, failed. Today we have mostly moved past the overreaction that either denies or sets Welles' work as the greatest or most groundbreaking film of all time, though many still give it top billing. In 2012, The British Film Institute published a poll of the greatest films of 71 film critics and scholars. In it, “Vertigo”, regarded by many as the greatest film ever made and Hitchcock’s magnum opus, replaced “Citizen Kane” at the top of the list. Five years prior to the BFI List, the American Film Institute named “Citizen Kane” the number one film of all time. Due to the methods of selection and inclusion, it is more probable that “Kane” remains critically more relevant today than any other film. In fact, the film has become so cozy in the American consciousness that it, originated or not, has become a cinematic stand-in for Thatcher-like figures in stories taking place at several different points in history. Whether or not it is the greatest film ever made, “Citizen Kane” is remarkable in that it has become the most examined film in cinema history. A film which has in turn informed the craft of a strain of people who have looked at it for its deserved accolades.