Citizen Kane which many respected critics and film historians consider to be the number one American made a movie of all time. Orson Wells and he will certainly be the primary subject. THE BATTLE OVER CITIZEN KANE, it’s about two men that are key to the movie and the real-life story. William Randolph Hearst whose movie is based on. At age 3 he was already performing on stage and at age 6 he was embracing all sorts of the arts and painting and writing of poetry and he loved performing magic and playing the piano. He was a very intelligent young man and a gifted child who had a pretty big IQ of 146. Orson spent his formative years at the place called THE TODD SCHOOL for boys in the place called WOODSTOCK, ILLINOIS. Todd’s school developed his interest in the arts and acting and the theater. After graduating from the Todd School, about the age of 16, most thought Orson would be heading for one of America's prestigious universities like Harvard or Yale. The decision Orson made was to forego a formal education instead travel on his own to Ireland, like a lot of young people did at the time. Orson unfortunately didn’t plan out his finances too well and did a bit of painting tour all around the island of Ireland. And basically ran out of money on the trip so he was looking for something else to get into and in order to keep traveling, he came across the Gate Theater where he auditioned and found employment at incredibly well-respected theater group in Dublin and he introduced himself as the star of the New York theater Guild and indicated he would be willing to lead his services of their company for a free. Orson Welles’s professional acting career. He wants to become a better actor so he goes to Broadway in New York City. Orson succeeded in becoming one of its major stars at a very young age. Orson Welles at 19. In his early 20’s Orson formed a theatrical company called the A MERCURY PRODUCTION. They performed on the radio. Orson wasn’t satisfied being an actor that was simply told what to do. He wanted to be in control and take charge. While working for the Mercury Players Orson wore a number of hats. He also helped to design sets, taking an interest in every aspect. Welles was always new and innovative. Took place in Harlem, New York in 1936 when he directed a version of Shakespeare’s <Macbeth= Orson Welles is seen as an innovative director who is willing to push the envelope when it comes to the traditional theater shows that are found in New York. In order to keep the Mercury Players and the theater-going Welles often performed on the radio to pay the bills. The most popular characters that Orson performed on the radio were called THE SHADOW and it is a character that kept millions of people listening to and glued to their radios and was considered the most famous mystery man to dominate the airwaves during radio’s golden age. The Shadow was one of the most recognized and well-known radio programs of all time and should be noted that The Shadow and Orson Welles character performing with his deep ominous voice was partly the inspiration for George Lucus in the Star Wars film with the character of Darth Vader. 1938 on Halloween night Orson decides to broadcast on radio a version of HG Wells novel called WAR OF THE WORLDS. The radio show would begin as Orson promised by listening to a musical program. A movie studio called RKO became very interested in Orson. RKO’s BIH OFFER, first make any 2 films he chose, the second could produce, direct, write, star of any combination, third final cut approval, lastly fourth place the studio condition was that they would stay out of his way allowing Welles to have complete and full control of the productions. The contract that was given was so unusual that it made headlines in Hollywood trade papers. Hollywood Film Moguls all the men ran the studios felt that RKO made a big big mistake and that one contract given to Welles could change everything in

the industry. They believed that if Orson Welles who never made a movie before was successful with the contract demands from proven veterans would be extremely costly so for these reasons the moguls did not want him to succeed whatsoever. Once Welles came to Hollywood he basically was a targeted man from his arrival by these Hollywood moguls. When Orson arrived in Hollywood, he asked the heads of the studio, RKO, if he could spend time going from department to department learning about filmmaking. Gregg Toland who is the best cinematographer in Hollywood in the 1940s and he called Orson up about the possibility of working with him on his film. Gregg Toland was very very established and incredibly talented and he enjoyed working with new and young talent as Toland had grown kind of tired of doing the same old thing in the movie after movie, he wanted a new challenge and so he had heard of Orson’s big reputation on Broadway and being an innovator and perhaps the two of them working together could bring some new and exciting ideas to the world of cinema and indeed was an offer Orson could not pass up. He accepted and the two men were to form the visual and creative team for the movie Citizen Kane. Orson needed to be was a script, he turned to an old friend named Herman Mankiewicz and Mankiewicz suggested a film based on the life of a newspaper publisher a guy named WILLIAM RANDOLPH HARVEST, one of the richest and powerful men in the United States at the time. Hearst Castle, it was a massive estate built by William Randolph Hearst located by the coast in the middle of California in a place called SAN SIMEON. Mankiewicz frequented the castle and told Orson about some of its features and he also shared the fact that there were a lot of exotic animals roaming the grounds and at that time Hearst had one of the world’s largest private zoom collections on his property. Mankiewicz also told Welles about Hollywood celebrities that would make weekend trips to the castle. Hearst decided to build a swimming pool and also provided an indoor pool for cold winter months. William Randolph Hearst was one of the world’s most prolific art collectors at one point he had amassed one of the largest collections for an individual in the world. Mankaqicz also mentioned Orson, besides being a famous Hollywood star, Marion Davies was also Hearst’s mistress. Hearst also decided to run for political office and was elected a US Senator from California. Orson Welles decides they should write a script based on Hearst’s life, together. In order to disguise their true subject, they needed to change a few things. Instead of changing the estate, Hearst Castle they changed the name in the movie to Xanadu. Hearst’s main occupation was a newspaper publisher, it’s no coincidence that the main character in Citizen Kane was also a newspaper baron, like Hearst the main character Charles Foster Kane. Once all their ideas were put together, they had a screenplay. RKO production number 281, Citizen Kane, was underway. Gregg Toland’s contributions to Citizen Kane was the movie’s extraordinary lighting. He used a lighting technique called CHIAROSCURO. Chiaroscuro lighting technique is what helped earn Gregg Toland his academy award nomination for best cinematography of Citizen Kane. when Orson comes to Hollywood he brought with him a number of actors from the Mercury Players and the Mercury Theater who haven’t worked in motion pictures before but being a guy that couldn’t trust anybody he had to get back to people he knew and had relationships with and being new to the movies they didn’t want to shoot their scenes in bits and pieces in what is called FILM STYLE. Toland’s solution to this was to use what is called DEEP FOCUS PHOTOGRAPHY. Deep focus is when the foreground element, the mid-ground element, and a background element are all in a scene as sharp as possible at the same time.

What is it called when the foreground, middle ground, and background are all in focus? ● Deep Focus Who was the producer of Citizen Kane? ● Orson Welles In Citizen Kane, who played Charles Foster Kane? ● Orson Welles How old was Orson Welles when he first performed on stage? ● 3 year old What was the play where Orson Welles used an all Africa American cast? ● Macbeth What radio character did Orson Welles make famous? ● The shadow What studio first signed Orson Welles to a Hollywood contract? ● RKO The film Citizen Kane is based on what a person’s life is? ● W Hearst What was Marion Davies' profession? ● Actress; Hollywood movie star What movie is considered the most important film during the sound era? ● Citizen Kane Who was W.R's mistress? ● Marion Davies What MGM studio head offered $800,000 to RKO for Citizen Kane? ● Lousie B. Mayer How many academy awards was citizen Kane nominated for? ● 9 How many Academy awards did Citizen Kane win? ● 1 How much advertising did RKO put into Citizen Kane? ● very little What was the deal RKO offered Orson Welles? ● 1.) Make any 2 Films He Chose ● 2.) Could produce, Direct, Write, star, or any combination ● 3.) Final cut approval ● 4.) Minimal studio input What group of men wanted Orson Welles to fail? ● Hollywood Film Moguls What camera angle makes the subject seem more powerful? ● Low Camera Angles

Following the death of publishing tycoon Charles Foster Kane, reporters scramble to uncover the meaning of his final utterance; 'Rosebud'. —Carl Schultz A group of reporters are trying to decipher the last word ever spoken by Charles Foster Kane, the millionaire newspaper tycoon: "Rosebud". The film begins with a news reel detailing Kane's life for the masses, and then from there, we are shown flashbacks from Kane's life. As the reporters investigate further, the viewers see a display of a fascinating man's rise to fame, and how he eventually fell off the top of the world. —Zack H. The newspaper baron Charles Foster Kane, one of the richest and most powerful men in America if not the world, dies. A newspaperman digs into his past seeking the meaning of his enigmatic last word: "Rosebud." He finds evidence of a child torn away from his family to serve Mammon. Grown into manhood, Charles Foster Kane becomes a newspaperman to indulge his idealism. He marries the niece of the man who will become President of the United States, and gradually assumes more and more power while losing more and more of his soul. Kane's money and power does not bring him happiness, as he has lost his youthful idealism, as has the America he is a symbol for. —Jon C. Hopwood After his death, the life of Charles Foster Kane - newspaper magnate and all-round larger-than-life American - is told from the perspective of those who knew him. A newspaper reporter is interviewing those in Kane's life hoping to learn the meaning of Kane's last word, Rosebud. Kane was sent to a boarding school at a young age after his mother struck it rich thanks to a mining claim that was signed over to her in lieu of rent. He came into his vast fortune at the age of 25 and promptly bought a newspaper. His idea of news was to make it as much as report it and along with his good friend, Jedediah Leland, had a rollicking good time. Unsuccessful in his bid for political office, his relationships with those around him begin to deteriorate and he dies, old and alone, whispering the word Rosebud. —garykmcd When a reporter is assigned to decipher newspaper magnate Charles Foster Kane's dying words, his investigation gradually reveals the fascinating portrait of a complex man who rose from obscurity to staggering heights. Though Kane's friend and colleague Jedediah Leland, and his mistress, Susan Alexander, shed fragments of light on Kane's life, the reporter fears he may never penetrate the mystery of the elusive man's final word, "Rosebud." —Jwelch Multimillionaire newspaper tycoon Charles Foster Kane dies alone in his extravagant mansion, Xanadu, speaking a single word: "Rosebud". In an attempt to figure out the meaning of this word, a reporter tracks down the people who worked and lived with Kane; they tell their stories in a series of flashbacks that reveal much about Kane's life but not enough to unlock the riddle of his dying breath.