There are 4508 official ©Disney characters listed below (2944 of them are one-time characters, 1564 appear in several stories)! Click on their underlined names to see what they look like and read about them in further detail.

NOTE: The list below includes many characters which are NOT from the Duck Universe. Those who’s descriptions end with (Ducks) are.

A

ANACOZECA Associacao NAcional dos CObradores do ZÉ CArioca (something like “National Association of Jose Carioca’s Debt Collectors”). In the first stories there were no fixed characters, but after some time they were reduced to four recurrent birdbeaks almost look-alike: Arlindo (tall), Asdrúbal (tall), Arnaldo (short) and Tadeu (short). There were also a mysterious leader, who after some time has been revealed to be Rocha Vaz, Rosinha’s father who dislikes JOC. In recent stories, the aforementioned four ANACOZECA members still appear sporadically with no leadership. (Carioca)

Abby Mallard Abby Mallard; a duck with big teeth (Chicken Little)

Abena Abena; Friendly sasabonsam who cooperates with the TNT organization (Ducks)

Abigail Abigail; Parceiro’s rich mother (Disney Teens)

Abigail and Amelia Abigail and Amelia; the geese; their last name is Gabble (Aristocats)

Abis Mal Abis Mal; Leader of a pack of thieves (Aladdin)

Abu Abu; ALA’s monkey companion (Aladdin)

Acacio Many cameo appearances in Brazilian stories. Actually a recurring in-joke on Brazilian inker Acácio Ramos (Carioca, Ducks)

Acciuga mariner friend of the ducks (Ducks)

Admiral Grimitz Admiral Grimitz; DD’s Navy commander (Ducktales)

Adonis Adonis; pompous prince, classmate of teen Herc from the Prometheus Academy (Hercules)

Afonsinho Brazilian, duck, Jose Carioca’s naive friend (Carioca)

Agenore Uncle Jeremy’s parrot (Mice)

Agent Berry Agent of the agency (Double Duck)

Agent Black Big eagle-looking agent of the agency who likes liquorice (Double Duck)

Agent Schamel (Mice)

Agent Sjoemel (Mice)

Agente Bigode Recurring BLONK agent in some Brazilian stories. He usually wears a checkered raincoat and hat and a big moustache (his name means “Agent Moustache”). His look seems to be inspired by similar BLONK agents drawn by Al Hubbard in S 68116, where many of them are seen in a train. (Ducks)

Agnes Agnes; GO’s female lion (Mice)

Akela Akela; Wolves’ leader (Jungle Book)

Al Cootest Al Cootest; a gangster (Clarabelle Reporter)

Al McWhiggin Al McWhiggin; Toy collector and owner of Al’s Toy Barn (Toy Story)

Al Popone partner of Pete (Mice)

Aladar Aladar; The Iguanodon orphan, who is brought up by the lemurs (Dinosaur movie)

Aladdin Aladdin; Arabian thief who finds a magic lamp (Aladdin)

Aladdin narrator (Aladdin)

Alameda Slim Alameda Slim; cattle rustler (Home on the Range)

Alan Bradley Alan Bradley; Bespectacled programmer who wrote the Tron program; dates Lora (Tron)

Alan-A-Dale Alan-A-Dale; story teller (Robin Hood)

Alazao-de-pau Pena Kid’s wooden toy horse originated in the dailies Fethry created for Scrooge’s newspaper (Ducks)

Albemarle Mouse Albemarle Mouse; MM’s great-grandfather (Mice)

Albert Albert; Boy from Scamp newspaper stories, son of Jim Dear and Darling (Scamp)

Albert Owl Dutch; class mate of HDL (Duckies)

Alberto Scrooge’s first butler (throughout the whole sixties) (Ducks)

Alborn Elyon’s adoptive father (W.I.T.C.H.)

Alcaide Alcaide; The mayor of the Pueblo of Los Angeles (Zorro)

Alcmene Alcmene; human foster mother of Herc (Hercules)

Alejandro Alejandro; Don Alejandro de la Vega, the rich Californian landowner and father of Don Diego/Zorro (Zorro)

Alexander Alexander the cat; Doc Static’s cat (Mice)

Alexander McDuck US’s ancestor who borrowed money from GU’s ancestor and never paid him back (Ducks)

Alf Alf; big fat, yellow-feathered goosefaced TNT agent who’s incredibly strong (Ducks)

Alfabeta One of a couple of alien invaders, a white little floating cloud with arms and eyes. (See also Gamadelta) (Carioca, Ducks)

Alfred Alfred Goupil, Brer Fox’s son in French stories (French Wolf)

Alfredo McEsposito MM’s porter (Anderville)

Alice in Wonderland Alice in Wonderland; (Alice in Wonderland)

Alice’s sister Alice’s elder sister (Alice in Wonderland)

Alicia Jensen Dance Academy stories (W.I.T.C.H.)

Alien thieves Couple of four-legged alien thieves, their home planet’s currency is the apple pie (Carioca, Ducks)

Aliens Aliens from Toy Story; 3 car toys, hanging in the rearview mirror (Toy Story)

Alienígenas Transmorfos Brazilian creation, a group of shape-shifting aliens who resemble big silkworms, visiting Earth from time to time; always with dishonest, clumsy plans. Their leader is a grumpy sovereign called “King B-A-H” and the other aliens have also 3-letter names like “Z-Y-K” (Carioca, Ducks, Mice)

Alma Grackle Old woman who loves jazz and sunbathing, owns a dog named Dempsey and lives in Miss Typefast’s apartment building (Ducks)

Althor bearded member of the Council (W.I.T.C.H.)

Alvin Alvin; Pal of Morty in the MM dailies, not to confuse with the JW one (Mice)

Alvin Alvin from the Junior Woodchucks; from JW, not to confuse with the Gottfredson one (Ducks)

Alvin’s mother Alvin’s mother (Mice)

Amanda Bolland secretary of Susan Vandom (W.I.T.C.H.)

Amanda Fox Daisy Duck’s oldest friend (Ducks)

Amazona Solitaria Lonely Amazon, Firmina’s secret identity (Ducks, Mice)

Ambrose Ambrose; The Robber Kitten (misc)

Ammonia Pine A former cleaning lady who is now a cleaning-obsessed villain (Darkwing Duck)

Amos Amos from Ben and Me; Mouse who came up with many ideas usually attributed to Benjamin Franklin (misc)

Amos P. Zoup Amos P. Zoup; Owner of coat shop in ZM 008 (Mice)

Amos Slade Amos Slade; Hunter; gruff owner of Copper (The Fox and the Hound)

Amphitryon Amphitryon; human foster father of Herc (Hercules)

Anacardo Mitraglia nephew of Anacleto Mitraglia, classmate of HDL (Ducks)

Anacleto Mitraglia both the Chierchini and Carpi interpretations of DD’s neighbour (Ducks)

Anastasia and Drizella Anastasia and Drizella; Cinderella’s stepsisters (Cinderella)

Anchor Anchor; a hammerhead shark in Bruce’s abstinence group (Finding Nemo)

Andold Wild Duck Mac Paperin; Andold Wild Duck, Donald’s Caledonian ancestor (Ducks)

Andrew Hornby boy turned into a frog (W.I.T.C.H.)

Andy Andy; the kid that owns all toys (Toy Story)

Andy Ascott a photoreporter (Ducks)

Angela Angela; Goliath and Demona’s gargoyle daughter, last addition to the team (Gargoyles)

Angelito Miraflores (Ducks)

Angus Fangus journalist (PKNA)

Angus McDuck Angus McDuck; “Pothole” McDuck, Scrooge’s uncle, first mentioned in W US 11-01 (Ducks)

Animal Animal the muppet; Savage drummer in Dr Teeth’s band (The Muppet Show)

Anita Anita from 101 Dalmatians; Wife of Roger (101 Dalmatians)

Anita from W.I.T.C.H. friend of Eric Lyndon (W.I.T.C.H.)

Anna Bannister Mrs. Lair, Irma’s adoptive mother (W.I.T.C.H.)

Annabel Dutch; red-haired girl; class mate of HDL, also named “Isabelle” (Duckies)

Annabelle Mink (Mice)

Annette Funicello Annette Funicello; One of the (real!) girls of the MM Club (Mickey Mouse Club)

Annie Annie from SC; show dog (Scamp)

Annie Sue Annie Sue; Young innocent female pig; Miss Piggy’s rival (The Muppet Show)

Annie and Fannie Annie and Fannie; Molly Cottontail’s nieces (Forest)

Ant king Ant king; King of the Ant tribe (Bucky Bug)

Ant tribe Ant tribe; Tribe of warlike warrior ants (Bucky Bug)

Antea fairy who is envious of TB (Fairies)

Anton Ego Anton Ego; Feared food critic. Refuses to swallow anything that does not match up to his expectations (Ratatouille)

Ants from SC an ant colony often seen marching somewhere (Scamp)

Anymore Boring Ducklair’s executive (PKNA)

Ape from YM 115 Eega Beeva’s ape friend who was used in university experiments and became an intellectual (Mice)

April May and June April May and June; Daisy’s nieces (Duckies, Ducks)

Aquatta Andrina Arista Adella Alana and Attina Ariel’s sisters; (The Little Mermaid)

Archie the spider Morgana McCawber’s pet spider (Darkwing Duck)

Archimedes Archimedes the owl; Merlin’s owl (The Sword in the Stone)

Argus McSwine Barks’ pig villain; The pig villain, carrying different names in different Barks stories. Since the 1990s named Argus McSwine (Ducks)

Ari Former farmer (W.I.T.C.H.)

Arie Dutch; fox; class mate of HDL (Duckies)

Ariel Ariel; the little mermaid (Disney’s Kirara Purinsesu, Princess, The Little Mermaid)

Arizona Goof Indiana Pipps; (Mice)

Armadillo Armadillo; Nefarious’ student, the pigface one (Sleuth)

Arpin Lusene Arpin Lusene; French master-thief in Rosa stories (Ducks)

Arrow Boy Quiverwing Quack’s sidekick. Honker Muddlefoot’s superhero identity (Darkwing Duck)

Arrow from Treasure Planet Captain Amelia’s disciplined, stone-skinned First Mate (Treasure Planet)

Arte Deco Arte Deco; Toucan sidekick of Gusto (Gummi Bears)

Arxon Xerbian Commander (PKNA)

Ask’ton (Kylion)

Astronauta(s) de Tucania Brazilian, Invading alien toucans from a planet named Tucania. (2 stories) (Ducks, Mice)

Atila Brazilian, Rocha Vaz’s ferocious (for Jose Carioca) dog (Carioca)

Atomo Bleep-Bleep Atomino Bip-Bip; atom (Mice)

Audrey Audrey the chicken; (Home on the Range)

Audrey Rocio Ramirez Audrey; Audrey Rocio Ramirez, mechanic (Atlantis)

August Plume August Plume; Smug and condescending know-it-all sceptic of paranormal phenomena (Ducks)

Aunt Eider Aunt Eider; Weird character… aunt of both Scrooge and Rockerduck (Ducks)

Aunt Matilda Aunt Matilda; MI’s cow-girl aunt / from Gottfredson ZM 014 (Mice)

Aunt Millicent Aunt Millicent; Minnie’s aunt from W WDC 386-05 (Mice)

Aunt Minerva Aunt Minerva; MI’s scaring aunt (Mice)

Aunt Sarah Aunt Sarah; owner of Si and Am (Scamp)

Aunt Terrible Aunt Terrible; LW’s aunt in S-coded stories (Forest)

Aunt Tessie Aunt Tessie; GO’s aunt Tessie (Mice)

Aunt Topolinda MM’s aunt (Mice)

Auntie Beagle Auntie Beagle; BB’s aunt in two 1-page stories (Ducks)

Automaton X Automaton X; Tough giant robot from outer space, seeking source of metal with which to build duplicates of himself (Ducks)

Avvocato criminal, nemesis of Scrooge and natural rival for the BB (Ducks)

Awfultonians The Citizens of Plain Awful from the Barks’ Square Eggs story (Ducks)

Axel Akuseru; Member #8 of the XIII Kikan (Kingudamu Hatsu)

Aydis Lady Paperina; English name Aydis, the girlfriend of Andold/Mac Paperin (Ducks)

Azimuth Azimuth Van Quack, wicked squire (Bay stories)

Azinuth from PKNA leader of the guardians of the galaxy (PKNA)

Azure Blue pretended descendant of “Olaf the Blue” in Barks’ Golden-Helmet-story (Duck)

B

B-Boyz B-Boyz; Beagle Boys from the future (Ducks)

B.E.N. from Treasure Planet a robot found by Jim on the Treasure Planet who claims to have lost part of his own memory, he was actually Captain Flint’s partner (Treasure Planet)

B.O.B. B.O.B.; the friendly flying robot in Cygnys, older model serie than V.I.N.CENT. (The Black Hole)

B.P. Richfield B.P. Richfield; Earl’s boss (Dinosaurs TV)

Babay Money Evil long-beaked scientist from P.I.A. stories (Ducks)

Babbo di Louis (Paperino Paperotto)

Babe Babe; Paul Bunyan’s pet, a nonhumanized giant ox with blue skin/hair (misc)

Baby Daisy Baby Daisy; (Disney babies)

Baby Donald Baby Donald; (Disney babies)

Baby Gladstone Baby Gladstone; (Disney babies)

Baby Goofy Baby Goofy; (Disney babies)

Baby Gus Baby Gus; (Disney babies)

Baby Gyro Baby Gyro; (Disney babies)

Baby Herman Baby Herman; Cigar smoking baby (Roger Rabbit)

Baby Mickey Baby Mickey; (Disney babies)

Baby Minnie Baby Minnie; (Disney babies)

Baby Pete Baby Pete; (Disney babies)

Baby Pluto Baby Pluto; (Disney babies)

Baby Scuttle Baby Scuttle; (Disney babies)

Baby Sinclair Baby Sinclair; Baby Dinosaur (Dinosaurs TV)

Baggy Baggy; a depressed and pessimistic basset hound (Scamp)

Bagheera Bagheera; Panther (Jungle Book)

Balabù Italian name; creature from I TL 243-A (Ducks)

Baldo The happy beaver (PKNA)

Baljeet Rai Baljeet Rai; Indian friend and neighbor of Phineas and Ferb (Phineas and Ferb)

Baloo Baloo; Bear (Jungle Book, Talespin)

Bambi Bambi; Fawn and later roebuck starring in Bambi (Bambi, Forest)

Bambi Gondola Reporter (Ducks)

Bambi’s mother (Bambi)

Bandit Banditto; a Heartless with Arabian clothes and a sabre (Kingudamu Hatsu)

Bank watchman from YM 036 (Mice)

Banzai Banzai; the male hyena with hair only on his back and without damaged ears (The Lion King)

Barao de Bazofia Barão de Bazófia; Parrot, a secret agent, JOC’s look-alike (Carioca)

Barbie Barbie from Toy Story; Tour guide (Toy Story)

Barnacle Bill Barnacle Bill; Sailor who helps Kat Nipp in untying ties (Mice)

Barney Louis; Friend of YDD (Paperino Paperotto)

Barrington Bee Barrington Bee; Easily angered non-humanized bee with big tuft of fur around his neck (Ducks)

Barry Diesel white camper (Cars)

Barry and Bob Barry and Bob; bulls (Home on the Range)

Barzan Barzan; Tarzan-like hero from W SG 3-02 (Mice)

Bashful Bashful; One of the SD (Forest, Snow White)

Basil Basil the burro; from newspaper strips (Ducks)

Basil from Baker Street Basil from Baker Street; (The Great Mouse Detective)

Battista in Cimino scripts (Ducks)

Baylene Baylene; An old female Brachiosaurus (Dinosaur movie)

Beaker Beaker; Dr Bunsen Honeydew’s unlucky assistant (The Muppet Show)

Bear kids (Forest)

Beauregard Beauregard; Dimwitted janitor at the Muppet Theater (The Muppet Show)

Beaver Beaver friend of CD appearing mainly in S-coded stories, real name unknown (Forest)

Beaver from SC Beaver in SC daily strips (Scamp)

Beck Beck; Animal-talent fairy. Red hair, wide mouth (Fairies)

Beebe Bluff Beebe Bluff; Spoiled rich girl (Doug)

Beelzebub Beelzebub; Witch Hazel’s broom (Ducks, Mice)

Behemoth Behemoth; Bolivar’s puppy (Ducks)

Bellarosa from I TL 428-B CL’s cousin (Mice)

Belle Belle; the Beauty (Beauty and the Beast, Disney’s Kirara Purinsesu, Princess)

Belle Duck Belle Duck; Eccentric female owner of steamboat; Scrooge’s old crush (Ducks)

Ben Bubbola writer and director from I TL 288-A (Mice)

Benjamin Franklin Benjamin Franklin from ZT 004; Inventor, author, Founding Father of the US and friend of a mouse named Amos; from QMS 1953-012 (misc)

Bennie Bird Bennie Bird; (misc)

Benny Benny; Cab from Roger Rabbit (Roger Rabbit)

Benny Benny from the I-Team; nerdy owlfaced boy from the I-Team (Ducks)

Benny Beaver CD’s beaver friend (Forest)

Bent-Tail Bent-Tail; (Forest, Mice)

Bent-Tail Junior Bent-Tail Junior; (Forest, Mice)

Beppie Dutch; goose with black hair; class mate of HDL (Duckies)

Berlioz Berlioz; (Aristocats)

Bernard Bernard; (The Rescuers)

Bernardo Bernardo; The loyal mute servant of Don Diego de la Vega who pretends to be deaf too (Zorro)

Bess Painting-talent fairy. Brown hair, wears a small cap (Fairies)

Bess Grumper round face, no freckles (W.I.T.C.H.)

Betty from GM (Giovani Marmotte)

Betty Lou a cute young hysteric duck (Paperino Paperotto)

Bianca Bianca; (The Rescuers)

Big Baby Big Baby; Very big baby doll with a lazy eye (Toy Story)

Big Bad Baron Big Bad Baron; Evil armour-wearing baron who often uses advanced inventions against Mighty Knight (Mighty Knight)

Big Bear Big Bear; member of a gang in recent Egmont LH stories (Hiawatha)

Big Chief Big Chief; LH’s father, also named Hiawatha (Hiawatha)

Big Chief’s horse Taller than Poncho’s, with black dots, colored grey in fr/W (Hiawatha)

Big Mama Big Mama; Wise old owl (The Fox and the Hound)

Big Toot Big Toot; Old man who is usually displeased with his son Little Toot’s irresponsible behaviour; anthropomorphized harbor tugboat (misc)

Biggles Biggles; Mr. Herb’s dog (Ducks)

Billy Tom; a young bully friend of DD (Paperino Paperotto)

Billy Beagle Billy Beagle; Male beagle pup with sad eyes (Scamp)

Billy Bones alien who crashes his ship near to Jim’s mom’s inn and gives the boy the map of the Treasure Planet before dying (Treasure Planet)

Billy Bow Billy Bow; A human boy, friend of Robin Hood and the merry men (misc)

Billy Brave Billy Brave; A real-life boy going on strange adventures (UK)

Billy Goat Billy Goat; GD’s goat (Ducks)

Billy Paganino gangster (PKNA)

Billy and Rick Tiny & Lily’s boyfriends, Rick has red hair, Billy black, they are dog-nosed humans (Mice)

Binkie Muddlefoot Binkie Muddlefoot; Honker’s mother (Darkwing Duck)

Biquinho Brazilian, Fethry’s nephew (Ducks)

Biquinho Kid Brazilian, Pena Kid’s nephew, Biquinho’s Western spin-off (Ducks)

Biquinhoboy Duckbill, Pena das Selvas’ nephew (looks like Biquinho) (Ducks)

Birgit Q Ducklair’s spokesman (PKNA)

Bitty Bitty; Small and polite pup (Scamp)

Black Brian Black Brian; Ghost pirate from YM 126, reused once in Brazil (Mice)

Black Mask Burglar Dangerous burglar (Ducks)

Blackheart Beagle Blackheart Beagle; Father of the Beagle Boys who operated on the Mississippi in Scrooge’s past. This character is sometimes seen as Grandpa Beagle. (Ducks)

Blackie Blackie the chick; the black one of Wise Little Hen’s children (misc)

Blackjack Blackjack; Goldie’s bear (Ducks)

Blacksnake McQuirt Blacksnake McQuirt; From Barks “Bullett Valley” (Ducks)

Blaze the firefly A firefly friend of Tinkerbell (Fairies)

Blink alien from planet Blink (Ducks)

Bloat Bloat; a puffer fish and an aquarium member (Finding Nemo)

Blonde girl with curly hair from YF (Mice)

Blonde girl with straight hair from YF (Mice)

Blonk Blonk; BLONK, An evil organization, 0.0. Duck’s main nemesis (Ducks)

Bloopy Bloopy; Fat sausage-shaped dog who loves to eat (Scamp)

Blossom Blossom; Thumper’s sister who wears flowers on her head (Bambi)

Blotman Blotman; PB’s good counterpart in Blotman stories (Mice)

Blue Fairy Blue Fairy; (Pinocchio)

Bluestone Bluestone; Det. Matt Bluestone, partner of Elisa Maza (Gargoyles)

Bo Bo; Bucky’s pal and constant companion (Bucky Bug)

Bo Peep Bo Peep; (Toy Story)

Bob (W.I.T.C.H.)

Bobble Bobble; Tinker sprite friend of Tinkerbell, with goggles (Fairies)

Bobby Bobby; Robert Zimmeruski, a friend of Max & P.J, a guy with big glasses (Goof Troop)

Bobo Bobo the elephant; playful non-humanized elephant (Ducks, Mice)

Boinifacio bull, Clarabelle Cow’s Brazilian unlucky cousin. His name is a pun with the word “boi” (bull or ox) and the name Bonifacio (Mice)

Boinitao Boinitão; A real bull in Hard Haid Moe’s farm (Ducks)

Bolivar Bolivar; DD’s St. Bernard dog (Ducks)

Bolt Bolt; dog; the main character from the movie Bolt (misc)

Bombie Bombie the zombie; The CB character (Ducks)

Bombolotto one of the many Italian JWs (Giovani Marmotte)

Bones blonde and tall financial promotor of “PdP Sim” (PdP Sim)

Bongo Bongo; (Forest)

Bonkers Bonkers; Bonkers D. Bobcat, a police bobcat and former cartoon star (Bonkers)

Bonnie Anderson Bonnie Anderson; Kid who goes to Sunnyside Daycare (Toy Story)

Boo Boo the girl; Mary; Human girl who visits Monstropolis (Monsters Inc.)

Boom Beagle Boom Beagle; One of three explosive-expert Beagle Boys. First appearance in July 1972. Prison number “BOOM”. He looks like a regular Beagle Boy except for wearing earmuffs and usually driving a truck with big balloon tires. Re-used in several Brazilian stories. Note: do not confuse Countdown, Boom Beagle, Boom Boom Beagle (Ducks)

Boom Boom Beagle Boom Boom Beagle; One of three explosive-expert Beagle Boys. First appearance in September 1976. Prison number “BB-23”. He wears coveralls (with a lighted fuse) and a heavy armoured squared metal helmet plus earmuffs. Note: do not confuse Countdown, Boom Beagle, Boom Boom Beagle (Ducks)

Boomer from Paperino Paperotto schoolmate of YDD, member of Tuck’s party (Paperino Paperotto)

Boost silver and purple race car (Cars)

Booster Booster; an aspiring Space Ranger in Buzz’s team (Toy Story)

Bootle Beetle Bootle Beetle; Bucky’s “grandfather” and advisor (also a former cartoon co-star with DD in several cartoons) (Bucky Bug, Ducks)

Bootsie Bootsie; Three months old pup with hairy chest and dark tip of his tail (Scamp)

Bootstrap Bill Bootstrap Bill; Will Turner’s father (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Borboleta Purpura Brazilian, “Purple Butterfly” – Fethry’s girlfriend Glorinha as a superheroine (Ducks)

Boris Boris; Tramp’s Afghane friend from L+T movie; sometimes with Russian accent (Scamp)

Boris Boris the Alley Cat; the bass player (Aristocats)

Boso and Lana Boso and Lana; BAM’s children’s cousins (Bambi, Forest)

Bossy Bossy; Grandma Duck’s cow in Vic Lockman Grandma Duck’s Farm Friends stories (Ducks)

Box-Trot Box-Trot; Scrooge McDuck’s mail delivery robot; resembles a walking mailbox (but is not Posty) (Ducks)

Boy from Reluctant Dragon (misc)

Boysenberry Boysenberry; girl mechanic in green overalls with magenta hair (Ducks)

Boz the unlucky dwarf-like character from the Ice Sword saga (Mice)

Boze Bij bee keeper in Dutch stories (Hiawatha)

Brad Buttowski Kick’s elder brother who often bullies Kick (Kick Buttowski)

Brad Van Beck Actor (PKNA)

Brain Brain the computer; LVD’s computer in YD strips (Ducks)

Brat Brat the wuzzle; dragon-frog, villain (Wuzzles)

Brave Damesbond In Dutch stories (Forest)

Bravo Bravo; MM’s guard dog in YM 45-09-20 (Mice)

Brendon Brendon; Leader of the heroes in Dragonlords saga (Dragonlords)

Brer Badger Brer Badger; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Bear Brer Bear; (Forest, French Wolf)

Brer Big Boss Brer Big Boss; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Buzzard Brer Buzzard; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Coon Brer Coon; (Forest)

Brer Dove Brer Dove; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Fox Brer Fox; (Forest)

Brer Frog Brer Frog; BR’s grumpy old frog friend, often seen as a fisherman (Forest)

Brer Groundhog Brer Groundhog; (Forest)

Brer Hawk in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Loon in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Lyre Bird Brer Lyre Bird; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Mole Brer Mole; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Moose Friendly moose who lives in CD’s forest (Forest)

Brer Owl Brer Owl; the “real” BR owl – more humanlike than Friend Owl, with bigger ears, more human posture, arms (rather than wings), and so on. Sometimes wears a hat, but not always (Forest)

Brer Possum Brer Possum; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Rabbit Brer Rabbit; (Forest)

Brer Rabbit’s nephews 2 nephews (Forest)

Brer Terrapin Brer Terrapin; (Forest)

Brer Waddle Duck Brer Waddle Duck; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Weasel Brer Weasel; in BR stories (Forest)

Brer Wolf Brer Wolf; in BR stories (Forest)

Brianna Buttowski Kick’s spoiled little sister (Kick Buttowski)

Brigitta MacBridge female duck courting US (Ducks)

Broadway Broadway; Fat young gargoyle (Gargoyles)

Broken Feather Broken Feather; leader of a gang in recent Egmont LH stories (Hiawatha)

Bronc Birdbeak, a caveman found by Nestor. He lives in a “hidden world” near Rio de Janeiro (Carioca)

Bronx Bronx; Dog gargoyle (Gargoyles)

Brooklyn Brooklyn; Young brave gargoyle (Gargoyles)

Bruce Hamster, appeared in few (4) stories on TL 2332 (misc)

Bruce Bruce the shark; a great white shark who is the head of an abstinence group of sharks who don’t eat fish (Finding Nemo)

Brulstra Dutch; janitor (concierge) (Duckies)

Bruno Bruno; the dog (Cinderella)

Bruto a.k.a. Gancetto, ELL’s adoptive son, looks like ELL with Baseballcap and shirt (Mice)

Bruto Castrova Evil Brutopian pigfaced consul who secretly dreams of conquering the world (Ducks)

Bruton Bruton; A brutal male Iguanodon and Kron’s henchman (Dinosaur movie)

Brutopian representative representative of Brutopia, modelled on Nikita Khrushchev (Ducks)

Brutus the villain Muscular villain who works for Sirena Seducy (Ducks)

Bruxomestre Powerful master sorcerer in Brazilian MDS/MIM stories, depicted as an old man with pointy ears and wearing witch garments and pince-nez (Ducks, Mice)

Bubba Duck Bubba Duck; Little duck of stone age (Ducktales)

Bubbles Bubbles; a yellow tang, an aquarium member who is a bubble-maniac (Finding Nemo)

Buck Buck the horse; sheriff Sam’s horse (Home on the Range)

Buck Calhoun Buck Calhoun; older man with beard and cowboy hat, runs the dinosaur ranch (Mice)

Buck Cluck Buck Cluck; father of Chicken Little (Chicken Little)

Buck Duck Buck Duck; (Buck Duck)

Buck the dog Russel’s dog (PKNA)

Bucky Bucky the squirrel; (The Emperor’s New Groove)

Bucky Bug Bucky Bug; the bug from the Silly Symphonies (Bucky Bug)

Buford Van Stomm Buford Van Stomm; Bully friend of Phineas and Ferb (Phineas and Ferb)

Bug-bug Bug-bug; an insect with wings; has a nose (see Buggy from SC and Buzzy) (Scamp)

Buggy Buggy from SC; a cute beetle; has no visible wings (Scamp)

Bugmaster Bugmaster; A former newscaster who became an insect-controlling villain in order to boost her ratings (Darkwing Duck)

Bull Bull; Tramp’s bulldog friend from Lady and the Tramp movie (Scamp)

Bullseye Bullseye; Woody’s horse in Woody’s Roundup (Toy Story)

Bum Bum Ghigno friend of Donald (Ducks)

Bumblelion Bumblelion; bumblebee-lion, hero (Wuzzles)

Bumbo Brazilian; Pena das Selvas’ pet elephant (Ducks)

Burke taxist (Anderville)

Burton La Valle Burton LaValle, 23rd century actor (PKNA)

Bushroot Bushroot; Plant villain (Darkwing Duck)

Butch Butch; Fat reformed crook who’s friends with Mickey from the early 30s (Mice)

Butch Butch the bulldog; arch-nemesis of Pluto (Mice)

Butterbear Butterbear; butterfly-bear, hero (Wuzzles)

Buttercup Buttercup from Toy Story; White toy unicorn with blue eyes and a yellow mane and tail (Toy Story)

Buttercup and Primrose Buttercup and Primrose; Flower’s children (Bambi, Forest)

Buzz Lightyear Buzz Lightyear; a space ranger, one of the main characters (Toy Story)

Buzzy Buzzy; SC’s male bee friend (Scamp)

By-Line Smith By-Line Smith; Super Goof’s journalist friend; name usually spelled “By-Line” Smith (Mice)

C

Caca-K-Lote Caça-k-lote; Powerful robot (See also Dr. Roboerto). (Carioca)

Cadpig Cadpig; the talkative runt pup (101 Dalmatians)

Calamity Duck Calamity Duck; Owner of sarsaparilla parlor and flirtatious acquaintance of Buck Duck (Buck Duck)

Caleb Rebel of the Metaworld (W.I.T.C.H.)

Calico Calico; one of the three little kittens, commonly shown as having partially black ears (misc)

Calla Calla; Princess of Dunwyn, friend of the Gummis (Gummi Bears)

Calliope Clio Melpomene Tersichore and Thalia Muses; Calliope, Clio, Melpomene, Tersichore & Thalia, narrators of Herc’s deeds. Yes, there are only 5 muses in the Disney world (Hercules)

Calliope from Kylion (Kylion)

Camera9 Cameraman, Stephan Vladuck’s secret identity (PKNA)

Camilla Camilla the chicken; Gonzo’s love interest (The Muppet Show)

Camille Chameleon Female villain who has the ability to shapeshift (Darkwing Duck)

Camillino Robot helping US in his Cimino-like adventures (Ducks)

Camper from W VP 1-01 the tough guy DD is in conflicts with (Ducks)

Canadian Canucklehead Canadian Canucklehead; (The Replacements)

Candace Flynn Candace Flynn; Candace Gertrude Flynn, neurotic older sister of Phineas and Ferb who always tries to bust them (Phineas and Ferb)

Cangiante (W.I.T.C.H.)

Cap. El Borron Brazilian, PB’s pirate ancestor from “History of Duckburg” series (Mice)

Cap. Losky Evil ship captain in I TL 303-A looking for Kalhoa (Mice)

Capitao Pagode Morcego Verde’s villain (Carioca)

Capitao Penoso A sea captain/scientific explorer who’s Jose Carioca’s lookalike (Carioca)

Capitao Porreta Pedrao’s secret identity, Afonsinho is his nameless sidekick (Carioca)

Capt. Dan Holland Capt. Dan Holland; Captain of the spaceship Palomino (The Black Hole)

Capt. Eustace Capt. Eustace; in BR stories (Forest)

Captain Amelia female cat-like alien, captain of the ship on which Jim embarks (Treasure Planet)

Captain Annie Captain Annie; Incompetent captain of steamboat The Flying Dutchman; rival of Belle Duck (Ducks)

Captain Barbossa Captain Barbossa; Pirate captain, under a curse in the first movie (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Captain Bugabee Captain Bugabee; Bo Bug’s sea captain friend (Bucky Bug)

Captain Chavez Captain Chavez; female police chief of Elisa Maza and Bluestone (Gargoyles)

Captain Doberman Captain Doberman; (Mice)

Captain Flint legendary pirate, he hidden the his loot on the Treasure Planet (Treasure Planet)

Captain Gantu Captain Gantu; Large and muscular alien who wants to capture Stitch (Lilo and Stitch)

Captain Hook Captain Hook; Pirate Captain with hook as hand in Peter Pan (Fairies, Peter Pan)

Captain Jack Sparrow Jack Sparrow the pirate; (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Captain Nathaniel Churchmouse Captain Nathaniel Churchmouse; (Mice)

Captain Nemo Captain Nemo; (Captain Nemo)

Captain Orville Captain Orville; Albatross, brother of Wilbur (The Rescuers)

Captain Ramrod Captain Ramrod; Akela of the Chickadees (Ducks)

Cara-de-Babá (“Babysitter Face”) A big pignose thief whose M.O. is to wear a babysitter disguise along with a shorty dognose partner disguised as a baby (see Cara-de-Bebê). They appear generally in MOV stories (Ducks)

Cara-de-Bebê (“Baby Face”) A shorty dognose thief whose M.O. is to wear a baby disguise along with a big pignose partner disguised as babysitter (see Cara-de-Babá). They appear generally in MOV stories (Ducks)

Carl Barks Carl Barks; (Ducks)

Carl Fredricksen Carl Fredricksen; Grumpy old man who owns a flying house (Up)

Carl the Intern Carl the Intern; Major Monogram’s young intern (Phineas and Ferb)

Carlotta Carlotta; Prince Eric’s female servant (The Little Mermaid)

Casey Coot Casey Coot; Grandma Duck’s brother, son of Gertrude Gadwall and Clinton Coot (Ducks)

Casey Jr Casey Jr; The talking train in Dumbo (Dumbo)

Cash a perfect financial promoter (PdP Sim)

Cassidy ex-WITCH; destroyed by Nerissa (W.I.T.C.H.)

Cassie Cassie; Cassandra, the psychic friend of teen Herc from the Prometheus Academy (Hercules)

Castaway Castaway; John Canmore, hereditary enemy of the Gargoyles, leader of the Quarrymen (Gargoyles)

Castore Tebel’s dog (Mice)

Cat dogcatcher in FG stories (Mice)

Caterpillar Caterpillar; (Alice in Wonderland)

Caubi Hard Haid Moe’s rooster (Ducks)

Cavin Cavin; Young human friend of the Gummis (Gummi Bears)

Cecil Van Oldguard Cicci Snobby; Billionaire, friend of US (Ducks)

Cecilio B. de Milho Cecílio B. de Milho; Rosinha’s uncle, a movie director in some stories (Carioca)

Cedric lord of the Metaworld (W.I.T.C.H.)

Celia Mae Celia Mae; Sulley’s one-eyed girlfriend (Monsters Inc.)

Cenere fire beast (W.I.T.C.H.)

Cerberus Cerberus; three-headed dog (Hercules)

Chaca Chaca; Pacha’s daughter (The Emperor’s New Groove)

Chad Danforth Chad Danforth; student of East High School, player of the basketball school team Wildcats, best friend of Troy Bolton modelled after the actor Corbin Bleu (High School Musical)

Chainsaw Chainsaw; Pete’s dog (Goof Troop)

Chalka (Kylion)

Chanchada Pignose, Morcego Verde’s villain, spoof of “The Riddler” (Carioca)

Charlene Sinclair Charlene Sinclair; Daughter from Dinosaur (Dinosaurs TV)

Charles Lyndon father of Eric Lyndon (W.I.T.C.H.)

Charlie Charlie the robot; GO’s little robot from W OS 401-02 which can foresee the future (Mice)

Charlie from Paperino Paperotto schoolmate of YDD, member of Tuck’s party (Paperino Paperotto)

Chatter Telephone Chatter Telephone; Toy phone with wheels (Toy Story)

Chattie Chipmunk Chattie Chipmunk; Chip ‘n’ Dale’s sister, mother of Zip and CD Zap (Forest)

Chatty Chatty; Scamp’s squirrel friend from newspaper stories (Scamp)

Checkers Checkers; A dalmatian working for the fire brigade (Scamp)

Cheeps Cheeps; Scamp’s bird friend who resembles a bluebird (Scamp)

Chef Louie Chef Louie; Prince Eric’s cook (The Little Mermaid)

Chen Lin Hay Lin’s father (W.I.T.C.H.)

Cheshire Cat Cheshire Cat; The vanishing cat (Alice in Wonderland)

Chester Soup very stupid journalist (Anderville)

Chi Fu Chi Fu; (Mulan)

Chi-Chi Chi-Chi; female chipmunk, friend of CD (Forest)

Chicha Chicha; Pacha’s wife (The Emperor’s New Groove)

Chick Hicks Chick Hicks; green race car (Cars)

Chickadees Chickadees; Female scout troup (Ducks)

Chicken Chicken the pup; Fearful and shy puppy (Scamp)

Chicken Duck Chicken Duck; Sheriff of Bootsville (Buck Duck)

Chicken Duck’s pony Chicken Duck’s pony (Buck Duck)

Chicken Little Chicken Little from 1943; (misc)

Chicken Little Chicken Little from 2005; (Chicken Little)

Chico Chico; Scamp’s round-cheeked Spanish-accented chihuahua friend (see Pedro from LT) (Scamp)

Chief Chief; Copper’s teacher (The Fox and the Hound)

Chief Inspector Lawless Chief Inspector Lawless; the police inspector from D/GMD 100 (The Great Mouse Detective)

Chief Kuma Chief Kuma; Chief of tropical island and Captain Nemo’s friend (Captain Nemo)

Chief O’Hara Chief O’Hara; (Mice)

Chien Po Chien Po; one of Mulan’s best friends from Imperial army (Mulan)

Chinese shopkeeper unnamed Chinese shopkeeper in Imp from the Eleventh Dimension stories (Mice)

Chino Chino the Alley Cat; the drummer (Aristocats)

Chip Chip; of Chip ‘n’ Dale, the one with black nose and teeth in the middle (Chip ‘n’ Dale Rescue Rangers, Donald and CD, Forest)

Chip Chip the cup; Enchanted cup and son of Mrs. Potts (Beauty and the Beast)

Chip Gearloose Chip Gearloose; Gyro’s distant descendant. Created by Lars Jensen (Ducks)

Chips from GM (Giovani Marmotte)

Chiquita Pedro’s sister Chiquita; Pedro’s attractive sister (Scamp)

Chisel McSue Chisel McSue; Barks’ villain in the horseradish story. His ancester is Swindle McSue (Ducks)

Chit and Chat CD’s playful and energetic nephews (Forest)

Chita da Silva Pena das Selvas’ pet monkey (Ducks)

Chitty Chitty; Chatty’s nephew (Scamp)

Choo-Choo Beagle Choo-Choo Beagle; Beagle Boy fond of trains; from W BB 41-04 (Ducks)

Christopher Irma’s little brother (W.I.T.C.H.)

Christopher Robin Christopher Robin; the human boy (Winnie the Pooh)

Chuck from GM (Giovani Marmotte)

Chuckles Chuckles; Doleful clown who was once owned by Daisy (Toy Story)

Chuki pink car reporter (Cars)

Chum Chum; a mako shark in Bruce’s abstinence group (Finding Nemo)

Chunk Chunk; Orange muscular rock monster toy (Toy Story)

Cientista Mascarado Brazilian, An evil masked scientist who is “Laser Commando”‘s main villain (Mice)

Cinda assistant of Queen Clarion, with long violet hair (Fairies)

Cinderella Cinderella; (Cinderella, Disney’s Kirara Purinsesu, Princess)

Cinderella’s prince Prince who marries Cinderella (Cinderella)

Cindy from GM (Giovani Marmotte)

Cinnamon Teal Female spy who uses hypnosis as her weapon (Ducktales)

Cintia Cíntia, Little pignose girl, Biquinho’s friend and neighbor (Ducks)

Cissy Swann Cissy Swann; Rich female acquaintance of Gus Goose (Ducks)

Claire Voyant Claire Voyant; Psychic detective colleague of Mickey in Mickey Mystery stories (Mice)

Clancy Clancy; wild-west-cousin of GO (Mice)

Clank Clank; Tinker sprite friend of Tinkerbell, huge and fat (Fairies)

Clantons Irmãos Clantons, also Os Clantons; Bird-beaks. Pena Kid’s villains (Ducks)

Clara Cluck Clara Cluck; friend of MI and DA (Ducks, Mice)

Clarabelle Cow Clarabelle Cow; (Clarabelle Reporter, Epic Mickey, Mice)

Clarg Clarg; Master morc of the slaves in Dragonlords saga (Dragonlords)

Clarion Clarion; Queen of Pixie Hollow (Fairies)

Clarissa from GM (Giovani Marmotte)

Clawdia Tuffy and Buster Crab-scouts; Clawdia, Tuffy & Buster, young crabs in Sebastian’s scout troop (The Little Mermaid)

Clayton Clayton; (Tarzan)

Clementine and her kittens Clementine and her kittens; US’s cat (Ducks)

Cleo Cleo; Goldfish from PIN Later also owned by Minnie (Mice, Pinocchio)

Clerk from W US 44-04 US’s clerk seen in a few stories, not to be confused with Clerkly (Ducks)

Clerkly Clerkly; Employee of US, his name and appearance is not consistent (Ducks)

Cletus (Kylion)

Clint Clint; CLINT; Computer Limited Intelligence Nutty Technocrat, intelligent computer (Ducks)

Clinton Coot Clinton Coot; father of GD and Casey Coot, husband of Gertrude Gadwall (Ducks)

Clopin Clopin; Narrator and leading fool: thin, big man with long nose and mask (Hunchback of Notre Dame)

Coach from Riverside Rovers (Riverside Rovers)

Coachman Coachman; Coach driver (Pinocchio)

Cobra Bubbles Cobra Bubbles; (Lilo and Stitch)

Cock Robin Cock Robin; (misc)

Codino a seahorse character by Scarpa (misc)

Cody Cody; Little Australian boy who talks with animals (The Rescuers)

Cogsworth Cogsworth; Enchanted clock (Beauty and the Beast)

Cole (Kylion)

Colette Colette; Full name Colette Tatou. Only woman chef in the kitchen at Gusteau’s, independent and tough. In love with Linguini (Ratatouille)

Collectionneur villain who collects the rarest things in the world and is willing to do anything to get them (Mice)

Colonel Colonel the sheepdog; Sheepdog (101 Dalmatians)

Colonel Bassett Colonel Bassett; Pompous but friendly rich man from the American South; owner of a large mansion (Mice)

Colonel Hathi Colonel Hathi; Leader of the elephant patrol (Jungle Book)

Colonel Philcher Colonel Philcher; looks like an archaeologist (Mice)

Colonel Spigot Spigot; Colonel Spigot, bungling leader of the Thembrian military (Talespin)

Columbo Columbo the pigeon; A pigeon trained by 0.0. Duck to help him (Ducks)

Cometa Beta Young comet friend of Eta Beta; from Italian stories (Mice)

Cometa Teta Young black charred comet; from Italian stories (Mice)

Commandante Commandante; Captain Enrique Sanches Monastario, the dishonest commandant of Los Angeles’ garrison who forced Don Diego to return from Spain and become Zorro (Zorro)

Commissario Pinko (Ducks)

Companhia Teatral Peninha Brazilian, Fethry’s Theatrical Troupe a group of “ultra-modern” theater actors: Fethry Duck dressed as a roman, a pig-nose dressed as a cowboy, a duck-bill dressed as a greek and a dog-nose dressed as a viking (Ducks)

Conde Draquila Dognose vampire in some Jose Carioca stories (Carioca)

Conde Naldo A count in some PB stories in Brazil (Mice)

Condorman Condorman; (Condorman)

Conseil Conseil; Professor Arronax’s assistant and friend (Captain Nemo)

Control Seven Overweight, balding, dogfaced secret agent boss who often smokes a pipe (Mice)

Coon kids in BR stories (Forest)

Copernico Pitagorico great-grandfather of GY, helper of Fantomius (Ducks)

Copper Copper; Copper is the starring hound (The Fox and the Hound)

Copperhead McViper Last remaining member of the McViper gang (Ducks)

Coral Coral; a clownfish and Marlin’s wife who got killed by a barracuda along with almost all of her offspring she gave birth to (Finding Nemo)

Cornelia Cornelia; witch, has power on earth (W.I.T.C.H.)

Cornelia’s grandmother (W.I.T.C.H.)

Cornelius Coot Cornelius Coot; Founder of Duckburg (Ducks)

Corporal Reyes Corporal Reyes; Corporal of the Los Angeles garrison, friend of Sergeant Garcia (Zorro)

Cotton Cotton; Older, mute, bearded member of Jack Sparrow’s crew, who carries a macaw parrot on his shoulder that sometimes speaks for him. (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Cotton’s parrot (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Count Gryphon Minister of state in Medioka (Mice)

Count de Sheckels Count de Sheckels; Minister of finance in Medioka and later its prime minister (Mice)

Countdown Countdown; One of three explosive-expert Beagle Boys. First appearance in August 1967. Prison number “7654321”. He looks like a regular Beagle Boy except for carrying small explosives in pockets and under the hat. Note: do not confuse Countdown, Boom Beagle, Boom Boom Beagle (Ducks)

Country Cousin Country Cousin; (misc)

Courtney Grumper oval face with freckles (W.I.T.C.H.)

Cousin Bertie Cousin Bertie; Bertie the Jinx from ZS 40-09-08 and WDCS#30; do not mix with Bertie from JW (Mice)

Cousin Daniel Cousin Daniel; (also Cousin Dan, Sheriff Dan Duck), DD’s cousin who’s sheriff of a Western town called Bent Spur Gulch (Ducks)

Cousin Douglas Cousin Douglas; Scrooge’s cousin in D-coded stories (Ducks)

Cousin Lucky Cousin Lucky; MIM’s unlucky cousin from BB 1 (Ducks)

Cousin Lurch McDuck Scrooge’s cousin who loaned him the dollar that started Scrooge on the road to riches and who is now an Arabian oil sheik (Ducks)

Cousin Tic-Tac-Toe Cousin Tic-Tac-Toe; one of BB cousins (Ducks)

Crabby Crabby; Scamp’s crab friend in beach stories, he often makes clicking sounds with his claws (Scamp)

Crapulia teacher of maths of HDL in I-coded stories (Ducks)

Crazy Harry Crazy Harry; Bomb expert (The Muppet Show)

Creamo Catnera Creamo Catnera; Boxing champion, parody of Primo Carnera (Mice)

Creeper Creeper; small creature serving Horned King (The Black Cauldron)

Cri-Kee Cri-Kee; Mulan’s lucky cricket (Mulan)

Crime Inc Crime organization which often hires Emil Eagle to get rid of Super Goof; name usually spelled “Crime Inc.” (Mice)

Crimson Frost’s mount (W.I.T.C.H.)

Croc Croc the wuzzle; crocodile-bull, villain (Wuzzles)

Crockett Duck HDL’s great great great great-grandfather who singlehandedly blazed the first road through the wilderness (Ducks)

Cronocomandante Chief of Time 00 (PKNA)

Croony Croony; Loudly singing pup (Scamp)

Crosby editor-in-chief of the newspaper “Topolinia Daily” (Mice)

Crow from SC a crow stealing bones (Scamp)

Cruella De Vil Cruella De Vil; Female villain with black and white hair wearing a fur (101 Dalmatians)

Crush Crush; an extreme loggerhead sea turtle who advises Marlin the fish on raising children (Finding Nemo)

Crusher Crusher; Bulldog who is a tough bully (Scamp)

Cubbi Cubbi; Adventurous boy Gummi (Gummi Bears)

Cubby and Tubby Cubby and Tubby; Bear cub twins from 1932 Disney cartoon “The Bears and Bees.” They had a series of their own in British-production (Forest, UK)

Curator Curator of Duckburg Museum; (Ducks)

Cuthbert Coot Cuthbert Coot; uncle of GU, son of Casey Coot and Gretchen Grebe (Ducks)

Cyanide Charlie Friendly mustachioed man who used to live in Goldopolis and own shares in the Goldopolis and Boom City railroad (Ducks)

Cyril Cyril the Alley Cat; the guitar player (Aristocats)

Cyril Chipmunk Cyril Chipmunk; Rich and lucky chipmunk (Forest)

Cyril McDuck Cyril the spendthrift, US’s cousin from Cheapside, Scotland (Ducks)

Cyrus Q. Husslepuffer Cyrus Q. Husslepuffer; Rich man who will use any means to abuse Super Goof’s powers in order to serve his own egotistical needs (Mice)

D

DD’s dog from YD 57-12-03 “medium-sized” lazy dog with black ears (Ducks)

DD’s dog from YD 61-04-04 slim dog with black ears (Ducks)

DJ the car blue car with big spoiler (Cars)

Dachsie Dachsie; Adult dachshund from L+T movie, sometimes with German accent; Speedy the dachshund’s uncle (Scamp)

Daddy Stork Daddy Stork; in BR stories (Forest)

Daedalus Daedalus; Inventor, shop class teacher and father of Icarus from the Prometheus Academy (Hercules)

Dagmar the police dog The police force’s greatest bloodhound; works for OH (Mice)

Daisy Duck Daisy Duck; (Dragonlords, Duckies, Ducks, Quack Pack)

Daisy’s aunt Drusilla Daisy’s aunt (Ducks)

Dale Dale; of Chip ‘n’ Dale, the one with big nose and right and left tooth (Chip ‘n’ Dale Rescue Rangers, Donald and CD, Forest)

Dallben Dallben; Taran’s mentor (The Black Cauldron)

Dallben’s cat (The Black Cauldron)

Daltar rose bush gardener (W.I.T.C.H.)

Dan Dan the dogcatcher; catfaced dogcatcher, typically with pegleg; similar in appearance to PE, but not a crook; often fatter than PE or with nonblack fur (Mice)

Dan Woodstein Dan Woodstein editor of Channel 00 (PKNA)

Dana Data Dana Data; Gyro’s girlfriend (Ducks)

Danblane McDuck Pap Mc Paper; Scrooge’s ancestor (Ducks)

Dangerous Dan McBoo Dangerous Dan McBoo; Crook, partner of Idgit the Midget (Mice)

Daniel Ashcroft (W.I.T.C.H.)

Danny Danny the black lamb; (misc)

Daphne Duck Daphne Duck; GL’s mother (Ducks)

Darbus teacher of Dramatic Arts at East High School modelled after the actress Alyson Reed (High School Musical)

Dario the dromedary Brazilian; Fethry’s dromedary in some Arabian stories (where Fethry sells carpets in the desert) (Ducks)

Dark Mother monster living inside the Earth (W.I.T.C.H.)

Darkus from GM (Giovani Marmotte)

Darkwarrior Duck A Darkwing Duck from an alternate future where Gosalyn had disappeared and Darkwing had become a ruthless law enforcer (Darkwing Duck)

Darkwing Duck Darkwing Duck; (Darkwing Duck)

Darla Sherman Darla Sherman; Dr. Sherman’s niece (Finding Nemo)

Darling Darling; Full name Elizabeth; also referred to as Betty; wife of Jim Dear; mother of Albert (Scamp)

Dash Little’s Caesar’s patron (Anderville)

Dash Parr Dash Parr; Power of superhuman speed; son of Helen and Bob Parr (The Incredibles)

Dave Dave; (Recess)

David Kawena David Kawena; Lifeguard, Nani’s friend and later Nani’s boyfriend (Lilo and Stitch)

David Xanatos David Xanatos; Bearded human villain of the Gargoyles (Gargoyles)

Davy Crockett Davy Crockett; (misc)

Davy Jones Davy Jones; captain of the Flying Dutchman (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Dean Collins History teacher (W.I.T.C.H.)

Deb Deb; a four-striped damselfish, an aquarium member who calls her own reflection – who she thinks is her sister – “Flo” (Finding Nemo)

Deeds of Sir Dauntless Deeds of Sir Dauntless; he comes from a Disney cartoon that was never finished (!) – in this case called “Through the Picture Frame” (UK)

Delegado Oliveira a.k.a. Delega Oliva; Birdbeak, Chief of police in some Jose Carioca’s stories (Carioca)

Delegado Porconi a.k.a. “Comissário” Porconi; Pignose, Chief of police in some Morcego Verde stories (Carioca)

Della Duck Della Duck; mother of HDL (Ducks)

Demona Demona; Female Gargoyle with red hair and blue skin, former love of Goliath (Gargoyles)

Dempsey Dog who loves sunbathing and sleeping. He is owned by Alma Grackle and lives in Miss Typefast’s apartment building. Created by Vicar (Ducks)

Denahi Denahi; the middle Inuit brother (Brother Bear)

Dentinho Dumb duckbill friend of JOC in old Brazilian stories, aparently a (now discarded) early version of Afonsinho (Carioca)

Depson (Kylion)

Descarado-176 Metralha Descarado 176; Beagle Boy expert in face disguises (Ducks)

Destroyer Duck super hero (PKNA)

Detective Casey Detective Casey; Assistant of OH (Mice)

Dexter Dingus Dexter Dingus; Criminal genius inventor and reluctant partner of Pete in modern Mickey stories (Mice)

DiZ Dizu; Mysterious guy, bandages all over his face (Kingudamu Hatsu)

Dick Tracy Dick Tracy; (misc)

Dickie Duck Paperetta Ye’-Ye’; Goldie’s granddaughter (Disney Teens, Ducks)

Dikke Tor Fat indian boy in Dutch stories (Hiawatha)

Dimples Dimples; a white pup, usually with small black spots on his head, he is very energetic. Wants to become a hunting dog and is younger than SC (see also Nappy) (Scamp)

Dimwitty Dimwitty Duck; Silly looking tall duck partner of MD (Ducks)

Dinah the cat Alice’s little cat (Alice in Wonderland)

Dinah the dog (Mice)

Dingus McDuck Dingus McDuck; “Dirty” Dingus McDuck, husband of Molly Mollard; grandpa of US; worker at coal mine in Glasgow (Ducks)

Dinkie DA & AMJ’s cat in Dutch stories (Duckies)

Dinky and Boomer Dinky and Boomer; Funny birds (The Fox and the Hound)

Dino Sauro Moviemaker from the Brazilian Robinze Crusoe sub-series (Carioca)

Dino Sauro’s secretary Nameless moviemaker’s secretary (Robinze Crusoe sub-series) (Carioca)

Dirk Duizendpoot (Bucky Bug)

Dirtbike Funnie Dirtbike Funnie; Doug’s little sister (Doug)

Dirty Bill Dirty Bill; the villain in “Ambrose the Robber Kitten”. Appears in the British newspaper serials, and later as a member of the “Dirty Dozen” stories along with BW (misc)

Djali Djali; Esmeralda’s goat and sidekick (Hunchback of Notre Dame)

Django Django; Rat, father of Rémy and Émile. Strict and dominating, and has a bias against humans (Ratatouille)

Dobbin Dobbin; Grandma Duck’s horse (Ducks)

Doc Doc; One of the SD (Forest, Snow White)

Doc Beagle Doc Beagle; Sidekick and straight-man for Sherlock Beagle. He wears white mustache and small rounded hat. Prison number: MD-176 (Ducks)

Doc Crane Doc Crane; Medical doctor in BR’s Sunday pages (Forest)

Doc Finkelstein Doc Finkelstein; crook with black clothes and sunglasses, friend of Shrimp (Mice)

Doc Hudson Doc Hudson; blue car (Cars)

Doc Static Doc Static; Mickey’s recurring overweight, clean-shaven inventor friend with lab coat, wavy hair and glasses (Mice)

Doctor Einmug Doctor Einmug; (Mice)

Doctor Proctor Doctor Proctor; MM’s doctor in the dailies (Mice)

Doctor Stat Doctor Stat; Doc Static’s evil counterpart in Blotman stories (Mice)

Doctor with beard Recurring in YM 111,YM 113 and YM 114 (Mice)

Dodger Dodger; Carefree leader of Fagin’s dog gang (Oliver and Company)

Dodo Dodo; (Alice in Wonderland)

Doe Boys Doe Boys; The Desperate Doe Boys (DDB), a couple of crooks often appearing in the Chronicle stories (Ducks)

Dog actress from ZM 46-12-08 (Mice)

Dogcatcher from ZM 32-01-10 (Mice)

Doggie Doggie; Dog that all humans love (Scamp)

Doli from Black Cauldron short, stocky dwarf, Eiddileg’s right-hand man (The Black Cauldron)

Dolly Dolly; Soft dress-up sarcastic rag doll with purple hair (Toy Story)

Dolly Paprika partner of Fantomius (Ducks)

Don Diego de la Vega Don Diego de la Vega; Zorro in normal life (Zorro)

Don Ignacio ‘Nacho’ Torres Nacho Torres; Don Ignacio ‘Nacho’ Torres, a Californian landowner unfairly accused of conspiracy by the Commandante of Los Angeles. Father of Elena Torres. He also appears in the first TV episodes (Zorro)

Don Karnage Don Karnage; Leading air pirate (Talespin)

Don Poocho Don Poocho; (Mice)

Don Rosa Don Rosa; comics creator (Ducks)

Don de Pato Scrooge’s Spanish ancestor who was in command of a treasure galleon and left the Spanish Armada in 1588 (Ducks)

Dona Guida Pignose, Cintia’s mother and Fethry’s neighbor (Ducks)

Donald Duck Donald Duck; Donald Fauntleroy Duck (Donald and CD, Double Duck, Dragonlords, Duckies, Ducks, Epic Mickey, Kingudamu Hatsu, PdP Sim, PKNA, Quack Pack, Witches)

Donald Duckling Paperino Paperotto; (Paperino Paperotto)

Donald Glub Brazilian, PSU’s prime-minister, Donald Duck’s underwater spin-off (Ducks)

Donald’s black cat black female cat straying in Taliaferro strips (Ducks)

Donald’s goat goat from the 1938 Donald dailies, given to DD by GU (Ducks)

Donna Donna; From the movie short (Ducks)

Donna Duck Donna Duck from 1951; Mexican lady moving in as DD’s neighbour in DD daily continuity of August 1951 (Ducks)

Doofus Doofus; Fat friend of HDL wearing glasses and admirer of Launchpad (Ducktales)

Doorknob from Alice in Wonderland (Alice in Wonderland)

Dopey Dopey; Silent Dwarf without beard (Forest, Snow White)

Doppio G A double-dealing spy, working for US and RKD (Ducks)

Doppioscherzo A villain in MM stories, with a typical way of laughing (Mice)

Dora Dora; member of DA’s ‘Chit-Chat Society’ women club, together with CL and Clara Cluck. Her name is rarely mentioned, we only know of W OS 1247-05 (Ducks)

Dorina from Miss Spring series (Mice)

Dory Dory; the blue tang (Finding Nemo)

Dot Dot; (A Bug’s Life)

Dottie Daisy’s niece Dottie; Daisy’s niece who lives on a farm (Ducks)

Dottor Talos villain who tries to animate shadows (Mice)

Dotty the ladybird (Forest)

Doug Funnie Doug Funnie; Adolescent star of series (Doug)

Doug’s father (Doug)

Doug’s mother (Doug)

Downy O’Drake Downy O’Drake; Scrooge’s mother (Ducks)

Dr Bunsen Honeydew Dr Bunsen Honeydew; Bald-headed, glasses-wearing scientist and head of Muppet Labs (The Muppet Show)

Dr Julius Strangepork Dr Julius Strangepork; Science officer on the USS Swinetrek in the fictitious TV series “Pigs in Space” (The Muppet Show)

Dr Teeth Dr Teeth; Ultra-cool band leader and keyboard player for the band “Dr Teeth and the Electric Mayhem” (The Muppet Show)

Dr. Alex Durant Dr. Alex Durant; The leader of the spaceship Palomino’s science exploration crew. In comic stories he looks very different from Anthony Perkins who had the role in the featured film (The Black Hole)

Dr. Apolo Issao Hunchbacked vulture, Morcego Vermelho’s villain, he makes evil robots using junk (Ducks, Mice)

Dr. Arrasarasa A tall birdbeak (a goose?) Brazilian villain whose “hair” resembles pointed ears or horns. He’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Biguebem A tall owl-face Brazilian villain. He’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Calunga A tall dognose Brazilian villain wearing top hat and pince-nez. He’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Dawson Dr. Dawson; his full name is David Q. Dawson (The Great Mouse Detective)

Dr. Doofenshmirtz Dr. Doofenshmirtz; Evil scientist and head of his own company, Doofenshmirtz Evil Incorporated (Phineas and Ferb)

Dr. Doppler dog-like friend of Jim Hawkins and Sarah who takes Jim on the travel to find the Treasure Planet (Treasure Planet)

Dr. Drakken Dr. Drakken; (Kim Possible)

Dr. Enigma A short redhead birdbeak Brazilian villain with a question mark on the chest. Expert on enigmas, he’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Espectro A tall birdbeak Brazilian villain wearing rounded sun glasses and white beard. He’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Estelionato A tall dognose Brazilian villain with flat nose and evil smile. Expert on frauds, he’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Everett Koppenhooper Dr. Everett Koppenhooper; child scientist from the “Atombrella” story (Mice)

Dr. Facilier Dr. Facilier; crook (Princess and the Frog)

Dr. Hach-Mac supercriminal; evil scientist (Ducks)

Dr. Hans Reinhardt Dr. Hans Reinhardt; commander of the lost space exploration ship Cygneus (The Black Hole)

Dr. Kanhestro Super Goof’s villain, a bald birdbeak mad scientist (Mice)

Dr. Kate McCrae Dr. Kate McCrae; Spacegeophycisist in spaceship Palomino, has telepatic connection with V.I.N.CENT. (The Black Hole)

Dr. Mefisto A tall redhead birdbeak Brazilian villain wearing top hat. He’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Morsa A tall walrus-face Brazilian villain. He’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Ninho Birdbeak, physician in some Jose Carioca stories (Carioca)

Dr. Philip Sherman Dr. Philip Sherman; the dentist who caught Nemo (Finding Nemo)

Dr. Q.I. Mundo 0.0. Duck’s villain, a man inside an earth-globe disguise in 0.0. Duck’s Brazilian stories (Ducks)

Dr. Roboerto Scientist who invented a deadbeat-hunter robot called Caca-K-Lote (Carioca)

Dr. Sara Bellum Dr. Sara Bellum; Scientist, agent of S.H.U.S.H. (Darkwing Duck)

Dr. Sevarius Dr. Sevarius; Dr. Anton Sevarius, evil scientist employed by Xanatos to clone gargoyles (Gargoyles)

Dr. Syclocks Dr. Syclocks; One-app, Super Goof’s villain, the clock-robot from W SG 2-02 (Ducks, Mice)

Dr. Tempo Dr. Tempo; The villain from W SG 6-02, inventor of the cold-ray gun (Mice)

Dr. Temporal A short dognose Brazilian villain wearing top hat and long tie. Expert on weather control, he’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Vivaldo A tall dognose Brazilian villain wearing white mustaches and curly black hair. He’s one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Mice)

Dr. Vulter Dr. Vulter; Ape-villain from FG story YM 028 (Mice)

Dr. Winx Dr. Winx; Evil scientist (Mice)

Dr. X Dr. X; Villain from W PB 1-02 “The Phantom Blot meets the Mysterious Mr.X”, one of regular villains in Brazilian stories (Mice)

Dr. Zung A short, bald dognose Brazilian villain wearing pince-nez. Expert on chemistry, his secret formula can turn him into a Mr. Hyde-like monster who is addicted to cakes. Originally a villain from MOV’s stories, he’s now one of the 12 members of the criminal organization known as “The Classless Professionals” (Ducks, Mice)

Dr. Zxo Dr. Zxo; Insane, evil and temperature-obsessed scientist (Mice)

Dracon Dracon; Anthony Dracon, NYC Underworld crimeboss (Gargoyles)

Drake Mallard Drake Mallard; Darkwing’s original identity (Darkwing Duck)

Drilly Drilly; Woodpecker. Often angry and likes to utilize his pointed beak (Scamp)

Duchess Duchess; (Aristocats)

Duchess Duchess from Lady and the Tramp; Scamp’s neighbor cat (Scamp)

Duck Avenger Paperinik; Super Duck, actually DD (Ducks, PKNA)

Duckies headmaster Ostrich headmaster of Duckies’ school with a long neck (Duckies)

Ducklair Everett Ducklair, scientist (PKNA)

Duckworth Duckworth; Scrooge’s Butler (Ducktales)

Ducky Bird Katie Mallard’s gun-toting granddaughter (Ducks)

Dudly D. Duck Donald Duck’s cousin, a crazy architect from W DD 136-01, reused in some Brazilian stories of the 1970s. (Ducks)

Due Evil electronic brain (PKNA)

Duepiedi Friend of Pipwolf, dressed like a waiter (X-Mickey)

Duff Killagan Duff Killigan; wears Scottish clothes (Kim Possible)

Dug Dug; Talking dog who accompanies Carl Fredricksen on an adventure in the movie (Up)

Duke Varlott Duke Varlott; Evil Mediokan duke who wants to become king of Medioka (Mice)

Duke de la Puche Duke de la Puche; Secretary of foreign affairs in Medioka (Mice)

Dulcie Dulcie; Baking-talent fairy. Brown hair, wears a baker’s cap (Fairies)

Dum-Dum Dum-Dum; Scuttle’s partner, not Pete, the fat dogfaced partner (Mice)

Dumb the robot Dr. Hach-Mac’s robot assistant; bullet proof but not a brainiac (Ducks)

Dumbo Dumbo; Flying child elephant with very big ears (Dumbo)

Dumont Dumont; Program who is the keeper of the I/O tower which makes communication between programs and their users possible (Tron)

Dumptruck Dumptruck; Big air pirate with top hat (Talespin)

Duncan Ducksan MI’s friend and colleague in the serial “Mai dire Quack!” (Mice)

Durandus Talented scientist, invented a beverage which allows time travel to the past or future (Mice)

Dusk Dasuku; a “nobody” with a mouth which looks a bit like a zipper (Kingudamu Hatsu)

Dusty Dusty the dirt bather; a bird who likes to bath in dirt (Scamp)

Dusty Dusty the road runner; Scamp’s fast road runner friend (Scamp)

Dutch medicine man the Dutch medicine man from the 1960s and 1970s, with 2 distinct masks (Hiawatha)

Dyl Dyl; Dylandra Piquel, Lucky Piquel’s wife (Bonkers)

E

EE’s robot rock hound EE’s invention which appeared in W WDC 330-05P, originally a diamond-searching robot armed with a strange ray used to confuse (reverse) the target’s mind. Reused in Brazil in some stories and covers (Ducks, Mice)

Earl Eagle Earl Eagle; in a few C&D stories (Forest)

Earl Sinclair Earl Sinclair; Father Dinosaur (Dinosaurs TV)

Easter Bunny Easter Bunny; (Ducks)

Ebenezer Higglesby Ebenezer Higglesby; grumpy plumbing contractor, honest rival of Joe Piper (Ducks, Mice)

Ed Ed the hyena; the stupid male hyena with damaged ears who usually has his tongue out (The Lion King)

Ed Dillinger Ed Dillinger; Evil and greedy vice president of the computer company ENCOM (Tron)

Ed and Al Witch birds; Ed and Al, MIM and MDS’s two ravens in S-coded stories (Witches)

Eddie Megget bookmaker (Anderville)

Eddie Thoryal a journalist at the Couac newspaper (Ducks)

Eddie Valiant Eddie Valiant; the fat, dark-haired detective (Roger Rabbit)

Edgar Edgar; Butler (Aristocats)

Edgerton Edgerton from W OS 178-02; Scrooge’s butler (Ducks)

Edna Gale (W.I.T.C.H.)

Edna Mode Edna Mode; Designer of superhero uniforms (The Incredibles)

Eduard Eekhoorn Chipmunk in Dutch CD stories (Forest)

Edward Folkner hunter of “ragorlang” monsters (W.I.T.C.H.)

Eega Beeva Eega Beeva; The Man of tomorrow with hands as fist gloves and short black trousers (Mice)

Eega Beeva’s fiancee (Mice)

Eek and Squeak Morgana McCawber’s pet bats (Darkwing Duck)

Eema Eema; An old female Styracosaurus (Dinosaur movie)

Eeyore Eeyore; (Winnie the Pooh)

Eggetha Eggetha; One of Grandma’s hens (Ducks)

Egidio Brazilian; Dogface, a talkative cleaner of Scrooge’s newspaper in some Brazilian Chronicle stories (Ducks)

Egret Heron Egret Heron; partner of Emil Eagle (Ducks)

Eider Duck Eider Duck; Fethry’s father and Grandma’s son in LoS (Ducks)

Eidolon Odin Eidolon, future UNO’s personality (PKNA)

Eilonwy Eilonwy; Princess (The Black Cauldron)

Einstein Einstein; Dumb Great Dane who is a member of Fagin’s dog gang (Oliver and Company)

Elastigirl Elastigirl; Helen Parr; able to make herself super elastic; wife of Bob Parr (The Incredibles)

Elektron android enemy of Paperinik in I PK stories (not in PKNA) (Ducks)

Eleroo Eleroo; elephant-kangaroo, hero (Wuzzles)

Elfego Baca Elfego Baca; (misc)

Elga Frau Zücker, Manny’s nanny (X-Mickey)

Eli Squinch Eli Squinch; (Mice)

Elisa Maza Elisa Maza; female human police detective (Gargoyles)

Elizabeth Landon Cornelia’s mother (W.I.T.C.H.)

Elizabeth Swann Elizabeth Swann; female pirate, later married to Will Turner (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Elliott Elliott; The invisible dragon (misc)

Ellsworth Ellsworth; (Mice)

Elmer Elephant Elmer Elephant; Young hat-wearing elephant boy (Elmer Elephant)

Elmo Noodle Elmo Noodle; Super Goof’s absent-minded archaeologist friend (Mice)

Elyon Cedric’s helper, former friend to the guardians (W.I.T.C.H.)

Emil Eagle Emil Eagle; Evil inventor, foe of SG and GY. Also often opponent of MM in Murry/Tello stories, and US. (Ducks, Mice)

Emily Emily; Former owner of Jessie (Toy Story)

Emperor (Mulan)

Encrenqueiro A birdbeak salesman who sold fish (B 780120) or had a general store (B 790191) in JOC stories (Carioca)

Endarno Guardian of the Kandrakar prison, or the oracle of Kandrakar. Sometimes Phobos in disguise (W.I.T.C.H.)

Enrietta Richardson Journalist (PKNA)

Enrique Fuentes Enrique Fuentes; One of the two accomplices of The Eagle who bought the Los Angeles’ Cantina (Zorro)

Epaminondas Lopes Chaves Rooster, Ze Galo’s rich uncle (Carioca)

Eric Lyndon Hay Lin’s boyfriend (W.I.T.C.H.)

Erin Peyton a girl whose hometown was destroyed by Ragorlang (W.I.T.C.H.)

Erin from Kylion navigation assistant (Kylion)

Esercito the army (PKNA)

Esmeralda Esmeralda; Female gipsy (Hunchback of Notre Dame)

Espirito do Futebol Espírito do Futebol; An ancient “Soccer’s Spirit” (Carioca)

Estratercio Estratércio; One of two green little alien who made Joe Carioca a super guy by accident (Carioca)

Estrella Marina whale expert (Mice)

Etch Etch; Etch-A-Sketch magic screen (Toy Story)

Etci an alien who is allergic to lies (Ducks)

Ethyl Sinclair Ethyl Sinclair; the grandma (Dinosaurs TV)

Euclid Euclid the butler; Scrooge’s butler in W-coded stories (Ducks)

Eudoxia Eudóxia; Angry and big female dognose neighbor of JOC in some Brazilian stories of the 70s (Carioca)

Eugene Photomas 23rd-century lawyer (PKNA)

Eugenie Dumal French; a woman wearing big glasses (Mice)

Eugenio o Genio Birdbeak, genie-in-a-bottle in some Jose Carioca stories (Carioca)

Eurasia Tost archaeologist, friend of MM (Mice)

Evangeline Evangeline; She is a Unvle Gudger’s goat (Mice)

Eve Eve; Wall-E’s white robot friend (misc)

Evil Manta Evil Manta; villainous half-manta ray enemy of Atlantica (The Little Mermaid)

Evil dwarfs (Forest, Snow White)

Evinrude Evinrude; dragonfly with a ferry service (The Rescuers)

Evroniani alien enemies of PK (PKNA)

Ew the white creature Female version of We the white creature (W.I.T.C.H.)

Émile Émile; Rat, older brother of Rémy. Loyal and good-hearted, but wolfs down anything edible he can find (Ratatouille)

F

F.O.W.L. F.O.W.L.; Nefarious agency plaguing Darkwing (Darkwing Duck)

Fa Li Fa Li; Mulan’s mother (Mulan)

Fa Zhou Mulan’s father; Mulan’s father, Fa Zhou (Mulan)

Fafnir DD’s dragon in Wizards of Mickey stories (Ducks, Mice)

Fagin Fagin; Human leader/friend of the dog gang (Oliver and Company)

Fairfax Dr. Morgan Fairfax, President of the Calisota Department of Environment (DOE) (PKNA)

Fairy Gary Tinker sprite, co-leader of the tinker fairies (Fairies)

Fairy Mary Fairy Mary; Plump fairy, leader of the tinker fairies (Fairies)

Fairy godmother Cinderella’s fairy godmother; (Cinderella)

Fakir Abdul Fakir Abdul; Arabian fakir, (almost) human looking (Mice)

Falcon Fatolino Stage performer who uses a unicycle in his act (Orange Bird)

Faline Faline; Bambi’s girlfriend/wife and mother of Geno and Gurri (Bambi)

Fall Apart Rabbit Fall Apart Rabbit; accident-prone cartoon star (Bonkers)

Fang Chinese cook (W.I.T.C.H.)

Fanny Coot Fanny Coot; mother of GU (Ducks)

Fantasteam Cyberghosts, they live in the PC of a Topolino editor (misc)

Fantomius PK’s predecessor (Ducks)

Farmer Brown Farmer Brown; A farmer and neighbor of BW and LW (Forest)

Farouk (Aladdin)

Fat Bandit Fatto Banditto; a fat Heartless with Arabian (?) clothes (Kingudamu Hatsu)

Fat Cat Fat Cat; fat leader of the criminal gang from CDR aristocratic crook with elegant hair, monocle, and clothes (Chip ‘n’ Dale Rescue Rangers)

Fauna Fauna; fairy godmother with green clothes (Sleeping Beauty)

Fawn Fawn; animal-talented fairy (Fairies)

Fawn Deer Fawn Deer; Bonker’s love interest and former cartoon co-star (Bonkers)

Feather Mallard Feather Mallard; Gladstone Gander’s romantic interest; luckiest girl in the world (Ducks)

Featherbrain Featherbrain; Zany bird who is bad at landing (Scamp)

Featherduster Featherduster; the enchanted duster and Lumiere’s girlfriend (Beauty and the Beast)

Feathers Feathers; Overly protected dog (Scamp)

Feathers’ human Overly protective woman (Scamp)

Felicia Felicia; Ratigan’s fatty pet cat (The Great Mouse Detective)

Fenimore Cook Gangster (PKNA)

Fenton Crackshell Fenton Crackshell; Scrooge’s assistant; alter-ego of Gizmoduck (Darkwing Duck, Ducktales)

Feras (Kylion)

Ferb Ferb; Silent brother of Phineas (Phineas and Ferb)

Ferdinand Ferdinand the bull; Bull who loves to smell the flowers (Ducks)

Fergus McDuck Fergus McDuck; Scrooge’s father (Ducks)

Fethry Duck Fethry Duck; Duck with few long hairs. Has a bit more (yellow) hair, actually, in early Strobl stories (Bay stories, Ducks, PdP Sim)

Fflewddur Fflam Fflewddur Fflam; Bard with magical harp (The Black Cauldron)

Fiddler Pig Fiddler Pig; one of the 3 little pigs, the one with the violin and a hat that looks like Donald’s (Forest)

Fidget Fidget; Ratigan’s right-hand bat, wears a long scarf and a wooden leg (The Great Mouse Detective)

Fido Fido; DD’s cocker spaniel dog in DD dailies, also named Pokey or Droopy (Ducks)

Fido from ZD 59-07-19 small pup with black ears

Field Marshal Fox Recurring fox member of HDL’s JW troop (Ducks)

Fifer Pig Fifer Pig; one of the 3 little pigs, the one with the flute (Forest)

Fifi Fifi the Peke; Minnie’s Pekinese dog, love-interest of Pluto. Named “Flapper” in her first appearance (ZM 32-05-29) (Mice)

Fifi Fifi the poodle; MI’s white poodle dog in Riddle stories (Mice)

Fifinellas Fifinellas; female adults (Gremlins)

Figaro Figaro; Minnie’s cat from Pinocchio (Mice, Pinocchio)

Fillmore Fillmore; Fuel shop owner (Cars)

Finch Finch; stocky birdfaced TNT agent with a white cowlick (Ducks)

Finney Cornelia’s ice skating teacher (W.I.T.C.H.)

Fira Fira; Illumination-talent fairy. Long dark hair (Fairies)

Fireball Fireball; Robot horse from W US 66-02 (Ducks)

Firmina Hard Haid Moe’s maid (Ducks, Mice)

Fitzroy Starcorp guard (PKNA)

Flat Manny’s butler (X-Mickey)

Flaversham Flaversham; toy maker and Olivia’s father who is kidnapped by Ratigan (The Great Mouse Detective)

Flea from SC flea living on SC (Scamp)

Flik Flik; (A Bug’s Life)

Flintheart Glomgold Flintheart Glomgold; Scrooge’s rival (Ducks, Ducktales)

Fliplip Fliplip; Nefarious’ student and son-in-law, the short one (Sleuth)

Flippy Flippy; a playful seal in beach stories (Scamp)

Flit Flit; hummingbird companion of Pocahontas (Pocahontas)

Flizard Flizard; frog-lizard, villain (Wuzzles)

Flo Flo; cyan car (Cars)

Floppy Floppy; dog with very long ears and good hearing (Scamp)

Flora Flora; fairy godmother with pink clothes (Sleeping Beauty)

Florismundo One of two green little alien who made Joe Carioca a super guy by accident (Carioca)

Flotsam and Jetsam Flotsam and Jetsam; Ursula’s two pet eels (The Little Mermaid)

Flotsam and Jetsam MD’s mascots; Named Flotsam and Jetsam; in 1972 newspaper strips (Ducks)

Flounder Flounder; Guppy of TLM, closest fish friend to TLM (The Little Mermaid)

Flower Flower; a boy skunk, BAM’s friend (Bambi, Forest)

Fluff Fluff; one of the three little kittens (misc)

Fluffy Fluffy the genius; The evil feline genius (Darkwing Duck)

Fluffy Ruffy and Scooter Scamp’s siblings; Originally Scamp’s siblings are two girls, Fluffy and Ruffy, and the third’s a boy, Scooter (Scamp)

Flumbert Flumbert; Super Thief’s assistant (Mice)

Flunkey Flunkey; King Louie’s second-in-command (Jungle Book)

Fly King (Bucky Bug)

Flynn Rider (Rapunzel)

Foo-Foo Foo-Foo; Miss Piggy’s dog (The Muppet Show)

Foola Zoola Foola Zoola; from “Voodoo Hoodoo” (Ducks)

Footstool Footstool; the enchanted Ottoman “dog” (Beauty and the Beast)

Forest sheriff in BR newspaper stories (Forest)

Former queen of Atlantis HRH the former queen of Atlantis (Atlantis)

Foul Fellows’ Club Foul Fellows’ Club; (Forest)

Foxy Loxy Foxy Loxy; mean girl fox, Chicken Little’s rival at school (Chicken Little)

Fozzie Bear Fozzie Bear; Unfunny stand-up comic; stars in the fictitious TV series “Bear On Patrol” (The Muppet Show)

Fran Sinclair Fran Sinclair; Mother Dinosaur (Dinosaurs TV)

Francis Francis; Snobbish bulldog in Fagin’s dog gang (Oliver and Company)

Frank Frank the lizard; lizard (The Rescuers)

Frank and Jesse James Frank and Jesse James; in Rosa Lo$ (Ducks)

Frank the journalist journalist (PKNA)

Frankie Frankie; Minnie Mouse’s bird from QMS 1947-005 (Mice)

Franny MI’s friend and secretary in the serial “Mai dire Quack!” (Mice)

Frederico Von Pato LVD’s grandfather, originated in “History of Duckburg” series (Ducks, Mice)

Friar Tuck Friar Tuck; (Robin Hood)

Friday Friday; Cannibal met by MM and Crusoe in YM 037 (Mice)

Friend Owl Friend Owl; the (realistically designed) owl from Bambi, less human-like than Brer Owl (Bambi, Forest)

Friendly Finch Friendly Finch; small finch who has a crush on Scamp (see also Fudgie) (Scamp)

Frollo Frollo; (Hunchback of Notre Dame)

Frost The hunter, from the Metaworld (W.I.T.C.H.)

Frou-Frou Frou-Frou; the horse (Aristocats)

Frozone Frozone; Lucius Best; tall, skinny superhero with the ability to freeze the moisture in air (The Incredibles)

Frump Frump; headmaster in D-coded Paperino Paperotto stories (Paperino Paperotto)

Fu Dog Fu Dog; a dog training dragons (American Dragon Jake Long)

Fudgie Fudgie; Small female bird with eyelashes and mop of hair; has a crush on Scamp (see also Friendly Finch) (Scamp)

Fulldrip Pulpbugle Fulldrip Pulpbugle; caricature of Carl Barks (Ducks)

Fulton Gearloose Fulton Gearloose; Gyro’s father (Ducks)

Fussmore Fussmore; Member of Orphan’s home committee in ZM 009 (Mice)

Fuu Fū from Kingdom Hearts; small boy with hair covering his left eye, friend of Saifā (Kingudamu Hatsu)

G

GD’s bull Grandma Duck’s bull (Ducks)

GD’s doctor Doctor of GD and GU in a few stories by JKr and MDj (Ducks)

GO’s parrot parrot in YM stories (Mice)

Gabby Talking dog from WDC 152; (Ducks)

Gabi Gabriela Vaz, young niece of Rosinha Vaz who sometimes terrorizes Joe and Zico & Zeca (Carioca)

Gabriela She-goat, Ze Queijinho’s pet (Carioca)

Gabriella Montez Gabriella Montez; student of East High School, girlfriend of Troy Bolton modelled after the actess Vanessa Hudgens (High School Musical)

Gad and Zook Gad and Zook; Ogres employed by Duke Igthorn (Gummi Bears)

Gadget Hackwrench Gadget Hackwrench; Female inventing mouse (Chip ‘n’ Dale Rescue Rangers)

Gaetan Moliere Gaetan Moliere; geologist (Atlantis)

Galactic Female Squadron A group of female alien heroines which has Brazilian Paperinika as honorary member (Ducks)

Gallien King Ducklien’s trusted technoid (Ducks)

Gamadelta One of a couple of alien invaders, a black little floating cloud with arms and eyes (Ducks, Mice)

Gandra Dee Gandra Dee; Fenton’s girlfriend (Ducktales)

Gangs young delinquents (PKNA)

Garcia Garcia; Demetrio Lopez Garcia, the fat sergeant of Los Angeles’ garrison (Zorro)

Gary Ground Squirrel Gary Ground Squirrel; in a few C&D stories (Forest)

Garé Barks Garé Barks; wife of Carl Barks (Ducks)

Gaston Gaston; Hunter villain (Beauty and the Beast)

Gastone Paperotto (Paperino Paperotto)

Ge-Sund-Hite Ge-Sund-Hite; An indian friend of Gudger (Mice)

Gedeone de’ Paperoni US’s brother (Ducks)

Geena Droid, same model as Lyla (not the same as Geena Onair) (PKNA)

Geena Onair news reporter (PKNA)

Gene the genie A genie from “Treasure of the Lost Lamp” who can grant wishes. He is turned into a real boy at the end of the movie (Ducktales)

General Li General Li; (Mulan)

Geneviève lady with glasses and chignon in Michel Souris stories (Mice)

Genialina Edy Son Female inventor of Paperinika’s gadgets (Ducks)

Genie Genie; the blue genie from the lamp (Aladdin)

Genie from YM 040 the genie from the lamp (Mice)

Geno and Gurri Geno and Gurri; Bambi’s children (Bambi)

Genoveva Young granddaughter of one of MOE’s neighbours, a beautiful brunette with a wild personality similar to MOE’s (Ducks)

George George the dog; large and unattractive tomboy girl dog with bows in the hair (Scamp)

George Darling George Darling; Wendy’s father (Peter Pan)

George the Janitor George the Janitor; Crotchety old janitor at the Muppet Theater (The Muppet Show)

Georges Hautecourt Georges Hautecourt; Madame Adelaide Bonfamille’s lawyer (Aristocats)

Georgette Georgette; Jenny’s family’s poodle who at first is spoiled, is jealous of Oliver and dislikes Tito (Oliver and Company)

Gepetto Gepetto; from Pinocchio, original Collodi name is Geppetto (Pinocchio)

Geronimo Geronimo; boy indian from LH newspaper strips (Hiawatha)

Geronimo from Altacraz (Mice)

Gerry Wilde a Native-American veterinarian (Ducks)

Gertie Manny’s carnivorous plant (X-Mickey)

Gertie Gabble Gertie Gabble; Daisy Duck’s gossipy and domineering neighbour (Ducks)

Gertie Garter Snake Gertie Garter Snake; in a C&D story (Forest)

Gertrude Gadwall Gertrude Gadwall; mother of GD and Casey Coot (Ducks)

Ghost rats of Hamelin Ghost rats of Hamelin; Nasty ghost rats in Hamelin (Ducks)

Giada IP’s love (Mice)

Gibber Gibber; The dog-faced air pirate with the orange cap (Talespin)

Gideon Gideon; The cat villain from Pinocchio (Pinocchio)

Gideon Goat Gideon Goat; Grumpy old black-furred, goatfaced hick, usually a farmer but occasionally a sheriff (Mice)

Gideon from W.I.T.C.H. (W.I.T.C.H.)

Gigi Gigi; Friendly female poodle with bows near her ears (Scamp)

Gilbert Gilbert; Goofy’s smart nephew (Mice, Riverside Rovers)

Gilda Brazilian, Nestor’s girlfriend in some stories (Carioca)

Gill Gill; a moorish idol and the leader of the aquarium fish (Finding Nemo)

Gilor Borax Gilor Borax; alien crook from TNT (Ducks)

Ginger Jensen Dance Academy stories (W.I.T.C.H.)

Giocattolaio (Ducks)

Gizmo Guy who takes care of the gadgets at the agency (Double Duck)

Gizmo-020 Gizmo-020; Inventor Beagle Boy, a thin, long-haired blond Beagle with little antennas on the cap. Mostly used in Brazilian stories of the 70s with the name Primo Cientista (Cousin Scientist), he seems to be an American creation though (Ducks)

Gizmoduck Gizmoduck; Armored superduck with one wheel and secret identity of Fenton Crackshell (Darkwing Duck, Ducktales)

Gladstone Gander Gladstone Gander; Lucky gander with curly hair (Ducks, PdP Sim)

Glittering Goldie Glittering Goldie; (Ducks)

Glo-Glo EB’s little nephew (very young: about one year old, appearing in I TL 1473-A) (Mice)

Globe the head of How and Bones (PdP Sim)

Gloomy Gloomy; airplane mechanic (Mice)

Gloria a.k.a. Glorinha (Brazil), Fethry’s girlfriend. She probably is a Studio creation (Ducks)

Gloria Del Orta Blond birdbeak (a kind of parrot), daughter of Senhor Del Orta (Carioca)

Gloria Gump jail governor (Anderville)

Glorijane Pena das Selvas’ girlfriend (looks like Gloria) (Ducks)

Glory-Bee Glory-Bee; Goofy’s girlfriend (Mice)

Gneezles Gneezles; dwarfs from W OS 62-03, re-used in Brazil (Ducks, Mice)

Goliath Goliath; Gargoyle leader (Gargoyles)

Goliath I Goliath I; Normal-sized elephant; father of Goliath II (misc)

Goliath II Goliath II; Very tiny elephant (misc)

Gomes Killer hired to kill Double Duck (Double Duck)

Gonzo Gonzo; Weird performance artist with a loong crooked nose/beak; loves Camilla the chicken (The Muppet Show)

Goo Goo the mongoose; appears in S-coded CD stories (Forest)

Gooch Gorilla Gooch Gorilla; gorilla from Elmer Elephant stories (Elmer Elephant)

Goofus D. Dawg Goofus D. Dawg; GO’s counterpart in Blotman stories (Mice)

Goofy Goofy; (Epic Mickey, Goof Troop, Kingudamu Hatsu, Mice)

Goofy’s cat (Mice)

Goostave Gander Goostave Gander; father of GL (Ducks)

Gopher Gopher; (Winnie the Pooh)

Gorilla Gorilla Gorilla Gorilla; a gorilla in some K-coded stories (Gorilla Gorilla)

Gorthan Evronian Branchchief (PKNA)

Gosalyn Waddlemeyer Gosalyn Waddlemeyer; Drake Mallard’s adoptive daughter (Darkwing Duck)

Gosmoduck Gosmoduck; a superhero identity of Gosalyn Waddlemeyer, using the suit of Gizmoduck (Darkwing Duck)

Gotrocks Gotrocks; a pointed-beaked billionaire competing with US (Ducks)

Gotrocks Gotrocks from DD 115; Billionaire competitor to Scrooge. Looking different from Gotrocks, though he has the same name (Ducks)

Grace Grace the cow; a light brown cow (Home on the Range)

Grace Grace the fairy; assistant of Queen Clarion, with medium length brown hair (Fairies)

Grammi Grammi; Matriarch of the Gummis (Gummi Bears)

Grand Mogul Grand Mogul; JW Chief, only the duck one from CB/TS/KWr stories (Ducks)

Grandma Duck Grandma Duck; (Ducks, Paperino Paperotto)

Grandma Duck’s rival in S 75194 (Ducks)

Grandma Goofy Grandma Goofy; (Mice)

Grandma Hortensia Vovó Hortênsia; Brazilian, GD’s grandmother (Ducks)

Grandma Wolf Grandma Wolf; (Forest)

Grandma Zigler Grandma Zigler; Elderly lady who lives in The Wrecking Crew’s neighbourhood (Mice)

Grandmother Fa Grandmother Fa; Mulan’s grandmother (Mulan)

Grandmother Willow Grandmother Willow; Willow Tree spirit (Pocahontas)

Grandpa Beagle Grandpa Beagle; (Bay stories, Ducks, PdP Sim)

Grandpa Bunny Rabbit with a pipe (misc)

Grandpa Chipmunk Grandpa Chipmunk; in C&D stories (Forest)

Grandpa Duck Grandpa Duck; Grandma Duck’s husband (Ducks)

Grandpa Gearloose Grandpa Gearloose from S 65114; (Ducks)

Grandpa Wolf Grandpa Wolf; LW’s grandfather, BW’s father (Forest)

Granny Beagle Granny Beagle; (Ducks)

Granny De Spell Granny De Spell; Magica’s granny in S-coded stories (Ducks, Witches)

Granny Fox Granny Fox; from Swampfolk (Forest)

Granolino da Rocha Vaz Brazilian; Toucan, Rocha Vaz’s twin brother (Carioca)

Grasshopper Grasshopper; The grasshopper from “The Grasshopper and the Ants” (misc)

Great Elmer Great Elmer; The tall fortune-teller crook from W OS 401-02, a.k.a. “Big McCall” (Mice)

Green-eyed monster little devil with a pitchfork, from DD’s conscience (Ducks)

Greengrocer Italo-American fruiterer recurring in MM dailies and DD Sunday pages; sometimes he has other jobs (Ducks, Mice)

Gregor Gregor; King of Dunwyn (Gummi Bears)

Gremlin Gus Gremlin Gus; hat-wearing old gremlin with a moustache (Epic Mickey, Gremlins)

Gremlins Gremlins; collective name for tribes of airplane-wrecking elves; in stories, the term is also used for male adults of the species (Gremlins)

Greta Glamor Greta Glamor; (Ducks)

Greta Reginald Henry’s mother (W.I.T.C.H.)

Gretchen Grebe Gretchen Grebe; wife of Casey Coot (Ducks)

Grifone Trip as a grownup in an alternate future (PKNA)

Grimsby Grimsby; Prince Eric’s butler (The Little Mermaid)

Grizelda A fat, ugly witch who’s friends with Madam Mim (Ducks)

Grizzlykoff Grizzlykoff; Agent of S.H.U.S.H. (Darkwing Duck)

Groob Groob; Morc in Duckburg in Dragonlords saga (Dragonlords)

Growlio Growlio; Boxer ape, fights against Hoopy in ZM 009 (Mice)

Grrodon Last of the Evronians (PKNA)

Gruffi Gruffi; Grumpy handiman Gummi (Gummi Bears)

Grugno Tom’s dog (Paperino Paperotto)

Grumbles Grizzly Grumbles Grizzly; Bonkers’s former cartoon villain, now neighbor (Bonkers)

Grumpy Grumpy; one of the SD (Forest, Snow White)

Guardie (Kylion)

Guido Guido from Cars; Italian car. Working at Luigi’s tyre shop. (Cars)

Gully Gully; a seagull in beach stories (Scamp)

Gumbo Gumbo; alligator of Jambalaya Jake (Darkwing Duck)

Gumboot HDL’s great grand-uncle who carried mail in the gold rush days over the Sierras (Ducks)

Gunni Helm the hunter from the Ice Sword saga (Mice)

Gunther Magnuson Kick’s best friend and stunt coordinator (Kick Buttowski)

Gurgi Gurgi; Small badger-like creature (The Black Cauldron)

Gurgle Gurgle; a royal gramma, an aquarium member who has molysmophobia (Finding Nemo)

Gus Gus; The fat one of Gus & Jaq (Cinderella, Ducks)

Gus Goose Gus Goose; (Ducks)

Gustav Giant from Brave Little Tailor; black-haired, bearded giant from Brave Little Tailor, named Gustav (Mice)

Gusto Gusto; Artist Gummi (Gummi Bears)

Gutenberg from Topolinia 20802 bookworm friend of MM (Mice)

Guy Ground Squirrel Guy Ground Squirrel; in a C&D story (Forest)

Guzman Fethry’s dog in 1990s Italian stories. A rather big molossian-type dog, like those Japanese ones (Ducks)

Gwumpki Gwumpki; Fry-cook & friend of HDL (Quack Pack)

Gypsy queen (Mice)

Gyro Gearloose Gyro Gearloose; (Dragonlords, Ducks, Ducktales, PdP Sim)

Gyro’s Helper Gyro’s Helper; (Ducks)

Gyro’s mother (Ducks)

Gyro’s thinking cap GY’s thinking cap; (Ducks)

Génie from F-coded Minnie gags (Mice)

H

H.I. Presser Dogged seller in later YM strips

Hacksaw Hacksaw; air pirate (Talespin)

Hades Hades; Underworld King, brother of Zeus, enemy of Hercules (Hercules)

Hairy Harry Dangerous train robber who claims to have killed several train station masters (Ducks)

Hairy hermit from W WDC 39-01 recluse living in the middle of the forest (Ducks)

Haley Haley; Jake Long’s sister (American Dragon Jake Long)

Half-Pint Beagle Half-Pint Beagle; Short Beagle Boy from W BB 28-02 (Ducks)

Halinor ex-W.I.T.C.H. (W.I.T.C.H.)

Hamm Hamm; a toy pig (Toy Story)

Hank old sailor of Quack Town (Paperino Paperotto)

Hannah Hannah; Sid’s sister (Toy Story)

Happy Happy; One of the SD (Forest, Snow White)

Harbor patrol boats from Little Toot Strict, male police officers; anthropomorphized police ships; one of them is named Clancy (misc)

Hard Haid Moe Hard Haid Moe; (Ducks)

Hardrock Joe Friendly full-bearded man who used to live in Goldopolis and own shares in the Goldopolis and Boom City railroad (Ducks)

Harold Buttowski Kick’s overcautious and neurotic father who is usually cheery and easygoing (Kick Buttowski)

Harold Hale Cornelia’s father (W.I.T.C.H.)

Harry Booth Harry Booth; Journalist onboard spaceship Palomino (The Black Hole)

Harry Oslo Harry Oslo; (Condorman)

Harvey Slimerick detective (W.I.T.C.H.)

Hathi Jr. Hathi Jr.; Child elephant and son of Colonel Hathi (Jungle Book)

Hay Lin witch has power on wind (W.I.T.C.H.)

Hayabusa Hayabusa; Shan Yu’s bird (Mulan)

Hayner Haine; thin boy, friend of Rokusasu (Kingudamu Hatsu)

Head Head; The Head, black pigfaced guy who’s in charge of TNT (Ducks)

Head H New director of the agency after Jay J (Double Duck)

Helga Sinclair Helga Sinclair; woman (Atlantis)

Hen Wen Hen Wen; Oracle pig (The Black Cauldron)

Henk en Annie A couple that appears in many stories drawn by JRP (Ducks, Mice)

Henriette Kip (Ducks)

Henrique a.k.a. “Henry”, Parceiro’s rich father. So far he is the only Disney Teen with parents (Disney Teens)

Henry J. Lasswell one of the richest men in Anderville, bad guy (Anderville)

Henry J. Waternoose Henry J. Waternoose; fat monster with lots of eyes and legs (Monsters Inc.)

Henry Reginald Young boy with magical powers (W.I.T.C.H.)

Hera Hera; Queen of Olympus, birth mother of Herc (Hercules)

Herb Muddlefoot Herb Muddlefoot; Honker’s father (Darkwing Duck)

Herb doctor Friendly doctor, a big older-looking bug with hooked nose, bushy eyebrows, spats, and a furry upper body (Bucky Bug)

Herbert Herbert; HDL’s friend in early Barks stories (Duckies, Ducks)

Herbie Herbie; The living Volkswagen beetle (misc)

Hercules Hercules; mythological hero (Hercules)

Herman Bing Ringmaster (Dumbo)

Hermes Hermes; Messenger of Olympus, Herc’s “uncle” who watches over him for Zeus (Hercules)

Hintermann Hintermann; Good wizard in Dragonlords saga (Dragonlords)

Hippo Hippopotamus Hippo Hippopotamus; Elmer’s hippopotamus friend (Elmer Elephant)

Hobey Guy linving in the unde (PKNA)

Hobi Cugino Hobi, friend of Pipwolf, wears a top hat (X-Mickey)

Hocus Young aspiring sorceress who is being tutored by MDS; has a ponytail (Ducks)

Holsworthy Hog Recurring pig member of HDL’s JW troop (Ducks)

Homem Elastico Homem Elástico; MOV’s villain, elastic robot robber created by Superthief (Ducks)

Honest John Filch Honest John Filch; a Mayor, candidate for his reelection, in ZS 36-12-13. Re-used in pre-war Italian stories where he is a journalist in the newspaper “L’altro mondo” (Ducks)

Honest John W. Foulfellow Honest John W. Foulfellow; the fox villain (Pinocchio)

Honey Buttowski Kick’s mother who is infrequently at home (Kick Buttowski)

Honker Honker; Gosalyn’s intelligent friend (Darkwing Duck)

Hoofdcommissaris van politie Chief of police (Ducks)

Hoot owl from SC a young owl who sometimes talks baby talk (Scamp)

Hoppopotamus Hoppopotamus; rabbit-hippo, hero (Wuzzles)

Hoppy Hoppy the kangaroo; Kangaroo from ZM 009 (Mice)

Horace Badun Horace Badun; bungling badguy who works for Cruella de Vil (101 Dalmatians)

Horace Horsecollar Horace Horsecollar; (Clarabelle Reporter, Epic Mickey, Mice)

Horned King Horned King; evil king with a skull face and horns (The Black Cauldron)

Horseberg teacher (W.I.T.C.H.)

Hortense Hortense the horse; Scrooge’s horse (Ducks)

Hortense Hortense the ostrich; Donald’s ostrich in dailies (Ducks)

Hortense McDuck Hortense McDuck; Scrooge’s sister and Donald’s mother (Ducks)

Hospitable Hat Rack Hospitable Hat Rack; (Beauty and the Beast)

Hot Rod Hound Hot Rod Hound; Fast running white dog with black ears and a pointed snout (Scamp)

Hotneige French, a detective (Clarabelle Reporter)

Houn’ Dawg Houn’ Dawg; Moe’s dog (Ducks)

How fat financial promotor of “PdP Sim” (PdP Sim)

Howard Rockerduck Howard Rockerduck; John D. Rockerduck’s father (in LoS) (Ducks)

Hubert Hippo Hubert Hippo; Know-it-all hippo detective from British stories (Forest)

Hudini Brazilian, magician villain (MOV’s enemy) (Ducks)

Hudson Hudson; Old gargoyle (Gargoyles)

Huey Dewey and Louie Huey Dewey and Louie; Donald Duck’s nephews. Listed as Junior Woodchucks when they wear JW caps (Dragonlords, Duckies, Ducks, Ducktales, PdP Sim, Quack Pack, Witches)

Huey Dewey and Louie’s father father of HDL, husband of Della Duck, name unknown (yet?) (Ducks)

Hugo Hugo the gargoyle; One of Quasimodo’s gargoyle companions in the bell tower (Hunchback of Notre Dame)

Hummy Hummy; Hummingbird, always flies in angles (Scamp)

Humperdink Duck Humperdink Duck; Humperdink “Dabney” Duck, Elvira Duck’s husband (Ducks)

Humphrey Bear Humphrey Bear; from GD’s farm and Brownstone (misc)

Humpie Hiawatha’s dog (Hiawatha)

Humpty Dumpty Egg who fell down from a wall in the nursery rhyme (Alice in Wonderland, Bucky Bug)

Huntsman from SW Humbert, the evil queen’s huntsman (Snow White)

Huran (Kylion)

Huskie Huskie; dog, Riverside Rovers #4 (Riverside Rovers)

Hustler Duck Hustler Duck; annoying duck with big round glasses (Ducks)

Hyacinth Jones’ girlfriend (Ducks)

Hydrophobey Bill Hydrophobey Bill; villain who teams up with Squinch in British stories (Ducks)

Hyrrr Hyrrr; Morc general in Dragonlords saga (Dragonlords)

I

Iago Iago; Jafar’s parrot (Aladdin)

Icarus Icarus; nerdy companion of teen Herc from the Prometheus Academy (Hercules)

Ice A snow-man like customer of “Topo bianco” (X-Mickey)

Idgit the Midget Idgit the Midget; Crook, partner of McBoo, sometimes called Idjit the Midget (Mice)

Ifigênio the neighbor A MOE’s neighbour in some Brazilian stories (Ducks)

Igor from X-Mickey invisible mailman (X-Mickey)

Igore Coneagle Igore Coneagle; Bird-faced biker who wants to use a JW statue to jump with his bike (Ducks)

Igthorn Igthorn; Evil Duke (Gummi Bears)

Il perfido Bingo mouse-looking villain menacing Reginella in I TL 1673-A1 (Ducks)

Il trasformista a “transformer”, dressing as various other people (Ducks)

Imp from the Eleventh Dimension Imp from the Eleventh Dimension; (Mice)

Imperatore Evronian emperor (PKNA)

Inky Inky; one of the three little kittens (misc)

Inquinator crook in PK stories who uses poison and pollution as his favorite weapons (Ducks)

Intellectual-176 Intellectual-176; The Beagle Boy with a high I.Q. (Ducks)

Ira (W.I.T.C.H.)

Ireyon Ireyon; A foxy female thief from 5000 years back in time. Opponent of PK, but a friend of Fantomius in recent D-stories (Ducks)

Iridessa light-talented fairy (Fairies)

Irina Von Paperov Fatal blond in some Italian detective parody stories (Ducks)

Iris Jensen Dance Academy stories (W.I.T.C.H.)

Irma Irma; Irma Lair, witch, has power on water (W.I.T.C.H.)

Iron Ears Colony Iron Ears Colony; Gangster who wants to be elected major in YM 078 (Mice)

Isabella Garcia-Shapiro Isabella Garcia-Shapiro; Girlfriend of Phineas and Ferb who has an obvious crush on Phineas (Phineas and Ferb)

Isidor red-headed boatbuilder (Bay stories)

Itzy Bitzy Itzy Bitzy; the flea (Ducks, Ducktales)

Ivan Ivan the cat; (misc)

Izzy Izzy; Little Bad Wolf’s cousin (Forest)

J

J. Audubon Woodlore J. Audubon Woodlore; the ranger from Humphrey Bear stories (misc)

J. Gander Hooter J. Gander Hooter; Director of S.H.U.S.H. (Darkwing Duck)

JOC’s Destiny Ghostly entity wearing a hood and floating on mist. One-app.: B 950128 (Carioca)

Ja-hera Já-hera; Spoof of Hera, wife of Ancient Greek god Zeus (Carioca)

Jack Jack the monkey; Captain Barbossa’s undead monkey (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Jack Jammer Jack Jammer; Detective colleague of Mickey turned bad in Mickey Mystery stories (Mice)

Jack Sparrow Jack Sparrow; in BR stories (Forest)

Jack-Jack Parr Jack-Jack Parr; Shapeshifter with the ability to teleport, levitate, pass through walls and create optic blasts; infant son of Helen and Bob Parr (The Incredibles)

Jackboy A. Deiro Dognose, rich ill-tempered cattle farmer in some Gyro stories (Ducks)

Jackie Gilligan girl whose St. Bernard puppy is too big to stay in Mr. Olsen’s pet shop, old love of Matt (W.I.T.C.H.)

Jackie Wackerman New resident of Mellowbrook who is obsessed with Kick (Kick Buttowski)

Jackson Jackson; tall dogfaced TNT agent with a red cowlick (Ducks)

Jackson Jackdaw Jackson Jackdaw; Velma Vanderduck’s secretary (Ducks)

Jacques Jacques the rabbit; Scamp’s rabbit friend (Scamp)

Jacques Jacques the shrimp; a pacific cleaner shrimp, an aquarium member and the group’s cleanser (Finding Nemo)

Jacques Shakal dealer in stolen art objects in Topogeo stories (Mice)

Jafar Jafar; (Aladdin)

Jake Jake; Kangaroo mouse friend of The Rescuers (The Rescuers)

Jake Long Jake Long; a boy with dragon powers (American Dragon Jake Long)

Jake McDuck Jake McDuck; Scrooge’s uncle and Fergus’ brother (Ducks)

James James; US’s driver in some BB stories (Ducks)

James James from W OS 178-02; Scrooge’s driver (Ducks)

James Goof James Ding; French (Mice)

James Norrington James Norrington; admiral (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Jan Clayton Anderville police inspector (Anderville)

Jan Zwijner Owner of a garage (Ducks)

Jana A girl (duck) with ESP powers (PKNA)

Jane Jane; (Tarzan)

Jane K. Lamidade Duckbill, Pena Kid’s friend (Ducks)

Jane from Peter Pan Wendy Darling’s daughter from Peter Pan 2 (Peter Pan)

Janice Janice the guitarist; Female hippie and guitarist in Dr Teeth’s band; has dated Zoot but currently dates Sgt. Floyd Pepper (The Muppet Show)

Janine Janine; Janine Renard-Xanatos, “Fox”, former member of the Pack, wife of David Xanatos (Gargoyles)

Janson Soldier (PKNA)

Jaq Jaq; The thin one of Gus & Jaq (Cinderella, Ducks)

Jasper Badun Jasper Badun; bungling badguy who works for Cruella de Vil (101 Dalmatians)

Jay J Director of the agency (Double Duck)

Jay from Paperino Paperotto schoolmate of YDD, younger brother of Tuck (Paperino Paperotto)

Jeb Jeb the goat; (Home on the Range)

Jebidiah Allardyce Farnsworth Jebidiah Allardyce Farnsworth; cook (Atlantis)

Jed il postino (Ducks)

Jedge Owl Jedge Owl; owl with glasses and a high hat in ZB strips (Forest)

Jeeves Lusky; secretary of Rockerduck (Ducks)

Jenny Jenny from Oliver; Kind rich girl who takes care of Oliver in the movie (Oliver and Company)

Jenny Grunt Playful pig girl who lives in Miss Typefast’s apartment building; Lenny Grunt’s sister (Ducks)

Jeremy Johnson Friend of Candace Flynn (Phineas and Ferb)

Jeremy from X-Mickey friend of Pipwolf, living in a painting (X-Mickey)

Jerome male fairy who is in love with Antea (Fairies)

Jervis Jervis; Baby Herman’s butler and chauffeur (Roger Rabbit)

Jessica Rabbit Jessica Rabbit; Roger Rabbit’s wife (Roger Rabbit)

Jessie Jessie; a cowgirl and former member of Woody’s Roundup gang (Toy Story)

Jet Bradley Jet Bradley; Jethro Bradley; son of Alan Bradley and Lora as seen in the Disney game “Tron 2.0”; was first sucked into the electronic world in that game (Tron)

Jim Cocorina French, gangster; the small one with the black hat (Clarabelle Reporter)

Jim Crow Preacher Straw Hat and Glasses Crows from Dumbo; their names are Jim Crow, Preacher, Straw Hat, and Glasses (Dumbo)

Jim Dear Jim Dear; Scamp’s master (Scamp)

Jim Hawkins from Treasure Planet an alienated and rebel teenager who costantly gets in trouble (Treasure Planet)

Jim Possible Jim Possible; (Kim Possible)

Jiminy Cricket Jiminy Cricket; (Kingudamu Hatsu, Pinocchio)

Jitters Jitters; Jitters A. Dogg, Bonkers’s friend and former co-star (Bonkers)

Joan Lin Hay Lin’s mother (W.I.T.C.H.)

Joanna Joanna; Big lizard and McLeach’s pet (The Rescuers)

Joao João; white birdbeak friend of JOC. Lives on a garbage dump. Appeared in early American strips and a few Brazilian stories of the 60s and 70s. Still used in Dutch JOC stories (Carioca)

Joao Gaviao João Gavião; Birdbeak, JOC’s big rival in some Brazilian stories of the 70s (Carioca)

Joao Ratazana João Ratazana; Ratfaced crook in JOC stories, mostly drawn by Canini (Carioca)

Joca Brazilian, bird-beak, owner of a snack bar where the Teens use to meet (Disney Teens)

Jock Jock; Scots Terrier (Scamp)

Joe Joe from LT; chef in restaurant, skinny man (Scamp)

Joe Joe the diner owner; Diner owner first seen in W US 7-05 (Ducks)

Joe Piper Joe Piper; (Mice)

Joel McTiennan Interpol agent (W.I.T.C.H.)

Joel Wright friend of Peter and Matt (W.I.T.C.H.)

John D. Rockerduck Rockerduck; John D. Rockerduck, Scrooge’s rival (Ducks, PdP Sim)

John Darling John Darling; Wendy’s elder brother (Peter Pan)

John Silver misteryous cyborg pirate who later becomes a close friend of Jim (Treasure Planet)

John Smith John Smith; (Pocahontas)

Johnny Appleseed Johnny Appleseed; (misc)

Jojo Birdbeak, Jose Carioca’s usually undesirable smarty friend (Carioca)

Joker Beagle Joker Beagle; A practical joker Beagle Boy who appeared in W BB 45-04 and then reused once in Brazil (Ducks)

Jolly Roger Jolly Roger; Stocky and bearded rat with patch over one eye; first mate of the Pi-Rats and friend of the Rescue Rangers (Chip ‘n’ Dale Rescue Rangers)

Jonas the chauffeur Dognose, private driver and skillful assistant of secret agent Barão de Bazófia (Carioca)

Jonathan Laramie Jonathan Laramie; Cattle owner in YM 067 (Mice)

Jonathan Ludmoore evil sorcerer and author (W.I.T.C.H.)

Jonathan Mouse Jonathan Mouse; MM’s ancestor materialized by the ‘lectro box in YM 058 (Mice)

Jones Jones; Donald’s American neighbor. See Anacleto for his Italian neighbour. (Ducks)

Jones’s mother (Ducks)

Jones’s nephew Friend of HDL. Less obstinate than his uncle but wears the same kind of clothes. (Ducks)

Joshamee Gibbs Joshamee Gibbs; Right-hand man to Jack Sparrow. Generally a warm and knowledgeable person but also very superstitious. (Pirates of the Caribbean)

Joshua Spader Detective of the Duckburg department (PKNA)

Joshua Strongbear Sweet Joshua Strongbear Sweet; doctor (Atlantis)

José Carioca Jose Carioca; (Carioca)

João João from ZS 43-09-12; A dumb birdbeak with long “hair”, friend of JOC (Carioca)

Juanella Van Damm Rich duck with a bad temper (Ducks)

Juanita and Rosita and Carmelita Juanita and Rosita and Carmelita; Three of Pedro’s sisters; always seen with Pedro’s sister Chiquita (Scamp)

Jubal Pomp Filo Sganga; Brigitta’s partner (Ducks, PdP Sim)

Juca Big friend of Zico and Zeca. (Do not confuse with Juca Piau) (Carioca)

Juca Piau Hard Haid Moe’s neighbor and shotgun adversary (Ducks)

Judy Funnie Judy Funnie; Doug’s older sister (Doug)

Juffrouw Knol Dutch; gymnastics teacher (Duckies)

Juiz Armandinho Judge of EB’s world of the future in some Brazilian stories (Mice)

Julius Mio Miao; Humanized cat lead character from Disney’s Laugh-O-Grams and Alice Comedies in the 1920s, rip-off of non-Disney character Felix the Cat, created by Otto Messmer for the Pat Sullivan Studio (Mice)

Jumba Jookiba Jumba Jookiba; (Lilo and Stitch)

Jumento Derneval Pet donkey of JOC’s cousin’s Zé Jandaia (Carioca)

June Bug June Bug; the Mayor’s daughter and wife of Bucky (Bucky Bug)

Junior French, Brer Bear’s son (French Wolf)

Junior Junior the buffalo; (Home on the Range)

Junior Bug Junior Bug; the young companion of Bucky, mayor Bugg’s son (Bucky Bug)

Junior’s lady sweet (Bucky Bug)

Juniper Ducklair mysterious woman with red clothes, yellow hair and blue eyes, sister of Korinna (PKNA)

Justice Ducks Justice Ducks; Superhero Team lead by Darkwing including: Morgana, Gizmoduck, Neptunia, Stegmutt and Launchpad (Darkwing Duck)

Jute Jute; Escaped prisoner boy in Dragonlords saga (Dragonlords)

K

K’neis (Kylion)

Kaa Kaa; Snake (Jungle Book)

Kader Peyton Erin’s brother (W.I.T.C.H.)

Kadma ex-W.I.T.C.H. (W.I.T.C.H.)

Kairi カイリ; girl born on Destiny Island, old friend of Sora (Kingudamu Hatsu)

Kala Kala; (Tarzan)

Kandor W.i.t.c.h. bus driver with a red beard (W.I.T.C.H.)

Kanga Kanga; Kangaroo mother of Roo (Winnie the Pooh)

Kanifky Kanifky; Chief Leonard Kanifky, the Chief of Police, Piquel and Bonkers’s boss (Bonkers)

Karel Krokodil Crocodile in H-stories (Forest)

Kari Korhonen Comics creator (Ducks)

Karl Ibsen husband of Tecla (W.I.T.C.H.)

Karlissya Blonde princess in the “Lords of the Galaxy” saga (Mice)

Karmilla famous singer (W.I.T.C.H.)

Kat Nipp Kat Nipp; Bully who likes to tie knots on Mickey Mouse’s tail (Mice)

Katarina Kodorofsky Katarina Kodorofsky; Female, attractive cat spy of Russian origin (Mice)

Katie Mallard Katie Mallard; Ducky Bird’s grandmother. As a young woman, she ran the Gold Cup Café in Goldopolis. Also known as Hashknife Kate (Ducks)

Katrina Kolik Kolik; Katrina Kolik, female TNT top agent with red hair, fancy helmet, and short temper (Ducks)

Katy Katy; niece of MI in a Michael-Gilbert-story (Mice)

Kay K Mysterious secret agent of the agency (Double Duck)

Kelly female teacher (W.I.T.C.H.)

Kelsi Nielsen Kelsi Nielsen; student of East High School, wannabe songwriter and composer modelled after the actress Olesya Rulin (High School Musical)

Ken Ken from Toy Story; Barbie’s friend (Toy Story)

Kenai Kenai; the youngest of the three Inuit brothers, who is transformed into a bear (Brother Bear)

Kendall Perkins Kick’s classmate and rival (Kick Buttowski)

Kent Powers Kent Powers; Arrogant News co-Anchor with Daisy (Quack Pack)

Kerchak Kerchak; (Tarzan)

Kermit Kermit; Director and host of the Muppet Show (The Muppet Show)

Kerthan (Kylion)

Kessel Kessel; TNT technician in a lab-coat and goggles (Ducks)

Kevin Kevin; chicken, Riverside Rovers #5 (Riverside Rovers)

Kevin Flynn Kevin Flynn; Brilliant ex-programmer who now runs a video game arcade and, in the movie “Tron”, is sucked into the electronic world; used to date Lora (Tron)

Kevin Jensen the owner of Jensen’s dance school (W.I.T.C.H.)

Khan Khan; Mulan’s faithful horse (Mulan)

Khor the dog Miska turned into a monster. Miska is the dog, owned by the man turned into Shagon (W.I.T.C.H.)

Ki-Kong