Data integration and analytics innovations are undergoing a seismic transformation, with AI-driven solutions and robust data management becoming pivotal in driving enterprise success.

One year after the QlikWorld 2023 event highlighted this evolution, QlikWorld has transformed into Qlik Connect, reflecting the rapid advancements in data, analytics and artificial intelligence. Since that period of time, QlikTech International AB has sought to deliver enterprises real ROI on AI and data integration initiatives. The company has made various announcements over the past year as it pursues that goal, including releasing its AI Accelerator.

“Reflecting on our momentum with customers using AI, we see a pivotal shift toward scalable AI, deeply anchored in strong data foundations,” said James Fisher, Qlik chief strategy officer, in a recent release. “Successful AI implementations hinge on exceptional data management, a principle driving our strategy and evidenced in sectors from healthcare to finance. Our focus is on enabling businesses to leverage AI effectively, underpinned by quality data, ensuring AI’s transformative potential is fully realized.”

What comes next for Qlik’s strategy will be of key interest during the Qlik Connect event on June 4. Among other subjects, the event will be an opportunity to explore Qlik’s role in the industry’s efforts to build domain-specific AI solutions.

Those subjects and more will be explored by theCUBE analysts John Furrier, Savannah Peterson and Shelly Kramer as they speak with industry professionals during the event. Join theCUBE on June 4 for our coverage of Qlik Connect, live on theCUBE, SiliconANGLE Media’s livestreaming studio. (* Disclosure below.)

Check out what’s in store for theCUBE’s coverage of Qlik Connect:

Qlik Connect: Company has been active in the acquisitions market

In April, Qlik released the results of a commissioned “Total Economic Impact” study conducted by Forrester Consulting on behalf of Qlik. That report stated that the benefits of Qlik Cloud Analytics included increased revenues, totaling a risk-adjusted $620,000 over the course of three years due to better decision-making, among other benefits.

“Qlik’s unique technology, including deep AI integration, plays a large role in helping today’s organizations keep up with the amount of new data being produced,” said Brendan Grady, Qlik’s general manager of analytics, in a release.

The company announced plans for an IPO filing in 2022, but it has yet to happen. The company has been active in the acquisitions market over the past number of years, including that of data integration solutions provider Attunity Inc. in 2019 and data management firm Talend Inc. in 2023.

In January, Qlik announced it had acquired Kyndi Inc. with the intention to advance its AI-driven business outcomes. The acquisition of Kyndi’s assets represented a significant move that reinforced Qlik’s already-established AI credentials and vision in the decision intelligence space, according to Mike Leone, principal analyst at Enterprise Strategy Group.

“Recognizing the criticality of enabling the combined analysis of structured and unstructured data, Qlik has positioned itself at the forefront of innovative analytics. By anticipating the surge in unstructured data analysis, this will enable Qlik’s customers to gain better insights that enhance decision-making across various industries,” Leone said in a release.

The Qlik Connect event will also be an opportunity to explore use cases for Qlik and its ecosystem on modernizing enterprises, upskilling existing workers and driving value through data analytics. TheCUBE will provide full coverage of the event to capture all the breaking news and provide analyst-driven commentary. You can follow theCUBE’s wall-to-wall coverage for firsthand insights.

TheCUBE event livestream

Don’t miss theCUBE’s coverage of Qlik Connect on June 4. Plus, you can watch theCUBE’s event coverage on-demand after the live event.

How to watch theCUBE interviews

We offer you various ways to watch theCUBE’s coverage of Qlik Connect, including theCUBE’s dedicated website and YouTube channel. You can also get all the coverage from this year’s events on SiliconANGLE.

TheCUBE Insights podcast

SiliconANGLE also has podcasts available of archived interview sessions, available on iTunes, Stitcher and Spotify, which you can enjoy while on the go.

SiliconANGLE also has analyst deep dives in our Breaking Analysis podcast, available on iTunes, Stitcher and Spotify.

Guests

During Qlik Connect, theCUBE analysts will talk with industry professionals about news and product announcements, as well as developments and innovations driving value through data for the enterprise. We’ll explore advancements in data governance, intelligent platforms and modern analytics.

(* Disclosure: TheCUBE is a paid media partner for Qlik Connect. Neither QlikTech International AB, the sponsor of theCUBE’s event coverage, nor other sponsors have editorial control over content on theCUBE or SiliconANGLE.)

Image: SiliconANGLE