Individual Assignment – Types of Communication in an organisation – External

Harshit D. Bora

Roll No. 8

PGDM-RM

Business Communication

Abstract

For any company to be perceived as a good company and survive for long, profits and reputations are not enough resources on which it can rely on. It is very important that the company creates a good working environment for its employees and also have zeal in attracting new customers. For this, it is very important that company knows it’s internal and external environment.

Companies should know their employees to prevent that they become dissatisfied with working conditions, feeling unpleasant or unheard. This is the aim of internal communication to prevent it, as from the internal communication processes in a very straight way depends what image company’s employees are going to deliver to the external audiences. It is of the interest of company to know their customers, so as to properly advertise and promote their products, in the same time being able to attract more customers continuously. On the other hand, relationships of customers and employees are directly affected by their perceptions and attitudes towards the company. So, the aim of external and internal communication is to form those attitudes in Accordance with how they want to see themselves in the future.

Communication

Communication (Latin commūnicāre, meaning “to share”) is the activity of conveying information through the exchange of thoughts, messages, or information, as by speech, visuals, signals, writing, or behaviour. It is the meaningful exchange of information between two or a group of living creatures. Pragmatics defines communication as any sign-mediated interaction that follows combinatorial, context-specific and content-coherent rules. Communicative competence designates the capability to install inter subjective interactions, which means that communication is an inherent social interaction.

One definition of communication is “any act by which one person gives to or receives from another person information about that person’s needs, desires, perceptions, knowledge, or affective states. Communication may be intentional or unintentional, may involve conventional or unconventional signals, may take linguistic or non-linguistic forms, and may occur through spoken or other modes.”

Communication requires a sender, a message, and a recipient, although the receiver doesn’t have to be present or aware of the sender’s intent to communicate at the time of communication; thus communication can occur across vast distances in time and space. Communication requires that the communicating parties share an area of communicative commonality. The communication process is complete once the receiver has understood the message of the sender.

Corporate Communication

Corporate communication is the set of activities involved in managing and orchestrating all internal and external communications aimed at creating favourable point-of-view among stakeholders on which the company depends. It is the messages issued by a corporate organization, body, or institute to its audiences, such as employees, media, channel partners and the general public. Organizations aim to communicate the same message to all its stakeholders, to transmit coherence, credibility and ethic. Corporate Communications help organizations explain their mission, combine its many visions and values into a cohesive message to stakeholders. The concept of corporate communication could be seen as an integrative communication structure linking stakeholders to the organization.

Corporate communication can be further classified into two

Internal Communication

External Communication

Internal Communication

Internal Communication is also interpreted as employee communication. Internal communication is the communication that exists within a company, between and among employees. It can take many forms, such as face to face casual conversations, formal meetings, phone calls, emails, memorandums, events and activities, reporting pattern etc. Communication within an organization is key to success. An organization’s adaptability to external changes relies on efficient communication internally

External Communication

External communication is a very important corporate communication element. It is crucial for creating brand image. It forms of various activities like advertising, customer service, public relations building, annual reports, launching of products and services etc. Existing and potential customers have perceptions towards the corporate brand based on the organization’s external communication. In other words, external communication is what is visible to the non-employees of the company.

Importance of Communication

Apart from other required skills to survive and grow in the corporate world, communication skills are an inseparable part of it. The advancement of technology and office automation leap has its own important role to play but the importance of good and effective communication skills can’t be denied. Be it any workplace situation- whether making phone calls or face to face presentation or interaction, sending office memos or emails where a person has to constantly express his ideas and opinions or decisions or be it promoting a product or service where a company has to convince the new and existing customers about their products and services. Without effective communication no organization can be successful.

Vodafone

Vodafone India is the third largest mobile network operator in India. It is one of the wide spread telecom operator with highest number of loyal customers. It also has one of the most dynamic and innovative marketing strategy. Also I have been using Vodafone since last 7 years so I am fairly familiar with its external communication.

In this assignment, I will cover external communication of Vodafone which will majorly comprise of television advertisements.

Background

Vodafone is derived from Vo- voice, Da-Data and Fone-Phone. Vodafone Entered Indian market in 2001 but it was in 2007 when they acquired the Hutchison India, that they became a well-established telecom player in India. On 11 February 2007, Vodafone agreed to acquire the controlling interest of 67% held by Li Ka Shing Holdings in Hutch-Essar for US$11.1 billion, pipping Reliance Communications, Hinduja Group, and Essar Group, which is the owner of the remaining 33%. The whole company was valued at USD 18.8 billion. The transaction closed on 8 May 2007. Hutch was often praised for its award winning advertisements which all follow a clean, minimalist look. Now that task was to be handled by Vodafone.

Introduction to Vodafone’s Advertisements

Vodafone is known for its unique advertisement campaign such as pug, happy to help service and latest released Zoozoos advertisement campaign. The Zoozoos’ advertisements were created in South Africa by Ogilvy & Mather (O&M), an international advertising, marketing, and public relations agency and Nirvana Films (Bangalore based company) used some animated characters to make these advertisements. It became so famous at little time that they made 30 advertisements on Zoozoos. They spent near Rs. 30 million to make these advertisements and soon it became one of the most admirable advertisements in India as seen from its members on facebook page which is increasing rapidly. Vodafone India’s page on facebook has around 700 thousand likes while Vodafone ZooZoo’s page on facebook has more than 15 million likes. This clearly shows how successful Vodafone’s ZooZoos strategy has been.

Timeline of Advertisements

2007 – Hutch is now Vodafone

When Vodafone started its advertising campaigns it did not have any famous celebrity with it like Airtel which had Shah Rukh Khan and Sachin Tendulkar as its brand ambassador. Thus Vodafone had a huge task of creating its own visible space through advertisements. It continued with some of its older friends like the “pug”. To show the transition from Hutch to Vodafone, O&M launched a rather direct, thematic ad showing the trademark pug in a garden, moving out of a pink coloured kennel (symbolising Hutch) and making his way into a red one (the Vodafone colour). A more energetic, chirpier version of the ‘You and I’ tune associated with Hutch, plays towards the end, as the super concludes, ‘Change is good. Hutch is now Vodafone’. They also rolled out four commercials featuring Hutch’s animated boy and girl, ‘introducing’ the new brand’s logo to consumers. The four creatives include the duo peeping over a wall to see the logo; parasailing with the logo flying high behind them; releasing a rocket bomb wherein the explosion reveals the logo; and lastly, drawing curtains aside to show the logo. Four other ads with the pug did the rounds of telly screens. The pug was shown in a red basket, popping up from a red cart, drying himself on a red mat, and hiding in a red blanket. Each of these made use of the ‘Hutch is now Vodafone’ tagline.

It wasn’t easy integrating Vodafone with Hutch; the latter, as is known, is a subtle, understated brand, while globally, Vodafone represents high energy, dynamism and young vitality – all represented by its bright red speech mark logo. The pug remained the brand’s soul even after the takeover by Vodafone.

2008 – Happy To Help

In 2008 Vodafone changed its tag line from “where ever you go network follows” to “Happy To Help”. This transition made a great impact as this was the time when people seriously doubted the customer service provided by the telecom companies. Vodafone made dozen of advertisements showing that the pug, its brand ambassador, successfully helping and taking care of its master, little kids in the advertisement.

2009 – ZooZoos

In 2009 Vodafone introduced ZooZoos during the second edition of IPL. Vodafone introduced a new advertisement every day of the match creating huge anxiety and curiosity among the audiences. This not only helped Vodafone but also helped IPL to increase its viewership. Vodafone created 30 ZooZoos advertisements. These advertisements were super hit among the Indians. This can be seen from the memberships on Facebook page. Vodafone India’s page on facebook has around 700 thousand likes while Vodafone ZooZoos’ page on facebook has more than 15 million likes. ZooZoos are white creatures with ballooned bodies and egg heads who are used to promote various value added services of Vodafone. Although these characters look animated, they are actually humans in Zoozoos costumes.

2010 – Power to You

In 2010 Vodafone made dozen of advertisements on the theme of Football World Cup. It also introduced Shakira in its advertisement to download the Football World Cup anthem. It also moved on from ZooZoos to classroom kids to Lewis Hamilton. But it also used ZooZoos to highlight its various other services. In 2010 it had its tagline as “Power To You” which was also the theme of the Nation at that time with Anna Hazare leading the anti-corruption march and seeking for more power in common man’s hand.

2011 –Super Week

In 2011 Vodafone introduced and promoted its 3G service. It used various gaming activities to show that how 3G is faster and better. Besides ZooZoos it used other live games like “snakes” to show how gaming is a fun activity when used with proper internet and also made some games available to download from its website. It also created a format called “super week” like “music super week”, “cricket super week”, “email super week” etc. which provided particular service for free for a week to highlight various services of Vodafone.

2012 –Made for You

In 2012 Vodafone focused more on teenage groups and their needs like grandfather playing with his grandson or gifting him something special or a two best friends made for each other or how network can connect. It also reintroduced “pug” in couple of advertisements.

Effectiveness

From the above advertisements from 2007 to 2012 it is evident that Vodafone is keeping its target audience in mind constantly as well as looking at the current situations and needs of that time and using them to communicate to the audiences. In 2007 it positioned itself. In 2008 it communicated that it is ready to help its customers at any given time. In 2009, when the IPL-2 which was basking on the success of its first edition, Vodafone capitalized on IPL and created a new brand ambassador for itself which showcased “change is good”. In 2010 when common man needed power, it came up with a tag line “Power to You”. In 2011 when the 3G licences were just allocated, it promoted its services through the message “Gaming is Fun”. The simple yet powerful advertisement campaigns won it many admirers which made Vodafone one of the most well-known brands in India. It is also seen that Vodafone doesn’t bring in well established brands on its board, rather it creates a new brand own its own which can connect to people easily.

Competitors’ strategies / opinions / reactions

The main competitor of Vodafone is Airtel. After analysing Vodafone’s advertising strategy, Airtel realized that using a well-known face is no longer the best way to make your dominance. It did not renew its contracts with Sachin Tendulkar and Shah Rukh Khan. It also shifted its focus to youth and the friendship theme “Har Ek Friend Zaroori Hota Hain”. Even Idea Cellular reduced the number of advertisements that they made with Abhishek Bachchan and started creating advertisements with unknown faces which are more diverse and less expensive. Thus communicating in a way common man can associate with.

Conclusions

Communication strategy changes according to time and place. People understand it better when they can associate it with themselves. Vodafone tried to make customize solutions for its customers as well engaged its audience through exciting advertising campaign. It experimented with innovative ideas of communicating and created new brands like ZooZoos which is more liked than the company it created. This shows the success of its communication campaign. Vodafone website is very interactive and friendly which also helps in easy navigation and this shows how strong its external communication is. They have also put up all the advertisements made till date. You can find them here [https://www.vodafone.in/pages/tvads.aspx?fid=0&year=2011&title=&currentpage=1]. This shows that they respect their work and are proud of it. Also they are easily available on all the social media platforms and connect to their customers on demand. I have personally used their service through twitter and which has been very helpful for me. Now whenever I have any problem regarding anything, I just tweet to them and within 24 hours, their executive gets in touch with me and tries to solve my problems. Thus Vodafone gets thumbs up from my side as far as external communication is concerned.

Recommendations

The suggestions I would like give is that it’s been long i.e. since 2009, Vodafone is using ZooZoos. It should create another brand ambassador now and keep changing it after a regular interval of say 3-4 years, as people like to see changes and new exciting stuff. Also it should start a Vodafone theme park where its customers can connect with already successful brands like pug and ZooZoos.

Sources

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vodafone_India

http://www.afaqs.com/news/story.html?sid=19184_India+calling:+Vodafone%E2%80%99s+strategy+unplugged

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZooZoo

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corporate_communication

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communication

http://pure.au.dk/portal/files/48563031/Thesis_Final.pdf

A Study of Factors Affecting Consumer Behaviour of Online Shoppers

Harshit Bora

Student – PGDM Retail Management

K. J. Somaiya Institute of Management Studies and Research, Mumbai

harshit.bora@somaiya.edu

Prof. Vilasini Jadhav

Assistant Professor – Marketing

K. J. Somaiya Institute of Management Studies and Research, Mumbai

Table of Contents

Sr. No. Title Page No. 1 Abstract 2 2 Keywords 2 3 Introduction 2 4 Literature Review 4 5 Research Methodology 7 6 Findings/Conclusion 8 7 Implication 10 8 Limitations 11 9 Future Scope 11 10 References 11

Abstract

The purpose of this study is to analyse factors affecting consumer behaviour of online shoppers that might be one of the most important issues of e-commerce. One of the objectives of the research paper is to find out how positively or negatively the independent variables affect the dependent variable, in this case the consumer behaviour of online shoppers. The papers talks about 26 such independent variables like trust, loyalty, return policy, risk and attitudes etc. that affect the behaviour of the consumer. This study is of relevance to both e-marketers and e-tailers, as it enables them to understand the impact of consumer’s purchase decision in Online Shopping Behavior which would help them in improvising and designing their offers, sales promotion on websites to meet needs and wants of targeted customers. It is a secondary research focuses on the consumer behavior patterns towards the apparel and travel industry online.

Keywords

E- commerce, E-tailing, Online shopping, Consumer behaviour, Shopping behaviour

Introduction

Online shopping is the process whereby consumers directly buy goods or services from a seller in real-time, without an intermediary service, over the Internet. It is a form of electronic commerce. An online shop, eshop, e-store, Internet shop, webshop, webstore, online store, or virtual store evokes the physical analogy of buying products or services at a bricks-and-mortar retailer or in a shopping center. The process is called business-to-consumer (B2C) online shopping. When a business buys from another business, it is called business-to-business (B2B) online shopping [[1]]. Philip Kotler defines e-commerce as a website to transact or facilitate the sale of products and services online. Online retailers can predictably provide convenient, informative and personalized experiences for vastly different types of consumers and businesses. By saving the cost of retail floor space, staff and inventory, online retailers can profitably sell low volume products to niche markets. Online retailers compete in three aspects of a transaction: 1) customer interaction with the website, 2) delivery and 3) ability to address problems when they occur [[2]].

In 1990, Tim Berners-Lee created the first World Wide Web server and browser. It opened for commercial use in 1991. In 1994 other advances took place, such as online banking and the opening of an online pizza shop by Pizza Hut. During that same year, Netscape introduced SSL encryption of data transferred online, which has become essential for secure online shopping. Also, in 1994, the German company intershop introduced its first online shopping system. In 1995, Amazon launched its online shopping site, and in 1996, eBay appeared [[3]].

The introduction of internet in India in 1995 marked the beginning of the first wave of e-commerce in the country. Moreover, economic liberalization after the launch of reforms in 1991 attracted MNCs and brought about the growth of the IT industry. The implementation of liberalization policies led to the demise of the license regime, and high taxes and import restrictions, as well as facilitated the growth of SMEs. The IT industry and SMEs were the early adopters of internet. This led to the emergence of B2B, job searches and matrimonial portals. Although online businesses had begun to develop in the late 1990s, the supporting ecosystem had not been put in place. The first wave of e-Commerce in India was characterized by low internet penetration, a small online shopping user base, slow internet speed, low consumer acceptance of online shopping and inadequate logistics infrastructure. Thereafter, the IT downturn in 2000 led to the collapse of more than 1,000 e-commerce businesses in India. Following this, there was muted activity in the space in India between 2000 and 2005[[4]].

Today India’s consumer-facing e-commerce market grew at a whopping CAGR of 28.3% from 2008 to 2013 to reach a market size of US$9.9 billion. The e-commerce industry is predicted to grow at CAGR of 17.4% across the world from 2012-2017 [[5]]. This makes e-commerce the next big thing not just in India but across the plane.

Literature Review

As we all see that outlook for the e-Commerce industry looks promising on grounds of increasing proliferation of digital devices (PC, mobiles, tablets etc.), a young and growing internet savvy population and increasing disposable income. Technology has become a critical enabler for doing business. Digitally connected users are taking control of when, where and how they shop. And with the change in shopping trends from traditional to virtual consumers, there are a lot of factors influencing the change amongst different product categories available on a click like online grocery, travel industry, apparel industry etc.

According to an E-commerce report by KPMG, The e-Commerce industry was in its infancy for the larger part of the previous decade. However, in last 3 years, the industry has witnessed a staggering growth of 150 percent, increasing from USD 3.8 billion (INR 19,249 crores) in 2009 to USD 9.5 billion (INR 47,349 crores) in 2012 [[6]].

D. Harrison McKnight et al. (2002) and Keen et al. (2000) in their research find that trust has been called vital or key to e-commerce. If trust is vital, then building trust is even more essential. Yet, as Keen et al. observed, both trust and its antecedents are elusive. By delineating the roles of trust, the paper focuses on the signiﬁcance of each aspect of trust in the domain of e-commerce, particularly in the initial phase of a relationship when the user does not have direct experience with a vendor. Two key trust-in-the-web-vendor concepts—trusting beliefs and willingness to depend—have been shown by this study to have a critical inﬂuence on key behavioral intentions of web consumers—intentions to purchase from the site, to share personal information, and to follow web site vendor advice. These are three intentions that represent an effective transactional vendor–consumer partnership. Three key trust building levers that can be managed by web vendors (reputation, site quality, and structural assurance) have been tested and shown to be effective in building initial trust in the web vendor.

Hooda S, (2012) research paper states that there exists a strong relation between monthly income, occupation and purchase decision. People with higher income groups usually have little time to go and purchase from traditional shops because of their busy schedule. Hence, in order to save time they trade online. Usage of newer technology and financial domain lead to resisting change and thus online shopping appeal is limited, due to requirement of High speed Internet connections, overly complicated websites, from the buyers’ perspective, the inability of customer to touch, taste or to smell or to have the trail before making the purchase online, and among them biggest is the concern of security with online payments etc..

Syed Shah Alam(2010) in his papers provides the analytical results which indicate relationships between satisfaction of online shopping and the determinants that influence their satisfaction. More specifically, website design, reliability, product variety and delivery performance have significant relationship with online shopping satisfaction. The analytical results are generally consistent with previous studies. In other words, for online buyers, the perceptions of reliability, product variety and delivery performance of consumers are better predictors than other constructs.

Sinha (2010) in his research talks about various factors such as risk of losing money, product risk, user friendly website and service to help transaction, fear of non-delivery of order, sales service, return policy, early adopters, family members, friends and peers’ online experience and suggestions and one’s attitude towards shopping influencing consumer attitude towards shopping online. The regression results showed that risk of losing money and financial details doesn’t have negative influence on attitude towards online shopping while fear of non-delivery of goods does have negative influence. It also did not support the claims that user friendly website and service can help positively influence attitude towards online shopping. Though a good and convenient product return policy affects attitude towards online shopping the study does not support good after sales service, strict cyber laws and low or no shipment fees will have positive influence on attitude towards online shopping. The study also did not support that product risk, or personal attributes such as early adopter of technology and products and one’s attitude towards online shopping will positive influence one’s attitude towards online shopping. However the study suggests that family members, friends and peers’ online experience and suggestions will have positive influence on attitude towards online shopping.

Booz & Company (2013) noticed a new emerging way of shopping that has been named “showrooming”. Customers check out products in the store and order them online. They predict that growth of online will put more and more pressure on offline prices due to increased (price) competition and increased price transparency.

Gwo-Guang Lee (2005) in his analytical results showed that the dimensions of website design, reliability, responsiveness and trust affect overall service quality and customer satisfaction. Moreover, the latter in turn are significantly related to customer purchase intentions. However, the personalization dimension is not significantly related to overall service quality and customer satisfaction

Kenneth Flick (2009) studied dimension of perceived site quality and a majority of survey respondents felt the web site they visited was visually appealing, while fewer respondents would rate the web site as being classy.Also the study covered opportunism concerns perceptions of the vendor making empty promises on the homepage. While respondents indicated a higher level of trust that the vendor would not make promises on the homepage without keeping them 65.3%, 19.5% were not sure, and 15% somewhat agreed to strongly agreed that there is a likelihood of promises being made and not kept.

Dennis Pitta (2006) studied factors associated with consumer loyalty and found out that consumer loyalty seems to be based on a collection of factors. The first is trust. Consumers must trust the vendor or product they encounter. Second, the transaction or relationship must have a positive perceived value greater than that supplied by competitors. Third, if marketers build on the first two factors, they may be able to create a level of positive customer emotional attachment. That emotional response may be commitment to their brands that is resistant to change.

Results from research of Jensen (2011) have seen a positive relationship between online search and online purchasing, suggesting that travelers searching online for travel related information are more likely to purchase their travel products online. In this light, it seems vital that travel marketers not only promote their products online but also make it possible for travel consumers to purchase the products online.

Rice, (2012) For the online travel shopping process, 47 percent of U.S. travelers experience frustration online, compared to over 78 percent of Russian travelers. This is due to information overload and the lack of confidence that they are getting a good deal. In the developed markets, nearly 50 percent of travelers had a particular place in mind, whereas in the emerging markets, it was only about a third of travelers. In addition, more than four in 10 travelers across the markets are flexible about travel dates, so tools that help determine where and which travel dates have the lowest price have widespread appeal. The study said it is time to think outside of the traditional city pair/travel date box.

Ankush Chibber (2011) reported that skewered proportion of credit to debit cards itself tells which way the tilt in payment method is for Indians. He quoted Sachin Bansal, CEO of Flipkart.com, “Many Indian consumers do not own debit or credit cards, so Flipkart.com needed a way to cater to them. Given the apprehensions ingrained in the Indian mindset in relation to any monetary transaction conducted online, the cash-on-delivery option is a much-trusted one that works well for the online brand”

Research methodology

The research methodology used to complete this paper was purely secondary research to understand the Factors Affecting Consumer Behaviour of Online Shoppers. Secondary data was taken from research papers that were extracted from online databases such as EBSCO, Emerald, Proquest and various other reports of E&Y and KPMG. As the purpose of this study is to analyse the factors affecting online purchase decision. Here we kept dependent variable as

Consumer behaviour of online shoppers

Online Purchase

And the independent variables in this study are as follows:

Trust

Monthly income

Occupation

Purchase decision

High speed internet

Inability of customer to touch, taste or smell

Trail before making the purchase

Concern of security with online payment

Website design

Reliability

Product variety

Delivery performance

Risk of losing money

Product risk

Shipment fees

Service to help transaction

Fear of non-delivery of order

Sales service

Return policy

Early adopters

Family members, friends and peers’ online experience and suggestions

One’s own attitude towards shopping

Promises on the homepage

Loyalty

Online search

Cash on delivery

Findings

The internet holds the key to the retail industry’s most attractive distribution opportunities over the next five years. Companies will need to be more creative, fusing virtual platforms with real platforms, and thinking outside the box in terms of helping consumers feel at ease about shopping for their clothes online. The format of ‘Buy and Collect’, with options to ‘Try and Return’ at pick-up points, is likely to grow in popularity. But, there is plenty of room for more innovation. And the companies that can break new ground in terms of minimizing the hassle factor of returns will be those driving the growth agenda.

People have dubious attitude towards e-marketing of product & services mainly due to security concern related to privacy of personal information. Personal information privacy should be given preference by the companies involved in online marketing of product & services. Companies involved in online trading should focus on building their brand awareness among people so that trust-worthy relationship can be developed between producers & consumers. On-time delivery of products purchased through online shopping will prove to be quite beneficial in a long run. Promotional schemes should be launched to promote e-marketing business. Companies should focus on offering informative advertisements which would contain product information along with additional products & services offering which best suits needs of people. Such advertisements frequency should be high so as to position the products & brands in consumer mind-set.

The following table summarizes the effects of independent variables on dependent variable

Sr.No. Independent Variable Effect (Positive or Negative or Neutral) 1 Trust Positive 2 High Monthly income Positive 3 Occupation Positive 4 Purchase decision Positive 5 High speed internet Positive 6 Ability of customer to touch, taste or smell Negative 7 Trail before making the purchase Negative 8 Concern of security with online payment Negative 9 Website design Positive 10 Reliability Positive 11 Product variety Positive 12 Delivery performance Positive 13 Risk of losing money Neutral 14 Product risk Neutral 15 Shipment fees Neutral 16 Service to help transaction Neutral 17 Fear of non-delivery of order Negative 18 Sales service Neutral 19 Return policy Positive 20 Early adopters Neutral 21 Family members, friends and peers’ online experience and suggestions Positive 22 One’s own attitude towards shopping Neutral 23 Promises on the homepage Positive 24 Loyalty Positive 25 Online search Positive 26 Cash on delivery Positive

Implications

Managerial Implications

Based on the findings of this study, online retail companies should start taking measures to eliminate risk factor and build trust. The retail managers should sway consumers through different platforms like social networking sites, ads, promotions, online only discounts etc. to let people cross the threshold and start buying because consumers are still comfortable with brick and mortar format as they appreciate friendly approach of salesman and social element of shopping, which has been found as important element in shopping. In addition, they need to make website user- friendly and less intriguing. It should encourage online consumers to spend time exploring the site and comparing prices online, provide detail product information and member discounts. The results also suggest that after-sales operations like, delivery and return policy should be carried out promptly and quickly so that consumer would build faith in the system. Also because of perceived lack of secured transaction (financial risk), retailers should introduce a mechanism that would improve safety and privacy to motivate people to buy online. Customers should not be worry about losing their financial details and their credit card information. Using SSL protocol for payment pages will secure the web page from disclosure of credit card information. Third, the impact of subjective norms on online shopping behavior proposes that online retailers should use word-of-mouth marketing to for getting their website known to consumers. This method could be one of the most effective method among other tools and methods of advertising. Loyalty also plays an important factor in selection of portal from where the product is bought. Loyalty can be developed by factors like trust, perceived value greater than that supplied by competitors and emotional attachment. This will help managers earn greater brand value for their company.

Academic Implications

Further research can be done on various independent variables and academicians can come to a conclusion what factors matters most while shopping online. The research paper gives fairly good idea of what factors are important for a consumer while shopping online. It also deals with the consumer behavioural aspects while purchasing online. This will help students and researchers to explore more behavioural aspects of online shoppers.

Limitations

The findings of this paper are purely based on the literature review of 10 research papers and articles, without any further survey or empirical study. Access to more secured journals and editorials could help in having a better insight and argument on the above mentioned research topic. Also this research paper was made in a very limited time of less than a fortnight. If more time was available, the research paper would have reviewed more research papers and would have certainly increased the scope of research.

Future Scope

Further this research can be carried forward by carrying out an extensive primary research on consumers who have shopped online. A gender based analysis can also be done to understand the target audience better and so the online portals can market their products/services better.

Also demographic factors affecting consumer behaviour for categories like Apparel, Books, Accessories, Travel portals, Electronics and Grocery shopping can be analysed. Today, social media advertisements play an important role in consumer buying pattern. A study regarding the same can be done which will help marketers to target and position their brands.

References

Booz & Company, (2013). “Footprint 2020 Offline Retail in an Online World for the German Market” retrieved from http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/file/Strategyand_Retail-Footprint-2020-Germany.pdf

Chibber, Ankush (Apr 8, 2011). “More Indian Online Merchants Turning To Cash On Delivery Payments”. Cardline (Proquest document ID 860741063) http://search.proquest.com/docview/860741063?accountid=31551

D. Harrison McKnight et al. (2002). “The impact of initial consumer trust on intentions to transact with a web site: a trust building model”. Journal of Strategic Information Systems 11, 297-323.

Pitta, Dennis. (2006). “A strategic approach to building online customer loyalty: integrating customer profitability tiers”. Journal of Consumer Marketing 23/7, 421-429 ISSN 0736-3761

Gerrard, P. A. (2003). The diffusion of internet banking among Singapore consumers. International Journal of Bank Marketing.

Lee, Gwo-Guang (2005). Customer perception of e-service quality in online shopping, International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, volume 33 No.2, 161-176.

Jensen, J. M., (2011). “Shopping orientation and online travel shopping: The role of travel experience”. International Journal of Tourism Research, Vol. 14(1), pp. 56-70.

FLICK, KENNETH L., (2009). “Assessing Consumer Acceptance of Online Shopping: Examining Factors Affecting Purchase Intentions”. UMI Number: 3353661.

Korgaonkar, P. S. (2006). “Online Retailing, Product Classifications, and Consumer Preferences”. Internet Research, 16(3), 267–288.

Rice, K. (2012). “Amadeus Study Examines Consumers’ Online Travel Shopping Behavior”. Retrieved from http://www.travelpulse.com/amadeus-study-examines-consumers-online-travel-shopping-behavior.html

Hooda, Sanjay, (2012). “Consumer Behavior towards E-marketing”. Journal of Arts, Science & Commerce, Vol.– III(Issue 2(2)).

Sinha, J. (2010). “Factors Affecting Online Shopping Behavior of Indian Consumers”. UMI Dissertation Publications.

Syed Shah Alam, (2010). “An Investigation into the Antecedents of Customer Satisfaction of Online Shopping”. Journal of Marketing Development and Competitiveness 5(1), 71-78.

[1] http://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_shopping

[2] Philip Kotler, Marketing Management, 14th edition, 395

[3] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_shopping

[4] Ernst & Young, (2013). “Rebirth of e-Commerce in India”. EYIN1304-028

[5] http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Global-B2C-Ecommerce-Sales-Hit-15-Trillion-This-Year-Driven-by-Growth-Emerging-Markets/1010575

[6] Proceed to Checkout – Rhetoric, Reality and Opportunity : KPMG-IAMAI Study

A lot of things are happening around us today. There is a lot of pessimism around. Today you get up and see any headlines; someone or other is maligning other. When will this stop? What we need today is hope, belief that we can do it and that positivity which will take us ahead. We surely don’t want to go ahead with negativity.

Today, every dining table in this country has got an opportunity to listen to our conversation on politics. If we ourselves record our conversations, we would not like to hear them again. That low, our standards of conversations have gone down. We have become more prejudice than ever. We have become more stubborn than ever. We have become more arrogant than ever. And we have become more selfish than ever. Accept or not, but this is the fact. We care little for what good others have done but we jump on the gun when we find one mistake. Since when have we become so intolerant? The British ruled us for over one and half century, the Mughals did the same for more than four centuries, we were patient, we accepted them and their rules, their injustice and we even welcomed them and some of us even loved them. Today when India is independent, run by its own men, by its own children, why are we targeting each other as if they are enemies? Some people have got to that extent that they believe what our enemies will say but won’t believe what their brothers, their countrymen will say. Do we call this as an independent country where we have to take a certificate from other countries?

I very well remember Advani and Modi both saying, we may criticize our PM as much as we want, but you dare not point finger on them, and they went on defending our PM Manmohan Singh. This is the sovereignty that our freedom fighters have fought for and have laid down their lives. But today, we see people from congress and people from other sections of political affiliations quoting various international sources to malign our own people. Why? The last time when our freedom was challenged, we did the same mistake. We let foreigners take advantage of our strife. When Modi was denied a visa of US, why Indian government did not take a tough stand against it? An elected member, chief minister of state was shown the doors, instead of criticizing the US government, why Indian National Congress party and the Government of India did not take this issue to highest level? Why was the same standards not applied on the US government? I think it doesn’t take google to know that more innocents were killed by Bush in Afghan and Iran war than what was alleged of Modi. Then why was Bush given an Indian Visa? Why do we call ourselves unity in diversity? I surely cannot see unity in diversity. What I can see is jealousy, enmity and hatred. The almost same thing had happened during NDA period. Rahul Gandhi was caught with a lot of cash (more than the permissible level at US airports) and with substances that can give any man rigorous imprisonment. The then Vajpayee government had summoned the Indian ambassador and saw to it that our boy was brought back to India safely. I think, no matter what our local differences are, atleast internationally we should value our political opponents.

Today India has three alternatives in

Rahul Gandhi

Narendra Modi

Arvind Kejriwal

I am not here to discuss who is most suitable to lead. Rahul Gandhi has his own charisma, his own way of thinking. He is a prince. We need him in politics. He may not be matured enough but he stands for a section of people which is important. Narendra Modi stands for a majority of section who have seen him work. He rose from a harsh background to come where he has come. He made the people of India realize that we need to dream and we need to work harder. Arvind Kejriwal was an instrumentalist in scaring people who are corrupt. He is a scholar who is learning how to do politics.

Arvind Kejriwal says that he is not sure if this general elections will help India grow because he finds Modi and Rahul both not capable enough. Modi thinks he can lead India to the dreams we saw in beginning of 21st century. He believes we can by 2020 be the developed nation. Rahul Gandhi has his own views which I appreciate too. He doesn’t want to see radical changes so suddenly that the people of India cannot digest. He wants to go slow and see that everyone grow at same level. He is like that old teacher who warns you a lot.

But today, we need to prioritize things. We need to see what we want by 2020. Let’s keep short term goals. Here we have three individuals whom we can give five years to rule. Rahul Gandhi is gonna take us ahead at a snail’s pace.

Arvind Kejriwal has no experience to rule. He hardly knows any protocol to follow. We need to give him chance to first learn all the rules and then lead us. I am sure he is quite capable of leading India, but don’t you think that a pilot must do a little bit of training and should have done stimulation practises and piloted a small plane before being the captain to the larger commercial plane? Consider you are traveling in a plane, you come to know that your plane will be captained by a pilot who has joined the training last month and today without even flying a single commercial plane before, is going to lead your plane. Will you be comfortable to board this plane? No na, then why so hurry to give India to the hands of someone who, definitely is qualified to become a prime minister but yet have not taken any training.

On the other hand we have Modi who have developed his state and now wants to develop India. There is no denying that Gujarat has developed. I have visited Gujarat three times in last six years and that too by roads and I can bet that the infrastructure provided there is the best in India. My relatives have business there and the policies laid down by the government are very clear which have helped them flourish. The policemen there are generally non-corrupt. I was traveling by my own car. Being from Nasik, my car number plate was of Maharashtra. In Ahmadabad, we had rented a driver to roam in the city. The traffic police had caught us as we did not have the yellow tape on the right side of front lights which is mandatory in Gujarat. The policeman said that because the driver had a Gujarat licence number, they had to fine us. The fine was just hundred and ten rupees. I tried to bribe him with hundred rupees but instead he told me “sir, again in future some policemen will catch you like this and fine you, at that time show him this receipt, and he will leave you.” I paid the fine of Rs.110 and left, I was surprised at his honesty. In the evening we were again caught by other policeman for the same reason, I showed him the receipt and he let us go. Now consider this situation anywhere in India, do you think the policemen will be so honest and won’t take bribes? This honesty comes from leadership. If the policemen have to pay bribes to save their jobs or to get promotions, they would have certainly taken the bribe. But when they know, that the bribes won’t work, and when we get opportunity to serve people honestly, why let us not serve them. The bureaucracy is the extension of government. Bureaucracy is like water, it takes the color of the container in which it is. If the politicians heading it are not corrupt then they won’t be. So when Arvind Kejriwal says there is a lot of corruption in Gujarat I feel disappointed. I feel sorry. Why does he have to falsely malign someone? Why can’t he fight on his own strength that he is someone from among us?

To those who think that if Modi comes to power, he will dictate like Hitler; let me assure you that we have a constitutional mode to govern in India. President of India keeps a tab on all. Our model of government is not one mode of government. It is interdependent. We have media, opposition, courts and hundreds of sane citizens to bring him to senses if he deviates which I don’t think he will. And I don’t think that you will allow someone to rule you like Hitler. Don’t you think by saying this you are questioning your own authority?

For me, I think we have lived last ten years in desperation and hope. Let us give some wings to these hopes and let us vote and give strength to someone who we think can lead us. Let us vote that person who can make us feel proud globally. Remember this general elections 2014 is for Nation and not for local constituency. The decisions which will be taken are not going to impact your local colony as much it will impact National policy making. Hope you vote wisely and vote in abundance.

May the best man win, but without mudslinging.