JOUt1NAL

;} tllJ"

nF nn:

STATE OF (~EORGlA,

~lE~ i~RAL ASSl~Jll3L ,f,

-r:::=)T ~ F ~...J.::'-1

.:::::::....,..,0,. -.. -,,D

...___. ~

\._ .._"'

ATLANTA. C:-:<>1<101.\

.i.\S. 1'. l!AIUUI-- ''- ~rn~o: I'I<Lvn:n.

]1-'i~.

no,irr,

OttHdH\

IlHJ!'J);IIr, Duprl't',

Ptn-a!l, Ji.llt>r. Fnrnrll,

1-'itz~.:rnld,

:VIrtt>ht'T, :Vullt>r1

C:unmol);e1 (l:trr:ml,

Grnnt, (1:lnv<'r1 Grrrnc nf Bnl<lwln, Grrene of 1\ladisnn.

X

ltd~

'"\\'hfl<'l' M Jllrr n( Hnll!ll<m, ~!! lltr o L.ilwrty,

.dlll!r

.\liflhh, \h-nrtt

::1.-l>tt,

:o\orthlrn, lllitr,

t"ii:l'C,

i',.rk,

t 111tlt'r!>llll,

Paull

Peacock,

\\' r ......

w..\\'"'Ita 1f, l<'~.

\ \',.,t hrnok 1

\\'lw..! t, \\'jl,...,

\\'ill 'nnt" nf t nlumbill. '\"illi;Plt~, I , \\ . \\'illinm-.. I'.1. Willingbnm,

'Yilumt~

\\'il(lll, Wr:'.fltl,

Ynll<'cy, Zellner.

Tllose absent wPre M:essrs.-

Bnrron, F1>rd, Fort, Gray, Harrell,

Pre~ent 1oo.

Abs<>nt 1:t

Irvine, Lang,

i'"I'IJCII, l'rcscolt1

Rnh<'riR, Hog<'r1!1 \'ick,

Wall.

1\fr. Kint~t.L frtlli To Commiti~e on .luurn.tl, .'f'pol'tP.c:l tht~ .l.>tU'tr.t! u. yet;t~rday exumiH+:'<i .~nd ...pprovt>d.

ThA .Jonnwt wns then 1'1-'lld and contirmt'd.

On motion uf ~L A.wtry, tha communic1ttion, re, cn~i Vt->ti. on ye~'ttrtla .v. from his Excellently, the Governor,

wa!'! tnh:l"n up nnrlrPad. :Mr. Awtry tnO\'ed to reft the HH:'ti:-,., ., and accom-

panying do<"nmem:-, to th~ Htweia t committt>f> of tlnee on the memorial of lion. James A. Gr~en.

lir. Humber movt,d to lay the whole ma.ttt>r on the table.

The motion to table w&s lost.

The motiou to rtfer to the spel~iai Nmmitt~ ]H''

\'a.iled.

On motion ot 1\fr. /1ellner, the followi ,.. Hill wa~:~ ral(en up and the SPnate amenrlm~nts concurred in, to wit:

1130

A hill to ,... n fnvlclitional fHH\'CI'S npon thr Tn ~ <'nl

or lector:-; Ut' "'"I'Jl"iil cmmtims of tlw ~tnt!:', nnd to Ill

saitl Tax-C~>ll~dor;; e.1:-<~f!lrio Sherifls in t:Pt'tnin en~~~~, and for other }mtpnsr'S.

'l'ht> action of thrll IlouSA wu ordered at once transmitted to tltP f;~~nnte.

On motion of l\Ir. Yanr.P)', the following bill wastaken np and rea.d tb11 sec.onrl t.imf, to-wit:

A bill to crt>atP n City Court in the county of Olnrkl", and to provide for the Pl.,.ction of a. ,Judge and Solicitor

tht>reof.

On motion of Mr. Rnrch, nf T..Jlllll'Pns, the rules were saspemlPd and tlu'\ following hill taken up and read the second timP, to-wit:

A bill to incorporn.te th5 Oconee River Steamboat Cmn}Jany.

On motion of J\fr. .A ndPr!'!nn, of ~fmga.n, the rnl ~~ WPl'e S11SlW11dec1, :tTHl hy a two-thirds-vote, ycas ~Q. nays nonr~, th11 follrming bill was introduced, n~ad the first time and Tl~ffmed to the Committt>e on Agriculture,

to-wit:

A hill to prP\'P.nt d')'II'Pflntion of hogs in the county of :M:organ, ttT111 to Jll'l'~f'l'ilm a penalty for the same.

On motion uf ;\It. lluptH', tlw rn1es were snl'lpenlled nnd tlw fo1lowi11g bill taltPn np n.ncl macl the thirfl tim~'>. the mideur.e of Om pnblieation of the notice I'equirf>ld by lltw was exhibited. and the bill pa.ssod by the requisite aonstituti\lnnl majority; yens 99, mtys none, to-wit;

A bi11 tn reJw:tl an act entitled an act to pr.ovid for the registration of P]t!Ctors in the counties of Thomn:4. Lr:nvnde::, Decatur, l\fitchell and Camden, and to pr'" vent illegal voting in the samP, approved February :l:i, 1876.

On motion of l\{r, 'Vestbrook, the rules were l'ftl:, pended and the bills ~nown as the general railroad bill

1:\.\'l'trlWAY, Auou:-;'J' Hi, H:l7!l.

il::t

and fTa ll's ~uluditnl' t.lJt'l't.,fnr W~1'1' rtrommittcd lfJ till~

Commi ttPn on Ita i I ro;ul ~.

The Sptn.k'"'l' n.ppnintnrl ns the t~ommith!l' on tJr,. nception of pnrtra.it llf Jh'. Crawforrl \V. JJong, l\1~> ..,-r;:;. Ynnrcy, l\Iihwr and Panll.

}\fr. Mrnatt, ehairmn.n of the Committee on GPrporat.ions, snhmitttrl tht:t following report:

!lfr. Bj)('Okr f :

'fhe CommittPfl on Corporations ha\e had underconsideration the following local hill, which tbey rPcommend do pnss, h.'' ~nhstit.nte, to-wit:

A bill to be entilletl an act to incorporate thR Tlwmn;:;ville Railroad Onmpany, and grant oortmn pri\il..:gus

to the samf'.

The committte ha\e h:ul before them proofs of the adverti~ing ami posting prior to the introduction of said bill, whiuh tht>y l'i~]mrt sufficient under the statuti:'.

Respectfnll y 1:m hmitte<l. P. L. MnrA~'T, Chairman.

:Mr. Livin~ston, ehairman of the Committee on Agrionltnre, !.nthmitt~>d the follo,ving report:

1r. Speaker:

The CnmniLt"" on Ahriunltttm have had under cot sideration the following bill, wbiuh tht:y report bu.c~.;:, to tbc Hom;, with the recommenda.tion that it cto pass, by snhstitntP, to wit:

A bill to be tmt.iiied an act to encourage the onitm~ of fish in tlte natural and artificial panels and ~~.,<l!IIS on the htncl~ uf Dadd Dickson, of Ha.ncock cu~&hty, lying in thP. counties of fiancoolt and 'Yashington, or both, and on the lands of Samuel C. Nichols, lying in the county of Dodge, in this State, and for other pur poses.

L. F. LnI.NGsTul'f, Chairtuau.

11:H

:Mr. Paull, c.hailnu1n of the Committee on th~ Lunatil' .A::;ylnm, submitted the following rep.Jrt:

J.lir. SptKtker :

ThP. Connnittot> on tlm Lunatic AAylum havp, had nn der uonsidt>rntion the following bill, which ther rnoommeond dn not pnss, to wit:

A bill tn be <mtitled an act to prevent the rE>Ilt>ption of certain r~bLssps of pe1sons, as patientR, in the Luna.tia Jhylnm of tbis StatE".

All of which is respLctfully submitted. 0. H. PAGLL, Chairman.

Mr. Paine, chairman of the Committee on Enrollment, submitted the following report:

. Mr. SptKtker : 'l'lw Committee on Enrollmf'nt report as duly enrolled and ruacly for the signature of the Speaker of the House of RPpresentatives, the following act towit:

An act t.o authorize the Oounty Commissioners of 'Bibb county to purchase the '\Viley Turnpilie in said county, and to make the same a. free cros.;ing; to levy a tax: for the purchase money, and for other purposed therein named.

W. W. PAINE, Chairman.

Mr. Yanct>y o1ft'red the following resolutu:m, whicn was read and agreed to, to-wit:

A resolution-

Tendering seat~'< on the floor on Monday next to various parties thexein named.

Leave of absence was granted to :M:r. Carr, :\Ir. F. J. '\Villiarus, ~Ir. 'Villiams of Columbia, and Mr. 1Vil-

cox, on business. 'rhe hour of 10:30 A .li. having arrived, the Housf:',

in accordance with the resolution adoptt~d on yesterday,

1134 :;

c

"

J;ouR.N4l4 o!i' ':!!HE RoiTS~.

~

.

.A!L'L.Al!ifTA, GEORGIA,

Monday, .August 18, 1879.

The House ~et 4p'Q.1'Suant to a.djournment, was

called to order by the Speaker, and opened with prayer

b~ Mr. Hanks.

'rhe roll wi.s called itd th~p.following members

anawered to their names =

40

f

Thoae present were Messrs.-

Adams,

Hender~n,

Phillips of Coffee.

Anderstm of Morgan, Hill,

Phiniey,

Anderson of Newton, Hogan,

Barksdale,

Hollis.

Pike, Polhill, ~

:Bell,

Howell of Lowndes, Pope,

Bennett.

Howell of Pickens, Poppell;

:Deny,

Hudson,

Prescott,

Bleekley,

Hulsey,

.

Puckett,

:Born,

Humber,

Rankin,

Branch,

Hutchins,

Redwine,

:Britttle,

Irvine,

Roach,

:Buchan,

Ivey,

Roberts,

Burch of Laurens, Jano,

Roney,

Burch of Towns,

Johnson of Clay,

'Rusell,

Butler,

Johnson ofJohnson. Shannon,

Butt, Cannon,

Jordan of Crawford, . SH'arman,

"

Jordan of Wilkes, '''~Sheffield of llarly,

Chambers,

k.end'rick.

, Sibley,

Chap map,

Kimsey.

Sikes,

Cli!il Colley,

Jing,.

Lamb,

Sims, .Smith of :Butts,

Collins,

Livin~Jston,

'Smith of Walton,

Cook,

Mathews.

Strickland,

Cox. of Harris.

Maund,

~ Strother,

Cex of Troup,

, McAfee,

Taliaferro, ~

Crawford,

'McConnell,

Tarver,

Danltl, Davis of H9uston,

McCurry McDonatd, o.

Tate, Tatum,

" ~

Davison,

McGouirck,

Thomas, .

DeLoach,

McLucas,

Turner ofl'Broolrs,

Duggar,

McRae,

Turner otCowe'ta.,

Duvaii,

McWhorter,

Vtc!o', '

Farnell,

Miller of Houston, Wall,

Fitzgerald,

Miller of Liberty, ~, Walters,

Fuller,

Milnert

Walton,

Gamma~Je,

:Mitcbetl,

Weehunt,

Garrard,

Mynatt,

Welch,

Grant,

Nisbet,

Wheeler,

MoNDAY, AUGUST 181 1879.

11~5

Gray, GlOYer, Greene of BuJwin, Hall, Hammond, Hamilton, Hanks,

Harp, .

Northern, Oliver,

Paine, Pat;terson, Paull,

Peacock, Phillips of CarJo11,

PhiDips of Cobb, "'

Those absent were Messrs.-

Williams, C. W.

Willingham. Wilmot Wilson,

Wright.

Yancey, Zellner.

Anderson of Pulaski,

Awtry,

Barron, Bird., Brantley,

Carr, Cunningham, Davis of Baker, Dic:kin,

Dozier, Du'Bose, ..,

Dupree,

Elder,

Fletcher, &,' F~, 'w. Fort, Greene of Madison,

Harrell, Harris,

H<~.rrisou,

Kirby, Lang, Luffman,.

Park,

Perkins,

Reese, Bideu, Rogers,

Scruggs, Sheffield of Miller,

Smith of Oglethorpe, Toole Westbrook,

Wilcox:, Williams of Columbia,

Wi~.F. J.

Present, 187.

Absent, 86.

Mr. Barksdale, chairman of the Committee on Jour-

nals, reported the Journa.l of Sa.turday eu.mined

a.nd approved.

The Journal W1tB then roo.d and confirmed.

')Ir. Wright., from the Committee on Railroads, sub-

mitted the following report:

Mr. Spaalcer:

The Committee on Railroads have had under !)On-

sideration the following bill, ~hich they recommen~

do pass, by substitute, to-wit:

J

A bill to be entitled an act to create a Board of Com-

missioners for Railroads, prescribe the bond and oath

of each'Commissioner, prescribe the duties of said Cam

missioner, prescribe penalties against railroa.d compa-

nies for violating regulations adoptt?d by said Cam-

missioners, provide for the collection of the sa.me, and

for other purposes.

Respectfully submitted.

H. G. WRIGHT, Chairma.n.

1136

JOURNAL OF TH.E HoUS.E.

Mr. Phillips, chairman of the Committee on Counties and County Lines, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on Counties and Couhty Lines have had under consideration the following Senate bill, towit:

A bill to be entitled an act to carry into effect section 1, paragraph 3, of article 11 of the Constitution, prescribing the manner of changing county lineg, which they report back to the House, with the recommendation that it do pass, by substitute.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to define by re- survey the county lines of this State, when the same are unknown or are in dispute, and for other purposes, which they recommend do pass.

Also, a bill entitled an act to change the line between the counties of Dougherty and Baker, which they recommend do not pass.

C. D. PHILLIPS, Chairman. Mr. Turner, of Brooks, chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary, submitted the following report:

Hr. Speaker:

The Committee on the Judiciary have had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend (do -pass, to-wit: ] A bill (consolidated for House bills Nos. 445, 569, " 626, 701, 769, 783) to be entitled an act to repeal the several acts establishing Commissioners of Roads and Revenues in the counties of Jones, Chattahoochee, Douglas, Floyd, Bullock, and Hea.rd, respectively.

Also, a bill (consolidated for Honse bills Nos. 556 and 058) to be entitled an act to repeal an act entitled an act to reduce the commissions of the Tax-Collector and Tax-Receiver of the county of Clay, and to repeal an act entitled an act to reduce the commissious of Lhe

MoNDAY, AuousT 18, 1879.

1137

Treasurer of said county, approved February 28, 1876. Also, a bill (consolidated for House bills Nos. 673

and 674) to be entitled an act to empower the authorities of the city of Darien, in this State, to compel wharfowners to keep their wharves in good order, and to compel owners of improved lots to construct and keep in repair pavements, and to adopt and enforce certain other sanitary measures, on the recommendation of the City Board of Health.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to extend to the county of Burke the provisions of an act entitled an act to provide for the payment of certain insolvent criminal costs in the Augusta Judicial Circuit, approved February 15, 1873.

The committee :find that the proper notices required by law have been given of intention to apply for the passage of this bill.

The committee have als.o had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do pass, as amended, to- wit :

A bill to be entitled an act to carry into operation paragraph 4, section 1, article 11, of the Constitution of this State.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to prevent the destruction of game in the county of Jones, and for other purposes.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to authorize the Mayor and Aldermen of the city of Savannah to build an aqueduct from said city to such point as they may select on the Savannah River, outside of the limits of said city, and to provide for the taking and paying for the right-of-way for such aqueduct.

The committee find that the proper notices required by law have been given of intention to)apply for the passage of the last two above mentioned 'bills.

The committee have also had under .consideration

.' .~

1138

JoURNAL Ol!' THE HousE.

the following Senate bill, which they recommend do pass, as amended, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend an a<.Jt carrying into effect paragraph 2, section 18, article 6 of the Constitution of 1877, and for other purposes.

'l'he committee have also had under consideration the following bills, which they report back with the recommendation that the introducers be allowed to withdraw them, to-wit:

A bill to he entitled an act to carry into effect paragraph 4, section 1, article 11 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to amend section 3408 of the Code of 1873, prescribing the venue in actions against insurance companies.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to provide the mode and manner in which county sites may be changed or removed in accordance with paragraph 4, section 1, article 11 of the Constitution of this State.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bill, which they rt3commend do not pass, towit:

A bill to be entitled an act to fix and regulate the time for the meeting of the General Assembly.

Respectfully submitted. R. G. TURNER, Chairman.

The special order for the day, the bill to regulate freight and passenger tariffs, and to prevent unjust discriminations, was taken up.

Mr. Pike moved to have the substitute, with the amendments proposed by the committee, printed, and to postpone the special order till Wednesday next.

The motion prevailed, and three hundred copies were ord~red printed, and made the special order for vVednesday next imm~::diately after the reading of the Journal.

:MoNDAY, AUGUST 18, 18':"9.

1139

On motion of l\fr. :Matthews, the following bill was taken up; the first Senate. amendment disagreed to; the second amendment was disagreed to ; the third amendment was concurred in, and the amendments to the title were disagreed to, to-wit:

A bill to exempt from jury duty ministers of the Gospel, physicians, apothecaries, school teachers, milleJs, ferrymen, certain railroacl employees, all male persons over sixty yea.rs old, and all telegraph operators.

On motion, thA action of the House upon the Senate amendments was ordered at once transmitted to the Senate

The following message ,.,as received from the Senate, through Mr. Harris, Secretary thereof :

Mr. Speaker:

The Senate has ordered that it will resolve itself into a High Court of Impeachment on Thursday, the 21st i nst., at the hour of' 11 o'clock A. )f., to consider the impeachment of "'\Yashington L. Goldsmith, Comptroller-General, and I am directed so to notify the House of Reprt>sentatives_

Mr. Garrard offered the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, to-wit :

A resolution-

To authorize the special committeA on the investigation of the office of t.he Principal Keeper of the Penitentiary to print five llUndred copies of their report and the evidence taken by them.

On motion of Mr. Chamhers, leave was granted to the special committee on the inVf~stigation of the office of the Principal Keeper of the Penitentiary to sit daily during the sessions of the Honse.

Mr. McCurry offered the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, to-wit:

1140

JoURNAL OF THE HousE.

A resolution-

Requesting the committee of conference on a bill to reduce the fees of Tax-Receivers and Tax-Collectors in this State to report as early as practicable.

The regular order, the call of the roll of counties, was taken up, commencing with the county of ~Vorth.

The following bill was introd need, read the first time, and refened to the Committee on Finance.

By Mr. RedwineA bill to appropriate money to pay for the survey of the line between this State and the State of North Carolina. By a two-thirds vote, yeas 89, nays none, the follow ing bill was introducfld, read the first time, and reerred to the Committee on Corporations, to-wit: By Mr. RedwineA bill to incorporate Gainesville Coll'ge, and to confer on the Faculty and Trustees of the same certain powers and privileges.

The following resolution was introduced, read the first time, and referred to the Committee on Finance, to-wit:

By Mr. Branch-

A resolution-

To appropriate money to pay Silas Crosby certain costs expended by him.

Mr. Bird, of Tatnall, asked leave to introduce and refer to the Committee on Local and Special Bills, with authority to consider and report thereon, the following bill, to-wit:

A bill to prescribe the method of granting license to sell spirituous or intoxicating liquors in the county of Tatnall, and to increase the fee for the same to twentyfive hundred dollars.

On a division, the yeas were 91, nays none ; so the bill was referred by the necessary two-thhds vote.

MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1879.

1141

Mr. Paine, chairman of the Committee on Enrollment, submitted the following report:

~Ir. Speaker :

The Committee on Enrollment report as duly en-

rolled, and ready for the signature of the Speaker of

the House of Representatives, the following acts, to-

wit:

.An act to change the time of holding the fall term of

the Superior Courts of Lumpkin and Dawson counties

of the Blue Ridge Circuit.

Also, an ad to confer additional powers on 'ax-

Collectors of the several counties of the State, and to

make said Tax-Collectors ex-officio Sheriffs in certain

cases, and for other purposes.

They also report as duly enrolled, signed by the

President of the Senate, and ready for the signature of

the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the fol.

lowing act of the Senate.

An act to establish the State line between Georgia

and North Carolina, so far as the same is the line be-

tween Rabun county, in Georgia, and Macon county,

in North Carolina, and to provide for the survey of the

same.

W. W. PAINE, Chairman.

The unfinished business was then taken up and the House went into the Committee of thfl Whole House for the further consideration of "a bill to settle the claim of Thomas L. Snead against the State of Georgia."

Mr. Polbill, chairman of the Committee of the Whole House, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker:

'he Committee of the 'Vhole House have had under consideration a bill to settle the claim of Thomas L. Snead against the State of Georgia. The committee

1142

JOURNAL OF THE HoUSE.

have instructed me to report that they have made some progress, and ask leave to sit again.

Mr. Yancey offt>red the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, to-wit:

A resolution-

Postponing the time for the presPntation of the por-

trait of Dr. Crawford ,V. Long to such time as may be

agreed on.

The action of the f!ouse was ordered at once transmitteU. to tha Senate.

The House, on motion, returned to Committee of the 'Vhole HousP.

Mr. Polhill, chairman of the CommittPe of the 'Vhole House, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker :

'fhe Committee of the Whole House have had undPr consiieration a bill to settle the cJaim of Thomas L. Snead against the State of Georgia, which they have instructed me to report back to the House with a request to be relieved from the furthr>r consideration thereof.

Mr. Wright moved to lay the bill on the table. Motion lost.

Mr. Rankin moved to indefinitely postpone the bill.

On the motion to indefinitely postpone, Mr. McCurry called for the yeas and nays.

The call was sustained, and on calling the roll the vote was as follows :

MoNDAY, AuGusT 18, 1879.

1143

Those voting in the affirmative are Messrs.-

Bennett, Brintle, Burch of Laurens,

Burch of Towns, Butt, Cannon, Cox of Harri~, DeLoach Duggar, Farnell,

Fuller, Grant,

Glover, Harp,

Hogan, Howell of Lowndes, Howell of Pickens,

Hudson,

Ivey, Johnson of Johnson, Jordan of Crawford, Kendrick. King,

Kirby,

~!c.Afee,

:McConnell, McCurry, l\IcGouirck, McRae, Miller of Houston, Mitchell, Northern, Oliver, Patterson,

Phillips of Carroll,

Phillips of Coffee, Puckett, Rankin,

Redwine, Reese, Riden, Roach, Shannon, Sharman,

Sims, Smith of Walton, Stric1<land,

Taliaferro.

Tate, . \Veehunt, wheeler,

Willingham.

Those voting in the negative are Messrs.-

Adams, Anderson of Morgan,

Barksdale, Bell,

Berry, Bleckley,

Born, Branch, Butler,

Chapman, Clegg,

Collins, Cox of Troup, Crawford, Daniel,

Davis of Baker, Davis of Houston,

Davison,

DuBo~e,

Duvall, Fitzgerald,

Gammage, Greene of Baldwin,

Hall,

Hamilton, Hanks,

Henderson,

Hill, Hulsey, Humber, Hutchins,

Janes, Johnson of Clay, Jordan of Wilkes,

Kimsey, Lamb, Li-dngston,

Mathews, Maund,

McDonald, Milner, llynatt,

Paine, Paull, Phillips of Cobb,

Phinizy,

Pike,

Polhill,

Pope, Roney,

Russell, Sheffield of Early,

Sibley, Sikes, s~ith of Butts, Strother, Tarver,

Thomas,

Toole, Turner of Brooks, Turner of Coweta,

Walton, Welch,

Westbrook, Williams, F. J. Wilmot,

Wilson, Wright,

Yancey, Zellner.

Those not voting are Messrs.-

Anderson of Newton, Anderson of Pulaski, Awtry,

Barron, Bird,

Brantley,

Ford, Fort, Garrard, Gray,

Greene of Madison, Hammond,

Park, Peacock, Perkins, Poppell, Prescott,

Roberts,

1144

JoURNAL OF 'l'HE HousE.

Buchan, Carr, Chambers,

Colley,

Cook, Cunningham, Dickin,

Dozier, Dupree, Elder,

Fletcher,

Harrell, Harris, Harrison,

Hollis, Irvil!e, Lang,

Luffman, McLucas, Mc,Vborter,

l\1iller of Liberty, Nisbet,

Yeas 52. Nays 70. Not voting 51.

Rogers, Scruggs,

Sheffield of l\Iiller,

Smith of Oglethorpe, Tatum, Vick,

Wall, walters,

Wilcox,

Williams of Columbia, Williams, C. W.

So the motion to indefinitely postpone did not prevail.

Several motions to amend were offered and voted down.

Mr. Cox, of Troup, moved to recommit to the Committee on Finance.

Lost.

Mr. Milner, of Bartow, moved to make the bill the special order for Friday next immediately after the reading of the Journal.

Lost.

Mr. Cannon called for the previou::; question on the the passage of the bill.

The call was sustained, and the main question ordered.

'l'he report of the co.mmittee was agreed to, and the bill being one to appropriate money, the yeas and nays were ordered, and on calling the roll the vote was as follows:

Those voU.ag in the affirmative are Messrs

Adams, Anderson;of Morgan, Andersf'r. of Newton, Bleckley, Born,

Henderson, Hill, Hulsey, Humber,

Hutchins,

Pope, Roney,

Russell, Sheffied of Early, Sibley,

MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1879.

1145

Butler,

Chapman,:

Clegg,

Collins,

Cox of Troup,

Crawford,

Daniel,

Davis of Baker,

Davis of Honst.on,

Duvall Fi tzger.al

a,

Gammage,

Greene of Baldwin,

Hall,

Hamilton,

Hanks,

Janes. Joilnson of Clay, Jordan of Wilkes, Lamb, Livingston, Mathews, Maund,

Miller of Liberty, Milner,

Myr:att, Paine,

Paull, Philips of Cobb, Phinizy,

Pike,

Polhill,

Smith of BuUF,

Stro~her,

Tarver, Tatum,

Thomas, Turner of Bronk", Tun~er of Coweta,

'alton, welch,

C. westbrook

Williams, W. Wilmot, "Wilson,

Wright, Yancey,

Zellner.

Those voting in the negative are Messrs.--

Barksdale,

Bell, Bennett,

Berry, Branch,,

Brintle, Buchan,

Burch of laurens, Buch of rowm, Butt,

Cannon,; Cook, Cox of Harris.

Cunningham, Davison,

DeLoach, DuBose,

Duggar, Farnell, Fuller,

Grant, Glover, Hammond,

Harp, Hogan, Howell of Lowndes, Ho,ve~l of Pickens, Hudson, Ivey, Johnson of Johnson, Jotdan of Crawford, Keadrick, Kimsey, King, Kirby, McA1ee, McConnell, McCurry, McDonald, :M:cGouirck, McRae, Miller of Houston, 1\Iitchell, Northern, Oliver,

Patterson, Peacock, Phillips ol Carroll, Phillips of Coffee,

P~ckett,

Rankin, Redwine, Reese, Riden, Roach, Shannon, Sharman, Sikes, Sin:s, Smith of walton, Strickland, Taliaferro, Tate, 'J.'oole,

vVeehnnt, wheeler,

Willingham.

Tbos'3 not voting are Me 3Srs.-

Aderson of Pulaski, Awtry, Barron,

Bird, Brantley, Carr,

Chambers,

Colley, Dickin,

Dozier,

73

Garrard, Gray, Greene of Madison, Harrell, Harris, Harrison, Hollis, Irvine, Lang,

Luflinan,

Perkins,

Poppell, Prescott, Roberts,

Rogers. Scruggs,

Sheflied of Miller,

Smith of Oglethorpe, Vick, Wall,

1146

JouRNAL OJ! THE HousE.

Dupree, Elder, Fletcher,

Ford, Fort,

McLucas,

:M:c\Vhorter, :Nisbet,;, Park,

Yeas 63.

Nays 67.

Not voting 43.

. \Valters, Wilcox, Williams of Columbia, Williams, F. J.

So the bill was lost. The following message was received from his Excellency, the Governor, through Mr. Avery, his Secretary, to-wit:

Mr. Speaker:

liis Excellency the Governor has approved and signed the following acts, to-wit:

An act to authorize the issue of interest-bearing bonds by the Mayor and Council of the city of Macon for refunding the present bonded debt, and for other purposes.

Also, an act to amend an act entitled an act to charter the Louisville Branch R-1ilroad Company, approved August 24, 1872 ; to change the name of said company; to make the town of \Vadley the point of junction with the Central Railroad; to rednce the amount of stock to be subscribed before election of Directors ; to change the mode of assessing damages for right-of-way; to ratify and confirm the acts of the corporators and stockholders in electing Directors, and for other purposes.

Also, a resolution to provide for the acceptance by the State of Georgia of the proposal of the Mayor and Council of the city of Atlanta to convey to said State a site on which to build a Capitol, and to adjust and settle with said Mayor and Council their proposal to build for said State a Capitol building.

Also, a resolution instructing the Superintendent of the Lunatic Asylum as to the admission of a certain class of patients.

MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1879.

1147

Also, a. resolution that the Governor offer a suitable reward for the apprehension of any person forging the great seal of the State in the matter of land grants.

The following message was received from the Senate, through Mr. Harris, Secretary thereof:

Mr. Speaker:

The s,,nate has passed the following Rouse bills by the requisite constitutional majority, to-wit :

A bill to regulate the publication of registered voters of the city of Augusta.

.Also, a bill to authorize the Comptroller-General to administer oaths.

Also, a bill to require the Mayor of the city of Augusta to discharge the duties of Recorder of said city, to limit the salary of said Mayor, and for other purposes therein cont~tined.

Also, a bill to amend an act entitled an act to provide that the Treasurer of Richmond county shall be allowed a salary, and to fix the amount thereof, and for other purposes, approved February 2, 1867.

Also, a bill to authorize the Ordinary of Jackson county to issue bonds to build a Court-Rouse, and to provide for the redemption of the same.

Also, a bill for the relief of Richard H. Leonard, Ordinary of Talbot county.

Also, a bill to amend an act entitled an act to authorize the City Council of Augusta to create a Board of Health.

The Senate has passed the following House bills, with certain amendments, to- wit:

A. bill to alter and amend section 28 of the school law of August 22, 1872, and to carry into effect as to the past, the conCluding words of that section.

Also, a bill to prohibit the catching of tish f01 the purpose of shippiug or selling from the waters of the

1148

JouRNAL oF THE HousE.

Little Ocmulgee River, in the county of Telfair, and to prescribe a penalty for the same.

The Senate has refused to concur in the House bill to amend section 1961 of the Code of 1873 in relation to the probate of mortgages for record, and the same was lost.

Mr. Paine, Chairman of the Commit~ee on Enrollment, submitted tile followiug report:

Mr. Speaker:

The Committ~e on Enrollmer.t report as duly enrolled, signed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, President of the Senate, and delivered to the Governor the following acts, to-wit:

An act to authorize the County Commissioners of Bibb county to purchase the 'Viley Turnpike in said county, and make the same a free crossing ; to levy a tax for the purchase money, and for other purposes.

Also, an act to incorporate the Hartwell Railroad Company, and for other purposes.

'V. \V. PAINE, Chairman. Mr. Colley, chairman of the Committee on Military Affairs, submitted the following report, to- wit:

Mr. Speaker :

'rhe Committee on Military Affairs have had the following bill under consideration, which they beg to report back to the House, with the recommendation that it be referred to the Committee on Finance, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act for supplying the soldiers who have lost a limb or limbs in the military service of the Confederate States with a substantial limb or limbs during life.

CoLLEY, Chairman.

Mr. Hutchins, chairman of the Committee on Finance, submitted the foll0\ving report :

MoNDAY, AuGUST 18, 1879.

1149

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on Finance have had unJer consideration the following bill, which they recommend do pass, by substitute, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act for the relief of Benjamin F. Matthews, of the county of Chattahoochee.

Proper notices of intention to apply for the passage of said special bill has been published, as required by law.

Respectfully submitted. N. L. HuTcHINS, Chairman.

Mr. YancAy, from the Committee of Conference on Senate bill No. 67, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker:

The undersigned committee of the House, appointed to confer with a like committee of the Senate, upon the amendments made by the House to Senate bill No. 67, having said Senate committee in joint conference, said joint committee have agreed upon the following recommendations :

First-That the substitute adopted by the House in lieu of Senate bill No. 67, be amended by striking off the final letter "s" from the word sections, which occurs in section 2.

Second-=That said substitute be amended by striking out of section 2 the words and figures following "and sixteen hundred and seventy-seven (1677,)."

Third-That said section be amended by adding thereto the following proviso: "Provided that this act shall not apply to the incorporation of associations of churches, and shall not repeal or a:ffect an act approved December 16, 1878, entitled an act to repeal section 1677 of the Code, and in lieu"thereof to provide for the granting and amending of charters for schools, academies, colleges, and churches.''

1150

JOURNAL OF TH~ HoUSE

The said committee recommend that said substitute, when so amended, be passed.

BEN. C. YANCEY, Chairman ; J. J. KIMSEY,

P. L. MYNATT.

House Committee. J onN T. CLARKE, Chairman ;

vV. J. HEAD,

SAMUEL HA WKJNS,

Senate Committee.

Mr. McCtury offered the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, to- wit :

A resolution-

To al)point a special committee of seven to investigate the office and official conduct of the P1,1blic Printer.

The following bill was read the third time>, amended, and the report of the committee adopted ; the vote was reconsidered, and the title was amended, and the relJOrt, as amended, was agreed to, and the bill passed by the requisite constitutional majority, yeas 99, nays none, to-wit :

A bill to authorize and provide for the organization of chain-gangs for misdemeanor convicts in this State.

On motion of Mr. Adams the bill to supply limbs to maimed soldiers, etc., was recommitted to the Committee on Finance.

On motion of Mr. Mynatt, House bill No. 490 was taken from the table and placed in its order on the calendar.

The House went into Committee of the 'Vhole House for the consideration of the bill to continue th~ appropriation for the geological survey.

Mr. Northern, chairman of the Committee of the Whole House, submitted the following report :

MoNDAY, AUGUS1' 18, 1879.

J.151

Mrl. Speaker:

The Committee of the Whole House have bad under consideration a bill to amend an act to create the office of State Geologist, and to provide for a mineralogical, geological and physical survey of the State of Georgia.

They have instructed me to report. the bill back to the House, and ask leave to sit again.

On motion of Mr. Yancey, the following resolution was taken up, read and agreed to, to:wit:

r

A resolution-

To present the names of Dr. Crawford vV. Long and

Gen. James Oglethorpe to the National Art Gallery at Washington, D. C.

The action of the House was ordered at once transmitted to the Senate.

Leave of absence was granted to Mr. Sibley on account of important business.

'fhe House then adjourned till 9 A. M. to-morrow

1152

JoURNAL OF THE Ho.usE.

ATLANTA., GEORGIA.,

Tuesday, August 19, 1879.

The House met pursuant to adjournment, was called to order by the Speaker, and opened with prayer by the Chaplain.

The roll was called and the following members answered to their names :

Those present were Messrs.-

.Adams, Anderson of Morgan, Anderson of Newton, Anderson of Pulaski,

Awtry, Barksdale,

Bell, Bennett,

Berry,

Bird, Bleckley, BorD, Branch,

Brintle, Buchan, Burch of Laurens,

Burch of Towns,

Butler,

Butt, Cannon,

Ca.rr, Chambers, Chapman,

Clegg, Colley, Collins,

Cook, Cox of Harris, Cox of Troup,

Crawford, Cunningham, Daniel, Davis of Baker, Davis of Houston,

navison,

DeLoach, Dick in,

Duggar,

Greene of Madison,

Hall, Hammond, Hamilton,

Hanks,

Ha':rell, Harp, Harris, Henderson,

Hill, Hogan, Howell of Lowndes,

Howell of Pickens, Hudson, Hulsey,

Humber,

Hutchins, Ivey, Ja'les, Johnson of Clay,

J ohneon of Johnson, Jordan of Crawford, .Tordan of 'WilkeR,

Kendrick, Kimsey,

King, Kirby,

Lamb, Livingston, Mathews,

Maund, McAfee, McConnell, McCurry, McDonald,

McGonrick, McLu0as, )feRae,

Phillip~ of Carroll, Phillips of Cobb, Phillips of Coffee, Phinizy, Pike,

Polhill, Pope, Puckett, Rankin, Redwine, Reese, Riden, Ro2ch, Roberts,

Rogers, Roney, Russell, Scruggs, Shannon, Sharwan, Sheffield of Early,

Sibley, Sikes,

Sims, Smith of Butts, Smith of Oglethorpe,

Smith of Walton Strickland, Strother, Tal; aferro,

Tarver, Tate, Tatum, Thomas, Toole, Turner of Brooks, Turner of Coweta, Vir alters,

TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1879.

1153

Dupree,

Duvall,

Elder, Farnell, Fitzgerald, Fort, Fuller, Gammage,

Garrard, Grant,

Gray, Glover, Greene of Baldwin,

Miller of Houston, Miller of Liberty, Milner, Mitchell, Mynatt, ~is bet, :No .. ~hern,

Oliver, Paine. Patterson, Paull, Peacock, Perkins,

Walton, Weehunt.

Welch, W estbiook, wheeler, Williams of Columbia, Williams, C. W., Willingham,

Wilruo~.

"Wilson, Wright, Yancey Zellner.

Those absent were Messrs.-

Barron, Brantley, Dozier, DuBose, Fletcher, Ford, Harrison,

Hollis, Irvine, Lang, Luffman, :i\fcwhorter, Park,

Poppell,

Prescott, Sheffield of Miller,

Vick, Wall, Wilcox, Williams, F. J.

Present, 153. Absent, 20.

Mr. Buchan, from the Committee on Journals, reported the Journal of yesterday examined and ap-proved.

The Journal was then read and approved.

Mr. \Vright moved to reconsider so much of the Journal as relates to the action of the House upon the bill to settle the claim of Thomas L. Snead against the State.

The motion to reconsider was lost.

On motion of Mr. Reese, the following bill was referred to the Committee on Finance, to wit:

A bill to appropriate $2,500 for fencing and repairs on the white's building at the Institute for the Deaf and Dumb, and $3,500 for the improvemPnt and support of the institution devoted to the colored deaf and dumb.

A motion by Mr. Paine to suspend. the rules was voted do 1vn.

On motion of Mr. Cunningham, House bill No. 427

1154

JOURNAL OF THE HOUSE.

was taken from the table and placed in its order on the calendar.

The business in order, the unfinished business, was taken up, and the House went into Committee of the Whole House for the further consideration of the bill for the continuance of the Geological Bureau.

Mr. Northern, chairman of the Committee of the Whole House, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker :

'T'he Committee of the Whole Honse have had under consideration a bill to amend the act providing for a mineralogical, geological and physical survey of the State, and to create the office of State Geologist. , They have instructed me to report that they have made some progress, and ask leave to sit again.

Mr. Tumer, of Brooks, chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on the J ndiciary have had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do pass, by substitute, to wit :

A bill to be entitled an act to define and enlarge the duties of the Attorney-General of this State, and for other purposes.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to amend an act entitled an act to alter the law of this State relative to the summary establishment of lost papers.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to regulate the practice in certiorari cases ; to suspend the issuing of execution, and for other purposes.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to repeal an act entitled an act to reduce the salaries of Tax-Receiver and Tax-Collector of Forsyth county, Georgia, approved February 27, 1877.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to entirely prohibit

. TuESDAY, AuGUF:T 19, 1879.

1155

the sale of spirituous and intoxicating liquors within the boundary lines of Irwin county.

TLe committee find that the proper notices, required by law, have been given of intention to apply for the passage of the last two bills.

H. G. TuRNER, Chairman.

The following message was received from the Senate, through Mr. Harris, the Secretary thereof:

Mr. BpealieT :

The Senate has passed the following House bills, towit:

A bill to prevent the forfeiture of recognizances in criminal cases except when the prosecuting officer is ready for trial.

Also, a bill to fix the fees of Justices of the Peace and Constables in appeal cases in Justice Courts.

Also, a bill to amend an act, approved February 28, 1874, entitled an act to establish a new eharter for the city of Atlanta.

The Senate has also passed with amendments, in which they ask the concurrence of the House, a bill to alter and amend section 2970 of the Code.

The Senate has also adopted the report of the conference committee on Senate bill to carry into effect paragraph 18, section 7, article 3 of the Constitution, by prescribing the mannPr in which corporate powers may be granted.

The Senate has also passed House bill to prescribe the manner for letting the public printing to the lowest bidder.

The hour of 10 o'clock having arrived, the special order, the bill to authorize the lease or sale of the Macon and Brunswick Railroad, and to confer certain chartered powers and privileges upon the lessees, etc., w~s taken up and read.

1156

JoURNAL OF THE HOUSE.

The amendment proposed by the committee was adopted.

Pending the discussion, the hour of adjournment arrived, and the House adjourned till 9 A. ni. to-morrow.

ATLANTA, GEORGIA,

Wednesday, August 2Q, 1879.

The House met pursuant to adjournment, was called to order by the Speaker, and opened with prayer by the Chaplain.

'rhe roll was called and the following members answered to their names:

Those present were Messrs.-

Adams, Anderson of Morgan, Anderson of Newton, Anderson of Pulaski,

Awtry,

Barksdale,

Bell, Bennett,

Berry,

Bird, Bleckley,

Born, Branch,

Brintle, Buchan, Burch of Laurens, Burch of Towns,

Butt, Cannon,

Carr, Chambers,

Chapman,

Clegg, Colley, Collins,

Cook, Cox of Harris, Cox of Troup, Crawford,

Greene of Madison, Hall, Hammond, Hamilton, Hank8, Harrell, Harp, Harr:s, Henderson, Hill, Hogan, Hollis, Howell of Lowndes, Howell of Pickens, Hudson, Hulsey, Humber, Hutchins, Irv:ne, Ivey, Janes. Johnson of Clay, Johnson of Johnson, Jordan of Crawford, Jordan of Wilkes, Kendrick, Kimsey, King, Kirby,

Paull, Peacock, Perkins, Phillips of Carroll, Phillips of Cobb, Phillips of CoHee,

Phinizy,

Pike, Polhill,

Pope, Puckett,

Ra'lkin, Redwine,

Reese.

Riden, Roach, Roberts,

Roney, Russell, Shannon, Sharman, Sheffield of Early,

Sibley, Sikes, Si;ns, Smith of Butt~,

Smith of Walton, Strickland, Strother,

'WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1879.

1157

Cunningham,

Daniel, Davis of Baker,

Davis of Houston, Davison,

DeLoach, Dickin,

DuBo&e, Duggar, Dupree,

Duvall, Elder, Farnell,

Fitzgerald, Fletcher, Fort, Fuller,

Gammage, Garrard, Grant,

Gray, Glover,

Greene of Baldwin,

Lamb,

Livingston, Mathews,

Maund, McAfee. McConnell,

McCuuy, McDoTiald,

McGouirck, McLucas,

McRae, McWhorter

Miller of Houston, Miller of Liberty, Milner, Mitchell,

Mynatt, Nisbet, Northern, Oliver, Pa:ne,

Park,

Patterson,

Those absent were Messrs.-

Barron, Brantley, Butler, Dozier, Ford, Harrison,

Present 165.

Absent lB.

Lang, Lufl'man, Poppell, Prescott, Rogers, Scruggs,

Taliaferro, Tarver, Tate, Tatum, Thomas, Too!e, Turner of Brook,, Turner of Coweta. Wa~te!'S1 Wa!!o!l, Weehunt, 'Velcl1,

we~thook,

Wheeler, Williams of Columbia, Williams,<..:. W. Willing!tam, Wilmot, Wilso!l, Wright, Yancey, Zellner.

Sheffield of Miller, Smith of Oglethorpe, Vick, Wall. Wilcox, Williams, F. J.

Mr. Barksdale, chairman of the Committee on Journals, reported the Journal of yesterday examined and approved.

The Journal was then read and confirmed.

The special oraer for the day-the bill known as the general railroad bill for the regulation of freights and passenger tariffs-was taken up.

On motion of Mr. Harris, the special order was postponed and made the special order immediately after the bill for the lease or sale of the Macon and Brunswick Railroad," now unfinished business is dispo3ed of.

1158

JoURNAL OF THE HoUSE.

Mr. Turner, of Brooks, offered the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, to-wit:

A resolution-

That after to-day the House shall, in addition to the regular session, hold an afternoon session, beginning at half past ;j o'clock for the reading of' House bills, favorably reported, the second time ; the reading of Senate bills the first time, and for the reading of Senate bills, favorably reported, the second time, and that no other business, execpt as abov~ stated, shall be in order.

On motion of Mr. McGouirck, House bill No. 627 to authorize J. B. Watson to erect gates on a public road therein named-was referred to the Committee on Internal Improvements.

Mr. Russell offered a resolution relative to the putting of advertising circulars upon the desks of members, that was not agreed to.

Mr. Hammond, chairman of the Committee on Local and Special Bills, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker :

The Committee on Local and Special Bills have had under consideration the following local bill, which they find incapable of' being consolidated with any other local bill or bills, now in their possession, and herewith report the same back to the Honse with the recommendation that it be read the first time, and referred to an appropriate committee, to-wit :

A bill to be entitled an act to prescribe the method of granting license to sell spirituous or intoxic.ating liquors in the county of 'fatnall, and to increase the fee for the same to $2,500.

'he committee have also had under consideration the following local bills, which they have consolidated, and herewith rt->port to tile House, aml recommend that

WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1879.

1159

the consolidated bill, proposed by the committee, be

substituted for said original bills, and that it be read

the first time and referred to an appropriate commit-

tee, to-wit:

A bill to.be entitled an act to create a Board of Com-

missioners of Roads and Revenues for the county of

Telfair.

A bill to be entitled an act to create a Board of Coun-

ty Commissioners of Roads and Revenues for the

county of Henry.

A bill to be entitled an act to creat~ a Board of Com-

missioners of Roads and Revenues for the county of

Cobb. , A bill to be entitled an act to create a Board of Com-

missioners of Roads and Revenues for the county of

vVashington.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to create a Board of

Commissi~ners of Roads and Revenues for the county

of Paulding.

And a bill to be entitled an act to a.ppoint a Board

of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues for the coun-

ty of Dooly.

The committee have also consolidated the following

additional local bills, and recommend that the con-

solidated bill herewith reportt;d be substituted for

said original bills, read the first time, and referred to

an appropriate committee, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to create a Board of Com-

missioners of Roads and Revenues for the county of

Emanuel.

A bill to be entitled an act to create a Board of Com-

missjoners of Ro:tds and Revenues for the county of

Marion.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to create a Board of

Commissioners of Roads and Revenues for the county

of Johnson.

'\VM. M. H.A:UMMOND, Chairman.

1160

JouRNAL OF THE HousE.

The following bills, reported by the Committee on Local and Special Bills, as a consolidated bill, for House bills Nos. 370, 462, 531, 551, 659 and 829, was read the first time, and referred to the Committee on Corporations, to-wit:

A bill to provide for the creation of Boards of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues in the counties of Dooly, Henry, Paulding, 'felfair and Washington, in this State; to prescribe thPir powers and duties, and to fix and limit their compensation, and the pay of officers employed by them.

Also, the following bill, as a consolidated bill for Honse IJills Nos. 449, 520 and 719, was read the first time, and referred to the Committee on the J udir.iary, to-wit:

A bill to provide for the creation of Boards of Com\nissioners of Roads and Revenue in the counties of Emanuel, Marion nnd Johnson ; to prt>scribe their powers and duties, and to limit the compensation of the officers employed by them.

By a two-thirds vote, yeas 89, nays none, the following bill was introduced, read the first time, andreferred to the Committee on Finance :

By Mr. NisbetA bill for the protection of game and birds in the the county of Bibb ; to prohibit the killing, trapping or netting the same, or buying, selling or offering for sale the same during certain months in said county; to provide penalties for so doing, and for other purposes.

The following resolution was introduced, read the first time, and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, to-wit:

By Mr. King-

A resolution-

Submitting the question of the continuance of the

"'\i\""EDNESDAY, AUGUt;T 20, 1879.

1101

Agricultural Department to the legal voters. of this State.

The following bills were introduced, read the first time, and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, to .. w i t :

By Mr. WelchA bill to change so much of paragraph 1, section 670 oF the Code of Georgia, which leaves to the discretion of the Ordinaries of said State the mode of making contracts for the erection and repairs of public bridges, etc. By Mr. DickinA bill to change the time of holding the Superior Court in Henry county.

Mr. Clegg asked leave to introduce and refer to the Committee on Local and Special Bills, with authority to consider and report thereon, the following bil1, to-wit:

.A bill to repeal an act to establish a County Court for the counties of Dougherty and Lee, approved August 24, 1872, so far as the same relates to the county of Lee.

On a division, the yeas were 101, nays none; so the bill was referred by the necessary two-thirds vote.

The following bill was introduced, read the first time and referred to the Committee on Railroads, to-wit:

By Mr. PhinizyA bill to require section bosses or overseers of railroad companies to remove stock killed by the running of thP. trains to a point at least two hundred yards from public roads and dwellings, and to prescribe a penalty

for a failure to do so, the place ot trial, etc.

The following bill, considered and reported back by the Committee on Local and Special Bills, was read the first time, and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, to-wit:

74

1162

JOU.RNAL OF THE HOUSE.

By Mr. Bird-

A bill to prescribe the method of granting license to

sell spirjtuous or intoxicating liquors in the county of

Tatnall, and to increase the fee for the same to twenty-

five hundred dollars.

Mr. :Mynatt, chairman of the Committee on Corpor-

ations, submited the following report:

Mr. Speaker:

The Committe~ on Corporations have had under consideration the following local bills, which, from the proofs exhibited to them, they report have been properly advertised and posted prior to the intreduction thereof: to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to incorporate the N ationa! Mercantile Debt Association Company, which they recommend do pass, as amended.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to amend an act incorporating the town of Forrestville, in Floyd county, so as to change the line of said town on the northwest side, and make the Selma, Rome and Dalton Railroad the line on that side of the town, which they recommend do not pass.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bill, which they recommend do not pass :

A bill to be entitled an act to amend an act entitled an act to prescribe the mode of incorporating towns and villages in this State, approved August 26, 1872, and acts amendatory thereof, by adding additional sections to the general act.

Respectfully submitted. P. L. MYNATT, Chairman.

Mr. Livingston, chairman of the Committee on Agriculture, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on Agrionlture have had under con

WED.NESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1879.

1163

sideratio!l the following bills, which they report back to the House with the recommendation that they do

pass, to-wit: A bill to be entitled an act to amend section 1456 of

t.he Code of Georgia. .Also, a bill to be entitled an act to prevent depreca

tion of hogs in the county of Morgan, and to prescribe a penalty for the same.

.Also, a bill to be entitled an act to repeal an act en titled an act to prohibit the sale of intoxicating liquors within certain limits of the depot on the Atlanta and Richmond .Air-LineRail1oad at Suwanee, in the county of Gwinnett, approved February 25, 1876, and for other purposes, which they report back with the recommen dation that it do not pass:

L. F. LIVINGSToN, Chairman.

Mr. Hutchins, chairman of the Committee on Finance, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker :

The Committee on Finance have had under consideration the following bill, which they recommend do not pass, to-wit:

.A bill to be entitled an act to appropriate $2,500 for fencing and repairs on the buitdiag for the whites at the Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, at Cave Spring, in this State, and $3,500 for the fitting up and support of that portion of the Institute devoted to the colored deaf and dumb, and for other purposes.

.Al.:;o, the following resolution, which they recommend do not pass, to wit :

A resolution-

'fo authorize the Governor to draw his warrant on

-tile Treasury to pay the reward which he is authorized

to offer for the apprehension, with evidence to convict,

1164

JouRNAL Ol!' THE HousE.

of such party or parties as have been counterfeiting the great seal of the State, in issuing fraudulent land grants.

'rhe committee have also had under consideration the follow-ing local and special bills, which they recommend do pass, by substitute, to-wit:

.A. bill to be entitled an act to amend an act to create a .Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues for Crawford county, approved March 2, 1874. . Also, a bill to be entitled an act to amend an act entitled an act to establish a City Court in the city of Atlanta, and more particularly to regulate the payment of' the insolvent costs, heretofore accrued, of the several officers of said City Court, and to authorize and prescribe for the allowance and receipt of tile several claims of the said officers on account of insolvent costs when duly authenticated as prescribed by law in payment ot taxes and other claims due to the State.

Abo, the following bill, which they rl:lcommend do not pass, to wit :

.A. bill to be entitled an act for the relief of Charles A. Nutting and John '1'. Grant as sur~ties of John Jones, Jate Treasurer of the State of Georgia.

Proper notices ot' intention to apply for the passage of said bills have been published as prescribed by law.

The com mittee returned a bill to be entitled an act to create and organize a Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues for the county of Fulton ; to define their powers, and for other purposes, which they recommend be referred to the Committee on the Judiciary.

Respectfully submitted. N. L. HuTCHINS, Chairman.

Mr. Paine, chairman of the Committee on Enrol ment, submitted the following report:

W:EDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1879.

]160

lrir. Speaker:

The Committee on Enrollrw=>nt report as duly en. rolled, signed by the Speaker of the House of Repre-

sentativetl, President of the Senate, and deli~ered to the Governor, the following acts, to-wit:

An act to confer additional powers upon the TaxCollectors of the several counties of the State, and to make said Tax-Collectors ex-officio Sheriffs in certain cases, and for other purposes.

Also, an act to change the time of holding Lumpkin and Dawson Superior Courts, of the Blue Ridge Circuit.

W. ,V. PAINE, Chairman.

The following message was received from the Senate through Mr. Harris, the Secretary thereof:

JJ1r. Speaker: The Senate has passed the following Honse bill,

with certain amendments, in which they ask the concmTence of the House, to wit:

A bill to create a Board of Police Commissioners for the city of Augusta.

The Senate has also passed a resolution accepting the invitation of the House to be present at the reception of the portrait of Dr. Long.

Also a resolution to present the name of Crawford 'V. Long, the discoverer of amesthesia, and James Oglethorpe, the historic founder of the Commonwealth, to the Art Gallery, established by Congress, to represen c Georgia.

The Senate insists on its amendments to a House bill to exempt from jury duty ministers of the Gospel, and others, and asks a committee of conference, and has aypointed as said committee, on the part of the Senate, Messrs. Harrison, Russell, and Holton, and I am in structed to transmit the action of the Senate to the House forthwith.

1166

JouRNAL OF THE HousE

The Senate also insists on its amendments to a Honse bill to repeal sections 4387 and 4388, and to provide for the punishment of burglary, and asks a committee of conference, and bas appointed as said committee, on the part of tha Senate, Messrs. Clark, Bower, and Preston, and I am instructed to transmit the action of the Senate forthwith to the House.

The Senate has also passed a resolution to remove the State Library to the apartment now occupied by the Agricultural and Geological Departments, and asks the concurrence of the House therein.

The following bill was, on motion. referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, to- wit:

A bill to create and organize a Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues for the county of Fulton, etc.

Mr. 'Vheeler offered the following resolution, which was read and referred to the Committee on RnlPs, towit:

A resolution-

That debate on this floot be limited to fifteen minutes, and that a two-thirds vote shall be nPcessary to prolong the time of any member.

Mr. King offered the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, to-wit:

A resolution-

That a committee of five be appointed to investigate the expenditures of the Geological Department of this State for the last five years, or since its establishment.

The following bill was, by permission, taken up and withilrawn, to-wit:

A bill to authorize F. M Ayers to peddle without license.

The following bill, reported back by the Committee on Local and Special Bills for a first reading, was read

WEDNESDAY, AuGU~T 20, 1879.

1167

and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary, to-wit: A bill to amend an act to amend an act to establish

a County Court in Coweta county, approved March 2, 1874, which amendatory act was approved February 16, 1876.

The unfinished business, the consideration of the bill to amend the act creating the Geological Department, was postponed and made the special order for Tuesday next immediately after the reading of the Journal.

The unfinished business, the bill for the lease or sale of the Macon and Brunswick Railroad, was then resumed.

Mr. Wheeler called for the previous question on the the amendment.proposed by Mr. Ball.

The call was sustained, and the main question ordered.

Mr. Hall called for the yeas and nays. The call was sustained, and on calling the roll the vote was as follows :

Those voting in the affirmative are Messrs.-

Adams,

Anderson of Morgan, Berry,

Carr, Chapman,

Cook, . Cox of Troup, Hall,

Irvine,

Kin.e:, McDonald,

Miller of Liberty, Paine,

Phillips of. Cobb, Phinizy, Pike,

Polhill,

Reese, Russell,

Strother, Tarver,

Tatum, Turner of Brooks, Turner of Coweta,

Those voting in the negative are Messrs.-

Anderson of Pulaski,

Barksdale,

Bell, Bennett, Bird, Bleckley, Born, Branch, Brintle, Buchan, Burch of Laurens, Burch of Towns, Butler,

Greene of M: adison, Hamilton, Hanks,

Harrell, Harp, Harris,

Henderson, Hill, Hogan, Howell of Lowndes,

Howell of Pickens, Hudson.

Hulsey,

Oliver, Park, PatterRon,

Peacock, Phillips of Carroll,

Phillips of Coffee, Pope, Puckett, Rankin,

Redwine, Riden, Roach,

Roberts,

1168

J OURNAT, OF THE HoUSE.

Butt, Cannon,

Chambers,

Cle~,

Colley, Collins, Cox of Harris, Crawford,

Cunningham, Daniel,

Davis of Baker, Davison,

DeLoach Diekin,

DuBose, Duggar, Dupree,

Duvall, Elder, Farnell, Fitzgerald,

Fort, Fuller,

Gan~mage,

Garrard, Grant,

Glover, Greene of Baldwin,

Humber, Fu'chins,

lvey, Janes, Johnson of Clay, J ohnsou of .Tohn.son, Jordan of Crawford, Jordan of Wilkes,

Kendrick. Kimsey,

Kirby,

Lamb, Livingston, Mathews,

.i\1aund, McConnell,

McCurry, McGouirck, .1\<IcLucas, McRae, l-Ie Whorter, Miller of Houston, "Milner,

Mitchell, Mynatt,

Nisbet, Northern,

Roney,

Shannon, Sbarman, Sheffield of Early,

Sikes, Sims, Smith of Butts, Smith of O~rlethorpe, Smith of Walton,

Strickland,

Taliaferro.

Tate, Thomas,

Toole, "\Valton,

"\Veehunt, Welch,

Westbrook, Wbeeler, Williams of Columbia,

Williams, C. W. Wi)lingbam.

\Vilmot, Wilson,

Wrigpt, Yancey, Zellner.

Those not voting are Messrs.-:-

Anderson of Newton,

Awtry, Barron, Brantley,

Davis of Houston, Dozier,

Fletcher,

Ford, Gray,

Hammond,

Harrison,

Hollis,

Lan~,

Luffman, .1\<Ic.A.fee, Paull,

Perkins,

Poppell, Prescott,

Yeas24. Nays 121. Not voting 28.

Rogers, Scruggs

Sheffield of Miller, Sibley, Vick,

Wall, Walters,

Wilcox, Williams, F. J.

So the amendment was not adopted. Mr. Hall proposed further to amend by striking out $60,000 and inserting $67,500 in the first section. The amendment was not adopted.

Mr. Turner, of Coweta, offered an amendment chang-

W-EDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1879.

1169

ing the date of lease to forty-five days after the approval of the act.

Lost. Mr. Sims proposed to strike out forty-five anil insert ninety days. Lost. Mr. Paine proposed to strike out so much as requires the Governor to advertise the lease. Lost. On motion of Mr. Tatum, the following words were stricken ont of section 3d, "nor to any company of non-resident adventurers or speculators." Mr. Cox, of Troup, offered the following amP.ndment, which was adopted, to-wit: Amend st:>ction 4th by inserting the words ' according to the value of said improvements at the time of the expiration of said lease." On motion of Mr. Yancey, the further consideration of this bill was postponed till to-morrow, immediately aftee the reading of the Journal. Mr. Yancey offered the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, and ordered at once transmitted to the Senate, to-wit:

A resolution-

Fixing the hour of 11 o'clock, A. ~L, :F'riday next as the time for formal presentation of the portrait of Dr.

Crawford vV. Long.

The time of the Bouse was extended three minutes.

Mr. Turner, of Brooks, chairman of the Committee on the .Tudiciary, snbmitted the following report:

M?. Speaker:

The Committee on the Judiciary have had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do pass, to- wit :

A bill to be entitled an act to repeal sections 1631,

1170

JOURNAL OJ! THE HOUSE.

1632 and 1633 of the Revised Code of 1873, and for other

purposes.

.,

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to amend an act en-

titled an act to provide for the payment of the fees of

the SolicitorGeneral of the Southern Judicial Circuit of this State in cases of misdemeanors transferred to the

County Courts in said circuit, and for other purpose!",

so as to provide also for the fees of the Clerk of the Su-

perior Court and Sheriff of the county of Brooks in said

cases.

The committee find that the proper notices required

by law have been given of intention to apply for the

passage of the last bill abovP.

The committee have also had under consideration

the following bills, which they recommend do pass, as

amended, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend section 1416 of

the Code of 1873, which relates to and regulates the

practice of dentistry.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to amend the 837th

section of the Code of Georgia.

They have also had under consideration the follow-

ing bills, which they recommend do pass, by substi-

tute, to-wit :

A bill to be entitled an act to carry into effect para-

graph 2, section 18, article 6 of the Constitution of 1877,

so as to provide for the revision of the jury box, and

for other purposes therein named.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to alter and amend

ser.tion 1730 of the Revised Code of Georgia of 1873, hy

striking out the words, "a special jury selected from the Grand Jury," and insertin~?; in lieu thereof the

words, "a jury as in other common law cases."

Also, a bill to be entitled an aet to carry into effect

article 5, section 1, paragraph 18 of the Constitution of

1877, which declares that the General .Assembly shall

"TEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1879.

1171'

have authority to provide by law for the suspension of either the Treasurer or Comptroller-General of the State from the discharge of the duties of their offices, and also for the appointment of a suitable person to discharge the duties of the same.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to provide one Commissioner of Roads and Revenues in the county of Forsyth, and to prescribe his powers and duties.

The committee find that the proper notices required by law have been given of intention to apply for the passage of the last bill above mentioned.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bill, which they report back with thererecommend that the introducer be allowed to withdraw it, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to authorize the Mayor and Aldermen of the city of Savannah to tax so much of the property of every railroad company, or other corporation as is used, owned or held by such company or corporation within the present or any future corporate limits of said city.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do not pass, towit:

A bill to be entitled an act to fix and regulate the fees of maRters and auditors.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to authorize Courts of Inquiry in this State to award the costs against the pHrson or persons sueing out the warrant, in case it should appear that such prosecution was malicious and unauthorized by law, and for other purposes.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act supplementary to an act to carry into effect paragraph 2, section 18, article 6 of the Constitution of 1877, so as to provide for the _ sebction of the most PXperienced, intelligent and upright men to serve as Grand Jurors, and of intelligent

1172

J OURNA.L OF THE HOUSE.

and upright men to serve as Traverse Jurors, and for drawing jurors, approved December 16, 1878.

Respectfully submitted. H. G. TuRNER, Chairman.

Mr. Paine, chairman of the Committee on Enroll ment, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on Enrollment report as duly en rolled and ready for the signature of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the following acts, towit:

An act for the relief of Richard H. Leonard, Ordinary of the county of Talbot from his disability under sections 327 and 328 of the Code of 1873, so far as it relates to estates not fully administered at the time of his election and qualification, and for other purposes.

Also, an act to fix the fees of Justices of the Peace and Notaries Public who are ex-o:fficio Justices of the Peace and Constables in appeal cases.

Also, an act to prevent the forfeiture of recognizances in criminal cases, except where the prosecuting officer is ready for trial, and for other purposes.

Also, an act to authorize the Ordinary of Jackson county to issue county bonds to build a Court-House in said county, and to provide for the redemption of the same, and for other purposes.

Also, an act to regulate the publication of the registered voters of the city of Augusta.

Also, an act to amend an act entitled an act to authorize the City Council of Augusta to create a Board of Health for said city.

Also, an act to require the Mayor of the city of Augusta to discharge the duties of Recorder of said city; to limit the salary of said Mayor, and for other purposes.

\V"EDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1879.

1173

Also, an act to authorize the Comptroller-General to administer oaths.

Also, an act to amend an act entitled an act to provide that the Treasurer of Richmond county shall be allowed a salary, and to fix the amount thereof, approved February 20, 1876.

Also, an act to amend an act approved February 28, 1874, entitled an act to establish a new charter for the city of Atlanta, and for other purposes.

Also, an act to prescribe the manner, terms, and specifications for letting the public printing to the lowest bidder, in accordance with article 7, section 17, paragraph 1, of the Constitution.

W. W. 1'AINE, Chairman. The Speaker then announced the following committees, to. wit : Committee to investigate 1he office and official conduct of the Public Printer: Messrs. Harrison, McCurry, Awtry, Redwine, \Villiams, J. F., Greene of Madison, aud Hogan. Committee to investigate the expenditures in the Geological Department. Messrs. Irvine, Rankin, Cook, Oliver, and Rowell of Lowndes. Leave of absence was granted to Mr. Gammage on account of business, and to Mr. Toole and Mr. Lamb on account of sickness in their families.

The Rouse then adjourned till 9 A. M. to morrow.

1174

J"ouRNAL OF THE HOUSE.

ATLANTA, GEORGIA,

Thursday, August 21, 1879.

The House met pursuant to adjournment, was called to order by the Speaker, and opened with prayer by the Chaplain.

'fhe roll was called and the following members answered to their names :

Those present were Messrs.-

Adams,

Hammond,

Anderson of Morgan, Hamilton,

Anderson of Newton, Hanks,

Anderson of Pulaski, Harrell,

Awtry,

Harp,

Barksdale,

Harris,

Bell,

Henderson,

Bennett,

Hill,

Berry,

Hogan,

Bird,

Hollis,

Bleckley,

Howell of Lowndes,

Born,

Howell of Pickens,

Branch,

Hudson,

Brintle,

Hulsey,

Buchan,

Humber,

Burch of Laurens,

Hutchins,

Burch of Towns,:

Irvine,

Butt,

Ivey,

Cannon,

Janes,

Carr,

Johnson of Clay,

Chambers,

Johnson of Johnson,

Chapman,

Jordan of Crawford,

Clegg,

Jordan of Wilkes,

Colley,

Kendrick,

Collins,

Kimsey.

Cook,

King,

Cox of Harris,

Kirby,

Cax of Troup,

Lamb,

Crawford,

Livingston,

Cunningham,

Luffman,

Danitl,

Mathews.

Davis of Baker,

Maund,

Davis of Houston,

McAfee,

Davison,

McConnell,

DeLoach,

McCurry,

Dickin,

McDonald,

Dozier.

McGouirck,

DuBose,

McLucas,

Phillips of Canoll, Phillips of Cobb, Phillips of Coffee, Phinizy, Pike, Polhill, Pope, Puckett, Rankin, Redwine, Reese, Riden, Roach, Roberts, Rogers, Roney, Russell, Scruggs, Shannon, Sharman, Sheffield of Early, Sheffield of Miller, Sibley, Sikes, Sims, Smith of Butts, Smith of Oglethorpe, Smith of Walton; Strickland, Strother, Taliaferro, Tarver, Tate, Tatuin, Thomas, Toole, Turner of Brooks, Turner of Coweta,

THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1879.

1175

Duggar, Dupree, Duvall, Elder, Farnell, Fitzgerald, Fletcher, Fort, Fuller, Gammage, Garrard, Grant, Gray, Glover, Greene of Baldwin, Greene of Madison,

Hall,

McRae, McWhorter, Miller of Houston, Miller of Liberty, Milner, Mitchell, Mynatt, Nisbet, Northern, Oliver, Paine, Park, Patterson, Paull, Peacock, Perkins,

Walters, Walton, Weehunt, Welch, Westbrook, Wheeler, Wilcox, Williams of Columbia, Williams, C. W.

Williams F. J.

Willingham, Wilmot Wilson, Wright. Yancey, Zellner.

Those absent were :Messrs.-

Barron, Brantley, Butler, Ford,

Present, 163.

Absent, 10.

Harrison, Lang, Poppell,

Prescott, Vic I<, Wall,

Mr. Barksdale, chairman of the Committee on Journals, reported the Journal of yesterday examined and approved.

The Journal was then read and confirmed.On motion of :Mr. Hanks the following House bill was taken up, and the SenatA amendments concurred in, to-wit: A bill to" alter and amend section 2970 of the Code of 1873, and for other purposes. The action of the House was ordered at once transmitted to the Senate. Mr. Paine, chairman of the Committee on Enrollment, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on Enrollment report as duly enrolled, and rPady for the signature of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the :following resolution, towit:

1176

JotTRNAL OF 1'HE HousE.

A resolution-

To present the names of Crawford l'V. Long, the discoverer of anresthesia, and James Oglethorpe, the historic founder of the Commonwealth, to tht-' Art Gallery established by Congress, to represent Georgia.

w. vV. PAiNE, Chairman.

The following message .~as received from the Senate, through Mr. Harris, Secretary thereof:

Mr. Speaker:

The Senate has passed the fo1lowwg House bills, towit:

A bill to authorize the Board of Education of Whitfield connty to order the payment of $103 of the school fund to the School Commissioners.

Also, a bill to revise the jury-box in the county of Harris.

Also, a bill to confirm an ordinance of the City Council of Augusta to create a sinking fund.

Also, a bill to prevent thfl grazing of diseased cattle into places other than those where the cattle are disease.d, and to fix a penalty for the same.

The consideration of the bill to lease or sell the Macon and Brunswick Hailroad, was resumed.

Mr. Polbill proposed to amend by adding a provision prohibiting the lessees of any other railroad from owning or controlling au interest in said lease.

Lost. Mr. Cox, of Troup, offered the following amendment, which was adopted, to-wit: Strike out the word "so" in the 7th line, lOth section, after the word "time," and the word "or" after the word "railroad" in the 8th line, and insert the words "as to" before the words "in any way" in the 8th line, and insert the words ''or management" after the word "tariffs'' in the 9th line.

'fHURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1879.

1177

Mr. Nesbit proposed to amend the 13th section by adding after the words "bonds of Georgia" the words "or currency of the United States."

Lost. Mr. Livingston proposed to amend by striking out $1,125,000 and insert 61,124,000 in the 13th section. Withdrawn. Mr. MeWhorter moved to amend by striking out all of the 13th section providing for a sale of the road. Lost.

M. Barksdale proposed to amend by striking out all in the 9th line, 13th section, after the word " shall " to the word "have," in the lOth line.

'fhe House went into Committee of the Whole House for the consideration of the 14th section of the bill.

Mr. Turner, of Coweta, chairman of the Committee of the vVhole House, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker :

The Committee of the vVhole House have had under consideration the 14th section of the bill to provide for the lease or sale of the Macon and Brunswick Railroad, and they have instructed me to report the bill back with a recommendation that the section, as amended, be adopted.

The report of the committee was disagreed to. On motion of }fr. Miller, of Houston, the 14th section was stricken from the bill. Mr. Anderson offered the following amendment to the 11th section, which was read and adopted, to-wit: Add after Georgia, in the 4th line, " it shall not be competent for the Governor to appoint any person such Commissioner who is the owner of any stock or bond in any line of railroad in Georgia competing with the Macon and Brunswick Railroad, who may be directly or indirectly in the employment of such cJmpeting line.

75

11'78

Joun.NAL o~ THE HousE.

Mr. Adams proposed as section 14 the following: Provided, That this act shall not go into effect for sixty days, and that during that time the Governor shall use his best efforts to sell the road, and shall sell it, provided he can get for it $1,250,000, to be paid in the recognized bonds of the State of Georgia, and should the Governor be able to sell said road at this or a higher price, then this act shall not go into effect. On the question of the adoption of this amendment, 1fr Adams called for the yeas and nays. The call was sustained, and on calling the roll the vote was as follows :

Those voting in the affirmative are Messrs.-

Adams, Anderson of Morgan,

Bell, Berry, Cook, Daniel, Davis of Baker,

Hall, Hammond, Irvine,

Janes, McCurry, McDonald, Mc\Vhorter, Miller of Liberty, Paine, Paull, Phillips of Cobb, Phinizy, Pike,

Polhi!l, Reese, Russell; Strother, Tarver, Tatum, Turner of Brooks, Turner of Coweta, \Val ton, Yancey,

Those voting in the negative are Messrs.-

Anderson of Newton, Anderson of Pulaski,

Awtry, Barksdale, Bennett, Bird, Bl<!ckley, Born, Branch, Brintle, Burch of Laurens, Burch of Towns, Butler, Butt, Cannon, Carr, Chapman, Cox of Harris, Crawford, Cunningham, Davis of Houston,

Greene of Madison, Hamilton, Hanks, Harrell, Harp, Harris, Hill, Hogan, Howell of Lowndes, Howell of Pickens, Hulsey, Humber, Hutchins,

lvey, Johnstn of Johnson, Jordan of Crawford, Jordan of Wilkes, Kendrick, Kimsey, Kirby, Lamb,

Oliver, P2tterson, Peacock, Phillips of Carroll, Phillips of Coffee, Pope, Puckett, Rankin, Redwine, Riden, Roach, Roberts, Shannon, Sharman, Sheffield of Early, Sheffield of Miller, Sikes, Sims,

Smith of Butl, t:!mith of Oglethorpe, Smith of Walton,

TIIU.RIJJDAY, AUGUST 21, 1879.

1179

Davison,

Livingston,

DeLoach,

Mathews.

Dickin,

Maund,

DuBose,

MeMee.,

Duggar.

McOonnell,

Duvall,

'McGouric:k,

Elder

l\1cLucas,

Fame\1,

McRae,

J'iuprald,

Miller of Houston,

Fort,

Mitchell,

Fuller,

Mynatt,

Grant,

Nisbet,

Glover,

l!ifar.hem,

Green of :Baldwin,

Thllse not voting are .Mesl!'a.-

Barron,

Brantley,

Buchan,

Chambers, Cleg, Colley,

Collins, Cox of Troup. Dozier, Dupree,

Fletcher,

Ford, Gammage, Gramrd,

Grar, Hamson, Henderson, Hollis,

Hudson,

Jo.hnson of Clay, l{mg,

Lang, LufFman, Milner,

Park~

Perkins. Poppell,

Yeas SO. Nays 103. Not voting 40.

Strickland, Taliaferro, Tate, Toole, Welch, Westbrook, Wheeler,

Williams, F. J.

Willingham,

WwUilsmoont;

Wright. Zellner.

Prescott, Rogers,

R<me)",

Scruggs, Sibley, Thomas, Vick, Wall, Walters,

Weebunt,

Wilcox, Willia11111 of Columbia, Willia111111 C. W.

So the amendment was not adopted. Mr. Rankin oalled for the previous question. The call was sustained, and the main question ordered on the passage of the bill.

Mr. McWhorter called for the yeas and nays. The call was 5Ustained, and on calling the roll, the vote was as follows :

Those voting in the affirmative are Messrs.-

Anderson of Newton, Anderson of Pulaski,

AJ3watrr~yale, Bem:xett,

Gray, Glover,

Greene of Baldwin, Greene of Madison,

Hamilton,

Miller of Liberty, 1\iitchell, Mynatt, Nisbet,

l\orihern,

1180

JOURNAL OF TH..I!l HoUsE.

Bleckley, Born,

Branch, Brintle, Buchan, Burch of Laurens,

Burch of Towns,

Butler, Butt,

Cannon,

Carr, Chambers

Colley, Collins, Cox of Harris,

Cox of Troup,

Crawford, Cunningham,

Davis of Baker, Davis of Houston,

navison,

DeLoach, Dickin,

DuBose,

Duggar, Dupree, Duvall,

Elder, Farnell,

Fitzgerald,

Fort, Fuller,

Garrard, Grant,

Hanks, Harrell, Harp,

Harris, Henderson,

Hill, Hogan,

Howell of LowndeR, Howell of Pickens, Hudson,

Hulsey, Humber,

Hutchins,

Ivey, Janes, Johnson of Clay,

Johnson of Johnson,

Jordan of Crawford, Jordan of WilkeR,

Kendrick,

Kimsey, King,

Kirby, Lamb,

Livingston, Mathews,

Maund, :McAfee,

McConnell, )fcCurry,

McGourick,

McLucas, McRae,

Miller of Houston,

Oliver, Patterson, Paull,

Peacock, Phillip~ of Carroll, Phillips of Coffee,

Pope, Puckett, Rankin,

Redwine,

Riden, Roach,

Roberts, Shannon,

Sharman,

Sheffield of Early,

Sheffield of Miller, Sikes,

Smith of ButtK, Smith of O~~:lethorpe, Smith of Walton

Taliaferro, Tate,

Toole, "Walters,

Welch,

Westbrook, Wheeler,

Williams of Columbia,

Williams, C. W., Willingham, Wilmot.

Wilson,

Wright,

Those voting in the negative are Messrs.-

Adams,

Anennd,erson of Morgan,

Berry, Chapman,

Cook, Daniel,

Irvine, }!cDonald,

McWhorter, Milner, Paine.

Phillips of Cobb, Phinizy, Pike, Pol hill, Reese, Russell,

Sims, Strickland, Strother, Tarver, Tatum,

Turner of Coweta,

'Valton,

Williams, F. J.

Those not voting are Messrs.-

Barron, Bird, Brantley, Clegg, Dozier, Fletcher

Harrison,

Hollis, Lang, Lufiinan, Park,

Perkins,

Scruggs,

Sibley,

Turner of Brooks, Thomas, Vick,

Wall,

THURSDAY, AUG-UST 21, 1879.

1181

Ford, Gammage,

Hall, Hammond,

Poppell, Prescott, Rogers, Roney,

Weehunt. Wilcox, Yancey.

Zellner.

Yeas 117. Nays 26. Not voting, 30. Mr. Hall paired with Mr. Gammage. Mr. Hall would have voted "no," and Mr. Gammage'' yes.'' So the bill was passed by the requisite constitutional majority. The following message was received from the S!mate, through Mr. Harris, Secretary thereof:

Mr. Speaker:

I am instructed to inform the House forthwith that the Senate having organized as the High Court of Impeachment, is now ready to receive the Managers for the purpose of proceeding upon the tnal of the impeachment of Washington L. Goldsmith, ComptrollerGeneral.

1\fr. Hutchins, chairman of the Committee on Finance, submitted the follGwing report :

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on Finance have had under consideration the following local and special bills, which they recommend do not pass, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend an act entitled an act to fix compensation for jurors for the county of Burke, approved February 10, 1876, so that the said act shall embrace the county of Lee.

Also, the following, which they recommend that the introducer be allowPd to withdraw, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to authorize and require the Treasurer of the State of G~orgia to pay to the

1182

JOURNAL OF THE HOUSE.

Board of Education of Glynn county a sum equivalent to the quota of school tax for the county of Glynn for the year 1876.

Also, a bill for the relief of E. V. Johnson, of Bartow county, and for other purposes.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act authorizing the issue of bonds by cities for the redemption of bonds now outstanding, and to secure the payment of the same.

Proper notices of intention to apply for the passage of said local and special bills have been published, as required by law.

The committee have also had under consideration the following resolutions, which they recommend do not pass, to-wit :

A resolution for the relief of R. M. Willis, Tax-Collector of Elb~rt county for the year 1872.

Also, a resolution to refund to Silas Crosby, Sheriff of Appling county, certain fees for advertising the sale ofland under the wil~ land taxji.fas.

The committee return a petition from the citizens of Clarke, Oconee, Jackson, and other counties, asking that Culp and Burch be paid for the capture of Charles Kelly,. an escaped convict, and recommend that the prayer of petitioners be not granted.

Respectfully submitted. N. L. HuTCHINS, Chairman.

On motion of 1\fr. "\Vright, the following bill was taken up and the Senate amendments concurred in, towit:

A bill to create a Board of Police Commissioners for the city of Augusta, in this State; to define its powers and duties, and for other purposes.

Mr. Yancey moved to suspend the rules to take up a Senate bill.

No quorum voting, Mr. Yancey demanded a call of , the House.

THURSDAY, AUGUBT 21, 1879.

1183

Mr. DuBose moved to adjourn till 3:30 P. ::~r. The motion to adjourn prevailed, and the House ad journed till 3:30 P. ::11. to day.

3:30 O'cLocK P. ::1r.

The House reassembled, and was called to order by the Speaker.

Mr. Cox, of Harris, moved to adjourn till 9 A.M. tomorrow.

No quorum voting, Mr. Wright demanded a call of the roll of the House.

On calling the roll a quorum was found to be present.

'fhe House then adjourned till 9 A. l\L to-morrow

ATLANTA, GEORGIA,

Friday, August :22, 1879.

The House met pursuant to adjournment, was called to order by the Speaker, and opened with prayer by the Chaplain.

The roll was called and a quorum found to be present, the following members answering to their names:

Those present were Messrs.-

Adams, Anderson of Morgan, Anderson of Pulaski, Barksdale, Barron, Bell, Bennett, Berry,

Hammond, Hamilton, HankP, Harrell, Harp, Harris, Henderson,

Hill,

Phillips of Cobb, Phillips of Coffee, Phinizy, Pike, Polhill, Pope, Prescott, Puckett,

1184

JOURNAL OF THE HOUSE.

Bird, Bleckley, Born, Branch, Brintle, Buchan, Burch of Laurens, Burch of Towns, Butler, Butt, Cannon, Carr, Chambers, Chapman, Clegg, Colley, Cook, Cox of Harris, Cox of Troup, Crawford, Cunningham, Daniel, Dttvis of Houston, Davison, DeLoach, Dickiu, DuBose, Duggar, Dupree, Duvall, Elder, Farnell, Fitzgerald, Fort, Fuller, Garrard, Grant, Gray, Glover, Greene of Baldwin, Greene of Madison, Hall,

Hogan, Hollis, Howell of Lowndes, Howell of Pickens, Hudson, Hulsey, Humber, Hutchins, Irvine, Ivey, Janes, Johnson of Clay, Johnson of Johnson, Jordan of Crawford, Jordan of Wilkes, Kendrick, Kimsey, King, Kirby, Livingston, Mathews, McAfee. McConnell, McCurry, :McDonald, :i\IcGouirck, McLucas, l\IcRae, l\IcWhorter Miller of Houston, Miller of Liberty, 1\Iilner, Mynatt, Nisbet, Northern, Oliver, Paine, Patterson, Paull, Peacock, Perkins, Phillips of Carroll,

Those absent were Messrs.-

Anderson of :Newton, Awtry, Brantley, Collins, Davis of Baker, Dozier, Fletcher, Ford,

Present 149.

Absent24.

Gammage, Harrison, Lamb, Lang, Luffman, Maund, Mitchell, Park,

Rankin, Redwine, Reese, Riden, Roach,

Robert.~,

Rogers, Roney, Russell, Scruggs, Shannon, Sharman, Sheffield of Miller, Sikes, Sims, Smith of Butt~, Smith of Oglethorpe, Smith of Walton, Strother, Taliaferro, Tarver, Tate, Tatum, Thomas, Turner of Brook~, Turner of Coweta walters, \Valton, welch, \Vestbrook, \V'heeler, \Vilcox, Williams of Columbia, \Villiams, C. W. Williams, F. J. Willingham, \Vilmot, wilson, Wright, Yancey, Zellner.

Poppell, Sheffield of Early, Sibley, Strickland, Toole, Vick, Wall. \Veehunt,

FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1879.

1185

Mr. Harrell, from the Committee on Journals, reported the Journal of yesterday examined and approved.

The Journal was then read and confirmed.

Mr. Pike moved to reconsider so much of the Journal as relates to the action of the House upon the bill for the lease or sale of the :Macon and Brunswick Railroad.

On motion of Mr. McCurry the motion to reconsider was laid on the table.

The committeeot arrangements, through Mr. Yancey, chairman, offered the following resolution, which was read and agreed to, to-wit:

A resolution-

Inviting the Mayor and Aldermen of Athens, and certain other citizens of that place and certain citizens of the town of Jefferson, with ladies accompanying them, to seats on the floor during the presentation of

the pictme of Dr. Crawford vV. Long.

Mr. Hamilton moved to take up the following resolution, to-wit:

A resolution-

To pay to Ron. R. A. Alston's family, and the representatives of Hons. S. Y. Jamison and J. M. Brannan, the balance due them as members of this House for their per diem.

The resolution was taken up and read.

On the question of the adoption of the resolution, Mr. Humber called for the yeas and nays.

The call was sustained, and on calling the roll the vote was as follows :

1186

JoURNAL OF THE HOUSE.

Those voting in the affirmative are Messrs

Adams, Anderson of Morgan, Ar!::lerson of Pulaski, Awtry, Barksdale, Bell, Bennett, Berry, Bleckley, Born, Branch,j Brintle, Buchan,

Burch of Laurens, Buch of fownR,

Butler, Carr, Chambers, Chapman,: Colley, Cox of Harris. Cox of Troup, Crawford, Cunningham, Daniel, Davis of Hou~ton, DeLoach, Duvall. Elder, Fort, Garrard Gray, Janes,

Johnson of Clay, Glover, Greene of Baldwin, Greene of Madison, Hall, Hamilton, Hanks, Harris, Henderson, Hill, Hollis, Hudson, Hulsey, Hutchins, Johnson of Johnson, Jordan of Crawford, Jordan of Wilkes, Kendrick, Kimsey, King, Kirby, Livingston, Mathews, McAfee,

~feRae,

Miller of Houston, Miller of Liberty, :Milner, Mynatt, ~is bet, Northern, Paine, Patterson,

Philips of Cobb, Phillips of Coffee, Phinizy, Pike, Polhill, Puckett, Rankin,

Reese, Roach, Rogers, Roney,, Russell, Shannon, Sheffied of Miller, Sims, Smith of Rutt~, Smith of Oglethorpe, Smith of Walton, Strother, Taliaferro, Tarver, Tatum, Thomas, Turner of Brook~, walton,

Westbrook, Williams of Columbia, "Williams, F. J . ..Willingham, wilson,

Wright, Zellner.

Those voting in the negative are Messrs.--

Bird, Butt, Cannon,' Davison, DuBose, Duggar, Dupree, Farnell,

l<itz~eralc:J.

Fuller, Grant, Harp, Hogan,

Howell of Lowndes, Howell of Pickens, Humber, Irvine, Ivey, McConnell, McCurry, :McDonald, McGouirck, :McLucas, Oliver, Paull, Phillips of Carroll,

Redwine, Riden, Roberts,

S~arman,

Suces, Tate, Turner of Coweta, welch, wheeler,

Williams, C. W. Wilmot, Yancey.

Tho!';'3 not voting are MeJsrs.-

Anders01: of Newton, Harrell,

Barron,

Harris0n,

Brantley,

Lamb,

Poppell, Prescott, Scrugg,

FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1879.

1187

Clegg,

Collins, Cook, Davis of Baker, Diekin, Dozier, Fletcher, Ford, Gammage,

Hammond,

Lang,'

Luffman, 1\Iaund, l\Ic \Vhorter,

:M:itchell, Park, Peacock, Perkins Pope, '

Sheffied of Early, Sibley, Strickland, Toole, Vick, Wall,

Walters, \Veehunt, Wilcox,

Yeas 98. Nays 38. Not voting 37.

So the resolution was agreed to.

Mr. Polhill moved to suspend the rules for the purpose of taking up and having read the second time House bill No. 671.

The motion ~vailed, and the following bill was read the second time, to-wit:

A bill to carry into effect paragraph 18, section 1, article 5 of the Constitution, which declares that the General Assembly shall have authority to provide by law for the suspension of either the Treasurer or Comptroller-General of the State.

Mr. Yancey movPd to take up the following bill, and adopt the report of the conference committee, to-wit:

A bill to carry into effect paragraph 18, section 7, article 3 of the Constitution, and to prescribe the manner in which private corporations may be chartered.

The report of the committee of conference was adopted, and the substitute, as amended, concurred in.

On motion of Mr. Northern, the rules were suspended and the following bill read the second time, to-wit:

A bill to encourage the culture of fish in the natural and artificial -ponds and streams on the lands of David Dickson, of Hancock county, lying in the county of Hancock or vVashington, or both, and on the lands of Samuel C. Nicholson, lying in the county of Dodge, in this State, and for other purposes.

118~j

JoURNAL OF THE HOUSE.

On motion of Mr. Bird, the folbwing bill was referred to the Committee on Education, to wit:

A bill to divert the unexpended part of the fund known as the OhoopPe River Fund, a fund provided for opening up the Ohoopee River, in the county ofTatnall, to educational purposes in said county.

Mr. Turner, of Brooks, chairman of the CommittP-e on the Judiciary, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on the Judiciary have had under consideration the following bill, which they recommend do pass, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend an act entitled an act to prohibit the killing of partridges, wild turkeys and deer at certain seasons in the counties of Lowndes, Thomas and Putnam, in this State, approved February 28, 1876, so far as the same relab~s to the county ofThomas,and to prohibit the destruction ofnests of partridges and wild turkeys, and to make the proof of the possession of any of the game protected by said act prima facia evidence of guilt.

The committee find that the proper notices required by law have been given of attention to apply for the passage of this bill.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do pass, as amended, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend an act entitled an act to incorporate the town of Thomasville, in this State ; to grant certain privileges to the same, and to define its limits, approved March 3, 1874.

TLe committee find that the proper notices, required by law, have been given of intention to apply for the passage of this bill.

The committee have also had under consideration

FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1879.

1189

the following bills, which they recommend do pass, by substitute, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to authorize the Judges of the Superior Courts of this State, and such Judges of City Courts as are commissioned by the Governor; to fix the fees of the Clerks and Sheriffs of their respective courts for all services rendered by them, and the fees for which are not fixed by law.

A bill to be entitled an act to establish a County Court in each county in this State.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bill, wilich they report back with the recommendation that the introducer be allowed to withdraw it, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend an act entitled an act to authorize and require the registration of the voters in the county of Camden, in this State, and for other purposes, approved February 26, 1877.

The committee find that the proper notices required by law have not been given of intention to apply for the passage of this biil.

The com:nittee have also had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do not pass, to-w1t:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend section 1455 of the Revised Code of 1873, last line of said section, by striking out the word "two," and inserting the word "one," so as that elections on fence or no fence may be held annually, if desired.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to repeal an act entitled an act to fix the fees and per diem of jurors and Bailiffs in attendance upon the Superior Court for the county of Upson, approved February 13, 1877.

The committee find that the proper notices required

1190

JOURNAL OF THE HouSE.

by law have not been given of intention to apply for the passage of the last bill.

Respectfully submitted. H. G. TURNER, Chairman.

Mr. Paine, Chairman of the Committee on Enrollment, submitted the following report:

Mr. Speaker :

The Committ;;,e on Enrollment report as duly enrolled, signed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, President of the Senate, and delivered to the Governor the following acts, to-wit:

An act for the relief of Richard H. Leonard, Ordinary of the county of Talbot, and for other purposes.

Also, an act, to fix the fees of Justices of the Peace and Notaries Public, who are ex-ojficio Justices of the Peace and Constables in appeal cases.

Also, an act to prevent the forfeiture of recognizances in criminal cases, except where the prosecuting officer is ready for trial.

Also, an act to authorize the Ordinary of Jackson county to issue County Bonds to build a Court-House in said county, and to provide for the redemption of the same.

Also, an act to regulate the publication of registered voters of the city of Augusta.

Also, an act to amend an act entitled an act to authorize the City Council of Augusta to create a Board of Health for said city.

Also, an act to require the Mayor of the city of Augusta to discharge the duties of Recorder of said city, to limit the salary of said Mayor, and for other pur poses.

Also, an act to authorize the Comptroller-General to administer oaths.

Also, an act to amend an act entitled an act to pro-

FRIDAY,- AUGUST 22, 1879.

1191

vide that the Treasurer of Richmond county shall be allowed a salary, and to fix the amount thereof, approved February 20, 1878.

Also, an act to prescribe the manner, terms and specifications for letting the public printing to the lowest bidder, in accordance with article 7, section 17, paragraph 1 of the Constitution..

Also, an act to amend an act, approved February 28, 1874, entitled an act to establish a new charter for the city of Atlanta, and for other purposes.

Also, a resolution to present the names of Crawford W. Long and James Oglethorpe to the Art Gallery, established by Congress, to represPnt Georgia.

'V. ,V. PAINE, Chairman.

Mr. 'Vright, from the Committee on Railroads, sub mitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker :

The Committee on Railroads have had under consideration the following bill, which they instruct me to report to the Honse, with the recommendation that the same be referred to the Committee on Corporations, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to re-enact an act to incorporate the Norcross and Dahlonega Railroad Company, and to substitute others as corporators.

Respectfully submitted. H. G. vVRIGHT, Chairman.

Mr. Northern, chairman of the Committee on Education, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker :

The Committee on Education have had under consideration the following bill, which they recommend do pass, to-wit:

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to repeal an act en-

1192

JouRNAL OF THE HousE.

titled an act to change and regulate the school system

in the counties of \:Vare, Echols, Lowndes, Berrien,

Charlton, Dodge, and Clinch, in certain particulars,

approved February 15, 1877, so far as applicable to

Dodge county.

vY. J. NoRTHERN, Chairman.

Mr. Turner, of Brooks, chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary, submitted the following report :

Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on the Judiciary have had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do pass, to-wit :

A bill to be entitled an act to amend section 611 of the Code of1873, which reads as follows : The same road hands shall not be compelled to work on more than one public road, which must come within three miles of their residence, except in opening a new road, when all the road hands of the road district are subject to work upon it.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to extend the provisions of an ad to relieve J. \V. Grubbs, A. G. Inman, S. J. Bell, and L. D. Matthews, securities on the bond of R. Columbus \Vimberly, Tax-Collector of Burke county, in the year 1874, approved February 28, 1876, so as to afford L. D. Matthews, the only remaining solvent security on said bond, further time to have all the payments which he claims have been made since the -passage of said act on said bond fully and fairly credited, and for other purposes.

The committee find that the proper notices required by law have been given of intention to apply for the passagR of the last bill above.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bill, which they recommend do pass, as amended, to- wit :

FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1879.

1193

A bill to be entitled an act to authorize the Mayor a.nd City Council of Athens to use the money paid by the Southern Mutual Insurance Company, of Athens, Georgia, as taxes on gross premiums for the year 1879, for the purpose of building cisterns in the city of

Athens.

The committee find that the proper notices required by law have been given of intention to apply for the passage of this bill.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do pass, by substitute, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to amend the law of the foreclosure of mortgages on personal property, as recited in part the third, chapter the seeond, article the first, in the second edition of the Revised Code.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to declare it illegal for the Judge of any City Court in this State to hold the office of corporation counsel, or any other municipal office or appointment in the city in which his said court is held.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to change the county site of Wilcox county from Abbeville to lot of land No. 135, in 1st District, of 'Vilcox county ; to review the act of 1H57 creating a new county called Wilcox ; to carry out the true meaning and intents of sai1 act, and for other purposes.

The committee find that the proper notices required by law have been given of intention to apply for the passage of the last bill.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bill, which they report back with the recommendation that the introducer be allowed to withdraw it, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to carry into effect article 9, section 1, paragraph 1 of the Constitution of 1877.

76

1194

JouRNAL oF THE HousE.

The committee have also had under consideration the following bills, which they recommend do not pass, to-wit:

A bill to be entitled an act to compel all persons entitled to vote for President and Vice-President of the United States, for Governor, members of Congress, members of the Legislature and all county officers ; to vote at their own district or precinct elections, and at no other place.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to rPgulate the granting of licenses to retail spirituous liquors in the State of Georgia.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to provide for the changing of private ways in certain cases.

Respectfully submitted. H. G. TuRNER, Chairman.

Mr. Smith, of Oglethorpe, chairman of the Committee on Internal Improvements, submitted the following report: Mr. Speaker:

The Committee on Internal Improvements have considered the following bills, to-wit:

A bill to regulate the tax on ten-pin alleys, and for other purpose therein mentioned, which they recommend do not pass, and that the author be allowed to nraw the game.

Also, a bill to be entitled an act to authorize J. B. Watson'to erect gates on the public road leading from Aderhold's Ferry to the Cambellton road, in the county of Douglas, in the State of Georgia, which they recommend do not pass.

They have also considered A resolutionIn reference to the opening of Chattahoochee River, and recommend its adoption. All of which is respectfully submitted.

J.a.:UES l\f. SlliTH, Chairman.

FRIDAY, .AUGUST 22, 1879.

1195

The s-pecial order, the bill known as the general railroad bill for the regulation of freight and passenger tariffs, was then taken up.

Mr. Wright moved to make the bill the special order for to-day at 3:30 P. ).[.

Lost. Mr. Me\V"horter then moved that the bill be made the special order for to-