Two new air routes between London Southend Airport and Scotland celebrated their inaugural departures today, including the first ever direct service to Stornoway.

Above:

(left to right) Glyn Jones, CEO of Stobart Aviation and Jonathan Hinkles, Loganair’s Managing Director at today's launch.

Scottish airline Loganair has launched three non-stop flights every weekday to Glasgow, alongside a selection of weekend services – operated by its fleet of Embraer 145 regional jet aircraft. As well as an early morning ‘red-eye’ service, the schedule has been designed to enable a full working day in Glasgow before an evening trip home.

It has also introduced six one-stop same plane flights per week to the Outer Hebridean Airport of Stornoway, which include a short a 30-minute stopover in Glasgow during which customers can remain on the aircraft – connecting London and the Western Isles in less than three hours.

Loganair was named Airline of the Year by the European Regional Airline Association while London Southend Airport has been voted the Best Airport in the UK by Which? Magazine for five years in a row.

Customers can enjoy a quick check-in through security in an airport which is much easier to navigate than its London counterparts, arriving on one of five peak time trains per hour from London’s Liverpool Street Station – only 53 minutes away.

The airport ranked seventh out of 24 for light delays last year, while London Stansted sat at the bottom of the table, with passengers kept waiting on flights for an average of 25 minutes – according to recent CAA data.

It is also possible to connect via Loganair’s Glasgow hub onwards to Orkney and Shetland. Corporate customers can access a competitively priced fully flexible fare, enabling last minute schedule changes as well as lounge access and fast track security at all airports.

Loganair’s Managing Director Jonathan Hinkles said: “These new air services are the ideal gateway to Scotland from the Southeast. The schedule to Glasgow is created to offer maximum flexibility for business customers, and as the only airline to offer an inclusive baggage allowance, onboard service and attractive frequent flyer programme within our lowest fare, we’re offering a more inclusive and rewarding way to travel North.

“We’re also seeing a steady increase in bookings from customers travelling to Stornoway; our new one-stop, same-plane service to the Outer Hebrides means those looking to escape the hustle and bustle of London and the South-East can reach the peace and serenity of the Scottish islands in less than three hours”

Two weeks ago the airline also launched daily services to Aberdeen in Scotland’s North East.

Glyn Jones, CEO of Stobart Aviation, owners of London Southend Airport said: “Adding to the Aberdeen route which launched two weeks ago, these two additional services to Glasgow and Stornoway connect London, Essex and the Southeast to Scotland – just ahead of the summer holidays.

“The Glasgow link will be a popular choice for business customers while also offering ongoing connections to Loganair’s Highland and Island network.

“We’re also extremely proud to be the first London Airport with a direct airlink to Stornoway in the Outer Hebrides – now accessible in under three hours.”

Paul White, Head of Aviation at Glasgow Airport, said: “Loganair’s decision to introduce this London Southend route is a landmark moment for the airline and welcome news for our passengers.

“London continues to be our most popular destination, so the introduction of these new services from Scotland’s airline provides our leisure and business passengers with even greater choice when visiting what is one of the world’s most iconic and exciting city destinations.”

Bob Grant, chief executive of Renfrewshire Chamber of Commerce said: “Loganair’s launch today of additional services between London Southend and Glasgow offers flexibility to travellers and is a great option with easy access to the City. Scotland’s Airline have shown creativity in responding to customer demand as they continue to grow at pace driven by the values of excellent customer service and economical fares. We wish them every success with the new routes.”

Susan McKay, commercial director at Glasgow Chamber of Commerce said: “Congratulations to Loganair for commencing its first ever air services between Glasgow and London – helping the city’s business community by enhancing connectivity to London, Essex and the South East. Access to London is a key priority for Glasgow Chamber of Commerce and this new airlink acts as a convenient entry point to the UK’s economic powerhouse. We’ve been championing this route since it was announced and I’m pleased to see the first flight departing from Glasgow Airport.”