Oracle Corp. (ORCL), the world's largest enterprise software company and the third-biggest software maker, announced on Wednesday that it has entered into a definitive agreement to buy enterprise infrastructure software maker BEA Systems Inc. (BEAS) for a sweetened price of $19.375 per share in cash. The offer values the company at about $8.5 billion, or $7.2 billion net of BEA's cash on hand of $1.3 billion. Responding to the merger news, BEA's largest shareholder Carl Icahn, in a statement, said he agreed to vote in favor of the deal. BEA shares are currently trading about 19% higher on the Nasdaq.

The transaction, which has been unanimously approved by the Board of Directors of BEA, is expected to close by mid-2008, subject to BEA stockholder approval, certain regulatory approvals and customary closing conditions.

Oracle President and Chief Financial Officer Safra Catz said the deal is anticipated to be accretive to the company's earnings by at least 1-2 cents on a non-GAAP basis in its first full year after closing.

In the transaction, BEA's financial advisor is Goldman Sachs, while its legal counsel is Wachtell Lipton Rosen & Katz.

Commenting on the buyout, Oracle CEO Larry Ellison said, The addition of BEA products and will significantly enhance and extend Oracle's Fusion middleware software suite.

Further, Oracle President Charles Phillips stated, BEA is a pioneer in middleware, and this combination recognizes the innovation and customer success the company has achieved. Our joint customers have consistently suggested this deal for more than three years. This transaction will accelerate the adoption of Java-based middleware technologies and SOA; advance innovation in enterprise applications infrastructure software; extend our strategic relationships with customers and partners; and increase our penetration in key regions like China.

Redwood Shores, California-based Oracle earlier had noted that its $17 per share offer represents a 21% premium to BEA's closing price of $14.05 on the date prior to proposal, a 31.5% premium to $12.93, the 52-week average before the proposal, and a 44% premium to $11.77, BEA's stock price on the date immediately prior to the date that activist shareholders disclosed their position in BEA. The company also said the price is higher than BEA's 5-year high before our proposal.

Oracle's initial unsolicited takeover proposal of $17 per share for BEA was rejected continuously by the latter, who refused to meet with Oracle for negotiations, saying the offer significantly undervalues BEA. The company later said it will sign a deal with anyone who comes with a $21.00 per share price, to which Oracle responded that its an impossibly high price for not only Oracle but for any other potential bidder to buy BEA.

While asking for higher price, BEA had said that based on analyst estimates of synergies in prior acquisitions by Oracle and other software consolidators, BEA Board believes that Oracle or other third parties could achieve earnings accretion in a BEA acquisition at levels well in excess of $21.00 per share.

However, Oracle continued to approach BEA with its $17 per share offer, saying that the offer was generous and there were no higher offers for BEA. Oracle also urged the BEA board to sign an acquisition agreement, and let its shareholders decide whether to vote. But BEA responded that it could not endorse the latter's proposal and that it would allow Oracle's bid to expire.

Oracle's proposal eventually expired on October 28. Oracle then had said that it will not renew its $17 per share offer.

Responding to the merger news, affiliates of Carl C. Icahn, which hold nearly 13% of BEA's common stock, in a statement on Wednesday said it agreed with Oracle to vote their BEA shares in favor of the merger.

Earlier, on October 26, Icahn wrote a letter to BEA's board saying the company should allow its shareholders to decide the fate of the company in view of the hostile offer from Oracle. Icahn urged the company to conduct an auction sale process and allow the shareholders to accept or reject the proposal made by the highest bidder.

BEA then clarified with Carl Icahn that it is opposed to selling the company at $17.00 per share, and not opposed to selling the company. Later, in early November, BEA agreed with Carl Icahn to provide confidential information that explains the company's rejection of the offer.

BEA's Chairman and CEO Alfred Chuang now commented, Over the past several months our Board of Directors, with the assistance of independent financial and legal advisors, has reviewed various ways to maximize stockholder value, including engaging in discussions with third parties about a possible sale of the company. This transaction is the culmination of that diligent and thoughtful process, and we believe it is in the best interests of our shareholders.

Oracle provides leading database and SOA solutions, while BEA provides world-class, open-standards Java-based application products and a highly scalable messaging and transaction processing platform. Oracle currently said it expects the combination will accelerate innovation by bringing together two companies with a common vision of a modern service-oriented architecture, or SOA, infrastructure.

The company added that it intends to preserve and enhance customers' investments in BEA products following the buyout, as Oracle has done with its other acquisitions. Meanwhile, Fusion Middleware will continue to be the center of Oracle's current and future middleware and applications strategy.

After the deal completion, BEA customers can continue to use their existing BEA products going forward, or choose to use Oracle and BEA products as part of the ongoing evolution of Fusion Middleware, the company said.

Oracle recently has announced many takeover deals, including Moniforce, a software vendor for monitoring the availability and performance of any web application, Interlace Systems, a provider of strategic operational planning software, among others.

Among peers, software giant Microsoft Corp. (MSFT, MSF.L) on January 8 announced its intention to make an offer to acquire Norwegian enterprise search solutions provider Fast Search & Transfer ASA through a cash tender offer for 19.00 NOK per share. The offer values Fast Search at 6.6 billion NOK or about US$1.2 billion. Microsoft said it expects to complete the deal in the second quarter of calendar year 2008.

International Business Machines Corp. (IBM) in November agreed to acquire Canada-based business intelligence software maker Cognos Inc. (COGN), (CSN.TO) for about US$5 billion in cash, a deal that would make IBM the premier provider across the business intelligence stack.

In a November 15 research note, brokerage firm Bear Stearns reiterated its rating on Oracle stock at Outperform', with a price target of $26. Analyst John DiFucci said he continues to believe Oracle has become more strategic to its customers, as deals have become larger, and there are more of them. The company has broadened its offerings to a platform of best-in-class products through both internal development and acquisition.

Stock Quote

ORCL is currently trading at $21.28, down $0.03 or 0.14%, on a volume of 12 million shares.

BEA shares are currently trading on Nasdaq at $18.55, up $2.97 or 19.06%, on a 75 million share volume, in comparison to a 3-month average volume of 13 million shares.

For comments and feedback contact: editorial@rttnews.com