News Facts

Oracle announced today that it has agreed to acquire Interlace Systems, a provider of strategic operational planning software. A key part of the enterprise performance management (EPM) segment, Interlace Systems software helps organizations, quickly and collaboratively, combine functional processes to address strategic operational planning needs. Its software uses a change-based data modeling server, connecting operational plans in an integrated model and allowing business planners across functions to rapidly change operational assumptions, reevaluate scenarios, assess business impact and update the plan of record.

The combination of Interlace Systems' technology and Oracle's leading Enterprise Performance Management System is expected to provide a common perspective across financial and strategic operational planning through an integrated business-planning framework. The Oracle Enterprise Performance Management System is a component of Oracle Fusion Middleware, the industry's fastest growing, most standards-compliant, and best-of-breed technology foundation for Service- Oriented Architecture.

"In today's global economy, organizations need a streamlined planning process that links strategic operational plans to the financial plan of record," said Thomas Kurian, Oracle Senior Vice President, Server Technologies. "The combination of Interlace Systems and Oracle will help enable business planners to rapidly evaluate the impact of changes to business assumptions across all plans and benefit from flexibility, speed, integrity, and accuracy, typically not found in traditional spreadsheet-based and function-specific planning solutions."

"Interlace Systems' technology enables rich cross-functional modeling and interactive business impact analysis, addressing a range of strategic operational planning needs for leading global companies," said Anurag Gupta, Interlace Systems co-founder and Vice President of Development. "Joining forces with Oracle will accelerate the integration of our technology into Oracle's industry-leading EPM System and provide customers with a comprehensive solution for integrated business planning."

The transaction is subject to customary conditions and is expected to close in November 2007. Financial details were not disclosed. More information is available at http://www.oracle.com/interlacesystems.