• California water authority will use the Lawson system to help standardize and automate its core business processes

ST. PAUL, MN, Nov. 10, 2008 -- Lawson Software announced that the Western Municipal Water District licensed the Lawson Human Resource Management Suite and the Lawson S3 Enterprise Financial Management, Supply Chain Management, and Enterprise Performance Management Suites. The organization also opted for Lawson System Foundation and Lawson Learning Accelerator. Western will use the Lawson applications to help create a single, consolidated business system and automate administrative processes. The contract was signed during Lawson's first quarter of fiscal 2009, which ended Aug. 31, 2008.

Based in Riverside, Calif., Western serves roughly 24,000 retail and eight wholesale customers with water from the Colorado River, the State Water Project and groundwater within its Murrieta Division. Western currently provides approximately 34 billion gallons of water annually to a population of more than 825,000.

Western sought to upgrade from its legacy applications to a modern business system that would be easy to learn and use. "After reviewing several options, we chose Lawson because of its intuitive interface, ease of navigation and flexibility," said John Rossi, general manager for Western Municipal Water District. "Compared to the other vendors we evaluated, Lawson offers software that focuses on our business needs, with high value at a reasonable price."

Once implemented, the Lawson system will help Western streamline processing of its accounts payable and accounts receivable transactions and enhance its reporting capabilities.

"Facing similar financial and workforce management challenges as other public sector organizations, public agents need a strong IT foundation to simplify business processes and help reduce administrative costs," said Cheryl Turk-Peterson, marketing director, Public Sector, Lawson. "We provide the software and services public sector organizations need to help them minimize administration so they can operate more efficiently and focus more of their resources on serving their constituents."

Lawson Software provides software and service solutions to 4,500 customers in manufacturing, distribution, maintenance, healthcare and service sector industries across 40 countries.