New technology platform gives retailers a secure, scalable and high-performance, standards-based technology foundation

Lawson Software (Nasdaq:LWSN) today announced that 24 retailers, including After Hours Formalwear, Boddie-Noell Enterprises and Hannaford Bros. Co., licensed Lawson System Foundation 9 in Lawson's second quarter of fiscal year 2007, which ended Nov. 30, 2006. The retailers are moving to Lawson's latest technology platform to achieve enhanced performance, security, application simplicity and scalability.

These customers are part of a group of nearly 50 retailers that have licensed Lawson System Foundation (LSF 9). And, 17 of these retailers licensed LSF 9 on the IBM System i platform, which Lawson released in November 2006.

LSF 9 helps retail customers by combining Lawson's newest technology with other world-class technologies, including IBM middleware, for a high-performance, standards-based technology solution. The highly secure and solid foundation provides a platform for Lawson's next-generation applications designed for use within a service-oriented architecture (SOA).

Additionally, by separating the technical foundation from its applications, Lawson provides customers with cross-version compatibility. This enables Lawson customers to upgrade their enterprise applications and technology independently - at their own pace and on their own budgets.

By moving to LSF 9, existing Lawson customer After Hours Formalwear will be able to better leverage its ERP investment and more quickly upgrade to Lawson's newest applications.

"LSF 9 gives us a strong technology platform at a lower total cost of ownership to support our future business solutions," said Robert C. Hunnicutt, manager of Financial Systems, After Hours Formalwear. "And because migrating to LSF 9 is more like a simple refresh than a formal upgrade process, it won't disrupt our business processes."

After Hours Formalwear is the nation's largest chain of company-owned tuxedo and men's formal wear stores. Recognized for its quality formal wear and accessibility, After Hours Formalwear has more than 450 store locations throughout the country.

LSF 9 includes IBM's leading WebSphere Application Server ND, Tivoli Directory Server and DB2 technology.

"Retail enterprises adopting demand-driven business strategies need technology foundations that can react quickly to customer service needs during peak/off-peak periods and help them orchestrate supply and demand activities while enhancing their margins and reputation," said Michelle Schooff, marketing director, Retail, Lawson Software. "Strong demand for LSF among retailers of different sizes and geographies validates our strategy of delivering low-cost, retail-specific solutions that simplify and support enterprise interoperability and integration so retailers can focus on responding to changing consumer preferences and market conditions."

Lawson's industry-focused software solutions help retailers integrate the systems they use to run and grow their businesses. Lawson has more than 350 retail customers worldwide. Specifically, customers include 10 of the top 25 specialty retailers, seven of the top 25 grocery chains, eight of the top 25 global retailers, six of the top 25 food service chains and eight of the top 30 U.S. convenience store companies.