Lawson Software has announced it will offer Lawson Total Care Platinum, a managed hosting offering designed to help customers get the most out of their Lawson ERP investment while minimizing demands on IT resources. In addition, Lawson and IBM have expanded their technology partnership by incorporating additional middleware from IBM, including IBM Websphere Enterprise Service Bus, into Lawson System Foundation.

CDW Healthcare of Vernon Hills, Ill. has signed an agreement with Barco to build and distribute integrated medical imaging solutions based upon Barco medical displays, Barco advanced visualization software solutions and workstations from HP and IBM.

The SSI Group of Mobile, Ala. has announced that it raised $1.083 through a basketball shoot at its booth at the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society’s annual Conference and Exhibition last month in New Orleans. The money has been donated to New Orleans’ Common Ground Clinic in Algiers.

The Imation Corp. of Oakdale, Minn. has unveiled the DataGuard Tape Tracking System, an RFID-based removable data storage tracking system that allows data center managers to track the location of data cartridges within their inventory.

The GetWellNetwork, a provider of interactive patient care solutions, has seen a number of contracts secured with hospitals in recent months, including Catholic Health Initiatives of Kentucky, Catholic Healthcare West on Nevada, the Christiana Care Health System of Delaware, the Community Health Network of Indiana, the Poudre Valley Health System of Colorado, Strong Health in New York, Trinity Health in Michigan and Virtua Health in New Jersey.

HTP, Inc., a Columbus, Ohio-based developer of software for the healthcare industry, has announced that the Dayton, Ohio-based Healthlink RHIO has selected HTP MedRunner to support the electronic exchange of administrative data for its members.

HealthMeans, Inc. of Irving, Texas, has partnered with Health One Alliance, LLC, a regional PPO network based in Calhoun, Ga., for a smart card project designed to eventually connect the entire northwest Georgia healthcare community. From the payer side it will include smart cards, kiosks, patient Web portals, real-time eligibility and demographic verification and employer enrollment services. For physicians and hospitals, it will include rapid paperless check-in with automated eligibility and demographic verification without user intervention, private patient portals or online registration and payment tracking, all tied to HMI’s smart card.

Encentuate, a Silicon Valley, Calif.-based provider of end-point identity and access management solutions, has announced that Children’s Hospital Boston has deployed Encentuate TCI for Healthcare to provide single sign-on to its caregivers and staff.

MedWorkxx, a Toronto-based vendor of strategic software solutions for hospitals, has announced the commercial launch of its Emergency Readiness software solution, which offers online, dynamic and real-time Hazard Vulnerability Awareness, ICS organizational charts, ICS form repositories and enhanced communication portals for both internal and external stakeholders.

LingoLogix, of Dallas, has announced that Johns Hopkins University Department of Medicine has moved the company’s GoCode software into production and is expanding its use into additional departments. GoCode takes free text encounter notes and uses the next generation of Natural Language Processing (NLP) to structure and codify the notes.

Sun Microsystems has unveiled the Sun B2B-enabled Electronic Master Patient Index (EMPI), as well as two OEM offerings, iPACS and uPACS, Integrated and Utility Picture Archiving and Communication Systems.

TeleVox Software of Mobile, Ala., a vendor of technology solutions including outbound message delivery, inbound inquiry, on-hold messaging, online communications, Web site design and hosting, survey delivery systems and data append services, has agreed to be acquired by the West Corporation of Omaha, Neb. TeleVox will become part of West Interactive.

SRS Software of Montvale, N.J. has announced that the Catawba Women’s Center, a Hickory, N.C.-based OB-GYN practice, successfully participated in the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) Bridges to Excellence Program and received a pay-for-performance financial incentive after implementing SRS Chart Manager in mid-2006.

GE Healthcare has announced that the Lehigh Valley Hospital and Health Network in Pennsylvania is rolling out GE’s Centricity Electronic Medical Record (EMR) solution to as many as 1,000 local primary care physicians and specialists.

Recently formed 2ndWave Software of Minneapolis has announced that it has acquired Amcom Software, a provider of enterprise software systems for mission critical communications. The 25-year-old Amcom’s software solutions are used by 70 percent of “America’s Best Hospitals,” according to a U.S. News and World Report ranking.

SunPoint Systems of Almonte, Ontario, Canada has unveiled its Universal Medical Imager (UMI), a high-resolution computerized viewbox for the review of a full range of DICOM images from spinning media, WiFi connectivity and hard copy films independent of a PACS or PC environment. The UMI is designed for such hospital installations as the emergency room, operating room and patient bedside.