St Kilda and Carlton will acknowledge two of their former players with a special Anzac Day medal to be awarded to the best player in this Saturday’s clash in Wellington.

RELATED: Saints in New Zealand

The match, which coincides with the 100th anniversary of the Gallipoli landing, will honour all soldiers involved in World War I but with a special emphasis on Claude Crowl (three games with St Kilda) and Fen McDonald (10 games with Carlton and one with Melbourne).

The two men will be honoured with the creation of the Crowl-McDonald medal which will be awarded to the best player in the match.

Both men are believed to have died on April 25, 1915 when the Anzacs first stormed the beach at Gallipoli. Their bodies were never found.

Incredibly, the two men not only lost their lives on the same day in Gallipoli, they also made their VFL debut against each other at Princes Park on Saturday 29 July, 1911.

Six VFL players are believed to have died on April 25 and a further 11 lost their lives in the Gallipoli campaign.

St Kilda coach Alan Richardson paid homage to those who made the ultimate sacrifice for their country.

Buy tickets HERE.

“We are privileged to have the opportunity to honour all past and present service men and women by playing in the Anzac Day Centenary clash,” Richardson said.

“What makes this especially powerful is that, sadly, St Kilda and Carlton have a direct link to Anzac Day through the deaths of these past players.

“It’s quite incredible and humbling to think that 100 years ago to the day when we play our game in NZ, those two young men and many others were killed at Gallipoli. They were just 22 and 23 years of age which is the average age of an AFL player.”

The Crowl-McDonald medal will be voted on by members of the football media who will be attending the match.

Book Wellington accommodation HERE.

Claude Crowl (St Kilda)

Age: 22yrs – born 26 December 1892

Enlisted: In the First AIF - 25 August 1914

Served: Egypt, Gallipoli

Medals: 1914-15 Star, British War Medal, Victory Medal

Lived: Poowong Vic, born in Stratford

Occupation: Farmer

Debuted: Aged 18 against Carlton, at Princes Park on Saturday, 29 July 1911 (round fifteen).

Games: 3 games

Fenley “Fen” McDonald (Carlton)