Since our foundation, our focus has been on building a solid and integrated value chain ranging from research, development and manufacture of pharmaceutical products, cosmetics and food supplements, including their distribution and marketing.

The experience acquired over about 50 years of market activity allows us, in addition to our own brands, to produce and sell licensed products in partnership with the world's largest pharmaceutical companies, continuously investing in new therapeutic areas and in the expansion of our product portfolio.

Our business strategy is also based on internationalization. We are present in more than 40 countries, including Morocco where we have our subsidiary and we also export to several regions of the world such as Europe, Francophone Africa, PALOP (Portuguese-speaking African countries), Middle East, CIS (former USSR) and Asia.

Health is the word that defines our story.

This is our goal to securing the future.

OUR STRATEGY

At MEDINFAR Group, we work to contribute, in an ethical, safe and sustainable way, so that healthcare is affordable to everyone, thus securing a better future for humanity.

The vision of MEDINFAR Group is to deliver innovative products and be a leading pharmaceutical production unit at European level.

We want to work continuously to improve the quality of life of people, developing and delivering solutions in the area of life sciences, ensuring the satisfaction of our customers, employees and key stakeholders.

This strategy is aimed at continuously ensuring that the operations of our organization are streamlined and adapted to an ever-changing business environment, preparing it for a complex and dynamic world.

A diversified portfolio, integrated in a close and efficient business, seeking to meet society's needs and focused on innovative and differential solutions, is the way we pursue our commitment to health.

This commitment is based on four pillars, which are the guiding principles of every action of the group.