ST. LOUIS

In the 1996-97 season, Ken Hitchcock’s first full season as an N.H.L. head coach, his Dallas Stars raced to a division title and the most points in franchise history. They claimed the second seed in the Western Conference, drawing the No. 7 Edmonton Oilers, who had lost all four of the teams’ regular-season matchups.

“And then everything changed,” Hitchcock said. “It overwhelmed me, overwhelmed our team.”

The Stars lost Game 7 at home, in overtime, despite having what Hitchcock called “a way higher level of talent.” That series introduced Hitchcock to the difference between the regular season and the playoffs, a difference he understands perhaps better than any other current coach.

Since Hitchcock joined St. Louis 13 games into the 2011-12 season, the Blues have the most regular-season victories in the league, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. But until Sunday’s victory at Dallas, they also had not won a second-round playoff game during that span.

The Blues have now won two, the latest a 6-1 demolition of Dallas on Tuesday night, their best performance of the postseason. Two more victories, and St. Louis will reach the conference finals for the first time in 15 years.

“We’ve had countless years of having early exits, and I think now we’ve really bought into what he preaches,” defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk said of Hitchcock. “As monotonous and as frustrating it might be at times when you want to play out of the structure, it works. And we really have a group in here that believes that now.”

This is the best and deepest team Hitchcock has coached in St. Louis, loaded with steady defensemen, balanced scoring and elite goaltending. It was also nearly eliminated in the first round by the reigning champions, the Chicago Blackhawks, who trailed the series by three games to one and overcame a two-goal deficit in Game 7 before losing.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.