With the 2011-12 season rapidly approaching, the gang at PHT decided to take a look at all 30 NHL teams’ schedules. Each team’s highs and lows will be studied in detail to give you an idea of what the future might hold for each squad.

Note: Mileage figures via On the Forecheck’s “Super Schedule.”

St. Louis Blues schedule analysis

Total mileage: 38,781 (19th most miles in NHL, but least in the Central Division)

Back-to-back games: 17

Toughest stretches

The Blues have two extremely tough runs that they’ll have to overcome if they want to make the playoffs this season. Things don’t start off easily for the Blues as they face nine games in nine different cities between October 13-30. The good news is that that team will be able to bond in early in the season. The bad news is they’re going to have a lot of time to bond during the beginning of the season. Too much.

If the beginning of the season is tough, then the end of the season is a nightmare. They play 13 of 16 games away from St. Louis between February 23 – March 25. Worse yet, they’ll have to endure their two longest road trips within the same span. They start the spell with a six game road trip, return for three games, then hit the road again for their season-long seven game roadie. The seven-game trip will see the Blues start in the Midwest, hit the Southeast, only to fly from Tampa to Anaheim in the middle of the trip. Hey, at least they’ll rack up a ton of frequent flyer miles over the two week span.

Easiest periods

The folks over at the NHL scheduling offices didn’t do the Blues any favors this year. Looking for positives—at least they get to start the season with a pair of games at home. It pretty much goes downhill from there.

If the Blues want to return to the playoffs, it will be imperative that they take advantage of their mid-season schedule. From January 3 – 21, they play eight of nine games at home. Matchups against the Coyotes, Avalanche, Wild, Stars, and Oilers (twice) within the time period are games that St. Louis needs to win to make the postseason.

Overall outlook

They may travel the least amount of miles among Central Division teams, but the 17 back-to-back games aren’t going to make things easy on the Blues. The Blues are in the tough position of having a rough stretch at the beginning of the season and a brutal road at the end of the season. Most teams can either hope to get off to a good start or know there’s potential for a strong finish—but the Blues have neither luxury.

The Blues don’t have many easy spells during their tough schedule. If people aren’t talking about how hot the Blues are by the end of January, then it may be another long summer in St. Louis this year.