Reviewed by: Erin Gallagher, Director of Collection Services, Reed College Library, gallaghere@reed.edu

Name of the Database: Age of Exploration

Name of the Vendor: Adam Matthew Digital

URL: http://www.exploration.amdigital.co.uk/

Purchase Model: One-time purchase plus annual or bundled one-time hosting fees

Cost/FTE: Pricing is a one-time purchase along with annual or one-time bundled hosting fees. They offer several different price tiers based on Carnegie classification and FTE, and they offer a liberal arts pricing model.

Type of Database: Aggregator, Primary Source

Audience: Undergraduate, Graduate, Specialized

Library Type: Academic

What is included? Images, Audio, Video, Books, Manuscripts, early printed material, maps, journals, biographies, diaries, ship’s logs, letters, essays, and other primary source documents.

Comments: What a treat it is to explore the wealth of rare content in this collection! Students and faculty in higher education with an interest in the history of exploration spanning five decades between 1420 and 1920 will undoubtedly find value in this collection.

Pros: Brilliant image quality. Content can be found through a variety of portals: basic and advanced searching, thematic collections, image/video/audio galleries, etc. Collection contains rare primary source documentation not digitally accessible elsewhere. VPAT (Voluntary Product Accessibility Template) report provided. Users can create personal accounts through “My Archive” where they can save searches and documents to refer to later. Excellent post-sales support, such as free MARC records for all Adam Matthew collections and curricular alignment services.

Cons: The collection is very targeted, and though it contains content that holds interdisciplinary value, the primary audience will be narrow. Will be of most use if intentionally paired with undergraduate courses on the history of exploration. The site’s landing page displays a large amount of “white space” on the perimeter and could use an update. Users are unable to download pdfs during trial periods.