Ordering Information

Adam Matthew Publications is an imprint of Adam Matthew Digital Ltd and orders can be placed by one of the following methods:

By e-mail: info@ampltd.co.uk

By Post:

Adam Matthew Digital Ltd

Pelham House, London Road

Marlborough, Wiltshire, SN8 2AG, ENGLAND

By Phone: +44 (1672) 511921

By Fax: +44 (1672) 511663

Please quote an order reference and state the appropriate invoice address and delivery address. We are happy to meet urgent order deadlines through the use of PDF invoices and special courier services.

Customer Service:

We offer a personal service and a quick response to all orders and enquiries. If you have been unable to find sufficient details on any of our titles on this website then please contact info@ampltd.co.uk for further information; or request a brochure, catalogue or price list.

Invoicing:

Invoices will be prepared according to your precise instructions and mailed and/or faxed to you as desired. We will make every effort to deal with orders efficiently and despatch them promptly. Our standard charge for carriage (which covers the costs of checking, boxing, labelling, packaging and distribution) is 4% of the list price for the publication. Our standard payment terms are 30 days from the date of invoice. If you have any queries regarding an invoice, or invoicing procedure, then please contact info@ampltd.co.uk

Online Guides:

All Guides are available electronically via this website with contents information and other descriptive details for microfilm projects.

Electronic Access:

Electronic MARC 21 records for individual microform publications are available, free of charge, to download from this website. Please see MARC Electronic Cataloguing for further details and a list of all the currently available MARC records.

Digital Publications (Online Resources):

Please see the Adam Matthew Digital website: www.amdigital.co.uk

Quality & Standards:

Our publications are produced to the highest standards. Microform publications are produced on silver-halide film stock conforming to ANSI, AIIM and European standards of archival permanence. Microfilm boxes, film collars and microfiche envelopes are designed for archival storage. All guides and books are printed on acid-free paper.

Any item found to be physically sub-standard on delivery will be replaced free of charge. Worn microforms will be replaced at near cost.

Suggestions & Comments:

We are always grateful for ideas and comments that help us to improve our publications and our standard of service, please send your suggestions to info@ampltd.co.uk

Thank you.