American rapper, Really Doe’s Net Worth is estimated to be $4 Million. Really Doe is a very famous rapper and songwriter, who has achieved decent success and fame in his career. He is one of the most prominent rappers in Chicago, who is also known for his relationship with Kanye West. He was signed to the recording label of Kanye West named Good Music.

Really Doe is a Rapper and songwriter who has a net worth of $4 million in 2024. He gained prominence in his early career because of that, although he left the label in 2008 and later released his debut album in 2009, named First Impression, in association with Cartel Records. Doe was also popular in his early career for being part of a group named The Go Getters. The group was formed in 1996, by Kanye West and GLC. Later he managed to do decent work in his career. You can also check Lil Scrappy’s Net Worth.

In this article:

What is Really Doe’s Net Worth?

American rapper, Really Doe’s Net Worth is around $4 Million as of 2024. Really Doe is a very successful and rich celebrity in America, who has achieved great heights in the music industry of America. He has achieved some serious acclamation in hip hop, with Kanye West and some other very successful figures. Really Doe is also very famous for winning Grammy awards, as a songwriter. He is so much appreciated for his prowess in songwriting. Currently, Really Doe has a net worth of $4 million.

Really Doe Assets

Home – Really Doe is an American celebrity, who has spent most of his early years in Chicago and has also started his career there. Currently, Really Doe lives in Los Angeles, and he owns a house there. He has several more properties in Chicago and near the vicinity.

Car collection – Really Doe has plenty of cars in his career. He likes four-wheelers and he also likes to drive them hard and fast. He has a Bentley, Aston Martin, Mercedes Benz, etc.

Really Doe Net Worth Growth

Really Doe Biography

Warren Trotter, who is known all around the world by his professional name Really Doe, is a very successful figure in the music industry of America. Trotter was born in Chicago, Illinois, United States, on 21 July 1980. Trotter was raised in Chicago, where he used to live with his parents. Although, not much is known about his personal life and his early life.

He has kept most of his personal affairs a secret. Trotter was a big fan of hip-hop music since a very young age. He used to follow several artists and musicians, who made him fall in love with hip-hop. He started working professionally with Kanye West in 1999, at the age of 19. Later, he gained prominence and achieved decent success and fame all around the world.

Trotter is probably single and he is currently not engaged with anyone. Though, as he doesn’t expose his personal life, it’s hard to tell exactly, whether he is in a relationship or not. You can also check Flavor Flav’s Net Worth.

Really Doe: Career and Awards

Really Doe started his career way back in 1999 when he became famous for several of his singles which were released online. Later, he featured in Kanye West’s single named We Major and Consequence’s Disperse, which made him very famous. Later, Really Doe joined the label Kanye West in 2004 and started working for it in 2005. He remained with the label till 2008 and has achieved decent success.

Really Doe is also known for being one-third of the group named The Go Getters, which was formed by Kanye West and GLC, way back in 1996. He is doing very well with the group and also in his solo career. After leaving Kanye West’s label, he signed to Cartel Records and released his debut album in 2009, named First Impression, which became a huge hit.

However, he has been inactive for the last 10 years and hasn’t released anything. Till 2010, he had several singles released after his album, and he also had some guest appearances. Really Doe has also won one Grammy award. You must read Eve Rapper’s Net Worth.

Really Doe Social Media Accounts

Education

Really Doe has not shared details about his education. He was born and raised in Chicago, where he would have done his studies. He also began rapping and writing songs at a very young age, which kept him away from education.

Conclusion

Really Doe is a phenomenal rapper and songwriter, who has gained immense success in his career. He is a very prominent songwriter, who has been appreciated by some of the biggest names like Kanye West and others. Really Doe is not that active these days, but he was quite active before 2010. He doesn’t share details, so we can’t say what he is onto.

FAQs