Sheila Fitzpatrick

Sheila Fitzpatrick, Bernadotte E. Schmitt Distinguished Service Professor Emerita at the University of Chicago, is currently Honorary Professor of modern Russia at the University of Sydney. Her academic research focuses on Soviet society and culture during the Stalin era, particularly everyday practices and social identity. In 2002, she received a Mellon Foundation Distinguished Achievement Award. She is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Australian Academy of the Humanities and is a past president of the American Association for Slavic and East European Studies. From 1996 – 2006, Fitzpatrick served as co-editor of The Journal of Modern History.

Fitzpatrick is the author and/or editor of more than a dozen books, including Tear off the Masks! Identity and Imposture in Twentieth-Century Russia; Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930s; The Russian Revolution; In the Shadow of Revolution: Life Stories of Russian Women from 1917 to the Second World War (edited volume); Stalinism: New Directions (edited volume); My Father's Daughter; A Spy in the Archives. Her most recent work, On Stalin’s Team: The Years of Living Dangerously in Soviet Politics, published in 2015 by Princeton University Press and Melbourne University Press, won the Prime Minister's Prize for Non-Fiction in Australia in 2016.

She is currently working on projects on Soviet society and culture under Khrushchev, the Australian Left, and displaced persons from the Soviet Union after the Second World War and the issue of repatriation. Her forthcoming book, Mischka`s War: A European Odyssey of the 1940s, focuses on the experiences of Michael and Olga Danos as DPs in Germany and will be published by Melbourne University Press and I.B.Tauris in London.

Fitzpatrick earned her BA from the University of Melbourne and her doctorate from Oxford University. She was a Research Fellow at the London School of Slavonic and East European Studies from1969 to 1972. During the 2016-2017 academic year, she is Visiting Professor at Central European University in Budapest where she offers a Master Class in Historiography: The Russian Revolution as History.

Wendy Goldman

Wendy Z Goldman, Paul Mellon Distinguished Professor of History, teaches at Carnegie Mellon University where she has been a faculty member since 1988. She is an historian of modern Russia who has focused her academic research on women's emancipation, family policy, and industrialization in the USSR. More recently, she has written about Stalinist repression and the Soviet home front during World War II.

Among Goldman’s recent publications are Hunger and War: Food Provisioning in the Soviet Union During World War II, (co-edited volume); Inventing the Enemy: Denunciation and Terror in Stalin’s Russia (that received Honorable Mention for the Reginald Zelnik Book Prize); Terror and Democracy in the Age of Stalin: The Social Dynamics of Repression; Women at the Gates: Gender and Industry in Stalin's Russia; and A Dream Deferred. New Studies in Russian and Soviet Labour History, (co-edited volume). Her early work, Women, the State and Revolution: Soviet Family Policy and Social Life, 1917-1936, won the Berkshire Conference Book Award.

Her forthcoming book, Fortress Dark and Stern: Work, Life, and Loyalty on the Soviet Home Front during World War II, will be published by Oxford University Press. She and Professor Joe Trotter received a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for a Sawyer Seminar on the transnational history of the ghetto. Their co-edited collection of essays, The Ghetto in Global History, will be released in 2018 by Routledge Press.