The waterfall is located on the Lavna River of the same name, which stretches for 21 kilometers, starts from Lake Lavna and flows into the Kola Bay. It is about 4 kilometers high, but it is quite full-flowing, and the shores are strewn with stones of different sizes, covered with moss and lichen.

All this makes the place incredibly picturesque.

It is no coincidence that newlyweds come here for photo shoots, and Murmansk residents often have picnics in the glades that are nearby. This place attracts even in winter, although after heavy snowfalls the road to it is not so easy.

In summer, berries and mushrooms are harvested here. And in the Avalanche itself they fish: trout, grayling, whitefish, perch and pike are found here. Once salmon even swam here, but after a dam appeared on the river, the royal fish stopped being met here.

How to get Across the Kola Bridge going towards Pechenga.

You pass the Wood, the lapels of Three Streams, Abram-cape, Minkino, Lavna, climb the hill, on the left turn to the Cheerful Ball, on the right stop.

Immediately after the stop there is a dirt road. You pull out onto it and drive 500 meters in the direction of Pechenga, there is a bridge, drive along it and leave the car.

Go down to the path and move along the river. The waterfall will be 1.3 km from the beginning of the trail.

Photo author: Andrey Russkikh

The waterfalls on the Titovka River are not of great height, but they are very spectacular and powerful. Because of this, the place was so loved by locals and guests.

In total, there are three beautiful waterfalls on the stormy mountain river Titovka. The Mill Cascade is considered the largest and most popular. Many claim that it got its name from the fact that in ancient times there was a mill here. However, this is false information that does not have any facts and evidence. The ruins of an ancient mill are often mistaken for the ruins of a hydroelectric power plant that once worked in this place. It was built after the Great Patriotic War. The station was used for the extraction of electricity. It fed nearby military settlements. Today, only a few dilapidated walls and a concrete foundation with the names of the builders inscribed on it remain. A beautiful and stormy cascade consists of three thresholds.

The next waterfall is called Pillows.

It does not boast of height, but it will surprise travelers with the speed of the current. The object is located above the Mill Cascade. They are separated by two small thresholds, which are called Breakthrough and Edik.

The lowest cascade is called the Farewell of the Slavs.

A powerful stream with noise overcomes two cascades, falling with incredible noise. These are not the biggest waterfalls in Russia, but one of the most picturesque and amazing.

Photo author: Andrey Russkikh

Yuringa starts from an unnamed lake and has a length of only about 2 kilometers. Below the bridge, the river begins its breakthrough into the Titovka Fjord with an impressive 3-step waterfall with a total height of about 12 meters.

If you go down to the base of the bridge, you can see there a carved logo left over from the Finnish army road builders — “Road Maintenance Company 1942".

How to get

From Murmansk to the village of Staraya Titovka is 150 km along the R-21 highway. Just beyond the bridge over the river .Titovka turn right on the killed primer, along it another 4 km. Without sufficient ground clearance (from 180 mm), you may have to overcome the last couple of kilometers on foot. Descent to the waterfall just behind the bridge over the Yuringa.

The waterfall on the Shuonijoki River is rightfully considered one of the most beautiful natural monuments of the Murmansk region.

The waterfall is located near the border of Russia with Norway on the Shuonijoki River, the length of which is almost 26 kilometers. The river originates from Lake Shuoniyavr and flows into Lake Kuetsjarvi.

The name of the river comes from the Sami "shuen", which means "swamp overgrown with grass". For the most part, the river really flows calmly and steadily through a swampy lowland and 7 kilometers before the mouth makes a sharp 90-degree turn, meeting a stone ridge through which it breaks through a waterfall. However, the area bears little resemblance to swampy – rocky riverbanks and golden-green tree crowns growing on coastal river cliffs create a stunningly picturesque view.

The height of the waterfall is small, only 8 meters, but the riverbed is divided into several streams by stone shafts, and the water flows along rather gentle, but beautiful rocks.

In the area of the waterfall, there are places for recreation and an observation deck, information stands for visitors designed for different ages are installed. The highlight of the place was the first selfie pole in Russia, which allows you to take your best photo with a waterfall.

Photo author: Galina Andreeva

The main Teribersky waterfall originates in the Small Battery Lake and flows into the Barents Sea.

A small stream separates from the reservoir and rushes along the stone ledges. The stream breaks from a great height, breaking on the rocks. Its power can be different depending on how much the Battery Lake is filled.

In some months, the waterfall is full–flowing and stormy, and in others it is calm and quiet. The fact that sometimes the stream is very powerful is indicated by the presence of a gorge. Over the years, the water has eroded the rocks, forming a fairly large and deep canyon.

View of clear falling water against the background of pink granite rocks in summer. Frozen in time and ice, mesmerizing in scale in winter.

One of the most beautiful places in the Khibiny tundra is located on the Risyok River, a tributary of the Kuniyok River. The turbulent river flow falls off the ledge and temporarily lingers in the bowl of the waterfall. The height of the waterfall is about 20 meters.

On the lapel to the waterfall, guests of the Khibiny are greeted by a sign "Beautiful Waterfall" with an arrow indicating the direction of movement. After 5-10 minutes, the ascent to the waterfall will appear on the right side.

If you have an appropriate car, you can get almost to the waterfall.

PicturesqueKolvitsky waterfalls are one of the most accessible and convenient to visit in the Murmansk region. They are located near the village of the same name (28 km from Kandalaksha) in the lower reaches of the Kolvitsa River. Here the river is divided by an island into two channels, forming a whole collection of beautiful water landscapes.

The right channel is a waterfall drain through a destroyed dam with a height difference of about 5 meters.

And on the left channel you will find the waterfall "Black Padun". It is formed by a granite rock, from which water falls with a powerful jet from a 6-meter height.

An ecotrope leads to the waterfall from the village. It originates from the bridge, then 600 meters along the left bank of the Kolvitsa River to the waterfall "Black Padun". There are signs with information about natural objects on the trail, and steps are equipped on the slopes for the convenience of travelers. The trail is regularly supplemented with new interesting objects.

The waterfall "Bolshoy Yaniskengas" is an outstanding natural attraction of the Kandalaksha district.

It is the second largest waterfall in Europe and one of the most beautiful waterfalls in the Murmansk region. Tons of water fall at an angle of 70-80 °, forming a cloud of spray that shimmers in the sun, forming a rainbow.

The water jets pass through three stages, with a total height of about 20 meters: the first is about 7 meters, the next is about 12 meters and the last is about 1.5 meters.

It is quite difficult to get to the waterfall by transport, mostly it is visited by water lovers. However, accompanied by experienced guides, you will easily find your way.

It is located in the reserve "Kutsa" on the Kutsayoki river of S.P. Alakurtti.

The waterfall on the Chapoma River is the largest both in length and in height of the water drop on the Kola Peninsula.

It consists of four rapids, at the highest of which water falls from a height of 20 meters. The flow of the river in this place is very turbulent, due to the large number of large boulders and boulders at the bottom of the Chapoma. Rocks rise above the banks of the river, forming a small picturesque canyon here.

Vegetation in the area of the natural monument is represented by taiga forests with a developed grass-shrub and moss layer and a large number of epiphytic lichens. The most common plants are forest geranium, cloudberry and hellebore. Of the rare plants, there is a Mary root listed in the regional Red Book (a deviant peony).

On the territory of the monument, it is prohibited to arrange recreation areas and other activities that entail a violation of the preservation of nature.

The waterfall consists of three cascades, stretched over a distance of a kilometer, with a height of 2, 3 and 4.5 meters.

The ledges of the waterfall are composed of picturesque complexes of granite and granite-gneiss rocks, weathered to a variety of bizarre shapes.

Vegetation in the vicinity of the waterfall belongs to the taiga zone with numerous small lakes, swampy areas of rivers and forested hills. Whitefish, grayling and trout are found in the waters of the Chavanga in this place.

On the territory of the monument, it is prohibited to arrange recreation areas and other activities that entail a violation of the preservation of the monument of nature.