ABOUT KOLA BAY

Kola Bay is about 57 km of water area surrounded by indescribable nature and landscapes of city ports. The Kola Bay annually accommodates thousands of ships, and its depth reaches 300 meters.

At the exit from the bay to the Barents Sea lies the hero city – Murmansk. Almost 10 kilometers from the port of Murmansk our journey begins. And at this time, on the left bank of the Kola Bay, in the area of Belokamenka, a grandiose construction began. Along which you will have to go a considerable amount of time.

WALKING IN KOLA BAY

BARENS invites guests and residents of the city to see Murmansk from the inside. Excursions along the Kola Bay are a great way to learn more about Murmansk, to see Murmansk from a completely different side. First impression of the excursion around the bay: “Have we always had so many ships in the bay ?!” And if we consider that this is a statement by a native of Murmansk, it turns out that we do not know anything about Murmansk. You have a chance to find out more.

NUMBER OF PERSONS ON THE SEA WALK IN MURMANSK

Our ships are designed for 10 people on board, but for a comfortable excursion around the bay we form groups of up to 5-6 people. This number of passengers allows for a more spacious feel.

HOW LONG IS THE SEA EXCURSION IN MURMANSK?

A tour of the Kola Bay is a journey of several tens of kilometers. The duration of the trip along the bay is approximately 3 hours. The time of the excursion consists of a one-way trip, which is about 1.5 hours, and in the opposite direction. First we walk along one edge of the bay, then along the other.

During a tour of the Kola Bay you will see:

OUR SHIP

Our vessel is specially assembled for tourist needs. Prepared for this kind of travel, it meets all the requirements of a modern tourist:

– navigation equipment that meets all modern trends;

– equipped vessel. The rear of the ships has an awning that can be installed at low temperatures for travel comfort;

– two motors of 300 horsepower will make you pick up speed;

– heating;

– 3 berths;

– a place for cooking and relaxing with a cheerful company;

– latrine, it’s a toilet, almost like at home.

WHAT DO WE OFFER

GALLERY OF SEA EXCURSIONS IN MURMANSK

VIDEO

PHOTO

PRICE

The cost of a tour of the bay can be calculated in two ways. We can organize an excursion not only around the bay, but also to other places of your choice.

LEAVE AN APPLICATION

CONTACT US

and our managers will advise you

Come: Murmansk. Lenin Ave. 82 (Azimut Island)

Call: 7 (921) 032 61 01

Write: info@barens.ru

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

If you have any questions, our staff are ready to answer them and tell you even more about this amazing journey along the Kola Bay.

MORE ABOUT SEA WALKS IN MURMANSK

How many enigmatic, mysterious, alluring and attractive in the word fjord. But you have the opportunity to observe the beauty of the fjords and enjoy their power, you just need to book a tour of the Kola Peninsula.

A typical example of a narrow, winding and deeply cutting fjord into the land is the Kola Bay. It is a real landmark of the Murmansk region. Its main feature is that the water in the bay does not freeze all year round, so it is of great strategic importance for the region. The Kola Bay protects the secrets of the whole city under a reliable curtain of water. In addition, the water surface offers stunning views of the hills, ports, ships, and of course, Murmansk. The main target for tourists is the western side of the bay, which, thanks to its steep cliffs, will not leave anyone indifferent. We offer to book a tour of the Kola Bay at competitive prices. Together with us you will see the city “outside”. A trip along the Kola Bay will give you a lot of positive impressions that will stay with you for the rest of your life.

How long does the Bay tour last ?

A tour of the Kola Bay is an exciting journey of several tens of kilometers. The total trip will take about 3 hours. During the excursion you will visit both sides of the bay.

What will you see during a tour of the Kola Bay?

During a tour of the bay you will see:

Kola bridge. This is the place where our journey and the Kola Bay itself begin. The bridge is the longest among the polar structures of this type;

village Abram-Mys. From there a very attractive view of the city, the sea terminal and the world famous Lenin nuclear powered ship opens up. In the same village there is a unique air defense museum, which is located in the open air. An excellent pastime for lovers of military equipment, aircraft and missiles;

an abandoned pier near the village of Mishukovo. For many years it was home to many ships, and today it reminds of those glorious times. Here you can visit the famous Mishukovsky lighthouse and the radar station, painted in bright orange colors. Moreover, you will be able to see the entire nuclear fleet of our country, located at the RosAtom pier: liners, nuclear-powered ships, icebreakers and floating nuclear power plants;

the half-abandoned village of Retinskoe will slightly open the veil of secrets for curious tourists.

All this you can see for yourself by ordering a tour of the Kola Bay.

Forming groups

Our sea transport (boats and yachts) is designed for groups of 10 people, but for a more comfortable excursion around the Kola Bay we form groups of 5-6. This allows the guide to pay attention to all tourists, and the travel participants themselves feel more comfortable.

A comfortable boat is the key to a successful excursion around the bay .

Our ships are equipped with all the necessary equipment for tourist needs:

navigation equipment;

the presence of an awning for comfort and maintaining the optimum temperature;

availability of heating;

latrine.

Price for a tour of the Kola Bay

In addition to a fascinating journey around the bay, we offer other types of excursions around Murmansk, Teriberka, etc. The cost of a tour of the bay is 275,96$ per group. When ordering additional excursions, the price will be 91,99$ higher per group.