SPARE me the spread of the bronzed, muscle-bound lifeguard and show me something I may not know about before visiting Sydney, such as the saltwater sea pools, built barely out of reach of the breakers, at many of the city's ocean beaches.

Guides to the host city of the 2000 Olympic Games are plentiful at the moment, but the best go beyond being just visually resplendent. Photos and graphics in these provide context, and are illustrative and informative rather than merely decorative. I can pardon the occasional close-up shot of a koala nibbling gum leaves, for example, but it is a delight to see giraffes or elephants against the backdrop of Sydney's skyline and harbor afforded by the Taronga Zoo. I'm also more tempted to visit a museum by a visual preview of a few of the works in its collection rather than a photo of its facade.

The Sydney guides I prefer also tell visitors intriguing things they might miss, like what stages the Sydney Harbour Bridge was built in and in what time spans, or tips about the different styles of Aboriginal art. De rigueur, too, are detailed accounts of excursions to nearby areas, like the majestic Blue Mountains about 65 miles to the west and the breathtaking juxtaposition of bush and waterways in Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park about 19 miles to the north.

I'll pass altogether on the Sydney guides whose pages are enlivened by little more than bold-face type or sporadic clumps of color pictures.

It's well worth spending the extra $5 to $10 for a thorough and thoughtfully produced book.

THE NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC TRAVELER SYDNEY, by Evan McHugh. 271 pages. 1999. (National Geographic Society, $22.95.)

As one would expect from the publisher, this handsome travel guide is impeccably appointed with bold and relevant color art. Even a relatively small photo in the Eastern Suburbs section places picnickers not only in Nielsen Park but also under the canopy of an outsize Moreton Bay fig tree, with the gables of Greycliffe House, an 1852 residence that now houses the National Parks and Wildlife Service office, visible in the background. Now, that's context! It also has the most comprehensive section on the Olympic site as well as an Olympic Survival Guide. (Don't forget the bottled water and the aspirin!)

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.