Carmelo Anthony was drafted third overall by the Denver Nuggets in 2003 and played with the New York Knicks from 2011-2017. He was the 2012-2013 season scoring champion, was named All-Star 10 times and was All-NBA six times in his career.

The 6-foot-7 scoring machine was shaken by the thought of coming off the bench as he had been a starter his entire career. Anthony’s defensive liability and declining offensive playstyle played a big part in his one-year NBA absence.

Anthony finally signed with the Portland Trail Blazers in 2019, following a brief stint with both the Oklahoma City Thunder during the 2017-2018 season and the Houston Rockets in the 2018-2019 season, where he helped them make two consecutive playoff appearances.

After one season with the Lakers, Anthony once again is without a team, when he should be playing.

Anthony can score.

Although his defense is mediocre, Anthony’s offense hasn’t altered one bit and is a threat to any team’s defense. Anthony averaged 14.4 Points on 42.55% shooting in his time with the Blazers. With that level of production at his age, the opportunity should present itself.

Anthony is a wise NBA Veteran.

The 20-year veteran forward still has one of the best shooting forms in the NBA and a highly effective scoring playstyle. A lot of NBA teams can use Anthony as a mentor figure to help younger players develop their games.

Anthony was a selfish player. He would hold onto the ball and shoot contested shots as he cared a lot about his individual career stats, primarily his scoring. Anthony’s old teammate, Chauncey Billups said, “scoring 30 meant too much.”

Over time, Anthony learned and became a different player who just wanted to help his team and play winning basketball. Anthony’s new mentality will help any team that signs him.

Anthony has adapted to today’s NBA.

As a Nugget and Knick, Anthony was a mid-range and post-player. Today, Anthony has developed a catch-and-shoot game. If he’s not open for a shot, Anthony will pass the ball to find an open man.

Anthony averaged 7.7 points during catch-and-shoot situations in the 2021-2022 season, ranking third in the league behind Stephen Curry and Joe Harris. Anthony’s new game and scoring ability are a recipe for success.

Is this the end for Anthony? He can still play basketball at a high level, and he belongs on an NBA team.

Every player lacks something in his game. Anthony, being no different, deserves another chance on the big stage to battle for a championship.