RAUL RUIZ'S ''Three Crowns of the Sailor,'' at the New York Film Festival, should delight students of semiotics and probably no one else. Filled with signs, symbols, letters, forms of currency, impenetrable aphorisms and images that are deliberately self- contradictory, it had easily the highest walk-out rate (at the press screening, anyhow) of any festival selection thus far.

''Three Crowns of the Sailor'' is described in festival advertising as ''deliberately unsynopsizable.'' In addition to being a bad sign, that's an understatement. The film's rambling, nonsensical narrative has an internal consistency of sorts, but it also has an utter lack of momentum. Even though there are flashes of humor and a great deal - an overabundance, in fact - of imagination to the Chilean-born Mr. Ruiz's work (which is in French), the ultimate effect is one of tedium.

''Don't believe it, it's only red paint,'' says a character who then bleeds to death. ''When you're only beautiful, you're always alone,'' says another. ''Tonight is starry,'' the narrator (Jean-Bernard Guillard) writes in a letter to his mother. ''The stars are twinkling. I'm ready to forget the slaps at Christmas, the beating on my 10th birthday,''

''By the way, why are you chewing gum?'' this same narrator asks a prostitute (Nad ege Clair) who calls herself the Virgin Mary. ''It's not me,'' she says, ''it's another girl. Of course, she's much prettier. They call her 'By-the-way,' she's always saying it.''

Mr. Ruiz's way with a non sequitur is distinctive, but it's more intriguing in small doses than in this very large one. And it's not put to any discernible purpose here. For every clever touch, there are 10 listless, pointless ones. Eventually, the two leading characters declare ''Our presence here is gratuitous, like most of the things in life'' and they seem to have a point. Or, as the screenplay by Mr. Ruiz with Emilio de Solar and Francois Ede also puts it, ''May God explain the guts of a million ants.''

''Three Crowns of the Sailor'' will be shown tonight at 6:15 and Monday night at 6:15.

Symbolic Exercise

THREE CROWNS OF THE SAILOR, directed by Raul Ruiz; screenplay (French with English subtitles) by Mr. Ruiz, with the collaboration of Emilio de Solar and Francois Ede; photography, Sacha Vierny; edited by Janine Verneau and Valeria Sarmiento; music by Jorge Arriagada; production companies, I.N.A. and Antenne 2. At Alice Tully Hall, as part of the 22d New York Film Festival. Running time: 117 minutes. This film has no rating.

The sailor . . . . . Jean-Bernard Guillard

The student . . . . . Philippe Deplanche

The officer . . . . . Jean Badin

Maria . . . . . Nadege Clair

Mathilde . . . . . Lisa Lyon

The captain . . . . . Claude Derepp

The blindman . . . . . Frank Oger