Comrat

Situated 105km south from Chisinau, Comrat is the capital city of Gagauzia (Gagauz Yeri in Turkic language), an autonomous republic of Moldova since 23 December 1994. The name of the city has its origins in the victory of a black horse (literally “Comur At”) of one of the nobles in XVIIIth century, after which the settlement was named. Despite being the biggest city in the region, Comrat has only 35 thousand inhabitants, mostly of “Gagauzian nationality”, but also Russians, Ukrainians, Moldovans and Poles (around 200 people). Comrat is home to the biggest number of Gagauzians in the world (the rest of people of this unique “nationality” live in Romania, Ukraine, Bulgaria, Russia and Kazakhstan). They speak Gagauzian (Turkic) language, close to Turkish. In contrast to Muslim Turks, Gagauz people are 100% Eastern Orthodox. In the past, the Cyrillic alphabet was used for writing, nowadays Latin alphabet is in use. Comrat hosts the only in the world Gagauz university. However, most of the classes there are taught in Russian. There is quite a significant group of international students, mainly from Turkey, Bulgaria and Ukraine, who attracted by low level of tuition fees are coming to study in Comrat. Thanks to this, the city gains on its multicultural and multiethnic character. Most of Comrat’s inhabitants speak both Gagauzian and Russian, Romanian is in minority. Gagauzians cultivate their unique history, heritage, culture and traditions. They also have their own president (başcan), currently Mihail Formuz, parliament (başkani), flag, anthem and control over other areas, such as science, education, culture and partly security.

Start your sightseeing from the bus station walking on Pobedy Street towards the market. After few minutes you will get to the central square, where many events, such as festivals or festivities are taking place. Turn right on the intersection and walk to Lenin Street – the biggest street in Gagauzian capital. First, you will see the building of the House of Culture, built in a classic grey soviet style, although the pink columns with the soviet symbol of hammer and sickle in the hall inside cheer it up a bit. Behind the building you can find probably the only public toilet. Use it only when you are desperate, as its sanitary conditions leave a huge room for improvement. Go back to the main street and you will see the building of the parliament of Gagauzia, also built in the classic soviet style. On top of the parliament’s roof you can see both Moldovan and Gagauzian flag and below the emblem. In front of it stands a monument of W.I. Lenin, surprise, surprise. Right across you will see one of the few tiny city parks. There are some attractions for children there – a ferris wheel, carousel and an old soviet-era car. Few benches, grass and some flowers make it quite a peaceful and relaxing place to be. Once you got some rest, continue walking on Lenin Street towards north. Right beside the park, you will see probably the most cheerful (in terms of colours) building in the city – a yellow-painted St John’s Orthodox Church. When you cross the street again, you’ll see stairs going up on a sort of a boulevard beside the Gagauz University (Komrat Devlet üniversitesi). The park there is called by locals the “Crows’ Park” due to the unbelievably big number of those loud and messy birds, which you cannot really hear anywhere else in the city, just in this place. On both sides of the main and the only alley, you will find statues and tables depicting the most famous people, such as poets, writers, teachers, priests and working class leaders. There is also a fountain there, but it hardly ever works. On top of the hill, you can see ruins of a cinema complex. Perhaps one day it will be rebuilt, so the locals can benefit from it again. Your visit in Comrat cannot be complete without seeing the Ethnographical Museum on 164 Lenin Street, in operation since 1969 (open Tue-Sun 9-17, entrance is free), which presents a collection of works, documents and pieces of art showing a daily life of Gagauzian people and their history across centuries. If you are lucky, you might receive free Russian language commentary from an experienced museum guide during your visit. The monument commemorating those, who died in the Russia-Afghanistan war, stands on the right side of the museum.

How to get:

The easiest way to get to Comrat from Chisinau is to take a maxi taxi from Gara de Sud. Mini buses leave regularly every hour starting from 10am. The journey costs 36 LEI (2.3 EURO) one way. The bus gets to the bus station in Comrat, located beside the market on Ploshchad Pobedy.

P.S. One of us actually passed by Comrat without stopping there, as the town is pretty small and it does not have a typical capital city look, so make sure that you get off at the right stop. If in doubt, ask the driver. Also, make sure you catch a mini bus, not a regular size of a bus as they sometimes have troubles climbing up even on small hills. If you by any chance happen to miss your bus, you can still get some money back. Usually it is 25% of the price that you paid, but if you are lucky then somehow you might even get a full refund.

Where to sleep:

There is not a wide range of choices of accommodation, however few options exist. There is a fairly modern hotel at Pobedy Street 127A (250 LEI for double room per night) and Hotel Astoria, Galaţana Street 34A (from 160 LEI up, including breakfast). Other than that, you can try to ask some locals for a possibility of staying at their home. Remember to set the price ahead.

Where to eat:

There are several small restaurants/bars/cafes scattered around the main square and on the main street of Comrat – Lenin Street. If you have a chance, make sure you try some typical Gagauzian dish made from lamb (ghiuveciu) or another local specialty – Kyvirma, similar to placinte, but with tvarog (cottage cheese) served with sour cream on top. On the way from the bus station to the city centre, you pass by the market. If you want some fresh fruits, vegetables or very nice brinza, that is the perfect place to go.