Background

Kanye Omari West was born in Atlanta, Georgia. He’s an American rapper, singer, songwriter, record producer, entrepreneur, and fashion designer. His parents divorced when he was three years old. West and his mother relocated to Chicago, Illinois. West grew up in a middle-class family in suburban Oak Lawn, Illinois, and attended Polaris High School. He demonstrated an affinity for the arts at an early age. At five, West was writing poetry. His mother noticed his interest in painting and music when West was in third grade. West wrote the rap song ‘Green Eggs and Ham’ at 13. He got his mother to pay for studio time.

His musical career has stylistic shifts. Its influences range from soul, baroque, pop, electro, indie rock, synth-pop, industrial, and gospel. Throughout his career, West has influenced cultural movements and progressions within mainstream hip-hop and popular music at large. West rose to fame as a producer for Roc-A-Fella Records in the early 2000s. He recorded hit singles for artists like Jay-Z, Ludacris, and Alicia Keys. West formed the record label GOOD Music. He released his debut album, “The College Dropout,” in 2004, to widespread critical and financial acclaim. West’s outspoken opinions and personal life have gotten a lot of publicity. His behavior at award presentations, on social media, and in other public settings, as well as his remarks on the music and fashion industries, and U.S. politics have all sparked controversy.

As a fashion designer, West has worked with Nike, Louis Vuitton, and A.P.C. on clothing and footwear. His most prominent collaboration was the Yeezy with Adidas. It began in 2013. He is the owner and C.E.O. of Donda, a creative content agency. With over 135 million records sold worldwide, West is one of the most critically regarded musicians of the twenty-first century and one of the best-selling music artists of all time. West has 21 Grammy Awards, making him one of the most prestigious performers of all time and the most Grammy-awarded artist of his generation.

His marriage to reality T.V. star Kim Kardashian drew a lot of media attention. The pair first met in the early 2000s but became friends in 2008. They started dating in 2011 and had their daughter in 2013. They wedded in 2014. After their wedding, they welcomed three more children ― Saint, Psalm, and Chicago. They announced their divorce in January 2021. Kardashian officially filed for divorce in February 2021. On March 2, 2022, the court declared them legally separated amid divorce proceedings.