WASHINGTON — Emeka Okafor had 19 points and 11 rebounds, leading six players in double figures for Washington in a 120-91 victory over the Orlando Magic on Monday night for the Wizards’ third straight win.

The Wizards were just 4-28 before their streak, but beat Oklahoma City, Atlanta and now Orlando – all at home – to nearly double their wins total. Washington leaves Tuesday on a five-game, eight-day road trip while the nation’s capital will be consumed by Inauguration ceremonies.

John Wall had 12 points and six assists in 20 minutes in his second game of the season after missing the Wizards’ first 33 with a left knee injury.

Washington shot a season-best 56.1 percent, scored its most points and had its largest winning margin of the season. A.J. Price and Kevin Seraphin had 18, Bradley Beal scored 17, and Jan Vesely matched his season high with 10.

Jameer Nelson had 19 points and 12 assists to lead Orlando, and Nikola Vucevic added 13 points and 13 rebounds. Arron Afflalo, who had 30 points against the Clippers, missed 10 of 11 from the field and finished with two points.

Orlando hoped it would be bolstered by the return of Glen Davis and E’Twaun Moore, who were both hurt in games against Washington. Davis, who had 13 points, sprained his right shoulder in the Magic’s win over the Wizards on Dec. 19. Orlando then lost 10 straight before winning on Saturday at the Los Angeles Clippers. In the fourth loss in that stretch – to Washington – Moore sprained his right elbow.

The Wizards led the entire game. They were ahead 28-22 after one and outscored the Magic 31-18 to take a 59-40 lead with 1:53 to play in the first half, but Orlando ended the period on a 13-0 tear with Nelson scoring eight straight points on two 3-pointers and a jumper. He passed to Josh McRoberts for a dunk to end the half, pulling the Magic to 59-53.

Vesely, who’s spent much of the season in coach Randy Wittman’s doghouse, scored eight quick points. Entering the game, Vesely had just three more points (68) this season than he had fouls (65).

In the third quarter, Washington scored 37 points – more than the Wizards had in any quarter this season – to lead 96-77.

NOTES: Magic F Hedo Turkoglu did not play for the third straight game. He scored just one point in 37 minutes in his three previous games. … Washington F Trevor Booker, who returned last Saturday after missing 22 games with a strained right knee, was out with a sprained right ankle. G Jordan Crawford (left ankle) missed his third straight game. … Beal was presented with the Eastern Conference Rookie of the month award for December.