Stacey Hayes comes to us from London, England. She has been in the game since she was three, when she landed her first commercial, and at age four, she did her first movie starring Elizabeth Taylor. Since her start, Stacey has done some TV shows, radio, hosting, and ad campaigns. Stacey has also appeared in the pages of some of the top national and international magazines. Currently, she can be seen on the Discovery ID show, Cry Wolfe, where she has a starring role. You can also find her on some of those late night infomercials. Stacey just started filming a lifestyle and entertainment show that takes you behind the scenes of some of the most exclusive parties and VIP clubs in London, so keep an eye out for that. Her future goals are to keep doing what she’s been doing and make a bigger name for herself.

1. What’s your Ethnicity?

Caucasian.

2. What’s your zodiac sign?

Leo.

3. Where are you from originally?

Well, I’m half English and half American, my dad is from Lincoln, Nebraska and my mother’s from London, England. I spent my early years in London.

4. What did you like most about growing up in London and Nebraska?

The UK is awesome, Open minded culture…a lot of history and beautiful architecture. Nebraska is beautiful in the winter with everything covered in snow and the people are about as down-to-earth as you get. My favorite thing was ice-skating on frozen lakes. I was a competitive ice skater my entire youth. Even in LA in the winter I always try to find an outdoor skating rink to get my skate on.

5. What kind of mischief did you get into while growing up?

Me? Awe no I was a good girl, well mostly a good girl. I was one of those girls who developed early so at 13 years old with a little bit of makeup people thought I was 23 so that right there was enough to get me into a lot of mischief. [wink]

6. If you could have a super power, what would it be and why?

To fly…I Always wanted to sore with the birds and feel free. Maybe that’s why “Freebird” is one of my all time favorite classic rock songs.

7. What’s your favorite hobby and why?

It might be more of an activity that a hobby, but I absolutely love to swim whether it be the ocean or the pool. I Love water. I also love boats, ironically I end up having to take Dramamine which zonks me out, but it doesn’t stop me from enjoying it.

8. What’s your guilty pleasure?

All my pleasures are Guilty. Isn’t that the point? [smile] I’m definitely a foodie I love me some good food and definitely wine, I’m big into wine I like white and sweet. I like to really enjoy myself, I don’t diet but I do work out.

9. Who do you admire and why?

My daddy, because he’s a hard working unselfish strong but kind man.

10.If you could change one thing in the world what would it be and why?

Homelessness and or abused animals. Any type of animal cruelty. I’m a big-time animal lover, it’s a huge passion of mine. I have one of those little placards that says, “my kids have paws,” and it’s true. I was in the grocery store one day getting my usual and the guy at the checkout said “oh I remember you all you ever buy is wine and cat food” [laugh]

11. What’s one of your personal goals?

Each time I achieve one that changes, but I do really enjoy what I do. Coming up in 2016, I’m going to be hosting a new show in the UK, it’s a lifestyle and entertainment show that goes to all the hottest VIP clubs in Europe. I would like to see that do well so I can continue with it. Right now it’s picked up for four episodes, so that’s a short-term goal, it’s called “Stepping out the Glamorous Life.”

12. What do guys compliment you on the most?

Usually, it’s a combination between my accent and my legs.

13. What’s your favorite body part on yourself?

My small waist, I like being hourglass shaped. I didn’t use to, but now I have embraced it. Nothing wrong with some curves, right boys.?

14. What do you look for in a guy?

I tell you nice is underrated, I look for nice guy, but not weak. Women love themselves a bad boy, but I would say it’s better to look for a “good” bad boy.

15. What’s the first thing you notice about a guy?

Probably his Eyes. I feel like a lot of women say that don’t they, but it’s kind of true there’s something about a guys eyes and the way he looks at you.

16. What’s your ideal first date?

I’m pretty simple, you can’t go wrong with dinner. I am a foodie, the way to my heart is definitely through my stomach. [smile] Oh yeah, and wine did I mention that earlier? [laugh]

17. What turns you on?

Intensity and subtle confidence. I definitely like a guy who’s passionate and sure of what he wants.

18. What turns you off?

Arrogance. There is a big difference to me between having self certainty and being an arrogant. Also, a huge turn off is someone who is rude to others. If I’m on a date with someone and they’re being really sweet to me and then turn and are really rude to the waiter, that’s the worst.

19. What’s your biggest pet peeve?

People who run late. Which seems to be pretty much everybody. [laugh] I’m ridiculously punctual. I’m trying to become more patient with that, but it really does drive me nuts.

20. Who’s your celebrity pass?

Hmmm, that probably changes depending on my mood, but right now, I’m going to go with Colin Farrell. Funny thing is, I prefer him when he’s in character with an American accent as opposed to his natural Irish one, I don’t know why.

STATS:

Birthday: August 10

Height: 5’7”

Weight: 120lb

Measurements: 32DDD-23-34