Our interview with stunning British bombshell Stacey Hayes.

Stacey is a former athlete, internationally published model, TV presenter and actress. She is known to millions world wide as the ultimate game show babe former cohost of “Lingo” on GSN.

Her gorgeous face and figure are splashed all over men’s magazines and she is currently in preproduction for two films coming out at the end of the year.

Stacey, please tell us a little about you?

Certainly, I’m originally from the UK, London England… I also spent time in Lincoln Nebraska which is quite the contrast! That is where my dad is from, spending the majority of my youth as a competitive Ice skater as well as actress and model. I currently live in Los Angeles California and I must say I’m loving it.

Describe yourself in 3 words?

Loving, motivated and kind.

Who has been the biggest influence on your life?

Coming from a working-class family my parents were always my greatest influence and whom created my desire to succeed in life as a way to provide and repay my family for all the sacrifices they made helping me pursue my dreams as a child.

How and when did you start into modeling?

I was discovered at three years old and cast in my first film! Many TV commercials and print jobs followed. When you’re that young people assume you’ve been pushed into it but believe it or not I have clear memories even at that age of wanting to play dress up and make-believe in front of an audience.I’m a Leo I was born a ham!

What keeps you motivated to keep training hard and eating right?

I try and remind myself daily that my body is a temple and to treat it as such! It’s the only one I’ve got…being a child athlete, discipline and exercise/fitness was all I knew and to this day it is very much ingrained in me to take care of myself and maintain a high level of fitness and nutrition. But I’m not nearly as strict as a lot of fitness enthusiasts I’m not gluten-free or sugar-free or anything like that but I do try my best to balance my indulgencies with daily wheatgrass shots and nightly organic kale spinach Cayanne pepper celery juice concoctions! And I don’t eat red meat.

What is the biggest highlight of your career so far?

There have been many in different ways but working along side the legendary Chuck Woolery as his cohost for many years on the number one rated game show “lingo” rates right up there! It was years ago now, but to this day I continue to get fans of the show reaching out to me from all over the world due to the fact the show still runs today!

What is your workout routine these days?

I work out seven days a week it’s just the way I choose to start my day. sometimes with my schedule filming I have to do it at 4 AM but I will do it anytime as long as I fit in!

I’m an avid runner, a minimum of 4 to 5 miles a day… I also love hiking, pilates and swimming during the Summer season.

What is your favorite healthy food?

Well I can’t do without wheat grass I have that every morning for breakfast with an organic banana and I love kale salads. I incorporate a lot of fish also. I really like seafood.

And your favorite cheat food?

Probably sounds typical but I never met a cheese pizza I didn’t love LOL and yes chocolate knows the way to my heart. Milk chocolate that is!

What magazines have you been in over the course of your career?

I’m lucky enough to say at this point I think I have lost count! (Maxim, FHM,stuff, Playboy non-nude feature, KANDY, Sports Illustrated etc.)

In five years from now, where do you see yourself and your career?

I like to try and live in the moment so I don’t miss out on it but I definitely see myself continuing to do what I do now and that is what I love.

Now tell us about your acting career?

As I mentioned I actually did my first film at the age of three and I have continued to work quite steadily as an actress although I think it at this point I actually prefer TV presenting/hosting and modeling as that generally allows me to work mostly in Los Angeles rather than having to go on location for months at a time in other states and or cities.

I’m a huge animal lover and advocate and I spend much of my free time rescuing and bringing awareness to animal welfare and it’s hard for me to leave my menagerie of rescues for too long LOL

Who is your biggest beauty inspiration?

Well there’s the legends like Marilyn Monroe and Sophia Loren but I will say currently Jennifer Lopez is a force to be reckoned with! She is so beautiful the bone structure and oh my goodness the skin!

Who are some of your favorite models and designers, and why?

I love so many amazingly talented female designers I’m very much a supporter of women in business I absolutely adore Marchesa, Donatella Versace, Stella McCartney.

Gigi Hadid is stunning, she’s not the it girl for no reason!

What are your makeup bag staples when traveling?

I actually probably don’t carry and wear as much as people think I do. obviously for a lot of photo shoots it’s glam glam glam which I love but I generally just put on two coats of Diorshow mascara with my natural eyelashes, a nice winged Mac gel eyeliner in jet black and lip gloss, gloss, gloss for days! I love Giorgio Armani and Chanel.

And I never ever go to bed without removing my make up! Everybody says that but I don’t think I have ever gone to bed in my make up in my entire life not even once I’m fanatical about removing it. Neutrogena night calming make up wipes make it a piece of cake. And I always have crem de la mer.

What is fun and rewarding about modeling? And what is not?

Modeling is always interesting because you’re creating along with the photographer and glam team a work of art in its own way and everyone’s take on that is different and every job is different and it allows one to express their creativity and at the end you have a visual reward that lasts forever, a moment in time captured generally quite beautifully.

I don’t really feel that there is a downside I’m very fortunate to be able to be in the business I love and make a living so I don’t really acknowledge any downside.

What’s your advice for the newer models?

Choose your jobs carefully because even though your new and starting out doesn’t mean you have to pose in Ways you’re not comfortable with…. and having a good attitude goes further than anything else as far as I’m concerned treat people with respect and courtesy even if they don’t do the same.

What music do you like?

I’m pretty old-school, it’s pretty much classic rock all the way for me …I have my dad to thank for that!

Do you support any charity?

Many, I’m highly involved in animal activism and animal advocacy. All of my proceeds from my emoji app go to animal charity as well as a portion of any other sales generated through my Modeling. PETA, ASPCA.

A perfect Sunday is…

Going on a long hike and then cuddling at home with my rescue cats.

3 things you can’t leave home without?

iPhone X, Sunglasses RX and Alkaline water.

What do you think of Social Media?

I love social media, I’m a bit of an antisocial person by nature. I’m a total loner even though I’m in a very extroverted profession. I’m inclined to spend most of my time alone with my animals so social media actually encourages me to be more interactive and more social in a social media kind of way LOL

Where we can follow you?

Instagram / Twitter / Facebook

Favorite food: Indian food

Song: Gosh there’s so many… Whole Lotta love by Led Zeppelin

Travel destination: Swiss Alps

Celebrity Crush: Jackson Galaxy

Actor/Actress: Benicio Del Toro / Nicole Kidman

Quote: Kindness is the language which the deaf can hear and the blind can see. Mark twain

Book: As a man thinketh by James Allen

Movie: Gentlemen prefer blondes 🙂

Drink: Tart cherry juice (in a wine glass!)

Photo Credit: Chaz photographics