1. AVAILABILITY SERVICES

2. “SunGard continues to show me they really care about us as a customer.” Teresa McCauley, Vice President and Business Continuity Manager of First Citizens Bank (USA) 1 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

3. EVERYONE RELIES ON YOU. WHO DO YOU RELY ON? Try naming a business function or corporate On the other hand, we find that leading department that doesn’t depend entirely on the companies have a markedly different view effective and efficient operation of information of availability—a more expansive view that technology (IT) resources. It really can’t be helps them ensure the highest levels of IT done. It is just as difficult to imagine a time performance across the board and around the when marketplace pressures have demanded clock. Their top managers pinpoint operational more of IT than they do now. Today, less-than- excellence as one of their most pressing optimal performance from data centers or priorities. They emphasize cost reductions storage servers has quick consequences for and efficiency regardless of economic climate. the business operations they support. And They think about availability in terms of peak unplanned downtime of any kind is unthinkable. loads, high efficiency, cost-effectiveness, shared services, green IT, mobile computing Put simply: IT availability, in the broadest and more. Then they go further, wrapping sense of the term, has become a these individual concepts into a unified and competitive essential. systematic approach to IT availability. We know this because most of these top performers are But not everyone interprets the term in the SunGard customers. same way. The difference in interpretations We know this because many other is helping to widen the gap between top- organizations—small and mid-sized as well performing companies and others in their as Fortune 500 corporations—are turning to industries. On the one hand, the conventional SunGard Availability Services to attain the view of IT availability concentrates on levels of IT reliability that are hallmarks of the established ideas about disaster preparedness high performers. and rapid recovery—concepts that remain valid but are inadequate for supporting fast-moving And we know it because availability is, quite organizations today. literally, our middle name. SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 2

4. “SunGard’s ability to help ensure maximum availability for our mission-critical systems is an integral part of achieving our security objectives.” Michael Campbell, CEO, Arch Chemicals (USA) 3 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

5. ALWAYS INNOVATING, ALWAYS CONNECTED, ALWAYS RELEVANT. Over 10,000 companies rely on SunGard. Why rely on SunGard? You can trust us to get it Today, we offer an unparalleled range of cost- right. We take extreme pride in our 100% success effective IT availability services, including rate supporting customer recoveries—over more comprehensive turnkey infrastructure management than 30 years in business—and our continued services, consulting and recovery services and ability to answer your needs in an ever-changing business continuity management software—all customized to what your organization needs. industry. Our culture is centered around meeting our obligations, and we have a passion to provide The diversity of our customer base is living proof outstanding customer service. of the broad range of benefits our solutions provide; over half of our customers are small and Whether the requirement is to help ensure that medium enterprises, and more than 70% of Fortune your sales representatives can always access their 100 companies rely on our services. Financial e-mail while on the road, or whether it calls for Services, Manufacturing, Retail, Healthcare and comprehensive plans to deal with global pandemics, Business Services industries are heavily represented, SunGard has the resources, the competencies and and we have significant customers from the the experience to manage it well. Transportation, Telecommunications and Utilities Our objective is to guarantee that your applications, and Government sectors. data and systems will always be up and running— and operating at peak efficiency. We want to ensure that you get the right solution for your current needs while retaining the flexibility to adapt and grow as your requirements change. So we’ve spent the past three decades listening closely to our customers’ needs, developing a resilient infrastructure and providing flexible, powerful solutions to help address those needs. SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 4

6. Our flexible support model gives you options for today and tomorrow. If the past • More than 10,000 customers worldwide few decades working with customers and technology have taught us anything, it is that • 100% success rate supporting customer change is the only constant. To stay ahead of recoveries over more than 30 years in our customers’ evolving needs, we continue business to innovate and develop our infrastructure and services supported by substantial • Over 5 million square feet of operations investments. SunGard’s strategic road map space is built to leverage advances in virtualization, blade server, wide area network (WAN) and • More than 80 highly resilient facilities storage-acceleration technologies. We will worldwide also continue to help shape emerging utility and cloud computing service delivery models. • A dedicated, redundant global network The breadth of availability solutions SunGard provides is something you cannot get with • More than 25,000 workplace end-user other providers. positions worldwide We also know you’d like to make the planet • Over 40 mobile recovery units, globally considerably cleaner and greener than you found it. That’s why our portfolio of services • Supporting more than 30 platforms, contains a set of solutions that leverage including virtualized environments shared high-intensity IT resources. With • Operational structure and best practices these options, our customers don’t have to backed by ITILv3 service-centric model, utilize redundant servers and electrical power in order to create backup environments. SAS 70 Type II and ISO9001 certification SunGard itself is an aggressive adopter of and PCI DSS-compliant facilities and green technology, continually researching and processes implementing best-of-breed components for • Seven-time winner of the Business our infrastructure and systems. Continuity Service Provider of the Year award • 2008 winner of the Outstanding Excellence in Business Continuity and the Data Centre Strategy of the Year award 5 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

7. “If a branch loses power for a few hours or if there’s a big snowstorm, [the plan] will help us deal with that and keep operating. It can cover something very small, but also the large catastrophe that you hope never happens.” John Kubinsky, Senior Vice President, AmeriServ Financial (USA) SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 6

8. 5 million square feet of secure (4) (2) (2) operations space (3) (3) More than 40 (3) (3) immediately deployable mobile data recovery centers WE’RE WHERE YOU NEED US, WHEN YOU NEED US. Where is SunGard? We are everywhere you need us to be. Our dedicated network backbone connects over 5 million square feet of secure operations space in North America and Europe, to offer you the reliable infrastructure you need. More than 40 immediately deployable mobile data recovery centers and over 80 hardened facilities offer local access and convenience. What does this mean for you? Your business can rely on SunGard, whether you are supporting a multinational corporation looking to address global demands, or a local company that needs continuous access to all communications.

9. More than 80 state-of-the- art hardened facilities “It was imperative that we found the right partner to protect and help ensure 24/7 availability of our critical systems. Having been out to tender, the decision to work with SunGard to improve (13) our resilience was a fairly simple one; it had the best infrastructure and technological solutions, and we were very impressed by its people and support processes. The events of 7/7 brought home to us the importance of having alternative backup sites away from our campus in central London. We are now very much leading the way amongst our peers by adopting an outsourced and multi-location approach to data recovery. Using SunGard’s Technology Centres, we have an extremely high level of resilience without needing to worry about power supply and air cooling, which were becoming major and expensive concerns.” Adrian Ellison, Assistant Director of IT Services, The London School of Economics (UK) More than 25,000 end-user positions worldwide A resilient global private network

10. “The thing I liked most about SunGard then is the thing I still like the most, their flexibility.” Dennis Hayman, Computer Operations Supervisor and IT Disaster Recovery Coordinator, Utica National (USA) 9 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

11. OUR SOLUTIONS ARE AS UNIQUE AS YOUR IT NEEDS. At SunGard we are focused on delivering value based on the strategic imperatives and objectives of each customer. Our services are scalable, flexible and customizable. We have the broadest portfolio of solutions in the industry, guaranteeing that your needs won’t be limited by infrastructure, technical requirements or complexity. SunGard’s focus is on availability—the services we offer, whether used individually or together, keep your business running so you can focus on keeping your business obligations. SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 10

12. Recovery Services — AdvancedRecoverySM Here’s how one of our European SunGard offers a broad range of recovery solutions to address customers is taking advantage of your organization’s specific application and business process SunGard’s broad range of services. availability needs. For mission-critical applications, our AdvancedRecoverySM services provide high availability using Established in 1869, Sainsbury’s replication and disk-based backup technologies. For applications is one of the UK’s leading food and systems that are supporting less time-sensitive business retailers, with interests in financial functions, we provide tape-based hot-site services—an affordable services via Sainsbury’s Bank. solution that leverages shared infrastructure resources and To deliver on a decades-long provides off-site recovery capabilities. SunGard’s recovery commitment to availability and services support both physical and virtual platforms, leverage continuity and to provide key cloud-based delivery models and offer fully managed as well as employees with access to critical customer-managed options. applications and communications Our AdvancedRecoverySM solutions combine basic systems essential to supporting Sainsbury’s recovery services with customer-dedicated data storage resources outlets and banking functions, to help customers recover key information and systems in the Sainsbury’s contracts to nation- event of an unplanned interruption, such as a major system wide Workforce Continuity for failure, significant power or communication outage, security several hundred users, as well as breach, terrorist attack, fire, flood or other natural disaster. managed services, all supported by AdvancedRecoverySM solutions enable customers to continuously SunGard’s network infrastructure. back up their data to one of our facilities using SunGard’s network The secure network backbone backbone and offer managed failover and failback options to help allows SunGard personnel at other minimize data loss. recovery locations to provide SunGard has successfully supported thousands of recoveries to additional remote support to date. And to help ensure our customers are prepared, we assist the local staff in cases of major them with their recovery testing efforts, completing more than incidents, regardless of location. 100,000 tests over the last decade alone. This not only provides a unique inter-service proposition that In addition to systems availability solutions, SunGard’s Workforce enables customers to exploit the Continuity services offer alternate workspace, telecommunications rich recovery capability SunGard capabilities and IT resources to help you recover and re-establish has at its disposal, but also powers your business. Our customers have access to over 25,000 “rollback” to alternative SunGard positions in sophisticated recovery real estate, all connected by sites−in cases of major incidents or SunGard’s advanced continuity network. Whether deploying your staff to one of our recovery centers located around the globe or multiple invocations−with no loss of delivering a mobile unit to your site, our Workforce Continuity service experience. Services can be tailored to your specific needs. 11 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

13. Managed Services — AdvancedHostingSM SunGard’s managed services take the burden off you when protecting your IT and information assets. With our managed services solutions, your business gets comprehensive, scalable services and cost-effective access to infrastructure and skills. We help our customers achieve improved systems performance, avoid capital outlays and benefit from lower operational expenses. Our services also enable a significantly shorter time to market through swift deployment of new applications, providing fast-growing organizations with the flexibility and reliability needed to win in a competitive marketplace. Our AdvancedHostingSM solutions deliver a full range of services that meet each customer’s unique requirements, from local access to standardized colocation to fully managed, end- to-end infrastructure solutions and integrated production and recovery options. SunGard’s solutions support both physical and virtual platforms and are backed by our private global network linking more than 80 highly resilient state-of-the-art facilities. SunGard can also provide its managed services remotely, at your data center. The managed services portal provides customers visibility into essential information such as infrastructure performance, problem and change activity, account information and more. Our Services Desk and Monitoring Services Team ensure 24/7 customer support, proactive notification and fast problem resolution. SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 12

14. Consulting Business Continuity Management Software Long-term planning is critical to success, Business continuity management software gives your but often suffers due to urgent tasks and organization a single source for end-to-end disaster recovery emergencies. and business continuity planning and support. By utilizing SunGard’s all-in-one Continuity Management Solution, Consulting is a key component of our customers can automate business continuity processes, while approach—we help clients identify risks, leveraging the expert guidance and best practices that we develop strategies and implement and maintain use as the foundation for this offering. solutions. Our consulting expertise in business continuity and disaster recovery, data center The modular approach to our business continuity technologies, storage, security and compliance management suite allows organizations to start with a single is a product of our experience and continuous key process and add functionality as needed. For example, learning process. We use these insights to you can start with SunGard’s Living Disaster Recovery continuously sharpen our problem-solving skills Planning System (LDRPS®)—a module that helps customers and better understand your needs, provide develop strategic plans to maintain access to mission-critical effective and responsive solutions, transform systems and data—while maintaining the flexibility to add your IT operations and improve results. components supporting other aspects of your business continuity strategy and execution at a later time. We provide the software tools to automate your business continuity plan—and keep it up-to-date. We are unmatched when it comes to expertise, scale and resources dedicated to customer support. Rapid Solutions Group (RSG), a leading provider of marketing support services to the financial services, healthcare and automotive industries, trusted SunGard to address its growing need for disaster recovery and business continuity across four locations. Boasting the largest distributive print network in the nation, RSG specializes in customer communications with digital print-on- demand technology and Internet-based solutions. SunGard had only six months to migrate all RSG’s information from its previous provider. The result was a fully hosted managed services site in SunGard’s St. Louis facility and a backup site in Philadelphia that includes management and monitoring of the network; hosting and database management; and recovery planning, procedures and backup management. 13 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

15. “Sainsbury’s takes business continuity very seriously; we’re always trying to improve. Because of our maturity and achievements, we needed to find a partner who was similarly positioned in approach, image, reputation, attitude and success. I stress the word ‘partnership’ because that is what I believe we have found with SunGard [Availability Services]. We have a very strong relationship and have achieved everything we set out to do.” Steve Mellish, FBCI, Head of Business Continuity, Sainsbury’s (UK) SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 14

16. 15 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

17. WE CAN HELP YOU BECOME MORE AGILE. Improving IT operations performance while By using our managed and recovery services, reducing costs is a daunting task for many CIOs, you gain affordable access to skilled resources yet it is a pervasive business requisite. You can and enterprise-class technologies at a lower rely on SunGard to help you become more agile. cost than dedicated internal assets. Our broad Our services help improve your IT efficiency portfolio of services enables us to design while enhancing the resilience and security of solutions that address your individual needs; the your environment. SunGard Solutions Engineering team will match technologies and levels of service to application SunGard consulting services can work with and business process criticality, thus providing you to uncover areas where cost savings are the availability you need without the risk of possible—for example, our experts will assess overpaying for expensive point-solutions. the impact of virtualization technology on your IT environment, estimate expected savings Our infrastructure supports yours, and our and lay out plans for implementation. Our investments benefit your business—we invest Data Center and IT Consulting team can help hundreds of millions of dollars every year to evaluate the financial benefits of data center enhance our capabilities—from tools and skilled consolidation options, as well as support your personnel, to data centers and technologies. team through data center migrations. The SunGard Storage Optimization Consulting practice can help improve operational IT efficiency by as much as 50 percent, leading customers through a five-step process to optimize data storage, server design and enterprise resource management. SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 16

18. RELY ON US. More than 10,000 organizations worldwide can tell you that SunGard Availability Services is the trusted high-performance partner they need to ensure that their IT operations never let them down—and always keep them at the top of their game. They can speak to SunGard’s ability to ensure optimal operational performance, the highest levels of Information Availability and—it goes without saying—extremely rapid and complete recovery from unplanned interruptions. Whether yours is a small company serving local markets, a dynamic mid-size enterprise or a large multinational organization, you will benefit from responsive, customized solutions from SunGard that help increase the efficiency of your IT operations and augment the value that information technology provides to the business. ISN’T IT TIME YOU RELIED ON US, TOO? To learn more about how to keep your people and information connected at all times, visit www.sungardas.com or call 1-800-468-7483. 17 SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES

19. “We do look at SunGard as the industry leader and we hope they can assist our move into the future and help us achieve strategic objectives ... We look at SunGard as a partner.” Kash Basavappa, Senior Vice President and CIO, MaineGeneral (USA) SUNGARD AVAILABILITY SERVICES 18