WAYNE, Pa., Nov. 27, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Sungard Availability Services (Sungard AS) today announced Managed Backup – Amazon Web Services (AWS) for enterprises looking to protect and preserve their data in the cloud. Managed Backup – AWS is a fully managed, Service Level Agreement (SLA)-backed data protection service that allows companies to back up data from their on-premises environments to AWS, giving them a more agile backup solution while enhancing their business resilience.

"Sungard AS' Managed Backup – AWS solution is well-suited to address the needs of organizations looking to refresh or augment their in-house legacy backup solutions, as well as those just starting their journey to the cloud," said Josh Crowe, Chief Technology Officer, Sungard AS. "This is yet another example of how Sungard AS is leveraging its status as an AWS Managed Service Provider Partner to provide our customers with resilient, recoverable IT solutions on AWS."

Managed Backup – AWS is ideal for organizations building a strategy to support them through their digital transformation, and aiming to modernize, optimize and cut the costs of legacy data protection facilities based on traditional physical infrastructure. In addition, it serves organizations that need to refresh their backup infrastructures while reducing CapEx investment through an OpEx model, as well as those who seek a fully managed data protection service backed by a 98 percent backup success rate SLA.

Sungard AS is not only an AWS Managed Service Provider (MSP) Partner, but earlier this month, it achieved AWS Storage Competency status. Sungard AS is also a leading provider for cloud-based managed recovery and production services on AWS, proving it has the tools and expertise to back up, recover and provide resiliency for an organization's data residing on AWS.

"With the exponential growth of data, organizations today need to make strategic choices around data protection and the location of data spread across on-premises, hybrid and cloud environments," said David Noy, vice president and general manager, Product Management and Alliances, Veritas. "Sungard AS, in collaboration with Veritas, has chosen Veritas data protection technology as the foundation of their new solution, built on AWS, to help customers bridge the complexities of hybrid architectures with their desire to safely migrate data to the cloud. As the worldwide leader in enterprise data protection and the software-defined storage market, Veritas is pleased to help advance Sungard AS' solution that enables customers to protect their hybrid cloud data with a simple, reliable and highly cost-effective service."

Sungard AS is a recognized leader in backup and recovery, with the AWS skills expected of an AWS Partner Network (APN) Advanced Consulting Partner. Sungard AS provides end-to-end services from consulting to Managed Backup – AWS in production and recovery, to network and security.

The announcement of Managed Backup – AWS is just one of many recent achievements for Sungard AS in its ongoing relationship with AWS. Sungard AS recently became a member of the AWS Solution Space Partner program, which features APN Partners that offer customer-ready solutions based on architectures validated by AWS.

Sungard AS' end-to-end hybrid IT services include cloud management for production and recovery, colocation, managed hosting and security consulting across a global footprint. Learn more about Sungard AS' managed cloud and recovery services on AWS.

About Sungard Availability Services

Sungard Availability Services ("Sungard AS") is a leading provider of critical production and recovery services to global enterprise companies. Sungard AS partners with customers across the globe to understand their business needs and provide production and recovery services tailored to help them achieve their desired business outcomes. Leveraging more than 40 years of experience, Sungard AS designs, builds and runs critical IT services that help customers manage complex IT, adapt quickly and build resiliency and availability. To learn more, visit www.sungardas.com or call 1-800-468-7483. Connect with us on Twitter, LinkedIn and Facebook.

Media Contact

Nora Hahn

Sungard Availability Services

Tel: 281-728-6999

[email protected]

Sungard Availability Services is a trademark or registered trademark of SunGard Data Systems or its affiliate, used under license. The Sungard Availability Services logo by itself is a trademark or registered trademark of Sungard Availability Services Capital, Inc. or its affiliate. All other trade names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders.

The abbreviation for Sungard Availability Services is 'Sungard AS' as cited above. Please use 'Sungard AS' when abbreviating the name rather than 'Sungard' or 'SunGard,' which may confuse the reader with another separate company with a similar name.

SOURCE Sungard Availability Services

Related Links