Original publisher's beige paper wrappers. Text printed in black ink. Two leaves are unopened. 5 3/4" x 9." Sixteen pages, complete. Pages are very clean and intact except for light age toning throughout, slight offsetting, small occasional spots of foxing or discoloration, and slight chipping and splitting along spine. Pages are crisp and clean. A Near Fine copy. A speech that was originally delivered before the United States House of Representatives on February 8, 1848 by David Fisher (1794-1886), an American politician. He began his career as a preacher and newspaper contributor. He served as a U.S. Representative from Ohio from 1847-1849. He was a Whig. Fisher begins his speech by addressing a recent loan bill requesting $18,500,000 for continued prosecution of the war. He is against the bill and claims that President James K. Polk and his supporters have told lies about the Mexican-American War in order to secure more funding. The rest of the speech is mostly about Fisher's opposition to Polk's actions taken before and during the war. He discusses the disputed boundary of Texas and argues that the Rio Grande was in the domain of Mexico, thus he states the marching of U.S. troops to the Rio Grande was an act of aggression toward Mexico. He also believes that Polk purposely sent John Slidell, a U.S. Minister and Envoy, instead of a commissioner as Mexico had requested for peace negotiations, to start the war. Fisher had voted that the war was "unnecessarily and unconstitutionally" begun by Polk. He also states the war was advantageous to no one and that it was costly both in terms of lives lost and financial hardships. Fisher briefly lambastes supporters of the war and Polk who consider themselves patriots and anyone opposing the war or Polk to be unpatriotic. Fisher believes such as a view is backwards and untrue. He also contends that "the war was waged, not for self-defense, as was said, but for the conquest of territory" and quotes Polk's statement, "the doctrine of no territory is the doctrine of no indemnity." Fisher says this indemnity owed by Mexico is to be interpreted as territory. Fisher later makes discriminatory statements holding the "Anglo-Saxon race" as "superior" but believes that the U.S. has no business in taking control of Mexican territory. Fisher is concerned that the idea that it is the "destiny" of the U.S. to control more territory and even the whole of North America will plunge the country's government into despotism. He concludes his speech by stating that he will not vote for the loan bill which he views as enabling an unjust war and potentially being only one of many more to come. Fisher wishes for the war to end and for U.S. soldiers to come home.