This 1960 Lotus 18 is one of approximately 120 built for use in the US Formula Junior series in the early 1960s. It is finished in British Racing Green with yellow stripes and wheels, and power is provided by a Ford 105E-series 1,100cc inline-four linked with a four-speed Hewland manual transaxle. The car was reportedly first delivered in Mexico and previously owned by Robin LeGrand, the son of Aldin ‘Red’ LeGrand, and it was acquired by the selling dealer approximately five years ago. Refurbishment in the 1990s included construction of a replacement tubular chassis and refinishing the exterior. This Lotus was previously listed on BaT in 2017 and is now offered by the same seller, a Florida dealer, on a bill of sale with the removed tubular chassis and water rails.

The removable bodywork consists of front and rear clamshells with two-piece side panels on both sides of the cars. The car was refinished in British Racing Green with yellow edging, stripes, and number roundels during the refurbishment, and the seller notes some stress cracks and a chip in the finish near the front Lotus badge.

15″ Wobbly Web wheels are finished in yellow with machined lips and are mounted with Dunlop Racing tires. Braking is handled by four-wheel finned drum brakes. Suspension is independent and features coilover shocks front and rear, with double wishbones at the front and upper and lower radius arms, a lower control arm, and an upper link formed by the half-shafts out back.

The fixed back seat is trimmed in red leather with a matching dash and steering wheel rim. The car is fitted with five-point harnesses and a Halon fire-suppression system, as well as a trio of Smiths instruments. The numbered dash placard is a reproduction made by the previous owner, as the original was destroyed by a prior owner.

Power is provided by a Ford 105E counterflow inline-four that is paired with a four-speed Hewland manual transaxle. Induction is handled by a pair of Weber carburetors and the seller reports that other features include a Richardson cylinder head, Crowther bottom end, a Cosworth valve cover, polished ports, a baffled six-quart oil pan, high-output dry-sump oil pump, electronic ignition, and Aeroquip fittings. A fuel cell is installed and an Accusump unit is pictured behind the driver’s seat. The most recent service was reportedly performed in early 2020.

The replaced triangulated tubular chassis and water cooling rails are included in the sale. The chassis number tag was transplanted to the replacement chassis and is shown in the gallery.