As a young woman who questions her religious background and embarks on a personal odyssey, Renee Zellweger gives, in “A Price Above Rubies,” an utterly convincing and captivating performance, one that should place her in the forefront of American screen leading ladies. Sophomore effort by Boaz Yakin, whose feature debut, “Fresh,” won the Filmmakers’ Trophy at the 1994 Sundance festival, represents a more mature and substantial work, but suffers from one-dimensional portraiture in the case of the male characters, and a context that’s not grounded enough in realistic detail. Less commercial than “Fresh,” and not entirely satisfying, Miramax release will need strong critical support and extra muscle to play well beyond the big urban centers.

Yakin takes a different direction here than in “Fresh,” a slick, manipulative inner-city drama that avoided dealing with its most significant moral issues; “Rubies” is more personal and heartfelt. Set in Brooklyn’s Orthodox Jewish community, the story depicts the pressures of a restrictive life on an individualistic woman who refuses to conform to her religiously ascribed identity.

In the fairy-tale-like prologue, two children, Yossi (Shelton Dane) and his younger sister, Sonia (Jackie Ryan), engage in a sincere con-versation about the most sacred things in life — specifically, the difference between siblings’ love and the love of God, which is supposed to be all-consuming. Bewildered by Sonia’s declaration of love for him, and obviously tormented by his own doubts, Yossi walks to the lake and never comes back.

Tale then jumps to the present, with the mature Sonia (Zellweger) at the hospital giving birth to her first baby. Surrounded by her loyal husband, Mendel (Glenn Fitzgerald), and his family, the couple battle over the name of their boy. In deference to her hubby, but quite resentfully, Sonia renounces her wish to name the kid after her dead brother.

In the first reel, Yakin provides a detailed chronicle of Hasidic life, beginning with the bris (circumcision) ceremony for the baby, of which both husband and wife are terribly fearful. Conforming to tradition, the marriage is segregated along clearly demarcated gender lines. Mendel refuses to keep the lights on or even look at his wife while making love, clearly a one-sided act that leaves Sonia sexually disappointed and emotionally frustrated.

The surrounding family members, particularly Mendel’s older brother, Sender (Christopher Eccleston), and his wife, Rachel (Julianna Margulies), try to help Sonia deal with her new duties. In one of the intimate encounters between the two women, Sonia loses control and begins to caress Rachel. Terribly upset, the prim and proper Rachel takes Sonia to the rabbi for psychological counseling.

For selfish as well as pragmatic reasons, Sender comes to the “rescue.” In a rather incredible scene, he forces himself sexually on Sonia and proposes that she run his neighborhood jewelry store. Story has established early on that Sonia’s parents didn’t want her to go into their line of work, despite her obvious penchant for — and knowledge of — the jewelry business. As expected, despite Mendel’s resistance, Sonia blossoms as a shrewd businesswoman, all along continuing her strange affair with Sender.

When Sonia befriends a Hispanic artist, Ramon (Allen Payne), a modest man who sculpts and designs jewelry at home as a hobby, the entire clan is upset, and Sender bars her from his store. Experiencing a deep personal and moral crisis, Sonia goes downhill, until she’s forbidden to see her boy and is forced to spend the night with a mysterious beggar (Kathleen Chalfant), who throughout the film functions as a Greek chorus.

Unfortunately, Yakin’s scripting is not on a par with his helming; as “Fresh” showed, his characterizations tend to be shallow. All the men in the film play narrowly conceived roles, each based on a single dominant trait. Mendel is the devoted zaddik (holy man) and bright scholar; brother Sender is his opposite, impudent, pragmatic and materialistic; Ramon is glorified as a sensitive and trusting artist.

Tale is contemporary, but lenser Adam Holender, who did such a pro job in “Fresh,” gives the film a look that’s not grounded in any particular locale. Some of it is intentional, to show that Hasidic life has not changed over time, but it doesn’t make the film more credible or attractive. Though as simple and straightforward as Joan Micklin Silver’s “Hester Street,” “Rubies” lacks the attention to detail that marked the 1975 indie. Although Yakin is Jewish, story feels as though it’s being told from an outsider’s perspective.

That said, Zellweger, placed in what could be described as a one-woman show with some peripheral characters, rises above the obstacles with a stunningly profound performance. Imbuing her part with greater depth than the script does, her acting is admirably modulated. Rest of the cast is adequate, with impressive work from Margulies in a deglamorized role, and from vet Kim Hunter, as the old rebbitzn who, thanks to Sonia, experiences a moment of exhilarating joy before her husband expires in bed.