After some months at the start of a new government administration, several government agencies are getting a fresh new look. The Department of Health (DOH) is having a new secretary in the person of Dr. Enrique T. Ona, former Executive Director of National Kidney and Transplant Institute.

The post of the DOH secretary plays a vital role in the transformation that the Aquino administration wants to happen. The Secretary should be able to lead and implement projects, programs and laws concerning health for the Filipino people. He is tasked to uphold this challenge because health is a basic human right and our country needs a healthy citizenry and population.

Dr. Enrique Ona, undoubtedly one of the Philippines’ best in the field of vascular and organ transplantation surgery, is a native of Sagay City, Negros Occidental. Dr. Ona graduated from the University of the Philippines College of Medicine in 1962. After passing the licensure exam for physicians, he took his residency training in surgery at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn, New York which earned him the position of chief resident. He later obtained fellowship degrees in surgery and experimental surgery in Boston and New York. All the trainings with other doctors from prestigious medical schools such as Harvard made Dr. Ona realized that he was actually at par with them. He quips “Kaya ko rin pala ang mga ginagawa nila,” he humbly thought to himself. It was then that he decided to train further as a Colombo Scholar in Organ transplantation at Cambridge University in England.

Soon afterwards, realizing his social responsibility as a Filipino, Dr. Ona came back to the Philippines to pioneer in what was then lacking in the country – organ transplantation. Thus began his enviable record as a leader in his profession. He organized medical congresses and symposia, became an active member of international medical organizations and even had time for research. In 1979, he was recognized as the Outstanding Filipino Physician for Medicine. At present, he is the President of the Transplantation Society of the Philippines.

One of the highlights of his career was his radical work in transforming NKTI to what it is now. The belief that quality training, service and research are all possible if done systematically and with passion, Dr. Ona transformed the NKTI from being a fire-ravaged hospital into a modern, state-of-the-art health institution. He established the most modern hemodialysis center in Southeast Asia and a word-class laboratory for hematology and oncology. Under his leadership, the Institute developed strategic planning processes for procuring funds to be used in the institution’s advancement and at the same time credited as a self sustaining hospital. Indeed, much of what the NKTI is at present can be attributed to his outstanding ability and determination.

As Sec. Ona assumed his new post as Department of Health Secretary, we accompany him with our utmost support and prayers to be successful in this new endeavour. We know that the contributions he will make for the Philippine health care delivery system will be viable and integral considering that he has been part of the government system for many years. We are happy that government hospitals nationwide will soon improve for the best and most Filipinos will enjoy universal Philhealth coverage the soonest.