Easygoing Elegance - Bearden

Ask a local where Bearden is, and you’ll get some varying answers in terms of boundaries. The simple version: Bearden is an eclectic neighborhood west of downtown. Ask a local what Bearden is, and you’ll get varying answers there, too. We think of it as a condensed nature-loving-adventure-seeking-artsy-kinda-town!

Nature lovers need look no further than Lakeshore Park. It’s one of the city’s most visited with over 185 acres of green space and an extensive greenway along the Tennessee River with distant mountain views. Get some fresh air and take time to dream at nearby Everly Brothers Park. This pocket park was created as a tribute to Don and Phil Everly, who went to nearby West High School and were discovered by the great Chet Atkins. Known for hits like “All I Have to Do Is Dream,” the duo has influenced musicians through the decades. The park features inlaid quotes and signatures from Paul McCartney, Joan Baez, Graham Nash (honorary chair of the park), Carole King, Brian Wilson, and more.

Adventure seekers will find their thrill in a few ways here. In the retail sphere, swing by The Long Run which caters to the pavement pounders. More athletic gear can be found at River Sports Outfitters on Sutherland. This Knoxville staple features athletic wear, kayaks/SUPs for purchase, and rentals at their outpost locations. The Climbing Center offers indoor climbing to suit all abilities and ages.

For some, adventure comes in the form of food. Try a nitro brew at Intrepid Coffee or begin your day at Holly’s Gourmets Market & Café (how many places have “Biscuit Bread Pudding” on the menu?) or grab a doughnut or two from Status Dough. Lunch is easy to find; international flavor (like Gosh Ethiopian and Holy Land Deli) and familiar favorites (like Knox Farmacy and Dead End BBQ) abound. Knoxville is the type of place where a mid-afternoon beverage is a welcome treat, so keep it casual at Bearden Brewhouse, Albright Grove and Abridged Beer Co. – you’re guaranteed to be elbowing locals in these popular tucked away neighborhood spots. Abridged works especially great if you’re hungry; they have the juiciest burgers, the stickiest maple buttermilk fried chicken sandwiches, and…pot roast nachos. If you’d prefer a sober space, head to The Boocherie. This adult only bar serves Frog Juice Kombucha, “Mertails”, and more! Hard Knox Pizza is another great pick that's sure to please - no "fighting" over red or white sauce, get one of each! And don’t forget to pick up some iconic lemon cookies from Ham’n Goodys on Northshore. Make dinner reservations for Harvest - Land Sea & Vine, or Savelli’s, a deliciously tiny BYOW Italian experience on Sutherland.

Artsy-kinda-town? In Bearden, replace “kinda” with “definitely”! The area is most well-known for its high-end shopping and galleries. From local designs to art from around the world, you’ll find the perfect piece for your abode as you work your way down Kingston Pike. Pop in and out of Todd Richesin Interiors, Laws Interiors, the Persian Galleries, Bennett Galleries, The District Gallery & Framery, G&G Interiors, Art Galleria, Davis Studio and more. Antiques are sprinkled throughout Bearden Antique Mall, Blair House Antiques, and West End Antique Mall. Fig & Co, and Ironic have Pinterest-worthy décor. The Southern Market has 40+ mini shops inside full of jewelry, home décor, and gifts. For those looking for a more vintage/retro vibe, consider Nostalgia on Homberg for records, memorabilia from the 1982 World’s Fair, and other kitschy items. Find more groovy goods at Four Seasons Vintage.

There’s more than interior design here for those looking to fill their bags. You’ll find higher-end chains like Lululemon, Anthropologie, Kendra Scott, and Madewell all within a stone’s throw of each other. But there’s additional local to enjoy, too! For classic style, head to M.S. McClellan; for stylish kids head to Twig. DW Designs has soft tees; Est8te, Elle, and Obligato offer upscale trendy pieces.

Nature-loving? Yep. Adventure-seeking? Oh yeah. Artsy-kinda? Definitely!