John Doyle (born: December 22, 1999 (1999-12-22) [age 24]), is an American YouTuber and political commentator. He is a paleoconservative and has supported Donald Trump in 2020.

John was listed by Newsweek as one of the 'Young, Diverse, Conservative stars Progressives need to fear' in 2020.

Content[]

Starting in 2019, John runs the YouTube show "Heck Off, Commie!" where he presents his opinions about trending topics and his opposition to left-wing ideologies. He is very critical of pornography, and calls for its criminalization. He has produced three videos[1][2][3] urging his fans to refrain from watching porn and lists the potential side effects.

In 2019, he began HOCtober, where he would go on tours to college campuses. Some of his appearances were protested by Antifa, some of them armed with knives.

In 2021, he was a guest speaker for "Conservative Coachella" a camp which was also attended by the American Populist Union (APU). He also spoke at an APU conference in July of that year.

He also does social experiments such as open carrying in public, and taking liberals to shoot multiple guns, which earned over 1 million views each. He also goes to Trump protests and interviews the protestors.

Political Views[]

John is a paleoconservative and self-proclaimed Neo-Gastonist ( an ideology based on the tenants practiced by the Disney character Gaston in the 1991 Disney film Beauty and the Beast ) . He opposes Satanism, Marxism, BLM, gender transitioning on children [4], pedophilia in mainstream culture [5], Communism, Abortion, polyamorous relationships and most left-wing ideologies. He is pro Donald Trump and voted for him in the 2020 election [6]. He also supported Libertarian candidate Austin Petersen in 2016, and debated him in 2021.

He also believes the age of consent is a myth. He also believed his neighbor Isaac is secretly plotting against him.

Personal Life[]

John grew up in Michigan, but now lives in Texas. In 2020, he held a charity livestream to raise funds for families put at a disadvantage due to the pandemic. He is good friends with BlazeTV host Elijah Schaeffer and has appeared on his show many times, as well as hosting two episodes. He is also good friends with Brittany Venti and was interviewed by her twice, as well as appearing in a cameo of one of her vlogs.

John grew up in the same neighborhood and went to middle and high school with fellow YouTuber Nathaniel Abbott. They also worked at Subway together.

John is Catholic.

Twitter Suspension[]

In November 2020, John posted a picture to Twitter of a computer that showed the names of dead people who were alleged to be illegitimate votes. John subsequently faced accusations of doxxing and had his account reported by fans of multiple left-wing streamers. His account was then permanently deleted. It was then reinstated in 2023.

Discord Ban[]

On January 6th, 2021, the Heck Off Commie! Discord server was deleted due to fed-posting. This was related to the storming of the Capitol.

Trivia[]

John once appeared to an episode of You Are Here with a sword.

Kaitlin Bennett had a cameo in some of his vlogs, as well as Michael Knowles.