Once a sleepy town on the edge of Atlanta, Roswell has grown into a progressive, bustling city of nearly 90,000 people, but that small town charm has remained the same. From the historic downtown’s eclectic mix of great restaurants, art galleries and boutiques to the bucolic nature trails along the Chattahoochee, Roswell draws tourists and new homeowners alike.

Roswell has been named one of the Top Three Cities in the Nation to Raise Your Family by Frommer’s and one of the Top 20 Safest Cities (#18) in the country by the United States by City Crime Rankings, an annual reference book of crime statistics and rankings. Celebrities that have called Roswell home over the years include Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward, Usher, Curtis Mayfield and Chipper Jones.

Roswell has a wide variety of homes to choose from, ranging in style from historic estates to quaint bungalows, and from elegant and traditional brick homes to new construction townhomes. The city also has a number of popular swim and tennis communities. The strong school districts attract families to the area, as well as businesses with the close proximity to GA 400.

Roswell’s recreation and parks services are outstanding, awarded eight times as the best in the state. There are numerous recreational programs offered to residents and the city’s magnificent trail system highlights the history and natural beauty of the area. One of the most picturesque areas of Roswell is the City’s Old Mill Park which showcases the old mill ruins of Roswell and a close up view of Vickery Creek and its dam. There is a 7-mile linear park along the Chattahoochee River that winds its way through the city, dotted with picnic areas, boat ramps and fishing.

The Roswell Cultural Arts Center (RCAC) offers an array of arts and entertainment throughout the year. Some of the community’s annual events include the Annual Lighting of the Square, Movies at Riverside Park and Alive After Five in historic Downtown Roswell. The city’s three famous, historic homes are open all year round, offering Candlelight Tours and special presentations: Barrington Hall, Bulloch Hall and Archibald Smith Plantation.

Resources

City of Roswell website: http://www.roswellgov.com/