Chaotic, fire fighting, fast-paced, high pressure, uncertain.

These are all words used to describe work environments that have a lot on the go. At a first glance, these may seem unfavorable, negative, and unsustainable.

But these are also the exact same words used to describe a sports environment. Practice, training, the actual game, off-season. All of these stages have a few, if not all elements described above.

But, sports are one of the most fun activities, whether you’re watching or playing. Yes, for the players it can be tough, but from everyone I’ve spoken to who has competed at a pro-level, they said it was the best experience of their life.

If you’re looking for ways to approach a challenging work environment with the lens of a pro-athlete, then this episode is for you!

Alexandra Orlando is the Director of Marketing at Panam Sports, a 5x Canadian National Champion, and an Olympian. She’s also a Commonwealth games record holder with 6 gold medals at a single event and 3x gold medalist at Pan Am Games.

Alex won every rhythmic gymnastics event at the Canadian National Championships in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007.

She won all six rhythmic gymnastics events included as part of the gymnastics program at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne. She joined Graham Smith (1978, Edmonton), Susie O’Neill (1998, Kuala Lumpur) and Ian Thorpe (2002, Manchester) as the only competitors to win six gold medals at a single Commonwealth Games.

After her sports career, Alex made a successful transition to corporate as a sports analyst at CBC, Senior Manager at Rogers Communications, and then taking on the role of Director at Panam Sports.

To receive more insights on how you can use sports principles in business check out more blogs here.

Also, watch his Sports to Business podcast series to understand how you can apply sports principles to business. In this series, Tanvir sits down with former athletes from CFL/NFL football players to Olympians, and share their business transformation stories with you.