TORONTO ¬ Continuing with the momentum from the Guadalajara 2011 Pan/Parapan American Games, the Toronto 2015 Pan/Parapan American Games Organizing Committee (TO2015) today announced the appointment of 10 Canadian high-performance athletes to its newly created Athlete Advisory Council.

The Athlete Advisory Council has nationwide representation from Olympic, Paralympic, Pan Am and Parapan Am athletes: Carla Qualtrough, chair (para-swimming); Nathaniel Miller (water polo); Marie Dannhaeuser (para-swimming); Trevino Betty (athletics); Warren Sawkiw (baseball); Nicole Forrester (athletics); Erika Schmutz (wheelchair rugby); Alexandra Orlando (rhythmic gymnastics), Jane Thornton (rowing) and John Hastings (kayak).

"TO2015 has taken a major step forward in the creation of this Council," said Sylvie Bernier, TO2015 Board Member and Olympic gold medallist. "Other international Games have had such advisory councils before, but this is the first one in Canada that reports into the Organizing Committee, so their input will be both vital and impactful."

The Athlete Advisory Council will support and represent the views and interests of world-class athletes to help ensure best performances at the Toronto 2015 Games. The Council will also help shape programs to enhance the athlete experience, encourage community engagement and create an intimate and authentic Games experience.

More than 40 applicants were considered by an evaluation panel including representatives from the Canadian Olympic Committee Athlete Commission, Canadian Sport Centre, Canadian Paralympic Committee, AthletesCAN and TO2015. The goal of the selection panel was to create a Council of active and retired national team members that reflect the diversity of the Canadian sport system. Therefore, the eight selections announced today represent team sport, individual sport, male, female, French, English, Aboriginal and athletes with disabilities.

"We have been working extremely hard to define our objectives and goals for the next two years to be as effective as possible to the organization. By focusing on a few key areas, we feel we can make a large impact on TO2015," said Carla Qualtrough, Chair, Athlete Advisory Council. "Promoting the Parapan side of the Games is important and will be a cornerstone of the work we want to achieve. If we can raise awareness of our para-athletes and their incredible stories of challenge and overcoming obstacles, then we've been successful."

"The Council also wants to ensure the Athletes' Village serves as a home away from home for the athletes," said Alexandra Orlando, Marketing and Revenue Associate,TO2015, Olympian and 12-time Pan American medallist, who is serving as the TO2015 staff representative on the council. "By taking into account high-performance athletes' invaluable knowledge and Games experience, the council can provide input to help create the right environment for Toronto 2015 athletes to perform at their best."

The Athlete Advisory Council term of office is two years.