Cache IQ Inc., a startup led by former NetQoS co-founder Joel Trammell , has raised $5 million from 25 private investors.

Cache IQ, which will announce the funding today, is developing software to solve the network storage bottlenecks that plague today's data centers.

The company was founded in July, when Trammell and co-founder Greg Dahl purchased the intellectual property of Austin-based Storspeed Inc. for an undisclosed price.

Storspeed, which filed for bankruptcy in February, was developing network-storage products.

Dahl was formerly vice president of business development at Storspeed.

"The technology was very interesting, but the company got into a difficult position when it spent most of its venture capital and was unable to raise more," Trammell said. "Storspeed's intellectual property gave us a great foundation for the storage products we are developing."

After buying the technology, Trammell, who has invested $1 million of his own money in Cache IQ, set out to raise venture capital.

"We had some good conversations, but that whole venture industry is somewhat in turmoil, and enterprise software is not the hottest area for investing," Trammell said. "Certainly within the Austin venture community, there are not many firms funding enterprise software."

So he shifted gears, targeting individual investors instead.

"I reached out to 50 folks I knew and encouraged them to reach out to the angel community," Trammell said. "We were able to find $5 million from 25 angels. It's a collection of folks around the country, most all with experience in technology in one way or another."

Angel investors are typically wealthy individuals who provide money and guidance to young companies, and usually take smaller ownership stakes than do venture capitalists.

Trammell said that with angel investors, "the terms were simpler and it was less expensive than the VC route would have been."

Trammell said he thinks it will be easier to work with a large number of individual investors rather than a few institutional investors.

"When you have just two or three, each one thinks they have a significant piece of the company, and they might all have different opinions," he said. "With 25, people have smaller stakes and different expectations of involvement."

Trammell took the traditional venture capital route with NetQoS, which he and his wife, Cathy Fulton , founded in 1999.

The network performance management software company raised $13 million from Liberty Partners in New York. It was acquired by software industry giant CA Inc. in 2009 for $200 million in an all-cash transaction.

Fulton left CA in January, and Trammell departed in May.

Fulton is Cache IQ's chief scientist.

Angel investor Errol Ginsberg said Trammell and Fulton's track record is a big reason he put money into Cache IQ.

"A lot of what you invest in is the people, not just the technology," said Ginsberg, who is founder and chairman of Ixia, a Calabasas, Calif.-based communications test equipment company. "I've known Joel for years, and I have a lot of respect for him and Kathy and the team at Cache IQ. I feel they have the expertise to pull this off."

For now, Cache IQ, which has 11 workers, is focused on completing its first product and is hiring software developers, Trammell said.

It will add sales and marketing employees as it gears up for its product launch in the third quarter, he said.

lhawkins@statesman.com; 912-5955