Russell Hoban’s ‘Riddley Walker’ is a dystopian sci-fi novel. It is set in the remains of an obliterated England, 2000 years later on after a destructive atomic war, pursues twelve-year old narrator and protagonist, Riddley Walker as he looks to reveal truth and history. Riddley's world is currently known as "Inland,” which has been wrecked and humankind is gradually revamping civilization in what mirrors the English Iron Age.

Villagers chase and accumulate just as dig for iron mineral from the rest of old machines from the "Bad Time." Their legends and old stories are taken from leftovers of undeniable standard society, frequently confounded, inadequate Catholic regulation, and the Punch and Judy Show.

The story gets in Kent; England roughly 2000 years into what is to come. Riddley's twelfth birthday is his "naming day," in which he turns into a man and lances a wild boar. After three days, Riddley's father dies and Riddley kills the pioneer of a wild pack of dogs, subsequently starting the boy’s epic voyage. The old stories of Riddley's reality spin to a great extent around the "Eusa Story," a story which figuratively addresses the demolition of the world by atomic power.

Subsequent to being accepted as a "connexion man" for his village in the strides of his father, Riddley tries to interface the appropriate responses between his world and the history which created it. Riddley is driven by a pack of wild dogs, which are fatal adversaries of people in this dystopian world, to locate a youngster caught in a prison looking for help. Riddley spares the Ardship of Cambry, otherwise called Lissener, and start a voyage to Cambry to help the Eusa society, a folk who were at one time the leaders of the world and had the most noteworthy innovation.

En route, Riddley learns the historical backdrop of the Eusa people and their contentions with Abel Goodparley, the "Pry Mincer" of Inland and the Ram, or administering framework. Riddley's dedication to Lissener is suspected when he meets again with Goodparley, whose bits of knowledge into the authentic setting of creation, decimation and the outcome of the world open Riddley's mind.

The disclosure of a fine yellow stone makes added force to the search through the various gatherings to reveal the riddle behind folk stories dependent on the "Eusa Story" and other reports from the "Bad Time." Their success is a search to locate the riddle behind the "1 Big 1," which alludes to black powder, and the "1 Big 1," which implies weaponry and atomic force. Riddley creates and loses numerous unions along his adventure. Finally, his "affiliation," or edification, identifies with the way that the most dominant are the individuals who do not look for power by any means. Riddley proceeds on his adventure, reenacting Punch and Judy shows in a voyaging escort, joined by the incredible pack of faithful dogs.