Biographical Notes:

The most recognized source book regarding Joseph Brown and his brothers is generally considered to be The Browns of Providence Plantations-Colonial Years, by James B. Hedges. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1952.

From: http://www.rilin.state.ri.us/studteaguide/RhodeIslandHistory/chapt3.html

In the economic realm, the famous Brown family of Providence rose to new financial, commercial, and industrial heights, surpassing in stature even the celebrated merchants Aaron Lopez, Joseph Wanton, and Christopher Champlin in Newport and James D'Wolf of Bristol. The resourceful Brown brothers -- Nicholas (1729-91). Joseph(1733-85), John (1736-1803), and Moses (1738-1836)- guided by uncles Obadiah (1712-62) and Elisha (1717-1802), laid the groundwork in this turbulent age for the remarkable commercial and industrial advances of the early national period.

From the Joseph Bucklin Society: The four Brown brothers were prominent merchants and ran several businesses in common. The initial key to the Browns' business success was a candle works. But in the same year, 1762, they also formed Nicholas Brown and Company for their shipping and commercial activities. That was the business that was large and complex and quickly became one of the most successful businesses in the English colonies. According to claims put forth by the Masonic Order, John, Joseph, and Moses were all active members of the St. John's Lodge Number 1 Providence Free and Accepted Masons, Joseph being the master of the lodge (Providence Evening Bulletin, Letter to the Editor, June 7, 1966). It should be pointed out that the Masons make many such claims of leaders of the American Revolution It is important to remember that younger brother, Moses Brown, the famous abolitionist and Quaker leader converted to Quakerism later in life. The Brown brothers were all born as Baptists. Joseph Brown was known to have held slaves; one of whom drowned in 1769 while bathing in the Providence River.

Left: The Joseph Brown House erected 1774, at 50 South Main Street in Providence, later the location for the Providence Bank, then the firm of Brown & Ives.

Of the Brown brothers, Joseph was the most active politically. In History of Providence County, Rhode Island, by Richard M. Bayles, New York, 1891, page 181, he is found in a list of December 1773 appointees to the Town of Providence Committee of Inspection, and was actively involved in the manufacturing saltpeter for use in gunpowder, planning fortifications at Fox Point, and procuring fire-ships for the defense of the Colony.

Joseph Brown served as a Deputy (equivalent to a modern State Representative) from Providence to the RI General Assembly, and is found in a list published in the Providence Gazette on May 8, 1784 as an Assistant (now known as State Senator) from Providence. He was also listed as being appointed to represent the State of Rhode Island in newly-formed Congress, but apparently never served since he is known to have suffered a stroke in 1784, and he is not listed in the files of the Political Graveyard.

Right: First Baptist Church in America, design and architecture by Joseph Brown.

It is interesting that Joseph Brown helped to fund the Revolution. In 2021 an item came up for sale on the private market, a document dated in 1779 as a Rhode Island Bill of Exchange (or loan) to the US Government which was made out to, and endorsed by, Joseph Brown. Issued by Francis Hopkinson, and countersigned by Joseph Clarke, these financial documents were a method to fund the government and thus be a basis for repayment to the people who loaned the money.

Although he did engage in the merchant business of Nicholas Brown and Company for income, his political and social activities overshadowed his business activities. His scientific skills were put to good use, though, and he was left by his brothers to be largely in charge of the mechanics of the Hope furnace and the spermeceti candle factory his family owned. He was an architect, leaving as part of his legacy the design of the Joseph Brown House (1774), the John Brown house, University Hall at Brown University, the Market Building, and the First Baptist Church of America (1774). He's listed in the Biographical Dictionary of American Architects. The John Brown House is the centerpiece of the RI Historical Society holdings. This brownstone-and-brick mansion, was designed by Joseph Brown for his brother John (1736-1803), and was built between 1786 and 1788 and has been restored. See http://www.rihs.org. The Joseph Brown house is also in Providence, and has also been restored. It became the site, after Joseph's death in 1785, of his brother John's Providence Bank in 1791.

According to First Baptist Church historian Dr. J. Stanley Lemons, Joseph Brown was an original member of the Charitable Baptist Society, organized c 1770 to fund and build the First Baptist Church meeting house which he designed and that still stands today as the largest wooden structure from the Colonial period in the United States. The meeting house spire and style have inspired church goers in Providence for three centuries. He was a pew owner, and later a baptized member of the Church as were his ancestors.

Left: The desk of Joseph Brown, crafted by Providence furniture artist John Carlisle in 1785. Sadly, Joseph Brown may never have used the desk he commissioned, since he had a stroke in 1784, and died in December of 1785.

Joseph Brown's property became the subject of much discourse in 2005 as the financially troubled Rhode Island Historical Society decided to put up for auction one of its prized possessions, the intricately crafted desk originally belonging to Joseph Brown, and which has long been on display in the John Brown mansion. It is expected that the desk may fetch upwards of $10 million if the auction comes to pass. Art critics have noted the similarities between the curve at the top of this desk with the curve at the top of Joseph Brown's house, which might indicate that Brown himself was involved in the design of the desk. (See Providence Journal, March 13, 2005)

From the 1770 List of Providence Taxpayers we get the following long list of Brown families:

Brown Allin I A 1

Brown Chad III D 5

Brown Esec III A 2

Brown George I A 2

Brown George XI D 4

Brown Elisha’s Brick House VI C 4

Brown Elisha’s Home VI C 4

Brown Elisha’s Mill VI D 1

Brown Hope III B 3

Brown Isaac VI C 2

Brown James’ Widow Hope III B 5

Brown John III B 5 Known Gaspee Raider

Brown John III B 6 Known Gaspee Raider

Brown John VI B 4 Known Gaspee Raider

Brown John VI C 4 Known Gaspee Raider

Brown John VI C 4 Known Gaspee Raider

Brown Joseph III B 5 Known Gaspee Raider

Brown Molly III A 4

Brown Moses III A 3

Brown Moses III B 5

Brown Nathaniel House see William Brown III B 1

Brown Nicholas III B 5

Brown Obadiah, Widow III A 4

Brown Richard, Jr. VI C 5

Brown William III B 1

Brown Zephaniah XI B 5

The only property listed by Joseph Brown at that time was held in common with his brothers, Nicholas and John, on the West side of North Main Street in a choice location only two buildings South of the Town Parade

Florence Parker Simister, in her book Streets of the City: An Anecdotal History of Providence, p57 relates that it was Joseph Brown who was at the forefront of citywide excitement about the transit of Venus across the sun in 1769. He purchased the observatory equipment such as a reflecting telescope (shown at left) and measuring devices for the observatory set up in Providence at the site of what is now known as "Transit Street". The precise measurements of architecture would have been applied in Joseph Brown's extracurricular interest in astronomy. The next such showing of the transit of Venus will be in 2112.

All of the knowledge of optics came in handy later on in 1775, when Brown, Joseph Bucklin, and Benjamin Thurber were assigned to build an 80 foot beacon tower on Prospect and Meeting Streets on College Hill to signal a British invasion.

According to Stewart Crump (in "Joseph Brown, Astronomer", Rhode Island History Vol. 27 January 1968) although he had lttle formal education, Joseph Brown was elected a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, awarded an honorary Masters degree in 1769, and was the first Professor of Experimental Philosophy at Brown University. He had agreed to teach without salary, but unfortunately, a stroke in 1784 prevented him from serving his full professorship.