Nearly half a century after his death, screen legend Humphrey Bogart has a new movie coming out Tuesday via video on demand — or at least his estate does.

“It just seemed like a perfect fit for us,’’ says the “Casablanca’’ star’s only son, Stephen Bogart, whose celebrated actress mother Lauren Bacall passed away at 89 in August. “My sister Leslie and I loved the script.’’

A neo-noir set in Los Angeles, “This Last Lonely Place’’ is the first film in decades produced by Santana Films, a production company that Humphrey Bogart formed in 1949 and named after his beloved yacht. The title of the new film is an homage to the most famous of the original Santana’s seven films, the classic noir “In a Lonely Place’’ (1950).

Stephen, a producer for a PBS station who also has a real-estate license in Naples, Fla., has been working with managing partner Robbert de Klerk to expand the activities of his father’s estate. They include an annual Humphrey Bogart Film Festival in Key Largo, Fla., and a licensing deal for Bogart’s Real English Gin with his dad’s face on the bottle.

Director Steve Anderson approached Bogart “a couple of years ago’’ with the idea for the film, a twisty tale of a cab driver (Rhys Coiro of “Entourage’’) who crosses paths with a crime perpetrated by an investment banker (Xander Berkeley of “24’’) and his mistress (Carly Pope “Elysium’’) one fateful evening.

Shot on an ultra-low-budget of $125,000, “This Last Lonely Place’’ is beautiful, with taut direction and great performances. There’s not a false note in this very solid piece of work.

“It’s such fun to watch,’’ says Stephen, who is also the film’s executive producer. Bogart supported the decision to skip a costly theatrical run and market the movie directly to fans via the crowd-sourcing site indiegogo.com, who got an early look. As of Tuesday, it can be streamed on the VHX platform by way of thislastlonelyplace.com.

Meanwhile, Bogart has been working with his siblings to wrap up his late mother’s estate.

“It was weird,’’ he says, “I had talked to Mom just the day before she died, so it came as a surprise. My brother Sam [his dad was the late Jason Robards, to whom Bacall was married from 1961 to 1969] had been taking care of her for the last two years.

“He was in Sweden when she passed away, and I happened to be in the city, but Sam had her health care proxy and spoke to the ambulance guys on the phone’’ to make sure the family’s wishes were followed.

“I can’t feel sorry for Mom,’’ Bogart adds. “She lived three or four lives. It was an amazing story.’’

Now Robards, who lives in Manhattan, is “saddled’’ with much of the responsibility for getting Bacall’s apartment at the Dakota with a spectacular view of Central Park — valued at over $20 million — ready for sale. “I go up for 10 days at time to help make it ready for showing,’’ says Bogart, referring to his real-estate background. “Her house was a real museum.’’

Bogart, who looks and sounds a lot like his late dad who died of esophageal cancer at age 57 in 1957, is engaged to Carla Soviero, an executive at NewsBank, which provides online research materials to libraries. The pair are marrying in New York in November.

“I knew Carla long ago, but we separated then reconnected,’’ he says. “I’m 66, she’s 60 and we’ve been together awhile.”

Meanwhile, Santana Films has already wrapped its second film, “The White Orchid,’’ another noir directed by Anderson starring John Carroll Lynch and Olivia Thirlby. It doesn’t have a release date yet, but Bogart and his partners are already looking for a third script to back.

Any chance that Bogart will follow in his dad’s footsteps in front of the camera?

“They tried to talk me into making a cameo appearance in ‘This Last Lonely Place,’ but I thought my mug would be too distracting for the audiences,’’ he says with his dad’s self-deprecating wit. “I actually haven’t been on a film set since my mom’s film ‘Blood Alley’ 50 years ago. Who knows, maybe I’ll turn up in the third movie.’’