Birth Name: Humphrey DeForest Bogart

Nickname: Bogie

Birth date: December 25, 1899

Birth place: New York, New York

Death date: January 14, 1957

Death place: At his home in Holmby Hills, CA

Burial location: Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale, California

(ashes kept at the Garden of Memory)

Height: 5’8”

Eye color: Brown

Hair color: Brown

Hobbies: Golf, sailing, chess

Hollywood Walk of Fame: Star is located at 6322 Hollywood Blvd.

Parents: Maude Humphrey and Belmont DeForest Bogart

Siblings: Two younger sisters, Frances and Kay

Married:

Helen Menken (m. 1926 – d.1927)

Mary Philips (m.1928 – d. 1937)

Mayo Methot (m. 1938 – d. 1945)

Betty Joan Perske a.k.a. Lauren Bacall (m.1945 – w.1957 )

Children: (Bacall) Stephen Humphrey and Leslie

Fast Facts:

Although he rarely participated in celebrity tournaments, Bogart was one of Hollywood’s better golfers. On many occasions, Bogart enjoyed catching a quick round of golf at Lakeside Golf Club in between filming at the nearby Warner Bros. studios.

Bogart and Spencer Tracy first met on the set of Up the River, when both were newcomers to the film industry. The two became lifelong friends, and Tracy was one of the few people who was allowed to visit Bogart once he became gravely ill.

During his marriage to Mayo Methot, Bogart bought a sailboat, which he lightheartedly named Sluggy after his hot-tempered wife.

Newlyweds Bogart and Betty purchased a home at 2707 Benedict Canyon Road in Beverly Hills, where they accumulated an array of animals. Their pets included 14 chickens, eight ducks and a large dog.

After marrying Betty, Bogart sold Sluggy and purchased a new 54-foot sailboat. He named the craft Santana.

Bogart and Bacall’s son, Stephen, was named after Bogart’s character in To Have and Have Not. His daughter, Leslie, was named after friend and The Petrified Forest co-star, Leslie Howard.

Betty put the gold whistle from To Have and Have Not, their first movie together, with Bogart when he was cremated.

In 1999, the American Film Institute named Humphrey Bogart the Greatest Male Star of All Time.

Click on image for video