When Pangaea broke up at the end of the Jurassic, a significant separation between Laurasia and Gondwana took place, causing increased differentiation of their respective faunas. In the Early Cretaceous Laurasia was divided into three palaeobiogeographic units: North America, Europe and Central Asia (Russell 1993). These landmasses, rather than being continuous, formed an archipelago. The combined effect of plate movements and eustatic sea level changes during the Early Cretaceous (Skelton et al. 2003) allowed the coastal or shallow sea areas to be used during sea level lows by the terrestrial tetrapods to move between these three major continental areas. The position of Europe, with its connections to Asia, North America and Gondwana, makes it a challenge to unravel the palaeobiogeography of terrestrial tetrapods at this time. The expression ‘biogeographic ambiguity of Europe’ defines this situation very well (Russell 1993; Canudo 2006). The Early Cretaceous, therefore, is a key period in investigating the geographical distribution, origin and evolution of many continental vertebrate faunas, including mammals. To date, the most complete and continuous Early Cretaceous mammalian fossil record in Europe has been found in the Iberian Peninsula, where immigrant (Gobiconodontidae Chow and Rich, 1984) and endemic faunas (the Dryolestidae Crusafontia cuencanaHenkel and Krebs, 1969) were present (Cuenca-Bescós and Canudo 2003, 2004). Multituberculate fossils dominate the mammal assemblages of the Iberian Peninsula (Canudo and Cuenca-Bescós 1996; Crusafont and Gibert 1976; Cuenca-Bescós et al. 1996; Hahn and Hahn 1992, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002), which also consist both of endemic taxa (Pinheirodontidae Hahn and Hahn, 1999 and Paulchoffatiidae Hahn, 1969), with representatives from the Late Jurassic, and others which, to date, are only known in western Europe and Asia (Eobaataridae Kielan-Jaworowska et al. 1987). New multituberculate finds from the Iberian Peninsula (Canudo and Cuenca-Bescós 1996; Cuenca-Bescós and Canudo 2004; Hahn and Hahn 2006; Badiola et al. 2007a, b), together with those from Britain (Sigogneau-Russell and Kielan-Jaworowska 2002; Butler and Hooker 2005; Sweetman 2006), have increased the resolution of the Middle and Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous multituberculate biostratigraphy and biogeography.

The most abundant and diverse Early Cretaceous multituberculate fossils are recorded in Western Europe, from the Berriasian of Portugal and England and from the Barremian of Spain. Fossils from the Valanginian are scarce, and no Hauterivian specimens have previously been described (Kielan-Jaworowska et al. 2004; Hahn and Hahn 2006). In this paper, the first record of late Hauterivian multituberculates in Europe is reported. These have been recovered in the late Hauterivian-early Barremian site of La Cantalera (Josa, province of Teruel), one of the sites in the Aragonese branch of the Iberian Ranges. The latter is becoming one of the most important areas in the study of Early Cretaceous vertebrate faunas, mainly multituberculates, because of the abundant and stratigraphically well-correlated fossiliferous beds. To date, late Valanginian, late Hauterivian and early and late Barremian multituberculate fossils have been recovered (Badiola et al. 2007a, b), of which those of the Barremian are the most abundant and diverse throughout the world (Canudo and Cuenca-Bescós 1996; Cuenca-Bescós and Canudo 2004; Cuenca-Bescós et al. 1996; Ruiz-Omeñaca et al. 2004). Further sampling in the Iberian Range, which is currently being undertaken, is expected to yield crucial information that will increase what is known about the phylogeny, systematics, palaeobiology and distribution of the Early Cretaceous multituberculate faunas.

Geologically, La Cantalera site is an outcrop of Early Cretaceous clays (‘Wealden facies’), specifically clays from the limestones and marls of the Blesa Formation, located in the Oliete Sub-Basin, one of the sub-basins of the Early Cretaceous Maestrazgo Basin (Text-Fig. 1). This unit has had a complex history, including a lower part with alluvial to lacustrine sedimentation (the site of La Cantalera). The fossiliferous beds comprise grey clays with abundant vegetal remains, ostracodes (Cypridea [Ulwellia] sorianaKneuper-Haack, 1966) and gastropods (Viviparidae indet., Basamotophora indet.) that are reported to be resistant to periods of drought (Brookes Knight et al. 1960; Mayoral and Sequeiros 1983), and abundant carbonate nodules that were formed in palaeosols (Aurell et al. 2004). There are also charophytes (Atopochara trivolvis triquetaGrambast, 1968 nov. com. Martín-Closas, 1996, Hemiclavator adnatusMartín-Closas and Grambast-Fessard, 1986 nov. com. Schudack, 1989) and other macroplant fossil remains. The presence of the charophyte Atopochara trivolvis triqueta, subzone triqueta, indicates that the fossiliferous beds are late Hauterivian–early Barremian in age (Canudo et al. 2002). The site was probably formed in a lucustrine environment with periodic droughts. It is likely to have been a rich and diverse terrestrial ecosystem with a complex and varied faunal assemblage and abundant vegetation in the surrounding area (Ruiz-Omeñaca et al. 1997). The highly diverse vertebrate fossils are composed mainly of isolated teeth, disarticulated, complete or fragmented bones, eggshell fragments, and coprolites. The vertebrate assemblage consists of fishes (scarce fossils), frogs, lizards, crocodiles, turtles, pterosaurs, dinosaurs and mammals (Ruiz-Omeñaca et al. 1997, 2005; Canudo et al. 2002). The study of the vertebrate fossils from La Cantalera is still in progress. To date, nine isolated teeth of multituberculate mammals have been recovered, which are here assigned to at least three different taxa.

Palaeobiogeographical implications

The late Hauterivian multituberculate fossil assemblage from La Cantalera consists of some taxa (Pinheirodontidae and probably ?Plagiaulacidae) that were restricted to what is now Western Europe, whereas others (Eobaataridae) have also been described from Asia. The two premolars described as Plagiaulacidae or Eobaataridae gen. et sp. indet. could belong to a new plagiaulacid taxon, in which case it would be the first in the Iberian Peninsula. To date, these multituberculates have only been described from the Berriasian deposits of England (Owen 1871; Simpson 1928; Kielan-Jaworowska and Ensom 1992, 1994; Sigogneau-Russell and Kielan-Jaworowska 2002; Hahn and Hahn 2004). Pinheirodontids are described from the Berriasian deposits of England and Portugal (Kielan-Jaworowska and Ensom 1992; Hahn and Hahn 1999), and in the late Hauterivian (this paper) and early and late Barremian deposits of Spain (Canudo and Cuenca-Bescós, 1996; Cuenca-Bescós et al. 1996; Badiola et al. 2007a). Eobaatarids are present in Europe (England and Spain) and Asia (China, Japan and Mongolia). Those from England are located in the Early Cretaceous (Wealden) deposits of Cliff End (Wadhurst Fm., south England) and of the Isle of Wight (Wessex Fm.), which are dated as Valanginian and Barremian, respectively: at the Cliff End site, Loxaulax valdensis (Woodward 1911) has been described from a few specimens (Clemens 1963, 1971; Clemens and Lees 1971), and two Barremian specimens from the Wessex Formation of the Isle of Wight have also been assigned to the genus LoxaulaxSimpson, 1928, without specific determination, by Butler and Ford (1975). New multituberculate fossils have been recovered in this area, the study of which by Steven C. Sweetman is still in progress. Two species of the eobaatarid Eobaatar are described from the early Barremian of Spain: Eobaatar hispanicus and Eobaatar? pajaronensis (Hahn and Hahn 1992, 2001, 2002). New specimens which belong to Eobaatar have recently been identified in the late Barremian bed at Vallipón (province of Teruel), in the Aragonese branch of the Iberian Ranges, in northeastern Iberia (Badiola et al. 2007a). Some of these were previously described as Eobaatarinae indet. (Cuenca-Bescós et al. 1996). In this paper, the oldest representative of Eobaatar is described. It comes from the late Hauterivian–early Barremian site of La Cantalera (Josa, Teruel), another site in the Aragonese branch of the Iberian Ranges. The age of the Asiatic localities that have yielded multituberculate fossils is still subject to debate. Such fossils come from the Jehol and Tetori Groups of China and Japan, and from the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. The only eobaatarid taxon described from the Jehol Group, in the Yixian Formation, is Sinobaatar lingyuanensisHu and Wang, 2002. The Jehol Biota is currently thought to date from about 130–120 Myr (Meng et al. 2006 and references therein), and so is Barremian to Aptian in age (Gradstein et al. 2004). There are also two other formations (the Shahai and Fuxin formations; e.g. Wang et al. 1995) that are stratigraphically younger than the Yixian Formation, which have yielded some multituberculate fossils that are still unpublished (Kusuhashi, pers. comm. 2007). Two other species of Eobaatar are described from the Aptian or Albian beds at Khovboor (Gobi Desert, Mongolia; Kielan-Jaworowska et al. 1987): Eobaatar magnus and Eobaatar minorKielan-Jaworowska et al. 1987. The age of the fossiliferous beds located in the Japanese Tetori Group is more obscure, because there are no good radiometric dates available and reliable index fossils are rare. The age of the Kuwajima Formation ranges from Valanginian to Aptian (Matsukawa et al. 2006; Rougier et al. 2007), although the Zircon U-Pb ages collected from tuff beds indicate a shorter period, Barremian or early Aptian (Kusuhashi et al. 2006). The multituberculate remains of the Kuwajima Formation were previously described as Eobaataridae indet. (Takada et al. 2001), but recently have been assigned to new eobaatarid taxa (Kusuhashi 2008).

The occurrence of Eobaatar in the Iberian Peninsula, from the late Hauterivian to late Barremian, and in Asia during the Aptian or Albian, indicates that some faunal exchange could have taken place between these areas during the Neocomian. The palaeogeographic models indicate that it was possible (Smith et al. 1994; Smith and Rush 1997). Other palaeontological data support this hypothesis, as well as the vertebrate faunal exchange between other parts of Laurasia and Gondwana. The mammalian family Gobiconodontidae is recorded in the ?Berriasian of Africa (Morocco), in the early and late Barremian of Europe (England and Spain), in the Hauterivian to Aptian of eastern and central Asia, and in the Aptian–Albian of North America (Cuenca-Bescós and Canudo 2003; Sweetman 2006; and references therein), and some Barremian dinosaur taxa (at generic level) are observed to be common to the Iberian Peninsula, Asia and North America, indicating intermittent faunal exchange between these areas of Laurasia during the Barremian (Milner et al. 2000; Cuenca-Bescós and Canudo 2003; Canudo 2006). However, the presence of Eobaatar, together with the presence of an euhelopodid dinosaur, in the late Hauterivian deposits of La Cantalera, in the Iberian Peninsula (Canudo et al. 2002; Ruiz-Omeñaca et al. 2005), suggests that an Early Cretaceous geographical connection between Europe and Asia could have existed from the Hauterivian to the Barremian (for c. 11 myr), either sporadically or constantly for most of the Early Cretaceous, thus making mammalian and dinosaur faunal exchange possible.

The area of origin of the family Eobaataridae is still unknown. The paucity of the fossil record for these multituberculates, and the absence of well-dated deposits in Asia, currently inhibits the use of cladistic analysis for investigating the phylogenetic and palaeobiogeogaphic relationships between the different taxa. However, the oldest representative of Eobaatar at La Cantalera, together with those of the early and late Barremian found in other Iberian localities, as well as the species from Asia, will be essential in studying the area of origin and the dispersals of this eobaatarid.