We are counting down the days now until the release of the brand new film from mastermind George Miller in Mad Max: Fury Road by covering all the Mad Max films before it and reviewing it for Ass Whoopin Wednesdays. So, the very first film in the series simply titled Mad Max sees Mel Gibson (Lethal Weapon) as our hero Max. It is a couple of years into the future according to the film and everything has gone cuckoo between law enforcement and all of the outlaws. The chief believes that the people just need a hero to look up to while Max just wants to be with his family. That is until they cross a vicious outlaw named Toecutter (Hugh Keays-Byrne) after Max eliminated their beloved outlaw Night Rider. After the gang kills his partner, wife, and son, Max will set out to seek revenge on the gang of outlaws until he has eliminated every last one. The film also stars Joanne Samuel (Nightmaster) as Jessie, Steve Bisley (The Great Gatsby) as Jim Goose, Tim Burns (Monkey Grip) as Johnny The Boy, Roger Ward (Quigley Down Under) as Fifi, David Cameron (Dogstar) as the underground mechanic, Reg Evans (Japanese Story) as the station master, Jerry Day (The Lost World: Jurassic Park) as Ziggy, Howard Eynon (The Man From Snowy River) as Diabando, and the film was also written and directed by George Miller. Before we get into the review of the film, let’s check out some stats from the film:

This was the first film in the whole entire series of three films that were originally released and the one less concentrated on the apocalyptic side cause that would come later. Max has a total of 12 kills in the film, but no origin story to speak of other than he is the bosses favorite. His wife is his love interest and along with his child and best friend, they are killed. The big boss Toecutter is defeated and it’ one of those scenes when Max chases him and forces him to hit a big truck and you get the eyes bulging out of the head reaction scene. The film sort of had this horror movie style to it while it was an action film with the music and the way some of the scenes were shot. I think Friday The 13TH may have gotten some inspiration from this film as far as stalking chase scenes are concerned. It takes a while int he film for Max to really get going, but when he does it’s pretty quick. This was definitely a fun film to watch and Mel Gibson looks so young in this film that’s insane. So, we have one down on Ass Whoopin Wednesdays and two more to go before we review Mad Max: Fury Road and I cannot wait to see that as George Miller returns. The next Mad Max will feature the Post Apocalyptic wasteland version of Australia so stay tuned here for that. I am going to give this film an B+ for a final grade.