Eastern Cape

Eastern Cape Information Directory

The Eastern Cape is known to be South Africa’s second largest province following the Northern Cape as the largest. The capital of the province is Bhisho. This province is one of natural beauty and diversity unmatched in another province. The Eastern Cape moves from the desert-like Great Karoo to the lush forests of the Wild Coast and the Keiskamma Valley, on to the Langkloof Valley.

Home to a number of renowned tertiary education establishments like Rhodes University, the Nelson Mandela University and the Walter Sisulu University of Technology, the Eastern Cape is a proud student supporter. Transport in and out of the Eastern Cape is not a problem as there is a good road system and there are airports at Bhisho, East London, Mthatha and Port Elizabeth (Gqeberha), along with two major harbours in East London and Port Elizabeth (Gqeberha).

The Langkloof Valley has large deciduous fruit growing communities while the arid Karoo is known for its sheep farming. Port Elizabeth (Gqeberha) is the largest city within the province and an important harbour. The city is also home to many sporting events throughout the year and is a popular holiday spot.

The majority of the economy in the Eastern Cape is centered around manufacturing primarily automotive, with it being the hub of South Africa’s motor industry.

Eastern Cape Accommodation

This province is well-known for its excellent tourist attractions and accommodation establishments. From the dry Karoo to the lush Wild Coast there are many things to do, see and experience. The accommodation directory is filled with advertisers in the Eastern Cape all offering splendid accommodation options from bed and breakfasts, and self-catering to game lodges. There is something to suit all budgets. Whatever your accommodation preference, the Eastern Cape has it all.

Some Highlights of the Eastern Cape

The Eastern Cape is home to many national parks and open areas, ideal for hikes, photographic opportunities, bird watching, and mountain biking - all the great outdoor adventures one seeks. It is also the location of the country’s only snow skiing resort, Tiffindell, which is near Rhodes. A popular retreat for those that love winter.

The Addo Elephant National Park approximately 73 km from Port Elizabeth (Gqeberha), is a hugely popular South African National Park. Offering sanctuary to over 170 elephants the park allows visitors to get close to these amazing creatures.

Grahamstown plays host to the annual National Arts Festival – Africa’s largest and most colourful cultural experience. For 11 days the town of Grahamstown is inundated with art lovers and theatrical’s as the town comes alive in extravagance.

The Tsitsikamma National Park forms an 80km stretch of coast between Nature’s Valley and the Storms River mouth. The famous Otter Trail is found within this park as visitors can stroll through untouched glorious landscapes.

The Wild Coast is named as that due to it being completely wild. This area is one of the world’s most untouched locations not scarred by pollution or the touch of man. Rugged coast, beautiful nature … and wild indeed.

Baviaanskloof Nature Reserve is a World Heritage Site and one of the eight protected areas of the Cape Floral Region. The reserve covers approximately 200km of unspoiled terrain with remarkable landscapes. Seven of the country’s eight biomes are found within the reserve.

Camdeboo National Park gives visitors a chance to gain insight into the Karoo’s great wonder. Practically surrounding the town of Graaff-Reinet, Camdeboo is famous for its mighty location next to the Valley of Desolation. A perfect opportunity to see geology at its best.

The activities directory provides an extensive list of advertisers offering a diverse range of activities within the Eastern Cape.

The Eastern Cape is made up of 5 major geographical areas:

Frontier country : it was in the Eastern Cape that the British, Xhosa and Afrikaner nations first made contact 200 years ago.

Karoo Heartland : a vast central plateau of wide open spaces and fantastic star-gazing opportunities

Sunshine Coast : coastline stretching from Port Elizabeth (Gqeberha) to East London boasting the highest number of hours of sunshine in the country

Wild Coast : an untouched paradise with a true raw African feel

Nature Reserves : some of the best in the country

Businesses in the Eastern Cape

There are many restaurants offering the very best in dining experiences, from the budget to the finer dining. Eastern Cape cuisine covers dining from the fresh East Coast seafoods of the Wild Coast, to the semi-arid plateau of Graaff-Reinet. There is magic in every mouthful!

Wildlife, sunshine and adventure activities for all ... the Eastern Cape is truly South Africa's no 1-holiday destination!

This region also offers a range of other business opportunities which can be viewed under the business directory.