East London

Geography and History

East London on the East coast of South Africa is affectionately called Buffalo City. Situated 1000 kilometres from Cape Town, between the Nahoon River in the North and the Buffalo river to the South, East London is the only river port in South Africa. The shores are lapped by the warm waters of the Indian Ocean and with its sub-tropical climate is a sought after tourist destination for local South Africans and international tourist alike.

East London is at the northern end of a 300 km stretch of coastline referred to as the "Sunshine Coast" which has St Francis Bay at the Southern end. The Sunshine Coast is renowned for its stretches of beautiful unpolluted and un-crowded beaches.

Activities

Nahoon Beach, Gonubie Beach and Orient Beach are extremely popular, as they offer clean sand, sparkling waters and beautiful sunsets. The fact that they are not overpopulated seems to lure many visitors to enjoy the many water sport activities such as surfing, dolphin and whale watching, scuba diving, sail boating, water skiing and fishing.

Adventure activities include hiking, horse riding and cycling.

Game reserves are plentiful and visitors can get up close and personal with their favourite African animals at nearby game reserves such as Camdeboo National Park, Mpgongo Private Game Reserve, Inkwenkwesi Private Game Reserve and Mountain Zebra National Park.

East London also has a wonderful miniature game reserve that is home to animals such as crocodile, tigers, lions, zebra and a large variety of birds.

The East London Aquarium and the East London Museum are another two attractions that should not be missed out on.

Accommodation

Accommodation includes Hotels and many Bed and Breakfast and Self-Catering establishments where you will find great service and true South African hospitality.

Photos courtesy of East London Tourism & Wikipedia

East Londoners are very laid back and will welcome you with open arms!.

Latest Listings - View All