Info about East London, Eastern Cape (South Africa)

East London region is Eastern Cape, with country South Africa (ZA).

Other names for East London are Buffalo City, ELS, EMonti, East London, Ist-Londan, Ist-London, Istochni London, Iztochen London, Londinium Orientale, Oos Londen, Oos-Londen, Orient-Londono, Tung Lun-tun, Tûng Lùn-tûn, Yst Londonas, ayst lndn, dong lun dui, iseuteuleondeon, ista landana, Іст-Лондан, Іст-Лондон, Източен Лондон, Ист-Лондон, Источни Лондон, איסט לונדון, إيست لندن, ایسٹ لندن, ईस्ट लंडन, イースト・ロンドン, 東倫敦, 이스트런던, latitude is -33.0152900, and its longitude is 27.9116200.

With 478.676 folks, this area timezone is Africa/Johannesburg (Africa/Johannesburg_cet).

East London is considered one of the best destinations for jet skiing, swimming, surf, snorkeling, windsurfing, water skiing, docks, mountains, horse trails, secret, sailboats, beaches, wellness, trail running, hiking trails, fountains, hiking, spa, aquariums, clubs, scenic roads, walking trails, rivers, water sports, tennis, wakeboard, fishing, valleys, nature, adventure, monuments, running, bodyboard, natural places, pubs, gardens, zoo, mosques, art galleries, golf, shooting ranges, snow tubing, boat rides, events, disco, adventure parks, statues, towers, churches in South Africa.

.

More details about East London in South Africa (ZA)

It is the capital of Amathole District Municipality.

East London has timezone UTC+02:00 (valid for standard time).

Do You are looking to use telephone for calling local people! You can call phone numbers by dialing 43 as local dialing code. It’s postal code is 5201, for this reason, for post delivery on your travel this can be done by using 5201 post code as described above.

East London dimension is 156 square km., ideal for travelling to mid-sized cities, definitely a place worth visiting. If you stay here you save money because of their cheap room prices, and this is why you could have it like basecamp to move across South Africa and East London near things to do.

Its meters above mean sea level, or meters above sea level (MASL) is about 48 mt. That’s why it is a perfect travel destination if you and your friends love flat areas to go to for your next trip.

If you want data about East London see East London official website http://www.eastlondon.org.za.

East London things to do and activities: best trip destination for: