The statue of Sivaji Ganeshan in Chennai

Chennai: The statue of Tamil actor Sivaji Ganesan, standing tall on the Marina Beach Road in Chennai, is in the eye of the storm.

The police have told the Madras High Court that the statue obstructs traffic visibility thereby risking the lives of many on the road. The police told the court that 21 accidents have taken place near the statue since 2012. One of these accidents was fatal, they said.

This is yet another blow to the legendary actor's statue. The court is already hearing a petition filed by a late Gandhian, who said that it undermines the statue of Mahatma Gandhi, located just behind it.

"We have great regards for Sivaji Ganesan but any construction on a main road is illegal. The statue can be shifted to the other side. There is a hidden agenda that the Gandhi statue must be defamed," said R Gandhi, the counsel for the petitioner.

The DMK, under whose regime the statue was unveiled in 2006, says it's vendetta by the ruling AIADMK government. Many leaders argue there are two other structures on the same line next to Sivaji's statue - a clock tower and an Ashok Pillar. "Because the statue was erected by our leader so they don't want the statue," said T K S Elangovan, DMK spokesperson.

In the fifties, Mr Sivaji Ganesan gave life to DMK Chief Karunanidhi's fiery dialogues. Together, they made an explosive impact in Tamil cinema.

Politics over statues is not new in Tamil Nadu. The statue of legendary woman Kannagi was removed by the AIADMK when it was in power earlier. The DMK government put it right back.

However, there are mixed reactions among public over the present controversy. One commuter strongly believes that "the statue definitely obstructs view as we turn right towards RK Salai", but another says, "It's all politics as elections are coming up soon."

Promoted

Listen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.com

Sources in the ruling AIADMK deny its political vendetta but say they are helpless as the court has intervened. The Madras High Court is likely to pass orders on the 13th.

.