Kamal Haasan penned an emotional note to legendary actor Sivaji Ganesan on his 20th death anniversary. He shared two throwback photos with Sivaji Ganesan and spoke highly of his talent. Sivaji Ganesan died on July 21, 2001, after a prolonged illness. In several interviews, Kamal Haasan has spoken about the influence Sivaji Ganesan had on him and his career.

advertisement

KAMAL HAASAN REMEMBERS SIVAJI GANESAN

Sivaji Ganesan is celebrated as the Marlon Brando of South India. Having won several awards, Sivaji is considered a legend in the Indian film industry. On his 20th death anniversary, Sivaji Ganesan's fans and celebrities took to Twitter to remember him.

Kamal Haasan, who considers Sivaji Ganesan as one of his mentors, took to social media to pay tribute to him. In one of the photos that the actor shared, Sivaji can be seen carrying little Kamal Haasan. Another photo shows Kamal Haasan and Sivaji talking to each other during the shooting of their iconic Thevar Magan.

Remembering Sivaji Ganesan, Kamal Haasan wrote in Tamil, "Today is the memorial day of actor Sivaji Ganesan, who has set a milestone for screen acting. Nadigar Thilagam's films will be remembered in the hearts of Tamil people till the day cinema lives on (sic)."

Here's the post:

LIFE AND CAREER OF SIVAJI GANESAN

Sivaji Ganesan, who is fondly called Nadigar Thilagam by his fans, ruled the Tamil film industry for almost five decades. He had acted in nearly 288 films in Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam and Hindi film industries. Sivaji Ganesan became the first Indian film personality to win a Best Actor award at an International Film Festival (the Afro-Asian Film Festival) in 1960.

In his career spanning five decades, Sivaji Ganesan had won a National Award, Dadasaheb Phalke Award. He was the first Indian actor to be made a Chevalier of Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.

Remembered as an iconic actor in the Tamil film industry, he has inspired several leading South Indian film actors.

ALSO SEE | Sivaji Ganesan was almost pushed out of Parasakthi because of his looks. He then ruled Kollywood