During the period of '60~'70, Japan had already successfully emerged from ashes of war where domestically has stepped into a booming economic cycle. Industrialization would not only create jobs or wealth but also being the drive force for many secondary supportive industries. For an instance, it started with a demand for local suppliers in providing various precision equipment manufacturers such as integrated circuits manufacturing in semiconductor industry, in turns to satisfy the need to serve high quality precision inspection instruments may then, eventually relate to Japan premier optical manufacturers. To serve purpose in each industry and/or special application, Nikon had introduced a series of industrial grade Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR lens series with very special lens characteristic of extremely high resolution and magnification. Each of these lenses within the series has resolving power beyond general usage where some may even exceeding 1,000 lines/mm !.

In relation to how Nippon Kogaku was actually being involved into development of the Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR lenses, here is an interesting background story written by Michio Akiyama, it explained the origin which gave rise to these special class of NIKKOR lens series. Although the 1962 Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR 105/2.8 was the first Nikkor lens which bear unique trade name of Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR (short as "UMN"), but personally I would think the 1958's Micro-Nikkor 1:5 f=7cm, 1960's Micro-Nikkor 150/5.6 had already possessed all the fundamental lens characteristic as forerunner model of the Nikon Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR.

<<<--- Cover of a Nikon Product Brochure published in 1982 on the Ultra-Micro-Nikkor lenses, where content in this site are largely based on.

Background and History

The diffraction theory of light imposes theoretical limitations on resolving power of a lens, the limit depending on the lens speed i.e. f/number. This limit can be determined by the lens speed, magnification ratio and wavelength used. In other words, the resolving power at the center portion of an aberation-FREE lens has the following relationship:- resolving power =

The resolving power of a lens closely associates to its aperture. Although there are other variable factors and for decades, even optical engineers may face the same issues in designing a high quality lens. Regardless, with a working lens, often we use of mid or small aperture as part of a solution to achieve the best of an optical lens. But as far as delivering super high resolution lenses are concerned, it can be a different story. In 1961, Nikon had first developed a high resolution optic, Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR 105mm f/2.8 e-line-type with very unique lens characteristic of limiting the picture angle as well as range of chromatic aberration corrections to the narrow wavelength band of green light to which the ultrahigh resolution orthochromtic photoplate sentitizer responds -essentially critical to meet the demanding needs and necessary standard by the electronic industry in the mass production of IC (integrated Circuits) and LSI miniaturized circuits.

During the period, for an instance, prior to mass production of IC and LSI, is the preparation of photomask-negatives measuring 5 square centimeters (cm), with central 3-5 sq. cm area covered by a few hundreds or thousands of micro-patterns of identical configuration. Quality of finished IC/LSI deprives directly from the degree of precision reflected by these photomarks. Similarly, accuracy of photomasks also depends on the lenses which are used to print them. So, these lenses would require an ultrahigh resolving power, so do those which were used to project the image of the photomask onto the silicon wafer from which the final product was then manufactured.

So, the lens used in the manufacturing would play an extremely important part in the whole process of manufacturing for this highly specialized field of industrial microphotography and precision necessity in the mass production of IC and LSI miniaturized circuits. It was the ensuing age of integrated circuitry that had prompted birth of the Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR series of lenses by Nikon. In 1965, Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR 1:1.2 f=30mm for industrial usage was awarded by Japan Science and Technology Agency award for Nikon effort in delivering solution to the precision manufacturing industry. Naturally, this was how it was started, but as in the fast moving world of electronic manufacturing, the early model was followed by series of other Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR lenses to cater for different specifications, requirements and purposes in the same field. We have mentioned the Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR 105mm f/2.8 w/e-line-type earlier. But the advent of even more sophisticated IC technology involving line widths of only 1nm made silver halide emulsions too thick for practical purpose; so chrome-plated photmasks with photo-resist as their photo-sentitizer were developed at later stage. This in turns gave birth to the h-line Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR lens group in order to meet the new wavelength requirement in the renewed way of large scale IC and LSI miniaturized circuits manufacturing process. In 1969, two new exotic ultrahigh lens speed g-lined series Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR 1:1g f=225mm and Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR 1:4g f=300mm projection printing lenses were developed to meet such new advances in IC production technology and to solve the problem caused by conventional contact printing where photomasks and silicon wafer inevitably become scratched. But as in 1:1 projection printing, masks and wafers do not come into physical contact and hence eliminates any chances of abrasion.

From then on, there were Two GROUPs of Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR lenses:- Broadly classified according to their photo-sentitive materials, there was sufficient variety in the two groups of Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR lenses to match the varying picture sizes, reduction ratios and other demanding technical requirements. With Group one, e-line Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR, lenses in this group are used mainly with high resolution photo plates of silver halide emulsion, using e-line. Main lens characteristics are minimal aberration and consequent super high resolving power, makes them come extremely close to ideal reproduction. Group two, consists of the g-line and h-line Ultra-Micro-NIKKOR. Lenses in this group are required when photo-resist (photosensitive resin) was used as the sentitizer. Basically the main difference was, using a shorter wavelength than the e-line group, the g/h-line series provide a higher resolving power. For an instance, the high speed UMN 1:1 225mm and 1.4 300mm g-line lenses were used for printing of phtomask images onto wafers and they can print as fine as 2nm over an entire picture area without image distortion as Nikon claimed the respective lens constructions were perfectly symmetrical.

Warmth Reminder: these are essentially materials or method used during the '70~'80, may not be applicable for modern days manufacturing anymore, just reading reference only.

Why would it need such a high lens speed for the 225mm f/1.0, 250mm f1.0 and 300mm/1.4 ? Nikon explained :- " ..Where =wavelength used (in mm) and Fe (effective f/number), which is related to the f/number (F) under formula Fe=F(1+M) ("M" =photographing magnification). From this equation, the faster the lens speed, the higher the resolution. Similarly, the shorter the wavelength used, the higher the resolution. The chart presented the relationship between the effective f/-number, operating wavelength ( and resolving power when calculated from the formula..".

<<<--- Above left image: Relationship between the effective f/-number, operating wavelength (64k Gif); Far left: Relationship of an aberation-free lens and resolving power at the center . Last chart: Photographic Magnification reference chart for various UMN lenses in one-shot or step & repeat process. Photomask and wafer printing/ one shot and step and repeat process in large scale IC/LSI manufacturing. Note: A micrometre is one-millionth of a metre (1/1000 of a millimetre, or 0.001mm). Its unit symbol in the International System of Units (SI) is µm. The nanometre was formerly called also millimicron,since it is 1/1000 of a micron, and was often denoted by the symbol mµ or (more rarely) µµ. or A unit of length equal to one thousandth (10-3) of a micrometer or one billionth (10-9) of a meter. (Mathematics & Measurements / Units) an obsolete name for a nanometre; one millionth of a millimetre. Useful links: What Wavelength Goes With a Color?