Details

40 boxes

The Edwin S. Stuart papers reflect a portion of the files from the Stuart/Emmons family and material stored at Leary & Co. prior to the closing of the firm in 1969. The records reflect both the archives of the Leary firm and the political and social activities of Governor Stuart. His papers document a variety of personal activities and social functions as well as his work with Girard College and the Union League. While the papers do document some of his political functions in Philadelphia and Pennsylvania, this collection does not contain his formal political office files. The vast majority of the collection consists of correspondence, however, there are also speeches, personal finances, articles regarding Stuart and photographs

Edwin Sydney Stuart (1853-1937) was a Philadelphia businessman and politician during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In addition to owning and operating Leary's Book Store, Stuart also served as mayor of Philadelphia from 1891 to 1995 and governor of Pennsylvania from 1907 to 1911

This collection is open for research

This collection may be housed off-site at the Library Depository, and require up to 48 hours to retrieve. Please contact the Special Collections Research Center in advance of your visit, so that materials may be relocated to the reading room for research

The Edwin S. Stuart Papers are the physical property of the Special Collections Research Center, Temple University Libraries. Temple University holds literary rights only for material created by university employees and to material given to the university with such rights specifically assigned. For all other material, literary rights, including copyright, belong to the authors or their legal heirs and assigns. Researchers are responsible for determining the identity of rights holders and obtaining their permission for publication and for other purposes where stated

Materials in English

Finding aid available in repository and online

Related Resources

View a description and list of collection contents in the online finding aid.: http://library.temple.edu/finding_aids/368