It’s still depressingly rare for a film to have all women in the lead roles, but Ocean’s 8 would have been worthy of very little attention if that was the only remarkable thing about it. Instead, it delivers a brilliant example of the kind of laidback, star-oriented blockbuster which the previous Ocean’s films exemplified.

Those films were never really about the con itself – that was just sleight of hand. The real appeal was seeing a host of A-list movie stars rattling wisecracks back and forth, competing to see who could set the screen alight with sheer charisma fastest.

Ocean’s 8 is no different, with Sandra Bullock and Cate Blanchett leading their all-female criminal crew with slick, dazzling performances. They also queer the bromance these kind of films typically imply, with plenty of flirtation between the pair.

Watching great actors perform together is one of the greatest and simplest joys of cinema, and the rest of the ensemble deliver with a host of eccentric and always engrossing characters. Helena Bonham Carter is hilarious and touching as a washed-up Irish designer, Anne Hathaway gamely plays the villain and victim of the piece as a bratty actress, and in the best possible way, Sarah Paulson always feels like she’s 30 seconds away from murdering someone.

Like its predecessors, Ocean’s 8 is an unabashed celebration of glitz, glamour, wealth, and what some will do to get it. The finale at the Met Gala will convince the unconverted with a spectacular sequence of glorious art, architecture and fashion. The production design and costuming are eye-wateringly good, and if you don’t want to leave the cinema wearing Cate Blanchett’s entire wardrobe there is something wrong with you. If you can take the plot holes you won’t find a more relaxing or entertaining film this summer.

RATING: 4/5

INFORMATION

CAST: Sandra Bullock, Cate Blanchett, Anne Hathaway, Helena Bonham Carter, Sarah Paulson, Mindy Kaling, Rihanna, Awkwafina, Richard Armitage

DIRECTOR: Gary Ross

WRITERS: Gary Ross & Olivia Milch (written by); Gary Ross (story by); George Clayton Johnson, Jack Golden Russell (based upon characters created by)

SYNOPSIS: Debbie Ocean gathers an all-female crew to attempt an impossible heist at New York City’s yearly Met Gala.