Want to learn more about the oceans? Dive into these ocean documentaries.

Covering over 70% of the Earth’s surface and holding 50-80% of all life, it’s no wonder oceans are the subject of so many documentaries.

From hard-hitting films about pollution and overfishing to awe-inspiring projects about marine life, the list is endless. We’ve narrowed it down to the 10 best documentaries about oceans and fish for you to stream online. Enjoy!

1. Watson

This documentary follows Paul Watson, co-founder of Greenpeace and founder of Sea Shepherd.

For over 40 years, he’s been uncompromising in his efforts to protect the seas, even if that means arrest or facing violence.

This brave, relentless eco-activist goes above and beyond to confront poachers and vessels illegally fishing. Watch this compelling documentary for his story.

Watch on Amazon Prime

2. Seaspiracy

All too often, plastic pollution dominates the narrative when it comes to ocean degradation. In Seaspiracy, director Ali Tabrizi uncovers the destructive practices of commercial fishing.

From whaling and shark finning to overfishing, the oceans face a myriad of threats from industries that aren’t held to account. This film is sure to make you think twice about eating seafood.

Watch on Netflix

3. Blackfish

For many of us, some of our fondest childhood memories involve marine parks where animals perform for our entertainment.

Blackfish exposes the cruelty of parks like SeaWorld, focusing on the orca named Tilikum who killed three humans.

We get an insight into the way animals are torn from their habitats to be sold to marine parks, as well as the severe confinement and isolation orcas must endure. Blackfish will put you off visiting marine parks again.

Watch on Netflix

4. A Plastic Ocean

Plastic pollution is a topic we’re all familiar with, but A Plastic Ocean reveals the shocking extent of ocean pollution.

Featuring over 20 locations documented over four years, the film shows how widespread plastic pollution is. It’s not all doom and gloom, though.

We also hear from scientists and the people who are pioneering solutions, so there is hope!

Watch on Amazon Prime

5. Chasing Coral

Known as the rainforests of the sea, corals are often overlooked when it comes to their impact on the health of the oceans.

In Chasing Coral, a team of divers explore the decline in coral reef populations due to climate change and human activity.

This stunning, powerful film is a must-watch to understand ocean ecosystems and the true extent of the damage we cause to the oceans without realising it.

Watch on Netflix

6. The Blue Planet / Blue Planet II

If you’re a fan of nature and all its wonders, The Blue Planet mini-series is right up your street.

David Attenborough narrates the spectacular scenes the oceans have to offer across multiple continents. The series captures the beauty, strength and magic of the world’s oceans, as well as showcasing the ways in which they’re threatened.

Watch on BBC iPlayer

7. Mission Blue

In need of inspiration? Renowned oceanographer Sylvia Earle is sure to dazzle you with her impressive career and activism.

Mission Blue follows her campaign to protect marine life and save the oceans from overfishing, plastic waste and climate change.

Watch on Netflix

8. The Cove

Learn about dolphin hunting and the Taiji dolphin drive in The Cove.

The film documents destructive fishing practices which kill thousands of dolphins every year, providing a compelling call to action to end mass killing of these important animals.

This is a great watch if you want to gain a better understanding of majestic marine life and the threats they face.

Watch on Amazon Prime⁠

9. MY OCTOPUS TEACHER

This Oscar-winning documentary became a viral sensation and won people’s hearts when it landed on Netflix in 2020. Octopus are among the many sealife species who are overlooked or completely forgotten when it comes to discussions about animal welfare.

It follows the story of filmmaker, Craig Foster who begins diving in a kelp forest off the coast of South Africa, and meets a female octopus who casts a spell on him.

Watch on Netflix

10. The Last Ocean

The Ross Sea in Antarctica is said to be the last ‘untouched’ ocean that can teach us about marine ecosystems, but it’s under threat from commercial fishing.

The Last Ocean documents the fishing industry’s targeting of Antarctic Toothfish and what’s at stake if we carry on disrupting the precious balance of these ecosystems.

Watch on Amazon Prime