“Oceans” accurately describes itself as an “ecological drama/documentary.” The director, Jacques Cluzaud, hoped to present some of the “wonder, fear, calm, tenderness, violence, vitality and power” of this last great wild expanse—and, to a certain extent, he did.

The Galapagos Islands are only the first stop in a journey that showcases some of the most interesting aquatic creatures, their habitats and the cycle of life that is as beautiful as often as it is violent.

The stories shown alternate between gripping, as is the drama of newly hatched sea turtles scurrying toward the nearby ocean, with only a thousand to one chance in reaching it, to wondrous—such as the seemingly uni-minded swarm of sardines that become a feast for dolphins, sharks, whales and dive bombing birds alike.

Objectionable Content

Narrated by Pierce Brosnan, this DisneyNature production lives up to its “G” rating and is indeed suitable for all audiences. There were only two areas of concern that need to be pointed out.

Violence: The most violent scenes were that of various fish feeding, often very quickly, on unsuspecting prey, including shark attacks on sea lions and Orcas cornering cubs near the shore. None of the scenes lingere on the feeding, and, in the case of the Orcas, the waves cover much of the action.

There is, also, a scene where fishing nets inadvertently capture larger, non-targeted fish, and, as shown from below, the camera captures fishermen working the nets amidst slightly bloodied waters.

Spiritual: The movie firmly establishes its belief that evolution, an unproven theory, was the process by which life developed on Earth.

Lessons

The world repeatedly tries to teach that science and God are incompatible, when nothing could be further from the truth. As believers, we know that the Word of God is infallible and that “The heavens are yours, and yours also the earth; you founded the world and all that is in it” (Psalm 89:11).

Nature, even in its most microscopic form as impressively presented in one scene examining a drop of water, fairly cries out for the existence of a Creator.

“The heavens declare the glory of God; the skies proclaim the work of his hands” (Psalm 19:1).

The holes in evolutionary theory are in point of fact too numerous to go into here, but I encourage the open-minded to read further on this subject within this sites’ pages. A great resource and destination can also be found at the Creation Museum in Kentucky.

Today’s secular authorities, as well as the environmental movement, are always trying to disprove the existence of God, and they remind me of the words of the apostle Paul:

“Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools… They exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshipped and served created things rather than the Creator-who is forever praised. Amen” (Romans 1:22-25).

Final Thoughts

The last segment focused on pollution, and the narrator pleads for us to do our part to combat it. Since this was released on Earth day 2010, I fully expected to hear where I could send my check, any moment, but thankfully he did not go that last step.

Even still, “Oceans” successfully manages to impress and inspire viewers with this dazzling sample of ocean life. The subject matter is, by its very nature, immense, which is why filmmakers (Jacques Cousteau comes to mind), who for years have done entire series dedicated to only one aspect of our world can still not do it justice.

“Oceans” is an enjoyable spectacle, with the humpback whales and sea otters standing out, and should appeal to nature enthusiasts of all ages, except the very young. I would recommend thorough family discussion on the secular theory of evolution being presented. The oceans are vast and awe inspiring, and yet I can’t help but recall the words of the psalmist when he said:

“Mightier than the thunder of the great waters, mightier than the breakers of the sea-the Lord on high is mighty” (Psalm 93:3-4).

Violence: Minor / Profanity: None / Sex/Nudity: None