WHAT: Miss Universe Pageant

HOSTS: Dick Clark, Leeza Gibbons.

WHEN: 8 p.m. Sunday.

WHERE: KOTV-6.

HOLLYWOOD - She's tall, she's thin, she's gorgeous, she

loves to talk, she would like to change the world and she

hopes to become the first American Miss Universe since 1980.

Carole Gist, a 20-year-old Detroit native, started to make

changes in the world six weeks ago when she became the first

black Miss USA. Since then, she has been accused of trying

to downplay her race, but the 6-foot Gist says that is not

true.

"I'm proud of being an African-American," she said in

an interview. "But we Gists are so multiracial, I don't

like to choose just one. I'm part African-American, part

Cherokee, part Caucasian, part Filipino, part Polynesian.

My hope for the future is that we all get so mixed up no

one can discriminate against anyone anymore.

"I personally prefer just to be Carole Gist. That's who

I am first. I don't want to make my race an issue. But of

course I'm proud to be the first black Miss USA. It's an

honor, and I love it. I hope because I'm first I can get

my word across to people even more so."

But she also worries that success may go to her head.

"I told my family `Here's a pin. Let the air out if you

ever see it swelling,' " she laughed.

Her family probably won't have any problem bringing her

back to earth if needed. Growing up in middle-class Detroit

neighborhoods, some of which were integrated, Gist was teased

mercilessly about her height.

"I always had to show I was tough," she recalled. "There

were no other girls on my block I could play with, so all

I had available was the guys on the block. I was a latchkey

kid, and I learned to tackle and all that. My backyard was

kind of a playground for me. It had trees and a garage to

jump off. It made me tough. And then I was labeled a bad

child by my family because I was tough.

"My other cousins were goody-two-shoes, and people always

asked why I couldn't be like them. And they teased me about

my height. So I eventually turned it around and started

excelling in school and dance and sports. I loved running

the hurdles and high jumping and running the mile in track."

Eventually, even people who had taunted Gist began to see

her beauty. "Some people who had teased me began to say,

`Gee, you should model.' No one ever told me flat out `You're

pretty,' but they said I had a good walk and things like

that."

Gradually, Gist began to believe in herself. "It was basically

taking the initiative to take myself in hand and build my

self-esteem," she said. "The church was a help. I realized

it was wrong not to be grateful to God for the blessings

I had."

Gist's confidence became so great that before the Miss USA

contest in Kansas City last month, she spent only two days

being coached and arranged for her own gown, rather than

using the one provided.

"For Miss USA, I decided to go and enjoy myself and have

a good time," she said. "I felt if I was happy being myself

and being Miss Michigan USA, I would make some friends and

the positive in me would shine."

Gist's warm-up for this week's Miss Universe pageant in

Los Angeles is similar. "I'll prepare myself mentally and

spiritually," she said. "All I can do is be the best Carole

Gist I can."

She also will have a bit more coaching on how to walk stairs,

the angle at which she should look at the judges and how

to walk in a swimsuit. But all that won't take more than

a few hours.

"I believe you are born to win and conditioned to lose,"

Gist said. "So I'll go into it thinking positively. This

is the first time in 10 years they've held the Miss Universe

pageant in the United States, and there hasn't been a winner

from America in all that time. Maybe that's good for me."

Win or lose, Gist eventually will return to college at Northwood

Institute in Midland, Mich., where she is a junior. She

heatedly denies rumors appearing in tabloids of an impending

engagement to singer Al B. Shore. "I'm not engaged and

I'm not getting married, not to him or anyone else," she

said.

What she wants to do is establish a fine-arts institute

for children. "I'd take them just as soon as they learn

to walk," she said.

Gist, convinced that the modern world stresses business

and sports to the exclusion of less competitive activities,

said the institute would be her way of helping to change

the world.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.