Centile Summary

This company was one of the first to develop cloud-based VoIP telephone switching technology in 1999, but being ahead of its time, the company faced serious challenges. Under a new owner (ViaOne), the company's positioning, product, sales, and marketing strategies were transformed with focus on a newly named 'ISTRA Platform' emphasizing customer acquisition on a pay as you grow basis with special emphasis on mobile network operators. The company 7x its revenue and is now a prominent player in the cloud-PBX space.

http://centile.com

Commquest Summary

Commquest was one of the first to develop silicon germanium semiconductor technology for GSM baseband chipsets. They had developed the semiconductor and the reference board design so that handset manufacturers can rapidly design and manufacture GSM handsets. They needed to expand their customer base and the focus of work was on bringing in blue-chip customers with global brand and this resulted in the sale of the company sold to IBM for $400 Million that later sold to Global Foundries.

https://www.globalfoundries.com

Audiovox Summary

Audiovox Corporation (now Voxx Int'l.) is a New York-based company that specialized in OEM of automotive, consumer electronics and cellular phones. It was rapidly growing through powerful relationships with mobile operators. As the world was shifting from analog to digital cellular, the company was gearing up to start an OEM program with GSM manufacturers which had been identified as Dancall owned by Sir. Alan Sugar and Hagenuk Telecom. This GSM OEM program launched Audiovox in specific markets in Asia, Mi-East and Southeast Europe increasing sales and share value.

http://www.voxxintl.com

Basecase Summary

This company is a Berlin startup that focused on Business Intelligence dashboards for the healthcare and pharmaceutical, therapeutic industries. The company needed a complete transformation to redefine its focus, positioning and implementing a business development, marketing and sales process which allowed it to I. acquire new customers and II. raise the necessary VC funds for its operations. All aspects of the transformation being a success allowed it to receive funding from HTGF and IBB. The company sold to Certara of Princeton, NJ.

http://basecase.com

MVolution Summary

This company was founded in 2005 in Jena Germany with a focus on travel companies have developed and deployed mobile applications for major brands in the travel and leisure industry. The company launched a service which consolidates users travel itineraries into one convenient tool and M&A needed expertise to organize the business, work on the monetization model and prepare it for I. market launch and II. VC fundraising round through a series of presentations. The business of Travelload is successful having several thousand of subscribers

https://travelload.dehttp://mvolution.com

Denso Summary

$40 Billion Denso Corporation is the independent technology arm of Toyota and supplier to the global automotive industry. The company had a strategic plan for its Intelligent Transportation Division that included digital cellular technology in W-CDMA. They strategically needed entry into the USA into the mobile industry. We setup of the business development arm in San Diego tied to a sales process and actively made contacts with cellular operators that landed the Sprint OEM program resulting in the successful Touchpoint handset.

https://denso.com

Silicon Allee Summary

This company was established to be a connector and publisher of news about the startup community in Berlin running a news blog, events, hosting moderated discussions and hosting foreign delegations into startup city Berlin. It was partially responsible for putting the focus on Berlin as the European Startup hub and actively promoted this position coining the city Silicon Allee. Now the company runs a startup Campus in the central district of Berlin (Silicon Allee Haus) hosting cafes, entrepreneurs and co-living spaces

http:/siliconallee.com

Hagenuk Summary

Hagenuk was acquired by Manfred Schmitt, the German tech entrepreneur (Esscom, Amiga, Commodore). The company needed a complete transformation (Marketing, Sales & Products). The portfolio was completely redesigned with Frog Design , a complex positioning was enforced and inventions such as the world's first internal cellphone antenna, multi-cell in building wireless and other technologies brought to market with an aggressive international program to raise revenues. The company was sold to IPC of Singapore.

http://www.ipc.com.sg

Beronet Summary

Beronet was founded by 3 friends and entrepreneurs to distribute VoIP hardware across Germany while in parallel developing their own PCI cards as ISDN to VoIP gateways. Their business needed a full transformation and this took shape in the entire repositioning of the company, its product portfolio, its business development, marketing, lead generation and sales processes. An aggressive plan ensued to I. save and II. grow the business with remarkable results, as Beronet today is one of the leading businesses in All IP Gateway technology.

https://beronet.com

Acrobits Summary

Acrobits is a Czech and Swiss-based company which created one of the first and best mobile applications for VoIP. The company was founded by 4 entrepreneurs and needed some experienced advice on entering the enterprise market which resulted in the creation of I. Groundwire and II. white label cloud solution to allow rapid development and deployment of custom label applications for telephone operators. The company is at the forefront of technology and the leading provider of VoIP applications with a No. 1 Global market share with 120 million endpoints.

https://acrobits.czhttps://cloudsoftphone.com

DeTeWe AG Summary

A 120-year-old company under the shareholding of the Roechling family holding. DeTeWe was struggling to maintain itself and specifically in its diverse loss-making business units as well as loss-making core telecommunications hardware business with competing platforms and sales divisions and a massive pension fund liability. The company was transformed and in identifying the profitable business units, they were carved out into 2 new companies and subsequently was in the lead M&A team together with UniCredit M&A and KPMG that sold the companies to AASTRA-Mitel.

http://www.detewe.de

Picue Summary

Hired by the business and legal advisers of German Bundeliga and World Cup footballer Marcell Jansen who is also an entrepreneur.

Details of mandate are under

Non Disclosure Agreement

http://picue.com

Cincinnati Microwave Summary

The company was listed on the NASDAQ as CNMW but in Chapter 11 in Federal Court. The objective was to acquire the semiconductor business and negotiated with the creditors committee, attorneys of the Nasdaq and successfully acquired the assets to continue the development of Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum semiconductors transforming the company to a Fabless Semiconductor company with NEC as its Fab.

Snom AG Summary

This company was acquired by Heidelberg Capital Private Equity. The mandate was Group CEO. The company underwent a complete global restructure resulting in the transformation of its entire business with new products, new customer and business systems, new positioning, an aggressive marketing, business development and sales processes that saw sales increase, margins increase and the best EBITDA in the entire industry. VTech acquired it returning 17x Money Multiple to Heidelberg Capital https:snom.com

MobileCity Summary

This company was part of the Heidelberg Capital Private Equity Portfolio of companies. The mandate was 'Board Member' (Beirat) and the board was extremely active in the operations and performance of the business that resulted in its sale to EZ Park, a Verdane Capital company returning 6x Money Multiple to Heidelberg Capital.

​

Communio Summary

This company was renamed from DeTeWe UK as one of the leftover subsidiaries of DeTeWe AG following its sale to AASTRA. The company was transformed into a business telecommunications and contact center technical support, field engineering and maintenance company with over 14,500 active contracts with enterprises that included Virgin, British Rail, NHS and other bluechip companies. This company was eventually sold in a Management Buyout and now controlled by 9 Group

https://9group.co.uk

Funktel Summary

This company is over 55 years old and focused on secure a d worker protection communications selling its solutions directly to penitentiaries, courts and the chemical/petrochemicals industries. The company engineers and manufacturers mission critical DECT and TETRA systems and handsets. To grow its operations, it needed to establish an indirect sales operation to recruit distribution and reseller partners across Europe and the mandate focused on a business build of this activity.

https:funktel.international

Autosnip Summary

This company is a startup and positioned as a video response tool to sales enquiries in the automotive dealership sector. It is in the building stages having completed its platform development, integration and mobile application. It is now recruiting and educating dealerships across Germany.

https://www.autosnip.de

Awesome Developers Summary

This company is a software development company based in Berlin and Prague with a primary focus on Systems Integration, API development and Cloud Migration. It undertook several project for our mandates to assist in assuring business success of the clients.

​

https://awesomedevelopers.eu

Noble Health Summary

This company is a creator of health supplements it was completely transformed, the product lineup was completely re-vamped in rational categories, the packaging and the positioning message of 'Premium Wellness' adding a GetSlim online club that promotes wellness and weight-loss. The company sales grew by a factor of 400% in 3 years, is covered across all lifestyle media (magazines and TV), is supported by many celebrities to become the No. brand in Poland.

https://noblehealth.eu

Innotrik/ Core Telesys Summary

This startup is based in Hong Kong and in partnership with Shenzhen Innotrik launches the family of video and audio conferencing terminals to the European and South American markets. The products are positioned for the small to medium enterprises on a budget.

​

www.innotrik.com

www.innotrik.eu

OKI Telecom Summary

This company was involved in the development and manufacturing of cellular telephones in the 1990s and within the mandate was to assist them identify new opportunities within the automotive sector resulting in work for Mercedes Benz, Chrysler and Hertz Rent A Car.

http://www.oki.com

Summary

This company was created and developed for a Taiwanese group in 1999 to provide Wireless Local Loop based on DECT technology to bring telecommunications services to rural villages across the developing world and specifically in India, Indonesia and the Philippines.

​

Boomtel Summary

This company was a carve out from the DeTeWe UK operations as it was developing a ubiquitous VoIP network for the global business to business market integrating with telephone switches for free business calling across the world using the traditional phone systems. This was achieved utilizing an internet telephone numbering system. The business was carved out with its relevant employees and closed post merger.

​

Moped Labs Summary

This Berlin startup company developed a messaging platform for teams and was funded by Early Bird Capital (Venture Capital) and its operations were merged into another of its portfolio companies 6Wunderkinder that was acquired by Microsoft for above $100 Million.

Read Here