1. INNOVATIONCOLLABORATION INNOVATION CUSTOMER FOCUS CUSTOMER FOCUS RELIABILITY KNOWLEDGE KNOWLEDGE KNOWLEDGE EXCELLENCE EXCELLENC EXCELLENCE COLLABORATION OLLABORATION COLLABORATION BAHWAN CYBERTEK INSPIRING INNOVATION Bahwan CyberTek (BCT) is a global provider of innovative software products and solutions. Since its inception in 1999, BCT has enabled hundreds of organizations to operate as smart, efficient and future-ready enterprises and helped large governments function with agility and citizen centricity. Throughout our product journey, we have remained at the leading edge of technology and today are among a few technology companies to have a platform of our own for IBO (Intelligent Business Operations) and developed industry leading capabilities around integration-centric enterprise solutions that have powered several mission-critical initiatives for banks, governments, energy & utilities, telecom and supply chain customers. BCT is one of the first 50 companies worldwide to be assessed at CMMi Level 5 Version 1.3 for its Process and Delivery Excellence. BCT's 2000+ associates have extensive industry knowledge and expertise in leading technologies, enabling BCT to rapidly expand its delivery footprints across twenty countries in North America, Middle East, Far East, Africa and Asia. BCT excels in Product Development, Middleware and Integration, Business Process Management, Systems Integration, Business Intelligence, BPO, SAP Consulting Services, Independent Testing, Training, Consulting and Infrastructure Management. Our partnership with the world's most admired technology providers, such as FISERV, FRS Global, IBM, Oracle, Microsoft and SAP enables us to offer our customers best-of-breed solutions that are powerful, innovative and offer tremendous business value. l l l BCT's Cuecent BPMS GoCloud – a world- class state-of art business process management solution – is a product of years of research and development. This comprehensive BPM Suite, with an integrated middleware platform Cuecent ESB, has helped automate and optimize complex business processes, allowing organizations to focus on accelerating change, rather than on technology limitations BCT's steadfast pursuance of excellence in product development and delivery has been reflected in its commitment to quality processes, testing and certifications. BCT is one of first 50 companies worldwide to be certified at CMMI Level 5 Ver 1.3 BCT's Innovation-focused approach – BCT looks at every customer challenge as an opportunity to find innovative and efficient ways to solve them resulting in evolved and proven solutions l l l BCT's state of the art Center of Excellence in India, houses domain specialists, technology experts, solution architects and project management specialists whose commitment and passion have been instrumental in delivering our robust solutions to a global market BCT has professionals with extensive industry knowledge and exposure to technologies like BPM, SOA, ERP, MES, Middleware Integration and Process Control. BCT specializes in Product Development, Systems Integration, Outsourced Application Development, Migration and Customization, Training and Consulting Services Today, with several large-scale implementations, including Fortune 500 organizations, BCT has rich experience in delivering a wide variety of solutions, ranging from point solutions to large enterprise class implementations Why Bahwan CyberTek? www.cuecent.com | www.bahwancybertek.com © 2015 Bahwan CyberTek. All rights reserved. For more information on Bahwan CyberTek, please mail to info@bahwancybertek.com About Bahwan CyberTek Bahwan CyberTek (BCT), established in 1999, is a global provider of innovative software products and services. A CMMi Level-5 Ver 1.3 organization, with 550+ customers and 2000+ professionals, BCT excels in Product Development, Middleware and Integration, Business Process Management, Systems Integration, Business Intelligence, BPO, Independent Testing, Training, Consulting and Infrastructure Management. BCT’s technology product - the Cuecent Suite - comprises leading edge BPM/SOA/ESB and enterprise business solutions National Payment Systems, Business Licensing, Utility Bill Payments etc. Our focus verticals include Banking, Government, Energy & Utilities, SCM & Logistics. BCT enjoys the highest level of partnership with Oracle, SAP, Microsoft, IBM, FRS Global etc. BCT has delivered solutions in twenty countries across North America, Middle East, Far East, Africa and Asia. USA OMAN SINGAPORE UAE INDIA MA : 209, West Central Street, Natick, Massachusetts 01760 | Tel : (1) 508 652- 0001 / 652-0015 VA : 11710, Plaza America Drive, Suite 2000, Reston, VA 20190 USA | Tel : (703) 707-0094 CA : 2041 Misson College Blvd, Suite 175, Santa Clara CA 95054 | Tel : (408) 432-7217 GA : 11330 Lakefield Dr. Bldg 2 Ste 200, Johns Creek, GA 30097 P.O.Box 97, Postal code 117, Wadi Kabir, Sultanate of Oman | Tel : (968) 24567154 1 Robinson Road, AIA Towers #22-02, Singapore 048542. Tel: +65- 6532 1120 Fax : +65-6532 1124 Office No. 206, Building No.1, Ist Floor, Dubai Internet City, P.O. Box 500061, Dubai, UAE | Tel : (9714) 3911850 Chennai : 148, Rajiv Gandhi Salai (OMR), Okkiyam Thoraipakkam, Chennai - 600 097 | Tel : (91) 44 43449000 / 39209000 Bangalore : Prestige Meridian II, 12th Floor, Unit 1202, #30, M. G. Road, Bangalore - 560 001 | Tel : (91) 80 40745454 / 25590996 / 97 Mumbai : 405, Matharu Arcade, 4th Floor, Subhash Road, Vile Parle East, Mumbai - 400 057 | Tel : (91) 22 4006 0111 ®

2. Cuecent BPMS Product Suite BCT developed a comprehensive BPMS suite, Cuecent BPMS GoCloud, in order to help organizations move to modular, flexible, change-ready IT implementations rather than static, monolithic solutions. The three integrated components of Cuecent BPMS GoCloud – Cuecent IDE, Cuecent BPMS Runtime and Cuecent ESB helps organizations to orchestrate, design, integrate, deploy, execute, monitor and optimize their critical business processes and operations and make them cloud-ready Cuecent BPMS GoCloud has an integrated middleware platform Cuecent ESB that leverages leading-edge technologies to automate and optimize complex business processes allowing organizations to focus on accelerating change. Cuecent BPMS GoCloud enables organizations to manage their complex and evolving business processes and integrate seamlessly with rd various 3 party and legacy systems. Energy & Utilities BCT’s E&U industry vertical offers a wide range of cutting edge high-end technology products, solutions, consultancy and Integration services in the areas such as Oil & gas, Power – Generation, Transmission & Distribution, Cement, Discrete and Wind. BCT offers solutions covering areas such as Operations Efficiency Center, Asset Fitness Center, Smart grid solutions, Data Modelling & Analytics, Real-time Analytics & Maximo integration, Production Monitoring, Operations Monitoring, well site monitoring & Asset performance optimization, Pipeline monitoring & Asset Analytics, Turbine Operation Monitoring System and Plant Operation Monitoring System. SCM & Logistics To help organizations handle key logistics challenges, improve process efficiencies, lower their total cost of ownership, BCT offers niche solutions in SCM and Logistics space covering areas such as logistics and transportation, Rig Transport Optimization, Rig Movement Optimization, Journey Management and In Vehicle Monitoring System. BCT provides fourth-party logistics (4PL) services in association with DHL. The JV has brought about reduction in overall logistics costs while minimizing end to end rig move time enhancing operational efficiency and raising the levels of Health Safety Environment (HSE) compliance and performance.Being an Oracle Platinum Partner, BCT has a large number of highly successful implementations of Oracle Business Solutions in the SCM space. RETINA has focused solutions that address the specific needs of verticals such as Power - Generation, Transmission & Distribution, Oil & Gas and Wind BCT's leading edge Cuecent ePay platform deliver National Payment Systems that have helped large businesses transform into customer-centric organizations and governments move up the global rankings in terms of Human Development Index, Citizen Participation Index and overall eGov Maturity ratings. These solutions have enabled governments to achieve citizen delight, improved service delivery, transparency and inclusive growth. Cuecent Payment Solutions Cuecent Real-time Integrated Analytics Cuecent RETINA is an real-time intelligent business support system that collects, validates, processes data from multiple plant data sources and allows multi parameter predictive modelling using statistical methods, AI techniques, evolutionary algorithms and constraint optimization tools. The key business objective of RETINA is to provide real-time insights for actionable intelligence for CXO’s, Operations Head / Plant Head, Supervisors and Managers. . Knowledge creation and building expertise is key to our success. BCT has gained immense experience and expertise working with over 550+ customers delivering several transformational solutions. This, coupled with the rich domain and technical knowledge of our experts, helps BCT deliver end- to-end business solutions that enable organizations to address market changes and develop profitable customer relationships and secure new opportunities to stay ahead of competition. Bahwan CyberTek is always looking to innovate for tomorrow. With innovation and thought leadership as our core value, BCT always delivers sustainable value to customers. BCT adapts recent advances in technology with innovative thinking to business scenarios to provide its customers state-of-art solutions that allow them to be future-ready. BFSI BCT offers state-of-the art niche solutions for Banking and Financial Services Institutions to enable process agility, reduction in costs, improved employee productivity, regulatory compliance and increase in profits by extending additional financial services and products to their clients. BCT's holistic suite of solutions helps banks drive efficiency, effectiveness and innovation. BCT offers strategic products and solutions covering areas such as Payments, Social Media, Analytics, Channel Management, Utility Bill Presentment & Payment and SWIFT Router. Government BCT has a strong presence in e-Government space and helped many cities worldwide to make a space for themselves in the list of the best e-governed cities of the world. BCT has played a pivotal role in large e-Government programs across multiple countries offering e- Payment, Integrated Payment Hub, Payment Aggregation, Integrated Revenue Management, Business Licensing and Citizen Services. With rich implementation experience, our specialists conceptualize, develop and deliver the best-in-class governance solutions which promote efficiency, transparency and enable “smart governance”. innovation knowledge CueTrans CueTrans - An integrated logistics & transportation solution product which manages and optimizes the end-to-end transportation process for oil & gas companies. Managing a limited pool of sophisticated assets makes the process complex and challenging. Organizations therefore require strategic, tactical and operational planning to remain agile and responsive to the constant changes in transportation demand and business priorities. This complex logistical activity requires a meticulous yet flexible IT system with configurable workflows to move the Cargo efficiently and safely from one location to another reducing non-productive time and unlocking value opportunities as available in the Transportation business process.

3. Cuecent BPMS Product Suite BCT developed a comprehensive BPMS suite, Cuecent BPMS GoCloud, in order to help organizations move to modular, flexible, change-ready IT implementations rather than static, monolithic solutions. The three integrated components of Cuecent BPMS GoCloud – Cuecent IDE, Cuecent BPMS Runtime and Cuecent ESB helps organizations to orchestrate, design, integrate, deploy, execute, monitor and optimize their critical business processes and operations and make them cloud-ready Cuecent BPMS GoCloud has an integrated middleware platform Cuecent ESB that leverages leading-edge technologies to automate and optimize complex business processes allowing organizations to focus on accelerating change. Cuecent BPMS GoCloud enables organizations to manage their complex and evolving business processes and integrate seamlessly with rd various 3 party and legacy systems. Energy & Utilities BCT’s E&U industry vertical offers a wide range of cutting edge high-end technology products, solutions, consultancy and Integration services in the areas such as Oil & gas, Power – Generation, Transmission & Distribution, Cement, Discrete and Wind. BCT offers solutions covering areas such as Operations Efficiency Center, Asset Fitness Center, Smart grid solutions, Data Modelling & Analytics, Real-time Analytics & Maximo integration, Production Monitoring, Operations Monitoring, well site monitoring & Asset performance optimization, Pipeline monitoring & Asset Analytics, Turbine Operation Monitoring System and Plant Operation Monitoring System. SCM & Logistics To help organizations handle key logistics challenges, improve process efficiencies, lower their total cost of ownership, BCT offers niche solutions in SCM and Logistics space covering areas such as logistics and transportation, Rig Transport Optimization, Rig Movement Optimization, Journey Management and In Vehicle Monitoring System. BCT provides fourth-party logistics (4PL) services in association with DHL. The JV has brought about reduction in overall logistics costs while minimizing end to end rig move time enhancing operational efficiency and raising the levels of Health Safety Environment (HSE) compliance and performance.Being an Oracle Platinum Partner, BCT has a large number of highly successful implementations of Oracle Business Solutions in the SCM space. RETINA has focused solutions that address the specific needs of verticals such as Power - Generation, Transmission & Distribution, Oil & Gas and Wind BCT's leading edge Cuecent ePay platform deliver National Payment Systems that have helped large businesses transform into customer-centric organizations and governments move up the global rankings in terms of Human Development Index, Citizen Participation Index and overall eGov Maturity ratings. These solutions have enabled governments to achieve citizen delight, improved service delivery, transparency and inclusive growth. Cuecent Payment Solutions Cuecent Real-time Integrated Analytics Cuecent RETINA is an real-time intelligent business support system that collects, validates, processes data from multiple plant data sources and allows multi parameter predictive modelling using statistical methods, AI techniques, evolutionary algorithms and constraint optimization tools. The key business objective of RETINA is to provide real-time insights for actionable intelligence for CXO’s, Operations Head / Plant Head, Supervisors and Managers. . Knowledge creation and building expertise is key to our success. BCT has gained immense experience and expertise working with over 550+ customers delivering several transformational solutions. This, coupled with the rich domain and technical knowledge of our experts, helps BCT deliver end- to-end business solutions that enable organizations to address market changes and develop profitable customer relationships and secure new opportunities to stay ahead of competition. Bahwan CyberTek is always looking to innovate for tomorrow. With innovation and thought leadership as our core value, BCT always delivers sustainable value to customers. BCT adapts recent advances in technology with innovative thinking to business scenarios to provide its customers state-of-art solutions that allow them to be future-ready. BFSI BCT offers state-of-the art niche solutions for Banking and Financial Services Institutions to enable process agility, reduction in costs, improved employee productivity, regulatory compliance and increase in profits by extending additional financial services and products to their clients. BCT's holistic suite of solutions helps banks drive efficiency, effectiveness and innovation. BCT offers strategic products and solutions covering areas such as Payments, Social Media, Analytics, Channel Management, Utility Bill Presentment & Payment and SWIFT Router. Government BCT has a strong presence in e-Government space and helped many cities worldwide to make a space for themselves in the list of the best e-governed cities of the world. BCT has played a pivotal role in large e-Government programs across multiple countries offering e- Payment, Integrated Payment Hub, Payment Aggregation, Integrated Revenue Management, Business Licensing and Citizen Services. With rich implementation experience, our specialists conceptualize, develop and deliver the best-in-class governance solutions which promote efficiency, transparency and enable “smart governance”. innovation knowledge CueTrans CueTrans - An integrated logistics & transportation solution product which manages and optimizes the end-to-end transportation process for oil & gas companies. Managing a limited pool of sophisticated assets makes the process complex and challenging. Organizations therefore require strategic, tactical and operational planning to remain agile and responsive to the constant changes in transportation demand and business priorities. This complex logistical activity requires a meticulous yet flexible IT system with configurable workflows to move the Cargo efficiently and safely from one location to another reducing non-productive time and unlocking value opportunities as available in the Transportation business process.

4. As an IBM Software ValuePlus Partner for MAXIMO, BCT offers IBM Maximo Asset Management Software for BCT's Energy & Utilities vertical to provide insights into enterprise assets, their conditions and work processes, for better planning and control. With several successful implementations in this area, BCT has become a key provider in the area of EAM Implementation. collaboration excellence BCT’s approach to achieving and maintaining organizational excellence involves an integrated performance management that results in delivery of improved value to customers, investors and stakeholders, contributing to sustainability and improvement of its effectiveness and capabilities. Longstanding Partnerships Our People Quality Relationship with Universities At Bahwan CyberTek (BCT), we believe that strategic partnerships create significant and sustainable value. Through its Connected Innovation Program, BCT has seen great success by teaming up with customers and partners to work on new frontiers of growth, led through co-creation and joint innovation. Partnering has proved to be a powerful business tool for dealing with changing markets, technologies and business models. Our long-standing strategic partnerships with major global technology players enable us to offer unique value propositions to our customers combining our rich experience with our partners' products. BCT's 2000+ associates, with extensive industry knowledge and expertise in leading technologies, form a vibrant and dynamic organization focused on technology innovation. As an organization, BCT operates with a passion for success and a belief that today's businesses need to innovate to lead. This is reflected in all our spheres of activitity as we innovate for our stakeholders and creating value for them and the community. BCT believes that its associates are their biggest assets. Their technical skills and knowledge, combined with the immense opportunities that BCT offers to foster innovation, pave the way for excellence in solution creation and service delivery. Being closely associated with the leading universities in the regions it operates in, BCT attracts some of the smartest and dedicated people who bring with them fresh ideas and out of the box capabilities. BCT’s commitment to quality goes beyond merely adhering to standards. They build quality into every step of its solution development and delivery. BCT’s streamlined and consistent quality processes help us consistently deliver superior quality and rapid ROI to our customers. Our quality journey has crossed several milestones such as achievement of ISO 9001- 2000 in July 2001, CMM Level 4 assessment in Jan 2002, and CMMi Maturity Level 5 assessment in September, 2005, and in 2012, BCT has achieved the highest level of global Certification - SEI CMMi Level 5 Ver1.3. BCT is one of the first 50 organizations worldwide to be assessed at this level. BCT has also received the ISO 9001: 2008 and ISO 270001:2005 certifications. BCT works in close partnership with leading educational institutions globally to create Centers of Excellence to impart top-of-the- line training in the latest technologies. These programs serve as a launch pad for professionals to get into meaningful and rewarding careers. Some of our partners in this area are l l l l l Anna University, India Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), UK ILM, Brunei ISB (Indian School of Business), India Nizwa College of Technology, Oman BCT is in partnership with SAP and Value Added Reseller (VAR) for the Middle-East and North Africa region. BCT is also involved in directly selling SAP ERP and Business Intelligence licenses. BCT delivers enhanced value to customers through consulting, end- to-end implementations, upgrades and support. Infoline is an innovative joint venture between BCT, Omantel and PEIE (Public Establishment for Industrial Estate). Infoline has emerged as a premier Outsourcing and IT organization. Infoline has moved up the value chain by diversifying its service offerings into the IT and BPO space. Comquest is a JV between BCT and eSipadu, a fully owned subsidiary of Telekom Brunei Berhad in Brunei Darussalam. It caters to the end-to-end outsourcing needs of the customers in Brunei and rest of BIMP-EAGA (Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia- Philippines) and Asia Pac. This JV leverages BCT’s Cuecent Suite and the deep domain expertise of Telbru to jointly create and market products for the Telco and Government vertical. BCT has a long-running and highly successful partnership with Petroleum Development Oman (PDO) where BCT runs the 4th Party Logistics program in collaboration with DHL. This has been a one of its kind engagement in the world, where we have delivered tremendous value, centered around reduced costs, improved productivity, highest levels of HSE compliance resulting in increased profitability through supply chain innovation. BCT is an Oracle Platinum Partner and one among 11 companies in the entire North America to become an Oracle SOA Pillar Partner. The recognition demonstrates Oracle's acknowledgement of BCT's deep competency in Oracle SOA stack, ability to leverage the same to solve customer problems and deliver high quality consulting services around the product. BCT is a Microsoft Gold Application development competency. Through this Application Development competency, BCT helps customers achieve higher levels of productivity and profitability through the deployment of custom applications and advanced web portals built on Microsoft technologies such as Windows Server, the Windows Azure platform, Microsoft Visual Studio 2012 development system, Microsoft SQL Server and web business models. Asian CIO Leadership Awards - Social Innovation Entrepreneur - CIO of the Year - Innovation in IT Industry AWARDS & RECOGNITION 'Indian Merchants Chamber - Award for Excellence' in the IT products category. BCT’s flagship Cuecent products featured in NASSCOM Product Excellence Matrix. Gold Awards for ‘Best Small Outsourced Contact Center’ and ‘Best Technology Innovation’ at the ‘Contact Center World’ Awards.

5. As an IBM Software ValuePlus Partner for MAXIMO, BCT offers IBM Maximo Asset Management Software for BCT's Energy & Utilities vertical to provide insights into enterprise assets, their conditions and work processes, for better planning and control. With several successful implementations in this area, BCT has become a key provider in the area of EAM Implementation. collaboration excellence BCT’s approach to achieving and maintaining organizational excellence involves an integrated performance management that results in delivery of improved value to customers, investors and stakeholders, contributing to sustainability and improvement of its effectiveness and capabilities. Longstanding Partnerships Our People Quality Relationship with Universities At Bahwan CyberTek (BCT), we believe that strategic partnerships create significant and sustainable value. Through its Connected Innovation Program, BCT has seen great success by teaming up with customers and partners to work on new frontiers of growth, led through co-creation and joint innovation. Partnering has proved to be a powerful business tool for dealing with changing markets, technologies and business models. Our long-standing strategic partnerships with major global technology players enable us to offer unique value propositions to our customers combining our rich experience with our partners' products. BCT's 2000+ associates, with extensive industry knowledge and expertise in leading technologies, form a vibrant and dynamic organization focused on technology innovation. As an organization, BCT operates with a passion for success and a belief that today's businesses need to innovate to lead. This is reflected in all our spheres of activitity as we innovate for our stakeholders and creating value for them and the community. BCT believes that its associates are their biggest assets. Their technical skills and knowledge, combined with the immense opportunities that BCT offers to foster innovation, pave the way for excellence in solution creation and service delivery. Being closely associated with the leading universities in the regions it operates in, BCT attracts some of the smartest and dedicated people who bring with them fresh ideas and out of the box capabilities. BCT’s commitment to quality goes beyond merely adhering to standards. They build quality into every step of its solution development and delivery. BCT’s streamlined and consistent quality processes help us consistently deliver superior quality and rapid ROI to our customers. Our quality journey has crossed several milestones such as achievement of ISO 9001- 2000 in July 2001, CMM Level 4 assessment in Jan 2002, and CMMi Maturity Level 5 assessment in September, 2005, and in 2012, BCT has achieved the highest level of global Certification - SEI CMMi Level 5 Ver1.3. BCT is one of the first 50 organizations worldwide to be assessed at this level. BCT has also received the ISO 9001: 2008 and ISO 270001:2005 certifications. BCT works in close partnership with leading educational institutions globally to create Centers of Excellence to impart top-of-the- line training in the latest technologies. These programs serve as a launch pad for professionals to get into meaningful and rewarding careers. Some of our partners in this area are l l l l l Anna University, India Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), UK ILM, Brunei ISB (Indian School of Business), India Nizwa College of Technology, Oman BCT is in partnership with SAP and Value Added Reseller (VAR) for the Middle-East and North Africa region. BCT is also involved in directly selling SAP ERP and Business Intelligence licenses. BCT delivers enhanced value to customers through consulting, end- to-end implementations, upgrades and support. Infoline is an innovative joint venture between BCT, Omantel and PEIE (Public Establishment for Industrial Estate). Infoline has emerged as a premier Outsourcing and IT organization. Infoline has moved up the value chain by diversifying its service offerings into the IT and BPO space. Comquest is a JV between BCT and eSipadu, a fully owned subsidiary of Telekom Brunei Berhad in Brunei Darussalam. It caters to the end-to-end outsourcing needs of the customers in Brunei and rest of BIMP-EAGA (Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia- Philippines) and Asia Pac. This JV leverages BCT’s Cuecent Suite and the deep domain expertise of Telbru to jointly create and market products for the Telco and Government vertical. BCT has a long-running and highly successful partnership with Petroleum Development Oman (PDO) where BCT runs the 4th Party Logistics program in collaboration with DHL. This has been a one of its kind engagement in the world, where we have delivered tremendous value, centered around reduced costs, improved productivity, highest levels of HSE compliance resulting in increased profitability through supply chain innovation. BCT is an Oracle Platinum Partner and one among 11 companies in the entire North America to become an Oracle SOA Pillar Partner. The recognition demonstrates Oracle's acknowledgement of BCT's deep competency in Oracle SOA stack, ability to leverage the same to solve customer problems and deliver high quality consulting services around the product. BCT is a Microsoft Gold Application development competency. Through this Application Development competency, BCT helps customers achieve higher levels of productivity and profitability through the deployment of custom applications and advanced web portals built on Microsoft technologies such as Windows Server, the Windows Azure platform, Microsoft Visual Studio 2012 development system, Microsoft SQL Server and web business models. Asian CIO Leadership Awards - Social Innovation Entrepreneur - CIO of the Year - Innovation in IT Industry AWARDS & RECOGNITION 'Indian Merchants Chamber - Award for Excellence' in the IT products category. BCT’s flagship Cuecent products featured in NASSCOM Product Excellence Matrix. Gold Awards for ‘Best Small Outsourced Contact Center’ and ‘Best Technology Innovation’ at the ‘Contact Center World’ Awards.

6. Independent Testing Services BCT understands the importance of software Quality and hence offers Testing Services under the bouquet 'ESP Testing' which stands for Earlier, Smarter, Parallel Testing - a totally innovative and holistic approach to testing. This approach to testing ensures an optimal environment for our customers to address all the major testing challenges and achieve enhanced results. ESP Testing lowers the risk of failures, detects defects in software development lifecycle, supports multilingual testing capability and helps companies achieve enhanced testing efficiency, precision and reduced costs. It uses a combination of experienced technical consultants, mature processes and robust testing methodology. BCT's ESP testing services offers services in various testing areas including Functional & Regression, Test Automation, SOA testing, Mobile Testing and Cloud Testing. Cuecent Business Solutions Service Offerings BCT’s Solutions and Service Offerings BCT facilitated the implementation of Cuecent ePay, a National Payment Aggregator which helped the customer reduce turnaround time, enable all government payment services under one umbrella, enable easy, convenient and secure payment for all its citizens, businesses and the government agencies. l l l l l l l l l Cuecent BPMS GoCloud A comprehensive Business Process Management Suite that allows organizations to manage the entire lifecycle of their complex business processes that can be cloud ready Cuecent ESB A standards- based intellegent ESB which is scalable, flexible, configurable and extensible Cuecent ePay A unified electronic billing and payment platform Cuecent RETINA A platform for intelligent and real- time business decision making CueTrans An Integrated Logistics & transportation solution Cuecent CueTrack An end-to-end Complaint Management Solution Cuecent eRemit An integrated inward remittance solution Cuecent ICM A seamless multi-point channel integration solution Cuecent SWIFT Router A payment workflow management solution BCT anticipates and understands customers’ needs, and works closely with them, to discover new frontiers of growth through co-creation and joint innovation. We believe that our growth is directly related to the growth of our customers and work towards innovating and delivering sustainable value to our customers. We experience a high level of satisfaction in the implementation of Cuecent ePay – NPA. We are delighted with the implementation outcome so far and are confident that BCT will enable us to realize our growth ambitious by enabling eGA to deliver a world-class eGovernment ePayment experience. Director - Service Delivery & Channel Enhancement This hub suited our bank's objectives and improved growth in business expansion. “Seamless co-ordination of BCT Team Members, Project delivery within the agreed scope and time, adherence to the standards and compliance to the process ensured a low defect leakage. Deputy General Manager We are pleased to find IT players from this region attain international acclaim and that too in creating valuable intellectual property. We intend to further strengthen our partnership with Bahwan CyberTek and jointly pursue initiatives that will make us both major eGovernment Services Transformers. Director - Operations Through the ePay gateway, we have succeeded in achieving immense cost savings for customers and government departments. This makes ePay one of our most important eTransformation enablers. Director General BCT team demonstrated deepest commitment and went that extra mile to ensure the solution implemented handles all the practical aspects of the operation. BCT has become as a key partner for Aban and we look forward to engaging them in our future assignment. Head - Information Technology As a key partner over the last year, BCT has always demonstrated the deepest commitment. Their technical expertise and creative blended delivery model have helped us achieve increased productivity and quality while reducing development costs. Director - Enterprise Applications customer focus BCT implemented IBM Maximo 5.2 application support across 10 rig sites which helped reduce application downtime, limit unplanned shutdowns and enabled on-time resolution of issues. Leveraging BCT's Global Delivery Model, BCT delivered a host of services, including architecture assessment and recommendation, installation of Oracle SOA Suite 11g, migration of existing web services from 10g platform to 11g, providing ongoing application development and platform support BCT implemented a robust remittance platform that helps one of the India's leading nationalized banks to manage remittance transactions which have resulted in 5-fold increase in the bank's inward remittance transactions and the solution helps the bank to manage a transaction load of 3.5 Million. BCT deployed Cuecent ePay, a National Payment Hub solution for one of the market leaders in the field of electronic payment to manage payment collections. The hub facilitates the collection of taxes of around USD 220+ million and customs collection of USD 190+ million annually. BCT's Cuecent ePay powers UAE's largest online payment aggregator for citizens involving 8 acquiring banks, 33 service providers and 2 payment gateways and handling 2.8 billion transactions involving $1 Billion in revenues. A Leading Government Far-East One of the largest Drilling Contractors APAC Biotechnology Company North America Leading Nationalized Bank APAC One of the largest IT Enterprises MENA One of the largest Municipalities MENA Oracle Services BCT provides world-class strategy, implementation and upgrade solutions across the full spectrum of Oracle products. BCT works with Oracle globally in providing high performance cost-effective solutions. BCT brings with it the experience of 350+ B2B & Middleware Engagements worldwide across multiple verticals. BCT has built and delivered industry-specific solutions that compliment the Oracle E-Business Suite with "Bolt-on" Solutions like Landed Costing, Bank Facilities Management, Material Allocation Sheet and Product price calculator. The practice comprises experts in various Domains, Applications, Middleware, Technology and Database Administration. It has proven, successful methodologies and a Global Delivery Model that enable rapid implementation and faster ROI. SAP Consulting Services BCT's SAP Consulting Services provide organizations the ability to exploit the power of SAP solutions to deliver extensive business and organizational benefits. BCT's expertise lies in innovative solutioning and delivery of SAP Applications with the highest level of fitment. BCT's SAP offerings span consulting, end-to-end implementations, upgrades, and application support and maintenance and testing services. BCT works closely with customers in the following areas such as Business Consultancy Services, Implementation/ Enterprise Application Services, Support/ Infrastructure Management Services BCT offers best-in-breed Products and Business Solutions under the brand name "Cuecent", to achieve dramatic increases in employee productivity, return on assets, customer service and operating margins. Cuecent (Customer+Enterprise+Centric) aptly symbolizes our core philosophy of "customer centricity". Targeted at Banks, Corporates, Governments, SCM Organizations and Energy & Utilities, these solutions open up new revenue streams and enhance performance and efficiency. “ “ “ “ “ “ T24 Core Banking Services BCT offers an entire gamut of T24 solutions and services that help global banks unlock the full value of this powerful platform, and create a core banking system environment that is simpler and more efficient, highly flexible, and that fosters responsiveness to the dynamic banking environment. We provide core banking services covering areas such as Life- cycle Implementation, an Upgrade to the next release, Business Processes analysis, Gap analysis/ Development, Interface design/ Development, Performance/ Database management, Project Management or Business/ Technical support. Risk & Compliance Management Services BCT offers a comprehensive range of risk and compliance management services which help banks and financial institution to gain maximum Return on Investments (RoI) from their current and planned spends in risk and compliance management. We provide services in the areas of Enterprise Risk Management, Risk Processes & Systems, Emerging Risks, Information Security Risk Management, Fraud management, Compliance Function Optimization, Risk dashboards & Regulatory Reporting and Testing & Validation.

7. Independent Testing Services BCT understands the importance of software Quality and hence offers Testing Services under the bouquet 'ESP Testing' which stands for Earlier, Smarter, Parallel Testing - a totally innovative and holistic approach to testing. This approach to testing ensures an optimal environment for our customers to address all the major testing challenges and achieve enhanced results. ESP Testing lowers the risk of failures, detects defects in software development lifecycle, supports multilingual testing capability and helps companies achieve enhanced testing efficiency, precision and reduced costs. It uses a combination of experienced technical consultants, mature processes and robust testing methodology. BCT's ESP testing services offers services in various testing areas including Functional & Regression, Test Automation, SOA testing, Mobile Testing and Cloud Testing. Cuecent Business Solutions Service Offerings BCT’s Solutions and Service Offerings BCT facilitated the implementation of Cuecent ePay, a National Payment Aggregator which helped the customer reduce turnaround time, enable all government payment services under one umbrella, enable easy, convenient and secure payment for all its citizens, businesses and the government agencies. l l l l l l l l l Cuecent BPMS GoCloud A comprehensive Business Process Management Suite that allows organizations to manage the entire lifecycle of their complex business processes that can be cloud ready Cuecent ESB A standards- based intellegent ESB which is scalable, flexible, configurable and extensible Cuecent ePay A unified electronic billing and payment platform Cuecent RETINA A platform for intelligent and real- time business decision making CueTrans An Integrated Logistics & transportation solution Cuecent CueTrack An end-to-end Complaint Management Solution Cuecent eRemit An integrated inward remittance solution Cuecent ICM A seamless multi-point channel integration solution Cuecent SWIFT Router A payment workflow management solution BCT anticipates and understands customers’ needs, and works closely with them, to discover new frontiers of growth through co-creation and joint innovation. We believe that our growth is directly related to the growth of our customers and work towards innovating and delivering sustainable value to our customers. We experience a high level of satisfaction in the implementation of Cuecent ePay – NPA. We are delighted with the implementation outcome so far and are confident that BCT will enable us to realize our growth ambitious by enabling eGA to deliver a world-class eGovernment ePayment experience. Director - Service Delivery & Channel Enhancement This hub suited our bank's objectives and improved growth in business expansion. “Seamless co-ordination of BCT Team Members, Project delivery within the agreed scope and time, adherence to the standards and compliance to the process ensured a low defect leakage. Deputy General Manager We are pleased to find IT players from this region attain international acclaim and that too in creating valuable intellectual property. We intend to further strengthen our partnership with Bahwan CyberTek and jointly pursue initiatives that will make us both major eGovernment Services Transformers. Director - Operations Through the ePay gateway, we have succeeded in achieving immense cost savings for customers and government departments. This makes ePay one of our most important eTransformation enablers. Director General BCT team demonstrated deepest commitment and went that extra mile to ensure the solution implemented handles all the practical aspects of the operation. BCT has become as a key partner for Aban and we look forward to engaging them in our future assignment. Head - Information Technology As a key partner over the last year, BCT has always demonstrated the deepest commitment. Their technical expertise and creative blended delivery model have helped us achieve increased productivity and quality while reducing development costs. Director - Enterprise Applications customer focus BCT implemented IBM Maximo 5.2 application support across 10 rig sites which helped reduce application downtime, limit unplanned shutdowns and enabled on-time resolution of issues. Leveraging BCT's Global Delivery Model, BCT delivered a host of services, including architecture assessment and recommendation, installation of Oracle SOA Suite 11g, migration of existing web services from 10g platform to 11g, providing ongoing application development and platform support BCT implemented a robust remittance platform that helps one of the India's leading nationalized banks to manage remittance transactions which have resulted in 5-fold increase in the bank's inward remittance transactions and the solution helps the bank to manage a transaction load of 3.5 Million. BCT deployed Cuecent ePay, a National Payment Hub solution for one of the market leaders in the field of electronic payment to manage payment collections. The hub facilitates the collection of taxes of around USD 220+ million and customs collection of USD 190+ million annually. BCT's Cuecent ePay powers UAE's largest online payment aggregator for citizens involving 8 acquiring banks, 33 service providers and 2 payment gateways and handling 2.8 billion transactions involving $1 Billion in revenues. A Leading Government Far-East One of the largest Drilling Contractors APAC Biotechnology Company North America Leading Nationalized Bank APAC One of the largest IT Enterprises MENA One of the largest Municipalities MENA Oracle Services BCT provides world-class strategy, implementation and upgrade solutions across the full spectrum of Oracle products. BCT works with Oracle globally in providing high performance cost-effective solutions. BCT brings with it the experience of 350+ B2B & Middleware Engagements worldwide across multiple verticals. BCT has built and delivered industry-specific solutions that compliment the Oracle E-Business Suite with "Bolt-on" Solutions like Landed Costing, Bank Facilities Management, Material Allocation Sheet and Product price calculator. The practice comprises experts in various Domains, Applications, Middleware, Technology and Database Administration. It has proven, successful methodologies and a Global Delivery Model that enable rapid implementation and faster ROI. SAP Consulting Services BCT's SAP Consulting Services provide organizations the ability to exploit the power of SAP solutions to deliver extensive business and organizational benefits. BCT's expertise lies in innovative solutioning and delivery of SAP Applications with the highest level of fitment. BCT's SAP offerings span consulting, end-to-end implementations, upgrades, and application support and maintenance and testing services. BCT works closely with customers in the following areas such as Business Consultancy Services, Implementation/ Enterprise Application Services, Support/ Infrastructure Management Services BCT offers best-in-breed Products and Business Solutions under the brand name "Cuecent", to achieve dramatic increases in employee productivity, return on assets, customer service and operating margins. Cuecent (Customer+Enterprise+Centric) aptly symbolizes our core philosophy of "customer centricity". Targeted at Banks, Corporates, Governments, SCM Organizations and Energy & Utilities, these solutions open up new revenue streams and enhance performance and efficiency. “ “ “ “ “ “ T24 Core Banking Services BCT offers an entire gamut of T24 solutions and services that help global banks unlock the full value of this powerful platform, and create a core banking system environment that is simpler and more efficient, highly flexible, and that fosters responsiveness to the dynamic banking environment. We provide core banking services covering areas such as Life- cycle Implementation, an Upgrade to the next release, Business Processes analysis, Gap analysis/ Development, Interface design/ Development, Performance/ Database management, Project Management or Business/ Technical support. Risk & Compliance Management Services BCT offers a comprehensive range of risk and compliance management services which help banks and financial institution to gain maximum Return on Investments (RoI) from their current and planned spends in risk and compliance management. We provide services in the areas of Enterprise Risk Management, Risk Processes & Systems, Emerging Risks, Information Security Risk Management, Fraud management, Compliance Function Optimization, Risk dashboards & Regulatory Reporting and Testing & Validation.