Brooklyn Decker, the Grace and Frankie actress and budding tech entrepreneur, is far from a “homemaker.” But wow, can she ever make a home. Her famous husband, Andy Roddick, is able to sum it up best. “My taste has definitely changed by virtue of her being right often—now, I’m into these rustic, antique pieces that she finds," he says. "It’s evolved in that it’s less and less modern. I’m in awe of her ability to come up with quirky things with design.”

Decker and Roddick reside with their two children in Austin, Texas—where the former athlete has based his Andy Roddick Foundation. The celebs also have a second residence in North Carolina, where Decker was raised. Decker and Roddick’s seven-bedroom home is situated on four acres in Cashiers, N.C., a peacefully secluded destination in the mountains. Decker, who co-founded digital wardrobe operating system Finery, comments, “For us, it was about finding a place that hadn’t become too touristy. It’s a really tiny town with families from cities like Boston, Chicago, and Philadelphia. So there’s an interesting culture, too—like, ex–big city kids.”

The barnlike residence was created from materials that were sourced from North Carolina, including granite and reclaimed wood (which was, serendipitously, discovered in the town of Cashiers). Decker was committed to this cause because she wanted the structure to be harmonious with its location. Her dream was realized in 2018, thanks to her collaboration with Ben Harris (from Harris Custom Builders) and Travis Mileti (from Mountainworks Custom Home Design). But it is Decker who is to be credited for the enviable interiors—which are elevated but rustic. She explains, “I love 1stdibs. I mean, anyone who loves interiors loves 1stdibs. We got our chairs from a place called Rusticks in Cashiers and our art and tchotchkes from Antique Tobacco Barn in Asheville.”

The small entrance is dark and dramatic, with a stained glass of St. Lucy (the patron saint of the blind) from a Catholic church. It unfolds into the light-filled main room, which is grand in scale. It is centered on a stone-decorated fireplace, which establishes two sections in the space: the dining room/kitchen and the living room. On one side of the vaulted structure, there’s a ladder to a lofted area that houses a multicolored collection of books.

Here, the color scheme consists of blues and greens, which echoes the outdoors. Decker says, “I like darker, more colorful colors. We were trying to bring in the open sky and the green mountains in the best way I know how. The view from this room out to the mountain is really beautiful. The fog rolls in every day and it never looks the same.”

There are seven bedrooms in this extensive “cabin,” including the master suite. Decker and Roddick’s quarters are a continuation of the house’s themes, with a green-fabric bed frame and a mixed-media landscape by artist Michael Dines. Decker herself sketched the design for the marble sinks in the bathroom.

Decker and Roddick recently hosted their first Christmas in their new house, which was designed to accommodate their family and friends. Roddick says, “It’s a place to store bodies. It becomes a house full of germs and people and dogs.” Decker continues, “Whenever we have a project, we want you to be able to put your feet on any piece of furniture. Nothing is precious. Come, relax on the furniture, have a glass of wine, stay forever—that’s the space we wanted to create.”

Brooklyn Decker and Andy Roddick's Mountain Getaway Is Equal Parts Rustic and Refined