Lee Ryan is set to become a dad for the fifth time as he announced that his wife Verity Paris is pregnant.

The singer already shares a two-year-old and a one-year old daughter with his wife, Verity. He is also a father to his daughter Bluebell, 14, with Jessica Keevil, and shares daughter Rayn with his ex Samantha Miller.

Lee shared a loved-up snap of himself and his wife sharing a kiss while he cradled her growing bump.

A statement shared on the official Blue Twitter page read: 'Me and my wife, Verity, are very pleased to announce our new baby, that will be born this year.'

'The news came out of the blue. I found out on my 40th birthday! What a present from god'.

Lee secretly married his girlfriend of two years Verity in March 2022, after dating for two years.

The couple, who moved to Spain in 2021, tied the knot in an intimate and romantic ceremony in Gibraltar.

Newlywed Lee told The Sun : 'I met someone finally who loves and supports me in everything I do.

'Verity is a beautiful, strong and loving woman who I treasure, and I'm a lucky man to have such a wonderful mother for my child, and now wife in her.

'I've never been more calm and grounded and I have Verity to thank for that. I'm the happiest I've ever been in my life because of the wonderful family life I now have.'

The couple moved to a beachfront apartment in the Costa del Sol in 2020 with the duo admitting that they now have a 'better quality of life' and 'new lease of life'.

Lee admitted that after 20 years of living in London he now loves scenic walks along the coastline and 'sea air'.

The singer revealed that they took out Spanish residency before Brexit and that their daughter will have 'dual passports' with the couple excited for her to speak Spanish.

Lee and Verity, whose real name is Verity Morley, were first linked back in January 2020 before enjoying a loved-up holiday together in February last year.

Verity is an Ariana Grande impersonator who starred on the X Factor in 2009.

Lee, who was known as somewhat as a Lothario on Celebrity Big Brother and Celebs Go Dating, previously reflected on his failed relationships and low points of his life.

He told the Daily Mail in 2019: 'I shouldn't have lost the family life I had with my ex-fiance, Sammi, and our little boy, Rayn. He's ten now and we're really close again.

'But I neglected the relationship so it's only relatively recently that he's been able to see functioning co-parenting, something my mum and dad never achieved,' they split when Lee was six.

He added: 'I don't know if I'll settle down for a long time. I love the early months of a relationship and then I start concentrating on my career again.

'I also have a daughter, Bluebell, who's 11. These are key ages for my kids so I'm working as hard as I know how to make memories with each of them that will last. They're my priority for the next few years.'