Strictly Come Dancing: Lee Ryan announced as twelfth contestant

Is Lee Ryan married?

Lee Ryan is not married and does not have a wife.

However, he’s been engaged twice in the past.

The 35-year-old EastEnders actor and pop star was once engaged to Atomic Kitten star Liz McClarnon back in 2003 but the relationship broke down.

He later went on to propose to his girlfriend Samantha Miller but sadly the couple split up before the wedding.

Although Lee is not married, he has two children from previous relationships.

His daughter with his ex-girlfriend Jessica Keevil is called Bluebell and was born in 2007.

Meanwhile, Lee and his former partner Samantha share son Rayn, who was born in 2008.

He has posted photos of his children on social media previously and appears to be on good terms with Miller, who he also features on his Instagram.

STRICTLY COME DANCING 2018 LINE-UP CONFIRMED

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

Lee was previously linked to both Casey Batchelor and Jasmine Waltz during his stint in the Celebrity Big Brother house back in 2014.

There are 15 stars taking part in Strictly Come Dancing this year, however the celebrities are still yet to be partnered up with their professionals.

Lee was the 12th contestant to be announced in this year’s line-up.

“I'm so excited to be joining this year’s Strictly line-up. It is a real honour for me and I can’t wait to get out on the dance floor,” he said.

WHO IS LEE RYAN?

He admitted that he had been a fan of Strictly Come Dancing since his fellow bandmate Simon Webbe took part on the show in 2011.

“Simon has been a great help, he just told me to watch and listen to everyone around me and give it my best and that’s all I can do,” he said.

Lee went on to reveal: “Once we knew it was happening, my manager told me I couldn’t tell anyone, there’s always this big secret about Strictly so I think for many it was a shock when it was announced.

“Even the band didn’t know! The feedback has been good; I have had a lot of phone calls and text messages!”

Given his background in entertainment, there had been questions over Lee’s previous dance background.

Lee explained: “I did learn dance at Italia Conti when I was young but it was never my favourite class.

“I used to sneak out and wait for the singing lessons!

“I asked my son Rayn if I am good dancer, he said no…”

Strictly Come Dancing launches on BBC One this Saturday at 7.35pm