LEE Ryan became a household name when he joined the boyband Blue when he was a teenager.

Since then he has not only been a pop star, he has conquered the world of reality TV and is currently in the new E4 dance series, The Real Dirty Dancing.

What is Lee Ryan's net worth?

Lee Ryan, 38 was born in Kent in 1983 and rose to fame in the early 2000s as one of the founding members of boy band Blue along with Simon Webbe, Anthony Costa, and Duncan James.

In 2015, Lee became the fourth and final Blue band member to declare himself bankrupt.

His current net worth is unknown, but in August 2021 he declared he "had no money" after being hit with his third driving ban.

He said he couldn't afford to cover a £1,500 fine for speeding as Covid had left him "unable to work".

Is Lee Ryan married and does he have children?

Lee isn't married but he is in a relationship with former X Factor star Verity Paris.

The couple started dating in 2020, and have a baby daughter together.

Lee has enjoyed a colourful love life over the years.

The singer became engaged to Atomic Kitten star Liz McClarnon in 2003, but later split after Liz said she found being in a celebrity couple too hard.

That was the closest he has come to getting married.

From his relationship with Jessica Keevil, Lee has a daughter named Bluebell, 14.

As well as son Ryan with former fiancée Samantha Miller.

Lee also had a fling with his Blue bandmate Duncan.

The Sun revealed in 2014 how both group members shared an ongoing sexual relationship during their earlier years and still remain close today.

What is Lee Ryan famous for?

Lee is most famous for being in the boy band group Blue.

Lee and the rest of the Blue group members are still together - but these days they only tour and have no plans to make any more new music.

Since releasing the first of their three UK number one albums, All Rise, in 2001, the band have sold 15 million records worldwide, including a series of hit singles.

Blue reunited after a six-year hiatus in 2011 to represent the UK in the Eurovision song contest with their track I Can, coming 11th.

Since taking part in the 2013 ITV show The Big Reunion they have released a further two albums, Roulette and Colours.

During his time away from the band, Lee embarked on a solo singing career, his self-titled album charting at number six in the UK charts in 2005.

What TV shows has Lee Ryan been in?

Deciding to venture into the TV industry, Lee and his fellow band member Duncan James appeared in an episode of comedy panel show Through the Keyhole in 2013.

He then appeared in Celebrity Big Brother in 2014 where he came out as bisexual, later stating in an interview, "I'm very open about what I've done in the past but that was the easiest way to come out. I did so much other stuff that people didn't even notice."

In February 2017, it was confirmed that Ryan had landed a role in the BBC soap, EastEnders where he was casted as Woody Woodward.

He later received 2017 Inside Soap Award nomination for Best Newcomer.

In 2018 he appeared as on Strictly Come dancing and then a year later on Celebs go dating.