1. Discussion about two of my articleson Albania,Kosova, and Macedoniain the AlbanianForum Illyria Proboards The discussion started on 30th March 2008,few days after the publication of my articles; it can be found here: https://illyria.proboards.com/thread/23240/albania-kosova-macedonia-triple- alliance ----------------------------------------------------------- Julius Mar 30, 2008 at 11:53pm Albania, Kosova, Macedonia: the Triple Alliance for Balkan Stability Dr. Muhammad Shamsaddin Megalommatis An earlier article about what a successful foreign policy for Kosova should be was published at a moment the political conjuncture in Kosova suggested rather a focus on domestic affairs. It is only normal that many Kosovars and Albanians wrote to me to thank me for the approach,and to underscore their present worries. While suggesting to think big, I did not mean that Kosova should undermine the pernicious Serbian policies that have ceaselessly been assumed under the stamp of an extreme nationalism, perilous chauvinism and unadulterated racism that consist in an amalgamation of concepts andideas that are far worse than Hitler´s Nazism and Mussolini´s Fascism. Neither should Kosovar diplomats, cadres, politicians and statesmen forget Russia´s desperate attempts to create problems and frictions between Europe and America or among the EU member states. All these Russian endeavours pertain to a most unsuccessful effort to maintain influence in the Balkans and to destabilize Europe up to the point of eventually making it dependant on Russian energy and political choices. Due to lack of earlier study, proper analysis and adequate comprehension, the Russian policy is predestined to doom. In fact, the Serbian plot of Russia is a matter of concern for both America and Europe. They will have to outmaneuver it, and the policy tools needed for this are already in place. NATO placed the Kosovo town of Mitrovica under de facto military law on Tuesday after riots by a Serb population caused the death of an Ukrainian UN policeman, and forced the withdrawal of UN personnel. Consequently, the NATO- led peacekeeping force KFOR and the United Nations mission ordered all local Kosovo Serb police officers to park their patrol cars and suspend normal duties. The further escalation will be prejudicial only to Serbia, which will face extra dismemberment, with the oppressed Muslims, Albanians, Hungarians and

2. Romanians (of Sandak and Voivodina) taking to the streets and manifesting their rejection of the Neo-Nazi Serb police state. Balkans oscillating between Oppression and Mistrust Yet, this is not the end of the colonial involvement in the Balkans. Dangers exist for various peoples; historical truth and political experience make our conclusion clear. Due to the long date Anglo-French, Russian and Austrian colonial involvement, post-Ottoman Balkans have been characterized by a binary situation that is bound to leave a long shadow. For decades, the Balkans, divided into meaningless states and partitioned by disqualifying borders, lived between oppression and mistrust. If there was no oppression, there was certainly mistrust; if several forms of oppression took an end, the mistrust survives. It would therefore be momentous to set up the structures and to implement the policies needed so that mutual trust be built. Of course, it will be inconsequential to expect several states that pursue divisive and revengeful, chauvinistic policies to cooperate; only humanist approaches and good intentions consist in real evidence of a political will to build mutual trust. Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia, Montenegro may be willing to engage in an effort to eliminate the ghosts of the past. Arrest and Incarcerate the Criminal Gangster Vuk Jeremic! Serbia is still plunged in a necrolatrous, nationalistic paroxysm; nothing can be expected from them, as long as they fail to realize that all peoples, all nations, all historical and cultural heritages are equal and equally important and valuable. Suffice it that you read a sentence articulated earlier today by Vuk Jerevic, the Serb minister of foreign affairs, and you realize that the guy reverberates the worst moments of Hitler and Stalin combined; quite shamelessly, Jerevic "asserted" that "every country that will recognize the illegal state of Kosova breaches the international law". It did not occur to this criminal gangster to imagine that no one appointed him as the World´s Supreme Erudite, Foremost Judge, and Law Interpreter, and that his idea is rejected as fallacious explanation by the world´s most democratic and most educated political establishments. The dangerous terrorist Jerevic, by deliberately threatening other countries, simply inflicted further damages to his country, as the answer to his Neo-Nazi paroxysm was Croatia´s and Hungary´s formal recognition of Kosova. As he fails to understand that his values are not values and his ideas are not ideas, he reveals his total incapacity to share civil life with others who disagree with him. This is the essence of Neo-Nazi totalitarian criminals, who view their opinion as the only allowed in the world. With further parts of Serbia detached (namely Sanjaq and Voicvodina) in the years ahead, the Serbs will have one more opportunity to get a more illuminated inward vision of their incredible failure. Every nationalism is indeed a flagrant case of

3. insensitivity and egoism; and as such, it should be denounced. On the other hand, Bulgaria and Romania are countries characterized by extreme weaknesses, dysfunctional administrations, and several, oppressed, ethnic and religious groups; longer they resist to the implementation of internationally accepted standards of democracy and multiculturalism, stronger they make the case of the secessionists of Transylvania, Pirin Macedonia, and other provinces. Yet, the main threat for regional peace and stability will not come from these states. The danger may come from artificially created impressions, effectively spread rumors, and astutely insinuated - yet deceptive – dreams. Three Small but Pivotal States As the newest neighbor and partner, Kosova certainly must have its own Balkan policy; geared to ensure peace and stability in the Balkans, and allow Kosovars pursue greater visions of foreign policy at the global level, Prishtina´s Balkan policy must evolve around the Triple Alliance: Macedonia, Albania and Kosova. Prishtina should take an initiative and, immediately after the exchange of ambassadors between Macedonia and Kosova, a great project of a Triple Balkan Alliance should be launched, involving a military treaty of common defense in case of an attack from another state. Albania and Macedonia would deploy their efforts to convince all their partners to formally recognize Kosova; and Kosova would demonstrate a great commitment to help shape a common vision for all three countries. The three countries should first and foremost agree to offer their citizens premium treatment in terms of cultural, educational, social, economic and political sensitivities. Working on both levels, educational – cultural and socio-economic – political, Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia should promote fast development, dramatic increase of the Foreign Direct Investment, and infrastructure projects,while at the same time becoming, all three, the Epitome of the Modern Multicultural Society. The triple Alliance:Albania, Kosova, Macedonia There are some projects that could promote mutual understanding and respect among the three states. Mutual trust means lack of fear; this presupposes knowledge of the ´Other´. More you know your interlocutors, more comfortable you feel with them. What can build then mutual trust – among Albania, Kosova and Macedonia – faster and better than bilingual schools and universities? It is clear that the three countries, even if combined, constitute a small market of less than 10 m people; consequently, with the necessary infrastructure built, there will be little to be expected from either agriculture or industry. The triple alliance of Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia for Peace and Stability in the Balkans should mostly focus on Services. Education and Culture, Tourism and ICT may be the stronger sectors to focus on. Certainly, every Macedonian in Albania and every Albanian in Macedonia must be

4. offered education in their native tongues. Cultural associations and political organizations must be free for all to found, join and develop. However, Albania, Kosovo, and Macedonia must go beyond that level. The three countries must form common cadres and elites, all bilingual, launch common projects, set up diverse partnerships, and in one word view their future as one common perspective of peace and stability. Businessmen originating from one of the allied countries must invest excessively in the other two, and bilateral companies must be launched in order to consolidate the local markets. Bilingual (Albanian / Macedonian) universities Bilingual (Albanian / Macedonian) universities will help set up a common approach to the Illyrian and Macedonian heritages that both have been equally and unjustifiably discriminated by the Western academia in the 17th – 19th century elaboration of their erroneous, unbalanced, and fallacious Hellenism, a theory and approach upon which the colonial establishment was based. The correct revelation of the real identity and the value of the Ancient Civilizations of the Illyrians and the Macedonians is a work that has to be undertaken commonly by today´s Kosovars, Macedonians and Albanians. In this regard, a fresh approach to the Late Antiquity phenomena of linguistic Greecization and Romanization should help tremendously in dissociating Greco- phony from the Ancient Greeks, and Latino-phony from the Ancient Romans. The Balkans as Late Antiquity home to Oriental religions, ideologies, philosophies and cultures should be another great project.Balkan Christianity, Balkan Medieval Profane Movements, and Balkan Islam should also be great projects for the bilingual Albanian / Macedonian universities to undertake in order to dismiss forever colonial fallacies that worked against the two Balkan nations. Positioning themselves at the East – West and Islam – Christianity crossroads, the bilingual universities of the three allied countries could help create a World Hub for Translations that would attractinvestment and experts from allover the world in view of the translation and the subsequent diffusion of authentic Christian / Western sources among Muslims / Easterners and authentic Islamic / Oriental sources among Christians / Westerners. Like this, when the three countries will be financially strong enough to join the European Union, they will have formed a very clear identity, and they will have produced a great work at the level of Culture and Education; their contribution will be necessary to transform the present, obsolete European academic class. By methodically acting in the aforementioned direction, Albania, Kosovo and Macedonia have the power to outmaneuver any possible threat, rivalry and opposition to their existence and identity. Without any war taking place in the Balkans! source: www.americanchronicle.com/articles/55820 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. julius So what u think? We can find our common points of view regarding foreign politics, respect each other in religion, history, culture etc. Prosperity cant come only with the work within our borders. I feel this can be the right direction to move forward. Same goals, asspirations, non-confrontal point of views (if we exclude religion). Alsat bilingual tv is a good example of what this man says. Also I have heard that Hashim Thaci has good relations with FYROM goverment. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- captainalbania Dr. Muhammad Shamsaddin Megalommatis who is this guy? A Muslim Greek? ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ilirian123 Dr. Muhammad Shamsaddin Megalommatis among Albania, Kosova and Macedonia – faster and better than bilingual schools and universities? Personally i could tell him to "HACK OFF". Bilingual (Albanian / Macedonian) universities will help set up a common approach to the Illyrian and Macedonianheritages.... What is today's macedonian heritage? We know that there is a large population of albanians but how about macedonians? Serbs , russians, a large bullgarians origin etc etc..... what heritage do they look for? If this MR Shamsadin want's to give to americans an persian haritage it's fine, but giving to serbs,bullgarians,russians etc etc an macedonian heritage ,to me look like STUPID. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Kastorianos Megalomatis is a Greek name indeed, meaning the one with big eyes. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- julius who is this guy? A Muslim Greek? =========== ethnic turk. converted in orthodox and than again reconverted in muslim. U can read his bio. at the end of the first post. Ilirian123...come on man,be serious..i was thinking in what direction should we

6. expand our economical growth, culture and everything. My first thought was to Greece. But the guys here dont seem too clear about that. So my next thought was to FYROM. Why is bothering u what they are thinking or believing? As an atheist I think religion is rediculous BUT I dont put a cross on every religious man. Here is the same thing. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ilirian123 ulius i understand the topic very well and i understand directions of economical growth and i agree on this, but i WILL not agree for example of having in Albania bilingual schools with macedonian culture. Why or give me a good reason why should we do that? Let the economy run itself ,but the culture ........... noway. And if it comes to culture which one is that ,as another question rise that there are very few true macedonians and that country is made up with lots of minorities. The idea of slavs calling themselves Macedonians it doesn't sound good to me when it comes Bilingual (Albanian / Macedonian) universities will help set up a common approach to the Illyrian and Macedonian heritages.... ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- julius Actually i think he is talking about bilingual schools in the region where these two different populations could be and live in. it wont make any sense to open a bilingual school in other cities of Albania. Maybe a uni cathedre of studies in some universities we have. This could come very cheap...The only thing to do is americans to spend some money on Tetove, Shkup, or Oher. Imagine a big ultramodern bilingual university in Tetove, the imaginary borders between two people will fall quicky. It can be the healthier of relationships between two different people in whole Balcans. Also a free market, no restrictions in trade, new working places would increase the concurrence and strengthen the economy of both states. My point is that relations between alb and fyromian are the easiest to cure. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Kassandros Nice dreams you have for your country Julius... -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- julius dreams are tax-free Basil. Besides this path could be one way ticket for Balkans. Because according to the same man, this below scenario can happen too: Kosova, Albania, Macedonia – or the Scenario of a Generalized Balkan War

7. Kosova´s liberation is a seminal development in the region of Balkans for one additional reason that was not extensively discussed in earlier articles about this subject. As a matter of fact, Kosova´s liberation does not mark the end of the historically demanded decomposition of Yugoslavia and Serbia, but it certainly cancels the possibility of Serbia becoming a reason for a major war in the area. After the secession and the formal declaration of Independence of Kosova, the clouds of war move away; certainly the Mitrovica Serbs may attempt to express their rejection of the fact that their country is Kosova and not Serbia, but this will not change much. Thanks to the multileveled international presence,the issue will be successfully contained between in Kosova itself. Even if the Muslims, who form the majority of the population at Sanjaq, demonstrate their opposition to the tyrannical Serbian state and the long employed forms of Anti- Islamic, Anti-Turkish and Anti-Albanian oppression, there is, practically speaking, no chance that Bosnia or Albania be involved in a direct war for Sanjaq. And Voivodina´s Hungarians may wish to secede from Serbia, a country of no European vocation, and merge with their homeland, which would open for them the gates of the European Union, but again this would not involve a major war in the Balkans. However, the fact that Kosova and Serbia are not anymore in a position to trigger a major Balkan war does not mean even for a moment that this sort of war is highly unlikely in the Balkans. On the contrary, few times we reached so close to a generalized war in the Balkans over the past 17 years. The epicenter of what is about to become the next major war in the Balkans is located further in the South. The entire situation of the recent Balkan conflicts, viewed through a perspicacious viewpoint, reflects the clash of two groups of power that happened to promote diametrically opposed plans, one attempting to trigger a generalized Balkan war whereas the opposite group of power deployed its best to avert the war. In fact, there is no clash between the American – British and French – German interests in the area as many have thought that it was the case in the 90s. With the American and the British interests diverging more and more allover the world (as one should have anticipated), the recent rhetoric abouta strong French – English relationship demonstrates very clearly from where comes the danger; the unrepentant colonial empires, totally controlled by the Apostate Freemasonic Lodge intend to wage a major Balkan war that would automatically cause the collapse and the dissolution of the NATO where the Anglo-French allies cannot manage to put the Americans aside. The worsening of the economic crisis in America, which has been triggered by the part of the American establishment that associates their interests with those of London and Paris, is a sign that NATO´s dissolution must advance fast in view of an American isolationism – to be expected as consequence of the forthcoming economic disaster.

8. The Explosive Material How a generalized war can be triggered in the Balkans, if Serbia does not count anymore? In fact, the explosive material, stored over the years, has become massive; the interests in conflict are many, the expectations great, the illusions out of control. The myths sold by the criminal colonial diplomats to the idiotic establishments of the Balkan periphery of Europe are all based on infamous lies and geared to disseminate enmity, hatred, and rancorfor the ´Other´, which in turn triggers reaction and as result causes instability. The false myths sold to all the nations of the area – which must be divided and engulfed in conflicts according to the Anglo-French Freemasonic plans – are currently shared by minorities in almost all the countries concerned; this is part of the game. The dynamics of perversion, as machinated by the Anglo-French Merchants of the Nations, involve the long diffusion of myths, the slow dissemination of their elements, and the sudden overwhelming acceptance of them at a moment a false threat is presented as real. The explosive material includes the following: 1. Albanian dreams for a Greater Albania. There is nothing wrong in this regard, as this nation has been among the most mistreated nations of the area; simply, the timing for this may favor others´ plans more than an eventual rightful Albanian demand. 2. Albanian demands of equal treatment with Macedonians in Macedonia.The various successive governments of Skopje did their best to ensure that equity, justice, and freedom prevail among all the citizens of the country, but – as usually – this should be better felt by the Albanian minority in Macedonia than just read on a piece of legal document, even if it is the constitution of the country. To avert uneasiness, the Macedonian authorities should work hard and strike a deal with the Albanian minority to make them truly feel and completely realize that Macedonia is a country for them too. Bi-national political parties would be a great achievement in this regard. 3. Bulgarian lack of recognition of the Macedonian nation as a different nation 4. Bulgarian dreams for a greater Bulgaria (fed by the aforementioned assumption that Macedonians are Bulgarians) 5. The present Bulgarian depression, which is due to the fact that the various post- Soviet governments failed over the past 20 years to offer a great vision to their disoriented nation. A remedy to it could be the vision of a Greater Bulgaria, and the easiest step in this case would be the absorption of Macedonia. The fact that Bulgaria officially does not recognize the existence of the Macedonian minority on its soil is an indication of appetite and a prelude to war. It means that Sofia recognizes Skopje as a state, but not as a nation.

9. 6. Greek – otherwise incomprehensible – rejection to recognize Macedonia underits rightful name, which harmonizes with the Bulgarian rejection of the existence of the Macedonian nation. 7. Greek – otherwise baffling – fears of a Macedonian campaign as regards the non recognition, harassment, and oppression of the Macedonian minority in Greece. 8. Greek fears of a Greater Albania, which seem to have increased after the quasi- completion of the Yugoslavian – Serbian decomposition. 9. Turkey´s bond with Albania, Kosova and Macedonia, and Ankara´s resolution not to let the Balkan equilibrium turn upside down. The Red Lines With the aforementioned being already in place, one has to bear in mind what is commonly known as red lines for all participants. They are as follows: 1. One should not expect Bulgaria to accept the formation of Greater Albania, particularly the annexation of Tetova/o and the western provinces of Macedonia 2. One should not expect Greece to accept the formation of Greater Albania,as the Greek fears related to the subject make mention of Albanian intentions to parts of Northwestern Greece (Chameria) 3. One should not expect Greece to be kept aside, if Albania and Bulgaria declare war to one another when fighting on Macedonia´s soil. 4. One should not expect that Greece would ever accept complete annexation of Macedonia by Bulgaria or mere division of Macedonia by Albania and Bulgaria (which is a remote possibility). 5. One should not expect that Turkey would leave Bulgaria and Greece expand to the detriment of Macedonia and Albania,thus gravely deranging the current Balkan equilibrium. With this situation characterizing the region, one understands that little is left until the activation of the evil scenario which has been masterminded by the Anglo-French establishments, and the Apostate Freemasonic lodge which, behind the scenes, prepares the rise in force of a United Europe – Ultimate Superpower. Of course, there are forces opposing this scenario, and they will do their ingenious best to avert it. But this time it will be very difficult to avert it, as it can be materialized in a precipitated way. One positive measure is of course to include Albania and Macedonia in the NATO, as this would offer containment mechanisms particularly as regards Albania, and crisis management tools for the case of Macedonia. This fight may be out of the capability of average people to influence, but still one has the possibility to do something to avert that the war explodes due to an Albanian – Macedonian confusion. The Triple Alliance among Albania,Kosova and

10. Macedonia (http://www.americanchronicle.com/articles/55820), which we suggested in an earlier article before 10 days, goes precisely in the direction. The Scenario The only reason for a generalized war to explode now in the Balkans is evolving around Macedonia; not Macedonia and Greece, and not Macedonia and Bulgaria. The reason for a generalized war in the Balkans will be Macedonia and Albania. The evil colonial forces will try first to infiltrate among Tetovo Albanians to convince them that they cannot live in Macedonia and thus push them to separatism. At this very moment there are people working among the Tetovo Albanians for this purpose. As they seem associated to different backgrounds, either nationalistic Albanian or Islamist, they can comfortably confuse the outright majority of the Macedonian Albanians. Their current endeavours can trigger the first step very soon. Step 1. They will generate an overwhelming instability in Macedonia, and an Albanian uprising in the western parts of the state. It is expected that the Islamist branch of Tetovo Albanians will trigger the events first. Step 2. Through other branches of advisors, they will advise / push the Macedonian state to act as Serbia did in Kosovo 1998 – 9, which means to respond brutally to eventual Albanian demands for advanced autonomy. Step 3. With the pretext to save the Albanians of Tetovo, Albania will attack Macedonia. It is expected that the nationalist branch of Albanians in Tirana will trigger this attack as they are those who passionately desire a greater Albania. Macedonia should start now negotiations with these groups of power in Tirana in order to avert their possible involvement in the maelstrom of war. Step 4. Due to successful advance of the Albanian forces from the west of Macedonia, Bulgaria will issue an ultimatum to Albania, positioning itself as defender of Bulgarians (as they will name the Macedonians). Step 5. As Albania will not accept the ultimatum, Bulgaria - convinced that the intervention does not endanger the national interests of a NATO member state - will try to reach Skopje first. This will trigger the advent of the Greater Bulgaria, something that will be depicted internally as a unique opportunity for 21st century Bulgaria. Step 6. Following the aforementioned developments, the existence of Macedonia will be definitely cancelled, but unable to reach an agreement, Albania and Bulgaria will enter in direct war on Macedonian soil. Step 7. At that moment, the vast Turkish minority of Bulgaria will explode against Sofia to express their solidarity with the Albanian Muslims. Bulgaria will be shaken from its foundations at a moment it will be practically fighting against all the Muslims of the Balkans.