Vittorina Lattuga was born in Paola, Calabria, Italia, on April 1, 1929. A small beach town with warm waters and a mountainous background. This town gave our mother, our nonna, her character. A strong woman with a steadfast goal to raise her family and ensure they had the opportunities that she did not. She gave us more than that, she gave us love, she gave us strength, she gave everything to us.

Vittoria's sister Susanna, sister-in-law Melina and brother Francesco join us in our grief. She is predeceased by her brothers Garibaldi and Ottavio, and her sisters Marina, Salva, Dora, Lidia and Rosetta.

Vittoria married Domenico Augimeri in 1953, and then immigrated to Toronto with daughter Maria in 1956. Life was not easy but she never complained, she did what needed to be done.

At 40 years old, she became a widow and never remarried. Our mom raised 3 children (Maria, Alberto and Carlo) on her own. Without much formal education (although a talented seamstress) and a scant knowledge of the English language, Vittoria persevered through hardship and challenges that seemed to be insurmountable. She is our hero and the strongest person we have ever known.

Looking through her memory box you find the treasures of her life—they are: the graduation pamphlets of universities from where her children and grandchildren graduated, photos of her children and grandchildren as infants in her arms, as toddlers, school children and young adults. We are Vittoria’s legacy. We are her treasure.

She had 3 grandchildren all of whom she helped raise, all loved Nonna with every breath they took. All high achievers, Vittoria (Master in Linguistics), William (Lawyer), Alexander (Engineer and MBA). Maria and Odoardo Di Santo named their daughter after Vittoria. She too is feisty and wise, beautiful and kind. Her partner, Roger Barroso, became a fourth grandchild. William was her constant companion and the apple of her eye. Will tucked her in every night and ensured her comfort and joy. She always said if it wasn’t for “Whhhilliam” she would be lost. Alexander (son of Carlo and Angela Ceccarelli) was her bello di Nonna and took on her passion for success in his character. After a race, she asked him if he won, “No Nonna I came second." "Oh that’s OK you will win next time."

Seven years ago she fell and broke her hip. She never complained. Healing came naturally to this vibrant lady. With every fall she rose up stronger and with a deliberate and dedicated focus for life. She lived for us.

Vittoria, a strong woman who instilled in her children and grandchildren the qualities of kindness and duty; of honour and hard work; of dedication and respect. We honour you. We dedicate our lives to your ideals and continue to live our lives with your spirit by our side. Our mamma!

In lieu of flowers, donations can be made in memory of Vittorina "Vittoria" Augimeri to the Heart and Stroke Foundation

All arrangements will be held in private, and we ask that you kindly respect the family’s privacy during this very difficult time.

Your thoughts and kindness are truly appreciated during this time of sorrow.