TORONTO, Sept. 26 /CNW/ - Today, Councillor Maria Augimeri (Ward 9 York Centre); Jim Leek, brother of Robert Leek; Fulvia Leek (nee Coccorocchio), wife of Robert Leek; David Leek, son of Robert Leek; and City of Toronto representatives, along with the Toronto Professional Fire Fighters' Association, commemorated the significant contributions of Toronto Fire Services District Chief Bob Leek with a park refurbishing and naming.

Robert Leek was a 25-year Toronto Fire Services veteran who responded to a propane explosion in 2008 and succumbed to a heart attack while carrying out his duties.

"It is with great pride that the City of Toronto honours fallen Toronto Fire Services District Chief Bob Leek with this park which bears his name," said Councillor Augimeri. "As a teacher and mentor, Bob used his knowledge and expertise to help people. As District Chief of Emergency Planning, Bob chose to aid the field operations on August 10, 2008 and died while performing his duty. I believe Bob would have liked to be remembered for that."

Bob was an instructor at the Fire Academy, where he utilized his communications skills to teach others about fire service hydraulics and fire pumps, both very complicated subjects. Bob was later promoted to District Chief of Emergency Planning.

"Not only will the memory of District Chief Bob Leek be remembered by the men and women of the Toronto Fire Services; with the creation of the park, his memory will forever be woven into the fabric of this community," said Fire Chief William Stewart.

Parminder Singh Saini, who also lost his life at the site of the explosion, was also commemorated with the unveiling of a new plaque in his honour.

The park features a new junior playground, trees, benches, a walkway and a pergola. New playground equipment and decorative metal fencing were installed at the park thanks to donations from the following organizations:

Amalgamated Transit Union, Local 113

Bell Canada

Biddington Property Management

Bombardier Aerospace

Drywall, Acoustics, Lathing & Insulation, Local 675

Enbridge Gas Inc

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 353

Ironworkers, Local 721

Labourers International Union of North America, Local 506

Lynn Petersen

MP Charitable Foundation - Bridlepath Property Management

National Automobile, Aerospace, Transportation and General Workers Union - Canadian Auto Workers, Local 112

Parc Downsview Park

Toronto Professional Fire Fighters' Association, Local 3888

United Association - Journeymen & Apprentices - Plumbing & Pipe Fitting Industry, Local 46

The following organizations contributed in-kind material and/or labour to support the project:

Home Depot Canada

Labourers International Union of North America, Local 183

Teskey Construction Limited

United Brotherhood of Carpenters & Joiners, Local 27

The City of Toronto's Parks, Forestry and Recreation division has overseen construction of the project through to completion.

Toronto is Canada's largest city and sixth largest government, and home to a diverse population of about 2.6 million people. It is the economic engine of Canada and one of the greenest and most creative cities in North America. Toronto has won numerous awards for quality, innovation and efficiency in delivering public services. Toronto's government is dedicated to prosperity, opportunity and liveability for all its residents. For information about non-emergency City services and programs, Toronto residents, businesses and visitors can dial 311, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

Visit our website at www.toronto.ca

For further information: