It's been years since I've seen this film again, on this third occasion I consider that I do not find it as hilarious and implausible as many who have seen it say it is, but at least for me, it is nothing special or something out of this world. It all starts when the family harmony of the Beasleys, a model family of a peaceful British town changes when his wife Marjorie and his youngest daughter Joyce, are suddenly threatened when they decide to host a guest at home.

Well, since this is a film based on real events, it doesn't look like something to laugh about or feel empathy for the events narrated or the characters but rather aims…

As regular readers of my reviews (and my list Rainy Day Matinees) probably know, I'm a bit of a fan of true crime biographies hailing from post war Britain. There's just something about that starchy austere veneer that once scratched so often revealed a hotbed of sexual frustration and cold blooded murder. No wonder the net curtains twitched!

This film from 1996 starring Julie Walter, Rupert Graves and Laura Sadler ticks all those boxes, based as it is on the real life murderous scandal that saw Albert Goozee, a former merchant seaman stab to death his landlady and ageing mistress Mrs Leakey and her fourteen year old daughter Norma, following a picnic, before attempting to take his own life. The…

I didn't have much interest in continuing after five minutes or so but it clicked how I recognised the daughter - I was very much, very sincerely haunted by her death when I was young, she'd been a childhood crush of sorts, more like a deep fascination than crush, when she was in her CBBC drama. So I on principle stuck with it.

Julie Walters could be handed a blank page and make it work as a script, she's so good.

Away from Walters being a true star, everything about this is weak at best, tawdry as a baseline, and crass at worst. The film leans heavily on the idea Guppey is a borderline simpleton whose tempers are driven by…

Released around the same time as The Young Poisoner's Handbook, this film sports some superficial 'relations' to that film in that both are based on real-life crimes that happened in England in the 1950s/1960s, both are stylized and adopt a cheeky tone augmented by musical counterpoints using middlebrow pop tunes of that era, and both are told from the criminal's point of view

Where they diverge is at the level of taste, intelligence and core morality. The Young Poisoner's Handbook understands ironic contrasts and allows the titular poisoner to tell the story. His narration becomes a window into his psychopathic callousness. Intimate Relations, on the other hand, tells the offender's version of the story in earnest, giving the benefit of…