From Vodnjan we arrived at the parking lot in the Old Town of Pula, on the west side is the Tito’s Park and the famous Roman amphitheater on the east side.

Pula is the largest city in Istria County, situated at the southern tip of the Istria peninsula, with a population of 57,460 in 2011.

Pula is known for its multitude of ancient Roman buildings, the most famous of which is the Pula Arena, one of the best-preserved Roman amphitheaters, and its beautiful sea.

This is the only remaining Roman Amphitheatre to have four side towers and with all three Roman architectural orders entirely preserved. It was constructed in 27 BC – 68 AD.

Since Amphitheater is now used as a venue for concerts, film festivals, etc., the lower floor seats on the land side are restored. The gladiators battle show also be held.

Left the Amphitheater we are walking through the Tito park to Adriatic coast.

Walking along the Adriatic coast, you will see a big church on your left.

The Cathedral is a co-cathedral in Pula along with the Euphrasian Basilica in Poreč, Croatia. It is one of the two official seats of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Poreč and Pula. The site of the present-day church has been used for religious worship since ancient Roman times and the first Christian churches on the site were built in the late 4th and early 5th century AD.

I got into the church, took a picture and immediately came out because I have no time,

Walking about 3 minutes from the cathedral and you will arrive at the Forum Square.

The main square, classical and medieval Forum Square of Pula was constructed in the 1st century BC. The Forum Square was the nucleus of city life, its religious, administrative, legislative and commercial centre. In the northern part of the Forum, stood the twin temple and a temple dedicated to Jupiter, Juno and Minerva. Today only the Temple of Augustus has been fully preserved while of the second temple only the back wall, built in the Communal Palace in the 13th century, is visible.

Temple of Augustus: Dedicated to the first Roman emperor, Augustus, it was probably built during the emperor’s lifetime at some point between 27 BC and his death in AD 14. Pula Communal Palace: There was a Temple of Diana, which was used as a public facility in this place. The temple was used as a city hall from the 9th century. The current city hall was built in 1296, influenced by Romanesque style.

Bartolomeo dei Vitrei is an administrator in the 13th century. Under his administration in 1296, the city palace was completed.

Passing in front of Tourist Information Office. A little museum is near the Forum Square. It’s called “Floor mosaic The Punishment of Dirce.”

The mosaic of the punishment of Dirce was found near the Church of St. Mary Formosa. The mythological topic of the punishment of Dirke is extremely rare.

The floor remained in the house around the 3rd century AD, and was found at the bombing during the Second World War.

According to Greek mythology, Dirce is the second wife of Thebes king Lycus. Dirce captured and abused the former wife Antiope. So, she was killed by Antiope songs, Zethus and Amphion.

The Basilica of St. Mary Formosa dates back to the 6th c. It is an exceptionally important Early Christian monument. Unfortunately, only the south chapel, shaped as a Greek cross, has been preserved.

From the church of St. Mary Formosa, we are going to Triumphal Arch of the Sergi.

The arch commemorates three brothers of the Sergi family. They participated in Battle of Actium of 31 BC and return in triumph.

The arch was called “golden gate” because golden decoration was given on the surface. It has one passageway in the center, and both sides are supported by a Corinth type column. The architectural style and decoration are influenced by Hellenism and Asia Minor.

The Hercules Gate is the oldest preserved monument of Roman architecture in Pula, built in the middle of the 1st century BC. It was named after the relief of the head of Hercules and his club. In Roman times Hercules was the guardian deity of Pula.

The Gate of Hercules is built of uncarved stone blocks at the top of which, although hardly recognizable, is a carved head of Hercules with visible beard, curly hair. On the left is Hercules’ club.

From the Gate of Hercules we were walking Carrarina Street to the north and arrived at the Roman Mausoleum and Twin Gates.

Roman Mausoleum is located at the southwestern edge of Park Kralja Petra Kresimira.

The Romans buried their dead outside of their towns for sanitation reasons. This often led to series of elaborate tombs lining the roads just before the city gates.

Pula was encircled by walls. There were about ten gates providing the entrance into the town, of which the Twin Gates is visible today, as well as a part of former walls. The Twin Gates were built between the end of the 1st and beginning of the 2nd century. Through them the road led to the Arena and then further to Nesactium (Archaeological site from the Iron Age)

The Small Roman Theatre from the 1st c. was erected on the slope underneath the Castle (Venetian fortress). It could hold between 4 and 5 thousand spectators. Unfortunately, this theatre has not been preserved.

Pula Castle “Kaštel” is an old fortress built by the Venetians, situated on a hill in the center of Pula. Because of its dominating position, the fortress was always used for defense of the city, bay and port.