Synopsis

Larry the Cable Guy is an immensely popular American stand-up comedian known for his appearances in various films and TV shows.

In July 2023, there was a cruel hoax circulating online falsely claiming that Larry the Cable Guy had passed away, but this information was not true.

Larry the Cable Guy: Who is he?

Daniel Lawrence Whitney, born on February 17, 1963, is famously recognized as Larry the Cable Guy. He hails from Nebraska, growing up on an 80-acre farm with his parents Tom and Shirley Whitney. When he was 16, the family relocated to West Palm Beach, Florida. Larry pursued his education in drama and speech, attending the Baptist University of America and the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.

After attempting comedy, Whitney decided to drop out of college. In the 1990s, he began his career on radio, appearing on shows like The Ron and Ron Show and various local stations. Initially, he performed stand-up under his real name, but he didn't achieve much success. However, everything changed when he created his famous character, the Cable Guy. This persona propelled his career to new heights.

Larry the Cable Guy is also famous for his catchphrase "Git-R-Done." He has released several comedy albums, including "Lord, I Apologize" (2001) and "The Right to Bare Arms" (2005), both certified gold by the RIAA. In 2007, he released "Morning Constitutions" alongside a TV special. Larry also starred in the travelogue series "Only in America with Larry the Cable Guy" on the History Channel in 2011.

Moreover, Larry has appeared in various films, often portraying his comedy alter ego. He is also recognized for voicing Mater in the beloved Cars film franchise. In his personal life, Larry is married to Cara, and they have two children, Wyatt and Reagan. Together, they founded the Git-R-Done Foundation in 2009 to support charitable causes.

Larry the Cable Guy has displayed his passion for music and showed up on stage with the band REO Speedwagon during a benefit concert in 2013 for tornado disaster relief in Bloomington, Illinois. Additionally, in October 2021, he was unmasked as the Baby on The Masked Singer.

Larry the Cable Guy: Why is it trending?

In July 2023, upsetting rumours falsely claimed that Larry the Cable Guy had passed away. These baseless rumours spread mainly on social media platforms like Twitter and Facebook, but they are nothing more than a hoax. Larry is very much alive and well.

Unfortunately, this is not the first time such unfounded rumours have circulated about the comedian's apparent demise. Over the years, various false reports have emerged, claiming Larry was involved in a fatal accident or had succumbed to a severe illness. However, Larry has used these instances to emphasize the importance of fact-checking and the dangers of spreading false information.

Rest assured, Larry the Cable Guy is alive and in good health. The rumours are entirely untrue, and he continues to entertain audiences with his humour and wit.

FAQs

Who is Larry the Cable Guy?

Daniel Lawrence Whitney, born on February 17, 1963, is famously recognized as Larry the Cable Guy. He hails from Nebraska, growing up on an 80-acre farm with his parents Tom and Shirley Whitney.

Who is Larry the Cable Guy’s wife?

In his personal life, Larry is married to Cara, and they have two children, Wyatt and Reagan. Together, they founded the Git-R-Done Foundation in 2009 to support charitable causes.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by a 3rd party. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

What’s India drinking? Spirits are high on apple, orange and honey flavours

India must protect doctors. They are scarce, and it takes years to train one.

The golden rule for how much you should invest in gold, and where

When earnings growth falls to 14-quarter low, you can't predict but can prepare

If market runs up too much, there could be problems later: Rajat Rajgarhia

Watch out for these 3 things if you’re holding Unicommerce stocks

1

2

3