Disclaimer

This is a Guiding Light fan-fiction for Gus Aitoro and Harley Cooper characters. The characters are owned by CBS and Guiding Light. The story is my idea of what could have happened.

Introduction

When Gus and Harley are sent on an undercover job, emotions run high when they realize that they are very much in love with one another. As the two declare their love, Philip Spaulding comes back to Springfield proposing marriage to Harley. Who will Harley choose?

Cast

Gus Aitoro: Ricky Paull Goldin

Harley Cooper: Beth Ehlers

Philip Spaulding: Grant Aleksander

Alan Spaulding: Ron Raines

Buzz Cooper: Justin Deas

Beth Raines Bauer: Beth Chamberlain

Chapter 1

“Gus. Harley. Can you two come into my office.” The police commissioner said as he poked his head out of his office.

As Gus and Harley followed the commissioner into his office, they both wondered what he could want.

“I’m sure you two are both wondering why I called you in here.” The commissioner said, as both Gus and Harley’s head nodded.

“Well, I have an undercover job that I want the two of you on.”

“What kind of undercover operation?” Gus asked as Harley listened.

“It’s a murder case. And it will involve the two of you going out of town.”

“Out of town? But sir, what about the case we are already working on?” Gus asks the commissioner.

“I’ve already assigned that case to two new detectives.”

“Sir, Harley and I have worked to get that case ready for trial.”

“I understand that, and I’m sorry, but I really need you and Harley on this case.” The commissioner explained, as he gave Gus and Harley the files he had on the case.

As Gus and Harley quickly glanced the case, they were surprised to learn who the victim was: an old friend of Harley’s from school.

“Omigosh! I can’t believe it!” Harley nearly cried. “Melinda.”

“I’m sorry, Harley, you know the victim?” the commissioner asked.

“She’s a high school classmate of mine.” Harley explained. “Gosh, it’s been years since I’ve heard from her.”

“Is it going to be a problem?” the commissioner asked.

“No, I’m honored to be on this case.”

“Great! Here are your flight tickets.” The commissioner said, handing the two of them the tickets. “Don’t forget to leave the details of your case for the new detectives.”

“Yes, sir.” Gus said as he and Harley left the commissioner’s office.

“Well, let’s go home and get ready to leave.” Gus said.

“Why in such a hurry?” Harley inquired.

“The tickets say the flight is for tonight.”

“Wow, the commissioner sure didn’t give us much time.”

Harley turn in the files of the case they were working on and head out of the office so they can pack, say good-bye to friends and family and make their flight later that night.

Chapter 2

Gus and Harley’s flight had just landed in San Jose, Costa Rica to investigate the murder of Harley’s classmate who was vacationing there. As soon as Gus and Harley got settled in their hotel room, they set off for the San Jose police to get details on the case.

“Yes, I’m Gus Aitoro, and this is my partner, Harley Cooper.” Gus told the dispatcher when they arrived at the police station. “We were sent here from Springfield, Illinois, USA, to discuss with your commissioner about a case.”

“Yes, Dets. Aitoro and Cooper.” The dispatcher said. “We were expecting you. I’ll inform the commissioner you’re here.”

As Gus and Harley waited for the commissioner, the dispatcher checked in with the commissioner Gus and Harley’s arrival.

“Yes, Dets. Aitoro and Cooper, Commissioner Samuels will see you now.” The dispatcher told Gus and Harley as he gave them directions to the commissioner’s office.

“Commissioner Samuels?” Gus said as he and Harley arrived at the commissioner’s office. “We’re here about the murder of Melinda Anderson.”

“Yes, the Springfield PD said they were sending someone to investigate the murder.” Commissioner Samuels said. “I’ll leave you two here to go over the files of the case.”

Commissioner Samuels left Harley and Gus to look over the files of Melinda’s murder.

“Harley, the number one suspect seems to be Melinda’s husband, Ben Anderson.” Gus noticed.

“I guess that’s where we should start.” Harley agreed.

Gus and Harley head out to the hotel where Melinda’s husband is staying, having been detained by the San Jose police for questioning in Melinda’s murder.

A half and hour later, Gus and Harley get some new information about Ben Anderson for the San Jose police into the murder of Melinda Anderson.

On their way back to the police station, they were surprised to run into Harley’s ex-husband Philip Spaulding, who was vacationing with his son and daughter, James and Lizzie.

Chapter 3

“Harley. Gus. How have you two been?” Philip said awkwardly.

“We’re doing okay.” Gus told Philip.

“You on vacation with the Lizzie and James?” Harley replies.

“Yes. Haven’t had much time with the two. So I thought I would make time for them.” Philip explained.

“Oh. Okay.” Harley said.

“Dad, James and I are going to the beach.” Lizzie announces to Philip.

“Okay, Lizzie.” Philip says. “You two enjoy yourselves.”

“So they’re going off by themselves? Whatever will you do now?” Harley says sarcastically.

“Kids? They don’t really want to be around the parentals? Do they?” Philip smirks.

“The parentals?” Harley laughs. “Well, sorry Philip, but Gus and I have to go. We’re on a case.”

“Oh, okay. Talk later?”

“Sure.” Harley says nicely, but really she didn’t want anything to do with Philip.

Philip heads to his hotel suite to get things ready for his secret date with Harley as Gus and Harley check out another lead into her friend, Melinda’s murder. But little did they two of them know, Philip’s involvement in Melinda’s murder.

Chapter 4

No one knew of his secret marriage to Harley’s friend, Melinda because Philip was using her to get closer to Harley. But he didn’t expect to come back their place and find Melinda dead in their bed. Philip had to get out of town, but doing so would make him look guilty. He gathered James and Lizzie and fled to the airport in San Jose, but airport officials stopped Philip due to issues with his passport. So he lied to Harley and Gus that he was vacationing with his children.

Meanwhile, Gus and Harley arrived at Melinda’s apartment to search for clues. After sending the clues to the Forensics department for testing, they were shocked to learn Philip’s fingerprints all over the apartment.

So Harley and Gus made a visit to Philip’s for questioning…

“Harley, what brings you by?” Philip asked upon answering his door.

“We’re here on official business.” Gus said, flashing his badge.

“Oh?” Philip said.

“Yes, Philip, we need to take you in for questioning in a murder.” Harley told him as she handcuffed him.

Philip went willingly knowing this day was bound to come.

When they arrived at the SJPD, gave his side of the story, signing away his right to an attorney, to Gus and Harley. Harley was stunned to learn Philip was married to her friend. While Philip swore his innocence in the murder, Gus wasn’t so sure.