1 / 9

2 / 9

3 / 9

4 / 9

5 / 9

6 / 9

7 / 9

8 / 9

9 / 9

❮ ❯

General Information

Built: 1965 (renovated 1986)

Capacity: 2,000

Gonzaga all-time NCAA record in the Martin Centre (1986-2023): 182-267 (.405)

Gonzaga all-time WCC record in the Martin Centre (1986-2023): 105-176 (.374)

Longest GU win streak: 9 (November 19, 1988 - October 7, 1989)

First NCAA match: September 12, 1986 (Montana 3, Gonzaga 1)

First NCAA win: September 18, 1986 (Gonzaga 3, Northern Montana 1)

History

Built in 1965 under the name Kennedy Pavilion, the Charlotte Y. Martin Centre has been the home of men's and women's basketball, volleyball, and the locker rooms for all sports. In addition to the main court, Martin Centre includes athletic administration offices, athletic equipment room, Physical Education classrooms and the Rudolf Fitness Center.

Volleyball took over on the main court in 2004, seating 2,500 for home matches. The Martin Court received new Daktronics scoreboard and videoboard in the fall of 2017, elevating the fan and student-athlete experience during Gonzaga Volleyball matches. The videoboard, which is 12-feet by 9-feet, replaced an existing screen with expanded capabilities for delivering high-quality content.

In the fall of 2017, the Volleyball locker room was remodeled thanks to the generosity of volleyball alumni. The expansion of the volleyball locker room includes a team lounge with entertainment system, a kitchen, and a study/meeting room. The space allows volleyball student-athletes to practice, study and relax all within the Martin Centre.

Josh Burrows Performance Athletic Center

The Josh Burrows Performance Athletic Center supports every Gonzaga Student-Athlete’s strength and conditioning needs. Student-athletes work with the GU strength coaches for all weight training in this private athletic training room. The attached court allows for agility and conditioning work for each team.

Diedrick-Delong Athletic Training Room

The Diedrick-Delong Athletic Training room opened in September of 2008 named after two of Gonzaga’s most influential trainers. The athletic training room is nearly 5,000 square feet and includes two whirlpools, and a host of therapeutic equipment. The first whirlpool is the Polar Plunge, which is a 9.5-by-7.5 cold water pool. The second pool is a 14-foot-long hydrotherapy pool with a built-in treadmill on the bottom. This pool has variable depths and is hooked up to a computer so trainers can chart the progress of injured student-athletes.

Martin Centre Donors

Josh Burrows, who is affectionately known as "JB" by student-athletes, had a dream that started with the men's basketball team, but now branches out across all of Gonzaga's sports. More than a decade ago, Burrows (a Spokane native and 1979 Gonzaga business graduate) saw a need at GU. The men's basketball team had just returned from a stellar run to the Elite Eight and Burrows knew that if they ever wanted to make it back onto that pedestal of greatness they would have to continue to build, not by working on their strengths, but by pinpointing their weaknesses and facing those head on.

Besides being a staple in the progress of the strength and conditioning program, Burrows served as the inspiration and namesake when it came time to build a facility where these beneficial practices could take place. Construction began on the Josh Burrows Performance Athletic Center in 2006.

In 1986, Charlotte Y. Martin donated $4.5 million to finance remodeling of the arena. Originally, the arena had a sewing room built where the P.E. classroom and office now sits.

Accessible Seats and ADA Parking

- ADA Parking is available in the parking lot on the South side of the Charlotte Y. Martin Centre.

- ADA Seating is available on the North side of the venue. Wheelchairs can be accommodated on the second-level on designated platforms. The second level can be accessed via the elevator in the north end of the atrium on the first floor of the Martin Centre.

Concessions

- Concessions are available in the lower level hallway on the West side of the Martin Centre.

Directions

Entrance

- The lone entrance to the Charlotte Y. Martin Centre is through the Volkar Center for Athletic Achievement on the West Side of the facility.

- Gates to the Charlotte Y. Martin Centre open one hour prior to first serve.

- Exit and re-entry of the Charlotte Y. Martin Centre is not permitted during volleyball matches. If patrons leave the facility, a new ticket is needed to be re-admitted.

Media

- For any media questions or requests, please contact the Sports Information office at (509)-313-6373.

Parking

Gameday Parking: Parking is available free of charge on game days in the parking lot on the South side of the Charlotte Y. Martin Centre. All parking, including ADA parking spaces, are available on a first-come, first-served basis. Gonzaga University is not responsible for illegal parking of their patrons.

Non-Gameday Parking: Per Gonzaga University Parking Services, visitors must obtain a visitor pass from the Admissions Visitor's Office, Law Library circulation desk, or prior arrangement by calling 509-313-6147. Please visit the Gonzaga University Parking website at www.gonzaga.edu/parking for more information.

Prohibited Items

- Detailed information on prohibited items and further gameday information can be found HERE.

Restrooms

- Restrooms are located in the lower and upper level hallways on the West side of the Martin Centre.

Tickets

- Single-game tickets, season tickets, and family passes are available at gozags.com/tickets.