Tana Ramsay, the wife of famed chef Gordon Ramsay, has opened up about their marriage in a candid chat, revealing the one thing that tends to spark a row between them. Married to the 57-year-old culinary star since 1996, Tana, 49, juggles life with their six children, who range from a an eight-month-old to a 26-year-old.

While Gordon's globetrotting career ventures often meant leaving Tana to hold the fort solo, these days he's more of a homebody. Back when he was away more however, the mother-of-six admitted they'd butt heads whenever he tried to "slot back in" to family life.

In a rare admission, she shared: "I tell you what's interesting, whenever he has been away, the first few days of him being back is really hard."

The couple's tiffs usually stem from Gordon feeling out of the loop, as Tana explained: "We always have an argument and it's usually because he has to slot back in. He'll sort of say to me, 'Am I even in this family? Because you know you've just done this that and the other, and you didn't even ask'."

Recalling her typical comeback, she shared: "I'm like, 'Well because I'm not used to asking, I don't need to ask you to do it, because you're not usually [here], you haven't been here for two weeks'," reports the Express. "So that's quite tricky."

Gordon's wife went on to say that having the celebrity chef at home more often since lockdown has now enabled them to cherish more family time. "Having him around so much more, it does make it really lovely and I think that being older, both of us value those moments," she added on the Postcards From Midlife podcast.

In a surprise announcement last November, the couple revealed the arrival of their sixth child, Jesse, after keeping the pregnancy under wraps. Gordon at the time took to Instagram to share the news, posting: "What an amazing birthday present please welcome Jesse James Ramsay, 7lbs 10oz whopper! ! " He added, "One more bundle of love to the Ramsay brigade! ! 3 boys, 3 girls.... Done."

The decision to keep the pregnancy private stemmed from a previous heartbreak of them losing their son Rocky at 20 weeks. Gordon shared with People Magazine, "That was a significant moment in the family's lives and so we tread with caution this time around and we were blessed."

Tana went on to say that bringing a new baby into their already large family had surprisingly been "calmer" this time round.