Tana Ramsay, the wife of celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay, has shared the one thing that makes them argue in a candid chat on the .Postcards From Midlife podcast. After marrying in 1996, the 57-year-old and his beloved wife, 49, became parents to six children, who range from eight months to 26 years old.

Throughout their journey together, Tana was often left on parenting duties while Gordon earned the money through numerous projects that included managing his restaurant chains and filming shows. Though he's been spending more time at home than ever before, his wife disclosed how frequent tiffs occurred when he used to return home from a break away.

She spilled: "I tell you what's interesting, whenever he has been away, the first few days of him being back is really hard.

"We always have an argument and it's usually because he has to slot back in. He'll sort of say to me, 'Am I even in this family? Because you know you've just done this that and the other, and you didn't even ask'."

Relaying her comeback, Tana added: "I'm like, 'Well because I'm not used to asking, I don't need to ask you to do it, because you're not usually [here], you haven't been here for two weeks'," reports the Express.

In her further statement on the podcast, she described the situation as "quite tricky".

Now with Gordon home more and helping to look after their youngest Jesse, Tana said that things had been "calmer" in the household. "Having him around so much more, it does make it really lovely and I think that being older, both of us value those moments," she expressed.

The couple surprised fans in November when they announced the arrival of their sixth child, Jesse James Ramsay, after a secret pregnancy.

Gordon shared the news on Instagram with a heartwarming photo at the time, captioning it: "What an amazing birthday present please welcome Jesse James Ramsay, 7lbs 10oz whopper!"

He continued: "One more bundle of love to the Ramsay brigade! ! 3 boys, 3 girls.... Done."

Gordon later disclosed to People Magazine that they had kept the pregnancy under wraps due to a previous loss at just 20 weeks, which was a profound moment for the family. "That was a significant moment in the family's lives," he said.

"And so we tread with caution this time around and we were blessed."

He also spoke about the positive impact Jesse has had on the family, saying, "Jesse's really helped bring everyone even closer. And then that level of responsibility again, is just even more exciting."