Hendrix library becomes first in Arkansas to earn this prestigious affiliation

CONWAY, Ark. (July 23, 2024) — Hendrix College’s Olin C. Bailey Library has joined the Oberlin Group of Libraries, a consortium of more than 80 liberal arts college libraries. It is the first library in Arkansas to hold Oberlin Group membership, which is by invitation only.

“Having Bailey Library counted among the Oberlin Group of Libraries is truly an honor,” said Hendrix College Provost Teresa Garrett. “Membership in the Oberlin Group places Hendrix among top-tier liberal arts colleges, affirming what many already know about the high quality of a Hendrix education.”

The Oberlin Group of Libraries provides a forum for member library directors and staff to discuss issues of common concern, share accomplishments and information on best practices in library operations and services, and to help members anticipate and adapt to the challenges of college library administration and liberal arts education.

Professor Britt Anne Murphy, director of the Olin C. Bailey Library, will serve as the primary point of contact between the College and the Oberlin Group.

“The Oberlin Group not only raises the profile of Hendrix College, but it will provide greater access to resources, expertise, and data for our library, which has direct benefits for our faculty and students,” Murphy said.

Joining the Oberlin Group of Libraries alongside Murphy are members from Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Hollins University, and the University of Richmond. The Oberlin Group plans to expand to 100 members within the coming years.

About Hendrix College

Founded in 1876, Hendrix College is featured in Colleges That Change Lives: 40 Schools That Will Change the Way You Think About Colleges and celebrated among the country’s leading liberal arts colleges for academic quality, engaged learning opportunities and career preparation, vibrant campus life, and value. The Hendrix College Warriors compete in 21 NCAA Division III sports. Hendrix has been affiliated with the United Methodist Church since 1884. Learn more at www.hendrix.edu.