Oberlin College overview

Industry

Education

Revenue

Headquarters

Employees

1,500

Founded In

Organization Type

Education

In the past 180 years and counting, Oberlin College has come to represent the best that liberal arts colleges have to offer. It was the one of the first American college to admit women and people of color, and its academics are regarded as some of the finest in the nation. Oberlin administers academics through its College of Arts & Sciences and its world-renowned Conservatory of Music. If desired, students can choose to pursue a joint-degree program between these two schools. Programs are available in a variety of subjects, from Neuroscience to Peace & Conflict Studies. Despite being a smaller school, Oberlin's campus offers big opportunities. Student life at Oberlin includes more than 20 varsity sports teams, about 150 student clubs, and more than 540 music, theater and dance performances. As a highly selective institution, Oberlin seeks dynamic, interesting and intellectually motivated students. Admissions requirements for the College of Arts & Sciences include the Common Application (and Oberlin Supplement), high school transcript, SAT/ACT scores and two teacher evaluations. Applicants to the Conservatory of Music must also audition. Oberlin is committed to making tuition affordable for all of its admitted students. Financial aid opportunities include federal grants and loans, student employment and institutional scholarships, for which all applicants are automatically considered.

Oberlin College has been around for a long time. It was founded back in 1833. This established organization loves to hire graduates from Oberlin College, with 80.4% of its employees having attended Oberlin College. Oberlin College is a great place to work and is featured as number 3 on Zippia's list of Best Companies to Work for in Oberlin, OH.The average employee at Oberlin College makes $43,277 per year. Pay at Oberlin College is significantly lower than some of its highest paying competitors, like Middlebury College, Smith College, and Barnard College, which pay $58,969, $58,967, and $58,233, respectively.

Based in Ohio, Oberlin College is a key player in the education industry with 1,500 employees and an annual revenue of $8.0M.