jhummel@njadvancemedia.com

Web: nj.com/ben

Cellphone: 856-237-6645

U.S. Army: RA13815980

The column that says hug a turkey this month.

--

Good afternoon!

--

"I would like to personally thank Pastor Anthony Ippolito for taking time out of his busy schedule to work with Miss Gloucester County Emily Williamson, Miss Gloucester County's Outstanding Teen Shellby Watts, and Miss Vineland 2014 Angela Doulis (not in photo).

"Pastor Anthony helped them record their own public service announcement which promotes Project Thanksgiving's 7th annual turkey drive.

"I would also like to thank Calvary Chapel of Vineland for allowing us to use their recording studio. The PSA will be aired on WPOV-LP 107.7 FM.

"Last, but not least, I extend my appreciation to a good friend, George Scully, for writing their script. Great job, everyone! Thanks for making it happen.''

-- Alex Kaganzev,

Project Thanksgiving

--

Pastor Anthony Ippolito is a 24-carat diamond when it comes to doing good things in his city.

He was connections to thousands of people in dozens of congregations who can move mountains.

--

"CASA of Cumberland, Gloucester & Salem Counties has two foster teens who have a passion for piano and we are hoping to find two new or used keyboards to give them.

"I looked on craigslist and couldn't find anything. Does any one have any other leads?

"Do you or someone you know have a keyboard to donate? Please contact me at Hillary.casaofcgs@gmail.com.

"Thanks!''

-- Hillary Nichols

--

Good news from Shep in Greenwich.

Linda Quay, the Mother Teresa of Cedarville, is coming to ring the Salvation Army bell in Greenwich on the morning of Dec. 5.

And bringing friends.

Shep has been known to get red-faced around women.

"Linda Quay and some friends from Cedarville will be joining me for my final bell ringing on Dec. 5.

"Hope to go out with a bang. Linda has helped me before and she is a major player in the Cedarville Memorial Day parade.

"We are both looking for vets to turn out for that, and I hope many vets will come to the bell ringing, as they have in the past.''

-- Shep,

on his final ring

--

"I thought I'd save your life today.

"I've noticed that every Friday everyone is in such a hurry to get wherever at 4 p.m.

"Listen up! Five, 10, 15 minutes are not going to matter for whatever reason.

"Speeding and cutting people off is a big no-no -- a sure way to cause an accident.

"What's the rush?

"Even if you have an emergency, you should focus on getting to your destination safely. Please, people, slow down and stop cutting me and others off.

"It's not nice and very dangerous.

"And have a blessed day.''

-- Gloria Cortez

--

"Getting ready to turn our house into a chapel ... literally.

"Millville Community Church will have its first wedding ceremony in our house.

"Wahoo!! You know you live in Millville when. It's gonna be a great day!''

-- Pastor Steve Harris

--

"I had the honor of attending last night's Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame Induction ceremonies for some of the area's most outstanding athletes.

"I was able to meet and speak with inductees Dick Vermeil, Rick MacLeish and Garry Maddox, as well as previous members Dan Baker, Mike Quick, Harold Charmichael, Sonny Hill, Wali Jones, Bill Bergey and Ernie Beck.

"What a night!''

-- David Hitchner

--