To mark the 190th anniversary of the first performance of the romantic drama “Hernani” on February 25, 1830, and to celebrate the 218th anniversary of Victor Hugo’s birth in Besançon, February 2020 will be theatrical at the Maison Victor Hugo!

Exhibition: Hernani

On February 25, 1830, the eve of his 28th birthday, Victor Hugo inaugurated the sensational debut of Romantic drama. To celebrate the 190th anniversary of the first performance of Hernani, this focus exhibition traces the history and posterity of this play, emblematic of Romanticism and theatrical revival in the 19th century.

From Wednesday, February 12 to Monday, March 9, 2020 on the1st floor of the Maison Victor Hugo (admission fee for the Maison Victor Hugo)

Café Hugo: Victor Hugo’s theater

Victor Hugo wrote his first plays at the age of 10. This early interest in the dramatic arts continued throughout his life, with the writing of some thirty plays of uneven success, some acclaimed, some censored, many not performed. This tour-conference offers a panorama of Victor Hugo’s sometimes little-known dramaturgy, over a cup of tea or coffee.

Sunday February 16 at 3pm (free admission, subject to availability).

Show : Hernani

Spain, 1519. One woman, three men. Who will win the heart of the beautiful Doña Sol: the young outlaw, the old uncle or the frivolous king? Will love triumph over revenge, honor and power? In this romantic drama, which sparked the famous “Battle of Hernani” when it was first staged in 1830, Victor Hugo blends the sublime with the grotesque in a hymn to artistic and political freedom.

Théâtre des Créatures, a young Bisontine company that grew out of the Conservatoire du Grand Besançon, brings this play from the theatrical repertory back to life in an original staging.

Two performances on Sunday February 23 at 2pm and 5pm (free admission subject to availability).

Workshop for young audiences: Happy birthday Victor!

218 years ago, on February 26 1802, Victor Hugo was born in Besançon. At the age of 6, he saw a play for the first time, and loved it! He went on to write numerous plays, for which he also designed the sets. To celebrate his birthday, create your own pocket theater to take home and invent new stories. The workshop is followed by a birthday snack.