There’s been a lot of Loony Tunes politics in the US midterms, and I’ll be documenting the madness live from Washington DC as of Monday. But I have to start by sharing this extraordinary cartoon from a race in Washington state. It was originally posted on a website opposing the candidacy of Mark Miloscia, a Republican seeking to serve in the local senate. Miloscia is a conservative, pro-life Catholic who has worked for the Church as a lobbyist (the horror!). He also hails from the Deep South (the monster!). The cartoon, a screenshot of which you can see above, lampoons his origins and beliefs with extreme prejudice. It accuses him of being in the employ of a foreign power, in similiar terms to those used to bash the supposed "dual loyalty" of the "Israel lobby".

The website is still up but the cartoon is now missing. We don’t know the authorship but the local press says that Miloscia’s opponent posted the following on her Facebook page: "There are lots of things in my opponent’s record that are fair game to take issue with. But I respect Mark Miloscia’s religion and I certainly don’t condone ANY of my supporters making attacks on that basis. I understand one of my supporters may have crossed the line of what is appropriate in that regard, and I’ve asked them to stop. This campaign should be about the issues, not personal attacks."

That statement implies that the author of the ad is indeed a supporter of the Democrat candidate and that the Democrat campaign is in contact with them. So, yeah, the ad is probably legit.

Ironically, Mark Miloscia converted from the Democrats to the Republicans precisely because he felt that socially conservative religious people were no longer welcome in the party of Obama. He wrote: "While Democrats promote diversity, they actually demand that faithful Catholic, Christian, and other religious believers must 'evolve' and change their faith and culture, in order to be allowed into today’s 'big tent'. In an honest moment, one Party activist told me that unless I changed, they wouldn’t vote for me '…for dog catcher, let alone State Auditor.'"

But this ad expresses more than just ideological inflexibility. It taps into an ancient tradition in Britain and America that sees Catholicism as a shady conspiracy against free-born Protestants – a kind of Bolshevism with rosary beads. And I've long suspected that many on the Left (and a few on the Right) have never shaken off the deep suspicion that Catholic social teaching is part of some grand plot to hand the country over to Rome. Today’s Democrats couch opposition to orthodox Catholicism as the defence of liberal principles. But a part of it is an old fashioned distaste for bells, smells, foreign bishops and the “ignorant masses” that seem to gravitate towards the Vatican.