Here are a few books on the history of recent mathematics that I recommend:

A History of Algebraic and Differential Topology, 1900 - 1960 by Jean Dieudonne.

History of Topology by I.M. James.

Reciprocity Laws: From Euler to Eisenstein by Franz Lemmermeyer.

The Shaping of Arithmetic after C.F. Gauss's Disquisitiones Arithmeticae

by Catherine Goldstein, Norbert Schappacher, and Joachim Schwermer.

The Mathematical Coloring Book: Mathematics of Coloring and the Colorful Life of its Creators by Alexander Soifer.

Other examples (just to give an idea of the choice), thematic sample, with scholarly work, popular science, and other types :

Recent theorems

Four Colours Suffice: How the Map Problem Was Solved de Robin J. Wilson

Proofs and Confirmations: The Story of the Alternating Sign Matrix Conjecture de David M. Bressoud, William Watkins, Gerald L. Alexanderson, and Dipa Choudhury

Kepler's Conjecture: How Some of the Greatest Minds in History Helped Solve One of the Oldest Math Problems in the World de George G. Szpiro

20th century

The Honors Class: Hilbert's Problems and Their Solvers de Benjamin H. Yandell

Mathematical Analysis During the 20th Century de Jean-Paul Pier

Development of Mathematics 1900-1950 de Jean-Paul Pier

The Mathematical Century: The 30 Greatest Problems of the Last 100 Years de Piergiorgio Odifreddi

Biography

Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius de Ray Monk

Von Neumann, Morgenstern, and the Creation of Game Theory: From Chess to Social Science, 1900-1960 de Robert J. Leonard

The Random Walks of George Polya de Gerald L. Alexanderson

Logic's Lost Genius: The Life of Gerhard Gentzen de Eckart Menzler-Trott

Auto biography

Indiscrete Thoughts de Gian-Carlo Rota et Fabrizio Palombi

Discrete Thoughts: Essays on Mathematics, Science, and Philosophy de M. Kac

A Mathematician Grappling With His Century de Laurent Schwartz = "Un mathematicien aux prises avec le siecle" original french title

Photographs

Mathematical People: Profiles and Interviews de Donald J. Albers

Source books

(because it is invaluable to read the original articles)

From Frege to Godel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879-1931 de Jean van Heijenoort

Yearly compilation

What's Happening in the Mathematical Sciences 200x-200x+1 de Barry Cipra

Math and society

The Rise of Statistical Thinking 1820-1900 de Theodore M. Porter

other

Abrégé d'histoire des mathématiques, 1700-1900

6000 Jahre Mathematik: Eine Kulturgeschichtliche Zeitreise - 2. Von Euler Bis Zur Gegenwart de Hans Wussing

I don't think that there is a shortage of books on "recent" history of mathematics - if anything, the growth has been exponential here as well! There are many recent books dealing with more specialized areas written by eminent scholars, e.g.

Charles Curtis, Pioneers of representation theory: Frobenius, Burnside, Schur, and Brauer

Armand Borel, Essays in the history of Lie groups and algebraic groups

Thomas Hawkins, Emergence of the theory of Lie groups. An essay in the history of mathematics 1869–1926

and, although this is not a book on history of mathematics as such, the erudite

Marcel Berger, A panoramic view of Riemannian geometry

Among broader views, I enjoyed reading

Piergiorgio Oddifreddi, The mathematical century. 30 greatest problems of the last 100 years

The four-color problem, Kepler's conjecture, and the Monster have all been featured in popular mathematics books.

These have already been mentioned in comments, but I wanted to put them here explicitly:

I Want To Be a Mathematician: An Automathography by Paul Halmos

I Have a Photographic Memory by Paul Halmos

And as for photographs, the recent Mathematicians: An Outer View of the Inner World is another good one.

There's some good historical material in the Princeton Companion to Mathematics as well.

I found the book "The Genesis of the Abstract Group Concept", by Hans Wussing (I have the Dover reprint) very interesting.

It covers the development of group theory from its precursors in pre-19th century mathematics, and then traces the development of the concept of an abstract group through to the end of the 19th century. It makes (what seems to me to be) a detailed study of primary sources, and the fact that the author has a good command of the mathematics helps lend credence to his assessment of the various historical trends and developments.

The degree to which you like this answer is very dependent on the degree to which you find physics even in its own right of interest to mathematicians, but Abraham Pais is a wonderful historian of (relatively) recent physics; I'm most familiar with his biography of Einstein (Subtle is the Lord) and his history of particle physics (Inward Bound), but I understand he has many more books as well.

I thought this book was terrific.

Labyrinth of Thought: A History of Set Theory and Its Role in Modern Mathematics: Jose Ferreiros Dominguez

I'm finding this useful in my research on a philosophy of mathematics dissertation:

Tool and object: a history and philosophy of category theory: Ralf Krömer

Others have mentioned Dieudonne's "A History of Algebraic and Differential Topology". As a philosopher (albeit one with some graduate math training) I found it very difficult to follow. Maybe I need to really commit to it, however.

Nicolas Bourbaki's Elements of the History of Mathematics covers the history of mathematics, and is a nearly unaltered reproduction of the historical notes from Bourbaki's Elements of Mathematics. The historical notes themselves are a great source for this type of information, and this book collects them in a nice readable format. It is pretty funny the way Bourbaki writes about the contributions of members of the group (from the chapter on uniform spaces: "Uniform spaces have only been defined in a general way recently by A. Weil...". He also plays up the importance of filters, in classic Bourbaki style.).

Edit: Fixed.

History, biography, and memoir are quite different genres for mathematics. But as long as some of the latter are being recommended, I'd have to add G.H. Hardy's short memoir A Mathematician's Apology. Like most memoirs this falls short of giving a full picture of Hardy's life and work. His life is by now impossible to document anyway, though the somewhat fictionalized account of his years in Cambridge during Ramanujan's visit given recently by David Leavitt in The Indian Clerk is quite readable. Leavitt's mathematics is weak at times, though corrections were made in the softcover reprint. But he has explored the documentary evidence thoroughly, including the detailed biography of Ramanujan by Kanigel (which however has been criticized by some Indian mathematicians for its portrayal of Indian culture and religion).

Two (very recent) books on (at least selected aspects of) the history of complex (holomorphic) dynamics, in the years >1850:

Audin, Michèle: Fatou, Julia, Montel. The great prize of mathematical sciences of 1918, and beyond. Translated from the 2009 French original by the author. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 2014. History of Mathematics Subseries. Springer, Heidelberg, 2011. viii+332 pp. ISBN: 978-3-642-17853-5 (the French original is from 2009)

Alexander, Daniel S.; Iavernaro, Felice; Rosa, Alessandro: Early days in complex dynamics. A history of complex dynamics in one variable during 1906–1942. History of Mathematics, 38. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; London Mathematical Society, London, 2012. xviii+454 pp. ISBN: 978-0-8218-4464-9