It’s road trip time again!

Saint Malo is a port city 43 miles north of Rennes, with a reputation at one time of having been a stronghold for “Corsairs” ( i.e. French Privateers).

Originally founded by the Gauls during the first century B.C., it later became known as the Roman settlement of “Reginca” or “Aletum.” When the Western Roman Empire began to lose its influence, the inhabitants of this region, which was now known as St. Malo (having been established as a monastic settlement by Saints Aaron and Brendon) rebelled against Roman rule, eventually declaring itself an independent republic.

During the 17th century, this port city had become an important international trade center. As a result, France found itself in nearly permanent conflict over trade with other maritime nations - especially England. Many Bretons in and around St. Malo took on contracts with the king to act as “Corsairs” ( i.e. privateers), forcing ships traveling through the English Channel to pay tribute. One of the best known privateers at this time was Captain Rene Dugyay-Trouin, who had captured over 300 merchant ships and 16 warships. The French King eventually appointed him as Lieutenant-General of the French naval armies. The Corsair shipowners became so rich from their activities that they built beautiful mansions known as “Malouniers” outside the city walls. By 1758, England had become so bothered by their ships being hounded by these Corairs of St. Malo, that British troops decided to raid the city in order to put a stop to their activities. However, after having destroyed thirty Corsair vessels, the British were unsuccessful at capturing St. Malo, instead only occupying nearby St. Servin.

​ From August to September of 1944 (during World War II) St. Malo was almost totally destroyed by Allied bombings. It took twelve years (1948 to 1960) to rebuild the city.

Perhaps the best known former inhabitant of St. Malo was the explorer Jacgues Cartier who had lived in and sailed from the city during his expeditions up the Canadian St. Lawrence River to Quebec and Montreal. Today, St. Malo’s tall granite walls and its central Cathedral (with Romanesque and Gothic architecture), along with its beautiful stained-glass windows, are top tourist attractions.

Walking the ramparts of this walled city provides a wonderful perspective of both the city and the harbor.

St. Malo’s Coat of Arms grace the entrance to the old city...

...where visitors can meander its cobblestone streets.

Early 18th century map of St. Malo.

Circa 1900 painting of the walled city of St. Malo by Emil Krause.

Old Fort National ( constructed in 1689 to protect the port) on the tidal island of L’Llette. Originally the site of a lighthouse beacon, the fort was at first called Fort Royal. From June to September, access is only gained by foot during low tide....

​

.... we managed to do that, which in of itself was interesting because when we first arrived, this was totally covered in water. And yet, a couple of hours later we were standing on dry sand.

Moored in the harbor, just outside the city walls, is the “Etoile du Roy” (“Star of the King”) replica of a 1745 frigate Corsair.

An example of the “Malouiers”/ mansions that the Corsair shipowners built in and around St. Malo.

Officially known as the “ St. Vincent de Saragosse de St.Malo” church ( built between 1146 and 1163 on the site of an ancient 7th century church), this cathedral sits in the center of the walled city.

Its stained-glass windows...

...and magnificent Rose window are highlights of its interior.

This columned-wall is part of the cathedral’s cloister, where the monks would meditate.