CHARLOTTE AND MARTIN’S wedding at St Michael's church in Middleton & Bella Vista restaurant in rochdale

“The pictures were captured with some amazing vibrant colours, superb lighting shots, silhouettes, group and action shots. There wasn’t an aspect of the day that wasn’t caught on camera which shows how hard you both worked.”

What we love about Charlotte and Martin is that they like to do things in their own way. Even their pre wedding shoot was something unique to them as they had the great idea of doing at their own home. Surrounded by their personal belongings and in a place where they felt they could relax and just be themselves, the shoot was a fun and genuine reflection of their personalities and relationship. Meeting and getting to know our amazing couples is such a rewarding part of wedding photography and between their shoot, wedding day and the lovely meal they cooked us when we dropped off their photos it as been a pleasure to bond with Charlotte and Martin and become friends.

“Zoe and Tom were exceptional, they were so natural and genuinely felt like two more wedding guests. We couldn't have asked for a more personable experience that really wasn't intrusive but as if a friend was taking the best shots of the day through their own eyes.”

An alternative wedding day in Rochdale, packed with personal and unique details.

Charlotte and Martin married in a beautiful and personal ceremony at their family church, St Michael's in Middleton, then headed to Bellavista restaurant in Rochdale for their reception. Their day was packed with so much of their own personality and creativity it was clear how much they were both invested in the details of their day. They used belongings from their own home to style the venue and they both hand painted and designed all the signs and stationary themselves. There were plenty of retro vibes from the vintage VW campervan from I Do Campers to the fifties inspired bridesmaids' dresses from Pretty Kitty fashion. Charlotte looked stunning in her Sophia Tolli dress teamed with a stunning lace cape from Vintage Lane Bridal (which Zoe fell in love with!) Music was such an important part of their lives and Martin and his best man had spent weeks researching and planning the music for the day. They chose a favourite song by Box Car Racer as their first dance and as an extra personal touch Martin’s friend performed the song with his band Champagne Skies who then had the guests dancing into the night.

“It was very important to us that our wedding was extremely personal. Every aspect of the day was chosen or created to celebrate our relationship and it was extremely special to us”

There was also so much help from their talented and kind friends and family too. Charlotte's Mum hand selected and arranged all the flowers for the day, the roses chosen were a reminder of Charlotte's late grandad. Her sister also decorated hundreds of cupcakes and her Dad designed and hand built a mirror photobooth, candy big wheel and cupcake merry-go-round. What a talented family!

Why it really doesn't matter if it rains on your wedding day and why we get excited about the golden hour!

We experienced the full range of UK weather on their wedding day from Lancashire thunderstorms to Mediterranean-like sunshine, there were even hailstones at one point! But Charlotte and Martin didn’t let it ruin their day, from Charlotte battling the high winds with her veil outside the church to them both not being phased by the threatening rain on their couple shoot. On the way to the Bellavista restaurant we stopped off at Hollingworth Lake Sailing Club for some photos by the water’s edge. It is a place filled with fond memories for Charlotte’s family so the perfect spot for a little quiet time to themselves. Martin, who has fond and emotional memories of thunderstorms was delighted with the dramatic sky backdrop and to hear the clap of thunder. The rain began to fall at the end of their shoot but Charlotte and Martin were lost the moment together and didn’t let it dampen their enjoyment of the couple shoot.

“You both handled the weather in such a way that kept us at ease and really did leave us without a care and kept ourselves in our own little world when we really needed it, that’s something so professional but you delivered it in such a personal way.”

Even if it’s rainy and grey on your wedding day you can still get some great photos and also have some amazing luck with the light. And just before sunset the clouds parted and we were treated to the most amazing golden hour light! We grabbed Charlotte and Martin and the four of us excitedly ran down the garden for a gorgeous evening shoot overlooking the surrounding fields.