Charlotte Day, a leading art curator and gallery director, has been appointed Associate Director, Art Museums at the University of Melbourne.

Charlotte will provide leadership to the University’s art museums, the Ian Potter Museum of Art and Buxton Contemporary as well as the Treasury Gallery at Old Quad.

Rose Hiscock, Director of Museums and Collections at the University of Melbourne said Charlotte’s deep connections with the national and international visual arts sector will be a major asset to the University’s Cultural Commons vision.

“Charlotte has spent two decades working with prominent museums and galleries to commission new work, develop impactful art programming and build significant contemporary collections,” Rose said.

“She has a reputation for innovation and collaboration, is a renowned champion for artists, and is passionate about art-led education. We are so pleased to have Charlotte join the University of Melbourne team at this exciting time.”

Charlotte, currently Director of the Monash University Museum of Art (MUMA), said she was excited to join the University of Melbourne.

“I’m looking forward to working with the University’s art collection as well as the curatorial team, staff and students. The University’s art museums - Buxton Contemporary, the Ian Potter Museum of Art and the Old Quad - are a compelling and distinctive offer, and as someone who is passionate about art led education, I am excited at the prospect of connecting art, ideas and research with communities, most especially with students of all ages.” Charlotte said.

Professor Su Baker, University of Melbourne Pro Vice-Chancellor Cultural Partnerships said “Charlotte joins the University of Melbourne at an exciting time. The University’s Cultural Commons Strategy demonstrates a strong commitment to the cultural life of our city and state. We are building an exceptionally talented team across performing and visual arts and Charlotte joins recent cultural appointments Virginia Lovett, Director Performing Arts, Sir Jonathan Mills Vice Chancellor’s Creative Fellow and Brook Andrew, Director Reimaging Museums.”

Charlotte has been the Director at MUMA since 2013 and has curatorial and arts management experience having worked in the Australian Centre for Contemporary Art (ACCA), Centre for Contemporary Photography (CCP) and Gertrude Contemporary and for the Michael Buxton Collection of Australian Art.

Charlotte has spent over two decades curating local and international projects, and recent exhibitions include co-curating with Dr Brian Martin Tree Story and curating Connecting the World Through Sculpture both at MUMA in 2021. She is also a leading commissioner of public art, and with Callum Morton and Amy Spiers co-edited the reader Let’s Go Outside: Art in Public in 2022 and worked with ARM Architects on a series of art columns for the Monash Chancellery in 2020.

Charlotte will take up the role in April 2023.