The garrison city of Townsville is emerging as Australia's new Army capital with hundreds of soldiers to be relocated to north Queensland over coming years, while Adelaide becomes the home of advanced land-based, long-range strike capabilities.

Defence Minister Richard Marles will unveil the massive Army shake-up on Thursday to make the service more focused on conducting missions in littoral waters close to shorelines in the Pacific, where a future conflict could be fought against an adversary such as China.

Under the changes first reported by the ABC this month, roughly 800 army personnel will move out of Adelaide, with most going to Townsville, up to 200 to Brisbane and about 100 to Darwin.

In response to the Defence Strategic Review (DSR), two Adelaide-based combat units are being disbanded, and from 2025 all of Army's heavy armour and half of its helicopters will be hosted in Townsville.

The Queensland city's 3rd Brigade will be re-formed as the Army's only heavy combat formation with up to 500 personnel added to its ranks.

Army's numbers in Adelaide will initially fall but are expected to later return to current levels as the World War 1-era 10th Brigade is re-raised in the city to host Long-Range Strike (HIMARS) and National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System (NASAMS) capabilities.

The 1st Armoured Regiment will be "re-roled" as an innovation and experimentation unit to deliver and integrate these emerging technologies but will remain at its current location in the South Australian capital, close to the Cultana and Woomera training ranges, and the ADF's space sector partners which provide targeting data.

Darwin's 5th Battalion will be re-linked with Adelaide's 7th Battalion to become 5th/7th Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment, and will be based in the northern capital but very few personnel will have to move.

Eventually, all of Army's tanks, Boxer Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles, Redback Infantry Fighting Vehicles and Huntsman self-propelled howitzers will be based in Townsville along with the Apache and Chinook helicopter fleets.

"These changes to Army are about responding to the recommendations of the Defence Strategic Review to maintain peace, security and prosperity in our region," Mr Marles said.

"Our Army has always played a vital role in the defence of our nation and will continue to do so as it adapts to the challenges of our times."

Army's current formation boasts three brigades — 1st Brigade (split between Adelaide and Darwin), 3rd Brigade in Townsville and 7th Brigade in Brisbane — all broadly capable of carrying out similar combat operations as required during past Middle East deployments.

Under the latest restructure, the Albanese government believes the Army will be "fit to fight" in line with the DSR's recommendation of being "optimised for littoral manoeuvre operations by sea, land and air from Australia, with enhanced long-range fires".

"These changes involve some hard decisions. But these decisions are necessary to build the Army Australia needs," the Defence Minister says.