In her first fight scene in Interceptor, the new action movie that began streaming on Netflix today, Elsa Pataky stabs a man in the eye with a gun. She does not shoot him in the eye with a gun—she stabs him. It’s just one of many badass moments from Pataky in this movie that cements her status as a bonafide action hero. And how fitting, then, that she’s married to Chris Hemsworth, who also served as an executive producer on Interceptor. They are the ultimate action hero couple, and I’d let them beat me up any day.

In Interceptor, which was directed by Matthew Reilly with a screenplay from Reilly and Stuart Beattie, Pataky stars as JJ, a U.S. Army captain on a missile interceptor base in the middle of the Pacific Ocean. Should Russia ever launch a nuclear attack on the U.S., it’s JJ’s job to shoot that missile out of the sky. When an American traitor named Alexander Kessel (played by Luke Bracey) sneaks onto the base and kills nearly everyone on board, the only thing standing between him and nuclear destruction is JJ. Luckily, JJ is super competent, and more importantly, she is super ripped.

Those rippling biceps didn’t happen overnight—Pataky trained for six months in preparation for the role. She learned over 800 moves, with help of her stunt team and stunt double, Hayley Wright, as well as with stunt choreographer Sam Hargrave, who previously directed the Chris Hemsworth Netflix action movie, Extraction. In an interview for the Interceptor press notes, Hargrave joked that Pataky may soon overtake her husband when it comes to beefy muscles. “Elsa is amazing. She’s incredibly talented and brings such commitment to the role,” Hargrave said.” She has pushed herself and her physical fitness to an extremely high level. I think she may be trying to edge Chris out for the fittest one in the family.”

In that same interview, Pataky said that Hemsworth came on as an executive producer after she showed him the script. “When I read Interceptor, I loved it,” Pataky said. “So, I brought it to him because we usually read each other’s scripts. After he read it, he really, really liked it too.” Hemsworth was the one who brought Hargrave on board as a stunt coordinator for the movie, and who stressed the importance of training and authenticity for the action sequences. Clearly, that paid off, because Pataky has all kinds of creative moves in Interceptor, from decapitating a man using barbed wire to swinging across monkey bars one-handed. It’s all very impressive.

Hemsworth and Pataky have been married since 2010, and now that they’ve both proven themselves to be action stars, it feels like it’s time they co-starred in an action movie, right? After all, a couple who punches together stays together!