Model and actress Elsa Pataky, and her husband, actor Chris Hemsworth, are spending their holidays at the beach. Pataky just shared a set of highlights on Instagram. In them, they spent time on the sand, and went fishing with their kids on a boat. Pataky captioned the post, "Merry Christmas to all from her favorite island!" How does she stay so fit? Read on to see 5 ways Elsa Pataky stays in shape and the photos that prove they work—and to get beach-ready yourself, don't miss these essential 30 Best-Ever Celebrity Bathing Suit Photos!

1

She Uses Natural Ingredients

Pataky has her own skincare line, called Purely Byron. She opened up about creating the brand to ELLE Magazine. She says that she got the name from her town in Australia, and used local ingredients in the products. "The whole brand has everything local from Byron," she explained. "It started with that, after discovering the amazing ingredients that we have here."

2

She Pushes Herself

In addition to modeling and creating a beauty line, Pataky is also an actress. She recently shot an action movie, Netflix's Interceptor. Pataky opened up about why she wanted to do the role to ELLE. "I've always challenged every boy that I've been around," she says. "I just wanted to beat them at everything, so I've had that in me from a young age."

3

She Has Rest Days

Pataky opened up about her wellness habits to Body + Soul. She says that she makes rest days a priority. "I worked out pretty intensely for [recently released Netflix film] Interceptor, which was a lot of strength sessions, but I really love breaking this up with more gentle options like yoga. And one rest day a week to let the body recover – I never miss this."df44d9eab23ea271ddde7545ae2c09ec

4

She Makes Time For Herself

Pataky has a busy life, but she always makes time for herself. She tells Body + Soul, "You want to take the time to take care of yourself… And when you have the kids, you actually need those 10 minutes, to say 'This is for me, and I'm going to enjoy this moment, OK?'"

5

She Loves Ice Baths

Pataky tells Body + Soul that she loves to take ice baths. "I'm obsessed with ice baths," she says. "I like to do one after every intensive workout. It's so good for your skin and for muscle recovery. It totally energises me. I don't need anything fancy – at home I use a large chest freezer!"