Inside their whirlwind romance, including getting married just months after meeting.

After over 10 years of marriage, Chris Hemsworth and Elsa Pataky’s flame has yet to fizzle out. It was love at first sight for the couple – the Thor actor has said he knew Pataky was the one when he first met her – and they spontaneously tied the knot while surrounded by family just months later. However, marriage hasn’t been all sunny skies for the couple.

Both the MCU alum and the Spanish model have discussed weathering their share of the “ups and downs” of wedded life over the years, especially when balancing sudden fame and busy careers with family obligations. Hemsworth even took a hiatus from acting, citing his desire to be more present with his kids.

Despite these challenges, both Pataky and Hemsworth have been vocal about their desire to grow together and the “constant work” they've put in to make their marriage last.

From welcoming three kids to working together on an action movie and hilariously pushing back on split rumors, here’s a look back on Hemsworth and Pataky’s relationship timeline.

2010: Hemsworth meets Pataky and immediately knows she’s the one.

The Thor actor was introduced to the Spanish actress by his talent agent William Ward in early 2010, and there were sparks at first sight.

"There was no light bulb moment," Hemsworth later told Elle about their meet-cute in a November 2015 interview. "From the first time we met, we just made sense. She's fun. She's outgoing, and she has a sense of humor and a passionate attitude toward life, which is nice to try and keep up with."

The couple was official by September, and they showed off their relationship by walking the red carpet together at the opening gala for the Resnick Pavilion at the Los Angeles Museum of Art.

December 2010: Hemsworth and Pataky spontaneously get married because “it just felt right.”

Just a few months later, the smitten couple quietly tied the knot while they were on vacation, Hemsworth’s rep confirmed. However, neither Hemsworth or Pataky spoke about their nuptials or shared where they’d decided to tie the knot at the time.

It was only later in a March 2016 interview with ITV's Good Morning Britain that the Ghostbusters actor revealed that deciding to get married was a spur-of-the-moment decision – and that, despite the lack of planning, it felt meant to be.

“It just felt right. It made sense,” he said. “There was no great plan to any of it to be honest, we were on holiday and we said, 'Why don't we get married, too?' And then the next minute...There probably should have been some planning, but it all worked out.”

Hemsworth also revealed that both his and Pataky’s families were also on their vacation, so they took advantage of everyone being together to pull the trigger on saying their “I do's.”

January 2012: The couple announces they're expecting their first child.

In an interview with the Spanish-speaking Hola! Magazine, the Snakes on a Plane actress revealed that she was pregnant and that they were choosing to keep the baby’s gender a surprise until the delivery.

“Chris and I are ecstatic, very happy and excited,” she told the publication, per People. “Since it’s our first child, we don’t care if it’s a boy or girl. Our only wish is that it’s healthy.”

April 2012: Pataky shows off her baby bump and pregnancy glow on the red carpet.

The mom-to-be, who accompanied her husband to the UK premiere for Avengers Assemble, turned heads in an emerald green Hoss Intropia gown featuring an empire waist and a halter neckline. Hemsworth, who wore a navy blue suit and his blond locks pulled back into a sleek bun, proudly put his hand on his wife’s belly as they posed on the red carpet.

May 2012: Hemsworth and Pataky welcome their first baby, India Rose.

Pataky gave birth to the couple’s first child, a baby girl, in May. Just days later, the Snow White and the Huntsman star told E! News that the name was a compromise for the two new parents.

"It was just a name we liked, I always kind of liked Indie or Indiana for a boy and she liked India," Hemsworth told Giuliana Rancic at a press junket for his new movie. "We sorta went, 'Oh well, whether it's a boy or girl that will decide.' It just seemed to fit."

May 2013: Pataky opens up about her and Hemsworth’s work arrangement to prioritize family time.

“You have to make an effort and try to stay together as much as you can,” Pataky told People in a May 2013 interview. The Fast And The Furious 6 actress told the publication that the couple agreed not to take on any jobs while the other is working in order to prioritize time with their newborn daughter.

“If we start splitting and doing other things it’s not going to last,” she said. “We try and keep it as normal as much as we can — like a typical family.”

January 2014: Hemsworth announces they're expecting a second child.

The actor’s rep confirmed the couple was expecting twins 18 months after the birth of India, according to People.

March 2014: Pataky and Hemsworth hit the red carpet for the Oscars.

A few months later, Pataky showed off her baby bump on another red carpet at the Academy Awards in March, showing off her expectant figure in a stunning sequined Eli Saab gown with a drop waist and a plunging neckline. The mom-to-be accessorized with matching silver earrings and sparkling jewelry.

March 2014: Pataky gives birth to the couple’s twin sons.

The Spanish star took to Instagram to share a photo of the newborns’ tiny feet along with a Spanish caption, which translates to, "You are home!! Tristan and Sasha came to this world on [Tuesday] March 18 just after [the] full moon. Complete happiness!!"

March 2015: Pataky admits that she finds Hemsworth’s “Sexiest Man Alive” title “funny.”

The actress told Women's Health U.K. that she didn’t see her husband any differently after he was named People’s Sexiest Man Alive 2014.

"It's funny when it's your husband," she said in the 2015 interview. "For me, sexy is the inside of someone. Of course, I think he's beautiful and fit, but I will never tell him that because he will get too ... cocky. He'll be like, 'What do you think of that?' And I'll say, 'Well, I've been the sexiest woman in Spain for a lot of years.' It's all just a joke, though."

November 2015: Hemsworth gushes over his appreciation of Pataky as a mother.

In a 2015 interview with The Who Magazine, the Aussie actor opened up about how motherhood had made him appreciate Pataky even more and how having kids together was the “best decision.”

"Watching her be a mother made me fall even more in love with her. Once we had kids we were like, 'We're in it, this is it,’” he told the publication, per Refinery 29. “All of a sudden I had a greater appreciation for my wife, she kind of came into her own when we had kids. She certainly keeps me sane. I complain about things, she gets on with it."

October 2016: Hemsworth and Pataky publicly clear tabloid rumors that their marriage is in trouble.

The star posted a photo of him and Pataky on a boat with the caption, “Looking for a new wife according to @womensdayaus and other misleading outlets! Honey, you still love me right?! @elsapatakyconfidential #thanksfortheheadsup.” Pataky commented, “forever and always” in English and Spanish.

October 2017: Hemsworth gets real about making sacrifices for their marriage and the importance of planning date nights.

In an interview with GQ, the Marvel star opened up about how he and Pataky had struggled to make time for their marriage as well as the sacrifices they’d had to face after having kids.

“My wife and I fell in love, had kids, didn’t really see each other for a few years, then fell back in love,” he told the interviewer, while acknowledging that “In terms of work, she’s certainly given up more than I have. She’d like me to step back and be at home with the kids more, and of course, I want that too. But I feel like I’m at this crucial point in my career – I’ve just got to set up for longevity or I’ll slip off.”

After considering the interviewer’s suggestion to write Pataky a love letter, Hemsworth shared his advice for new parents who want to keep the romance alive: planning date nights.

“Once you have children, every instinct and every moment of your time is consumed by that,” he said. “You’ve got nothing for each other – so make sure you have date night even if it’s once in a blue moon, because most of the time you’re just too tired and you’d actually prefer to sleep.”

2018: Pataky admits she doesn’t know how they “survived as a couple” while navigating fame.

In an interview with Vogue Australia, the Spanish model shared her perspective on the growing pains the couple had dealt with and the “pressure” that getting married and having kids so quickly had put on their relationship early on.

“I don’t know how we survived as a couple,” Pataky admitted, revealing that the overnight fame in tandem of quickly having kids had been difficult to work through, but in hindsight, she’s happy they “grew together.”

“In the beginning, it was beautiful – when I met him he wasn’t known at all and I grew with him and experienced all his successes and changes,” she said.

“We came out good because there is a lot of love between us and we are very strong personalities, but love each other so much. We make it work,” Pataky continued. “Every marriage has ups and downs – it’s constant work to be in a successful marriage and stay together forever.”

January 2019: Hemsworth and Pataky ring in the new year on a double date with Matt Damon.

The Avengers: Endgame actor and the Strong author spent early January with Damon and his wife, Luciana Barroso, on a ski trip in Montana. Pataky shared several Instagram Stories of the group hanging out together in a jacuzzi.

August 2020: Pataky says her marriage with Hemsworth is “constant work.”

In an interview with Australia's Body+Soul magazine, Pataky reflected on the consistent work required in her marriage ahead of the couple’s 10th anniversary.

“It’s funny that people think of us as a perfect couple,” she told the publication. “No way. It’s been ups and downs, and we still keep working at the relationship. I think a relationship is constant work. It’s not easy. I always try to see the positives of things.”

December 2020: Hemsworth and Pataky celebrate a decade of marriage on Instagram.

The action star took to Instagram to share a carousel of his favorite memories with his wife, writing, "10 years together! Looking forward to the advancements of modern medicine and science and enjoying a couple hundred more!"

May 2021: Hemsworth shares a Mother’s Day post praising his wife.

The In The Heart Of The Sea actor headed to Instagram to give his wife her due on Mother’s Day. Alongside a photo of Pataky holding all three of their kids at once, he tagged his wife and wrote, “Happy Mother's Day to all the brilliant, hardworking, kid carrying, bar raising, husband-putting-up-with-ing woman out there!! We salute you."

May 2022: Pataky and Hemsworth work together on an action movie.

When Pataky signed on to play a military captain in Netflix’s Interceptor, she credited Hemsworth – a producer on the movie – for helping her get ready for the physically challenging role while on set.

"He was there to just [offer] all kinds of advice. Of course, he's a professional action movie star,” she told People, referencing a time the actor showed her the best way to throw a punch. “It was great to have him holding my hand,"

Hemsworth also showed support for his wife’s new role on Instagram, sharing the trailer with the caption, “Sometimes you need a one woman army to round house kick a nuclear missile into space. That’s when you call @elsapatakyconfidential.”

July 2022: Hemsworth shares a flirty birthday post for Pataky’s 46th.

"Happy birthday to this gorgeous lady! Thanks for always being my rock to sit on but way comfier. Love you @elsapataky,” the actor posted alongside a black-and-white photo of him sitting on his wife.

August 2022: Pataky returns the favor with a post of Hemsworth sitting in a bathtub for his 39th birthday.

“Happy birthday to my favourite parrot trainer, kids handler and wife tamer, There’s nothing you can’t do. We love you to the moon and back,” she captioned the Instagram carousel.

November 2022: Pataky transforms into an older version of herself amidst Hemsworth’s Alzheimer’s concerns.

While the actor was filming his Disney+ series Limitless, he discovered that he was at high risk for developing Alzheimer’s disease during the fifth episode. Pataky had a special effects makeup artist help her transform into an older version of herself so he’d always remember what she looked like. “Still beautiful,” a touched Hemsworth – who’d originally been told he was meeting an elderly fan – told his wife when he recognized her.

June 2023: Hemsworth thanks Pataky for her support over the years.

In an interview with British GQ, Hemsworth told the publication that he “couldn’t have done any of the things” he’d done without Pataky’s “sacrifice, commitment, work, support, forgiveness.”

While the Thor star said the couple have a common goal to "have a good time, to laugh and be involved in new adventures,” he admitted that having kids while balancing his career was challenging for their relationship.

"It feels like we got to know each other halfway through our relationship, five, six years ago. In a beautiful way," Hemsworth said. "Once our kids were out of nappies, things became a bit more manageable."

March 2024: Hemsworth Pranks Pataky Ahead Of Their Oscars appearance.

While practicing his Oscars presenter speech on the couple’s drive to the ceremony, the actor hilariously flipped the script while Pataky was filming.

"And the winner is Elsa Pataky,” he told his wife, who laughed and made a face at the camera. “Congrats, bud. Congrats,” he added. “She couldn't be here tonight, so I'm just going to take this opportunity to say she thanks me mostly for her performance and basically everything in her entire life. You're welcome, honey. Love you."

He shared a clip of the moment on Instagram, writing, “A little Oscar’s rehearsal with @elsapataky! congrats love xo.”

For more InStyle news, make sure to sign up for our newsletter!