July 28, 2019

The Rapture, written and directed by Michael Tolkin

9.4 out of 10

Mimi Rogers carries this outstanding film with a mesmerizing, incredible,magnetic, complex, haunting and hypnotic performance.

The Rapture is one of the best motion pictures on The New York Times' Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made list.

On the other hand, an evil voice in my head says that you could turn the famous John Stuart Mill quote 'the mind is its own place, it can make heaven out of hell and hell out of Heaven' on its head.

A vicious, false take on The Rapture would be:

'A woman with a ferocious virus working through her mind engages in frenetic sex in the first part of her story, only to become a bigoted, sick fundamentalist in the second half, when she kills in the name of Jesus'

That would be not just wrong, but maybe the exact opposite of the motion picture that is complicated, thought provoking, splendidly acted, captivating and sophisticated in that it raises questions that are fundamental and offers the various, opposing angles to the meaning of life, existence of God.

At the start, Sharon aka the superb Mimi Rogers is frenetically searching for pleasure in sex, with her companion Vic, but mostly with what seems to be alternating swingers, often debutantes, people met occasionally in bars and other public places.

This is how she runs into Randy aka the young but accomplished David Duchovny and his partner.

The two couples engage in sex at the store that Vic has, although he is more interested in watching.

What seemed like one of a multitude of casual, coital encounters, develops into something more complex, albeit after a rocky start.

Randy gets involved, but Sharon is first more inclined to share her body with others, while experiencing a taedium vitae, an existential crisis in which she finds her life lacks meaning...well, a more significant one than copulating with hoi polloi.

'There has to be something more...I am tired of the pain in my life'

The heroine is visited by some missionaries and she has another vision, perhaps, when she is having so in another foursome and the other woman has a tattoo on her back.

This is an amusing moment, even if it may mark one stage in the revelation, epiphany of the protagonist, for while she has one man entering her from the side, she looks at the apparently religious tattoo and keeps asking questions about it, until both men stop their frenzied intercourse...

'For God's sake, do you have to do this now?!'

Eventually Sharon is 'born again' or whatever the characterization should be and she is not only a believer now,but she is using her job to spread the word of God.

She works as a telephone operator - back in the old days- and when her boss talks about the excessive time she spends with various callers, it looks like she may be fired.

Instead, this man happens to be another very faithful man - and probably a strong Trump supporter today.

When she sees Randy, she tells him that she is in love with Jesus...

'Oh, yeah? And how is this going to work?

Is he going to keep his place or is he going to move in?'

He is not just acrimonious, cynical and an atheist, he rejects her new found faith decidedly...

'It's just a drug!

You're in pain and instead of doing heroine, you're doing God!'

Nonetheless, we skip a few years and the anti dogmatic Randy is now married to Sharon, a solid church going father of a girl of about five.

And tragedy strikes.

The Rapture is the best motion picture I have seen in quite some time.

May 8, 2012

This is a book of three screenplays by Michael Tolkin. I recently read his novel of The Player and I read a lot of reviews saying the movie is much better than the book, so I wanted to read the screenplay to compare. As this is three separate screenplays I will review them separately.

The Player: Personally, based solely on the screenplay, I liked the book better. Now, I've only seen the opening sequence of the movie, and it's a very famous opening sequence and is, of course, amazing. So it's quite possible that the movie improves upon the screenplay. But as far as the screenplay goes, Tolkin has taken the story of the book and toned everything down. He tries to make Griffin Mills a better person, instead of having him murder the writer on purpose, he does it accidentally. The overwhelming sense of paranoia is also lost, Griffin barely seems phased by the detectives shadowing him. Now again, I'm sure Tim Robbins and Robert Altman bring a lot to the film, but the screenplay lacked the originality of the novel.

The Rapture: All I can say is: What the F**k? This was actually made into a movie? This starts out as the story of two swingers, who get off on sexual deviance, but then all of a sudden the woman finds God. Now she loves Jesus and believes the rapture is imminent. Years pass and she marries and has a child, and every day she assumes the rapture is just around the corner. Then her husband is killed and she flips her shit. She takes her daughter into the desert to await the coming of God. But God doesn't come and they slowly starve to death. The little girl wants to go to Heaven NOW, so... the woman kills her. Murders her daughter. Then she heads back into town, meets some cop, marries him and has a new life. Then the rapture finally comes, but now she's not so sure she truly loves God anymore. She feels like he forced her to murder her daughter. Thus she is doomed to walk in purgatory forever. Are you F-ing kidding me? Based on The Player I would have never guessed Tolkin has some serious issues with religion. This was the strangest screenplay I have ever read. If someone had submitted that to one of my writing classes they would have been thoroughly mocked. I repeat, what the f**k?

The New Age: This one was not quite as bad as The Rapture, but still pretty lame. A rich Hollywood couple is falling out of love while their lives are falling apart around them. The husband quits his job and the wife is having trouble getting business. They want to separate, but can't afford it, so instead they continue to live in the same house while dating other people and, and here's the kicker, OPENING A CLOTHING STORE TOGETHER CALLED HIPOCRACY. What?? Meanwhile they get into spirituality and yoga and Zen shit and get advice from a skeezy seeming guru. Finally it ends when the wife pretends she wants to kill herself and together they take a bunch of sleeping pills... but then it turns out she was only kidding and she's fine and the husband is just really sleepy. WHAT?? So they get a divorce and the husband becomes a telemarketer. Seriously. So yeah, that happened.