A 42 man delegation of Athletique Bizertin Football Club of Tunisia, Warri Wolves opponent in the first leg of CAF Confederation Cup holding in Warri this Sunday will arrive Lagos on Thursday morning and will immediately board an Arik Airline to Warri.

According to the Media Manager of Warri Wolves, Moses Etu, the Tunisia team which will arrive Warri by 8.15am is made up of 20 players, 3 Medical team, 5 Technical crew, 9 Executive Officials, and 5 journalists from Tunisian National Television with Mr Naffeti Zied as head of delegation.

The twenty players has Bejaoui Hassen, born in February 1974 as the oldest while youthful Kchok Slimane born in July, 1994 as the youngest.

Other players that made the trip include Bargaoui Chaker, Ben Hadj Mabrouk, Ben Mustapha Farouk, Brik Marouen, Melliti Khaled, Jaziri Fakherddine, Rjaibi Edem, Salhi Yassine, Youssoupha Mbengue, Zaeim Kamel, Khadheri Mohahamed Arbi, Hmani Khaled, Mossaab Sassi, Darragi Zoubaier, Mathlouthi Hamza, Harbaoui Hassen, Machani Al;i, and Hadhria Nour.

Meanwhile, Warri Wolves Officials aware of the herculean task awaiting them this Sunday has intensified efforts to see that the boys are in great shape before the crucial encounter as the Tunisians are known to be a hard nut to crack judging from the matches they have played so far.

“We have to double our efforts to see that we get a favourable result and this is first leg so we need to score goals. The available information at our disposal confirmed that they are good and are currently doing well in their league but we are going to do our best” said Coach Aigbogun who is having his second stint with Warri Wolves.

Goalkeeper Sunday Alampasu will lead 19 other players from the Golden Eaglets to the Flying Eagles training camp in Abuja.

Alampasu was named best goalkeeper at last year’s FIFA U17 World Cup and was also picked for the country’s squad to the recent CHAN in South Africa.

Some of the other players invited are Wilfred Ndidi, Abdullahi Alfa, Akinjide Idowu, Saviour Godwin, Aliyu Abubakar, Chigozie Obasi, Dennis Okon Nya and Zaraddeen Bello.

They are latest Wednesday to join 35 other players who were picked from a two-week open trial in Abuja.

The Flying Eagles under coach Manu Garba have been training for a third week in Abuja ahead of a 2015 African Youth Championship qualifier against either Kenya or Tanzania in May.

Kenya and Tanzania will do battle next month for the right to face six-time African Youth Champions Nigeria in May with the overall winners advancing to the final qualifying round in August.

The invitees:

Goakeepers: Dele Alampasu, Abdulazeez Abubakar

Defenders: Wilfred Ndidi, Prince Izu Omego, Dennis Okon Nya

Midfielders: Clement Ogbobe, Akinjide Idowu, Aliyu Abubakar, Abdullahi Alfa, Ifeanyi Matthew, Zaraddeen Bello, Emmanuel Asadu, Prince Bonkat, Mustapha Abdullahi, Chigozie Obasi

Strikers: Saviour Godwin, Nafiu Kabuga, Ahmed Umar, Bernard Bulbwa, Chinedu Enedemu

6.514159 3.387009