Zygmunt Berling was a Polish politician and general. In the early twentieth century, he fought for Poland's independence. Berling was a co-founder and commander of the First Polish Army, which fought on the Eastern Front under overall Soviet control during the Second World War.

After being imprisoned by the Soviets after the Invasion of Poland in 1939, Berling had been eventually released and remained in the Soviet Union.

He became involved in efforts to establish a Polish division in the Soviet Union, initially within the Soviet Red Army. In September 1942 and the months that followed, he and left-wing journalist Wanda Wasilewska petitioned Joseph Stalin for permission to establish the Polish division, which eventually led to the formation of a new Polish army on the 8th April 1943.

However, Stalin the Russian Leader had other ideas. He had - for his own, mainly political reasons – provided little in the way of support for the Warsaw Uprising, being opposed to it from the start and seeing the successes of the Polish Home Army as a threat to his own, future plans for Poland once the war was over.

He envisaged a Poland shaped and influenced by Soviet Russia, not the Western Allies and saw no place for the Polish government-in-exile in his future plans for the country.

He had also proved to be uncooperative and at times, obstructive, to any attempts by the Western allies to support the Polish insurgents themselves and even after international pressure, any concessions on his part were made reluctantly.

The Germans increased their attacks on Home Army positions near the river to prevent further landings, but they were unable to make any significant advances for several days as Polish forces held those critical positions in preparation for a new wave of Soviet landings.

Polish units from the eastern shore attempted several more landings and suffered heavy losses from the 15th until the 23rd of September. (including the destruction of all their landing boats and most of their other river crossing equipment).

The Red Army's assistance was severely lacking. Following the failure of the 1st Polish Army's repeated attempts to link up with the resistance, the Soviets limited their assistance to sporadic artillery and air support.