Sundby farm on Storsand is a peaceful and beautiful meeting place, for events with colleagues and customers, as well as for socializing with friends and family, and for memorials. The farm is located on a ridge over the Oslo Fjord with great views of the Drøbaksundet.

In the barn we welcome you into "Fjøset" and "Grisehuset".

With its white-painted timber walls, "Fjøset" is well suited for companies and associations for various meetings, also with subsequent lunch or dinner. The venue is also great for various cultural events, and widely used for socializing through life's anniversaries. "The Pig House" is the perfect place to gather for a welcome, work in groups, hold an intimate concert, devote yourself or just for a little quiet time during the event.

On fine days, the garden characterized by old oak trees, fruit trees, ornamental shrubs, as well as hundreds of roses with great views of the Oslo Fjord can be used as desired and needed. The surrounding area, the garden and the premises can also be used for photography and video shoots.

We are flexible and helpful in organizing your event. We are happy to share our experiences with everything from food, including chefs and catering, to logistics for the day. Sundbysand does not cook or sell drinks, but we are happy to serve and assist.

Sundby Gård has its place in both the Norwegian and world history. Locally, we have a lot of history around us from older to recent times. We mention caverns, Viking burial ground, ice dam, Oscarsborg fortress, and the remains of a tragic plane crash. Of greater world political history is that Leo Trotsky, Russian revolutionary hero and leader of the "Red Army" was interned here in the fall of 1936. Trotsky was granted asylum in Norway after great political controversy, and it is said that he is the most important historical figure to have lived in Norway in recent time.

Trosky himself called the farm "Sundby prison", but the place today seems far more hospitable. We are happy to tell you a little about the history of the farm during your event.

Sundby Gård is located approx. 35-40 min drive from central Oslo, via the Olsofjord tunnel.

The place is suitable for 10 to 90 guests, depending on the type of event.

Member of Visit Greater Oslo