IN THE MEANTIME is a TV movie about a young woman whose eccentric fiancé decides to take a break from their relationship. In the process, the woman loses her job, but her sister shelters her and gets her a job teaching adults how to read at the local community center. IN THE MEANTIME has a strong Christian worldview with positive characters teaching Jazz to follow God’s plan.

It’s Jazz’s 29th birthday, but she feels like her life isn’t together. She’s been engaged to an eccentric artist who tells her, on her birthday, he would like to take a six months break from their relationship in order to go to an artist retreat. The same day, Jazz’s harsh boss fires her. Confiding in her pregnant sister, Nina, Jazz decides to move in with Nina’s family. Nina is a great witness to Jazz, telling her she needs to follows God’s plan and not fall into false religion.

Unknown to Jazz, Nina gets Jazz a job at the local community center teaching adults how to read. At first, Jazz immediately says no to the job, but the owner of the center, Sister Fay, talks some sense into her. Jazz’s co-teacher is an attorney, Kwame, who’s doing pro-bono work for the center to build up his firm’s reputation. Kwame is really taking the job so that he can potentially move up in the firm to Partner.

Jazz and Kwame are very different people. Kwame is a bit of a “player” when it comes to romantic relationships, while Jazz is committed to her fiancé. Some funny characters are in the class, including Minnie who wants to be able to read the Bible and do karaoke with her grandchildren, an African named BJ who wants to receive his American citizenship, and Frankie who was once an R&B artist. Jazz and Kwame have to learn, through their differences, how to teach the class to read.

IN THE MEANTIME has a strong Christian worldview, where the main character’s family is constantly leading her back to faith. Family, marriage and faith are extolled. IN THE MEANTIME also stresses doing the right thing even if it’s hard or won’t lead to worldly success but will help people. That said, the beginning implies Jazz is living with her fiancé, though her sister tries to tell Jazz she must marry. Once Jazz comes closer to faith, she realizes this too.

IN THE MEANTIME has a good overall plotline. The direction needed to be better, since the actors didn’t seem very natural at times. Also, the sound wasn’t high quality and there were some continuity issues. Terri J. Vaughn as the sister seems to do the best job when it comes to acting. Overall, however, the storyline is sweet, and the worldview very positive.