Situated in Baden-Württemberg – in the south-western region of Germany, Freiburg im Breisgau or Freiburg is also otherwise famous for being eco-friendly and as quite a homely town other than being famous for its beauty. Prior to the foundation of Baden-Württemberg on the 25th of April, 1952, Freiburg im Breisgau was under the jurisdiction of Breisgau which was the capital of Baden back then. The city is a popular university town of Germany and an archiepiscopal seat along with being located on the western side of the Black Forest in the Upper Rhine Plains. Freiburg, in the early parts of 12th century was an important intellectual, commercial and ecclesiastical centre.

The climate here remains relatively warm and sunny throughout the year and the region is also blessed with ample amount of scenic beauty. The city offers much more than just monuments and history. It is located on an almost secluded wine rich side of the German geography, so explore the different cultural arrays arising out of the triangle between Germany, France and Switzerland which has influenced the people of Freiburg considerably.

Geography

The city encompasses an area worth 153.07 kilometres squared and is located at 278 metres above sea level. Freiburg im Breisgau can be reached when you travel towards the southwestern edge of Baden-Württemberg which is further at the south-eastern edge of the Upper Rhine Valley and the western foothills of the Black Forest. The closest city to Freiburg is Mulhouse in Alsace, the other closest major city at a distance of 46 kilometres in the south-western direction is Basel. The northern side, at a distance of 85 kilometres is Zurich, towards the south eastern side at a distance of 65 kilometres is Karlsruhe and Stuttgart, an important German city can be reached from the north eastern side at a distance of 133 kilometres.

The following is a list of other cities that are located around Freiburg and are listed from north to south: Vörstetten, Gundelfingen, Glottertal, Stegen, Kirchzarten, Oberried (Breisgau), Münstertal/Schwarzwald, Bollschweil, Horben, Au (Breisgau), Merzhausen, Ebringen, Schallstadt, Bad Krozingen, Breisach am Rhein, Merdingen, Gottenheim, Umkirch and March.

On the borders between Black Forest and the Upper Rhine Valley is where Freinurg is located. There are certain elongated fault liens which run through the city as well. Towards the northern end are the mountains of Rosskopf and the eastern districts compose of the Zartener basin in parts. Kappel and Günterstal, the southern districts in-fact falls under the Black Forest region. The south-eastern side is elevated to a height of 1284 metres.

History

Duke Bertold III of Zähringen and Konrad are known to have founded Freiburg in A.D. 1120 as a town for free marketers. Interestingly, the name Freiburg also translates into English as a free or an independent town, implying the autonomous status that the region enjoyed back in those days. Furthermore, the strategic importance of the town was rather evident because it was rather situated between the already established major trade routes between the Mediterranean Sea and the North Sea regions. The city also has rivers Rhine and Danube which have been important source of transportation.

During A.D. 1200, Bertold V, the last duke of Zähringen was the ruler of Freiburg and he was responsible for the creation of Cathedral Freiburg Münster. Though this cathedral could only get completed in 1513 and was designed in emulation of the Romanesque style and most of its edifice resembles the Gothic tradition. With the death of Bertolt V in 1218, the Count of Urach became the Count of Freiburg, but his reign was not well received by the people of Freiburg. Thus, by the end of the 13th century a feud arose between the lords and the people of Freiburg. In response to the agitation, Egino II of Freiburg raised the taxes considerably and also limited the freedom of the people. As a result of all of this, the people used catapults and brought down the castle of the Count which was located on top of Schloßberg. Furthermore, the brother-in-law of the Count the Bishop of Strasbourg, Konradius von Lichtenberg was called for help. He marched with an army and came in for protection.

There is also a legend which goes around the battle that followed. A butcher who went by the name of Hauri killed the Bishop of Strasbourg on the 29th of July in 1299. Despite all of this the people of Freiburg could only receive a pyrrhic victory due to which they were supposed to pay the Count of Frieburg 300 marks in silver each year until 1368. The Count was not somebody who would give up Freiburg this easily, so in 1366 he tried to occupy the region again but failed. Due to this constant trouble, the people of Freiburg themselves purchased their independence from the Lords and moved under the protection of the House of Habsburg who also allowed the city to retain much of its freedom.

It is thought the silver mines located on Mount Schauinsland that most of the capital for Freiburg acquired. These mines made the city one of the wealthiest in Europe and 1327 onwards the city minted its own coins. Freiburg also entered into an alliance with the neighbouring cities of Basel, Colmar, and Breisach. This was to facilitate commercial activities and managed to successfully last till the end of 16th century. Thus the population also flourished and prospered in the region.

By the end of the Middle Ages, Renaissance dawned upon the region and rest of Europe as well. It was around this time that the regional University of Freiburg developed as a major centre for the arts and sciences.

The age also carried a lot of superstitious belief systems. Particularly, in 1536 the ideas of witchcraft persisted and the city at this time saw its first witch-hunt. Later historian found that it was nothing more than the desire of the people to escape the Black Plague and therefore they needed a scapegoat and there came the witch-hunt program.

During the later three centuries, Freiburg remained largely disturbed beginning with the Thirty Years’ War. The population of Freiburg declined significantly and the ownership of the city also kept on moving from Austrians, French, the Swedish, the Spanish, and also among the various members of the German Confederacy. It was only in 1805 Freiburg became a part of Baden along with Breisgau and Ortenau.

Freiburg would attain the seat of a Catholic archbishop when in 1827 the Archdiocese of Freiburg would be established.

The Jewish citizens of Baden and Freiburg were deported to camps in South of France on the 22nd of October 1940. They continued to live there for two years in hostile and inhumane conditions and on 18th July 1942, the survivors were sent to death camps at Auschwitz. Today, Freiburg maintains a cemetery in the memory of all those who lost their lives. Furthermore, during the bombings of World War II, Freiburg was also damaged significantly, almost completely destroying the central region of the city.

Culture and sites to visit

Here in Freiburg you can travel on the longest cable car in the whole of Germany. It runs between Günterstal and the mountain, Schauinsland. The total distance covered is about 2.2 miles or 3.6 kilometres. For those who are interested in the gutter system of cities, Freiburg can be quite an experience. Its gutter system is called Freiburg Bächle. These systems were used for the purpose of feeding the livestock and assisting firefighters. They are constantly flowing with water which is diverted from Dreisam. The intention was never to be used in the form of a sewage system. As a matter of fact heavy punishments would be levied upon those who would dispose sewage in these gutters during the Middle Ages. These channels also provide coolness to the city during hot summer days and a somewhat pleasant sound of water gurgling. As per a local belief, if you happen to step or fall into the Bächle, you will then either marry a Freiburger or a Bobble.

The central square in the olden part of the city is known as: The Augustinerplatz. Here you can also visit the Augustiner Museum. Interestingly, the site of the museum used to be where the Augustinian Monastery once used to be located. In addition to that, there are fantastic bars and local breweries that must be tried. The central square is also like the most popular hangout zone for most of the localities and touristy folks.

Furthermore, the largest square in Freiburg is called the Münsterplatz or Cathedral Square. If you happen to be here on a Sunday then make sure that you attend the weekly farmers market there. A Gothic minister cathedral chiselled out of red sandstone is also located here. It was built sometime between A.D. 1200 and 1530. The Historical Merchants Hall was a major centre through which financial conduction took place in the region. It has a façade which carries the statues and the coat of arms of four Habsburg emperors. This building is located on the southern side of Freiburg’s Münsterplatz and is known to have been built between 1520 and 1530.

The oldest city hall is Altes Rathaus. The most striking part about this building which was built in 1559 is its painted façade. Platz der alten Synagoge or the Old Synagogue Square, situated on the outskirts of the old city holds quite a bit of prominence.

You can also visit the victory monument or as it is otherwise called, Siegesdenkmal. It was erected after Germany’s victory during the Franco-Prussian War in 1871. You can locate the monument on the edge of the northern side of the historic city centre in Freiburg.

While travelling towards the east of the city centre, Schlossberg hill can provide a beautiful panoramic picturesque view of the region. The castle which used to be on top of the hill was unfortunately demolished in the 1740’s and today just the name remains. The hill can also be reached and explored thorough the Schlossbergbahn funicular railway. The railway network begins at the city centre.

The city also was also recognised as the City of the Year for its exemplary sustainable urbanism in the year 2010.

Climate

The Köppen climate classification describes the climate of Freiburg to be of oceanic type. The highest average yearly temperature remains around 15.6 degree centigrade. Moreover, the hottest months of the year lay between June and September. On the other hand the average annual low temperature is 7.7 degree centigrade and the coldest months fall between Octobers to March.

More information about Freiburg

The city is also known as the eco-city because of the many solar industries along with research and development centres present there. Rather amusingly, the people of Freiburg are known for their love for cycling and recycling. The city is also home to many international organisations, some of them being: ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability, ISES – International Solar Energy Society and others. There is quite a prominent medical centre located within the city and also Albert Ludwig University of Freiburg which is among the oldest and most renowned universities in Germany.

Travelling within the city

The road network will not be the one to disappoint there, though it might get confusing once in a while. It is quite pedestrian friendly. Moreover, the public transport system is quite good as it is equipped with: VGA Freiburg, the tram system, and the feeder busses.

Furthermore, the Frankfurt am Main – Basel railway line passes right through Freiburg so travelling to the rest of the world is equally simple. There are railway line running east from the Black Forest and westwards from Breisach.

The closest airport base is Karlsruhe/Baden-Baden airport which is situated south of Freiburg at a distance of 70 kilometres. The other airports in close proximity are located in Stuttgart, Munich, and Frankfurt Hahn.