• Carson McAllister is the husband of Witney Carson, a renowned dancer and cast member of Dancing with the Stars.

• He was born in American Fork, Utah and went to American Fork High School and Southern Utah University.

• He and Witney married in 2016 and do not yet have children.

• His net worth is estimated to be around $400,000.

• Carson is 6ft 5ins tall, while Witney is 5ft 3ins tall.

Who is Carson McAllister?

Carson McAllister’s wife, Witney Carson, has taken the dancing scene by the storm and is quite a renowned name in the entertainment world. She has been a regular cast member of the popular show “Dancing with the Stars” since 2013, but what do you know about her husband? Carson McAllister is Whitney’s childhood love, and has been her support throughout her career. For now, he hasn’t disclosed his career and remains popular only as her spouse.

So, do you want to find out more about Carson, from his childhood years to his own personal endeavors? If yes, then stay with us as we cover the life and work of Carson McAllister.

Carson McAllister Wiki, Age, Childhood, Education

Kevin Carson McAllister was born on the 24th September 1993 – only 23 days before his wife – in American Fork, Utah USA, to Cheryl and Kevin McAllister and his wife. He grew up in his hometown with two sisters, Cassidy and Kelcie, and a brother whose name is unknown. He went to American Fork High School, and after matriculation he continued his education at Southern Utah University in Cedar City.

Carson McAllister and Witney Carson

The couple met for the first time in the 7th grade, and soon after started dating; after finishing high school, the two endured a long distance relationship, since Carson went on to Romania on a two-year Mormon mission with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Once he returned to the US, they continued their relationship, and in October 2015 announced their engagement. The two married on the 1st January 2016, in a classical Mormon wedding ceremony attended only by closest friends and family, at the Salt Lake Temple in Salt Lake City. Witney’s bridesmaids were Brittany Cherry, Emma Slater, and Jenna Johnson, who are Whitney’s colleagues in “Dancing with the Stars”. The couple doesn’t have children, yet?

Carson McAllister Net Worth

So far, Carson hasn’t disclosed the nature of his career, though he is known as a fairly successful businessman, which has certainly contributed to his wealth. So, have you ever wondered how rich Carson McAllister is, as early 2019? According to authoritative sources, it has been estimated that McAllister’s net worth is as high as $400,000.

Carson McAllister Career, Personal Life and Internet Popularity

Carson ventured into business with his father, who sadly passed away on the 9th March 2018, since when he has continued the business on his own, however, he hasn’t disclosed in which industry he is involved.

Although his name isn’t as popular as his wife’s, he has a decent fan base on social media platforms, especially Instagram, on which he has over 60,000 followers. He has often shared pictures of himself and Witney, among many other posts.

So, if you aren’t already a fan of Carson McAllister, then this is a perfect opportunity for you to become one, just skip over to his official pages.

Carson McAllister’s Wife, Witney Carson

Now that we have shared all that we know about Carson, let’s share some information about his wife, Witney Carson.

Born Witney Capri Carson on the 17th October 1993, also in American Fork, Utah, she is the oldest child of Jill Johnson-Carson and Tyler Carson. She has three younger siblings, Camry, Jaxo, and Cade. She went to American Fork High School, where she met the love of her life, and after matriculation enrolled at Utah Valley University.

Career Beginnings

Witney started dancing at the age of three, having joined a dance studio where she began dance lessons. She didn’t have a specific dance, but trained all the genres, including ballet, ballroom, tap, hip-hop, jazz and others. Gradually she improved and started participating in various dance competitions, not only in the US but across the world as well. When she turned 18 years old, Witney auditioned to become a participant of the show “So You Think You Can Dance”, and reaching the top 20 contestants, was paired with Chehon Wespi-Tschopp, a professional ballet dancer, with whom she reached the seventh round before they were eliminated.

Rise to Prominence

Witney steadily became more popular, and in 2013 was chosen for the show “Dancing with the Stars”, starting as a troupe dancer, but in 2014 was promoted to the main program and was partnered with Cody Simpson – the two were eliminated as the ninth pair from the show, but the following year Witney performed with Alfonso Ribeiro and they won the competition, which is one of her most successful endeavors. She has continued to feature in the show until the latest season but hasn’t managed to repeat the feat, even finishing 12th once when she performed with Chris Katta, but bounced back with a third place, dancing alongside Frankie Muniz, and then finished fourth with Chris Mazdzer. Most recently, she danced with Milo Manheim, with whom she reached the finals, but unfortunately finished second best, behind Bobby Bones and Sharna Burgess. To speak further of her accomplishments, Witney now serves as a mentor to children who compete in the “Dancing with the Stars: Junior”, which was launched in 2018.

Witney Carson Net Worth

All of her endeavors contributed to her wealth, especially her participation in the show “Dancing with the Stars”. So, have you ever wondered how rich Witney Carson is, as of early 2019? According to authoritative sources, it has been estimated that Carson’s net worth is as high as $300,000. Undoubtedly, her wealth will increase in the upcoming years, assuming she successfully continues her career.

Love how light my @HP Spectre x360 is! Perfect for my busy schedule!! #ad pic.twitter.com/3P8KXV4ZRY

— Witney Carson (@WitneyCarson) December 6, 2017

Witney Carson Body Measurements

Do you know how tall Witney is, and how much she weighs? Well, she stands at 5ft 3ins, which is equal to 1.6m, while she weighs approximately 128lbs or 58kg. She has blonde hair and blue eyes, while her vital statistics are 36-27-36 inches. On the other hand, her husband is rather taller than her, as he stands at 6ft 5ins, which is equal to 1.95m.

ncG1vNJzZmiZlpuuqr7PqKqtZpOkunDDx6hkq52Robm6ecisZJyZoqi8r3nMnJilpJmowaa%2BjLCgpKFdl7awecCgnGain5d6qbHIoJ%2BtZZ2Wv7O1xJ1m

Share!