Today we are sad to announce with heavy hearts the passing of Mary Emma (Gregg) McAllister, beloved wife of the late George E. McAllister. Mary passed away at the Pine Grove Nursing Home, on Friday June 19th 2015. She was 87.Born in Sussex, NB, Mary was a daughter of the late Horatio and Meta (Hunter) Gregg.

Mary was a homemaker all her life. She had a mother’s heart and understood everything that comes with that. Mary was hospitable, welcomed all and always enjoyed the company of friends and family. She was a great woman of faith, loving, prayerful and filled with grace. She attended Evangel Assembly in Fredericton.

Mary loved her children unconditionally and leaves a legacy of loveand inspiration for daughters, Linda Mosher of St. Stephen, Joyce Coleman (Stanley) of Ripples and Laverne McAllister of Fredericton ; also four sons, George (Rhonda) of Fredericton, Gregg of Moncton, Gary (Tina) of Geary, Douglas of Fredericton and Milton (Sharon) of Moncton. She is also survived by a son-in-law, Nelson McDonald of Cambridge-Narrows, NB.Mary was deeply loved by her 26 grandchildren and 26 great-grandchildren. She is also survived by a sister, Margaret McAllister of Snider Mountain. Her many nieces and nephews always held a special place in her heart.

Aside from her parents and husband, Mary was predeceased by a son Charles; daughter, Glenna E. McDonald; grandson, Ben Coleman; daughter-in-law, Heidi Forbes McAllister and brother’s Charles, Ronald and William.

You are invited to Bishop’s Funeral Home, 540 Woodstock Road, Fredericton, to visit with Mary’s family and share some memories with them on Sunday June 21st 2015 between 2 - 4 PM in the afternoon and 7 – 9 in the evening. A celebration of Mary’s life will be held at Evangel Assembly, 705 Maple Street, Fredericton, on Monday June 22nd at 11 AM with Rev. Duane Collicott officiating. Interment will be in the Ripples Community Cemetery.

The family has suggested that in lieu of flowers, memorial donations in Mary’s memory be made to The ALS Society of NB, Ripples Community Cemetery Fund or to a charity of the donor’s choice.

Mary received loving care from many kind and compassionate caregivers with special mention to Dr. King and the nurses at the Dr. Everett Chalmers Hospital and Pine Grove Nursing Home.