While she might be most well-known for playing Carrie Bradshaw on the long-running HBO television show Sex and the City, Sarah Jessica Parker is capable of much more than just Bradshaw’s keen observational and situational humor. Parker was (and continued to be) a notable actress both before and after Sex and the City’s run, sticking mostly to romantic and comedic roles but perfectly capable of going beyond these parameters, as well. Believe it or not, Parker was actually a part of some of the most iconic films of the 80s and 90s. She’s an Emmy and Golden Globe winner, and this is not for nothing — Parker is deserving of these awards, even if she’s often left without the right role for her to adequately show off her talents. Looking at her best roles across film and television, it’s easy to see just how under-appreciated Parker often is.

Ed Wood

Based on the life of cult movie director Ed Wood, Tim Burton tells the story of a filmmaker who never stops aspiring for greatness (despite what his occasionally polarizing track record says). Sarah Jessica Parker plays the role of Dolores Fuller, a real-life actress who often starred in Wood’s films. This type of role — one in a very stylized, very unique film — is not typical for her, and that’s a travesty.

Purchase now on Amazon for $9.99.

L.A. Story

Costarring alongside Steve Martin (who also serves as writer and producer), Parker delivers a great performance in one of Martin’s strongest creations to date. The movie is a surreal satire of the romantic comedy, and the end result is as memorable and enjoyable as you could imagine. Parker is able to keep up with Martin effortlessly, which is something not many can say.

Purchase now on Amazon for $9.99.

State and Main

Many actors dream of being a part of a David Mamet production. His scripts for both stage and screen are studied to no end by acting students, which makes being a part of one of his films an impressive and notable feat. Parker stars in his 2000 film-about-a-film State and Main alongside Philip Seymour Hoffman and William H. Macy. The trio of three-named actors satirizes their own industry without holding back, with Parker stealing the show often.

Purchase now on Amazon for $9.99.

Hocus Pocus

It’s a Halloween classic and one that plays on television almost constantly between the 1st and the 31st of October: Hocus Pocus. Costarring alongside Bette Midler and Kathy Najimy, Sarah Jessica Parker plays one of three witches determined to become immortal after being freed by two unsuspecting kids in modern-day Salem, Massachusetts. Parker is part of what still makes this movie so iconic, even 25 years after.

Purchase now on Amazon for $9.99.

Flight of the Navigator

One of Disney’s stranger family films from the late 80s, Flight of the Navigator sees Sarah Jessica Parker playing Carolyn, an intern at NASA tasked with informing a teen boy’s family as he escapes on an alien spacecraft. It might be seen as an ET knockoff, sure, but at least Disney made a valiant effort to mix things up, choosing to shrink the lead alien to practically pocket-sized. Parker’s Carolyn plays a small but significant part of the story.

Purchase now on Amazon for $5.99.

Footloose

Another 80s classic, Footloose is the story of a teenager from the city who moves to a small town where dancing and loud rock music are illegal. He’s a rebel, and this naturally disrupts the status quo of the entire town. You might recognize the famous song from the film, but you might not recognize the fact that Sarah Jessica Parker plays one of the leads, a teenager named Rusty.

Purchase now on Amazon for $13.99.

Mars Attacks!

Strangely enough, this cult classic from the late 90s is actually based on a hit card game. Tim Burton is no stranger to these kinds of movies — darkly comedic stories about strange creatures and surreal scenarios, this one focusing on aliens from Mars—but Parker is, so it’s impressive to see her in a role like this one. She’s actually one of many stars that make up the cast, starring alongside Danny DeVito, Annette Bening, Jack Nicholson, and Glenn Close.

Purchase now on Amazon for $12.99.

Sex and the City

The TV show that went on to define Parker’s career is actually pretty great. It’s one of the very few vehicles that seems made for her, tailored exactly to compliment her strengths as an actress. She shares the screen with a great ensemble cast, but it’s hard to deny Sex and the City is Parker’s show, first and foremost.

Purchase now on Amazon for $52.97.

Divorce

Her first return to television since the end of Sex and the City in 2004, Divorce is as endlessly entertaining as any other dramedy she’s attached herself to. The show follows her and her neurotic husband-turned-ex-husband as they battle it out over the course of a messy divorce, but it’s actually a lot funnier than it might sound from the description. It’s Parker at the best she’s been in years.

Purchase now on Amazon for $13.79.

Sex and the City: The Movie

The feature film adaptation of the hit series didn’t hit with every fan, but the movie is an absolute blast for those who did happen to connect with it. It’s essentially the length of five episodes of the show, which might seem long for a film, but it’s just the right amount for those who missed the iconic squad in the years since they left the air. Parker makes a flawless transition from silver screen to big screen, proving she’s capable of carrying much more than she’s given.

Purchase now on Amazon for $12.99.

We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.