Sarah Jessica Parker is a darling of television and movies. Whether you’ve seen her act in a classic rom-com alongside a 35-year-old bachelor with a fear of commitment in Failure to Launch or as Carrie Bradshaw in the ultra-successful HBO television series Sex and the City, her name has permeated entertainment headlines for as long as we remember.

Sarah is a veteran in the industry, making her debut on stage at 11-years-old. At 57, audiences love her just as much as they ever did, so maybe the best is still yet to come. Most entertainment buffs know a lot about Sarah, but if you didn’t know about the seven siblings she calls family, that’s where we come in.

So tag along while we learn more about Sarah Jessica Parker and her brothers and sisters as we rank them from oldest to youngest!

8. Allegra Forste

Allegra Forste is the daughter of Barbra Forste and Paul Forste. She and Sarah Jessica Parker share the same mother, making them half-sisters.

Other information on Allegra’s personal and professional life is unavailable online.

Did You Know?

According to IMDb, Allegra worked behind the scenes in film as part of the additional crew of the 1989 48-minute video, Creating Rem Lezar.

7. Megan Forste

Megan Forste is the daughter of Barbra Forste and Paul Forste, making her a half-sister of Sarah Jessica Parker.

Personal details of her life are unknown.

Did You Know?

Megan has an extensive resume chronicling chronicling a career behind the camera. She’s worked on the production side of television and film as part of the additional crew and camera assistant. Her work includes The 40-Year-Old Virgin, Click, Apocalypto, and The Longest Yard.

6. Rachel Parker

Rachel Parker is the daughter of Barbra Forste and Stephen Parker, making her Sarah’s full sibling by blood.

Information on her personal and professional life is unknown.

Did You Know?

We believe Rachel is a Broadway actress. She performed in The Sound of Music, portraying Louisa von Trapp, between June 28, 1977, and September 04, 1977.

5. Andrew Forste

Andrew Forste is the son of Barbra Forste and Paul Forste. He is the half-brother of Sarah Jessica Parker.

Information on his personal and professional life is unknown.

Did You Know?

Andrew performed on Broadway in The Sound of Music with his half-sister Rachel. He portrayed Kurt von Trapp between June 28, 1977, and September 04, 1977.

4. Timothy (Toby) Britten Parker (February 8, 1962 – Present)

photo source: Wikipedia

Timothy Britten Parker is Sarah’s full sibling. He made his Broadway debut in 1976 as an understudy for a revival of The Innocents. By 1977, at 15-years-old, he and his family moved to New York City to establish his career. Timothy achieved what any struggling actor dreams of having – stability. It came with his recurring role beginning in 1991 as a Forensics Technician on Law & Order.

His name is forever associated with Doctor Dillamond as the originator of the role from the classic Broadway play, Wicked. He’s also performed in Rent, The Visit, and Runaways.

Did You Know?

In 1986, Timothy Parker, his brother Pippin Parker, and several other theater artists co-founded the Naked Angels Theater Company in New York City. The company’s mission is to give a platform to creatives to showcase their work.

As a result, countless artists have come to present workshops and readings, using the stage as a vehicle to bring attention to social and political issues through the magic of theater performance.

3. Sarah Jessica Parker (March 25, 1965 – Present)

photo source: Wikimedia Commons

Sarah Jessica Parker is a household name in the industry thanks to her longstanding role as Carrie Bradshaw in the overwhelmingly popular television show Sex and the City. Because of the show, she and her co-stars became the face of single women in American metropolitan cities looking for love.

She’s been in the business for decades, but in 2022, she was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world, according to TIME magazine.

Her awards and nominations include two Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. Sarah carved out a lucrative career through television, but she’s had her fair share of success on the big screen, reprising Carrie Bradshaw for the feature film versions of Sex and the City and Sex and the City 2.

Parker founded her production company, Pretty Matches, which has been producing new content for HBO. The relationship between the two entertainment powerhouses has been one of the most fruitful of any collaboration between an actress and a studio, and it’s still paying off today.

Her production company is responsible for the dramedy series Divorce (2016-2019), in which she starred as Frances Dufresne, and the HBO film Here and Now (2018).

If that isn’t enough, Sarah Jessica Parker is also dubbed a fashion icon, once appearing in fourteen different outfits while hosting the MTV Movie Awards in 2000. The potentially record-setting feat turned her into the subject of either praise, laughs, scrutiny, or all the above from the audience watching at home.

Did You Know?

Sarah Jessica Parker’s relationships were about as high profile as you’d expect from television’s “golden girl.” She’s dated John F. Kennedy Jr. and Robert Downey Jr. but ultimately settled down with actor Matthew Broderick in 1997. The two are still married and have three children together.

2. Pippin Parker (June 22, 1969 – Present)

Pippin Parker is an American playwright, theatre director, and Dean of The New School’s Writing, Acting, and Directing program. He’s a co-founder and artistic director of the Naked Angels Theater Company with Timothy.

George Packer, a journalist, novelist, and playwright, had his first play, Betrayed, directed by Pippin at The Culture Project in New York. It proved to be a success and won the Lucille Lortel Award for Outstanding Play in 2008.

Pippin is the creative mind behind Passion Play, Ever Less Free, Little Bites, Limbo, Anesthesia, and The Gift. The latter of which was featured on NPR’s The Next Big Thing. He’s written a few episodes for the children’s educational music show, Jam Inn, and the animated series The Tick. The creative spirit is a part of the entire Parker and Forste family.

Did You Know?

Pippin is a council member for the Writers Guild of America, East — a labor union representing writers in film, tv, radio and its employees.

1. Aaron D. Forste (September 28, 1978 – Present)

Aaron D. Forste is the youngest among the Parker siblings at 43-years-old!

Aaron is the son of Barbra Forste and Paul Forste. Much like his family, he’s made his career behind the camera, working as a second unit director for The Bourne Ultimatum. Other works as a member of additional crew and production staff include Phone Booth, Changing Lanes, Birth, and Sex and the City.

Did You Know?

Aaron worked as a production assistant on several episodes of one of the most critically and commercially beloved shows, The Sopranos.