Penguins of Madagascar is a 2014 American 3D computer-animated spy action-adventure comedy film, directed and produced by DreamWorks Animation, distributed by 20th Century Fox. Based on The Penguins of Madagascar, the film premiered on November 26th, 2014. It is DreamWorks Animation's 30th movie. And It's also the final DreamWorks Animation film to be produced by Pacific Data Images until it shut down on January 22, 2015.

Despite positive reviews, the film underperformed at the box office, only making $83 million domestically and $373 million worldwide. The film's performance forced another write-down for the studio.

Plot[]

In Antarctica three young penguins; Skipper, Kowalski, and Rico defy the laws of nature to save an egg the other penguins believe to be doomed. After saving it from a pack of leopard seals and accidentally setting themselves adrift on an iceberg, the egg hatches into Private.

Ten years later, after the events of the previous film, the penguins decide to leave the circus to celebrate Private's birthday by breaking into Fort Knox in order to treat him to a discontinued snack in the vending machine of their break room. Despite this, Private begins to feel out of place with the team; as Skipper is the leader, Kowalski is the strategist and Rico is the arsenal. Suddenly, they are abducted into the machine and sent to Venice, Italy by Doctor Octavius Brine a known scientist who removes his human disguise and reveals he is actually an octopus named Dave, who has grown jealous of penguins, after their nature of cuteness had shunned him out of every major zoo in the world. Rico devours Dave's collection of snowglobes along with a canister of a green substance called the Medusa Serum before the four escape and are chased through the streets of Venice. When cornered, they are rescued by a group of animals from a spy agency called North Wind and consisting of their leader, a wolf who is introduced as "Classified" (although that's his description, not his name); a harp seal demolitionist named Short Fuse; Corporal, a polar bear; and Eva, an intelligent snow owl with whom Kowalski is instantly smitten. Their mission; to protect the animals of the world who cannot protect themselves.

At their hideout, their communication systems are hacked by Dave, who reveals that he has an enormous supply of the Medusa Serum and that he intends to capture the penguins out of every zoo he was kicked out of. Not wanting the penguins' help, "classified" sends the group to their most remote base, but the penguins awaken midflight and crash land in the Sahara Desert before making their way to Shanghai, which they mistake for Dublin, Ireland. Discovering Dave's next target in Shanghai, the penguins ship themselves to their current location and make their way to the zoo. Disguising himself as a mermaid-tailed penguin to distract Dave from his real target, Private himself is captured along with the Shanghai penguins after the North Wind arrives to put a stop to Dave's plan. The penguins take the North Wind's high-tech plane to give chase but accidentally self-destruct the machine. They manage to track Private to an island, though, using a device planted on him when "classified" tranquilized them. Meanwhile, on the island, Dave demonstrates his way to genetically mutate the penguins into hideous monsters to make humans disgusted with them as revenge.

Skipper and "classified" argue on the best means to rescue the captives and stop Dave, settling on "classified" 's plan of a frontal assault; however also hurting Kowalski and Rico’s feelings. However, they are quickly captured, and the other penguins are also when North Wind does not return. Dave demonstrates his ray at full power on Private, apparently disintegrating him with the beam, but unbeknownst to them, he has escaped. Private rescues "classified" and the others who want to regroup but Private, not wanting to leave anyone behind, goes to stop Dave. As Dave's submarine docks at New York with the promise of returning the penguins he found to the zoo, he turns the ray on the rest of the penguins, mutating them all into hideous monsters. The city erupts into chaos as the uncontrolled, mutated penguins run amok on the terrified human crowd. Getting the senses back into Skipper, Kowalski, and Rico, they decide to connect the cute Private into the machine to return them to normal. Dave jumps into the path of the machine and is turned into a baby-like version of himself while the others attach his snowglobes to the machine, returning all the penguins back to normal in one shot.

Private is left mutated from the machine while the rest of the penguins are restored to normal. Private has been tinted pink and grown antlers. Despite his strange new look, the Penguins show their gratitude and a newfound respect for Private. Dave has also been made cute by the ray and stuck in a snow globe where he is admired by a little girl. Finally, seeing one another as equals, "classified" promises to grant the Penguins anything they want. The Penguins are given their own jetpacks and fly off above the clouds, looking for their next adventure.

In a mid-credits scene, the Penguins return to the circus and plug Mort into the ray and use him to revert Private back to normal. Mort doesn't appear to show any side effects from the ray until he manages to swallow King Julien whole.

Cast[]

Tom McGrath as Skipper

Chris Miller as Kowalski

Christopher Knights as Private

Conrad Vernon as Rico

John Malkovich as Dave

Benedict Cumberbatch as Agent Classified

Ken Jeong as Short Fuse

Annet Mahendru as Eva

Peter Stormare as Corporal

Andy Richter as Mort

Danny Jacobs as King Julien

Production[]

Production for a spin-off films starring the NYC Adelie penguin spies originally began in 2005, shortly after the release of the first Madagascar film. it was to be called The Penguins Of Madagascar, and be released in 2009 as a TV special, until it was officially announced in 2011 as a theatrical feature film to be entitled Penguins of Madagascar. Bob Schooley said that the film's plot was not currently to have any connection to the TV series but that it could change. it was later announced that Benedict Cumberbatch (making his second time doing the voice of an animated character after his role of Smaug in The Hobbit) and John Malkovich (who had experience playing a spy villain after his role of Pascal Sauvage in Johnny English) would star in the movie. Malkovich said he thought it was "a funny idea" to use his voice for an octopus. the lighting for the film was to distinguish the villains from the heroes, via making the penguins' scenes white, blue and orange and Dave's scenes purple and green.

Home Media[]

Penguins of Madagascar was released on DVD, Blu-ray and Blu-ray 3D on March 17, 2015. It topped the home video sales chart in its first week.

Gallery[]

Videos[]

[]

Penguins of Madagascar on Wikipedia

Navigation[]

Media Films: Madagascar • Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa • Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted • Penguins of Madagascar

Shows: The Penguins of Madagascar • All Hail King Julien • Madagascar: A Little Wild

TV Specials: The Madagascar Penguins in a Christmas Caper • Merry Madagascar • Madly Madagascar

Characters Zoosters: Alex • Marty • Melman • Gloria

Penguins: Skipper • Kowalski • Rico • Private

Lemurs: King Julien the 13th • Maurice • Mort • Clover

The Circus: Gia • Stefano • Vitaly • Sonya • Esmeralda, Esperanza and Ernestina • Manu and Maya • Dancing Dogs

The North Wind: Classified • Eva • Short Fuse • Corporal

Allies: Mason and Phil • Lemurs • Ted • Zuba • Florrie • Moto Moto • Marlene

Villains: Fossas • Nana • Makunga • Teetsi • Shark • Mr. Chew • Chantel DuBois • Dave • Octopuses • Karl • Chauncey

Music Madagascar: I Like To Move It • Stayin' Alive • What a Wonderful World

Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa: The Traveling Song • I Like To Move It • Alex On The Spot • Big & Chunky • Copacabana

Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted: Afro Circus • Afro Circus/I Like To Move It • Firework • Gonna Make You Sweat • What's New Pussycat?

The Penguins of Madagascar: Brand New Plan • Conga King • Drop Some Acorns on Em' • Penguin Chant • Porpoise Power Ballad • Thump Thump Thump • He's Doctor Blowhole

Others: Celebrate • Santa Claus is Coming to Madagascar • Who's da King

Cast Films: Ben Stiller (Alex) • Chris Rock (Marty) • Christopher Knights (Private) • Chris Miller (Kowalski) • Cedric the Entertainer (Maurice) • Andy Richter (Mort) • Conrad Vernon (Mason) • Bernie Mac (Zuba) • Alec Baldwin (Makunga) • Bryan Cranston (Vitaly) • Benedict Cumberbatch (Classified) • Annet Mahendru (Eva) • David Cowgill (Police Horse) • David P. Smith (additional voices) • Ariel Winter (additional voices) • Bob Saget (additional voices) • Chris Sanders (additional voices)

Shows: Ty Burrell (Parker) • Brian Stepanek (Dode) • Bill Fagerbakke (additional voices) • Dee Bradley Baker (additional voices) • Jeff Bennett (additional voices) • Sean Bishop (additional voices)

Video Games: Crispin Freeman (Alex) • André Sogliuzzo (additional voices)

See also Locations: Africa • Antarctica • Central Park Zoo • Circus Zaragoza • France • Madagascar • New York City • Vatican City