Penguins of Madagascar (released on home video as Penguins of Madagascar: The Movie) is a 2014 American computer-animated spy action comedy film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by 20th Century Fox. It is a spin-off of the Madagascar film series and takes place right after the events of Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted, following the penguins: Skipper, Kowalski, Rico, and Private in their own adventure.

Despite the title, it is directly unrelated to the Nickelodeon TV series of the same name. Tom McGrath, Chris Miller, and Christopher Knights reprise their roles from the first three films as well as Conrad Vernon, Benedict Cumberbatch, Ken Jeong, Annet Mahendru, Peter Stormare, and John Malkovich voicing new characters.

The film was released two weeks earlier in China on November 14, 2014, where it was released by Oriental DreamWorks. Penguins of Madagascar was released theatrically on November 26, 2014, in both 2D and 3D, making it the only film in the Madagascar franchise to be distributed by 20th Century Fox as well as the final DreamWorks Animation film to be produced by Pacific Data Images prior to its closure on January 22, 2015, as well as DWA Glendale taking over.

Plot:

One day, Antarctican penguin chick brothers Skipper, Rico, and Kowalski, upon seeing a runaway egg roll away from their colony, rescue it from leopard seals on an abandoned ship and are set adrift on an iceberg. When the egg hatches, the trio adopt the penguin chick as their brother, Private.

Ten years later, the penguins leave Circus Zaragoza to celebrate Private's tenth birthday by breaking into Fort Knox to get Cheesy Dibbles from a vending machine, despite the fact Private's real wish is to be recognized as an official team member. The penguins are subsequently kidnapped and taken to a submarine, where they are confronted by Dave, a Giant Pacific octopus who was once a star attraction in the Central Park Zoo until the penguins upstaged him with their cuteness. After being repeatedly upstaged by more penguins and passed between zoos and aquariums as an unwanted animal, a bitter Dave disguised himself as a human scientist named Dr. Octavius Brine to enact his revenge. Rico swallows a vial of Dave's bioweapon – the Medusa Serum – and his snow globe collection before the penguins escape.

Fleeing through Venice, Italy while being pursued by Dave's henchmen, the penguins are rescued by the North Wind, an inter-species intelligence agency consisting of Classified, the British Eurasian wolf leader; Norwegianpolar bear muscle Corporal; Belgian harp seal demolitionist Short Fuse; and Russian snowy owl intelligence analyst Eva. After Rico shows the North Wind the Medusa Serum, Dave hacks into the North Wind's computers to reveal he has made more of it. Penguins start vanishing from exhibits all over the world; deeming Skipper's team a liability to the mission, Classified darts them and puts them on a plane bound for Madagascar.

The penguins escape the plane, and, using Dave's snow globes, deduce that the Shanghai Zoo is Dave's next target. Skipper's team forms a plan to stop Dave, and Private reluctantly agrees to be the bait. The other penguins manage to trap Dave with a dinosaur skeleton after creating a water leak in the aquarium, just as the North Wind shows up. However, Dave escapes through a drain and captures Private and the rest of the Shanghai penguins. Skipper, Rico, and Kowalski hijack the North Wind's jet to pursue him, accidentally destroying it. At Dave's lair, Private learns that Dave is planning to use the Medusa Serum to turn penguins into mindless and disfigured monsters, so that the public will hate and exterminate them.

Upon reaching Dave's hideout, the penguins and the North Wind clash over their different plans to infiltrate the submarine, before Skipper finally admits the North Wind to be more qualified and relents. The penguins distract the octopus guards while the North Wind sneak inside, but both teams are captured. Dave tests the Medusa Serum on Private, but he escapes at the last second using a paper clip he swallowed earlier, causing everyone present to believe Private has been vaporized. Private finds and frees the North Wind; however, they refuse to help without their gear, so Private heads off to rescue the penguins alone.

Dave uses the Medusa Serum to transform all the penguins, and, as Dr. Brine, unleashes them on New York City. In the chaos, Private obtains Dave's ray, chases down Skipper, Kowalski, and Rico, and restores their sanity. As the penguins and the North Wind battle Dave and his henchmen, Private inserts himself into Dave's ray, using the power of his cuteness to restore the other penguins to normal. This leaves Private mutated, and Dave shrunk and trapped inside one of his snow globes, which a little girl plays with. For his heroism, Private finally earns his place as a qualified member of the team. Classified congratulates the penguins and apologizes for misjudging them. As a reward, the North Wind gives the penguins jetpacks, which they use to fly back to Circus Zaragoza.

In a mid-credits scene, the penguins use Mort's cuteness to restore Private to normal. King Julien is upset that Mort has not shown any monster qualities, until the latter swallows him whole.

Why It Didn't Get Turned Into A Monster:

The idea of the film about penguins from Madagascar movie is a very interesting and excellent idea, since, unlike Minions, the execution works very well. The premise of penguins working with the serious North Wind is both a funny and enjoyable idea as well.

Skipper, Kowalski, Rico, and Private are just as likable as they were in the other Madagascar films, and they do work on their own as protagonists.

Very amazing and well-crafted animation that is another step-up for prior DreamWorks Animation movies and is also the last time we see a movie being animated by Pacific Data Images before it shut down.

The humor, like in most Madagascar movies, is so hilarious.

Dave the Octopus is a great and charismatic antagonist and he has a pretty interesting backstory.

The storyline is pretty good and does serve its purpose as a spin-off.

Lorne Balfe's score is well composed.

In particular, the new song performed by Pitbull, "Celebrate" that plays in the trailer and the end credits, is also catchy.

The emotional core with Private trying to prove his worth works quite well.

Good voice acting like the first three movies. The new cast also includes Benedict Cumberbatch, Ken Jeong, Annet Mahendru, Peter Stormare, and especially John Malkovich.

The movie packs the usual zany and crazy tone that one would expect from the Madagascar series, and Dave's gimmick of naming his minions after famous actors, such as Nicolas Cage ("Nicolas, cage them.") and Elijah Wood ("Elijah, would you please take them away?"), can get hilarious.

The backgrounds are beautiful, such as Antartica.

The soundtrack that accompanies the scenes is very nice and friendly

The international dubbing of the movie is very nice.

The landscapes of the world that are shown in much of the movie are amazing and friendly.

A pretty funny post-credits scene involving Julien and Mort since Private have reverted back to normal.

"Now that's just hurtful, and I'm so happy to see you again!"

"An octopus? Ha, ha, ha! No, Dr. Brine is not an octopus!"

"Private, stop playing with those backpacks! Find something useful!"

"Sorry, Skipper!"

"Well, boys. We did it."

Bad Qualities:

Dave, although charismatic, eloquent, and motivated as an antagonist, also falls into the trope of the villain "He's bad because yes" and "Villain who is not a threat."

In fact there is a scene where Dave says that he is not an antagonist.

There is a serious plot hole within the movie, which contradicts all three Madagascar movies, according to Dave in all zoos the penguins were the biggest attraction in the world, however, in Madagascar, it is made clear that all animals are the main attractions in the zoo and in the circus.

On more than one occasion, the movie makes the penguins and humans look stupid or useless, contradicting the franchise, where they were seen (mainly the Penguins) trained for whatever situation they are in.

The movie features several mean moments:

Baby penguins are thrown into the abyss.

Dave is treated like trash by the people at the zoos.

The North Wind eat lunch while the penguins starve.

The North Wind calling and treating penguins as stupid and useless.

The penguins treat him badly and look down on Private.

Kowalski tells horrible stories to Private.

Anachronisms: apparently this movie is set in 2012 after the events of the third Madagascar movie, but the movie has many references to 2014 and 2015.

False advertising: several penguins parachuting from The North Wind appear on the main poster of the film, this never happens in the movie.

In a movie poster, it is said that this movie told how the penguins got to the zoo, however, the movie only tells how Skipper, Kowalski, Rico and Private met.

Reception:

Penguins of Madagascar did receive generally positive reception from critics and audiences, praising the action, humor, cast, soundtrack, and animation. The film has a 73% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 110 reviews, with an average rating of 6.2/10. The site's consensus was "Penguins of Madagascar is fast and brightly colored enough to entertain small children, but too frantically silly to offer real filmgoing fun for the whole family.".

OMW rated the movie a 88% based on 209 users, the website’s consensus reads: “Penguins of Madagascar offers enough eye-catching entertainment to sustain viewers, although it's starting to feel like the franchise is running out of steam.”

On Metacritic, the film achieved a score of 53 out of 100 based on reviews from 31 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".

Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade A–.

Trivia: