YEHUDA MANDEL [1-1-1]http://collections.ushmm.org/oh_findingaids/RG-50.462.0116_01_trs_en.pdf

From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive

THIS IS AN INTERVIE.org/oh_findingaidstrs_en.pdf

YM - Cantor Yehuda Mandel [interviewee]

NL - Nora Levin [interviewer]

Interview - 1982,

NL: Now, Cantor Mandel, would you be good enough to tell us a little about when

and where you were born and a little about your family background?

YM: Dr. Levin, I was born in a small town in Hungary called Csepe.

Ugocsa Comidat. The district. On March the 3rd, 1904.

NL: So this was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.

YM: This was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It was in the part of Hungary

which was the so-called "religious" Jewish part, where we spoke Yiddish and, eh, automatically

we learned two, and some of us even three languages when we were small children. Yiddish

was spoken inside as soon as we closed the door.

From the inside we spoke Yiddish only. As soon as we were on the outside, the language was Hungarian and in some cases the Russian,

Maloruski, the Ukrainian language.

NL: May I ask, why Russian? What was the Russian influence there?

YM: Because there, at that part of Hungary, were many, many Ukrainians who spoke Russian, and the pressure was so big, even 50

and 100 years ago, to tear away from mainly Austro-Hungary because they felt that they can't live as nationals. Their culture, their

education, their music, their everything, is oppressed by the Austrian government. Therefore, they, in their own homes, just as we Jews spoke Yiddish, so they spoke Ukrainian.

This, then, shows that that was even in many, many years ago a very highly-explosive part of Hungary. If they could have, probably, they would have torn away the

part of Hungary from the Austro-Hungarian Empire in those days. This brought another interesting fact. They were completely influenced by the Church. Some of them were

Catholics; most of them (the non-Jewish part, we're talking about) were Greek Catholics.

NL: Greek Orthodox.

YM: Greek Orthodox. In both cases, the Church had an immense...eh...

...power and influence over them, and even when I was a small child, I started to

go to heder at the age of three-and-a-half. When I was four and five, I knew very well what it means to be attacked by the non-Jewish students.

They waited for us with sticks and all kinds of things, and we learned to a degree how to fight them as well. This

is maybe an interesting point from a point of view when we ask ourselves, how did the things get to the point where they started in 1938 or '39 in Hungary? But

they really and actually started in 1917 and '18 on a big scale when Horthy and his, eh, people, came and killed plenty of Jews in Hungary proper, and whoever could take advantage of Jews,

did.

NL: Yes, we want to come to that, because that's an extremely important chapter. This was part of the reaction against the Béla Kun Communist regime, I believe. Now, can you

say a little more about your childhood, because this would be so interesting.

YM: I, eh, was born in an extremely Orthodox religious family. My upbringing was the old type of Yiddish upbringing. Eh, and I was four-and-a-half years old, probably, surely

not five yet, I started to learn Chumesh [Pentateuch], Chumesh Midrasheh[Post-Talmudic literature], eh, it wasn't a question of, do I want it? There were no considerations as far as

psychological questions. This was it, and this is the way we grew up.

NL: Can you tell me, eh, excuse me, par-, I think I interrupted you

YM:We were seven children at home,

Three sisters and four brothers, of whom by today only one is alive, who came here in 1913, probably the last boat which reached the United...

That's my oldest sister who lives in Philadelphia. Her name is Mrs. Helen Borish, B-O-R-I-S-H.

The sister who followed her was Esther. She was married to Yaakov Deutsch. One sister, the youngest sister, died.

She was never married. She got what was prevalent in those days in that part of the world, galoppierende Tuberkulose

[consumption] and died before the age of 20. Her name was Rivka.

My brothers, the younger brother, is Yoel. The one following him is Yisrael Dov, or Srulbear, as we called him, and the youngest brother was David.

Now, my sister's children. Did I give you the name of Esther?

NL: Yes.

YM: Yes, I did. Esther had three children.These children are, all three of them, in Israel, are settled there, and there they live.

Yoel, of course, Rivka had no children, Yoel was the first Associate Chief Cantor of the congregation in Zagreb.

He was professor of Hebrew Studies. The younger brother was also a cantor; they were both my pupils.

In Chazanut [studies of religious chants], I mean. We all went to Yeshivot, and the youngest brother, David, David Mandel, died in Israel in 1949. His, he already got his doctoral degree from the university in Budapest, with a yellow star on his lapel. He was a graduate of the seminary in Budapest, and, was a graduate of the university in Budapest.

NL: What a distinguished family!

YM: Interesting, maybe--he was a graduate of the, Hebrew gymnasium in Munkács, and maybe one distinction which does not apply, maybe, to too many people, is that after he

went from Budapest because we were so very active in Zionist works--I wasn't home--he was engaged to a young lady by the name Hava Eisdorfer. Their wedding was supposed to take

place in June in my Temple in Budapest. I wasn't home, of course, I was in labor camp already in 1940-1944, and it never took place, the wedding never took place, of course, but he went

with a Kasztner group...

NL: Ah, yes.

YM:

...to, eh, Bergen-Belsen. Not only that, because of my activity in Budapest, while I was there for ten years, my family was called upon to take them along in my absence...

NL: Mmm

YM:

...and that was, that was wonderful.

NL: Oh yeh.

YM:

These people who you read in this...

NL: Yes...

YM:

...Yuri Brown story, they thought of it, because my brother was just as active. And my brother came to Israel after Bergen-Belsen. And after all this, and taught for awhile in

Gymnasium HaRaealit in Haifa and had an appointment to teach at the university in Yerushalaim [Jerusalem] of all things, Hebrew literature. And, he never reached that day,

because he died in Israel in April of 1949.

NL:

Now, let's go back a bit. I'd like to know a little about your parents. Can you tell me about father and mother?

YM:

Father grew up, probably, the same way as I did. He probably started heder [chuckles] when he was the age of three. He was a real Talmid chochem

[scholar of Talmud]. Very knowledgeable Jew. He also spoke these languages, I have mentioned before, perfectly. He had, quite a bit of knowledge in, in not only

Sifrut [oral law] and, Talmud and Chumash and so on, but he was a Talmid chochem. As a matter of fact, he was not, though he was an ordained rabbi by his own

rabbonim who gave him Hatorath Tora, and Hatorat rabbanot, he

never acted, never was, a professional rabbi, but he

pasket shayles

[decided questions] as they

said there, and took care of the

Yeshuvim

[settlements] all around us, and Avrohom Mandel

was, eh, quite a

bekovedigge

r [honorable Jew]. My mother...

NL:

Did he, eh, make a living out of teachi

ng, or did he have a separate occupation?

YM:

No, no, he had fields and was in the, he was a farmer...

NL: A farmer...

YM:

And I, eh...

NL:

Were Jews able to own land at that time?

YM:

Yes. In those days, yes. My father, who was born in '77, I think, 1877. That was

really the golden period of Hungarian Jews.

NL: I see.

YM:

Because then, it was after '48, after th

e French Revolution and so on. And all

these countries copied to a degree the French freedom, and so on and so forth.

NL: I see.

YEHUDA MANDEL [1-1-5]

From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive

YM:

And that expressed itself in the fact as

well for Jews not to have any restrictions.

Jews, as a matter of fact, were allowed to ma

rry non-Jews, for which before they would have

been burned on the, you know?

NL: Stake, yes.

YM:

But in those days there was freedom.

So, you could buy a house. You could get

into business, you could, you could own fields and farms and so on.

NL:

And so, you grew up on the land.

YM: Yes, absolutely.

NL:

Yes. And was the family fairly comfortable, economically...

YM: Yes.

NL:

...or did you have hardships?

YM:

You have to know, I mean, if I should go into this, I don't know.

NL: Yes.

YM:

That in, in that part of Hungary in those days, let's say my days, after 1904, when

I grew up to be at least to understand what's

going on, 1910, '11, '12, and '13, '14, and even to

'16, there is a river which was never controlled and never, never, put into shape, so to say, which

every year brought floods and floods and floods.

NL: Mmm.

YM:

My father became a poor man, I th

ink, between 1910 and 1916. Poor. They

made out somehow, but they weren't comfortable at the time anymore.

NL:

But, eh, the land...

YM: The land...

NL:

...was still his, and...

YM: ...belonged...

NL:

...and was he able to recover?

YM:

Yes, some of it, and whatever could

be done with it was done. But comfortable,

he was not. Before his time, and, of course, my

recollection doesn't go back to that, all these

land, belonged to my mother's father.

NL: I see.

YM:

Eh, and presumably he made a very, very

comfortable living. So that shows that

there must have come some kind of natural cau

ses which made it impossible for them to be

comfortable anymore. My mother, it may be worthwhile to mention, is the daughter of a man

who was a teacher in 1830.

knew, of course, how to

daven

. And I will never forget it. I was maybe eight or nine years old when I davened

in my, in our own congregation at home in Csepa, maariv [evening prayer], on

Pesach, Shavuos, Succot, whatever it was. And eh, and there were, there were those

additional prayers, those inserts, we call them marouvis [evening prayers], lel shamurim

[prayers at Pesach night], and so on and so forth. And I did very well, I, I knew it was no

problem.

NL: Eight.

YM:When I hear people prepare for the Bar Mitzvah a year or two earlier, I'm just angry, because if we were called and

we were eight, nine years old, for a maftir [last reading of the Torah], it was no problem. I mean, it was, as a matter of fact the children were called as a

rule, because that was the only kibbud [honor] a boy could get in those days, to be called for a maftir [one who reads concluding verses of

the Torah portion], because another aliyah he couldn't get; the shevah korim[seven readers] had to be adults

. So, we were the additional, anachron[the last], or a maftir, we could be called too.

NL: This was all very natural in the cycle of your life.

YM: Yeh.

NL:

And so your childhood was passed quite happily.

YM: Yes.

NL:

And, do you have some memories of the war years? Did your family have to move out? Were any, were there any deprivations?

YM:

No. In 1914 when the war broke out, as you well know now, I was ten years old. This is just a side line. I remember exactly

the spot where I read the first announcement of Franz Josef [emperor of Austria/Hungary], who said, "I have thought it through very carefully.

I have given it all the consideration, and we must step in..." and so on and so forth, "the war". The war years I remember very well because there was terrible pressure on all of us. Because

you have to know that we lived right underneath the Carpathian Mountains. And the first lines maybe were about 100 km, which is about 60-65 miles away from us. But I remember

particularly during the war two years, when people who lived at the very end of the Galician part of Austro-Hungary, had to evac-, be evacuated and evacuated, and came to us before

Pesach. What part of the war that was, I don't remember any more, but these people, about 60 families, came into our little community before Pesach, and I will never forget it. Everyone

was put up. At families, my father, zichrono l'bracha [of blessed memory], gave a special, gave special permits to use on that Pesach kitniyot [forbidden food]. He consulted with his

rabbi, and they gave permission not only for matzoh or potatoes or what, but kitniyot. In otherwords, vegetables...

NL: Baked beans

YM: Beans which you wouldn't eat normally.

So, all these families were put up. I

think this was repeated in '15, '16, '15 and '16,

because as the war went on, either the Russians

pushed the Austro-Hungarians back, or the Au

stro-Hungarians pushed the Russians back, but

the war went on in that part of the world, very close to us.

NL: Very close.

YM: Ya.

NL:

But you weren't involved in the...

YM:

We were never evacuated. No.

NL: ...war actually.

YM:

We had, of course, my mother's brother in particular, you may even know about

him, Dr. Moishe Bolgar...

NL: The, the...

YM:

Braun, original name. His original name was Moishe Braun. He was a lawyer

by profession, and a first rate Hebrew novelist and

writer and translator and, so he was at the

battlefield all the time.

NL: A soldier.

YM:

A soldier. And we were under his, under this pressure that we were terribly

scared for him.

NL: For him.

YM:

He was like more than an uncle to us.

And we constantly were scared. He was

then, later on during the war he was the, the

man responsible for a military newspaper called

Manilova

, where he was still in great danger all the time,

but at least he didn't have to stay in the

first line and shoot at someone.

NL:

Yes, and, the end of the war meant

changes for your community. The peace

treaty. What were the territorial changes that involved your town?

YM:

No, first of all, before it came to the

very end and before it was decided that our

part of the world should belong to Czechoslovakia,

or that Czechoslovakia should be called into

being at all, there were the--you know that th

e war in Hungary, especially where we belonged

to, that part of Hungary came to an end by

the White Revolution, White Flower Revolution, I

don't know how that Flower is called, but the Socialist movement became stronger, later on the

ad those little slats made out of wood. This is

the way shoes were manufactured instead of

soles. So, this, these are my impressions. Of course, what can a thirteen-year-old know...

NL: Yes, yes.

YM:

...in this kind of a boiling world.

NL:

Yes, did your parents ever talk to

you or to the children about the Bolshevik

period of occupation?

YM:

In my parents' mind, and I have to say this quite honestly, rightly or wrongly,

Bolsheviks, because we were born, grew up, and liv

ed in a different society, whatever was Red,

whatever was Bolshevik, was poison. They just c

ouldn't, they couldn't even get to the point, I'm

afraid, to consider it.

NL:

But this was how most Jews felt, I believe.

YM:

I would say so, yes.

NL:

Yes, there was a lot to fear.

YM:

Yes, a lot to fear.

NL:

A lot to fear.

YM:

A. The financial standings of ev

eryone were in danger, and second, the

religion...

NL: Anti-religious...

YM:

...which was their life...

NL: Of course.

YM:

...which was their, their mainstay, was constantly in danger.

NL: Of course.

YM:

And we heard that after, I don't know, we knew about all the troubles, let's say

the, the Russian Czar and his

family and his generals gave to the Jewish population of Russia,

we knew about all that, and we were

sorry that they were killed. But

Fonya-ganef

[Russian

thief], as we called him in those days, and as he was called by the people who came to us, eh, we

knew very well what happened to them, a

nd we couldn't really, so to say, say

kaddish

after

them. We were sorry as human beings that they were killed, but we knew that religion is out,

and no more

heder

, and no more

Mishnah

, and no more, no more, eh...

NL:

No more property, no more private property.

YM:

Right, yes, no more private property.

NL:

A lot to fear.

YM:

So from this you will see what our em

otions and even logical considerations

were. Now my father, or mother, never sat down with us to have a political...

NL: Discussion.

YM: Political discussion.

NL: [chuckles]

YM:

I mean in those days. Among the boys

I was the oldest, but my oldest sister

wasn't even there. She left Europe in 1913.

My younger sister got married and she didn't live in

the same place where we lived. I really did not

attend too many, and didn't even have a chance,

to get the feeling--just what I heard superficia

lly--and, of course, if Reb Moishe or Reb Chaim

said that this is terrible, I had to think it is terrible.

NL:

And, and it was. It was. Uh, now

in 1918, 1919, what was the political setup

that affected your town, Cantor?

YM:

In 1918 and 1919, as I said, our part of

the land changed owners, so to say, many

many times, but in '19 I went to Nagyhalasz, to my first

yeshiva

. Nagyhalasz at the time,

already, was Czechoslovakia. And there was a

great relaxation. Our village was divided by

the, rather, about four kilometers from our v

illage we had a river called Tisza, which comes

from the high, up in the...

NL: Carpathian.

YM:

Carpathian mountains. And, eh, flew

through, close by to our river, to our

village. When I used to come home in the first

z'man--z'man

is a semester, six months, you

know--when I used to come home, in '19 or maybe '20, from Nagyhalasz, for a

Shabbes

to be

home with my parents, we didn't need anything else, but a permit from the, Czechoslovakian

police, let's say, or

Gendarmerie

, or whatever it was, that we are citizens or...

NL: Residents.

YM:

...residents of this and this village.

And even if we were stopped, we could pass.

NL:

But your parents were technically within Hungary.

YM:

Technically, they were within Hungary, ye

s. Because it wasn't decided that this

wouldn't be Hungary any more at the time. When

then this other side of the Tisza was, eh,

adopted to be also Czechoslovakia up to a certain point, then things relaxed in our village as

well. But in Nagyhalasz, really we didn't ha

ve this when I got there anymore, because

Nagyhalasz, as such, because it was on the right

hand side of this river, immediately was

decided that this will be part of Podkarpatska

Rus, yes, but it will belong as such, eh, to the

Czechoslovakia.

YM: Czechoslovakia. Now you know th

at Czechoslovakia consisted of

Podkarpatska Rus, Slovakia, Moravia, eh...

NL: Bohemia.

YM:

Bohemia and so on. So, therefore, this wa

s just a part of it. Where we lived was

part of Podkarpatska Rus, all of it belongs, now, of course, to Russia.

NL:

To Russia, yes. And did you live with a private family, or did you live in the

yeshiva

? Was there a dormitory?

YM:

This again is a very interesting story.

Ich hab gegessen cost-teg

["to support

learning" families provided meals for

Yeshiva

students on different days], if you know what

that is.

NL: Yes, yes.

YM:

I eat a...

NL: Eating days.

YM:

Right. Every day at a diffe

rent place. I was just extremely lucky that my father,

as a, a, as the owner of some...

NL: Land.

YM:

...land and so on had cattle to sell, and

had sheep to sell, and had to buy things

from, eh, materials for the farm and so on, so he

had these friends, and I, just by coincidence,

used to have my

cost-teg

at these families.

NL: I see.

YM:

As a matter of fact, my sister-in-law,

Chava, who lives in Israel, her father was

an associate in some way of my father, and I had a

cost-tug

[singular], a day, to get my lunch or

dinner, whatever in their house.

NL: Ah.

YM:

So that I knew Chava Eizdorfer even before she was born.

NL:

[Laughs]. Very interesting. And this was a large

yeshiva

?

YM:

It wasn't a large

yeshiva

; it was a much bigger town than ours. As I say it was

the capital of this district, Ungvar, and, eh, I will say in Nagyhalasz, at the time probably have

lived 350 Jewish, 400 Jewish families. So that

was already a big town. Nagyhalasz had a

beautiful, big synagogue, of

course Orthodox, two, three

betai medrushim

[class-rooms], and it

was a nice, nice town. The

yeshiva

as such was never big, and was never, there was never a

yeshiva

in Nagyhalasz in spite of the fact that the great Shmelcha Klein was the, the

Rov

in Nagyhalasz, it was never a yeshiva

town until Yosef Nehemiah Korenitz,

zichron l'bracha

, came

and organized this

yeshiva

.

NL: I see.

YM:

Which consisted always

of about 30, 35, less than 40

bocherim

[young men].

And mainly youngsters.

NL: Youngsters.

YM:

Young people, 14, 15, I myself studied in

Nagyhalasz for two-and-a-half years;

after that I already went to Ungvar, which wa

s the capital city of Podkarpatska Rus, Uzhgorod,

today it's called Uzhgorod. Eh, and the

Rov

was the chief rabbi of Podkarpatska Rus, Erbavram

Yosef Greenwald, he was a

haver

of my father in his father's

yeshiva

in Ust. So, I went to this

yeshiva

to study. After that, in other words,

we didn't spend, I don't know, the time in

Nagyhalasz until we became ready for, for anything like

hora'ah

[teaching], or whatever it was.

We studied and got a good basic education there.

I myself was there, I think, for five

z'man

[semesters], that means two-and-a-half years.

After that I went to--started to study in Ungvar.

NL:

Oh my. And, were there any secular studies involved, or...

YM: No.

NL:

...did you have a tutor for those?

YM:

In my, of course, in my village you couldn't, even if you did want to...

NL: No.

YM:

...go further than the fourth, maximum the sixth grade.

NL: Grade.

YM:

Eh, so that when I came to Nagyhalasz and my uncle--this uncle which I

mentioned before, was a great influence--to ge

t some secular knowledge as well, I studied

privately. At the end of the

season we took our exams in a private way. Let me mention

something very interesting. I never in my lif

e had any exercises, any kind of painting or

drawing; that was just strange to me.

Farbrenggen di tzait oif a solcha narishkaiten

[to spend

time on such nonsense], who did it? So, at th

e end, when I was prepared, ya, in Nagyhalasz,

there was the middle

shule

, and the [unclear] it was called, where you could get above the

elementary school four grades, four years. So, I wanted to have at least get that what I could. I

don't know if my father ever discussed this question with, eh...

NL: Your uncle.

YM:

No, my uncle he did, but with my rebbe.

NL: Oh.

YM:

Yes, you know, that was a big thing.

NL: Of course.

YM:

Hachutzoniyot

[outside studies] wasn't simple

to study. I don't know if he did or

if he didn't, but he advised me, probably at the influence of my uncle, to go to A, B, C, D

teachers, prepare with them, and at the end they

gave us then, we went

to school, that was a day

assigned for...

NL: Examinations.

YM:

For private examinations. So, the man who gave me the exam in mathematics,

and, eh,

tziur

, eh,

NL: Penmanship?

YM:

No, eh, not penmanship, but you know, to...

NL: Composition?

YM:

To eh, to draw something.

NL: Oh.

YM: Drawing.

NL: Drawing.

YM:

You know, so he said, look, you did quite

well in mathematics. You did terribly,

no, he said, you did terribly in this, my departme

nt and if you will pass mathematics, well, fine,

I will let you pass. If not, [laughs] you won't pass!

NL: [Laughs]

YM: [Laughs]

NL:

Yah, interesting. So now, you stayed in this town for two-and-a-half years...

YM: Two-and-a-half years.

NL: And then?

YM:

Then I went to Ungvar.

NL: That's...

YM: U-N-G-V-A-R.

NL:

And that was in Hungary?

YM:

That was, that was, that was origina

lly, originally it was Hungary. At the time

when I went there it was the capital city of Podkarpatska Rus.

NL:

And how do you spell Podkarpatska Rus?

YM:

P-O-D, Karpatska as you spell, it's a separate word, of course.

NL: Yes.

Kar-Pat-Ski, just as I say it phonetically, Russ, R-U-S-S.

And this was the

capital city of Podkarpatska Rus. In, at the time, 13, 14, two-and-a-half years, I was about

seventeen, eighteen years of age, and I got to U

ngvar, maybe even less, I don't know, I stayed in

Ungvar for four-and-a-half years.

NL: Still studying?

YM:

Still studying, and only this.

NL: At the

yeshiva

there?

YM: At the

yeshiva

. There was a

yeshiva haramah

, it was a big

yeshiva

. There were

300

bocherim

, and there already it was divided in,

eh, divisions and sub-divisions, younger

bocherim

who studied [unclear] just this.

As I have mentioned before,

maidneshiiur

[phonetic]

and so on, so, others who studied up to this a

nd this point, later on others who came up to, I

don't know, the

horaah

, who, who stood for the

nisayon

, [exams]

paskan shailles

and so on.

There was, as I have said, this Erbavram Yosef Greenwald was my father's

haver

[friend] in his

father's

yeshiva

, and he was one, he was the chairman of the committee who examined for the

horaah

.

Horaah

, is you know, all kinds of other things.

NL: Yes.

YM:

But among other things it is, eh

issur veheter

, [prohibition permitted] you know,

kashres

[dietary laws], and

Shabbes

and

yom tov

[holiday] and so on, so, under his guidance, his

son, who died here already, in Brooklyn, who wa

s his successor later on, I studied with him,

Yehoshua Greenwald, and together we were

ordained, if I may call it that, to be

rabbonim

, and

to, that was not yet

haturis rabbonis

[ordination], it was just to

paskan

and to

paskan shailles

in

issur veheter

.

NL: Mmm Hmm.

YM: Up to

simank

?

fiyot

. That was the way it went.

And that's the way, the way it

worked.

NL:

That was the cycle.

YM:

The cycle, yes. That was the highest

. That was the most, eh, progress, the

highest grade, let's say, achieved.

NL: Yes.

YM:

So this is what I finished in Ungvar.

From Ungvar I was, at the age of 19 and

older, probably, drafted into the Czech army.

2

Podkarpatska Rus in

Columbia Lippincott Gazetteer

.

NL: I see.

YM:

I think we should stop here and now

and we could probably, ya, and we will...

NL:

We'll continue, all right, thank you very much, eh.

NL:

We are continuing the interview with Cantor Mandel, March 3rd, 1982, Nora

Levin interviewing. Cantor Mandel, would you

now tell us the circumstances under which you,

went into the Czech army, and your experiences in the army?

YM:

I see, eh...[tape turns off briefly]

YM:

I'm sorry for this interruption. You as

ked me to tell you how I got into the Czech

army? Of course I was drafted and, like anybody else, at the time [phone rings; pause]

NL: All right.

YM:

Is this O.K.? The draft into the Czech

army went like everywhere else. You had

to register, and, the draft board saw you in March,

for what I had to come home especially from

my

yeshiva

, and I was found, eh, able to, to serve.

NL:

What year was this?

YM:

That was in 1924. 1924. I then, wh

en I was drafted, I went back to

yeshiva

for

my last exams which I had to go through, and with that I started to look, maybe for a position for

the High Holy Days, because draftees had to report October the 1st, and on October the 1st, was

I think

erev

or

Rosh Hashanah

, I tried out in a few places. Fina

lly I, performed the services, I

davened

, and served in Ruzomberok [phonetic], th

at's called Russaveit [phonetic] eh, where,

eh, a high military official who was a physician w

ho had a sanatorium in Detatra [phonetic] told

me I shouldn't be concerned, he will give me pr

oper documentation that I got sick on the way to

Olmütz where I had to, mail some letter that I ha

d to report, and this would be accepted. The

only thing what will happen is that I will have to

serve a few days, and in this case it was ten

days, after I am finished with my year-and-a-half

of service. It happened that way in 1926 I got

out of this early Czech military

service. A very interesting thing and maybe worthwhile to

mention just for one reason, how the Czech, who--

how liberal and wonderful

they were. In the

Czech army, any candidate for the priesthood, the ra

bbinate, or such, had the right to, after basic

training, which everyone had to go through, and that

was ten weeks, he had the right to report or

to request or was even asked if he wants to

go to a school, school for military administration

was one way, the second possibility was a school in

different hospitals to learn and study and

become a male nurse. I chose the hospitals, the military nursing, and went through all kinds of

courses, and finally I was placed in Olmütz

,

which is a town, Olomoudz

3

, spelled

A-L-O-M-O-U-D-Z, where I served in their

basheli

, in, in the hospital there,

Nahradisko

, and

Novy Svet

[all phonetic]. Those were the two places wh

ere I served. The patients, the soldiers,

came in the morning, with this kind, that kind, th

e other kind of illnesses, and we always had

two doctors. It happened that the commandant of

the school, who was a, eh, colonel, a Jew, Dr.

Galner, I will never forget his name, he was the

head of these departments where I served. So,

I served there, and from there I was discharged from the military.

NL:

That would be 1927?

YM: 1926.

NL: 1926.

YM:

'24 I was taken, '26 I got out. The military service at the time was a

year-and-a-half, eighteen months. From there, I

went home and, eh, as every Jewish father, my

father saw my future very well-established and wa

nted me to get married and so on. I, however,

as I have mentioned before, got infected with mu

sic. It happened partially that when I came in,

as a, as a, into the military, one day a lieuten

ant came out to the exercises and asked who could

help him out. He was studying a new operetta for the, to be performed on the celebration of

Masaryk's birthday, and he would like some people

who could sing to help him, and so on. So

my friends, who knew me from

yeshiva

, they heard me

daven

there and all that, said, "He has a

nice voice." So, this man arranged with my co

mmanding officer to see him. I didn't know one

musical note at the time, not at all. And this

wonderful human being was patient with me and

taught me

Prodanánev

?

sta

, the, the, ten, the Bride, whatever...

NL: Bartered Bride?

YM: Ya.

NL: Smetana.

YM:

Smetana. He taught it to me. Of course I didn't know, I was never in a theater.

NL: Uhm hmn.

YM:

So, I didn't know when to go out and when

to come in, but he pushed me in and

pulled me out, just like, but I knew the music very

well, because music, a musical ear I had. I

learned everything by ear.

NL: Interesting.ve

YM:

In Pressburg, you mean?

NL: Yes.

YM:

I was, because I made myself availa

ble to many, of course you know that the

congregations in Europe were orga

nized, there was one community, one

kehillah

, but there

were many small synagogues. And I was always invited to

daven

here, to

daven

there, and I

was paid for it. And this money which I made th

ere, I could continue my musical studies right

in Pressburg proper, and eventually travel to Vi

enna and pay for my lessons, which I got there.

NL:

These were vocal lessons?

YM:

Vocal lessons, musical lessons. I didn't know, I had no musical training.

NL:

Did you go to a conservatory, or...

YM: Later on.

NL: Later on.

YM:

In Vienna. In 1926 I finally...

h

Tape two, side one:

NL:

This is a continuation of our interview with Cantor Mandel, tape two, side one.

Yes, you were saying about your musical education?

YM:

I got my musical education from 1926, '27, '28, when I already used to go to

Vienna and had lessons in Press

burg. In 1928, finally, I went over to Vienna and settled there.

The way to settle there for me was one way. I

became the cantor of a small congregation which

was supposed to have been built later on, a beautif

ul temple and so on, but when I came there,

the name of it was Montef-Temple Montefiore,

Tabelstrasse achtunddreissig

[38]. That's

where I functioned as a cantor and got a salary wh

ich was very small, but I taught a lot. I had

children to prepare for bar mitzvahs and gave

lessons in Talmud and other Hebrew lessons.

And this is the way I maintained myself in Vi

enna while I was studying, was the cantor of this

little congregation, and did other work, and studied. Now there I was already a student in

Neues Wiener Konservatorium. That was the

place where I studied music and voice and piano

and so on and so forth.

NL:

You had the best of both worlds.

YM: Ya, right.

NL:

So, tell me a little about your impressions of the Jewish community as you

experienced it.

YM: In Vienna?

NL:

In Vienna, yes. And whether there

were any ominous signs of antisemitism or

the coming of the Nazi movement.

YM:

If I will tell you that at the time when

I was in Vienna, or a little before that, a

school was organized there for the training of

Bet Sefer L'hazanim Vemorim

[school for cantors

and teachers]. However, in order to understa

nd how it could be organized, you have to know

that at the time I was fortunate to meet and the

school was lucky, I think, to have been organized

at the time when the chief rabbi of Austria in Vienna, of course, was Rav Chajes.

NL:

How is that spelled?

YM: C-H-A-J-E-S.

NL:

Oh, very well-known.

YM: Sure.

NL:

Yes, of course.

YM:

A person who was not only the great

lamdan

[scholar], was not only the, the,

extremely well educated person in every field,

but he loved, he was never married, and he

always told us that we are his family. He used

to come into school. I will never forget it and I

consider it as a great, eh, as an extraordinary

occurrence in my life. Rav Chajes came in to

school and at the time he prepared something, either it was

Yom Kippur katan

service or

something or

minha

for weekdays, and he looked at me

and came over to me and got a hold of

my cheeks and said, "

Solche bokerim darfen mir haben hier

[We need such young men here!]."

NL:

[Chuckles] Oh, how beautiful.

YM:

Eh, he heard about me, about my b

ackground, and so on. But maybe there is

another thing. After I studied for about two years or something like that in Vienna, in the

meantime I went to

Bet Sefer L'hazanim Vemorim

, went, had these teachings, was the cantor of

this small congregation, something happened in Vi

enna. The 20th District

of Vienna looked for

a

hazan

at the time. And this is again interesti

ng maybe for people to know

. It's history. The

Vienna congregation, even for its smallest distri

ct, like Florence, or it was the name of the 20th

District, was looking for a cantor, so they, in

those days there was no Cantor's Assembly and

there was no placement commission, so they put an announcement in the newspapers that

this-and-this age, and this-and-this quality and

so on and so forth is needed, and whoever felt

like applying, applied. One hundred and eighteen people applied in 1928, young people, all

talented, all very fine young upcoming people, and out of this amount of

people, about 12 were

chosen, not for an audition, but

für eine Vorprobe

[pre-audition]. That means before they were

given permission to perform in synagogue, the

board, the rabbis, the music educators, the

conductors in the different temples, the cantors

of the different temples, came together in no

other place but the Seitenstetten Temple. And there they listened to him, and each in his

department posed questions to the candidate.

If the young man passed, then he got permission

to give an audition. I had one of my teachers,

who was the last chief cantor of the Seitenstetten

Temple in Vienna, Heinrich Fischer, was the ch

ief cantor of Vienna because he was Sulzer's

successor. And he arranged for someone from

Nuesatz Ujvidék, Novi Sad, in Yugoslavia,

where the congregation was also seeking a cantor.

He arranged for a man by the name of Mr.

Gross to be able to attend and listen to the people,

to the twelve or whatever who will hear there.

He had to have special permission for it, but

he got it for him. This Mr. Gross came from

Germany, from the Fair, went home, on his way b

ack to Yugoslavia he stayed in Vienna, I don't

know what, and came to this eh...

NL: Examination?

YM:

Examination, yes. He heard me and told my teacher he likes what he heard and

he would like me to come down to Yugoslavia--Novi

Sad--for an audition. At the same time in

my family there was a lot of trouble. One of

my sisters who was the immediate child after me,

had

galoppierende Tuberkulose

[consumption]. And my parents weren't in good financial

standings, and I was just sick all the time to he

lp her, to try to get her to the doctor or

somewhere, where we thought at l

east she would get some help. So I knew I had to get a bigger

position, more money, and to help. My sister, unf

ortunately, died. All my efforts didn't help

her. And, eh...

NL:

What was her name?

YM: Rivka.

NL:

That was Rivka.

YM: Rivka.

NL: Yes.

YM: Eh...

NL:

Were you able to go to Yugoslavia?

YM:

Yes. I spoke to my teacher, Chais Fischer,

Hazan

Fischer, and he arranged for

me at a certain date to go to Yugoslavia. At th

e meantime, one of the rabbis, Dr. Bach in Vienna

who heard me there, said his son-in-law is th

e rabbi in Groningen, Holla

nd, and he thinks I am

the ideal candidate for his congregation.

NL: Well well.

YM:

So, I went to Yugoslavia. I will never fo

rget it. I think it was the 19th of April,

1928. And I gave an audition.

NL:

It was in Novi Sad?

YM:

In Novi Sad. N-O-V-I, next word is

capital S-A-D, Yugoslavia. I say this

because I will come back to another point in th

e same place later. So I went down there and I

davened

...

NL:

Excuse me, before we go there, eh, Ca

ntor, did you detect a

ny signs of growing

Nazi activity in Vienna?

YM:

In Vienna? Yes, a lot.

NL:

Can you talk about that a bit?

YM:

Yes. I used to spend a lot of time in the house of

Oberkantor

Fischer. And he

had a son, Alex, who at the time wa

s a student at the university. And one day I--it's very clear in

my mind--he came home and told his parents in Hungarian, because they came from Hungary

and they still spoke it, "Please, please, whatever

the great position of the- eh, to be Sulzer's

successor, whatever money you make here, Fath

er, whatever comfort you have here, please

don't remain here, because this thing will just fa

ll apart. It is impossible. Today in this

department of the university there were fights,

and Jewish people were beaten up and weren't let

go to listen to the lectures, and so on." But you

could see it even sometimes in the streets and,

eh...

NL: For example?

YM:

For example, eh, men fighting outsi

de and a hundred people around. No one

knew what it's all about, so someone said, "Yes,

this man called the other man, 'You dirty Jew.'

And this one couldn't take it and started a fight."

Another thing, people used to sit in the coffee

houses when people used to walk by--and I e

xperienced this myself--and they made just

remarks, "This is stable, the Jewish stable, where they sit around and they do nothing, they just

live on our money and our land, and

so on and so forth." It was not as organized as it became

later, but it was...

NL: It was...

YM: Brewing.

NL: And discernible.

YM:

Yes. Yes. Definitely yes.

NL:

Was there a Nazi movement yet that you recall? An Austrian Nazi movement?

YM:

I was told that in Oberstreig at

the time, around Graz and Linz, there were

already people communicating with German N

azis and, you have to know, and you know it just

as well as I do, that in the middle 20's, already '23, '24, Hitler was already arrested, was already

in jail, and was already writing his eh...

NL:

Mein Kampf

.

YM:

Mein Kampf

and so on and so forth. And that

influenced many people. When I

see for instance that with, The S

ound of Music, I see the same thing what I really experienced.

How many times did it happen that we wanted to go in Austria especially is eh famous that

people bought for

Ausflüge

, eh... [excursions]

NL: Outings?

YM:

Outings. And how many times were we told, "Don't go there." I don't know

where, this place, that place, "'Cause there there is something preparing for this and this day,

and if a group of young Jews will be seen some

where," though we didn't look like Jews but, "eh,

there will be some trouble. So you better don't make

that trip." You could see it officially. I know that I, for instance, needed working papers, and this small congregation didn't have too

much influence, but they tried very hard to ge

t it for me. They couldn't, and I could stay in

Vienna only illegally as a cantor, and legally as a

student. Because as a student I was allowed to

stay there.

NL:

So Austrian citizenship was out of the question.

YM:

Oh, it was out of the question, sure. It was out of the question.

NL:

Did you have any knowledge of Mayor Luger, was he in office at the time?

YM:

He was before my time.

NL:

He was before your time.

YM:

He was before my time. I know that he was a strong antisemite, but I never

knew him. He was before my time.

NL:

Now was the milieu different in Yugosla

via at Novi Sad? Was it more benign

with respect to Jews?

YM:

Maybe it's worth it--yes, it definitely was, because the Serb people who took

over really this part of former Hungary were

depressed themselves for many many hundreds of

years, and they knew what it is to live under an oppressive government, and they were very nice

and pleasant, and the Slav people as a rule,

I mean if you are talking about Serbs, about

Ruthenians, until they are poisoned...

NL: Instigated...

YM:

Instigated, there's no trouble with them

. I mean you can live with them. I don't

say they loved Jews. But when you have for in

stance a priest who will tell them nothing else

but that the Jews killed Christ and this and th

at and the Jews, be careful before Passover,

because they need your children's blood for the Passover

matzah

, then of course, a fire starts.

It's terrible.

NL:

How large a Jewish community was in Novi Sad?

YM:

In Novi Sad there were 1,000 Jews, a

bout 500 families, one temple--beautiful,

with an organ, with a choir of

40, with, eh, it was a beautiful

community. And I was there for

six years.

NL:

And you were quite happy?

YM:

I was very happy there. As a matter of

fact, I married there my wife, may she

rest in peace, Zahava.

NL:

Zahava. What year was that?

YM:

We got married in 1930. June the 30th.

And so you were there until '34.

YM: Yes.

NL:

I see. And it was a very contented time for you?

YM:

A beautiful time in my life.

NL:

What was happening to your parents in the meantime? Were they...

YM:

My father died in 1930, formal death

that he had heart trouble and lung trouble

and all kinds of things, he died in 1930. At th

e same time in 1930 while being the cantor of, eh,

Oberkantor

of Novi Sad, I was elected now without a

ny audition, in Vienna again. This time it

was

der fünfzehnte Bezirk

. It was a very elegant, beautiful, section.

NL:

That's the fifth...

YM: The fifteenth.

NL: The fifteenth.

YM:

The Temple of the Fifteenth District. And eh...

NL:

Did you accept?

YM:

I went to Vienna with my wife in 1930.

She didn't want to leave before--she was

a teacher by profession--and she didn't want to leave before the exams are over, so we left in

June. By the time--the end of June. By the

time we got to Budapest where she had an uncle,

this uncle was already at the station, and we want

ed to go to Vienna, giving us a telegram from

my uncle who, I told you before, who went to talk, speak up for me, to intercede.

NL:

Who tried to intercede?

YM:

"Don't ask questions. Come straight

over." And the reason for it was that my

father died. We were in Budapest on a certain

Sunday, and it was the thirtieth or whatever it

was, the first of July, and my father died Frid

ay before, was buried on the same day, because, of

course, my uncle wouldn't have done anything else. So I was never at my father's funeral. So

when I went home, I sat

shiva

and [unclear]. So, eh...

NL:

Did you return to Novi Sad?

YM:

No, I went to Vienna and [unclear].

However, my appointment in, with

Obergeneralstabsrat

Bieck, who was the president of th

e congregation, was for the first or

second of July. And after the

shiva

it was already the 10th or 8th of

July. By the time I got to

Vienna it was the 12th of July. And the secret

ary, Dr. Löwenherz of the main congregation in

Vienna, my--you asked me before about the citizensh

ip in Austria--told me when I told him that

one of my conditions to come to Vienna is if the congregation, the community, guarantees me

to become a citizen. So he said--I was very young, and he was a middle-aged person, very well-educated--so he told me, "

Mein liebes Kind, die Staatsbürgerschaft können wir nicht

garantieren. Das ist die Sache der Regier

ung. Wir können Ihren alles Andere geben.

"

So I--my wife was a teacher in Yugoslavia at this date, and I had this beautiful position, and we

went back. However, we stayed in the Marienbad Hotel, I will never forget it. And I looked out

at the quay and tears were dripping out of my ey

es. I was so sad that I can't come back to

Vienna. I loved Vienna. I loved Vienna.

NL:

It's an enchanting city, especially in

this pre-war period, the inter-war period.

So...

YM:

So after this...

NL:

Your life flowed on then, in Novi Sad?

YM:

Yes, after this it's a very interesti

ng period. As I say, up until '34, February, I

was in Novi Sad. I sang concerts in the Academ

y of Music in Budapest, here, there, I sang on

the radio. I started in 1930 the cantorial music programs on the Yugoslav radio. You may even

have found something in those notes which I le

ft with you, where there are letters and notes

from the radio station in Budapest.

NL:

Yes, I want you to identify those if we have time.

YM:

Yes, I will, I will.

NL:

Because we made copies and I think I have your original.

YM:

I will. I will. So...

NL:

It was a rich life.

YM:

It was a very rich life. Here, the following happened, probably in 1933, fall,

after the holiday, in the fall, the

Chevrah Kadisha

[burial society] in Novi Sad which was at the

time 200 years old, because they started with Je

ws who came from Phoenicia and all the Middle

Eastern countries...

NL: Turkey...

YM:

Traveled through Turkey and all the other countries, and settled in Yugoslavia,

and among other places, Novi Sad, so that

Chevrah Kaddisha

started to be active in that part of

the world, 200 years ago at the time. So, they,

eh, this was a very big celebration, where the

king, King Alexander, was represented by one of

his generals, and the chief rabbi, Alkali, Dr.

Alkali from Belgrade, came down and there was

a tremendous banquet in the evening, but in

4

My dear child, we cannot guarantee your citi

zenship. Only the government can give you

that. We can give you everything else.

the morning it started, the whole thing started with

a celebration in the temple to have a service.

The details are not important, but...

NL:

But it was a momentous time.

YM:

Yes. But what is important is that

a man by the name of Dr. Braun, who was at

the time--a German fellow--who was at the time the director of the radio station, the national

radio station, that is, the radio station was run by the government there, you know, so, he was

the director of that, and when he heard us with

the choir and how beautiful it was, and all that,

he came over to me after the service and said, "Could we come over once to pick up your

service on Friday evening, or

Shabbes

Saturday morning, and broadcast it?" I said, "I couldn't

tell you that. You would have to

talk to the rabbi, and the religious committee, and so on." I

spoke to the rabbi and saw right away that he

will not agree. He was an extremely jealous

person, and didn't want to give

koved

[show respect] to...

NL:

Be showered on like that.

YM:

Yes. So anyway, eh, finally this got

back and forth. Finally we decided with

this Dr. Braun that if he can't take the whole

service from the temple, I should come and give

concerts in Belgrade, and so I went every three,

four, five weeks [unclear] Belgrade and gave

concerts and so on. One day I get a letter from

a man in Kovno, of all places. He writes to me

in Yiddish, "My dear friend,

Hazan

Mandel, I heard you on the radio on this and this date, and

I liked what I heard, and I w

ould like you to come down to Kovno to give a few concerts.

Concerning this, don't worry about money," he sa

id, "it's my responsibility. But in order to

make it legal, in a few days you will receive suggestions, a plan, plus an agreement from a

concert bureau, Klavahoff [phonetic]."

NL: [chuckles]

YM:

Klavahoff [phonetic], was the name of the concert bureau. I remember! In a

few days I really received, I think it was around

January or something, now, of 1934. This went

on for three months in 1933 and so on. But it took

us a long time. I get this, and I thought, one

more thing is important, that my family, the fam

ily of my wife, was, all lived in Novi Sad, and

my father-in-law, who was the rabbi of this congregation once upon a time, because he never

learned the Serb language which became the offici

al language of the community, he wasn't the

rabbi or the associate rabbi but became the secret

ary general of the congregation. So I spoke to

him, I spoke to the family and so on, and they,

my mother-in-law, may she rest in peace, she

said, "My dear child, you live in the same house where we are. What are you missing? Why do

you want to go away? What is it, what are you really looking for?"

NL: Searching...

YM:

Searching for. And I didn't know what

to answer. But

I answered, "I will

come." And we corresponded back and forth, a

nd in February of 1934 I

went down to Kovno to

the house of this wonderful person who arranged for

me in his--he lived in a mansion--a wing of

his house, with a car, with everything, whatever I

wanted to go, at my disposal and so on, and I

sang, I

davened

in Kovno, in the

Dobi Shakorshul

[phonetic] first

Shabbes

, then I sang a benefit

concert for the, for a

yeshiva

, and then the next week we had a concert with the Lithuanian

National Orchestra, rather in the Academy of Music there, and it was very nice.

NL:

A concert of Jewish...?

YM:

A concert, no, no,

NL: Secular.

YM: A mixture.

NL:

But some liturgical music?

YM:

Ya. Yes. Definitely yes.

NL:

In the Lithuanian...

YM:

In the Lithuanian...

NL: Musical Hall...

YM:

In the Academy of Music. Ye

s. And accompanying was the symphony

orchestra of the Lithuanian govern...

NL:

What an experience for a young man.

YM:

It was just overwhelming. And I was

there for two or three weeks. I sent

telegrams to extend my vacation, because I ha

d vacation for two weeks, and suddenly one

weekend, one

Shabbes

, I think the third

Shabbes

or something, a gentleman is at the table with

us, and this man, I think his name was Mr. Bark

in, in whose house I stayed, introduces a man by

the name Mr., eh, I can't remember his name

now. Anyway, introduces him, "This is the

president of the

Grosse Chor Synagoge

in Riga. It's my brother-in-law, Mr. Becker."

NL: Your brother-in-law?

YM:

His

brother-in-law, Mr. Becker.

NL: Barkin's brother-in-law.

YM:

Ya. This man was the brother-in-law of

this Mr. Becker. And Mr. Becker came

to

shul

, heard me

daven

, and Sunday he tells me, "You know, we are seeking a

hazan

for

eighteen or nineteen months already,

Hazan

Rabitz

davened Rosh Hashonah and Yom Kippur

.

Our

hazan

until now was Herman Yadlovger [phonetic], who was

Rigenzer

himself, but he isn't there any more. And we had many, many candidate

s, this one, that one. I think you should try

out for this position." So I didn't dare to stay

any longer. I went home, and about two, three,

maybe four weeks later I went back to Riga, and

then my family was all in tears, why do I go?

And I

davened

in Riga, and among three, we were down, they were down, the congregation was

down to three people. That

was Herman Yadlovger [phonetic],

Hazan

Alter, Yisruel Alter, and

myself. And I will, consider this again it was a

great and beautiful shining point in my career.

Rogachover

Gaon

at the time, who lived in Dvinsk, but

came for treatment to Riga, and I had a

chance to speak with him, and before the...

NL:

What was his name again?

YM: The

Rogachover Gaon

, Rozin.

5

NL: Rozin.

YM:

But he goes under the name, the

Rogachover

Gaon

,

Rogachover

. How you spell

it,

Rogachover

, the best way I can say it, Gaon [Brillia

nt Rabbi-teacher]. And he told the

people, the board, when they came to him "Re

bbe, we are in such-and-such a quandary, we

don't have a

hazan

," an so on, he said, "

Yidden, oib yir vilt haben a

Yid, a hazan, a Yid, nemt

Hazan Mandel

."

6

NL:

Ah, you had

so

many offers!

YM:

Yes. Yes.

NL: Incredible.

YM: So...

NL:

Did you pick up any impressions of Jewish life...

5

Joseph Rozin (1858-1936), Polish Talmudic genius, called "the

Rogachover

" after his

birthplace (Rogachov).

6

Jews, if you want to have a Jew, a cantor, a Jew, take Cantor Mandel.