Feature Film

Directed by Marlin Darrah

A rejected husband. A beautiful stranger. A dangerous liaison.

For two couples enjoying a spectacular Egyptian adventure,

treachery and deception cruise the Nile along with them.

This 83-minute adventure-thriller involving love, deception, betrayal and redemption was recently filmed on-location and features breathtaking panoramic views of desert Egypt and the Egypt of the pharaohs. AN EGYPT AFFAIR unfolds on an exotic riverboat cruising up the great Nile River between Luxor and Aswan. Shot in 2022, Marlin Darrah assembled for his movie a cast of accomplished veteran actors including Yolanthe Cabau ("Pain and Gain"), Massi Furlan ("Jumanji, the Next Level") and Alfonso DiLuca (CW-"Jane the Virgin") and features three talented and emerging younger actors, Jarred Harper ("American Housewife"), Nick Dreselly Thomas ("Amazon Queen"), Lesley Grant ("Paradise Hills") and Stacey Marie Williams ("The Cake").

Animation/Music Video/Short

Directed by Mythravarun Vepakomma

"Dance You Are Alive" represents a unique fusion of my passions — Dance, Music, Animation, and Lego — into a single, transformative Music Video. Thanks to my late uncle, who used to get me valuable cartoon cassettes at a time when we couldn't access or afford them. Drawing inspiration from these childhood cartoons and their imparted life wisdom, this project signifies a personal dream realised.

Despite moments of disillusionment in my career upon recognizing commercial animation's toy-centric focus, childhood memories of impactful cartoons propelled me forward. They showcased the potential to sow seeds of positive change in young minds and motivate a brighter future.

In 'Dance You Are Alive,' I aspire to ignite inspiration for the freedom of choice we all have to empower innate peace within us. Harnessing the influence of uplifting messages, this video aims to leave a lasting imprint, fostering hope for a better tomorrow.

Documentary/Feature

Directed by Keyonda Smith

In northeastern North Carolina, Bertie County is one of the largest counties in the state and is classified as a "rural" food desert resulting from "Food Apartheid." As a predominately African American population, there is only ONE grocery store to cover the county's entire 741 square miles.

Shopping for junk food is more convenient and economically feasible due to mere accessibility and affordability. Bertie County's economic deprivation has resulted in 100% of all children receiving free school lunches. The area is economically deprived, with few employment opportunities. In 2020, the U.S. Census Bureau reported the unemployment rate in Bertie County was 10 to 12%.

Deserted in Bertie examines the County's residents' personal experiences and recommends potential solutions to reduce and alleviate food insecurity.

Short Film

Directed by Lara Britton

Trapped in the trauma of her past and haunted by the voice of her abusive partner, a woman sorts through a wall of boxes in an old, rusty shipping container. With each box she discards, the voice gets louder, the effect of chronic abuse, until she uncovers a long-hidden artifact that sparks long-suppressed memories of who she once was, forcing her to confront her past in order to move on to the future.

Feature Film

Directed by Ryan Smith

ELDRITCH, USA features sibling rivals Geoff and Rich Brewer, who have competed all their lives over family, career, and love with Rich coming out on top and Geoff trailing in his shadow. Tragedy strikes and a backwoods cult rumored to have supernatural powers is enlisted to set things right. The cult's bumbling ritual unleashes forces beyond their control and creates mayhem for the quiet, Midwestern town.

Featuring 13 original songs cowritten by members from the band “Fox Royale”, ELDRITCH, USA’s pop/rock centric melodies carry the audience along the path of this darkly comedic adventure.

Feature Film

Directed by Phil Peel

When an old ex RAF wartime pilot rescues an injured woman from a car accident. She says she's a sex worker and their cultures clash as he’s shocked by her feral in-your-face sexuality and she’s exasperated by his mannered irritating routines, but as she slowly recovers they learn to accept each other ..until her violent past returns to threaten both their lives.

Documentary/Feature

Directed by Guldana Talgat

This film began as my thesis several years ago. It is a personal look at the local history in my father's hometown as well as an environmental catastrophe that took place there and the natives who struggled to end it. It was a pleasure reconnecting with my father's hometown and the people living there and giving them a forum to share their memories and testimonies.

Short Film

Directed by Iraj Habashi

“Azar “is a taxi driver in Tehran. She has a friend (Mahtab) who is blind. She unwillingly has to start a journey through the city together with “Mahtab”, helping her to find the truth about something very important. While “Azar” is supposed to see on her behalf, she has to make a very hard decision.

Experimental/Short

Directed by Elisabetta Cancelli

Through the nostalgic gaze of the 80s and 90s nostalgia, the story tells of Damjan, a young romantic who becomes attached to a girl he meets on a dating site. However, when she ghosts him apparently for no reason, the boy will try to contact her and understand why she disappeared so suddenly.

Feature Film

Directed by Andrés Ricaurte, Martín Agudelo Ramírez

Sara is a judge very committed to the cases she hears in her office. After meeting David, a young artist, on the beach, she must make decisions about her work and her relationship with Lucas, her husband. Sara, through the force of the sea, wants to achieve spaces of freedom. The encounters with a Caribbean woman, Rosa, and an enigmatic man from the city, Virgilio, will be decisive in resolving her personal dilemmas and better understanding the meaning of justice in a society indifferent to the most marginalized people and with enormous inequality.

Short Film

Directed by André Rodrigues

Logline:

A breathtaking thriller about betrayal and revenge that plays with the minds and memories of its characters and the viewer. A delight for fans of films like Inception, Memento and Mr. Nobody.

Synopsis:

Daniel is a bored guy. He decides to try to find someone on a dating app.

Anne is a woman looking for some "adventure".

Dr. Anthony is a scientist who only cares about his work.

Soon they will meet and make some decisions that they may want to forget.

Documentary

Driected by Hanspeter Aliesch, Zürich

For many villagers of Stromboli, the volcano is both its Soul, and at the same time, a monster. And for some of them, the view of the volcano, was the last of their lives.

During the great eruptions of 1930… Maria lost her grandfather. For many years, Maria has hoped that Grandpa is still alive.

The fisherman, the philosopher, the cook… they're all dependent, bound to the mountain – a life in the unknown.

This is Maria’s story… and a little bit of Stromboli's too.

The Documentary was shot in nativ 3D from 2013 to 2019.

Italian, English, German Versions (Storyteller) - with Subtitles original or as Dubbing versions.

Feature

Directed by Sam McCoy

Millie Blake has always been a perfectionist. A soccer star and straight A student, her main focus is on her future. So receiving a month of community service at a local nursing home, after trying to break up a fight at school - not how she pictured the start of her senior year of high school.

To make matters worse, Millie is stuck at the nursing home with the instigator of the fight: Andy Wellick. She is another senior student, who is outspoken about her identity as a lesbian on the asexual spectrum. Initially, the two girls butt heads, but the tension quickly blossoms into friendship as they learn more about each other.

As time goes on and Millie’s friendship with Andy grows into something more, she finds herself trying to find the courage to finally show her true self to her friends and family. This coming of age, all-inclusive LGBTQ+ film focuses on the self, sexuality, and how that plays out in one's community

Feature Film

Directed by Elliott Hasler

The inspirational true story of Mercedes Gleitze, who in 1927 became the first British woman to swim the English Channel. 'Vindication Swim' depicts Mercedes’ upstream struggle in overcoming both the cold waters of the English Channel and the oppressive society of 1920s England. However, after a rival comes forward claiming to have accomplished the same feat, Mercedes is forced into battle to retain her record and her legacy.