Tuvan Autonomous Oblast — The Tuvan Autonomous Oblast ( ru. Тувинская автономная область, Tuvinskaya avtonomnaya oblast ) was an autonomous oblast of the Soviet Union created on 11 October 1944 following the annexation of the Tuvan People s Republic by the Soviet Union.… … Wikipedia

Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic — (RSFSR) As part of the reorganization of Soviet Russia following the October Revolution of 1917, the Bolsheviks created the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, colloquially known abroad as Soviet Russia. With the creation of the… … Historical Dictionary of the Russian Federation

Soviet Union — USSR and CCCP redirect here. For other uses, see USSR (disambiguation) and CCCP (disambiguation). Soviet redirects here. For the term itself, see Soviet (council). For other uses, see Soviet (disambiguation). Union of Soviet Socialist Republics … Wikipedia

Orders and Medals of Soviet Republics — The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic which was founded after the October Revolution in the Russian Empire and very soon had to create an award system. The award systems of parallel Soviet states soon followed and they also created and … Wikipedia

Gorno-Altai Autonomous Oblast — Not to be confused with Gorno Altai Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. The Gorno Altai Autonomous Oblast (Russian: Горно Алтайская автономная область was formed as the Oyrot Autonomous Oblast (Russian: Ойротская Автономная область) in 1922 and … Wikipedia

Moldavian Autonomous Oblast — was created on March 7, 1924 within the Ukrainian SSR. The new oblast had four districts, all of them having a Moldovan majority:[1] Rîbniţa with 48,748 inhabitants, of which 25,387 Moldovans (52%) Dubăsari with 57,371 inhabitants, of which… … Wikipedia

Chechen Autonomous Oblast — (Russian: Чеченская автономная область), or Autonomous Oblast of Chechnya (Russian: автономная область Чечни), was an autonomous oblast of the Russian SFSR, created on November 30, 1922 when it was separated from the Mountain Autonomous Soviet… … Wikipedia

Chechen–Ingush Autonomous Oblast — Chechen Ingush Autonomous Oblast (Russian: Чечено Ингушская автономная область) was an autonomous oblast of the Russian SFSR, Soviet Union, created on January 15, 1934 by merging Chechen and Ingush Autonomous Oblasts. It was elevated in… … Wikipedia

Tuvan People's Republic — Infobox Former Country native name = ty. Tьвa Arat Respuвlik conventional long name = Tuvan People s Republic common name = Tannu Tuva continent=Asia region = Outer Mongolia status = Satellite state empire = Soviet Union country = Russia… … Wikipedia