Concentrating on a personal story of Nikolai N. Bolkhovitinov (1930-2008), one of the pioneers in Soviet studies in US history, this paper will examine how the purely academic research in the early beginning of the “people’s diplomacy” of the late eighteenth century between the Russian Empire and the United States contributed to the relaxation of political tensions in the Soviet-American relations under Khrushchev and Brezhnev. Paradoxically, the support of the Soviet politicians, such as Aleksei Adzhubei, who were interested in using Bolkhovitinov’s historical expertise for the Soviet-American diplomacy, not only protected Bolkhovitinov from the KGB persecutions, but also stimulated his academic career during the 1970s.

Using various case studies – from Oleg Kalugin to Grigorii Sevostianov and Nikolai Sivachev in Russia, and Askold Shlepakov in Ukraine, this article examines different instrumental functions of the KGB people among Soviet Americanists, specialists in the US history, politics, literature and films. It focuses on the KGB influences in the field of American studies in the Soviet Union since the beginning of Soviet-us academic exchanges programs in 1958 till the beginning of perestroika. This article is a part of the larger project about cultural and social history of Soviet Americanists during the Cold War.

Using various case studies – from Oleg Kalugin to Grigorii Sevostianov and Nikolai Sivachev in Russia, and Askold Shlepakov in Ukraine, this article examines different instrumental functions of the KGB people among Soviet Americanists, specialists in the US history, politics, literature and films. It focuses on the KGB influences in the field of American studies in the Soviet Union since the beginning of Soviet-us academic exchanges programs in 1958 till the beginning of perestroika. This article is a part of the larger project about cultural and social history of Soviet Americanists during the Cold War.

Using various archival documents, memoirs, diaries, periodicals and more than 70 personal interviews with contemporaries of the events, this essay is an attempt to show the paradoxes of the cultural Cold War in Soviet consumption of the American visual media – films and television from the United States.

This essay is based on my recent research about a history of American studies in the Soviet Union during the Cold War. Using various archival documents, personal papers, diaries, memoirs, contemporary periodicals and more than seventy interviews, this essay explores how one year, 1968, changed the entire life of Nikolai N. Bolkhovitinov (1930-2008), a Soviet historian, an author of pioneering studies in the beginning of Russian-American relations. During this year Bolkhovitinov used the American Council of Learned Societies (ACLS) funding for his first research trip to the USA, not only to discover “the real America” through various forms of cultural consumption, but also to build his international reputation as a historian of early America and an expert in early American-Russian relations. Данный очерк основан на материале моего нового исследования по истории советской американистики времен холодной войны. Используя различные архивные документы, личную переписку, дневники, мемуары, современные периодические издания и более семидесяти интервью, данный очерк исследует как один, 1968-й, год изменил все течение жизни Николая Н. Болховитинова (1930-2008), советского историка, автора оригинальных исследований начала истории российско-американских отношений. В течение этого года Болховитинов использовал финансирование Американским Советом Ученых Обществ для своей научной поездки в США, за время которой он не только «открыл» для себя «реальную Америку» через различные формы культурного потребления, но и начал создавать себе международную репутацию историка ранней Америки и эксперта из истории российско-американских отношений.

Using various case studies – from Oleg Kalugin to Grigorii Sevostianov and Nikolai Sivachev in Russia, and Askold Shlepakov in Ukraine, this paper examines various instrumental functions of the KGB people among Soviet Americanists, specialists in the US history, politics, literature and films. It will focus on the KGB influences in the field of American studies in the Soviet Union since the beginning of Soviet-US academic exchanges programs in 1958. This paper is based on the material from my book manuscript about cultural and social history of Soviet Americanists during the Cold War. The main sources of my research are archival documents, personal correspondence, memoirs, periodicals and more than one hundred interviews, which I conducted during 1990 - 2014.

Using personal histories of Arnold Shlepakov and Leonid Leshchenko, the founding fathers of Canadian/U.S. studies in Soviet Ukraine, this paper explores how “the global conversations” between Ukrainian historians and their Canadian and American colleagues of the Ukrainian origin not only influenced the research interests of Soviet Ukrainian Americanists, but also contributed to formation of their Ukrainian identity. Since the 1970s, the intensive contacts with Ukrainian diaspora pushed the Soviet Ukrainian intellectual elite into the direction of the building the separate (from Russia) Ukrainian national modernity in Ukraine, using the intellectual, economic and cultural experience of those American Ukrainians, who had already contributed to creation of the modern North American civilization.

This is a second part of my essay which was published last summer. This first Bolkhovitinov’s trip to the United States in 1968 changed completely not only his skeptical perception of the “country which killed its best politicians like Kennedy,” but also his understanding of the nature of the “historian’s craft” and “methodology of collecting and analyzing the historical sources.”