NOTE: All women are beautiful in their own right. There is no accurate measure of beauty. This list is based on Internet polls and searches.

Here are some countries with the most beautiful women.

#17 Sweden

They usually have eyes you’d want to drown in and are sporty and elegant. This one’s a no-brainer. Recognize this stunner below? She was in Troy, and she played Helen, the most beautiful woman in the world.

#16 Philippines

They’re fun, cute and also ranked second with the most wins in the “The Big Four International Beauty Pageants”.

Check Out – Countries without income tax

#15 UK

They’re charismatic, eloquent and also have some lovely cheekbones. They’re also super confident.

#14 India

India is home to some of the most unpredictable, earthy and charming women in the world. We all know just how amazing Indian women can be.

Check Out – Countries that pay you to move there

#13 USA

Sporty and fun-loving, American women have their own kind of offhand attractiveness.

Check Out – Talented People Who Only Became Famous After Their Deaths

#12 Argentina

Argentinian women have their own kind of beauty, which is instantly recognisable but hard to pin down. They’re unique.

#11 Australia

Living by the beach has it’s perks, as stunners like Margot Robbie will surely testify to. I think it’s all in the right kind of tan.

#10 Canada

They’re some of the nicest people around, which is it’s own kind of beauty. They’re also super chill and easy to hang with.

#9 Netherland

They’re open minded, tall and pretty accepting about different world views, which is hard to find and pretty attractive.

Check Out – Women Share Shocking Incidents of Sexism

#8 Italy

A penchant for fashion and that distinct accent makes most Italian women quite an exotic catch.

#7 Venezuela

They hold the title for the most number of beauty pageants won. Don’t need any more info than that!

#6 Russia

Their accents mixed with their national love for vodka is a match that very few people can truly resist, right up until your liver gives up.

Check Out – Famous People Whose Talents Were Only Recognized After Their Deaths

#5 Colombia

They have the perfect tan, as Sofia Vergara so aptly shows. Again, beautiful and exotic.

#4 Denmark

Danish women are straight up gorgeous. They look like the wives of vikings, which is cool enough for me.

#3 South Korea

They’re cute, bubbly and have the best poses for pictures. Plus, they’re boatloads of fun!

Check Out – Women Entrepreneurs Changing The Narrative

#2 Ukraine

Ukraine was actually voted as having some of the most beautiful women in the world. They’re unexplainably pretty, and the fact that Mila Kunis is from here is also a plus!

#1 Brazil

They’re sporty, tanned and give off a natural beach vibe. What else does one want?