Another streaming site officially joins the feeding frenzy. NBCUniversal unveiled the name of its streaming service on Tuesday — Peacock — and said it is scheduled to launch in April 2020. The company did not announce pricing or distribution details, saying it will provide details closer to release. NBCUniversal previously said the service would offer ad-supported and subscription options.

Along with the name, NBCUniversal revealed the content lineup that will be on Peacock. New television shows include a reboot of Battlestar Galactica from Mr. Robot creator Sam Esmail; Dr. Death, starring Alec Baldwin, Jamie Dornan and Christian Slater; an adaptation of Aldous Huxley’s novel Brave New World featuring Demi Moore; and a Telemundo show called Armas de Mujer. Peacock will also feature reboots of Saved by the Bell and Punky Brewster.

Of course, Peacock will pull from NBC’s back catalog — it will serve as the exclusive home of popular sitcoms Parks and Recreation and The Office. Episodes of 30 Rock, Brooklyn Nine-Nine, Cheers, Everybody Loves Raymond, Frasier, Saturday Night Live, Will & Grace, King Of Queens, and Married With…Children will also be available to stream, though NBCUniversal did not specify whether those shows will be exclusive to the service. In addition to these classics, there will be new scripted and unscripted comedy programing from Jimmy Fallon, Seth Meyers, Lorne Michaels, Mike Schur, Ed Helms, Jada Pinkett Smith, Rashida Jones, and Tracey Wigfield.

Peacock will also host movies from Universal Pictures, Focus Features, DreamWorks Animation, and Illumination like Brokeback Mountain, Jaws, Mamma Mia!, The Breakfast Club, and Shrek, along with entries from the Bourne, Fast & Furious, and Despicable Me franchises. The studios in question also plan to make Peacock-exclusive original films.

When Peacock launches in April, it will join Apple TV Plus and Disney Plus, both of which are debuting in November. Also scheduled to arrive next spring is WarnerMedia’s streaming service, HBO Max.