A close adviser to Bashar al-Assad, his brother Maher, and their father President Hafez al-Assad before them, Mohammed Nasif Kheirbek was a name connected to many of the darkest works of the Syrian regime.

He was said to have had a role in the occupation of Lebanon, helping jihadist groups, and the crackdown on protesters at the start of the Syrian uprising.

Syrian state television declared that he was struck down at the age of 78 after a long battle with cancer.

He is the second of the inner five of the Assad regime’s circle of trust to have died since the start of the uprising.

Though officially deputy vice-president for security affairs, his real value to the regime was as a relative by marriage and close colleague of Hafez al-Assad whose trustworthiness in the inner-regime battles the father fought made him a pillar of continuity for the rule of the sons.

General Assef Shawkat (AFP/Getty)

Assef Shawkat, brother-in-law of the president, died in an as yet unexplained explosion in Damascus in July 2012 which killed a number of senior officials.President Assad’s brother, Maher, was reportedly also seriously wounded in the attack, with some suggesting that he had lost a leg.

L-R General Assef Shawkat, Maher al-Assad and Bashar al-Assad in Damascus in 2000 (AP)

In addition, Ali Mamlouk, the intelligence chief, has recently been disgraced and is said to be under effective house arrest.

Kheirbek had been targeted with sanctions by both the United States and the European Union, but continued to play a central role up to his death, reportedly acting as a regime “point-man” to its most critical ally Iran.

There have been serious rifts in the regime’s response to the uprising from the start, with the vice-president, Farouk Shara’a, opposing the crackdown and being sidelined. He is also said to be under house arrest, and is rarely seen in public.

• Islamic State executes over 3,000 in Syria in year-long 'caliphate', says monitor

More recently, the regime has split at the highest levels over the leading role now played by Iran in taking on the insurgents.

Ali Mamlouk

Mr Mamlouk was said to have opposed the Iranian ascendancy. A well-informed Syrian government source, who asked not to be named, confirmed that Mr Mamlouk’s role had been curtailed.

“Publicly he holds the same title, but the power is not the same,” the source said. “Bashar used to boost Mamlouk’s position by making him the key person to receive visitors, or by ensuring that the ultimate power to release prisoners lay with him. Today that isn’t happening.”

Another source, close to the intelligence chief, expressed frustration that Mr Mamlouk was “not allowed to move as he wants” and that “no one is listening to his decisions”.

• Turkey 'planning to invade Syria'

Rustum Ghazaleh in Damascus in 2005 (AFP/Getty)

Another casualty of the row apparently was Rustum Ghazaleh, the head of the Political Security Directorate and a man just outside the inner circle, who died in hospital after he was attacked by men loyal to General Rafiq Shehadeh, his opposite number in military intelligence, who was in turn sacked.

The events of the past four years have left in place only Abdel-Fatah Qudsiyeh, deputy director of national security, and Rami Makhlouf, Syria’s media mogul and maternal cousin to Bashar.