Home/Press Translator/Morocco

Le Matin · The Morning

Information about «Le Matin» media

Newspaper Name: Le Matin Newspaper name in English: The Morning Alternative Names: Le Matin du Sahara et du Maghreb, Le Petit Marocain Owner: Groupe Le Matin Publisher: Othman Al Omeir Country / Region: Morocco (Casablanca) Language: French Format type: Newspaper Category: General Political alignment: None Frequency: Daily Publication Years (print version): 1971 — now (52 years) Circulation: 60,000 (2015) Official Pages: Official Apps: Website: lematin.ma [read with translation]

«Le Matin» (Le Matin du Sahara et du Maghreb) is a popular French-language daily newspaper in Morocco with a national distribution. The newspaper was formed on November 1, 1971 on the basis of «Le Petit Marocain», which was published in Morocco since colonial times (1925). After the change of ownership, it was decided to create a new publication with a new name, although its content and editorial staff remained. So it can be called the very first Francophone newspaper in Morocco. Le Matin is now one of the most prominent representatives of the Francophone press in Morocco, published in French. The newspaper has an Arabic version that differs slightly from the original content.

«Le Matin» newspaper content: Activités Royales (news of the royal family), Nation (national news of Morocco), Économie (economy, business), Monde (review of international events), Société (society), Culture (cultural events, billboard), Régions (regions of Morocco), Employi (job, career, education), Sports, Automobile, Dossier (various author's topics and periodical sections, photo reports: Spéciaux, MTF, Ip Week, Fête du Trône, Siam, Afrique Développement, Fête de la Jeunesse, Marche verte, Auto Expo, Enseignement, Rétrospective, Spécial CAN, Spécial UA, CIS, 8 Mars, Immobilier, E-commerce, Forum Étudiant).

«Matin TV» — an online video channel for readers of the electronic version of the newspaper, the best videos from the publication's own correspondents.

Read Maroccan newspaper «Le Matin» online

«Le Matin» in Original Language

Last issue of the Maroccan newspaper «Le Matin» (The Morning)

always available on newspaper website

Read «Le Matin»

in French language

online

«Le Matin» in English Language

Latest digital version of the Maroccan newspaper «Le Matin»

available now with automatic translation.

Read «Le Matin»

in English language

online

You can translate newspaper «Le Matin» (The Morning) here in English language.

Translate the latest edition of the Maroccan newspaper «Le Matin»

Latest issue of the «Le Matin» (The Morning) may be translated in English language now.

For request latest edition of this media, click «Translate» button in front of the selected translator.

Translation result will be opened in your browser on new window (or tab).

Select one of the translators below.

available 3 translators

⇓

Translate «Le Matin / The Morning / lematin.ma» newspaper into English by Google Translate

Click on this button to begin translation of the media ⇒

Read «Le Matin / The Morning / lematin.ma» newspaper online in English with translation by Yandex Translate

For request translation result click on this button ⇒

«Le Matin / The Morning / lematin.ma» in English by Bing Translator

Click on button this for translate media ⇒

...

English version of «Le Matin / The Morning / lematin.ma», latest issue from SysTran Translation Service

Translator currently not available x

English edition of «Le Matin / The Morning / lematin.ma», fresh translation by PROMT Trans

Translator currently not available x

Subscribe to newspaper «Le Matin» Offer payment subscription on Maroccan newspaper «Le Matin» and enjoy unlimited access to all the newspaper issues on any device. We offer wide range of subscription rates: daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, yearly and special offers (student, corporate, library, limited offer, test subscriptions). Types of subscriptions: home delivery, postal delivery, digital online, premium. You can cancel or renewal subscription anytime.