Overview[]

War Zone is a competitive game mode where players battle endless hordes of Corrupted for ranked scoring and War Zone Influence.

In War Zone, Commandants deploy teams of their choice in two of five available elementally-themed regions. Each region possesses three stages for the user to clear; clearing these stages will earn the user a score. Stage entry in this mode is unlimited and costs no serum.

Users in this mode will be grouped together in teams of three with two other Commandants. The team's collective score will contribute to their placement on a ranked leaderboard.

War Zone operates on a biweekly cycle. Each cycle is separated into three phases: Recruitment, Battle, and Results.

Recruitment: During this phase, players may form teams with other Commandants of their choosing. If no action is taken during this phase, the user will be placed in a team at random. For Global Server, recruitment begins every Sunday and Wednesday (20:30 UTC).

Battle: This is the main phase. Users may enter any of the available battle stages during this time. For Global Server, the Battle phase begins every Monday and Thursday (07:00 UTC).

Results: All War Zone stages will lock and the system tallies scores. During this time, no action is required from the player. For Global Server, this begins every Sunday and Wednesday at 20:00 UTC.

There are five War Zone regions in total. During each cycle, two regions will randomly become available for the user to challenge. By default, both of these regions will be locked; one region can be unlocked per day.

Each of the five regions has different elemental properties. Constructs or Transcendants deployed in these regions will deal 30% more of the corresponding elemental damage type. Note that this bonus has no effect on Constructs or Transcendants that do not deal the corresponding damage type (e.g. Karenina - Ember will deal 30% more Fire damage in the Cycle of Fire stages, while Kamui - Tenebrion will gain no effect in the same weather).

Machine Factory: Increase Physical DMG by 30%

Cycle of Fire: Increase Fire DMG by 30%

Laser Alloy: Increase Lightning DMG by 30%

Shadow Forest: Increase Dark DMG by 30%

Crimson: Increase Ice DMG by 30%

War Zone Influence is a currency used to purchase Memories from the War Shop. It is rewarded based on the user's individual score (not the team score!) at the end of the Battle phase.

Both 5☆ and 6☆ Memories can be purchased for 160 WZI and 500 WZI respectively. Randomized selections of Memories in different grid placements will appear here; this selection rotates at the beginning of every new War Zone Cycle.

6☆ Memory Resonance Material Pick is also sold in the War Zone Shop. These cost 800/1200/2000/ WZI, with the cost increasing with each purchase until the end of the month, when the cost reverts to 800. It is highly recommended to save War Zone Influence for the 6☆ Memory Resonance Material Pick, as they are difficult to obtain otherwise.

(Global: Updated for the current patch Evernight Beat.)

Below are suggested War Zone teams for the game's current meta state. Note that these are simply suggestions; all characters and teams have viability, and player skill can easily supplement meta.

Physical Team[]

Recommended Lucia: Crimson Abyss Rosetta: Rigor Liv: Eclipse (SSS) Alternative Lee: Entropy Rosetta: Rigor Liv: Eclipse (SSS)

If crowd control is needed, Karenina: Blast can replace Liv: Eclipse.

Liv: Eclipse at SSS-Rank is Physical teams' best support until Liv: Luminance's buff in a future version.

Liv: Eclipse can be upgraded to SSS-Rank for free by farming Interlude shards.

The Future of Physical Team[]

Recommended Bianca: Abystigma Rosetta: Rigor Liv: Luminance

NieR:Automata Team[]

NieR Physical Team 2B A2 9S

The NieR:Automata collaboration is a limited-time Physical Damage team. These three synergize extremely well with each other, and thus it is strongly recommended to pair them together. This team deals consistent damage, has strong survivability, and strong crowd-control abilities.

The Future of NieR:Automata Team[]

The NieR:Automata units are limited edition and cannot be obtained after a one-time rerun. This rerun occurs in Evernight Beat.

[Meta analysis TBA]

Ice Team[]

Recommended Lucia: Plume Chrome: Glory Wanshi: Hypnos (SSS) Alternative 1 Lucia: Plume Ayla: Brilliance Wanshi: Hypnos (SSS)

Wanshi: Hypnos can be upgraded to SSS-Rank for free by farming Interlude shards.

The Future of Ice Team[]

Recommended Lucia: Plume Chrome: Glory Ayla: Kaleido Alternative 1 Bombinata: Vitrum Chrome: Glory Ayla: Kaleido

Ayla: Kaleido will be given for free in a future version of the game.

Lightning Team[]

Recommended Bianca: Veritas Vera: Garnet Liv: Lux Alternative 1 Lucia: Dawn Vera: Garnet Liv: Lux Alternative 2 Bianca: Veritas Chrome: Arclight Liv: Lux Alternative 3 Chrome: Arclight Vera: Garnet Liv: Lux

The Future of Lightning Team[]

Recommended Lucia: Crimson Weave Vera: Garnet Liv: Lux Selena: Tempest (SSS) Vera: Garnet Liv: Lux

When Construct/Transcendant mixed teams are added, SSS-Rank Selena: Tempest slightly outperforms Bianca: Veritas.

Dark Team[]

Recommended Luna: Laurel Kamui: Tenebrion Vera: Rozen Alternative 1 Luna: Laurel No.21: XXI Vera: Rozen Alternative 2 Watanabe: Astral Kamui: Tenebrion Vera: Rozen Alternative 3 Watanabe: Astral No.21: XXI Vera: Rozen

The Future of Dark Team[]

Recommended 1 Luna: Laurel Karenina: Radiant Dawn Selena: Capriccio Recommended 2 Luna: Laurel Karenina: Radiant Dawn Vera: Rozen (SSS)

Vera: Rozen can be upgraded to SSS-Rank for free by farming Interlude shards.

Fire Team[]

Recommended Karenina: Ember Nanami: Pulse Karenina: Blast

With the current state of the Global version of the game, Fire Team is the weakest team, with off-element teams performing much better in Fire War Zones.

If you find yourself needing to clear all War Zone-related Weekly Missions as soon as possible (eg. needing the Black Card rewards), the below strategy may be utilized.