By Mariam Chanishvili

Wednesday, November 13

The Decalogue by the Polish film director Krzysztof Kieslowski was staged at the Royal District Theatre.

Georgian-Polish co-production on the stage of the Royal District Theater premiered on November 9-12.

Thirty years after the release of the "Decalogue" screens, Polish director Wojtek Faruga offered an original, theatrical adaptation of our television series to our viewers. The director was in Tbilisi during the premiere.

The scenic version was adapted by Georgian translator, playwright, and author Davit Gabunia. The costumes were designed by Keti Nadibaidze. The participating actors include Kato Kalatozishvili, Giorgi Kikvidze, Magda Lebanidze, Paata Inauri, Sandro Samkharadze, Nata Murvanidze, Zaal Chikobava and Soso Khvedelidze.

The performance was accompanied by a multimedia exhibition of theater photography You Shall not Kill by Magda Hueckel. The exhibition and play created a diptych, referring to one of the commandments.

The project was supported by Adam Mickiewicz Institute, Ministry of Culture and National Heritage of the Republic of Poland, ASSITEJ/PL.

It was funded by the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage of the Republic of Poland within the frames of the Multi-annual Program “Independent” for 2017-2022, as well as the “Cultural Bridges” (Kulturalne Pomosty), a grant program by the Adam Mickiewicz Institute for the years 2017-2021.

The Adam Mickiewicz Institute is a government-sponsored organization funded by Poland's Ministry of Culture and National Heritage and headquartered at Ulica Mokotowska 25 in Warsaw. Named after Polish national poet Adam Mickiewicz, its goal is to promote the Polish language and culture abroad.

Dekalog is a 1989 Polish drama series of films directed by Krzysztof Kieslowski for television and co-written by Kieslowski with Krzysztof Piesiewicz, with music by Zbigniew Preisner. It consists of ten one-hour films, inspired by the decalogue of the Ten Commandments.

The play exposes the situations in Warsaw in the 1980s, time for drastic change of values.