Hello world of Trainz

This is not the greatest thing to ever happen to me and my download system, it has decided to stuff up. Does anyone know if these Trains are availiable for download ???? Or could anyone ahve a crack at creating them ?????

Here is some of the units that I would like to download and that many other fans would like to have.

Connex X' Trapolis 100 Units

Connex Comeng Units

Connex Siemens Units

V Line Sprinter Units

V Line VLocity Units in older and newer livery and with middle coach if possible

http://www.railpictures.net/images/d1/3/9/6/8396.1227691060.jpg

TransAdelaide 2000 Class railcar "Jumbos" in STA and AdelaideMetro livery

TransAdelaide 3000 and 3100 Class railcars in Adelaide Metro Livery

TransAdelaide Flexity Classic Units

LONG LIST, PLEASE HELP MIGHTY CREATERS!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Sorry if the pics are a bit big.

Thanks, SARRailways

Connex X' Trapolis 100 Units - These are available in a 'beta' only, although they are pretty much complete. You can get access to the beta on the VicTrainz Forums

Connex Comeng Units - Not currently available. However, I do plan to make a set of Comeng units in the future. Not likely for a few years yet though.

Connex Siemens Units - There are currently no Siemens units available, or in production as far as I know.

V Line Sprinter Units - None available, however it is on my to-do list for the future. Again, not likely for a few years.

V Line VLocity Units - None available. I did start one, but lost interest in it due to lack of reference data for some parts. I plan to eventually complete it and release it, however this is a long term project.

TransAdelaide 2000 Class railcar "Jumbos" - None available at the moment. However, there is at least one person working on a set of these as far as I know.

TransAdelaide 3000 and 3100 Class railcars in Adelaide Metro Livery - There is a 3000 available on the DLS, however it is an extremely old model. I believe there is a new 3000 being produced as well.

TransAdelaide Flexity Classic Units - None available at the moment, however it may be possible to reskin an existing tram. Not sure if there are any matching trams available elsewhere.

Hope this helps.

Zec

Hey

I know its a really long list. I do know about the 3000s. One of the reasons that I am really looking fot some 2000s in STA and AdelaideMetro colours is because my Dad works for TransAdelaide and he has for 20ish years. The older 3000s are very rare to be seen, so I was wondering if the newer ones were out there. My account is going to expire in a few days, so, if you guys could give me updates on when you know that these downloads are out there, could you send me an email at : liam1996@live.com.au. If you guys could, I will re-acctivate my account and download them. And, I dont know what I did wrong, but I couldnt find the X'Trapolis units, could one of you guys send me a link please!!!!

Thanks, SARRailways

Hey Electro

Im not sure if its just me or if the front part of the railcar is a bit bendy. Still good work. Do you have any or are planning on making a resking of them in Adelaide Metro Colours ???? I know it must take a lot of work. I would try but, my download program stuffed up and I need to contact someone to un-install it and get a better one. I will try to get it un-installed over the weekend when I take all of my downloaded content of my PC and onto my USB so I can transfer them back onto there when I get a better one. And sorry for quating my pics. It was just so that you guys knew which one was which.

Thanks SARRailways

Hi SARRailways depending on what Trainz you are useing it would be Surveyor Menu (TC) or Main Menu (09) then merge Route then a window with all your route's will pop up highlight 1 click ok it then will open a small panel where you see both route's and will be able to move and aline the route you want to the route you have open

hope that helps

RE : Adelaide Metro Colours At the moment i am makeing other things when i can get back to them i will try

Poul

Hi SARRailways

Send a ticket to the helpdesk, and we will help you with the account problem (please note, it may be a little while before you get a reply).

Please also keep in mind that, unless you buy another copy of Trainz, you won't be able to download from another username, since you can only register a serial number once.

Yeh I found that out.

Thanks SARRailways