A quieter, more comfortable ride for commuters – a newly converted hybrid train – enters service today, the latest green technology to be rolled out on the Adelaide Metro network.

After a successful testing period, the hybrid-diesel train will be running on the Outer Harbor, Grange and Belair lines – instantly recognisable by its distinctive bright-green wrap.

Hybrid-diesel trains are quieter and release fewer fumes than traditional diesels trains, using up to 20% less fuel and providing a more comfortable journey for passengers.

Each rail car of this two-car train set has been fitted with an Energy Storage and Recovery System. These two cars are the first of 44 diesel railcars expected to be fitted with the hybrid system.

The Energy Storage and Recovery System works by recovering excess energy when the train brakes and storing it in a battery for later use.

The battery will also be used instead of the diesel engine to supply auxiliary loads – power for lighting and air-conditioning, for example – at the train platform within Adelaide Railway Station to reduce noise, emissions, and air pollution.

Installation of the Energy Storage and Recovery System on the remaining trains will be a phased roll-out, with all trains expected to feature the new system by late-2024.

Once fully installed, Adelaide Metro will save an estimated 2,400 tonnes of CO2 emissions annually.

Adelaide Metro is also accelerating towards a greener future across its bus fleet, with two hydrogen buses hitting Adelaide’s streets in late August and the state’s first full battery electric bus expected to starting taking passengers by the end of October.

Both battery electric and hydrogen powered buses offer a range of benefits for passengers, including a smoother ride, reduced noise and fuel-based pollution.

The Malinauskas Labor Government is transitioning the Adelaide Metro system to a zero-emissions public transport system to support the net zero emissions by 2050 target.

Quotes

Attributable to Tom Koutsantonis

In another milestone for a sustainable public transport future, the first of many hybrid-diesel trains will start taking passengers this morning.

Reducing our environmental impact and using significantly less fuel, this new hybrid-train also offers a great customer experience, particularly at Adelaide Railway Station where the diesel engine can remain off – reducing noise and fumes for those on board and in the station.

We are about exploring any technologies or solutions to de-carbonise and deliver a net zero-emissions public transport system.