TransAdelaide Bombardier Flexity Classic.

In 2006 Adelaide Metro began to replace the H Class cars operated on the Glenelg Tramway, by TransAdelaide with a fleet of eleven Bombardier Flexity Classic trams. The first of the new Flexitys was delivered to the Glengowrie depot in November 2005 and entered public service on 9th of Janurary 2006.

Delivery continued in small batches through 2006, with new trams operating on the Glenelg line side-by-side with the H-class in the interim.

The Flexitys are painted in a standard Adelaide Metro colour scheme of white, with yellow, blue and red ends, very similar to Adelaide’s metropolitan bus fleet and heavy rail, although many now run corporate advertising top-to-bottom on the sides and only have the 'safety yellow' ends. They have a low floor layout throughout, except over the bogies, and are accessible to kids pushers and wheelchairs through each of the three sets of doors.

*Adelaide Metro is a registered Trademark of the Department for Transport, Energy and Infrastucture (DTEI).

Bombardier and FLEXITY are Trademarks of Bombardier Inc, or its subsidiaries.

All other copyrights & trademarks mentioned are the property of their

respective owners.

The Adelaide Metro Logo and Livery is used under licence and with kind permission from the Public Transport Division of the Department for Transport, Energy and Infrastructure and is a registered Trademark and may not be licenced or on sold in any way.

Author: Reskin by Jason Wilson. Original Author Maurice Paetzold.

TransAdelaide Bombardier Flexity Classic.

Reskin by Jason Wilson. Original Author Maurice Paetzold.

Requires additional files to be downloaded from www.trainzdepot.net.

dsw21NGT8 original and NGT8 Zusatze.

No charge may be made for this archive;

- This model is provided AS IS, I assume no responsibility or

liablity for any Trainz or system hardware/software problems you

may encounter after installing this tram;

- By downloading and/or using this model, you have agreed with these