By StudentFilmmakers.com

posted Sep 18, 2012, 13:46

(New York, NY) Troma Entertainment is proud to announce that Poultrygeist: Night of the Chicken Dead, is now available for free online and is creating buzz! In a recent article, Buzzfeed raved about the film, calling it "some of the strangest body-horror this side of David Cronenberg". To thank their fans for almost 40 successful years, Troma has made Poultrygeist, along with its behind-the-scenes documentary Poultry in Motion, and scores of other full feature films available to watch free on their youtube channel.

Poultrygeist combines an anti-corporate activist message with body horror and gore galore. On its release, the New York Times said "within the context of its genre - the satirical sexploitation zombie chicken gross-out musical extravaganza - it is just about as perfect as a film predicated on the joys of projectile vomiting and explosive diarrhea can be." Entertainment Weekly said "Skeletons being tossed in a dumpster, possession by chicken spirits, a lesbian make-out, and a worker being chewed up by a meat grinder... Now we're talking!"

Established in 1974 by Yale friends Lloyd Kaufman and Michael Herz, Troma Entertainment is one of the longest-running independent movie studios in United States history, and one of the best-known names in the industry. World famous for movie classics like Kaufman's The Toxic Avenger, Poultrygeist: Night of the Chicken Dead, Class of Nuke'em High, Mother's Day and Tromeo and Juliet, Troma's seminal films are now being remade as big budget mainstream productions by the likes of Brett Ratner, Richard Saperstein, Akiva Goldsman, and Steven Pink. Among today's luminaries whose early work can be found in Troma's 800+ film library are Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Jenna Fischer, Robert De Niro, Dustin Hoffman, Kevin Costner, Fergie, Vincent D'Onofrio, Samuel L. Jackson, James Gunn and Eli Roth.

Resources: www.troma.com, www.lloydkaufman.com, www.twitter.com/lloydkaufman, www.tromapast.tumblr.com