Robert D. Graham, 84 passed away September 3rd, 2021. He was born in Taos, New Mexico on March 25, 1937.

He was preceded in death by his loving and beautiful wife Dilia. His parents Donaciano and Soledad Graham, his in-laws Eduardo and Solidea Mondragon. Brother Tobias Graham and sister Sally Graham. Brothers and Sisters-in-law: Carla Graham, Molly and Salvador Archuleta, Antonio and Tomasita Mondragon, Ida Mondragon, Geneva Mondragon, Margarito Mondragon, Aurelio “Joe” Montoya and Juan Gonzales. Godson: Rick Gonzales.

He is survived by his children: Roberta Sandoval (Alfonso), Grace Graham (Yvonne Salazar), Don Graham (Carolee) and Leonard Graham (Katie). Grandkids: Nicole Graham (Roman Carrejo) Cleo Dehne (Adam), Rebecca Valerio (Alex Candelaria), Samantha Martinez (Paul), Lenny Graham (Geena Flecha), Tori Graham, Cristofer Graham, Joshua Graham, Luz Graham, Bennen Graham and Ethan Graham. Great Grandchildren: Tenley, Taylor and Raelyn Dehne; Angel Gutierrez, Adrian, Isaiah, Tony and Javani Martinez; Alejandro, Marcos and baby Graham. Godchildren: Jacqueline Graham, Eloy Mondragon, Yolanda Michelle Duran, Nicole Graham, Jeremiah Benjey and Tony Martinez.

Brothers and Sister: Leroy Graham (Geneva), Ruben Graham and Dolores Chavez (Faustin). Brothers and Sisters-in-law: Abelardo Mondragon, Chris Mondragon (Corrine), Elvira Mondragon, Ruby Montoya, Linda Gonzales, Gilbert Mondragon (Arlene) and Uvaldo Mondragon (Ruby). Many nieces, nephews, friends and his special friend Randy Pacheco.

He was very active in the community. He was an active member of the Knights of Columbus. Member of the Senior Olympics for many years and received many 1st, 2nd and 3rd place ribbons. In July 2015 was recognized as the “Courage Award” winner. He was a cherished Senior Companion Sponsor for many years. He was also very well known as the proud owner with his loving wife Dilia of Graham’s Superette, serving the Taos community for 25 years.

Public visitation will be held on Monday September 13, 2021 from 5 to 6pm in the Evergreen Chapel of DeVargas Funeral Home of Taos. Rosary will be recited on Thursday September 16, 2021 at 9am followed by the Funeral Mass at 10am at Our Lady of Guadalupe Catholic Church. Burial will follow at the Graham Family Cemetery, located on Camino del Medio. Serving the family as pallbearers are his grandchildren, honorary bearers will be his great-grandchildren.

The family of Robert D. Graham has entrusted the care of their loved one to DeVargas Funeral Home of Taos. www.devargastaos.com 1-866-657-4019