The formidable fortress of Carlisle Castle stands proud over the cityscape, explore the medieval castle rooms, discover a turbulent history with the exhibition, and walk some of the castle walls. It’s also home to Cumbria's Museum of Military Life. The Museum tells the 300 year story of the history of The Border Regiment and its successors through audio/visual displays, artefacts, photographs and interactive environments.

The Cathedral is within a few minutes’ walk of the spacious pedestrianised Greenmarket, a focal point for street entertainment and farmers’ markets. Carlisle Cathedral is a small but beautiful 900-year-old building, full of history, stained glass and... spy tours. Begin by taking a peek at the stained-glass windows followed looking up at the ceiling full of stars. For families though, spy tours in and outside of the Cathedral are the highlight, with an activity trail and all sorts of secret discoveries.

Next up is Tullie House Museum and Art Gallery, one of Carlisle's finest visitor attraction, it houses considerable collections of fine and decorative art, human history and natural sciences. Set in attractive and well-planted gardens, Old Tullie House still retains its beautiful Jacobean facade. Inside there is an impressive Jacobean staircase and fireplace. Children and adults of all ages will find fun, hands-on exhibits and even games... fire a Roman weapon, climb our life-sized section of Hadrian’s Wall or visit the badgers’ sett!

Frequent Green Flag winner, Bitts Park is great for families, offering a nice range of activity options and some truly beautiful surroundings. It has a fantastic children's adventure and pirate ship sand play area! You can also find a putting green, fun crazy golf course, a mini maze together with both open air and under cover tennis courts, all the ingredients for a great day out.

For the aviation fan, Solway Aviation Museum is a collection of aircraft, aviation artefacts and displays reflecting Britain's position as a former world leader in aircraft design and innovation at the dawn of the jet age. See what a World War 2 air raid shelter was like as bombs dropped all around. Hear the childhood memories of men and women who went to school during the war and see what is probably, the largest collection of model WW2 aircraft in this country then climb aboard some of our aircraft collection and sit in the pilot's seat, take the controls and imagine what it's like to fly a real jet (even the big kids will love this).

Walkers will love the Hadrian’s Wall Trail, set off east or west towards either Bowness or Walton to see the Northern frontier of a mighty empire that once covered the known world. There are plenty of sections left of the wall with countless opportunities of stunning scenery.

Not the walking type, never fear, there are bus tours that introduce you to many of the best views along the route of Hadrian’s Wall World Heritage Site passing Lanercost Priory and Banks Turret with a short stop to view the wall remains at Birdoswald Fort.

Looking for a day of fun, Walby Farm Park is just the ticket. It’s an award-winning farm visitor attraction with daily farm activities together with Cumbria's largest indoor play area. Dare to try out the demon drop slide, meet the friendly animals and enjoy refreshments from the Curly Tails Cafe. There is outdoor excitement too with a play area, Walby's Wacky Golf, JCB Dig & Play sand area, seasonal maize maze, pedal go-karts and tractors.

Looking to get active? Eden Rock is an indoor climbing centre with a dedicated kids area and a cafe serving coffee and teas for the parents while Urban Adventure offers high ropes, aerial trek, zip wire, fan descender and climbing wall plus unique infant ropes course for smaller adventurers.

Carlisle is a great base to also get out for the and discover the Lake District. Also worth visiting is Talkin Tarn Country Park, a whopping 165-acre site rich in fairy-tale like mature woodland and gentle meadows, all surrounding a glacial lake with the stunning Pennine Hills as the best photo backdrop ever! The Tarn has a 1.3-mile circular path that is ideal for a gentle stroll. This path is hard surfaced and perfect for wheel and push chairs, plus there are also 3 way marked trails of varying lengths from 1.5km to 3.5km starting from the car park.

Gretna, Brampton and a little further afield Penrith are also worth the trip for great days out.