Koper win Slovenian Cup

It happened for the fourth time in Slovenian history that Celje Pivovarna Lasko failed to win the Slovenian Cup. The quickly developing team of Koper deservedly won the trophy.

Celje that won 13 editions out of the 17 Slovenian Cup played so far, were playing in the semi-final against Gold Club and lost in extra time by 37:38. In the other semi-final Cimos-Koper – the only Slovenian team standing in the European cups – defeated Trimo Trebnje easily.

The final between Koper and Gold Club was equal until the 40th minute, with Gold Club playing better. After that Matjaz Tominec’s team woke up and turned the result. With the magnificent goalkeeper, Enid Tahirovic, and unstoppable Denis Butnic Koper went to plus seven what Gold Club could not reach anymore. After Prule, Gorenje and Gold Club, Cimos Koper are the fourth team to steal the Slovenian Cup from Celje.

Koper's players were celebrating their enormous progress in two years.

"I could not be happier. It is our first title. You know, the first is always something special," said Koper coach, Matjaz Tominec. He added: "We thought we would play against Celje, but Gold Club were also tough opponents. We needed some time to get into the match but afterwards played superbly."

Celje defeated Trimo Trebnje 26:19 for the third place.

"For us the third place is not a success. We wanted to win the cup, but we played badly and our concentration was not enough," said goalkeeper Gorazd Skof after the tournament.

The MVP of the tournament was Denis Buntic (Koper).

Sigurdsson in Löwen

Bad news for VfL Gummersbach: the Germans lose their best player at the end of the season. As reported by ehfCL.com earlier, Gudjon Valur Sigurdsson will change club and move to Rhein Neckar Löwen Mannheim.

Primarily, he wanted to change in 2009, but the clubs have come to an agreement after long negotiations that the captain would leave earlier.

The clubs did not disclose details:

“We fought hard to force Sigurdsson to stay in Gummersbach, but we accept his decision,” said VfL sport director, Francois-Xavier Houlet. Sigurdsson came to Gummersbach in 2005 and became Germany’s top scorer next season. Besides this, he was awarded best player of the season:

“I will give all I can for the team and spectators before I leave,” said the Icelandic international.

Laluska back in Hungary

The President of Ademar Leon, Juan Arias, officially confirmed that Balázs Laluska would play for Pick Szeged next season.

The Hungarian team wanted to buy him out of his contract, but the Spanish side did not show interest for it. His contract expires this season, so he will be free to go back to his homeland.

The 200 cm tall left back started his carrier in the same club, Pick Szeged. He debuted in the CL in 2003/04.

After excellent performances, he was transferred to Ademar Leon in 2005. After two successful seasons in Spain, the 26-year old will go home and reinforce the Hungarian team.

TEXT: Maja Mastnak, Björn Pazen, Ivan Ambros

ehfcl.com