Armory of the Kingdom of Sicily

Families of the Sicilian nobility recognised from 1282 to 1860

Related pages: Genealogy • Heraldry • Kings & Knights • Feudalism in Sicily

What follows is the most complete list of Sicilian noble and armigerous families ever published, drawn primarily from two landmark works, namely Palizzolo Gravina's Il Blasone in Sicilia (1871) and Mango di Casalgerardo's Nobiliario di Sicilia (1912), as well as San Martino's Storia dei Feudi and official lists retained at the state archives in Naples and Palermo and the author's original research around Sicily. At the abolition of feudalism (1812) there were some three thousand armigerous families, of which rather few - holding extensive property - were recognised as peers of the realm in 1812 and in 1848. Anybody seeking further information on particular families should consult the aforementioned volumes or the original feudal records. The bearing and use of a coat of arms usually implied at least minor nobility, even in those cases where a family had no title (baron, count, etc.). It should be remembered, however, that while a coat of arms was an "ensign" of nobility, nobiliary status itself was not based exclusively on possession and use of a coat of arms but on feudal or official status (viz. the mastra nobile and giurati nobili of demesnial towns, et al.). Until 1860, the Royal Commission on Titles of Nobility, based in Naples, concerned itself with administration of certain nobiliary institutions and recognition of titles of nobility, with little regulation of armorial heraldry (coats of arms) per se. Normally, a man ennobled by feudal purchase would simply assume a new coat of arms; the concept of a heraldic authority "granting" coats of arms was virtually unknown in Sicily. In Sicily a coat of arms is the familial property of all the first armiger's descendants in the direct, legitimate male line; there was little differencing for cadency. Some of the following families are, in fact, extinct in the male line, though unrelated families coincidentally bearing the same surnames may exist. A coat of arms can be claimed only where there is proven descent (i.e. a lineal genealogy) from an armigerous ancestor, and not simply because a person happens to share a surname with a historical armiger to whom he is unrelated. Around ten percent of the noble families listed here bore coats of arms for which the blazons were not identified by Palizzolo or Mango. Since the constitutional abolition of the Consulta Araldica in 1948, there has been no official authority in Italy empowered to regulate the use of personal coats of arms, the rights to which are not protected in law; nor is there any agency or herald authorised by Italian law - or even heraldic law - to determine who is (or is not) a nobleman or armiger. Anybody descended from one of the following families in the direct, legitimate male line may, by inalienable right of birth, make use of an ancestral coat of arms.