The Vino Nobile Museum in Pachino

Sicily is dotted with real hidden treasures, which tell the history of the places better than any other description, retracing the stages of the past and keeping the very long traditions alive to this day. Preserving this priceless heritage is the difficult task of the bodies in charge, who are called upon to enhance the initiative of willing people and lovers of the territory.

The Sicilian Superintendency and the department that deals with regional cultural heritage have placed the Pachino Wine Museum by Emanuele Nobile, a point of interest that every year attracts tourists, curious people and enthusiasts of this fascinating product sector.

Here wine is the true protagonist and technological evolution accompanies man in a unique and unmissable narrative. The museum has therefore managed to obtain the exceptional recognition of ethno-anthropological interest, precisely because it bears witness to the habits and customs of the past, preserving their peculiarities and making them available to all those who want to approach this world full of working and economic meanings. and folkloristic.

The history of Nobile wine and the museum

At the end of 1800 the Nobile family decided to move from Ragusa towards the Municipality of Rosolini to work in the production of wine, acquiring significant skills in the field. Shortly after, in 1920, Emanuele's son, who today owns the company, chose to go to Pachino, already known for its wine excellence. The company is located here Noble Wines and a glorious commercial journey is inaugurated with customers throughout Sicily. Business is booming and it soon becomes necessary to further expand the structure where processing is carried out, with the relative enlargement of the storage area, with an ever-increasing number of orders for different types of wine.

In the 50s the family business changed its name and saw the entry into the company of the brothers Emanuele and Stefano, taking on the company brand F.lli Nobile. Other corporate changes took place in 90 and 2001, without however distorting the main mission, with strong roots in the area and a broad perspective for the future.

The origins of the Pachino red they even seem to derive from the Greeks, therefore representing a delicacy known since ancient times. The wine has a rather dark color, with a strong character and a high alcohol content that reaches 17 degrees. It is also exported abroad, with numerous admirers in France. In Italy it has great success in the regions of Piedmont and Tuscany, being used as a blending wine due to its unique specificities.

Love for tradition: the Pachino wine museum by Emanuele Nobile

The structure where Emanuele Nobile's Pachino wine museum is located extends over 4 thousand square metres. Here the stories of the Nobile family intersect with those of the best popular tradition connected to the production of wine, with a journey made up of photos and objects that make you dive back into a time span of 170 years.

The family decides to found an association whose primary objective is the preservation of all these memories, envisaging the creation of an ecomuseum to stimulate a dense network of collaborations on the topic. Local institutions played a leading role, encouraging the family's action and resourcefulness, appreciating this very important work and giving the right cultural value to the setting up of the museum exhibition.

What to see in the museum

The museum houses objects that narrate the toil in the vineyards, with more than 600 tools that relate to everyday life, to the processing of the must and grapes. The Nobile family has preserved and cataloged professional tools that today seem to belong to a parallel dimension, such as the bicycle with the hoe attached or the cart with chairs that allowed women to be comfortable during the journey to the fields.

What to do in the museum and future initiatives

Specialization workshops, training and in-depth courses for sommeliers and winemakers, projects that look with interest at multimedia development, presentations, screenings and conferences can be developed around this associative hub. The museum therefore becomes a starting point for an active promotion of the entire local context of Pachino, with the possibility of intercepting national and European funds for long-term planning.

In the meantime, themed events are promoted such as the pressing festival held in August and other very interesting guided tours dedicated to tourists in the area. Emanuele Nobile's Pachino wine museum is a stop that arouses curiosity for every age group, being able to accommodate more or less numerous groups, groups of holidaymakers or school groups who want to discover the history of local wine production.

How to get to the museum

Pachino is located in the south-eastern tip of Sicily and can be reached by car from Syracuse, Modica or Pozzallo. Once you arrive in the town, you have to go to Via Fiume, at the intersection with Via A. Brancati, where the entrance to the museum is easily found.