Immersed in a vast citrus grove among the scent of zagra and jasmine, the luxurious Verde Nobile Dimora di Charme is an ancient villa dating back to the mid 800, located on an acropolis between Etna and the sea and enjoys a splendid view of Taormina and the Calabrian coast.

An ancient belvedere offers breathtaking sunrises and sunsets. The garden and the courtyard in summer become a large outdoor living room. Verde nobile has belonged to a family context for three generations and is an integral part of a farm of almost five hectares planted with citrus and olive groves and numerous fruit trees.

The farmhouse does not offer restaurant service, but a rich breakfast and welcome drink. Pets are not allowed.

Reopening in March 2021.

30 minutes from Catania airport.

Criteria of energy saving and bio-architecture have been the main theme of the restoration carried out respecting the history of the building.

For guests there are an apartment, 2 suites, 2 superior double rooms with minibar and digital TV, a room for events with bar, a wellness area with herbal tea corner, a 3-seater hydromassage, an area where relaxing and decontracting massages with citrus oils are practiced.

There is heating but no air conditioning: the breezy climate, the lava stone walls, the arches that shelter from the sirocco do not make it necessary.

Rooms

Pista is a double room obtained from the old millstone, the floor in handmade lava stone dates back to the early 800 as well as the whole structure.

Archi is a double room obtained from an old cellar with a beautiful old brick and lava stone arch, the room is spacious, elegant and private with a small terrace overlooking a secluded corner of the garden.

Mini Nespolo is a comfortable and elegant living room that becomes a single room with a garden view, a junction and a large bathroom.

Camelie is a large suite with light colors and vaulted ceilings, a small living room leads into the sleeping area with two French beds, a 800 Sicilian chest of drawers completes the sober and functional furniture.

Nespolo is a large suite consisting of a romantic double bedroom with a window overlooking the old garden, a "country chic" living room with a single sofa bed and a small nice single room.

The Limonaiawas the old warehouse where the lemons were processed and stored. Now it has become a "family room" with a large and elegant living room that overlooks the garden and a large loft dedicated to the sleeping area with a double bed and two single beds.

The structure is equipped with a reception room dedicated to hospitality, check-in/check-out, information, guests' wishes.

The structure respects the directives covid-19 issued by the Sicilian Region.

----

IDEAL PLACE FOR SMARTWORKING

It is possible to work in smartworking at the farmhouse. The managers will give you the opportunity to work outdoors, in the garden, equipping a special area with table and internet connection. For those who want to work inside, it is advisable to book in the apartment, "Nespolo" and "Limonaia", as they are ideal for smartworking.