Study a PhD with Northumbria University

Northumbria is a research-intensive university that unlocks potential for all, changing lives regionally, nationally and internationally. A bold, confident and ambitious university, we are an institution that embraces the future and faces challenges head on, enabling us to meet the world’s changing needs and make a positive difference.

We are the Times Higher Education University of the Year 2022.

Results from the recent Research Excellence Framework (REF2021) see us rise to 23rd place, climbing from our positions of 50th in 2014, and 80th in 2008. Northumbria University is the sector’s largest riser in research power in the UK.

Northumbria submitted 1095 staff across thirteen Units of Assessment (UoA) to the Research Excellence Framework (REF) 2021. This submission reflects our research across four Faculties and nineteen Departments.

Sustained progress by Northumbria has given the city of Newcastle a second research-intensive university, bringing a complementary set of research strengths to the city, and creating with Durham a Northern Research Powerhouse with the largest city-area concentration of researchers outside London.

Northumbria’s success is the result of a profound transformation over the last 15 years, combining research with existing areas of strength in relationships with business, skills, enterprise and innovation. The full-time equivalent number of Northumbria researchers assessed as producing world-leading and internationally excellent research has jumped from 56 in 2008, to 207 in 2014 and 840 today. At the same time, the quality and impact of research at Northumbria have risen significantly. On Quality-related (QR) power it ranks 28th, again with the biggest rise on this measure.

Additionally, Northumbria is ranked among the world’s top 100 universities aged 50 years or under, according to the THE World University Rankings.

As part of our continued commitment to research excellence, the University is offering over 100 funded PhD studentships, to commence from October 2023. These opportunities are open to exceptional applicants worldwide, including funding from across UKRI and their research councils, as well as our own University supported PhDs, the Research Development Fund.

These opportunities are available across all faculties:

Arts, Design and Social Sciences

Business and Law

Engineering and Environment

Health and Life Sciences

As part of the University’s developing research strategy, we are growing research in a number of Interdisciplinary Research Themes. These themes bring together expertise from across the University to address the pressing regional, societal and global challenges of this century and beyond. Our themes are aligned specifically with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and provide a unique platform for collaboration between researchers from across departments and disciplines to deliver cutting-edge, impactful research.

Biofutures

Extreme Environments

Gendered Violence and Abuse

Global Development Futures

Space

Urban Futures

Many of the available studentships are aligned to these themes, giving students the opportunity to be involved in areas of activity addressing societal and global challenges.

More information relating to the research themes is available at www.northumbria.ac.uk/research.