Shimla was the summer capital of the British era, where many British officers and other people retreated in summer. So, it was natural that romance and love should flourish in Shimla’s beautiful and lavish green surroundings. The hub of social life, the Scandal Point, is located near the General Post Office and is constructed from Spartan bricks and timber frames. Scandal Point is the highest point in Shimla on the Mall Road. There’s a popular story behind the name of this place. This was where a British Viceroy’s daughter eloped with the Maharaja of Patiala. There’s a statue of Lala Lajpat Rai erected at this spot now.

Scandal Point And Its Surrounding Beauty

Image Credit: Biswarup Ganguly for Wikimedia Commons

Scandal Point is where the Mall Road joins Ridge Road on the west side. The name arose from the commotion caused by the supposed elopement of a British lady with an Indian Maharaja. The story goes that the Maharaja of Patiala had eloped with the daughter of the British Viceroy. The story behind the Scandal Point has been in the talks of many for years, and many seem to understand the story differently. For example, many tourist guides say that the Viceroy’s daughter didn’t elope with Maharaja Bhupinder Singh, but in fact, the Maharaja kidnapped Kitchener’s impressionable daughter from Scandal Point.

This point is a mountain lover’s haven because it enjoys a picturesque and unobstructed view of gigantic mountains covered in a blanket of dense fir and spruce. It is a year-round magnet where people relax and rejuvenate amidst the view of the soaring mountains. One can opt for a horse ride at this point, enjoy some hill station Maggi and play some arcade games in the small shops surrounding this point.

Must Read: Offbeat Places Near Shimla

Best Time To Visit Scandal Point

Image Credit: Biswarup Ganguly for Wikimedia Commons

The best time to visit the Scandal Point would be between March and June. The climate is pleasant and usually varies between 15 and 30 degrees Celsius. The days are bright, and the clear skies allow you to explore the point and its surroundings freely. The winters start in October and go on till February. The climate is biting cold, and the temperature is below -2 degrees Celsius. There may be better times to visit the Scandal Point. Months between July and September experience the seasonal showers. Shimla experiences heavy rainfall and occasional landslides during monsoons. However, the monsoons bring out the lush side of this hill station and make it all the more beautiful and alluring.

Places To Visit Nearby Scandal Point

There are myriad attractions that are worth visiting and add an extra dose of charm to your visit at Scandal Point. These places are as follows:

1. Christ Church

Image Credit: Ma_Frank for pixabay

St Michael Cathedral in Shimla is a throwback to the Victorian era, dating back to 1886. The interiors of the cathedral are decorated in typical French-Gothic style architecture. Currently, the cathedral can hold a service of at least 400 people. Like other churches in India, St. Michael’s Cathedral incorporates a nave, a vestry, a confessional room, a baptistery room and two aisles. The organ in the church is considered to be the finest in North India. The big church building is an essential landmark of Shimla and is located just below the district court. There is an aroma of spirituality in the air of St. Michael’s Cathedral, which sways tourists to light a candle or lay flowers amongst the gilded walls. Inside the church, tourists can see an old glass tapestry and a precious old statue of “Our Lady of Guadalupe,” a gift from Mexico. The beautiful architectural masterpiece is worth a visit on a trip to Shimla.

Location:453G+P9F, Ridge To US Club, The Mall, Shimla, Himachal Pradesh 171001

Distance from Scandal Point: 4.5 Km

Suggested Read: Offbeat Places In Shimla

2. Johnnie’s Wax Museum

Image Credit: Ronit Bhattacharjee for Wikimedia Commons

Johnnie’s Wax Museum, Shimla, was Opened on May 11, 2016, by Chief Minister Virbhadra Singh, the Johnnie’s Wax Museum was brought into existence by a Gurgaon-based company “BM Brothers”, which laid its foundation at the historic Willowbank Estate in the “Queen of Hills”.Featuring wax statues of 16 widely recognised people from different backgrounds, the museum displays the statue of Mahatma Gandhi at the entrance. The Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, and the former President of the USA, Barack Obama, are standing face-to-face. Other names such as Steve Jobs, Johnny Depp, Michael Jackson, Paul Walker (actor of the Fast and Furious), Amir Khan, Harry Potter, James Bond, Tony Stark, Dwayne Johnson, Lionel Messi (Soccer Player), Indian rapper Honey Singh, Justin Bieber and Salman Khan are also there. Located just a few steps away from The Mall Road in Shimla, Johnnie’s Wax Museum can be easily accessed from all parts of the town.

Location: 2, Mall Rd, Near willow Bank, The Mall, Shimla, Himachal Pradesh 171001

Distance from Scandal Point: 3.8 Km

3. Chadwick Falls

Image Credit: Santanu Chandra for Wikimedia Commons

Chadwick Falls is located in the Glen Forests of the beautiful city of Shimla. This stream of water trickles from a height of about 100 metres. Some explorers recall a walk through the forest as an adventurous experience because of the damp and dark environment created by the thick canopy forest. The best time to visit Chadwick Falls is during monsoon, i.e., from June to September as the region receives a good amount of rainfall and the water level rises considerably. Chadwick Falls is located about 7 kilometres from Shimla. Tourists can rent taxis to reach the falls inside the Glen Forest. Those exploring by self-driven vehicles can take the route to the fall via Cart Road and Chaura Maidan Road. Inside the forest, the path goes through a narrow lane, and the trickling waterfall’s sound leads explorers to the exact location.

Location: 449Q+VH3, Shimla, Himachal Pradesh 171005

Distance from Scandal Point: 6.2 Km

Suggested Read: Resorts Near Kufri

4. Baba Balak Nath Temple Garkhal , Kasauli

Image Credit: Rajthakurdxb for Wikimedia Commons

At a distance of 3.5 km from Kasauli, Baba Balak Nath Temple is a famous temple situated at Gadkhal in the Solan district of Himachal Pradesh. The Baba Balak Nath Temple is located on the Graner Hill. This cave temple is dedicated to Baba Balak Nath, an ardent follower of Lord Shiva. Baba Balak Nath is believed to be a reincarnation of Lord Kartikeya, son of Lord Shiva and Goddess Parvati, born in Satya Yuga to annihilate the demon Tarkasur. He is dear to Goddess Ganga and came into his earthly abode as the son of a Pandit Vishnu and Lakshmi in Kathiawad Junagadh, Gujarat. Most of the villages around Hoshiapur and Jullundhar contain a Baba Balaknath temple, frequented by as many Sikhs as Hindus. The Sikhs do not always identify with the official cult and very often believe Baba Balaknath to have been a fourteenth-century predecessor of Guru Nanak, noted for his healing powers.

Location: MDR10, Kasauli, Garkhal, Himachal Pradesh 173202

Distance from Scandal Point: 65.5 Km

5. Mall Road

Image Credit: sushmab for Wikimedia Commons

Mall Road is the major hangout point and shopping centre in Shimla, the capital city of Himachal Pradesh, India. Constructed during British colonial rule, the Mall Road is a level below The Ridge. The stores on Mall Road are famous for their woollen clothes and exclusively handcrafted works, apart from the usual books and jewellery. The wooden furniture shops are particularly well-known; so do not forget to shop for some exquisite wooden articles and antiques. The nearest central railway station to the Mall Road is the Shimla Railway Station. It is located about 3.4 kilometres from here. It is a pedestrian avenue known for its vibrant atmosphere, colonial-era buildings, various shops, cafes, and restaurants, and cultural and historical significance. Vehicles are generally not allowed on Mall Road to maintain its pedestrian-friendly environment.

Location: Shimla, Himachal Pradesh, India

Distance from Scandal Point: 4.5 Km

Further Read: Things To Do In Shimla

Now that you know the factors to consider, you can easily plan your next trip to Shimla. For a truly unique experience, remember to include a stop at the Scandal Point. Prepare your backpacks and head to this unusual and distinctive location.

For our editorial codes of conduct and copyright disclaimer, please click here.

Cover Image Credit: Biswarup Ganguly for wikimedia commons

Frequently Asked Questions About Scandal Point

What is the location of the Scandal Point?

Situated on the Mall Road, Scandal Point is the highest point in Shimla.

What are the various activities to do in Shimla?

Activities to Do While on Vacation in Shimla are Walking on Jakhu Hill, praying at Tara Devi Temple, Taking Pictures at Shimla Ridge, Taking Celebrity Selfies at Johnnie's Wax Museum, and Riding the Toy Train.

Which food is most famous in Shimla?

Madra is among the most well-known meals in Shimla. In this traditional Himachali meal, soaked and boiled chickpeas are cooked in a thick, creamy stew made with yoghurt and a variety of aromatic spices.

What are Shimla temperatures during winter months?

Although November marks the start of winter, December and January are the coldest months. Weather and Temperature: The most significant temperature is 8°C, and the lowest is -6°C.

What is the best way to travel to Shimla?

One can take a taxi, local bus or the toy train to Shimla. Shimla is easily accessible via road too.