Originally formed as a gospel trio in 1990, members Cheryl Gamble, Tamara Johnson and Leanne Lyons sent out demo tapes of their recordings along with bottles of Perrier in the hope of garnering the attention of some record executives across America. In 1991 the group were invited to sing in front of a number of RCA label executives who ended up signing SWV on an eight album contract.

In October 1992 the group released their debut album “It’s About Time” which went double platinum in its first year of release and has since been certified diamond. Influenced by their church gospel harmonies producer Teddy Riley helped establish the group as a commercial force with the No. 13 debut single “Right Here” and the No. 1 hit single “I’m So Into You”. These were followed by the singles “Weak” and “Right Here/Human Nature” – a remix of their debut “Right Here” with Michael Jackson’s “Human Nature” – which led to SWV having two No. 1 R&B singles in a row.

SWV’s follow-up album “New Beginning”, released in 1996 featured the song “You’re the One” which has become one of their most popular songs peaking at No. 5 on the Billboard Hot 100. The album went platinum and made way for their third studio album “Release Some Tension” a year later in 1997. “Release Some Tension” has guest appearances from a laundry list of reputable artists including E-40, P. Diddy, Missy Elliott, Foxy Brown, Lil’ Kim, Snoop Dogg and Redman. Following the release came the Christmas album “A Special Christmas” in 1997 after which SWV announced their separation.

With the disbandment, members pursued their solo efforts with Cheryl Gamble or Coko releasing the solo album “Hot Coko” in 1999 and the full gospel album “Grateful” in 2006. In 2005 SWV returned, however the promised album never materialised but led to a number of live performances with the likes of Alicia Keys, TLC, En Vogue, Bobby Brown and After 7.

In 2011 the group signed with Mass Appeal Entertainment and E1 Entertainment through which they released the lead single “Co-Sign” ahead of their fourth studio album “I Missed Us” (2012).