BOSTON — Jason Terry is growing fond of Boston, but he’ll always have love for Dallas.

And most likely, he’ll be back at some point.

“Dallas is still my home base,” Terry said before the Mavericks played the Celtics on Wednesday night. “I’m still a Maverick in my heart.”

That’s what made it weird seeing Terry in Celtics green as opposed to Mavericks blue. He spent eight seasons in Dallas, and now he’s 20 games into his three-year contract with Boston.

He said he plans to be back with the Mavericks in a capacity to be determined. Owner Mark Cuban already has said Terry always will have a place in the franchise.

“I have no idea,” Terry said of what he would do. “But coaching is in my [future]. I know I want to coach at the college level.”

As far as playing for the Mavericks again someday, Terry said, “You never know. All the options are open. But I’ll always remember what we accomplished in 2011, winning the championship for that city and that organization.”

Before the game Terry trotted to the Mavericks bench, where he and coach Rick Carlisle shared a hand slap and a hug for several seconds.

Asked if the Mavericks miss Terry, Carlisle said: “As K.C. Jones used to say, does a wild bear sleep in the woods? Yeah, we miss him.”

OK, maybe Carlisle didn’t use the word “sleep,” but you get the point.

Cuban said it’s only a matter of time until he retires Terry’s jersey number.

“I have a lot of affection for Jet,” Cuban said. “Not just for what he did on the court, but for what he did for Dallas.”

Terry continued to downplay his first game against the Mavericks, saying the trip to AAC in March will be far more special.

He scored 10 points on 3-for-10 shooting and logged almost 48 minutes of court time in Boston’s double-overtime victory.

Harper next in line: Regarding the subject of jersey number retirement, Cuban said Derek Harper would probably be up next.

Harper, along with Mark Aguirre, were the two Mavericks along with Brad Davis and Rolando Blackman (whose numbers already hang in the rafters) who got the franchise started in the early days.

“I’ll deal with Derek first,” Cuban said when asked if Terry’s jersey would go up soon. “I’d say there’s a good chance [Harper’s number will be retired]. But I’m in no rush to do that.”

Crowder sits out: Rookie forward Jae Crowder remained at the team's Boston hotel during the game to receive fluids and recover from a nasty cold.

Crowder was set to rejoin the team at the plane for their late-night trip to Toronto.

More jersey talk: Carlisle couldn't resist having a little fun at the media's expense before Wednesday's game.

He was asked about the 1986 Boston team that he was part of and won the NBA championship.

“I know my number is going to be retired here, and I’ll be very proud when it goes up,” Carlisle said. “I’ll try to be here for that.”

Carlisle wore No. 34, which also happens to be Paul Pierce’s number.

“He’ll share in that, too, I’m sure,” Carlisle said.

Follow Eddie Sefko on Twitter at @ESefko.