JASON_TERRY_AIRPLANE.JPG

Jason Terry vowed to be more aggressive for the Boston Celtics. He returns Friday night to Dallas, where he was a big part of the Mavericks' 2011 championship.

(Photo by AP Photo/Michael Dwyer)

Jason Terry has had a rough week, at least basketball-wise.

He shot well against the Miami Heat, hitting 67 percent of his field goal attempts, but also scored just nine points because -- as has been his problem all year -- he couldn't find enough opportunities. He hit 4-6 from the field, but the Celtics lost a 13-point fourth-quarter lead and fell by two points.

The highlight of the game was Terry getting

dunked on by LeBron James, leading to a Twitter and Instagram meme of pictures

proclaiming Terry dead

. Later, James said he was glad he dunked on Terry, because the shooting guard talks too much.

Two days after the Miami nail-biter, the Celtics lost another heartbreaker, this time to the woeful New Orleans Hornets when Anthony Davis tipped in an Eric Gordon miss just before the buzzer. The defeat would have been bad enough for Terry, who seems to like little more than winning. But there was also his part in the loss. JET, as they call him, missed all five of his field goal attempts, finishing scoreless for the second time this season, the fifth time since 2004, and the 14th time in his 14-year career.

You can forgive him if he wasn't ready to discuss his return to the Dallas Mavericks. He did say "it's cool" and he plans to be "super-aggressive," but he seemed more concentrated on making a vow for the remainder of the season.

"I'm about to get more aggressive," he promised, according to the Boston Globe. "I already know what time it is. Any time you have a game like I had tonight, it's time to turn up the aggression level.

“I can’t wait until the third or fourth quarter and think I’m just going to get it going. So that’s my responsibility. The team is counting on me. And I told them, ‘This one’s on me,’ so I’ll definitely make up for it Friday.”

Terry's certainly proud. One gets the sense he always will be. But at 35 years old, it's fair to ask whether he's capable of consistently providing scoring outbursts like he did in the past. This season, he's actually shooting more efficiently than he has since 2008-09 (based on true shooting percentage and effective field goal percentage, two stats which weigh the respective value of 2- and 3-pointers). The problem has been finding shots, which likely points to a combination of Terry being a step slower and struggling to adjust to his new offensive system in Boston.

He's returning to Dallas for the first time on Friday, after leaving the Mavericks in free agency when their interest didn't seem to match his own. Terry left on good terms, to be sure. His former teammates and owner all seem to echo an appreciation for everything Terry gave the franchise.

"I hope they (fans) give him a standing ovation," said Mavericks owner Mark Cuban, according to the Dallas News. "He's earned it. He'll be a Maverick for life. He's part of the family.

“Basketball is a short part of your life, and then there’s the rest of your life. Hopefully we’ll be part of JET's after he retires.”

“It should be a great standing ovation for him,” said Mavericks forward Shawn Marion, according to the Globe. “He played a big part in us winning the championship, and we’ve got a bond together for life. They know that here in the valley, and that’s all that matters.

“He didn’t leave here with no problems. It just happened that he wasn’t able to extend his deal here and he went to Boston and started a new career. But at the same time, he’s got a piece of that championship banner in there, so that’s all I need to say.”

Terry has a piece of that championship banner in Dallas, and a big one. And he will keep fighting for another championship banner in Boston, even if it seems beyond unlikely, even if there will sometimes be nights when he wonders where his scoring prowess went to hide.