Martha Coakley Concession

Democratic Attorney General Martha Coakley concedes in her race for governor against Charlie Baker on November 5, 2014.

(Garrett Quinn, MassLive)

SOMERVILLE – Democratic Attorney General Martha Coakley, who lost the governor's race by a razor-thin margin, pledged on Wednesday to help Republican governor-elect Charlie Baker in any way she can.

"In the end, after a race like this, we come together and make sure we have a governing democracy," Coakley said.

Coakley lost to Baker by just 40,000 votes out of more than 2 million votes cast, and the race was not called in Baker's favor until nearly 1 a.m. Given the closeness of the race, Coakley waited to concede until the morning.

Coakley called Baker to congratulate him at 8:15 a.m. She spoke to a dispirited group of staff and supporters at her Somerville headquarters later in the morning. At times, Coakley's voice broke, and she appeared to be holding back tears.

"He could not have been more gracious last night making sure we got the tally, and he could not have been more gracious when I called to say congratulations Charlie, great race, and I look forward to helping you in any way I can," Coakley said.

Coakley, whose term as attorney general concludes at the end of the year, did not say what her future plans are, and would not rule out another run for elected office. "There so many things that I care about, that I am interested in. I want to find a way to keep working for the people of Massachusetts," Coakley said. "What form that takes, I'll see."

Coakley was joined by Gov. Deval Patrick, U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren, attorney general-elect Maura Healey, local officials and labor leaders.

Coakley cited two issues that she said are important to her and she believes to Baker – making Massachusetts a leader on environmental issues and reducing the stigma around mental illness.

If elected, Coakley would have become Massachusetts' first female elected governor. She encouraged other women to run for office. "For every woman who didn't get the job she wanted or didn't get the promotion or who ran the race and lost, I say go right back at it," Coakley said.

Coakley's supporters attributed her defeat in part to a deluge of outside spending and negative television ads. An outside group funded primarily by the Republican Governors Association spent more than $11 million on the race, most of it running negative ads against Coakley. Pro-Coakley political action committees spent around $4 million.

"There's no mystery to the fact we were outspent ten to one in negative advertising by the RGA," Coakley said.

Coakley's campaign had asked the DGA for help, but the national association spent just $1.3 million in independent expenditures.

New Jersey governor and RGA chairman Chris Christie congratulated Baker in a statement on Wednesday saying Baker's victory "primes Massachusetts for a turnaround."

Coakley, asked about DGA, said "That's a question for them." A DGA spokesman did not immediately respond to an email asking about the race.

Baker and Polito also raised $6.87 million, compared to just $4.26 million raised by Coakley and Kerrigan.

Kerrigan, speaking before Coakley, said, "Her class and her dignity permeated every aspect of this campaign." Though his party lost, Kerrigan said, "our journey is far from over.

Kerrigan too appeared to be holding back tears as he quoted his former boss, U.S. Sen. Edward Kennedy, who said in his own concession speech, "The work goes on, the cause endures, the hopes still lives and the dream shall never die."

Baker is scheduled to speak to reporters at 12:30 p.m.