Martha Coakley, Charlie Baker

This Oct. 21, 2014, file photo shows Massachusetts gubernatorial candidates Democrat Martha Coakley, left, and Republican Charlie Baker, right, moments before their televised debate at WGBH television studios in Boston. In the final weekend before the election, both candidates will be campaigning across the state including high-profile stops in Springfield. (AP Photo/The Boston Globe, Barry Chin, Pool)

(Barry Chin)

BOSTON -- In the final days of the Massachusetts gubernatorial campaign, an old political corruption case is coming back to haunt Democrat Martha Coakley, while Republican Charlie Baker is being dogged by a fisherman.

Coakley is facing accusations from former inspector general Greg Sullivan that she failed to properly investigate former Democratic House Speaker Sal DiMasi in a corruption scandal, which was ultimately tried by federal prosecutors.

Massachusetts Democrats are attacking Baker because of an emotional story he told during a debate about a fisherman in New Bedford who denied his sons a chance to go to college, then regretted it. Baker later acknowledged that he'd met the man during his 2010 run for governor and may have misstated some of the details.

The DiMasi issue arose last week when Sullivan, in a Boston Globe story, said Coakley in October 2008 told him to discontinue an investigation into DiMasi because she did not see a "bright line of criminality" in DiMasi's conduct. DiMasi was convicted of federal corruption charges in 2011 for taking kickbacks in exchange for steering state contracts to the software company Cognos.

A whistleblower, Stuart Lecky, told the Globe that he approached Coakley's office with information about DiMasi and Cognos, and her office told him it appeared to be political deal-making but not anything the attorney general could prosecute.

Sullivan and Lecky held a call with reporters on Sunday. Lecky said he told the attorney general's office in 2007 about what appeared to be procurement fraud related to Cognos, with the governor's office purchasing software that was unnecessary. Lecky said he brought a 90-page packet to Coakley's office and was told the procurement may have involved "horsetrading" but they "felt there was nothing illegal" and referred him to Sullivan.

Sullivan said that behavior "is at odds with the statement the attorney general is making that they aggressively pursued the Cognos-DiMasi matter."

Coakley does not dispute that the attorney general's office did not find enough for a criminal prosecution when Lecky first approached them. It is the job of the inspector general to investigate, then it can refer a matter back to the attorney general, or the U.S. Attorney, for prosecution.

But Coakley has said the October 2008 conversation Sullivan referenced did not happen as he described it, and she never told him to discontinue the investigation. She said her office was actively investigating DiMasi at the time, in light of additional information that emerged after Lecky came to her. According to Coakley's aides, by March 2008, emails show Coakley was pursuing a cyber-crime investigation into the Cognos issue. During the summer of 2008, that investigation was ongoing, and the attorney general issued subpoenas and empaneled a grand jury investigation in a separate but related case involving DiMasi adviser Richard Vitale's illegal lobbying on behalf of ticket brokers. Court documents in the Vitale case indicate that a grand jury was meeting between September and December 2008.

Ultimately, Coakley's office tried and convicted Vitale. Coakley says she worked with the U.S. Attorney's office to prosecute DiMasi and his friend Richard McDonough for the Cognos scheme - though Sullivan says it was his office, not Coakley's, that worked with the U.S. Attorney.

Coakley's campaign released a statement from former attorney general Tom Reilly, whose chief of staff was Coakley's running mate Steve Kerrigan, calling Coakley "fearless" in prosecuting public corruption.

"As Attorney General, I also know first-hand that it is best to work cooperatively with the United States Attorney's Office when they have stronger tools to prosecute these cases, including the DiMasi case," Reilly said. "Greg Sullivan is wrong to question her aggressive pursuit of these cases, and doing it two days before an election makes me question his motivations."

Baker's recent trouble began when was asked at the final televised debate about the last time he cried. Baker told an emotional story about an interaction with a fisherman. Reporters later discovered that Baker told a similar story in 2010, and no one could track down the fisherman. Baker says he confused the details.

"I got some of the details wrong, but the story's true," Baker said Sunday.

The Massachusetts Democratic Party held a call Sunday with New Bedford Mayor Jon Mitchell and State Rep. Ann-Margaret Ferrante, a Gloucester Democrat. Ferrante and Mitchell criticized Baker's portrayal of fishermen and said Coakley has been a strong advocate for the fishing industry. "I don't believe Charlie Baker's fisherman exists, because I don't believe a fisherman would deny their child a free college education," Ferrante said.

Ferrante said if Baker was so concerned with the plight of fishermen, he should have reached out to the fishing community over the last four years and used his connections to help them. She said that shows what kind of governor Baker would be.

"Is this a governor of action or is this a governor who says I may have talked to someone and I'm so moved I cry every time I tell it, yet I didn't pick up the phone to call and say what can I do to help these guys?" Ferrante said.

At a Saturday rally in Springfield, Kerrigan and Democratic treasurer candidate Deb Goldberg both attacked Baker over the story.

"I've been in New Bedford twice in the last 48 hours. I can't find the fisherman. Why? Because he doesn't exist," Goldberg said. Goldberg told MassLive.com reporter Brendan McKenna that she thinks Baker was targeting women with his tears, and finding out that his story had mistakes "doesn't quite add up for us."

Baker responded that Democrats "are desperate." "I've been saying since the primary that they were going to spend most of the general election talking about me and not talking about their message for voters about what their plans were because they don't have any," Baker told reporters in Boston.

Baker said he and his wife joke that "every time we turn on the TV we learn something new about me that we never knew even though we've been married for 27 years."

Baker was endorsed Saturday by Carolyn Kirk, the Democratic mayor of Gloucester, which has a strong fishing industry.

The two issues are clearly of a different magnitude, but both have been dogging the candidates during days that are typically dedicated to turning out voters.

Coakley's campaign manager Tim Foley wrote in an email, "There is a big difference between this (DiMasi) issue and Charlie Baker's fisherman story. Sal DiMasi is in jail, and the fisherman is still missing."