Hello Frockers & the Stokers!!

It is Autumn which means it is Vintage Time in Hawkes Bay!!!

What better way to celebrate than a ride to take in the New Pathway extension out back of Park Island and ending up at Crab Farm Winery, Bayview for Lunch.

Then back along the Water front to your desired finishing point.

When: Sunday April the 15th 2012

Time: 10.00 meet at Park Island, Napier for 10.15am ride time!

Lunch: approximate arrival 12.00pm Crab Farm Please RSVP to Anna to book a place anna@aratakihoney.co.nz

NOTE: Added extra for those that want to part take in or to have a go at bike polo, meet at the Sound Shell at 2.30 pm

Deco Bicycle Belles

The Annual Deco Ride is on again!

Saturday Feb 18th – Bicycle Belles, yes its the annual Art Deco Weekend, which is wheelie lots of fun 😉 Meet Soundshell at 9.30am and proceed in a disorderly fashion around to East Pier for refreshements. Then return to Soundshell for a picnic lunch by the pathway. Gold Coin donation for the Art Deco Trust. So start thinking about your Deco Duds for this one – everyone is welcome.

Christmas Celebration Ride!

Sunday 18th December, come join us for a ride, coffee n treats – Christmas Theme – bring out the mistle toe 🙂

Long Option: Meet 18 Ellison Street, Napier at Anna’s place at 12pm. Ride along Marine Parade and out to Bayview, winding back on pathways via Airport/Park Island to Wild Roses, to be there by 2pm. This is a long ride option so be ready to ride for about 20km

Short Option: Meet Wild Roses Cafe, Greenmeadows at 2pm for a quick ride around Park Island followed by coffee n treats at Wild Roses Cafe at 2.30pm. Ride length about 7km 🙂

Come join us for some Christmas Cheer!

WOMANS ONLY BIKE MAINTENANCE COURSE

I often get asked questions about how to change a tyre – and I’m amazed how many of us girls think it’s a ‘boys’ job. Sometimes though the ‘boys’ just don’t happen to be handy so……….

Empower yourselves girls!

In conjunction with Avanti Plus Hastings we are offering the ‘Ladies’ a special bike maintenance course – just for you! It doesn’t matter what bike you have I’m sure they can enlighten you. Jamie and Jon from AvantiPlus Hastings have kindly offered to run a Bike Maintenance course just for the girls. These workshops are a great way to increase your understanding of how your bicycle works and gain confidence with carrying out your own basic maintenance. With all those summer events and summer evenings coming up what better time to!

Topics covered will be: Puncture repair, wheel removal, simple cleaning & lubrication, instruction on chain breaking and repair, basic gear tuning and brake pad replacement & adjustment and any other questions/requests.

DATE: Wednesday 12 Oct, 6pm WHERE: Avanti Plus Hastings, 1/401 Queen Street West, Hastings.

COST: Gold coin only! Please RSVP: 8703500 or avantiplushastings@paradise.net.nz

First in first served – a maximum of 20 per course.

Bonjour Madams!

Spring is here we hope you are enjoying our lovely Hawke’s Bay Spring – by cycling! You are all invited to the next “HB Frockers” ride. We will be following on from Ingrid’s famous French themed Rugby World Cup Ride, where she won tickets and smoozed with Tamati. We are inviting you all to meet dressed in French theme (French Knickers, Beret, French Maid or just French Chic) for a Picnic.

Date: Sunday 18th September at 1pm at the Napier Sound Shell.

So ride your bike into Napier, meet at the Sound Shell for some French picnic fun! BYO Fabulicious French Picnic, what about a bottle of Moet, cheese, pate, grapes and chocolates ……… mmmmmm ENJOY! All to coincide with the Rugby World Cup French game that evening and Art Deco afternoon.

Oh lala! Aurevoir! Fantastic French Picnic – thanks for the French support HB frockers! Photos at: https://picasaweb.google.com/BikeChic99/Frockers?authuser=0&feat=directlink

Its that time of year again. The HB Brave at Heart Tartan & Tweed Trail is on Sunday 3rd July.

Thanks for coming to the Heels on Wheels show! From having fun on runway bikes to watching the red carpet show. Check out the photos here: http://www.facebook.com/mobileprotection#!/media/set/?set=a.213105835376987.54737.180221015332136

Come join us for Heels on Wheels Bike Fashion Show in Hastings on Sunday May 22nd

3-5pm at the Hawke’s Bay Opera House, free glass of bubbles for first 200 arrivals.

Compared by Miss Universe NZ 2010 Ria van Dyke and Ross Holden

A wonderful show of fashionable bikes and everyday cycle clothes!

Heels on Wheels Link for poster and more details

Bicycle Belles Ride! Hawke’s Bay Sat 19th Feb 9.30am

All welcome to join the Hawkes Bay Frockers and Art Deco Weekend Celebrations

Where: Marine Parade, behind Sound Shell on pathway, Napier

When: Saturday February 19th at 9.30am – Art Deco Weekend 2011 www.artdeconapier.com

Join the Bicycle Belles at Marine Parade, on pathway behind Soundshell in Napier. Join us for a leisurely cycle on the Rotary Pathway around to East Pier where you can enjoy light refreshments before biking back to Marine Parade. Old bikes and deco duds a must! Last year we had over 80 riders, some on beautiful old bikes and in Deco finery. If you don’t have an old bike just come anyway! Gold Coin donation for Deco Trust.

Frockolicious Pink Cup Cake Ride!

♥ You are invited to join us on a ride and picnic to celebrate National Frocktober Day on October 16th. Bring your own picnic down the Hastings Race Course, to join us on a ride around some of Hastings Parks, before heading back to the Race Course for a Teaparty and Pink Cup Cake Judging Competition.

♥ A fantastic prize from Total Food Equipment is up for grabs. So try your hand at baking some pink cupcakes! Judges Robyn Warren from Warrens Bakery and Vicki Butterworth will be looking for the best looking and tasting Frockolicious Pink Cup Cake! Check out Total Food Equipment range for inspiration, you can find them on Bower Street in Napier.

♥ So pop on your prettiest Frock and join us for the celebrations of National Froctober Day and raise awareness by wearing Pink for Breast Cancer Awareness Month.

Meet Saturday October 16th at Hastings Race Course, Prospect Road, Hastings. Time: 1.00pm for a ride, returning approx 3pm for the Teaparty and CupCake Competition! Fran, Judy and Sue will be your party leaders 🙂

Blossom Festival – Come join the parade!

All Frockers are invited to join in the Blossom Festival Parade, on Saturday 11th Sept in Hastings. Judging of the float starts at 12.15, with the parade commencing at 1.30pm. You are all invited to join Hastings District Councils float/parade! So, if you are planning to dress up, you will need to be ready by 12.15, so in order to make life easier, we will be providing a bite to eat from 11.30am at the main admin building, Hastings District Council, Lyndon Street, Hastings. This will be on the first floor, outside the Mayor’s office. If you don’t want lunch, just make sure you are at the admin building for 1.15pm. Remember, you can come dressed as a walker or cyclist (or a famous walker or cyclist,) and bring your scooters, cycles, pushchairs, wheelchairs, mobility scooters, preferably decked out in a floral theme … so get out your prettiest spring frock, we want to show our community that walking and cycling is fun, healthy and easy!

Deco Decanted Weekend – Cycling Event

Bicycle Belles Parade (New Associated Event)

Celebrate Deco Decanted Weekend in Napier and join the Parade. Join us for a promenade of bicycles. Old bikes and tweeds a must!

Event: Deco Decanted Bicycle Belles Parade

Date: Saturday 17th July 2010, 10.30am to 11.30am approx (gold coin entry)

Venue: Rendezvous at the Hawke’s Bay Club, Browning Street, Napier

Course: Cyclists and their cycling machines will congregate at the HB Club on Browning Street at 10.30am. At 11.00am the parade will be the led out by a vintage truck, bikes and pedestrians will follow with vintage cars at the rear. The parade will proceed in orderly fashion along Hastings Street, down Emerson Street, finishing just outside Whitcoulls Bookshop. We encourage you to bring your bike, tweeds and enjoy the opportunity to partake in an official deco parade.This is a social and fun ride for anyone with an old bike!

HB Brave at Heart Tartan Trail Sunday 27th June

BOOK THE BABY SITTER GIRLS!

On Saturday April 10th all Frockers are invited to join us in a delicious evening soiree. In conjunction with the Avanti Plus Girls Weekend Ride (details at www.bikehb.co.nz) you are invited to join us to see an exclusive Annah S Fashion Show at Black Barn Vineyards, Black Barn Road, Havelock North. Being held in the Underground Cellar from 5pm. Refreshments will be available for purchase. After the show we are riding down the hill into Havelock North Village to imbibe at Diva Bistro & Bar. (Phone 06 8775149 to book at table for dinner)

For those who would like to finish riding down and not up, some will be meeting in the carpark behind the Havelock North Info centre and riding up to Black Barn (approx 5k), leaving from 4.30pm. It is recommended you dust off the dynamo and put on your lights – the delights of autumn evening riding.