On Thursday, March 11, 4:00 pm, Florence Board of Architects dedicates a meeting to “Wood City: An Example of a Sustainable City in Helsinki”

Florence Architects Foundation has scheduled an online meeting for Thursday, March 11, 4:00-6:00 pm, dedicated to Wood City, a sustainable architecture project recently inaugurated in Helsinki. Wood City is a new urban regeneration project by AOA Anttinen Oiva Architects, in the spirit of sustainability. Completed at the beginning of 2021 in the Jätkäsaari area close to Helsinki City Center, with a gross floor area of 34,000 sqm, it consists of housing, a hotel, stores, offices and parking premises.

The initiative, promoted by Florence Architects Foundation, is curated by architect Arianna Callocchia. The goal of this webinar is to show the value of sustainable projects and urban regeneration in Finland, and in Helsinki in particular. In addition to environmental sustainability and urban regeneration, the webinar will also focus on technological innovation and building redevelopment as sustainability factors in architecture.

The meeting, moderated by Giorgio Cerrai, Councilor of the Florence Board of Architects and Florence Architects Foundation, will start with the welcome remarks by Colomba Pecchioli, President of the Florence Architects Foundation, then the floor will be given to Selina Anttinen, Architect SAFA, AOA Anttinen Oiva Architects Ltd of Helsinki, and Teemu Halme, Architect SAFA, AOA Anttinen Oiva Architects Ltd of Helsinki.

Discover the new Amos Rex art museum in Helsinki

The conference is organized in collaboration with ATL – The Association of Finnish Architects’ Offices, with the Patronage of the Finnish Embassy to Italy, Archinfo Finland, the Florence Board of Architects and the Italian Council of Architects. This meeting is organized with the support of Gruppo Pirotto, Italian company specialized in the sector of wooden prefabricated houses and roof beams.

Architects must register online via IM@ATERIA and will receive 2 CFP professional training credits.

For further information open the following link: