A good love makes your heart soar, fills your stomach with butterflies, and fills your head with pictures of a future together. But a bad love can leave you broken and wishing you'd never known this person in the first place.

What’s worse is that we don’t always know when the person we love is actually bad for us. Sometimes we think that’s just how love is supposed to be. Or maybe you are "accepting the love you think you deserve," as author Stephen Chbosky once said.

Advertisement

In a perfect world, we’d all have and know only that kind of love all the time — but we don’t live in a perfect world. So sometimes, we fall in love with someone who does more harm than good.

Things might get to a point where we just can't take it anymore and the only thing to do is leave. And when we finally find the strength to do that, only then do we see just how badly they treated us.

Advertisement

Without an understanding friend to lean on, heartbreak can feel really lonely. When there's no one else to talk to, sad but inspirational love quotes are reassuring. Take, for instance, Sylvia Plath's quote, “Perhaps someday I’ll crawl back home, beaten, defeated. But not as long as I can make stories out of my heartbreak, beauty out of sorrow.”

Sometimes it takes sad quotes to make us realize that love is the greatest and most painful force on earth. The saddest quotes strike a chord with anyone experiencing heartache. Like Meredith Taylor's words, "My heart no longer felt as if it belonged to me. It now felt as it had been stolen, torn from my chest by someone who wanted no part of it.”

But wise words about breakups can also come in the form of empowering quotes that encourage you to pick yourself back up when you're feeling broken.

Here are 65 “no more love” quotes about the heartbreak of giving up on a relationship with someone you love.

1. "I'm tired of fighting. For once I want to be fought for."

2. "The moment you start to wonder if you deserve better, you do." — David Williams

Advertisement

3. "Nothing hurts more than being disappointed by the single person you thought would never hurt you." — Ayo Makun

4. "Someone shouldn't need to be faced with your absence to value your presence." — Nitya Prakash

5. "There is a difference between giving up and knowing when you have had enough." — Joanne Reed

6. "Apology accepted. Trust denied." — Tony Reeves

7. "Just because I'm strong enough to handle the pain, doesn't mean I deserve it."

8. “We accept the love we think we deserve.” ― Stephen Chbosky

9. "Your worst battle is between what you know and what you feel." — Alex Haditaghi

10. "It is a lonely feeling when someone you care about becomes a stranger." — Lemony Snicket

11. "You see a person's true colors when you are no longer beneficial to their life." — Lovely Goyal

12. "She didn't leave you for making too many mistakes, she left because you made the same mistake too many times." — Theresa Fearon

13. “I miss your smile... but I miss mine more.” ― Laurel House

Advertisement

14. “It is in that moment, when you really lay down your cards and see the relationship for what it was, that you'll find the freedom to kick it in the ass and let it go.” ― Greg Behrendt

15. “No matter how bad you want a person, if your hearts are in two different places, you’ll have to pass and move on.” ― Alexandra Elle

16. “I was fine before you came into my life. And I bet I’ll be just fine without you in it again.” ― Nina Ardianti

17. “Being close but feeling far, talking but not being heard, loving but not being loved, that is the painful reality of a dying relationship.” ― Steve Maraboli

18. “I loved him, every inch of his being, but I realized one day; if loving him meant losing me, then loving him was not enough anymore.” ― Nikki Rowe

19. “Sometimes it's better to end something and try to start something new than imprison yourself in hoping for the impossible.” ― Karen Salmansohn

20. “Know this: whenever you think of leaving, a part of you has already left. But it’s never too late to get it back.” ― Kamand Kojouri

21. “You don't walk away to prove your worth. You walk away because you allowed someone else to dictate your value and you found yourself believing it.” ― Shannon L. Alder

22. “Somewhere underneath it all, I know he doesn't deserve to take up space in my brain.” ― Susane Colasanti

23. “I stayed there loving you, though the love made me, not sad, but I guess melancholy, for a reason I couldn’t point to.” ― Daniel Handler

24. “Never allow someone to be your priority while allowing yourself to be their option.” ― Mark Twain

25. “She took a step and didn't want to take any more, but she did.” ― Markus Zusak

Advertisement

26. “You cannot be with someone just because you don’t want to hurt him. You have your own happiness to think about.” ― Melissa de la Cruz

27. “The saddest thing is to be a minute to someone, when you've made them your eternity.” ― Sanober Khan

28. “When you leave, weary of me, without a word I shall gently let you go.” ― Kim Sowol

29. “We walked to meet each other up at the time of our love and then we have been irresistibly drifting in different directions, and there's no altering that.” ― Leo Tolstoy

30. “To truly love is to have the courage to walk away and let the other person who wishes to be free go no matter how much it hurts.” ― Taylor Swift

31. “It is better to be hated for what you are than to be loved for what you are not.” ― Andre Gide

32. “If you ever find yourself in the wrong story, leave.” ― Mo Willems

33. “The only thing more unthinkable than leaving was staying; the only thing more impossible than staying was leaving.” ― Elizabeth Gilbert

34. “I don’t want just words. If that’s all you have for me, you’d better go.” ― F. Scott Fitzgerald

35. “I didn't leave because I stopped loving you, I left because the longer I stayed the less I loved myself.” ― Rupi Kaur

36. “I'm guilty of giving people more chances than they deserve but when I'm done, I'm done.” ― Turcois Ominek

37. “I have not broken your heart - you have broken it; and in breaking it, you have broken mine.” ― Emily Brontë

Advertisement

38. “Well, you can't have heartbreak without love. If your heart was really broken, then at least you know you really loved him.” ― Leila Sales

39. “If you have to speculate if someone loves you and wants to be with you, chances are they don't. It's not that complicated. Love, in most cases, betrays the one feeling it. Don't waste moments waiting and wondering. Don't throw away your time dreaming of someone that doesn't want you. No one is that amazing, certainly not the one who would pass you up.” ― Donna Lynn Hope

40. “We hurt so much because we have lost a part of ourselves. If we have loved much, we must have given much also, and when everything's over, we feel as though we have lost everything.” ― Jocelyn Soriano

41. “My heart no longer felt as if it belonged to me. It now felt as it had been stolen, torn from my chest by someone who wanted no part of it.” ― Meredith Taylor

42. “The only place I ever felt at home was with you. There isn’t a place for me anywhere anymore... I’ve been evicted.” ― Ranata Suzuki

43. "Half of my heart's got a grip on the situation. Half of my heart takes time. Half of my heart's got the right mind to tell you that I can't keep loving you with half of my heart, with half of my heart." — John Mayer

44. "When all you wanted was to be wanted, wish you could go back and tell yourself what you know now. Back then I swore I was going to marry him someday but I realized some bigger dreams of mine." — Taylor Swift

45. "For so many months I was wishing that you, that you would stop pretending. Remember all those countless nights when I told you I'd loved you? And you'd never forget it, oh, just forget it." — Modern Baseball, "Your Graduation"

46. "You know you can't give me what I need. And even though you mean so much to me, I can't wait through everything." — A Day to Remember, "If It Means A Lot To You"

47. "We still talk like every day. But we don’t talk in the same way that we used to, I’ll move on and forget you. We could never see eye to eye." — Neck Deep, "A Part of Me"

48. “You flew off with the wings of my heart and left me flightless.” — Stelle Atwater

49. “Sometimes it takes a heartbreak to shake us awake and help us see we are worth so much more than we’re settling for.” — Mandy Hale

Advertisement

50. "I’m not crying because of you; you’re not worth it. I’m crying because my delusion of who you were was shattered by the truth of who you are.” — Steve Maraboli

51. “So it’s true when all is said and done, grief is the price we pay for love.” — E.A. Bucchianeri

52. “Perhaps someday I’ll crawl back home, beaten, defeated. But not as long as I can make stories out of my heartbreak, beauty out of sorrow.” — Sylvia Plath

53. “You left with my soul in your fists and my heart in your teeth, and I don’t want either of them back.” — Colleen Hoover

54. “Loving you was like going to war; I never came back the same.” — Warsan Shire

55. “What a painful thing to taste forever in the eyes of someone who doesn’t see the same.” — Perry Poetry

56. “I am hopelessly in love with a memory. An echo from another time, another place.” — Michael Faudet

57. “I will never regret you or say I wish I’d never met you. Because once upon a time you were exactly what I needed.” — Bob Marley

58. “I love you, but I hate you. I miss you, but I’m better off without you. I want you out of my life, but I never want to let you go.” — Minhal Mehdi

59. "And now I'll do what's best for me." — John Green

60. "The most painful thing is losing yourself in the process of loving someone too much, and forgetting that you are special too." — Ernest Hemingway

61. “I will not try to convince you to love me, to respect me, to commit to me. I deserve better than that; I am better than that... goodbye.” ― Steve Maraboli

62. “When you loved someone and had to let them go, there will always be that small part of yourself that whispers, 'What was it that you wanted and why didn't you fight for it?'” ― Shannon L. Alder

63. “You fell in love with a storm. Did you really think you would get out unscathed?” ― Nikita Gill

64. “There is an ocean of silence between us... and I am drowning in it.” ― Ranata Suzuki

65. “I cannot compromise my respect for your love. You can keep your love, I will keep my respect.” ― Amit Kalantri

Tess Griman is a writer whose work focuses on relationships, astrology, and pop culture.

Advertisement