Has anyone ever addressed the issue as to why '65 Love Affair' sounds so muffled?

It's one of my favorite songs from the '80s, but I always thought that sonically it leaves a lot to be desired.

Were they trying to get an AM radio sound from it, hence the title?

Were they going for a Wall Of Sound approach?

Was it recorded in a cheap studio while Paul Davis was on tour?

Am I overexamining this?

And those drums. Yikes!! Could they have found a more primitive sounding drum machine? (Gee, I hope that isn't a real drummer on there.)

Those drums sound like one of those groovy, but slightly creepy guys from the music store at the mall who would play one of those cheesey organs with a robotic rhythm track and smile at all the thirteen year old girls who walked by.

Hey, Mike! How've ya been? You're right, I was thinking that when I started the thread, but didn't actually use the word compressed in my post.

I'm wondering if maybe it started out as a demo recording and was transferred to a 32 track for additional overdubbing? Maybe that's why the drums are so cheesey. Could be they were locked in with the vocals. Again, all this is pure speculation.

That's possible. I will say that even though it might not be a Hi-Fi recording, it always sounded good to me on the radio. It was fun firing up the 45 coming out of a shotgun jingle. Those drums would hit just as the jingle finished. Always sounded great. The same with "Go All The Way" by The Raspberries. I loved playing that song after a jingle.

I just noticed on Amazon that Paul Davis has a budget compilation in the 'Super Hits' series that was released earlier this year.

This might be the perfect disc for the casual fan because it appears that all his radio hits are here from both Columbia and-----was it Arista that released the 'Cool Night' album?

Anway, here's the track list. Looks great to me and only $5.98!

1. '65 Love Affair

2. Thinking Of You

3. Cool Night

4. Darlin'

5. I Go Crazy

6. Do Right

7. Superstar

8. Sweet Life

9. Ride 'Em Cowboy

10. Love Or Let Me Be Lonely

... and a few from the "BANG!" years.

Actually, by the time that BANG Records released "I Go Crazy" back in 1978, CBS/Columbia had begun distributing releases from that label; "I Go Crazy" bore the BANG label but had record numbers used by the CBS Associated group of labels (e.g. Kirshner, Jet). Paul Davis switched to Arista around 1982 when CBS bought the BANG label outright (including its back catalog and masters). The BANG catalog is now part of Sony Music Entertainment, which now also owns the labels that were previously part of BMG Entertainment (including Arista).

Between 1973 and 1977, BANG Records was based in Atlanta and was independently distributed. Prior to 1973, BANG was based in NYC and was also independently distributed.

You're just a little bit early on that. "I Go Crazy" was still on the Web IV version of the Bang label (catalog number B-733). His late-1978 hit "Sweet Life" was also on the Atlanta Bang label (B-738). The last big hit on the "indie" Bang label was "Dancin' Shoes" by Nigel Olsson in late 1978-early 1979 (B-740). Olsson's 1979 follow-up, a remake of "A Little Bit of Soap" (without the "A" as part of the title) was the first single on the CBS-distributed Bang label (ZS8 4800).

CBS bought Bang primarily at the insistence of Neil Diamond, in order to get the countless reissues of his Bang stuff off the market and get them under his control. It's kinda like how (and why) CBS helped Andy Williams buy the Cadence label in 1964.

I am always concerned when an artist who has appeared on various labels puts out a greatest hits CD containing ALL of their hits. Makes me think they are either "live" versions (Neil Diamond, anyone), or simply re-recordings.

Well, in this case Davis has passed away, and I am not aware that he re-recorded his hits before passing. So the chances would be high in any case that these are originals. Add to that the fact that, as someone else has already pointed out, the songs are all now controlled under the Sony umbrella and chances are very high these are the original versions.

Have any of you, other than me, ever listened to the complete ARISTA album (Cool Night), from which "'65 Love Affair" was taken? This whole album sounds like crap, including the three chart singles, "'65 Love Affair", "Cool Night" and Paul's cover of "Love Or Let Me Be Lonely". Normally, I'm a HUGE fan of Japanese released CD's, because they normally have flat or softly altered "sound", but even my Japanese ARISTA/BMG CD from 1991 (pictured below), has HORRIBLE "sound", proving that this is plainly a poor recording. Now, with THAT said, let me investigate this a little further to try to find out WHY it sounds so crappy. I can offer the following info (provided by the CD booklets), both the ARISTA "Cool Night" album sessions and the album previous to "Cool Night", the self-titled Paul Davis (1980, BANG/SONY RECORDS, my Japanese CD pressing, also pictured below, from 1991, which sounds GREAT in comparison to the "Cool Night" album), were BOTH produced by the same producers, Ed Seay and Paul Davis and BOTH albums were recorded at the SAME studio, WEB IV in Atlanta. BOTH albums were mastered at MASTERFONICS in Nashville (possibly different mastering engineers?) (NOTE: the "Paul Davis" album gives no mastering engineer credit, while the "Cool Night" album was done by Jim Loyd. BOTH albums shared the same engineers, Ed Seay and Tommy Cooper (with Richard Wells additionally, on the "Paul Davis" album). With THIS info provided, it could be that the poor sound could be due to a possible "different" mastering engineer or possibly "different" equipment added or subtracted from the WEB IV studios? Draw your own conclusions,,,

Chris C

Thanks for the small correction.

Got this in the mail today and after a quick listen to the "hits", this release appears (to me) to use the original versions and not re-recordings which was my fear.

Great! There's a much more expensive 14 track Greatest Hits, but that's a little more Paul Davis than I need. My collection is so huge (like most of us here) that I really only want the radio hits collected in one place. This 'Super Hits' CD seems to be the best bet for a lot of people out there.