BobbyM

Post by t***@iwvisp.com

Paul Davis, a singer and songwriter whose soft rock hit "I Go Crazy"

stayed at the top of the charts for weeks after its release in 1977,

has died at a Mississippi hospital.

Davis was a singer and songwriter, whose other popular hits included

"65 Love Affair;" "You're Still New To Me," a country duet with Marie

Osmond; and "Ride 'Em Cowboy."

His 1977 album "Singer of Songs -- Teller of Tales" featured the

ballad "I Go Crazy."

I was just listening to several Paul Davis songs last night while on my

evening walk. Although I can take or leave a lot of his work, he was

definitely one of the more versatile performers in the 70's, who was equally

at home writing/singing country, pop, rock & even a dash of disco. My

favorite will always be "Ride 'Em Cowboy". It was released just as new

country was starting to emerge from the late 60's country-rock movement.

The album was unique in that the front cover was a denim shirt that actually

opened in the middle as if it were a real shirt. The back of the album was

the back of the shirt naturally, except that you also saw Davis' ponytail

and only then did you realize that Davis wasn't really a country singer

(long hair, especially that long, wasn't in fashion for country singers at

the time); just a guess but the inspiration for that album cover probably

came from Alice Cooper's "Easy Action".

unknown

Very sorry to hear of his death - that being said, I think he was a

singer that was a lot more talented than the songs he released as

singles. they were good, but there wasn't any one song that was truly

great or stood out as his best. His biggest was probably I Go Crazy

but that really wasn't a great song or even that good. he did some

remakes Darlin', Little Bit Of Soap, Love or Let Me Be Lonely, etc

good but certainly not great. Various other popular hits - Superstar,

Ride Em Cowboy, Sweet Life, Cool Night, Do Right - all popular hits,

decent but nothing spectacular. what does that leave?

'65 Love Affair !! could that have been his best? It was pretty good.

RIP Paul Davis