Tad arrived in Pine Valley in 1973, a young boy who was rushed to the hospital after being thrown from a moving car by his father, Ray Gardner. Jeff Martin and his girlfriend Mary Kennicott grew to care for Tad, but were unable to adopt him until his biological parents were found.

After Mary’s tragic death, a despondent Jeff left Pine Valley, entrusting Tad into the care of his father, Joe Martin, and his wife Ruth…

Children: Jamie Martin (with Brooke English); JR Chandler (longtime stepson, raised him as a son), Kate Martin (with Dixie Martin)

Grandchildren: Adam Chandler III (no biological relation, but JR’s child)

Mothers: Ruth Martin (adoptive), Opal Cortlandt (biological)

Fathers: Joe Martin (adoptive), Ray Gardner (biological; deceased)

Grandmother: Kate Martin (adoptive; deceased)

Siblings: Jenny Nelson (biological; deceased), Adrian Sword (half-brother), Peter Cortlandt (half-brother), Jeff Martin (adoptive), Tara Martin (adoptive), Jake Martin (adoptive)

Nephews: Charlie Brent (adoptive), Josh Madden (adoptive)

Nieces: Kelsey Jefferson (adoptive)

Uncle: Paul Martin (adoptive)

Aunt: Amy Tyler (adoptive)

Cousin: Beth Tyler (adoptive; deceased), Phil Brent (adoptive; deceased)

Sister-in-law: Carolyn Martin

Significant Romantic Relationships: Liza Colby, Dottie Thornton (1st wife/divorced), Hillary Wilson (2nd wife/divorced), Dixie Cooney (3rd, 5th and 6th wife/deceased), Brooke English (4th wife/divorced), Gloria Marsh, Simone Torres, Krystal Carey, Di Henry

Ricky Paull Goldin Speaks on Move to All My Children

It’s the news that’s rocking the soap opera world: Within a week, Ricky Paull Goldin left Guiding Light and agreed to join the cast of Al…

All My Children Season 37 Episode 39 Recap: September 11, 2007

As resumes, at Fusion, Annie relates for Babe and Amanda how frightened everyone was by Spike’s close call. Meanwhile, a seething Ryan i…

All My Children Hunk Alert! Billy Miller, Sterling Sulieman to Join Show

Attention, All My Children fans: your favorite soap opera is adding a pair of hunks to its roster. Move over, Cameron Mathison! The fir…

The next sound you hear will be my head exploding.

Tad Martin: The next sound you hear will be my head exploding.