SoCal Racers – the time is here! K1 Speed Thousand Oaks is NOW OPEN!!

This location is our eighth center in Southern California, and our first in Ventura County. K1 Speed Thousand Oaks has everything you love at K1 Speed. This includes our fast electric go karts, a professionally designed indoor track, our onsite Paddock Lounge café, an arcade, and much more!

Like all of our other locations, K1 Speed Thousand Oaks has a unique track, different from any other K1 Speed. This indoor go kart track is a challenging, technical track with a high-speed front straight. The result is a challenge for both veteran racers and first-timers alike.

This track is also lined with LED lights, creating a unique racing atmosphere that transforms the karting experience as you know it. It’s something new you just have to experience!

The fun at K1 Speed Thousand Oaks doesn’t end when your race is over. That’s because there’s plenty of fun to be had when you’re off the track as well! Our arcade features over 30 video games – from classics like Pac-Man to modern favorites such as the co-op Jurassic Park shooter and the Batman Batmobile racing game!

If video games aren’t your jam, then we’ve also got pool tables for billiards, air-hockey, an arcade basketball hoop, and prize machines!

The Paddock Lounge at K1 Speed Thousand Oaks keeps you charged up and ready for more fun! We’ve got all the food offerings you crave such as cheeseburgers, pizzas, wings, quesadillas, nachos, chicken tenders, and more! And we’ve got a wide variety of non-alcoholic beverages for you to wash your food down with, such as Red Bull, Pepsi, Mountain Dew, Gatorade, shakes, and smoothies!

In the near future, we’ll also be serving beer & wine for adults 21 years old and older who have finished racing for the day.

Our new location in Thousand Oaks has a private meeting space for birthdays for all ages, company parties / corporate events, bachelor parties, and any other group events. For those looking for an exclusive event closed to the public, our entire facility may be rented.

Click the button below to explore our event packages at K1 Speed Thousand Oaks!

Thousand Oaks lies in the northwestern part of the Greater Los Angeles area. And we’re only around 40 miles from the heart of downtown LA. So Angelenos will now have three different locations to try out: K1 Speed Torrance, K1 Speed Burbank, and K1 Speed Thousand Oaks.

This location also brings the K1 Speed experience to other cities and towns that had to make long drives to experience the best indoor go kart racing. These places include Calabasas, Simi Valley, Camarillo, Oxnard, Westlake Village, Malibu, Moorpark, and Ventura. And folks from Santa Barbara searching for some speed will only have to make an hour’s trip to get their racing fix in.