K1 Speed, the first indoor, electric, state-of-the-art go-kart company to open in Southern California, offers the largest indoor go-kart racing entertainment centers in the region.

The Carlsbad location, which employs 25 people, boasts the longest single track on the West Coast. The 70,000-square-foot building includes a more than one-third mile asphalt track that features 12 turns, long straights and wide lanes for passing.

“Carlsbad is special to us because it was our first location to open and test the market to see if we had a successful product or not,” said Susan Danglard, director of marketing, corporate sales advisor and an operating partner of K1 Speed. “It worked because here we are about to open our sixth.”

The facilities are co-owned by Boris Said, a former BMW PTG racing star, current NASCAR racer and team owner of Sobe No Fear. A new generation of state-of-the-art, high-torque, zero-emission electric pro karts, combined with K1's large, road-race style track, are designed to give you the experience and feel of a real race car driver.

The Carlsbad Business Journal interviewed Danglard about the business of racing and the rapidly expanding company.

CBJ : What is your professional background?

Danglard: I graduated from the Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale with a degree in buying and fashion merchandising. I always wanted to work in the racing industry. I've had a passion for racing since I was 16, and my husband, David, has been racing his whole life.

CBJ: What is the company's background and history?

Danglard: My husband, David, and I started K1 in 2002 with a dream to be the first indoor electric go-kart racing chain. We sold our denim company and house to start K1. It took us eight months to open the first location; it was a challenge to make the city understand that we weren't your typical go-kart facility. We finally opened our first location in Carlsbad in 2003. After working 18 hours a day, loving what we do with great success, we decided to go for a second location, which opened in Irvine in 2005. It was such a hit that we now have a total of five locations, the others are in Anaheim, Ontario and Seattle, and a sixth in Los Angeles will open this month.

CBJ: What is the company's philosophy and mission?

Danglard: To be as successful as we can, run a great business and make all of our customers walk out with a smile on their face. We want to make sure that everyone who walks through the front door of any K1 Speed has a true racing experience.

CBJ: What services do you offer?

Danglard: We offer team building events for corporations, birthday parties for ages 12 and up and bachelor parties, or just come in with your friends to race against the clock. We have meeting rooms equipped with projectors and WiFi to hold your next company meeting, cafes to have a snack and game areas with pool tables and arcade games.

CBJ: How many employees do you have?

Danglard: We have a total of 150 employees.

CBJ: What is unique about K1 Speed?

Danglard: We were the first indoor, electric, state-of-the-art go-kart company to open in Southern California. K1 appeals to a wider, more upscale audience. Our go-karts are cleaner and quieter with zero emissions. We have a very long list of corporate customers who hold several events at K1, including Qualcomm, HP, Callaway Golf, Titleist, Verizon Wireless, Taco Bell, Allergan, DPR construction and many, many more.

CBJ: What is the most challenging aspect of this company?

Danglard: The marketing, and not just because I am in charge of it. This industry is so new, you have to pick and choose your markets from ages 12 and up and then hit the entire corporate world, which is a challenge.

CBJ: What do you enjoy most about your position?

Danglard: The challenge to pick and choose the right marketing strategy and meeting so many new people.

CBJ: What is your greatest accomplishment in business?

Danglard: To have people who I know and advertise with call and tell me “I see your marketing everywhere, you're doing a great job.” It's so exciting to know where we started and see where we are now. It's quite a big accomplishment to have started from scratch.

CBJ: What do you see for the future of this company?

Danglard: To expand to 10 locations from San Diego to San Francisco.

K1 Speed:

6212 Corte Del Abeto, Carlsbad

(760) 929-2225

www.k1speed.com