K1 Speed revs up the go kart experience for the kid or the kid at heart as the largest indoor go kart racing company on the West Coast. With 6 locations throughout Southern California and the Pacific Northwest, K1 Speed is the place to go for an ultra hip and eco-friendly go kart experience. Founded in 2003, K1 Speed has go kart locations in Los Angeles, San Diego, the Inland Empire and Seattle.

Modern Go Kart Venue

It’s not your grandfather’s go kart track as K1 Speed has created a fresh and electric interpretation of what a go kart racing venue should be. Highly advanced and green friendly electric karts are complemented by a vibrant entertainment environment, complete with pool tables, authentic racing memorabilia, pit cafes and meeting rooms for parties and corporate events.

Green Friendly Karts

K1 Speed has also reinvented the go kart itself with sporty yet environmentally friendly electric go karts. Gone is that familiar smell of gas fumes as you slide behind the wheel of a go kart. These electric alternatives to gas powered karts reduce the impact on the environment while actually offering superior performance with speeds approaching 45 mph.

A 20hp DC electric motor produces far more torque than gas engines, allowing for superb acceleration out of tight corners. K1 Speed’s electric karts can be programmed to a wide range of pre-set speeds which means the vehicles can be adjusted to meet a variety of skill levels, from the novice participant to advanced drivers. Safety is also an advantage with the electric karts as they are programmed for automatic speed reduction when entering the pits and can be turned off remotely if needed.

K1 Speed Tracks

Part of the appeal with K1 Speed racing centers is their intricately designed tracks. Each location’s track is distinct from the others but all of the track layouts feature tantalizing turns and curves. K1 Speed tracks prefer quality over quantity with their straightaway stretches, offering unprecedented twists and turns while still giving you those chances to satisfy your need for speed. The spacious 1/3 mile tracks allow as many as 12 racers to compete at one time.

Corporate Friendly

K1 Speed isn’t just a place for kids. With a functional setting that’s rich in amenities, these racing centers are perfect for corporate parties. K1 Speed venues have meeting rooms with wireless internet and 110 inch display screens for your presentation needs. They also have catering options and budget friendly race packages. From team building exercises to celebrations, they create a compelling atmosphere for corporate events. K1 Speed is even a popular destination for tradeshows and product launches.

New Torrance Location

This year K1 Speed opened their newest location in Torrance. The venue began operations in May and is their first in California to include the concrete surface that’s become so popular at their Seattle location. The etched concrete racing surface is ideal for drifting and offers slightly less grip compared to asphalt tracks. The difference makes for a more challenging experience as even expert drivers will have to work hard to achieve fast lap times. Located on South Vermont Avenue near LAX airport, K1 Speed’s Torrance location is easily accessible from the Carson, Long Beach and Los Angeles areas.

Great For All Ages

From birthday parties and Bar and Bat Mitzvah celebrations to corporate events, holding a commemorative event at K1 Speed can be fun for everyone. It’s also a great site to host adult birthday parties and even bachelor parties. However, you don’t have to be part of a group because K1 Speed also offers great prices for individuals, including competitively priced packages like their buy 2 get 1 free deal. True racing enthusiasts can compete in K1 Speed’s racing leagues while newcomers to kart racing can learn in their instructional classes.

K1 Speed is located in San Diego North, Irvine, Orange County, Anaheim, Orange County, Ontario, Torrance/LA, and Seattle.

Susan Graver is the creator of K1 Speed, who went to great lengths to open the first one in San Diego, then 5 more locations. Now, thousands have had much fun racing and playing at K1 Speed. Watch for our upcoming debut of LA’s The Place Daily TV, which we will feature an interview with Susan!