According to the Nobel Committee for Literature, the 2023 Nobel Prize in Literature, Jon Fosse (64 years old) was honored "for his creative plays and prose, which gave voice to the unspeakable."

“His vast oeuvre, written in Norwegian and spanning many genres, includes countless plays, novels, poetry collections, essays, children's books and translations.

Today, he is one of the most widely performed playwrights in the world, and he is also increasingly recognized in the field of prose,” the Nobel Committee commented on his works.

The author will receive a reward of 11 million Swedish krona (about 991.000 USD).

Jon Fosse is a big name in Nordic literature and is known as the number 1 figure in Norwegian literature.

He is famous for the books: "Andvake", "Olavs draumar", "Kveldsvævd". Jon Fosse won the Nordic Council's literature prize and the international Ibsen prize, similar to the Nobel Prize in theater.

Fosse's novels have been translated into more than 40 languages, and his plays have been staged in many different countries. In 2007, the Daily Telegraph called Fosse a "living genius". Besides writing books, he is also a translator.

Before the results were announced, he was ranked second on the betting list of bookmaker NicerOdds, with a prediction rate of 5/1 (one to 5).

The Nobel Prize in Literature is the fourth prize announced in the 2023 Nobel season and the 116th Nobel Prize in Literature since 1901.

In 2022, the Nobel Prize in Literature was awarded to French writer Annie Ernaux for “the courage and cold sensitivity with which she explored the roots, dissonances and limitations of personal memory.” core".

The Nobel Prize in Literature is one of six categories of the Nobel Prize, awarded to authors from any country, according to the will of chemist Alfred Nobel. The Swedish Academy will select the winner.

The prize was first awarded to French poet Sully Prudhomme in 1901.

The Nobel Prize in Literature was designed by Swedish sculptor Erik Lindberg, with the image representing a young man sitting under a laurel tree.

Meanwhile, Nobel certificates are unique works of art, created by Swedish and Norwegian artists and calligraphers.