The railway board has decided to transform Dombivli railway station which is known as the busiest railway station on the Central Railway line. The railway administration has planned to provide all essential five-star facilities to the passengers in the railway station. The face of the railway station is going to be changed for the second time in the last 20 years.

This work will be undertaken under Phase III A through the Mumbai Railway Development Board. The Railway Board has decided to develop a total of 17 railway stations on the Central and Western Railway lines. This includes Dombivli, Mulund railway stations. A senior railway official said that a fund of INR 120 crores has been proposed for the development of these two stations.

Also Read: Mumbai Police Imposes Traffic Restrictions At Dadar Between 4-7 Pm

A few years ago, the railway station was constructed in a new structure by removing the old structure of railway ticket window, stairs in Dombivli railway station. Now, considering the increasing number of passengers, the railways has decided to provide modern, five-star facilities to the passengers. These stations are going to be transformed by thinking of automatic railway stations. The tender process for these works has been completed. The process of issuing work orders to contractors is underway. These works will be started after monsoon i.e. from October, the official said.

About three lakh passengers travel from Dombivli railway station every day. The city has been urbanised. Considering the airport in Navi Mumbai, the citizens are preferring to buy houses in Shilphata area for future travel. The people of this area will have to come to Dombivli railway station as the railway station. Taking into consideration the increasing passenger load at Dombivli railway station in the coming time, railways have planned to provide facilities at the railway station. Apart from this, electrical equipment in the railway station will be newly constructed, new systems will be installed in the communication and communication service centre. Passengers have expressed their satisfaction as the Dombivli railway station will be transformed with state-of-the-art facilities.