Definition

Under general direction, provides secretarial and office services for one or more court officials, judicial officers, or court managers; performs administrative tasks as requested; performs a range of work from basic clerical support to complex and highly responsible administrative work; and performs related work within area of assignment.

Class Characteristics

This series is distinguished from other clerical classes by the personalized and confidential administrative support provided rather than the generalized clerical support found in the office services series or in court case processing. Each level in the series is characterized by the level of administrator or official served and the responsibilities delegated. The duties of all the positions are very similar, but the higher the level of the administrator or official to whom the position is assigned, the more complex, confidential, and relatively significant the duties become. Certain positions may require specialized paralegal knowledge.

Administrative Assistant II

Positions in this class typically provide full-time support to a Director or Branch/Unit Manager.

Administrative Assistant I

Positions in this class provide full-time specialized administrative support in court/judicial administration typically for one or more mid-level managers.

The Administrative Assistant I/II differs from the Executive Administrative Assistant in that the latter classification is a confidential (at-will) position and serves at the pleasure of the Chief Executive Office. This classification differs from the Executive Assistant classification in that the latter classification is assigned to and work directly for the Presiding Judge, Assistant Presiding Judge, Chief Executive Officer or one of the Court's Deputy Executive Officers and may be required to perform a broader range of duties in support of that court official.

Essential Functions

(These functions are intended as a general illustration of the work performed in this job classification and are not all inclusive for this position)

1. Relieves judges, administrators and/or grand jurors of routine administrative duties, which include maintaining calendars, scheduling meetings and conferences, and making travel arrangements.

2. Prepares, types, and proofreads documents (e.g., correspondence, memoranda, reports, forms, spreadsheets, charts, or other graphic representations of information) from instruction, drafts, dictation, or transcripts.

3. Performs clerical duties such as filing, copying, assembling reports and documents, and processing mail.

4. Operates a computer and a variety of other office equipment.

5. Develops and maintains office filing systems, records, and forms.

6. Answers incoming calls, personally assisting callers where possible, directs callers and visitors, takes and deliver messages.

7. Collects, compiles, verifies, and presents data for statistical studies and reports.

8. Prepares agendas and minutes for various committees and meetings.

9. Trains new administrative assistants and other support staff as needed.

10. Performs other duties as assigned.

At higher levels, positions are delegated broader administrative duties such as:

11. Reviews mail, prioritizes items, and refers items to appropriate staff or official for appropriate action.

12. Composes basic correspondence for signature based on general guidelines.

13. Has special project responsibility requiring independent judgment, analysis or organizational awareness.

14. Attends staff and/or committee meetings; takes minutes; identifies action items; follows up with appropriate staff.

15. Reviews meeting minutes, memos and correspondence and highlights action items and those of particular pertinence to supported court/division.

16. Reviews journals or periodicals and highlights items of particular pertinence to supported court/division.

17. Is entrusted with handling sensitive confidential information appropriately including proxy to e-mail.

18. Demonstrated proficiency (intermediate to advanced level) in the following applications as required by assignment:

Email

Excel

MS Word

Power Point

Windows

Court Case Management System

SharePoint or other application relevant to assignment

Minimum Qualifications

Education:

High school diploma or GED equivalent.

Experience:

Administrative Assistant I: Two (2) years of secretarial or three (3) years of general office experience that demonstrates possession of the knowledge and abilities at the required level of skill and judgment.

Administrative Assistant II: Three (3) years of secretarial or four (4) years of general office experience that demonstrates possession of the knowledge and abilities at the required level of skill and judgment.

Education Substitution:

Twelve (12) units of college level secretarial or business education may substitute for six (6) months of experience. Twenty-four (24) units of college level secretarial or business education may substitute for one year of experience.

Knowledge, Skills and Abilities

Knowledge of:

Modern office practices and procedures, including filing methods and systems, and the operation of electronic office equipment, including a personal computer.

Principles of writing and grammar for business correspondence, including correct spelling and proper word usage, punctuation, and sentence structure.

Basic business mathematics, public contact techniques; office protocol and business etiquette.

Paralegal or legal secretarial practices may be required for some assignments.

Ability to:

Type at a corrected rate of at least 45 words per minute.

Learn, interpret, and apply administrative and departmental policies, laws, and rules with particular reference to the activities of the Superior Court.

Respond to the public either in person or on the phone in situations requiring tact, diplomacy, and poise.

Take responsibility and use good judgment in recognizing scope of authority.

Understand and follow general directions, both oral and written.

Use excellent judgment, logic, and analytical skills in the performance of duties.

Frequently and repetitively use a keyboard and take notes.

Use personal computer applications such as word processing, electronic mail, internet, legal research, spreadsheets, graphic presentations, court case management system and/or other software.

Hear well enough to understand others on the telephone and in person, often with competing background noises such as in meetings while taking minutes.

Clearly communicate with others on the telephone and in person.

Professionally interact with others to obtain and disseminate information.

Establish and maintain effective working relationships with judicial officers, public officials, managers, co-workers, and other court staff, both individually and in group settings.

Work cooperatively under time constraints and exacting professional and legal standards.

Other Necessary Requirements

Must pass a thorough background check.

Miscellaneous Information