June Diane Raphael is an American comedic actress and screenwriter. She is perhaps best known for her work on the Adult Swim sketch series "NTSF:SD:SUV" and Yahoo! webseries "Burning Love." Most recently, she has been cast in the Netflix original series, "Grace and Frankie." She is married (since 2009) to comedian and screenwriter Paul Scheer, with whom she co-stars on "NTSF" and on a weekly movie review podcast titled "How Did This Get Made?" She also appears on "New Girl" as Sadie, Jess' lesbian gynecologist friend.

Raphael was born to parents John and Diane Raphael in Rockville Center, New York. She is the youngest of three girls, and has older sisters Lauren and Deanna. After high school, she attended NYU's Tisch School of the Arts to study acting, where she met actress Casey Wilson, who became Raphael's lifelong best friend and comedy partner. After college, the two women joined New York's Upright Citizens Brigade Theater, and there they wrote and performed a successful two-woman sketch show, "Rode Hard and Put Away Wet," for many years.

The girls' success in improv led to success on the big and small screen. In 2005, Raphael and Wilson moved to L.A., and were hired to pen the film "Bride Wars" (starring Kate Hudson and Anne Hathaway), in which they both had supporting roles. The women are frequently asked to make comedic changes to scripts in development, and have written multiple romantic comedy scripts of their own that are still in the development stages. They also wrote and screened a female buddy comedy, starring themselves (as well as Alicia Silverstone, Vincent D'Onofrio, Jon Cryer, and Bob Odenkirk) at the Sundance Film Festival in 2013, called "Ass Backwards."

Raphael's TV credits include guest roles on Wilson's former show, "Happy Endings," "Party Down," "Animal Practice," and "Flight of the Conchords," and she has had small roles in films including "Zodiac," "Forgetting Sarah Marshall," and "Going the Distance." She has appeared Off-Broadway, and on stage with Wilson in a show they penned called "The Realest Real Housewives," through the UCB Theater in Los Angeles.