If any of you want one, I have a 20 guage RedLabel with box, papers, all fiv choke tubes......everything that belongs to a friend of mine who has gone blind! This one has the English straight stock and is immacculate!! Have pics if interested and I'm holding out for $900.00 plus shipping! If I had an extra $900.00.....you wouldn't get the chance!! Super little O/U with pretty darn good wood! Email with inquiries! May be first of the week till I can reply! Seems that a virus has done something to my email functions!! If I could find the party that does this BS, I would gladly use the Ruger on them!!!!! GHD

0 ·

I have an older Red Label without choke tubes. I bought it from the family of Col Charlie Beckwith of Special Forces fame.

It is a nice shooter and easy to operate. You should be able to find one in the $1100 to $1200 area on the auction.

"Never let school interfere with your education"

0 ·

I had a 20ga. and a 12ga. I liked them, I just couldn't shoot them well. I think the rise over the rib on the Rugers is a little lower. That isn't bad, it just didn't fit me. They are built strong box tough and are really attractive. Look also at the sporting clays model. That one felt better for me, but everyone's preference is different.

0 ·

i know a world champion skeet shooter that shot one. lasted him 10 years and it fell apart at the lock up lug. it still shot safely, it just was lose as a goose. then again, it had over 1,000,000 rounds in it. its better than any import.

former air operations officer SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team 2. former navy skeet team, navy rifle/pistol team member. co-owner skeetmaster tubes inc.. owner/operator professional shooting instruction.

Retired Naval Aviation

Former Member U.S. Navy Shooting Team

Former NSSA All American

Navy Distinguished Pistol Shot

MO, CT, VA.

0 ·

Bobski -

What you forgot, or forgot to say...

Had that gun been sent back to Ruger it would have returned in new condition at no charge to the owner. At least that's my experience with Ruger.

Where else can one expect to wear out a product and still have a full warranty?

Nord

0 ·