In recognition of those “who protect and serve communities across the U.S. and around the world,” GLOCK instituted its Blue Label Program with selected dealers. GLOCK pistols are the preferred weapon for law enforcement because they offer:

Durability and dependability with a rugged polymer exterior to withstand extensive use without jamming or requiring high levels of maintenance.

Safety through three independent mechanisms preventing accidental discharge: the trigger safety, the firing pin safety, and the drop safety.

Capacity and power, with a wide selection from 380A to 10mm ammunition, there are numerous options for deep carry, back up, or a full-size duty firearm.

What does the GLOCK Blue Label Program Provide?

The program discounts the price of GLOCK LE pistols for qualified purchasers.

Public safety professionals can purchase two GLOCKs per calendar year (excluding special edition pistols). Qualified private citizens can purchase one GLOCK per year by participating in a Glock Shooting Sports Foundation program.

Discounts usually deliver prices from $75 to $100 below retail.

Who can participate in the GLOCK Blue Label Program?

Professionals in these public safety roles are eligible for the program:

Current federal, state, county, city law enforcement officers.

Retired law enforcement officers with complete credentials showing an LE department photo.

Firefighters, volunteer firefighters, EMTs and paramedics with department photo credentials.

Active military personnel, reservists and members of the National Guard. Contractors and civilian employees working for the military are excluded from the program.

Retired military personnel with military photo credentials. (DD 214 discharge papers aren’t sufficient).

Current corrections officers, parole officers and probation officers with photo credentials.

Security companies that are state licensed such as Loomis or RAMS, and licensed armed security officers employed by these companies. Employment photo credentials are required.

Current court judges, district attorneys, and deputy district attorneys.

Law Enforcement Academy cadets with enrollment documents.

Private citizens may participate in the program under the following conditions:

Active members of the GLOCK Sport Shooting Foundation (GSSF).

Enrolled in the GSSF with a two-year membership.

How to purchase under the GLOCK Blue Label Program