Kastamonu is a provincial town located on the Black Sea coast in northern Turkey. It is surrounded by a rich natural heritage of mountains and forests, but also by land that is still cultivated in a traditional way. Most of the population lives in the countryside and many people are still involved in self-production, following ancient recipes of the local cuisine.

Kastamonu is an ancient centre dating back to Hittite, Roman and Byzantine times, with a very rich urban culture with centuries-old buildings and monuments. This makes it an important tourist landmark, welcoming hundreds of thousands of tourists every year. There is also a tradition of haute cuisine: its chefs were historically chosen to serve the Ottoman Sultans in Istanbul. The tradition of ‘palace cuisine’ is therefore still alive in the city and many cooks and housewives are very skilled at it. Kastamonu is the land of ‘siyez wheat’. This is an ancient species that dates back 10,000 years and has survived without any change in its genetic structure. Many people visit the area specifically to buy this wheat and taste dishes made from it.

The Earth Market is a project implemented by members of the Slow Food community ‘Preserving the local food culture of Kastamonu’ with the support of the Municipality which aims to raise awareness of the value of the products of the local agricultural and gastronomic heritage by creating an alternative to existing commercial channels (the commercial markets and weekly street markets). These markets usually sell products of industrial agriculture, transported from long distances and mostly grown in greenhouses and using intensive methods. Only a few small local farmers bring their products to these markets, but since there is no control over the use of pesticides, these products cannot be assessed as healthy and safe. Our Earth Market intends to provide a reliable alternative for those in search of good, clean food.

The market will be a place of education: at each edition an expert will give a short lecture on good, clean and fair food, biodiversity or healthy food storage methods. There will be fun activities for children related to biodiversity and good agriculture. Music will accompany everything. There will be a stall where women will demonstrate and teach how to (re)produce packaging materials, bags or home and kitchen textiles from used clothing or similar textile materials.

There are 19 producers who founded the market, with fruit (including the indigenous Uryani plum when in season), vegetables, the famous siyez wheat and the sourdough bread made from it, honey and medicinal herbs. Some of them will sell traditional dishes of Kastamonu cuisine, such as some popular soups, the famous rice dish with siyez wheat bulgur called ‘ekşili pilav’, different types of pasta, and sweets. Visitors will be greeted by excellent herbal teas.

How to reach the Market

The place is in the very center of the city, between the administrative center and historical city square. It can be reached by any public transport means like bus, car, public minibusses,who operate to the city center. People need to get off at the stop named "Republic Square". The market place will be just opposite to the bus stop. There are also several car parking areas around.

More info:

Slow Food Kastamonu (Facebook Group)

Ig: www.instagram.com/slowfoodkastamonu