Gerhart Johann Robert Hauptmann was a German dramatist and novelist. He is counted among the most important promoters of literary naturalism, though he integrated other styles into his work as well. He received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1912.

Life Hauptmann's first drama, Before Dawn (1889) inaugurated the naturalistic movement in modern German literature. It was followed by The Reconciliation (1890), Lonely People (1891) and The Weavers (1892), a powerful drama depicting the rising of the Silesian weavers in 1844 for which he is best known outside of Germany.

Hauptmann's subsequent work includes the comedies Colleague Crampton (1892), The Beaver Coat (1893), and The Conflagration (1901), the symbolist dream play The Assumption of Hannele (1893), and an historical drama Florian Geyer (1895). He also wrote two tragedies of Silesian peasant life, Drayman Henschel (1898) and Rose Bernd (1903), and the dramatic fairy-tales The Sunken Bell (1896) and And Pippa Dances (1906).

Hauptmann's marital life was difficult and in 1904 he divorced his wife. That same year he married the actress Margarete Marschalk, who had borne him a son four years earlier. The following year he had an affair with the 17-year-old Austrian actress Ida Orloff, whom he met in Berlin when she performed in his play The Assumption of Hannele. Orloff inspired characters in several of Hauptmann's works and he later referred to her as his muse.

In 1911 he wrote The Rats. In 1912, Hauptmann was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, "primarily in recognition of his fruitful, varied and outstanding production in the realm of dramatic art."

During the First World War Hauptmann was a pacifist. In this period of his career he wrote several gloomy historical-allegorical plays, such as The Bow of Odysseus (1914), The White Saviour (1912–17), and Winter Ballade (1917). After the war, his dramatic abilities appeared to diminish. He wrote two full-length plays that are similar to the early successes: Dorothea Angermann (1926) and Before Sunset (1932). He remained in Germany after Hitler's Machtergreifung and survived the bombing of Dresden. His last work was the Atriden-Tetralogie (1942–46). His works in German were published by S. Fischer Verlag.

Hauptmann died at the age of 83 at his home in Agnetendorf (now Jagniątków, Poland) in 1946. Since the Polish communist administration did not allow Hauptmann's relatives to bury him in Agnetendorf (although even the Soviet military government had recommended this), his body was transported in an old cattle wagon to occupied Germany more than a month after his death. He was buried near his cottage on Hiddensee.

Under Wilhelm II Hauptmann enjoyed the reputation of a radical writer, on the side of the poor and outcasts. During the Weimar Republic (1918–33) he enjoyed the status of the literary figurehead of the new order, and was even considered for the post of state president. Under Hitler he kept his distance from the regime, but never publicly criticized it. This, and the fact that (unlike so many writers and academics) he stayed in Germany, was strongly held against him after the war. A superb collected edition of his works appeared in the 1960s, and stimulated some impressive studies of his work (e.g. those by Peter Sprengel), but the tide of critical and public opinion remained negative. A few of his plays are still revived from time to time, but otherwise he is neglected. He was certainly an uneven writer, but at his best (as in 'The Weavers', his novel 'The Fool in Christ Emmanuel Quint', and the Novellen 'The Heretic of Soana' and 'Das Meerwunder') he can arguably rank with the best of his German contemporaries.

Source : http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerhart_...

December 29, 2016

This is truly one of the oddest books I've ever come across, in my long experience of odd books. It is written by Hauptmann who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1912 (before he wrote this) for his many plays. The book is about the adventures of a man who believes that he is a son of God and wanders through Germany giving testimony of Christ. I've never read anything like it although parts of it remind me of the Journal of George Fox, the founder of Quakerism and the sense of the book reminded me a little of Dreyer's movie "Ordet." But within literature, no - it's not really like Dostoyevsky's "The Idiot", although it would seems like it would be.

While Quint is clearly insane (in a way that George Fox is not), the effect he has on people is quite powerful, and by far the most interesting part of the book is the way his simplistic (yet in a way profound) views of Christianity interact with things like socialism and more traditional Christianity. The author is unafraid to put his poor character in all sorts of difficult situations. The tremendous sympathy shown by the author for Quint is also surprising and greatly adds to the book - he is not mocked. There's also a powerful realism to the book, and interesting parallels between Quint's actions and those of the socialist reformers (referenced in Turgenev's "Virgin Soil") who used to wander the German countryside in a similar fashion.

The book also grows and changes on you - and Quint grows and changes - the real miracle of the book is how it retains its fascination and goes places you think it might be afraid to go. Its oddness also seems to increase rather than decline. By the end you feel exhausted by this endlessly weird book.

Apparently this book inspired a lot of discussion in its day, although it is rarely read now. I found this on the web which was helpful:

https://books.google.com/books?id=yRv...

I strongly recommend the book, but only to those who are unafraid to read anything, as I can imagine a high percentage of readers giving up after the first few pages, perhaps feeling offended (why am I reading this?). I implore you however if you start to keep going, the book is not what it seems at first and becomes almost monstrous in its bizzareness, as Quint's following grows, and his followers become more and more totally off the wall. Familiarity with Christianity is helpful but not required. One must understand when reading however that the book is not unrealistic, at that time of its writing this type of thing was not inconceivable. Heck crazy things like Mormonism (as the book points out), Christian Science, and Seventh Day Adventism began in the United States at the time. While the book is German, the Herrnhuter (mentioned by Goethe in Young Werther) - also known as the Morvian Brotherhood - a Christian "cult" dating from the Middle Ages - is part of the book. Nothing remotely like this is being written today - the tone of the book especially would not pass muster.