This data the coastal Newcastle ocean water temperature today, tomorrow and the upcoming days. Besides, you can also get information about the weather and surf forecast, as well as the data on sunrise / sunset and moonrise / moonset at a given point on any given day.

Current ocean temperature in Newcastle

Water temperature in Newcastle today is 18.8°C. Based on our historical data over a period of ten years, the warmest water in this day in the Tasman Sea near Newcastle was recorded in 2013 and was 19.1°C, and the coldest was recorded in 2012 at 16.6°C. Sea water temperature in Newcastle is expected to drop to 17.8°C in the next 10 days. August average water temperature in Newcastle is 17.8°C, the minimum temperature is 16°C, and the maximum is 19.5°C.

The swimming season in Newcastle lasts from November to June. During those months, Newcastle water temperature does not drop below 20°C and therefore suitable for comfortable swimming. The average water temperature in Newcastle in winter reaches 18.5°C, in spring 19°C, in summer the average temperature rises to 22.3°C, and in autumn it is 22°C.

Newcastle water temperature now

The ocean salinity in Newcastle is 35.24‰, and the average salinity of the World Ocean is 35‰.

Surf Forecast in Newcastle for today

Another important indicators for a comfortable holiday on the beach are the presence and height of the waves, as well as the speed and direction of the wind. Please find below data on the swell size for Newcastle. We calculate the swell size based on the mean wave height (trough to crest) of each third highest wave. For more information on surf forecasts for the next ten days, please visit sea state forecast Newcastle. Data in table shown for 15 August 2024, time in GMT 0 format (you can change the time zone on the sea state forecast page)

Current temperature and weather

Data in a table show Newcastle temperature today (15 August 2024). For more information and forecast for a few days, go to the weather forecast Newcastle

Newcastle water temperature by month

These figures shows the average, minimum and maximum monthly sea temperature in Newcastle. In addition to the table values, the graph below displays of changes average surface temperature during the year. Values are calculated based on the data over the past 10 years. Using them, you can check the water temperature in Newcastle on any day of this period that interests you. Click on the month link and you will see a table for each day, or alternatively you can view the temperature curve of the month and select 2 different years you want to compare, either in a table or as a curve

Chart monthly average water temperature in Newcastle

Where is the warmest sea water in the world?

If you want to plan a vacation on the beach and enjoy the warm sea, choose the day of the year, region and the minimum comfortable sea/ocean temperature that interests you. As a result, you will get a list of countries and cities in which the average sea temperature or maximum temperature on this day over the past 10 years exceeds your chosen value

Region Date (day and month) Water temperature: min 16°C Average temperature Maximum temperature

Nearby beaches and cities

The nearest beaches and cities from Newcastle with the water temperature today, as well as the air temperature and the state of the weather during the day and the average wave height for today

WaterWeatherWaveMerewether18.4°C18°C0.87 mRedhead Beach18.4°C18°C1.09 mEleebana18.1°C18°C1.09 mBelmont18.2°C18°C0.9 mRathmines18°C18°C0.9 mBlacksmiths Beach18°C18°C0.9 mCaves Beach18°C18°C0.9 mCatherine Hill Bay18°C18°C0.9 mAnna Bay18.8°C18°C0.72 mOne Mile Beach18.9°C18°C0.72 m

Newcastle photo gallery

If you have interesting photos of this place, you can upload them here. Photos will be available to all users after verification by the moderator.

Other names for Newcastle

Newcastle Beach

Vote for New South Wales best beach

Current rating: (0 votes cast)

If you know this place (Newcastle) and want to leave your comment or rate it, then fill out the following form.

Your rating for this place:

Does this place have a "Blue Flag" award [1], are there rip currents and what type of beach is it, sand or pebble:

Your comments for this place (water quality, crowds, facilities, activities, lifeguards, service etc.):

[1] - The "Blue Flag" is awarded to beaches which fulfill a number of criteria, including: the quality of the bathing water, which must be in accordance with the relevant European Union Directive environmental education and information and beach area management and safety.

Get widget or API for your website

Our report for Newcastle is compiled using satellite data together with in-situ observations to get the most reliable daily data of sea surface temperatures, surf forecasts, current temperatures and weather forecasts.