Parts of New South Wales will feel a sudden drop in temperature on Wednesday evening as a cold front continues to sweep the south-east of the country.

The cold front has been moving steadily across South Australia, Victoria and Tasmania since Tuesday and will reach NSW on Wednesday.

Meteorologist Angus Hines from the Bureau of Meteorology said temperatures had dropped by 10C and 15C in parts of the southern states. Melbourne surpassed 28C on Tuesday but was struggling to reach 18C by Wednesday.

Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup

Maximum temperatures across the city would remain in the low 20s until the weekend, before jumping to 25C next Monday.

Hines said the cold front was still bringing some showers to Tasmania and southern Victoria on Wednesday. With the cold air and rain across Tasmania, “we could see a dusting of snow at high peaks”, he said.

Weatherzone reported that snow had already fallen at Mount Mawson and Ben Lomond on Wednesday morning, marking the first significant snowfall for the season.

The NSW south coast was already feeling cool, southerly winds on Wednesday morning but this would move to the coast by the afternoon, bringing a “punchy” change in conditions to Sydney, Wollongong and Newcastle.

Sydney was forecast to reach a maximum of 27C on Wednesday, with the southerly winds kicking in throughout the afternoon. Gusts up to 55km/h were forecast near the coast.

The southerly buster would also bring large swells to the Sydney coastline up to 3 metres in the early evening.

Hines said some rain and isolated thunderstorms in “one or two spots” may hit the coast as the cold front moves through but any rain would clear after a couple of hours.

“What will stick around though [is the] cooler temperatures for the next several days,” Hines said. “After today [temperatures] are looking to be below average across almost all of New South Wales, Tasmania and Victoria.

“It’s a bit of a reminder that we are moving away from those summer months. It’s deeply into autumn now.”

Canberra’s minimum temperatures are forecast to remain in the single digits through to next Tuesday, peaking at 9C on Sunday and Monday.

Although the country is moving towards a stretch of cooler weather, Hines said warmer days were likely to pop up over the end of March and possibly throughout April.

The bureau is not forecasting any record low temperatures for March with this cold front but some places would certainly be “towards the cooler end of the spectrum”.