Newcastle weather in May (New South Wales, Australia)

What's the typical weather in Newcastle for May? See what weather conditions to anticipate this month with our guide.

Temperatures

The weather in Newcastle is usually perfect in May, characterized by pleasant temperatures and moderate rainfall. The temperature during the day can rise to approximately 21°C. At night, it falls to around 15°C.

Precipitation

Newcastle in May usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 89 mm for the month. Delving into the climate records from the past 30 years, one can predict that nearly 11 days of the month will see rainfall.

If you're a fan of comfortable temperatures and drier conditions, May is a great time to visit. January, March, April, May, September, October, November and December generally stand out with the best circumstances. While June tends to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Newcastle climate page with graphs.

Newcastle, monthly averages in May

Min Temperature 15°C

Max Temperature 21°C

Chance of Rain 38%

Precipitation 89 mm

Rainy days 11 days

Humidity 58% *

* Data from: Maitland, Australia (30 KM, 18 Miles).

Where to go in Australia in May

Find out more about the weather in Australia and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

For visitors traveling to Newcastle, we recommend wearing layers. So maybe a skirt, t-shirt, shorts for during the day and jeans and a warm jacket for some days and evenings. Bring a rain jacket in case it rains during your stay. Plan on layering your clothes.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Cycling 9/10

Walking 9/10

Camping 8/10

Outdoor sports 9/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Newcastle.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Australia? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Australia. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.