The use of Gen AI is accelerating rapidly, presenting both challenges for organizations with the rise in AI-generated cyberattacks and opportunities for transformation. In a recent survey from Accenture, 97% of organizations responded that they expect Gen AI to be transformative, but only 31% have invested significantly—organizations struggle to scale AI effectively while mitigating risks. Palo Alto Networks and Accenture are working together to help solve this for joint clients, enabling them to work toward a secure AI future through intentional design, deployment and use of AI that creates value while also improving cybersecurity outcomes.

Nikesh Arora, chairman and CEO at Palo Alto Networks, said:

"AI is transformational to every aspect of the enterprise business when used the right way. With Accenture, we’re uniting Precision AI-powered solutions and services expertise, helping our joint customers use the best of AI to create value for their business today and in the future—with better real-time security outcomes. The expansion of our partnership underscores the critical importance of a strong AI ecosystem for customers.”

Karthik Narain, group chief executive — Technology at Accenture, said:

“Generative AI is being adopted by companies across industries as the #1 lever for reinvention. It is also a moment of reinvention for cybersecurity—creating new risks, but also providing new tools. Accenture and Palo Alto Networks are helping clients confidently navigate each phase of their AI journey, ensuring cybersecurity is prioritized right from the outset.”

Palo Alto Networks Secure AI by Design creates a secure AI ecosystem that prioritizes the integrity of AI security frameworks, improves security compliance and minimizes data exposure. Accenture will offer comprehensive AI diagnostic services powered by Palo Alto Networks Prisma® Cloud AI Security Posture Management (AI-SPM) and AI Access Security to secure clients’ AI environment with AI Runtime Security, helping them develop a multilayered strategy to support every stage of the AI lifecycle. Cross-platform offers will include:

Securing Gen AI builds: The combined offering secures the data/AI framework lifecycle from ingesting, storing and processing data to model training and deployment leading to data analysis and visualization. It secures the full AI lifecycle, protecting against vulnerabilities.

Discovery and exposure management: Accenture's AI Discovery & Exposure Management offering, powered by Palo Alto Networks cutting-edge AI Security Posture Management and AI Access Security capabilities, provides a comprehensive solution to govern and defend AI environments.

Proactive threat detection and prevention: Palo Alto Networks suite of AI cybersecurity products powered by Precision AI offers advanced threat detection and prevention capabilities. Combined with Accenture’s services capabilities, the offering helps clients identify and block AI-generated attacks, safeguard data with policy controls across applications and users, and proactively address AI-specific threats through expert guidance and hardening of AI-enabled application development.

Responsible AI practices: Palo Alto Networks and Accenture are jointly committed to fostering ethical and responsible AI adoption with an approach that leverages AI cybersecurity assessments to establish a foundation for secure, responsible practices throughout an organization.

Palo Alto Networks will collaborate closely with Accenture Security as a design partner to develop and customize Palo Alto Networks AI Runtime Security to meet specific client needs, and better protect AI-powered business applications, models and enterprise data in real-time from AI-specific and foundational cyberattacks.

Learn more about Accenture and Palo Alto Networks.

About Palo Alto Networks

Palo Alto Networks is the world's cybersecurity leader. We innovate to outpace cyberthreats, so organizations can embrace technology with confidence. We provide next-gen cybersecurity to thousands of customers globally, across all sectors. Our best-in-class cybersecurity platforms and services are backed by industry-leading threat intelligence and strengthened by state-of-the-art automation. Whether deploying our products to enable the Zero Trust Enterprise, responding to a security incident, or partnering to deliver better security outcomes through a world-class partner ecosystem, we're committed to helping ensure each day is safer than the one before. It's what makes us the cybersecurity partner of choice.

At Palo Alto Networks, we're committed to bringing together the very best people in service of our mission, so we're also proud to be the cybersecurity workplace of choice, recognized among Newsweek's Most Loved Workplaces (2023, 2022, 2021), with a score of 100 on the Disability Equality Index (2023, 2022), and HRC Best Places for LGBTQ+ Equality (2022). For more information, visitwww.paloaltonetworks.com.

Palo Alto Networks, Precision AI, Prisma, and the Palo Alto Networks logo are trademarks of Palo Alto Networks, Inc. in the United States and in jurisdictions throughout the world. All other trademarks, trade names, or service marks used or mentioned herein belong to their respective owners. Any unreleased services or features (and any services or features not generally available to customers) referenced in this or other press releases or public statements are not currently available (or are not yet generally available to customers) and may not be delivered when expected or at all. Customers who purchase Palo Alto Networks applications should make their purchase decisions based on services and features currently generally available.

About Accenture

Accenture is a leading global professional services company that helps the world’s leading businesses, governments and other organizations build their digital core, optimize their operations, accelerate revenue growth and enhance citizen services—creating tangible value at speed and scale. We are a talent- and innovation-led company with approximately 742,000 people serving clients in more than 120 countries. Technology is at the core of change today, and we are one of the world’s leaders in helping drive that change, with strong ecosystem relationships. We combine our strength in technology and leadership in cloud, data and AI with unmatched industry experience, functional expertise and global delivery capability. We are uniquely able to deliver tangible outcomes because of our broad range of services, solutions and assets across Strategy & Consulting, Technology, Operations, Industry X and Song. These capabilities, together with our culture of shared success and commitment to creating 360° value, enable us to help our clients reinvent and build trusted, lasting relationships. We measure our success by the 360° value we create for our clients, each other, our shareholders, partners and communities. Visit us at www.accenture.com.

Accenture Security is a leading provider of end-to-end cybersecurity services, including strategy, protection, resilience and industry-specific cyber services. We bring security innovation, coupled with global scale and a worldwide delivery capability through our network of Cyber Fusion Centers. Helped by our team of 22,000 highly skilled professionals, we enable clients to innovate safely, build cyber resilience and grow with confidence. Visit us at accenture.com/security.

# # #