The Palo Alto Medical Foundation announced that it has scaled back its plans for a new medical center in Sunnyvale in response to neighborhood opposition, cutting 30,000 square feet from the original design by eliminating a vision center.

“We had to make a significant sacrifice to get to that win-win,” said Cynthia Greaves, a spokeswoman for the medical foundation, which presented the revised plans to city staff and neighbors on April 17.

A group of neighbors has organized a group called Citizens Address Re-zoning (CARz) to oppose the project because of concerns about the mass and aesthetics of the building and parking garage, the traffic impact on neighboring streets and the safety of pedestrians nearby.

The group was happy about the changes and is guardedly optimistic, said Jeff Jones, who helped form it.

“They were not just token changes. They really did put a solid effort into looking at what they could do” to address neighborhood concerns, Jones said of the foundation’s revisions.

The medical center, which was called Camino Medical Group until that group merged with PAMF, is located at 301 Old San Francisco Road near El Camino Real and S. Sunnyvale Avenue.

The original plans called for a 150,000-square-foot building that would have been equivalent to four stories tall, plus a four-story parking garage at Bayview Avenue and Old San Francisco.

The revised plans eliminate a vision care center to reduce the size of the top floor of the proposed building to 120,000 square feet. The elimination of the vision center also allowed architects to cut the parking garage in half to two levels.

The medical offices are still designed to be 52 feet tall in parts, as they were proposed originally, and therefore require a city-approved rezoning.

Jones said that this process has caused “eye-opening revelations about all the traffic that’s going to be coming through our neighborhood” when the Downtown Sunnyvale redevelopment project is completed.

As a result, CARz has been asking the city to create a left turn from southbound Sunnyvale onto Old San Francisco. The draft environmental impact report about the project did not recommend that, and the city has no plans for additional traffic studies.

Jones also said that CARz is circulating petitions to build support for closing off Bayview and Carol avenues. Street closures were considered in the past but were rejected because of the potential for adding traffic to other streets.

The group remains concerned about the proposed rezoning from low-density residential/office to public facility/planned development because of concerns that the greater flexibility of the zoning could allow larger development proposals in the future.

The Sunnyvale Planning Commission is set to consider a final environmental impact report on the project on May 18 and the city council is set to consider the project on June 9.

In a recent meeting, the city council expressed concern about whether PAMF was meeting with neighbors and responding to their concerns. There has been a series of meetings recently at which neighbors voiced their opposition to the project as it was proposed, but it was unclear until now what changes PAMF would make to the plans.