The Argentinian tennis player David Nalbandian (photo ©Carine06) announced his retirement from his professional activity.

Born in Unquillo, in the province of Córdoba, Argentina, on January 1, 1982, David Nalbandian became a professional tennis player in 2000 after a good junior career in which he won the U.S. Open of the category by defeating Roger Federer in the final.

The results for David Nalbandian started arriving in 2001, with his first final in an ATP tournament in Palermo. In 2002 he started winning his first tournaments in Estoril and Basel and also reached his most important achievement in a Grand Slam tournament with the Wimbledon final.

In 2003 and 2004, David Nalbandian did well but failed to win any tournament still reaching the final in tournaments in Montreal, twice in Basel, Rome and Madrid.

In 2005, David Nalbandian won some tournaments again, in Monaco and especially his most prestigious victory at the Tennis Masters Cup.

For David Nalbandian that was the beginning of his best period because in 2006 he won the Estoril tournament again and in March he reached the third place in the ATP part of the Master Series.

In 2008, David Nalbandian still had good results by winning tournaments in Buenos Aires and Stockholm and reaching the final tournament in Acapulco, Basel and Paris. With Argentina he reached the final of the Davis Cup, where he won the singles match that he played, the only one conquered by his team against Spain, and lost to double together with Augustin Calleri.

The year 2009 started well for David Nalbandian with a victory in the Sydney tournament but in the rest of the year he had many problems and didn’t even reach any other finals. Due to a hip injury he had to undergo surgery and skipped several months.

In 2010 came the last victory in an ATP tournament for David Nalbandian, in Washington. His shape wasn’t always adequate and various physical problems prevented him from winning again so he reached only some finals in Auckland in 2011, in London in 2012 and Sao Paulo in 2013. In 2011 he played his last Davis Cup final winning the doubles match together with Eduardo Schwank, the only point conquered by his team against Spain.

Now David Nalbandian has decided to retire stating that his body doesn’t allow him to play at a high level anymore. He’s been a player of great talent but rarely physically prepared adequately for a professional sportsman. Now his dream is to become the captain of the Argentine Davis Cup team to try to win the trophy that eluded him.

[ad name=”AmazonTennis468″]