Garden of Rama

Arthur Charles Clarke. Bantam Books, $20 (0pp) ISBN 978-0-553-07261-7

Introduced in Clarke's 1973 Hugo- and Nebula-winning Rendezvous with Rama and most recently seen in Clarke and Lee's Rama II , the massive spacecraft Rama is back, but the luster and sense of wonder generated by its first appearances have eroded. The once-exciting vessel, a ``cylindrical worldlet,'' has been turned into a cheaply painted backdrop for an equally garish exposition of vice-lord politics. When Rama returns to earth and demands a sample of humanity for observation, a lying, corrupt government hands over 2000 citizens. These individuals serve as a microcosm to reflect most of today's big sociological problems, thus implying that in 300 years no existing problems will have been solved nor will any others have been created. Clarke's unmistakable style is sadly lacking. Essentially, the book suffers from an imbalance between what occurs onstage and what offstage. Minor characters are built up with detailed introductions and then generally ignored. Major events, about which reader interest has been piqued, are skipped, then given a one-sentence review. Potentially captivating interactions with aliens and advanced technology are ignored. Readers are advised to give this voyage a miss and wait for Rama's next adventure. (Aug.)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 07/29/1991

Genre: Fiction

Mass Market Paperbound - 528 pages - 978-0-553-29817-8

Mass Market Paperbound - 978-0-553-18093-0

Open Ebook - 530 pages - 978-0-7953-2545-8

Prebound-Glued - 528 pages - 978-0-613-28849-1

Prebound-Sewn - 518 pages - 978-0-606-00743-6

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

Stephen Baxter, Arthur Charles Clarke

Clarke, with Baxter (Coalescent ), probably the most talented of the former's several collaborators, have cooked up an exciting tale full of high-tech Continue reading »

Stephen Baxter, Arthur Charles Clarke

Set in the same universe as Clarke's 2001 and its sequels, Clarke and Baxter's second and final Time Odyssey book (after 2004's Continue reading »

Stephen Baxter, Arthur Charles Clarke

Though supposedly the last volume of Clarke and Baxter’s Time Odyssey series (after 2005’s Sunstorm ), this intriguing and frustrating installment of Continue reading »

Frederik Pohl, Arthur Charles Clarke

Grand Masters Pohl (Gateway ) and the late Clarke (1917–2008, best known for 2001 ) collaborated on a Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke, Lee Clarke

This disappointing conclusion to the Rama series picks up at the point where the previous volume, The Garden of Rama , left its characters in peril. Cosmonaut Nicole Wakefield, the former governor of Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

Frank Poole was the astronaut murdered by the berserk computer HAL in 2001: A Space Odyssey. In this third sequel to that classic novel, Poole is returned to life after his frozen body is recovered Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

Clarke's SF novel concerns an asteroid on a collision course with 22nd-century earth. Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

This final volume of the Rama tetralogy chronicles the end of the spaceship's intergalactic odyssey; a five-week PW bestseller. Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

HTwo titans of hard SF--multiple award-winning British authors Clarke (Rendezvous with Rama, etc.) and Baxter (The Time Ships, etc.)--team up for a story of grand scientific and philosophical scope. Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke, Frederick I. Ordway, III

Writer Frederick I. Ordway III worked with Werner von Braun in the early days of NASA; he also spent decades collecting pictures, paintings and diagrams of space voyages, real or imagined. With Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

In 1973, Clarke's Rendezvous with Rama won the Hugo, Nebula and Campbell awards. This new novel is the second in a trilogy about the mystifying world-ships and their flybys of our solar system. Continue reading »

Gregory Benford, Arthur Charles Clarke

One of Clarke's early novels, Against the Fall of Night , has long been recognized as among his very best; the tale of a young man's need to escape from the limits of the last cities on Earth, it Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

Setting his novel in the near future, close to the centennial of the 1912 sinking of the Titanic , SF luminary Clarke ( Childhood's End ) spins an initially ingenious scenario that only partially Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

Fully one-half of this personalized history of telecommunications appeared in Clarke's Voices Across the Sea (1958), but few authors bear repeating so well as this renowned writer of science fiction Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

Classic SF author Clarke ( 2001: A Space Odyssey ) walks on well-trodden ground with this entertaining but forgettable book. In the early 22nd century, an enormous asteroid is discovered to be on a Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

Human beings could visit Mars in the early part of the 21st century if the resources were made available, asserts science-fiction novelist Clarke. Citing a report issued by the International Space Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke

Two formidable SF talents converge splendidly in this disaster thriller, which offers sleek action-adventure writing, world-class tumult and a coherent near-future based on sound yet innovative Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke, Michael P. Kube-McDowell

One of the grand old men of SF has teamed up with Kube-McDowell (Tyrant's Test, etc.) to imagine a near-future in which all traditional weapons that use gunpowder are rendered obsolete. Out of the Continue reading »

Arthur Charles Clarke, Clark

Though best known as the author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, Clarke has been a scientist and writer of nonfiction for almost two-thirds of a century. This collection is organized chronologically by Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS