Editor’s Note: These articles are part of a series of questionnaires profiling candidates running for Bryan County Commissioner (District 1) in the upcoming Republican primary (Tuesday, May 21). Answers were edited for length and clarity.

About Silas

Originally from Effingham County, Wes Silas said he and his wife Alisha, "chose Bryan County several years ago as the place we wanted to raise a family and feel strongly that the quality of life we experience here is second to none. And it is my desire to protect the quality of life as well as promote and manage the growth of our county."

Silas said he's worked since a teenager, "first at Kroger and then in lawn care during high school. After graduating from Georgia Southern with a degree in construction management I went to work at Industrial Technical Coatings, Inc. (ITC). In 2017, I became the owner of ITC. As such, I have extensive experience in the day-to-day operations of a growing industrial business which include managing employees; forecasting trends; budgeting expenses; staying informed of state, federal, and other government regulations; and prioritizing commitments. I believe these valuable work experiences will lend themselves to the tasks involved in performing the duties of a county commissioner."

Silas added, "More importantly, my involvement in the Bryan County community through my family’s faithful membership with Pembroke First Baptist Church as well as the involvement we have with our two boys with the Bryan County Recreation Department give me a vital component that far outweighs most other accomplishments.”

Why are you running?

There are two specific areas that I believe we can work on together. One is managing the explosive growth we are experiencing and the other is addressing the ongoing needs of our recreational department.

What do you feel are the three biggest issues facing District 1?

Activities for children, infrastructure and managing growth.

What will you do to help solve those issues?

Have a better line of communication between the county, city and residents. This includes talking to the community about the needs of the area so everyone provides input and understands the reasoning for requests from the city and county regarding infrastructure and amenities.

With growth coming from Savannah and the port to North Bryan at I-16, are you as a candidate willing to support new road corridors in and around Pembroke, specifically from Highway 280 to Highway 119?

I am willing to support infrastructure that makes sense for the North Bryan community. The residents and small business owners and their concerns should be taken into consideration first. With growth coming there are things that have to be managed and thought out in advance. This is why I believe my background in construction contracting will allow me to make the best decisions.