Bryan Silas Feeling Confident About Michigan Debut

"Recent Races Have Thrown New Face Into Mix"

BROOKLYN, Michigan (June 13, 2007) - - ARCA RE/MAX Series rookie Bryan Silas has emerged from the pack as a serious contender in the last two races and he plans to keep his strong performances going entering Friday's ARCA 200 at Michigan International Speedway.

Three straight top-20 finishes have been good for the team, but the team has also seen three potential top-10 efforts erase thanks to bad luck. With Friday's race expected to be one of the most intense of the year, Silas is concentrating on his driving while leaving the rest of up to his Fast Track Racing team.

"I'm looking forward to making my Michigan debut this weekend," said Silas, a native of Stuart, Florida. "These last two races have been absolutely amazing. We've come out of the box strong and that's what we need to do. Now if we can keep the monkey off our back during the race, I think the finishes will start pouring in."

Last weekend, Silas etched his way into the record books by leading 15 laps before battling a flat tire in the final laps of the event to record a 18th place finish. While the finish overshadows the performance of the Fast Track Racing team, Silas remains upbeat about his recent runs in the ARCA RE/MAX Series.

"I've learned so much in the last two or three weeks than I've learned in the first seven races," he explained. "To go to Pocono last weekend and run the way we did is a real testament to how this team is improving. I'm really proud of all the great strides we made, we just need to keep digging and the rest will fall into place."

Did Silas mention he made his Pocono debut? With the stout performance last weekend, the driver can't wait to get back to the 2.5-mile triangular monster in August.

Turing complete focus over to Michigan, Silas has a big weekend ahead of him. In addition to running the ARCA RE/MAX Series event, Silas will also attempt to make his third start of the season in the NASCAR Craftsman Truck Series event on Saturday.

"I'm no stranger to competing double duty now," Silas said laughing. "I think it's great for me to run both races this weekend. The more experience I've been taking in, the quicker I'm adapting to both the car and truck. We were really strong with the truck at Lowes Motor Speedway before the engine failed. I don't think we'll have that problem again this weekend, we just look to log all the laps we can."

Luckily, Silas won't head into the Motor City blindfolded as the Rookie-of-the-Year candidate recently participated in the open test session for the ARS with satisfying results. "We were pretty solid last month in the test," Silas recalled. "We unloaded with two cars and the Chevrolet Monte Carlo was the faster than our Ford Fusion, so we've opted to stick with that. If we can backup what we tested, I think we're set for another good weekend."

With his solid performance last Saturday, Silas overtook Patrick Sheltra for ninth in the ARCA RE//MAX Series championship standings heading into the only event held at MIS this season. Silas also closed the gap between eighth place competitor Justin Marks. "We're gunning for a top-five finish in the points this season," added Silas. "We're picking them off one by one. We just need to keep learning and keep finishing and the points should take care of themselves."

Nortrax, Shell Rotella T, Holland Pump and Palm Beach Grading (PBG) will all sponsor the No. 11 Chevrolet in the 26th ARS event held at Michigan International Speedway.

"Our sponsors were able to get some television time during the live race last weekend and we're looking to do the same in Michigan on Friday. My sponsors have been really satisfied with our efforts this last month and I want to let them know we don't have any plans on stopping."

Heading into Michigan, Silas has 16 ARCA RE/MAX Series starts to his credit with a career best finish of eighth at Salem Speedway (April 2007) while holding an additional top-10 performance at USA International Speedway (March 2007). He holds a career best short track time trials effort of eighth at Berlin Raceway and Iowa Speedway (July 2006 and June 2007). A fourth place qualifying effort at Pocono Raceway (June 2007) is Silas's best speedway run to date. He has controlled the ARCA field for 15 laps in one race.

-credit: BryanSilasRacing.com