Gensomaden Saiyuki (Saiyuki RELOAD, Saiyuki RELOAD Gunlock, etc.) is a manga and anime series kinda-sorta inspired by the Chinese classic Journey to the West (which is Saiyuki in Japan).

Set in a Schizo-Tech universe where demons, mystical powers and nominally Buddhist Powers That Be (see the trope entry below for a better explanation) coexist with guns, credit cards, and a Jeep (which, coincidentally, transforms into a small dragon). In the past, demons and humans coexisted in peace. But recently, the demons have been driven to madness and violence. This was found out to be linked to the resurrection of the demon Gyumao, by forces unknown. In response, the trash-talking monk Genjyo Sanzo is commanded to journey West with his three companions Son Goku, Sha Gojyo, and Cho Hakkai. Sanzo's three companions aren't exactly what they seem, as they are demons who are only kept in check by accessories that also serve to limit their power. However, their history stretches back not only to the recent past, but to hundreds of years before.

Saiyuki is a somewhat large franchise, with three TV series, two OVAs, stage plays, drama CDs, and a movie, along with the five manga everything is based on. One could argue that this series has Multiple Demographic Appeal, with an overwhelmingly Bishonen cast and multiple opportunities for Ho Yay, but also has some elements of Shonen series, such as My Kung Fu Is Stronger Than Yours.

Not to be confused with Sayuki (nee Fiona Graham), the first and only white woman to become a geisha.

Tropes used in Saiyuki include:

Abusive Parents: Li Touten, who uses his bio-engineered son to gain military and political power. He's also implied to be sexually abusing him.

Gojyo is the original example of this, with an abusive step-mother.

Lirin's mother (and Kougaiji's stepmother), Gyokumen Kousho. She uses her children for science projects, among other things.

Actually, I Am Him: Happens every time the Sanzo party enter a new town that doesn't recognize who they are.

Adorably Precocious Child: Tenkai in Ibun.

Affably Evil: Most of the antagonists don't really qualify as evil. Kougaiji and his group sometimes make the main characters look like the bad guys. Lirin is basically a female Goku (except she's an complete idiot), Dokugakuji is something of a Punch Clock Villain that loyally follows Kougaiji, and Yaone is considered a possible non Fan Dumb love interest for Hakkai. Villains that can be considered evil are typically complete monsters.

The Ageless: The gods.

Alternate Character Meaning: How the title is written is a pun; instead of the kanji for "west" it uses another with the same reading that makes the whole thing mean Journey to the Max!

And the Adventure Continues...: Every one of the anime and manga series to date ends with the Sanzo-ikkou headed west once again, typically driving off into a blazing sunset.

Asleep for Days: Happens a few times after major injuries.

Attempted Rape: Genjo Sanzo's Burial chapter reveals that, just after witnessing his master's death, 14 year-old Genjyo was waylaid by a band of thugs who attempted to rob and rape him. He shot his attacker at point-blank range, the first time he had ever killed another person. This could also be considered Rape as Backstory because it's clearly tied to his trust and distance issues as an adult.

Badass Abnormal: Sanzo, thanks to his Sutra.

Hakkai was a normal man that before becoming a youkai, killed a thousand youkai on his own, and before he learned the energy attacks he used during the main series.

Badass Crew

Badass Normal: Gojyo somewhat qualifies. While Hakkai and Goku can remove their limiters for a power boost, Gojyo doesn't undergo any changes other than a mystical weapon and taking things up a notch.

Bald of Evil: Rikkudo

Because I'm Jonesy: Happens both in the beginning of the Saiyuki reload manga as well as in various filler eppisodes of the anime. Sadly enough, both times the Sanzo weren't very good at convincing who was the "real".

Beware the Nice Ones: Hakkai is usually the most polite and civil of the group... until he takes off his Restraining Bolt. (Even Goku was frightened after he did that!)

He's scary even without taking off the power limiter. Who else in the series smiles as they snap your arm?

Big Bad: The Sealed Evil in a Can Gyumao, as well as seasonal Big Bads Homura, Kami-sama, Hazel, and Ukoku Sanzo.

Big Brother Instinct: Kougaiji deeply cares about his half-sister Lirin (not that way).

Gojyo's half-brother. Even though the two are sworn enemies, he obviously still cares deeply about his little brother, and feels a great deal of guilt about not being able to protect him from abuse at the hands of his step mother. It's also implied that the main motivation behind the elder brother's sexualised relationship with his biological mother and his subsequent murder of her were both attempts to keep Gojyo safe. Given the complexity of the relationship (and how Gojyo also had sexual/romantic feelings for the woman), there were likely other motivating factors, but he is certainly more broken up over not being able to protect his little brother than the incest thingy.

Also, his extreme protectiveness over Kougaiji is motivated strongly by his guilt at not being able to keep his biological half-brother safe, and a way to gain redemption for not being able to do so. His complete psychological breakdown in the manga (when he thinks he cannot keep Kougaiji safe) reflects this.

In Saiyuki Ibun, Houmei (who would be known as Koumyou Sanzo) develops this towards the youngest apprentice monk Tenkai.

Big Eater: Goku. Sanzo suggests that this is because he was locked up for 500 years with no food.

Bishonen

Brother-Sister Incest: Kanan and Gonou/Hakkai didn't realize they were long-lost siblings until after they fell in love, apparently. The anime toned it down it so that Kanan was only like an older sister to Hakkai, instead of actually being his older sister.

Brainwashed and Crazy: "Barcode" Kougaiji.

Brainy Brunette: Oh, Hakkai.

Bunny Ears Lawyer:

Dr. Nii Jienyi carries around an ACTUAL bunny rabbit doll which he babytalks to like a lover, does not seem to feel the need to bathe on a regular basis, and is a walking sexual harassment lawsuit. He's also the only person on Earth capable of using the Tenchi Kaigen sutras to revive Gyuumaoh, had a doctorate by the age of 17, and is the keeper of the Muten sutra, the second youngest sanzo ever.

Field Marshall Tenpou in Gaiden can't for the life of him keep his office cleaner than "trainwreck", wears shower sandals to work on a regular basis, and is voluntarily an adjutant to a less senior officer because it deflects some of the attention and paperwork. When he's in a battle, however...every soldier wants to be under him because his troops come home in one piece. In the escape to the Lower World, Tenpou takes off in the opposite direction to draw attention away from the gate and clear the way for Goku and Konzen. Barefoot and armed with only a regular katana, he takes out at least a dozen defenders before being fatally struck.

The entire sanzo priesthood is basically an order of Bunny-Ears Preachers. The order's purpose is protecting the sutras above all else and its members are not bound to the usual Buddhist monastic precepts. None of them seem to shave their heads (as would normally be required) and they seem to freely indulge in tobacco and alcohol. Genjyo and Ukoku aren't even necessarily professing Buddhists. Yet one would still be GREATLY ill-advised to challenge any sanzo at Buddhist magic or martial arts if one were not suicidal.

Butt Monkey: Zakuro, and sometimes Gojyo.

Canon Foreigner: Homura, Zenon and Shien from the Gensoumaden Filler arc.

Cast Full of Pretty Boys: 4 semi-recurring, 100% female characters; 2 sympathetic, all antagonists.

Character Development: Most obviously Goku and Konzen.

All of the four main characters (Sanzo, Goku, Hakkai, and Gojyo) have a lot of this. Goku is coming of age throughout the story, so his development is extremely in-your-face. The other three are adults and as such, their development is shown through flashbacks and interactions that demonstrate they are more than what they first appear. It is most apparent in the manga, whereas the anime adaptations tended to get bogged down by repetitive Filler.

Celestial Bureaucracy

Cherry Blossoms: A major motif of Gaiden.

Chekhov's Gun: Dr. Nii's bunny plushie. 'Where's the fifth sutra?' You ask? Look no further.

Color Coded for Your Convenience: Purple = Sanzo, Yellow/Gold = Goku, Red = Gojyo, Green = Hakkai. These are their eye colors, and in Goku and Gojyo's cases, there are important plot points attached. Purple/yellow and red/green are also opposites/complementarity on the color wheel. Weirdly, the Reload anime used blue as Sanzo's color in the openings and changed Hakkai's eyes to blue.

Combat Tentacles: Some youkai have these or something like it especially Hakkai in youkai form, with his vines.

Comforting the Widow: Dokugakuji to his own mother to keep her from killing her husband's bastard.

Ukoku Sanzo and Gyokumen Koushu as well.

Convenient Enemy Base: ...they're not there yet.

Costume Copycat - Kami-sama, the huge fanboy. He just needs ONE MORE THING to finish it.

Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Koumyou Sanzo is either this or Obfuscating Stupidity; though he appears to be genuinely ditzy. While we've yet to see him do much, there is the small feat of attaining Sanzo-hood at the youngest age (before Ukoku and Genjyo came along, the latter having inherited it from Koumyou upon his death) and having been so powerful that he was entrusted with two sutras.

Cue the Sun: Happens over and over in the manga, usually in reference to Sanzo and sometimes the whole group. Invoking this image is also part of a symbolic bet between Koumyou Sanzo and Ukoku Sanzo.

Curtains Match the Window: Gojyo's eyes and hair are "blood red," proof of his human-demon hybrid nature. The actual color used to indicate "blood red" varies from darkish pink to a weird orange, depending.

As Goku helpfully informs us after having seen Gojyo in the bath, the carpet does not match the drapes. It's black.

Cute Bruiser: Lirin

Dragon Lady: Gyokumen Koushu

Dark-Skinned Redhead: Kougaiji

Dark-Skinned Blond: Lirin (though she has orange hair in Gensomaden Saiyuki anime, in the other anime and manga color pictures she is blonde).

Dead Little Sister: Sanzo's and Hazel's father figures, Kougaiji's mom.

Gonou/Hakkai's sister, of course. Although the events leading up to her death set off his Berserk Button, and her death itself consolidates it.

Defiant to the End: Sanzou, when captured by the Scorpion Lady.

Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: Sanzo's group, with help from their buddies in Kougaiji's bunch, join forces to defeat a bunch of soldiers from the army of heaven, as well as three high-ranking gods. Justified, since with the exception of Goku, the members of Sanzo's party were high-ranking gods themselves in their past lives. Gojyo was a General, and Hakkai was his direct superior, while Sanzo was the Goddess of Mercy's nephew.

This wasn't in the manga, however. In the manga, the guys that fought there only appeared briefly in the Gaiden-arc.

Disposable Woman: Kanan

Damsel in Distress: Kanan when she is kidnapped by Hyakugan Maoh and thus becoming a Disposable Woman. Lirin when she is taken off by her mother for scientific experimentation only to be saved by Kougaiji, Yaone and Doukugakuji. And somewhat Yaone when she failed her mission and was saved by Kougaiji when she attempted to kill herself.

Also that one episode where once again Yaone failed her mission and gets kidnapped by another demon, and when Hakkai heard that, he requests the team to save her, leading to an Enemy Mine situation with Kougaiji & co.

Dark Mistress: Gyokumen Koushu

Dysfunction Junction: The four main characters all have their tragic pasts. Sanzo has to deal with the death of his Mentor, who died to protect him; Gojyo has to deal with his half-demon nature, as well as guilt over the death of his step-mother; Hakkai has to deal with his past as an orphan who had inadvertent Brother-Sister Incest, as well as the manner by which he became a demon; finally, Goku is Really Seven Hundred Years Old, although he spent most of that time being caged on top of a mountain. Whew!

Eerie Pale-Skinned Brunette: Nii Jenyi Ukoku

Eighties Hair: Mullets! Mullets Galore! In fact almost every male character in the series at one point or another sported one.

Empty Shell: Prince Nataku

Everyone Calls Him "Barkeep": 'Sanzo' is technically a rank, not a personal name. His Buddhist dynastic name is Genjyo but it's rarely used except in his full title or to distinguish him from other members of the Sanzo priesthood like Koumyou and Ukoku. Goku seized on the "Sanzo" part of that long-ass formal title when they first met and used it like a personal name. Hakki and Gojyo later picked up this habit from Goku. We're reminded of this in the aftermath of the first fight with Kami-sama, when the-priest-formerly-known-Koryuu screams at his companions to stop calling him "Sanzo": without the sutra, he can't lay claim to that rank anymore.

Expy: Homura's clothes, appearance, goals and means of death are suspiciously similar to those of Sensui Shinobu. Both series were animated by Studio Pierrot, and Homura is a Canon Foreigner who made a brief cameo as a Canon Tourist.

Eyeless Face: If you're not important you don't need eyes.

Eyes Always Shut: Shien and (usually) Koumyou Sanzo.

Chin Yisou, too. He's in permanent niko-niko mode, and much like Xellos, is one of those characters whom you really don't want to open his eyes, because it usually means he's about to do something really...uh...bad.

Eyes of Gold: The eye color itself is taken very seriously, as people with these tend to be extremely dangerous, even by the PTB's standards. Goku, Homura, and Nataku have these.

Hazel's resurrected people have yellow eyes - sort of related, though Saiyuki distinguishes between yellow and gold in this case. Either way, Hazel's - patients(?) are perfectly nice normal people post resurrection unless you happen to be a youkai.

Eye Scream: Hakkai puts his own eye out, and wears a glass replacement. The anime toned it down so that the actual eye didn't, y'know, come out.

Minekura specifies that it isn't glass in a Q&A session of an artbook. It's actually bio-mechanical (there's your Schizo Tech again) and he can see through it.

At the end of the Reload manga, Sanzo shoots Ukoku's eye out, and it is strongly implied that he rips the other out himself because he's a nutjob. Which would fit perfectly for his "darkness" theme; who better than an evil blind guy? He is VERY aware of the connection, and thinks it's quite funny.

Evil Matriarch: Gyokumen Koushu and Gojyo's mother.

Fan Girl: "Pippi" is a Kougaiji fangirl.

Fan Nickname: "Pippi," after Pippi Longstocking, for the girl the guys live with in the youkai village.

"Sanzo-ikkou," for Sanzo's group (Sanzo, Goku, Hakkai, Gojyo, & Jeep) and in turn "Kougajiji-ikkou" for his group (Kougaiji, Doku, Yaone, & Lirin). "-ikkou" is used to denote a group, particularly of Buddhist pilgrims. A/k/a the "Kougaiji-tachi" or "Kou-tachi" ("Kou's gang/people/posse").

Fan Service (For everybody! Lirin, Yaone and several incidental girls are incredibly busty, and the four protagonists are kind enough to remove their shirts on occasion.

especially on Hakkai and Goku.