We all could use some laughs as well as beauty, joy, another reality. Recently, musicals have become my great escape, because, well, they’re s’wonderful, filled with affairs of the heart and body, toe-tapping rhythms, witty lyrics and syncopated motion. The stories invariably turn on couples (or matchmakers) and play like courtships: Guy and gal meet, they dance, sing, kiss, argue. Then they dance again, beautifully, because it is always fair weather in the musical even when it’s storming outside. Here are five from the 1930s, the decade when movies went from all talking to all singing and dancing.

1931

‘The Smiling Lieutenant’

Best known for exquisite romantic comedies, Ernst Lubitsch was also instrumental in developing the musical as a genre. “The Smiling Lieutenant” follows Niki (Maurice Chevalier), a rakish Viennese officer. One night at a beer garden (where else?), he meets Franzi (Claudette Colbert), a violinist, and they’re soon cooing over breakfast. “You put kisses in the coffee,” he sings.

There aren’t many songs and scarcely any dancing, but it’s funny, sexy and thoroughly charming. During a waltz, Franzi asks Niki if the other woman in his life, Princess Anna (Miriam Hopkins), is a blonde or a brunette. He says that he doesn’t know and Franzi laughs, because she now realizes that Niki hasn’t seen Anna in the buff. The moment is naughty in a film suffused with adult knowing and melancholic longing.

The cleverest, zingiest song is “Jazz Up Your Lingerie,” which Franzi and Anna perform together. After slaps and tears, the worldly Franzi suggests that Anna ditch her bloomers for something flirtier. The women are rivals, but as they play a piano trilling about lace and melodies — and everything else unmentionable — they form a rueful sisterhood that’s as emotionally persuasive as it is narratively dubious. The film doesn’t end the way you want. “A poignant sadness infiltrates the director’s gayest moments,” Andrew Sarris once observed — but that’s Lubitsch, whose touch, “is this counterpoint between sadness and gaiety.”

Available to stream on Flix Fling.