Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, who has been appointed the director of the Bibliotheque Nationale, France's national library, is one of the few European scholars whose name is known to American readers as well as historians. He is ranked as the foremost French historian of his generation and one of the two or three most influential historians in the world today.

The news of his appointment to the challenging post at the Bibliotheque, troubled by ministerial conflicts and strikes in the last few years, has been hailed by American historians. His own books have been building a steady readership in the United States. ''Jasmin's Witch,'' his latest book from his American publisher, George Braziller, is a portrait of village superstitions in the South of France over several centuries. It follows his other translated works - ''Montaillou,'' ''Carnival in Romans'' and ''Love, Death and Money in the Pays d'Oc.''

What makes the new 58-year-old director of the Bibliotheque so influential is that he is a leader of the ''Annales'' school of historians.

Centered in Paris, the school emphasizes social, cultural and economic history. Theirs is not the history of kings, generals and battles but of a country's non-elite: the peasantry and the common men and women in a regional society. They try to offer insights into the minds of ordinary people.

In a recent interview, Mr. Le Roy Ladurie explained that the ''Annales'' school uses modern tools - computers, carbon-14 dating, mathematical formulas and statistical records - to arrive at critical interpretations of everyday life. It recreate whole cultures by availing itself of other disciplines - anthropology, theology, demography, sociology.

In his research, Mr. Le Roy Ladurie has studied such phenomena as crop failures and famines to gauge the importance of climate in agrarian history. For example, he said, by using harvest dates and parish records and even analysis of tree trunks embedded in French glaciers, he has charted fluctuations in temperature and climate -and therefore in human fortunes - in Europe since 1000 A.D.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.