Delta’s people-first culture continues to be recognized, earning the airline a spot on Fortune’s 100 Best Companies to Work For® list for the fifth year. Delta is the only airline included on the 2024 list.

Great Place To Work, an esteemed expert in workplace culture, supports the selection process each year for Fortune’s 100 Best Companies to Work For. Employee feedback is a key driver in the process, which recognizes employers who provide a great company culture. Read more on Delta's Great Place to Work page.

“Delta people fuel our success and are the reason we are the most-awarded airline,” said CEO Ed Bastian. “This recognition is a testament to what we can achieve by listening and working as a team to continuously improve the workplace experience for all 100,000 Delta people.”

The input Delta people provided through last year’s GPTW Trust Index Survey was crucial to earning this coveted recognition. This feedback, along with GPTW’s evaluation, highlights the many ways Delta invests in its people.

Delta is committed to providing industry-leading total rewards for industry-leading performance and regularly invests in employees’ financial, emotional, physical and social wellbeing. Recent examples include:

Earlier this year, Delta paid out $1.4 billion in profit sharing to employees worldwide. The Shared Rewards program provides the opportunity to earn up to $1,200 annually based on meeting operational goals.

Delta’s Emergency Savings Program helps boost emergency savings with up to $1,000 in contributions from Delta.

All Delta employees and their household members have access to mental health support at no charge through Spring Health.

Partnerships with Maven and Progyny provide family building and comprehensive fertility benefits to support family-building journeys. Progyny has supported nearly 1,700 Delta people on their fertility and family planning journeys, and since January 2023, 88 children have been born.

By implementing a skills-first approach and eliminating college degree requirements, Delta people have more equitable career growth opportunities.

“Delta’s culture of care starts with our people,” said E.V.P. and Chief People Officer Joanne Smith. “When we take care of our people, they extend that care to our customers, who become loyal to Delta, which takes care of the company and Delta’s shareholders. It’s the virtuous circle in action that helps us keep climbing.”

GPTW Trust Index

A randomized sample of approximately 25,000 U.S.-based Delta people with representation across divisions and functions were asked to participate in the 2023 Trust Index survey administered by GPTW. The independent survey asks employees to share their voice and provide their honest opinions about different aspects of working at Delta. This survey assesses Delta’s strengths and challenges and complements our internal surveys to help us continuously improve the work experience for our people.

America’s most awarded airline

Delta is consistently recognized for excellence in workplace culture, customer experience, operational performance and more. The airline continues to earn accolades, with other recent recognition including:

Earning a spot on Fast Company’s list of the Most Innovative Companies for the fifth time in seven years.

Ascending to No. 11 on this year’s list of Fortune’s Worlds Most Admired Companies, ranking higher than any other airline on the Top 50 list. Delta also was ranked No. 1 among the list of Most Admired Airlines.

Being named to the 2024 Forbes Customer Experience All-Stars list. The coveted list recognizes the top brands that consumers ranked highest with respect to the company’s products, services and treatment of customers.

Being rated No. 1 by travel pros in the annual Business Travel News Airline Survey for the thirteenth year in a row.