Overview: WKXC-FM, also known as "Kicks 99", is a Country music radio station located in Augusta, Georgia. The station is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to the city of Aiken, South Carolina ...

Overview: LRL301 (94.3 FM) is a radio station broadcasting current music. Licensed to Buenos Aires, Argentina, the station serves the Greater Buenos Aires area. The station is currently owned by Difusora Baires ...

Overview: WMGV (103.3 FM, "V103.3") is a Hot AC music formatted radio station licensed to serve Newport, North Carolina. The station serves Eastern North Carolina with a mix of music from the 1980s, 1990s and today ...

Overview: WPTE is a Hot Adult Contemporary formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Virginia Beach, Virginia, serving Hampton Roads. WPTE is owned and operated by Entercom Communications. WPTE's studios are ...

Overview: WXKB (103.9 MHz, "B1039") is a commercial FM radio station licensed to Cape Coral, Florida, broadcasting to Fort Myers and Southwest Florida. WXKB is owned by the Beasley Broadcast Group and airs a Top ...

Overview: Radio Disney Latin America is a pop music and rock music network owned by The Walt Disney Company, which is broadcast in several countries in Latin America. The station is aimed primarily at youth and ...

Overview: WXTU (92.5 FM) is a commercial FM radio station in Philadelphia. Owned by Beasley Broadcast Group, the station broadcasts a country music format. Its studios and offices are located at 1 Bala Plaza on ...

Overview: KYXY (96.5 MHz) is a commercial FM radio station owned by Entercom. KYXY is licensed to San Diego, California with its studios in the city's Stonecrest area. Its transmitter site is in La Jolla, on the ...

Overview: KRDC (1110 AM) is a family-targeted country-formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Pasadena, California, serving the Greater Los Angeles Area. The station is owned and operated by The Walt Disney ...

Overview: WZFX is a Mainstream Urban formatted broadcast radio station licensed to Whiteville, North Carolina and located in Fayetteville, North Carolina. WZFX broadcasts under the branding "Foxy 99." WZFX is owned ...

Overview: Radio Disney Brasil is a radio network that is mostly owned by Rádio Holding, but The Walt Disney Company also has a 30% share. São Paulo is the only city in Brazil that has this format being carried on ...

Overview: WKIS (99.9 MHz) is a commercial FM radio station licensed to Boca Raton, Florida, and serving South Florida, including the Miami-Fort Lauderdale radio market. It is owned by Entercom and airs a country ...

Overview: KGSR (97.1 FM, is a radio station licensed to Cedar Park, Texas, and serving the Austin-Round Rock metropolitan area. Owned by Sinclair Telecable Inc. (not related to television broadcaster Sinclair ...