REDWOOD CITY, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Siebel Scholars Foundation today announced the recipients of the 2023 Siebel Scholars award. Now in its 22nd year, the Siebel Scholars program annually recognizes nearly 100 exceptional students

commitment to academics and influencing future society. This year’s class is exceptional, and once again represents the best and brightest minds from around the globe who are advancing innovations in healthcare, artificial intelligence, financial services, and more,” said from the world’s leading graduate schools of business, computer science, and bioengineering.

The 83 distinguished students of the Class of 2023 join past Siebel Scholars classes to form an unmatched professional and personal network of more than 1,700 scholars, researchers, and entrepreneurs. Through the program, this formidable group brings together diverse perspectives from business, science, and engineering to influence the technologies, policies, and economic and social decisions that shape the future.

“Every year, the Siebel Scholars continue to impress me with their commitment to academics and influencing future society. This year’s class is exceptional, and once again represents the best and brightest minds from around the globe who are advancing innovations in healthcare, artificial intelligence, financial services, and more,” said Thomas M. Siebel, Chairman of the Siebel Scholars Foundation. “It is my distinct pleasure to welcome these students into this ever-growing, lifelong community, and I personally look forward to seeing their impact and contributions unfold.”

Founded in 2000 by the Thomas and Stacey Siebel Foundation, the Siebel Scholars program awards grants to 16 universities in the United States, China, France, Italy and Japan. Following a competitive review process by the deans of their respective schools on the basis of outstanding academic achievement and demonstrated leadership, the top graduate students from 27 partner programs are selected each year as Siebel Scholars and receive a $35,000 award for their final year of studies. On average, Siebel Scholars rank in the top five percent of their class, many within the top one percent.

This year’s honorees are:

Graduate Schools of Bioengineering

Johns Hopkins University, Whiting School of Engineering and School of Medicine:

Tatsat Banerjee, Savannah Est-Witte, Justin Lowenthal, Zachary J. Schneiderman, Xiaoshan Shao

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, School of Engineering:

Miguel A. Alcantar, Cal Gunnarsson, Catherine Henry, Bianca Arielle Lepe, Jacqueline Valeri

Stanford University, School of Engineering and School of Medicine:

Michael Chavez, Thomas Lozanoski, Erica Schwarz, Pranav Vyas, Xinzhi Zou

University of California, Berkeley, College of Engineering:

Jordan Baker, Kelsey Gray DeFrates, Juan Eduardo Hurtado, Gabriela Lomeli, Connor Tsuchida

University of California, San Diego, Institute of Engineering in Medicine and Jacobs School of Engineering:

Erick Armingol, Jervaughn Hunter, Esther Lim, Jonathan Pekar, Yue Qin

Graduate Schools of Business

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sloan School of Management:

Stwart Pena Feliz, Belen Gallego, Boyana Georgieva, Amelia De Paola, Amitabh Guha Roy

Stanford University, Graduate School of Business:

Olivier Babin, Kathryn Gautier, Hannah Richards, Elizabeth Rosenblatt, Joshua Rowley

University of Chicago Booth School of Business:

Catalina Bilbao De Raadt, Hunter Holland, Wynne Tang, Todd Vogel, Yinga Xia

Graduate Schools of Computer Science

Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science:

Victoria Dean, Shivam Duggal, Isaac Grosof, Divanyash Kaushik, Lynn Kirabo

Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences:

Chi-Ning Chou, Gregory Kehne, Dor Verbin, Kai Wang, Kelly Zhang

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, School of Engineering:

Tanner Andrulis, Ce Jin, Ming Yang Lu, Wei-Chiu Ma, Junyi Zhu

Princeton University, School of Engineering and Applied Science:

Uthsav Chitra, Uma Girish, Jane Pan, Clayton Thomas, Teague Joseph Tomesh

Stanford University, School of Engineering:

Peng Chen, Ziang Liu, Clara Greene MacAvoy, Carmen Daniela Strassle, Yian Zhang

Tsinghua University, School of Information Science and Technology:

Shengding Hu, Zhiyue Li, Chen Wang, Jiayi Wang, Mengyu Zhang

University of California, Berkeley, College of Engineering:

Michael Lam, Kaushik Shivakumar

University of Chicago, School of Computer Science:

Phoebe Collins, Yi He, Drew Keller, Andrew McNutt, Emily Wenger

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, College of Engineering:

Gargi Balasubramaniam, Emmanuel Gallegos, Ryan Marten, Samraj Moorjani, Xueqing Wu

To date, the over 1,700 Siebel Scholars have driven innovations in over a dozen industries, launched more than 1,100 products, authored more than 420 patents, published over 42 books and more than 3,936 articles or book chapters, and managed more than $2.8 trillion in assets. As leaders of some of today’s most preeminent start-ups, nonprofits and research institutions, Siebel Scholars have served on more than 341 boards, established more than 54 philanthropic initiatives, and founded more than 158 companies – of which more than 57 have successfully gone public or were sold to enterprises including Google, Intuit, Match.com and Dropbox.

For more information about the Siebel Scholars program, please visit www.SiebelScholars.com.

About Siebel Scholars

The Siebel Scholars program was founded in 2000 by the Siebel Foundation to recognize the most talented students at the world’s leading graduate schools of business, computer science, bioengineering, and energy science. These include: Carnegie Mellon University; École Polytechnique; Harvard University; Johns Hopkins University; Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Northwestern University; Politecnico di Torino; Princeton University; Stanford University; Tsinghua University; University of California, Berkeley; University of California, San Diego; University of Chicago; University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; University of Pennsylvania; and University of Tokyo. Today, our active community of over 1,700 leaders serves as advisors to the Siebel Foundation and works collaboratively to find solutions to society’s most pressing problems.

About the Siebel Foundation

The Thomas and Stacey Siebel Foundation, a nonprofit, public benefit corporation, was established as a private foundation in 1996. Its mission is to foster programs and organizations that improve the quality of life, environment, and education of its community members. The Siebel Foundation funds projects to support education, the homeless and underprivileged, public health, research and development around the world.