From OASIS to Oracle Siebel CRM

This timeline documents the history of Siebel Systems Inc. and its products.;xNLx;;xNLx;Please click Continue to start.;xNLx;Enjoy the timeline in 2D or 3D. For more information and links click the More button in each entry.

OASIS project kick-off at Oracle

Tom Siebel, VP of Direct Marketing at Oracle and his pre-sales techs launch project OASIS, "the genesis of the CRM industry" (Mei Lin Fung)

OASIS in the News

In his role as Vice President for Oracle’s direct marketing division, Tom Siebel introduces OASIS (Oracle Automated Sales Information System), which can be seen as the predecessor of Siebel Sales Force Automation.

Tom Siebel leaves Oracle

Tom Siebel leaves Oracle and becomes CEO of Gain Technology.

Sybase acquires Gain Technology Inc.

As CEO of Gain Technology, Tom Siebel sells the company to Sybase and lays the financial foundation for Siebel Systems.

Siebel Systems Founded

Siebel Systems Inc. founded by Thomas M. Siebel and Patricia House.

Charles Schwab joins Siebel Board of Directors

Charles Schwab joins the Siebel Board of Directors. Charles Schwab & Co. is one of the first key customers using Siebel CRM.

Siebel Sales Enterprise

Siebel Systems ships the initial release of Siebel Sales Enterprise (SSE).

Siebel Sales Version 2 Released

Siebel Systems Inc. releases Sales Force Automation (SFA) Version 2 with 'Opportunites' and Sales Forecasting as well as reporting capabilities.

IPO: Siebel Systems Inc. goes public

Listed as SEBL, Siebel Systems Inc goes public on NASDAQ with an initial offering of 1.9 million shares at USD 17 each.

Leader in Sales and Marketing Information Systems

On siebel.com, Siebel Systems Inc. presents itself as the leader in sales and marketing information systems.

Siebel 3.0 Released

Siebel releases version 3 of its sales and marketing information system.

Siebel acquires InterActive WorkPlace

Siebel Systems Inc. acquires intranet BI software maker InterActive WorkPlace Inc.

Siebel Buys Nomadic Systems

Siebel Systems Inc. acquires Nomadic Systems Inc., heading into the pharma industry.

Siebel Certification

Siebel launches the Certified Consultant program

Siebel Buys Scopus

Siebel Systems acquires customer service software maker Scopus for $460 Million.

Siebel 98 Released

Siebel Systems releases Siebel 98

Siebel 99 Released

Siebel 99 introduces web-based applications, handheld support and document generation.

sales.com

Siebel launches sales.com, a web portal for sales information.

Siebel Observer Launch

Bruce Daley launches the first comprehensive information site on Siebel - the Siebel Observer.

Fastest Growing Company

Fortune magazine names Siebel Systems Inc. the fastest growing company in the USA.

Alliance with IBM

Siebel Systems Inc. agrees with IBM to develop and sell Siebel software together.

Siebel Buys OnTarget

Siebel Systems acquires OnTarget, adding sales consulting services to its portfolio.

IBM launches Siebel CRM project

IBM launches one of the biggest Siebel CRM implementation projects, rolling out to more than 60000 users worldwide.

Deloitte becomes Global Strategic Partner

Long-time consulting partner Deloitte becomes a Global Strategic Partner of Siebel Systems.

Siebel acquires Paragren

Siebel buys marketing software maker Paragren Technologies Inc.

Siebel 2000

Siebel Systems Inc. releases Siebel 2000. This milestone release covered web access, EAI, marketing and BI capabilities.

First Release of Siebel Mid Market Edition

Based on Siebel 2000, Mid Market Edition is a downsized version aimed at the small and medium business market

OnLink and Janna Acquisitions

Siebel expands with buying OnLink (e-commerce) and Janna (financial services).

$ 1 Billion in Revenue

The revenue of Siebel Systems Inc. for 2000 surpasses $ 1 billion.

Siebel 7.0 Released

Siebel releases version 7.0, the first completely web-based version.

Siebel Buys nQuire

Siebel Systems Inc. acquires BI software maker nQuire, laying the foundation for Siebel Analytics (and later Oracle BI).

The Man Who Sees Around Corners

With data from Siebel's sales pipeline, Tom Siebel and company brace for a recession.

The King of Customer

Tom Siebel named CEO of the Year by Industry Week

Siebel European User Week Barcelona

The European User Week in 2002 takes place in Barcelona.

Siebel 7.5.2 Released

Siebel releases version 7.5.2

Universal Application Network

Siebel announces the release of version 1.0 of UAN (Universal Application Network), the result of cooperation with major middleware vendors and one of the industry's first standardized hub-and-spoke integration packages.

Siebel in Turmoil

Siebel Systems is not spared by the burst of the dot-com bubble and reports its first net loss ($ 92 million) since 1998.

Siebel Universal Customer Master

Siebel UCM (Universal Customer Master) is introduced. It is one of the first Customer Hubs in the Industry. In the course of the next two years, Siebel UCM and UAN revenues rise rapidly to be almost 10% of the corporation's revenues.

Accenture Becomes Global Strategic Partner

Accenture and Siebel announce their global strategic partnership.

Siebel 7.5.3 Released

Siebel 7.5.3 introduces major UI enhancements (shuttle applet).

CRM OnDemand Released

Siebel announces the release of CRM OnDemand. Developed by Siebel and IBM, this marks the second entry of Siebel into cloud-based CRM (after sales.com which went out of business in 2000).

Project Nexus Launched

Siebel publicly announces its project 'Nexus'. The SOA based component framework was supposed to support .NET and J2EE but was never released.

Siebel 7.7 Released

Siebel Systems Inc. releases Siebel 7.7 with redesigned UI. The release introduces iHelp and Marketing Segmentation with Siebel Analytics.

Mike Lawrie named CEO

Former IBM executive Mike Lawrie is named CEO of Siebel Systems. Tom Siebel stays chairman.

Oracle Launches Project Fusion

Planned as a successor to the eBusiness ERP suite both powered and delayed over the years by numerous acquisitions, Oracle launches the biggest enterprise software project on the planet: "Fusion"

Siebel challenges Salesforce

Siebel Systems releases CRM OnDemand version 6 with a host of new features aimed directly at the competitor-in-the-cloud Salesforce

Siebel Business Analytics wins Award

Siebel Systems announces that its Business Analytics offering (formerly nQuire) received the 2004 RealWare Award.

George Shaheen named CEO

George Shaheen replaces Mike Lawrie as the CEO of Siebel Systems.

Siebel 7.8 Released

Siebel 7.8 introduces service-oriented order management.