(CINCINNATI, Ohio) – Cincinnati Recreation Commission (CRC) – operator of six beloved local and public golf courses – announces Ron Dumas, assistant professional at its Avon Fields Golf Course, has received the Jefferson Award from the American Institute of Public Service through the Cincinnati Rotary Club.

The Jefferson Award, the Nobel Prize for public service, was created in 1972 by Cincinnati’s own U.S. Senator Robert Taft and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. Its mission is to encourage and honor individuals for their achievements and contributions through public and community service. It is presented annually to recipients in more than 90 cities in the U.S. by The American Institute of Public Service.

As a result of winning the local award, Dumas will travel to New York later this year for the National Jefferson Award ceremony. Past national award winners include Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, Condoleezza Rice, Madeleine Albright, John Glenn, Bob Dole, Justice Thurgood Marshall, General Colin Powell, Henry Kissinger and many more distinguished individuals.

“When I think of the word “public servant” there is no one in our community that exemplifies the title more than Ron,” says Rob Higby, Supervisor of Golf at CRC. “He has not only helped grow the game of golf but has had a positive impact on the trajectory of so many kid’s lives through his life lessons and using the game as its vehicle.”

Dumas is the current assistant teaching professional at Avon Fields and has been a PGA professional since 1998. Just prior to becoming certified by the PGA of America, Dumas founded the Reaching Out For Kids (ROFK) program in order to teach life lessons and help direct young lives in need. The program is free of charge for its participants and is held at Avon Fields Golf Course with 200 - 300 kids involved annually.

Goals of the program include character education, highlighting the negative impacts of drugs and alcohol, life values and the importance of education and diversity. ROFK provides golf equipment, transportation, clothing, school supplies, food baskets and tutoring. There will be scholarship opportunities for each student in the near future.

“For Ron to be recognized on a local level and potentially on a national stage is a testament to just who he is,” says Nick Bednar, Vice President of Operations for Indigo Sports. “Ron represents the best of Indigo Sports and Troon and we could not be more proud to have him on our team while shaping people’s lives.”

Opening in 1924, Avon Fields Golf Course is the oldest CRC course designed by William Diddel. Diddel then added the nine-hole Woodland Golf Course in 1931 and another 18-hole layout, California Golf Course, in 1935. After a few more decades, Diddel decided to add two more 18-hole layouts: The Neumann Course in 1960 and the Reeves Golf Course in 1965.

Glenview Golf Course opened in 1975 under the watchful eye of Arthur Hills. Glenview is Cincinnati's premier public championship layout, offering 27 beautiful holes with lush landscapes, panoramic views and demanding hazard features. Glenview was once ranked among Golf Digest's Top 75 Public Courses in the U.S. and was site of the 1987 U.S. Amateur Public Links Championship.

More information: https://www.cincygolf.org/, 513.651.GOLF

About Indigo Sports

Dedicated to optimizing all that the sport and business of golf offers, Indigo Sports is a division of Troon and manages more than 160 golf courses, country clubs and resorts in 29 states. Headquartered in Reston, Va. with regional offices and teams across America, the company subscribes to a #GolfForEveryone purpose. Leveraging over 30 years of expertise, Indigo Sports specializes in full-service property management as well as assistance in specific segments of the golf business. They include modern-day golf and property maintenance, staffing and training, clubhouse operations, food and beverage, merchandising, golf instruction, marketing, public relations, HOA integration, technology, special events and financial management.