Distinguished architect and 1974 City College of New York alumnus Frank J. Sciame is a recipient of the 2023 Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Medal from the Municipal Art Society (MAS). The honor is for making a lasting contribution to New York City through his vision, leadership, and his philanthropy. The award ceremony is Wednesday, Nov. 29 at 7 p.m. at Guastavino’s on 409 E. 59 St., New York, N.Y., 10022. Tickets are available here.

The medal was established in 1994 to honor Mrs. Kennedy Onassis and her passionate efforts to preserve great architecture in New York City, and her remarkable partnership with the Municipal Art Society over nearly two decades. The other awardees are Patricia Cruz, CEO and artistic director of Harlem Stage, and Jeffrey Gural, chairman and principal of GFP Real Estate.

Sciame studied architecture at CCNY and, soon after, started F.J. Sciame Construction Co., Inc. In the almost five decades since he established the company, he has built a leading construction management firm in the tri-state area. He is a board member of the and a former chairman of the New York Landmarks Conservancy as well as the former chairman of the South Street Seaport Museum. He was also the former chairman of the N.Y. Building Congress.

“There were cheers at the Spitzer School of Architecture when this news reached us, that the MAS is awarding Frank Sciame, B.S. ‘74 the 2023 Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Award,” said Spitzer School of Architecture Dean Marta Gutman. “Our illustrious alumnus receiving this illustrious prize—what an honor, what a good fit. We’re thrilled for Frank, who is dedicated to making our school and our city just as fine as they can be.”

His devotion to CCNY has never flagged. Sciame received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts from CCNY in 2004 and is a former president and current board member of the CCNY Architecture Alumni Group.

“Frank Sciame represents the very best of CCNY: throughout his decades of professional accomplishment, he's demonstrated a dedication to the traditions and artistry of his profession and a commitment to turn his skills to the public good,” said CCNY President Vincent Boudreau. “Today, when the denizens of New York entrust someone to preserve and restore or construct our cityscape, they seek out Frank. He is a living testimony to the importance of those public contributions by which we measure the very greatest of our CCNY alumni.”

In 2006, Sciame was appointed by Governor Pataki and Mayor Bloomberg to lead the effort to ensure a buildable World Trade Center Memorial. Tasked to stay within the memorial’s spiraling budget, work with the families of the victims and other stakeholders, he made viable the project for New York and the nation. To read more about him, click here.