The concept of Cincinnati's La Soupe is simple: Take food that's perfectly good but is going to be thrown out, turn it into delicious soups and get it to people who need it.

But the way La Soupe has made the concept work has been so unique and effective that the nonprofit was honored recently with an award that is thought of as the U.S. Nobel Prize for public and community service.

Suzy DeYoung, founder of La Soupe, went to Washington D.C., recently to receive the Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Award for Outstanding Public Service Benefiting Local Communities, given by the Jefferson Awards Foundation.

The Rotary Club of Cincinnati and the American Institute of Public Service are behind the search for Jefferson Awards nominees in Southwest Ohio and Northern Kentucky. This year, the program's 16th locally, the Cincinnati competition saw a record 31 nominations. A committee reviewed the nominations and culled the list to one winner (DeYoung) and two finalists.

In accepting the award in Washington, DeYoung acknowledged what has made the organization work.

"The dedication of our Bucket Brigade and, of course, hundreds of volunteers," she said.

The Brigade is a group of chefs who turn boxes of donated produce into soup or other simple meals once a week.

La Soupe was the subject of an April 2016 Enquirer and Cincinnati.com story and video that detailed how DeYoung has knitted together an effort involving major grocery chains, restaurants and organic farms.

Here's how The Enquirer, which is a media sponsor of the award locally along with WKRC-TV Channel 12, described the program:

"It’s called La Soupe (that’s “süp,” not “sü-PAY”) and here is how it works: Stores such as Kroger and Jungle Jim’s donate produce they would otherwise throw away, and DeYoung and a team of volunteer chefs turn it into soup. Then, they give that soup – or, sometimes, stew or gumbo or casserole – to people who are hungry."

The award was created in 1972 by a Cincinnati native, then-U.S. Senator Robert Taft, and former first lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. It is presented annually to recipients in more than 90 cities in the United States. It honors community members who go above and beyond the call of duty when it comes to their volunteer efforts in the Greater Cincinnati area.

Close to one-third of local Jefferson Award winners have gone on to win national honors, according to Rotary officials.