A $26M duplex co-op in Jacqueline Onassis’ childhood building recalls the Gilded Age

By Michelle Cohen

A mansion-sized 14-room duplex at 740 Park Avenue, a building considered to be Manhattan's most luxurious residential address, is now on the market for $26,000,000. Built in 1929 by James T. Lee, grandfather of Jacqueline Bouvier (later Kennedy Onassis), who lived there as a girl, the Art Deco building was designed by Rosario Candela. One of its first notable residents was John D. Rockefeller, Jr., who resided in a duplex similar to the one featured here.

Step inside one of the city's grandest homes

Steven Mnuchin lists swank Park Avenue co-op for $33M

By Michelle Cohen

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin has just listed the Park Avenue duplex that has been in his family since the 1960s for $32.5 million, the New York Post reports. Mnuchin bought the 12-room, 6,500 square-foot Upper East Side duplex from his aunt for $10.5 million in 2000, so even if the co-op in tony 740 Park Avenue doesn't fetch the ask, he'll pocket a tidy profit. The Rosario Candela-designed building is known for its wealthy residents who have included Rockefellers, Kochs and Bronfmans as well as being Mrs. Onassis' childhood home. The former Goldman Sachs investment banker and Hollywood film producer was based in California before accepting a position with the Trump administration and has never claimed the Park Avenue home as his primary residence.

See more, this way

For $65M, this limestone Beaux Arts mansion on the UES is a trophy townhouse for the ages

By Michelle Cohen

Only a few of Manhattan's opulent Gilded Age mansions remain standing and possessed of their original splendor. Many have been turned into art galleries and cultural destinations–the Frick Collection, the Cooper Hewitt design museum, and the Morgan Library and Museum–come to mind. This limestone Beaux Arts mansion at 15 East 63rd Street is a rare opportunity to own one of these stunning survivors. Located just off Fifth Avenue and Central Park on the Upper East Side, the palatial eight-level townhouse, asking a trophy-tier $65 million, offers 18,000 square feet of interior space, with an elevator to access every floor.

revisit the gilded age

For $5.4M, this Park Avenue duplex has modern architectural appeal and two terraces

By Michelle Cohen

On streets lined with historic buildings, glamorous historic hotels, and stately townhouses, modern architecture on the Upper East Side is rare, making the neighborhood's notable modernist buildings all the more desirable. Behind a sleek limestone and glass facade, this two-bedroom condo at 949 Park Avenue, asking $5,350,000, is a fine example. The light-filled duplex has massive windows offering iconic Upper East Side views from within and from the home's two terraces, one on each level.

park avenue modern, this way

Upper East Side pre-war elegance in a compact co-op package asks $1.75M

By Michelle Cohen

This one-bedroom co-op at 14 East 75th Street on Manhattan's Upper East Side embodies the elegance and drama of the neighborhood's sought-after pre-war residences. It may not be palatial in size, but glamorous details like a sunken living room, 14-foot ceilings, iron-framed casement windows, and floor-to-ceiling bookshelves have all been scaled to fit within its compact frame. Asking $1,750,000, the home's interiors offer a sophisticated take on classic Gothic style. Open views across the neighborhood's townhouses and gardens–and the Carlyle Hotel–complete the picture of New York City living.

Step down into the living room

Pulitzer Mansion penthouse where real-life Indiana Jones lived lists for $7M

By Devin Gannon

A penthouse on the Upper East Side owned by the explorer and naturalist who inspired the character "Indiana Jones" hit the market this month. Taking up the top two floors of the Pulitzer Mansion, a Venetian palace-inspired home built for Joseph Pulitzer and converted into co-ops in the 1950s, the penthouse was first owned by Roy Chapman Andrews, an explorer and director of the American Museum of Natural History who is said to have been the model for the adventurous film hero. Asking $6,975,000, the unique duplex at 11 East 73rd Street features oversized living spaces, three bedrooms, and a 750-square-foot private terrace.

see inside

Asking $6.7M, the Gimbel apartment is the picture of classic Upper East Side elegance

By Michelle Cohen

This three-bedroom Upper East Side co-op at 66 East 79th Street was the longtime home of the late philanthropists Bruce and Barbara Gimbel. Bruce was chairman and chief executive of Gimbels, the iconic New York City department store founded in 1842 by his great-grandfather. Asking $6,700,000, this nine-room apartment is both a grand Manhattan residence and a cozy, well-appointed home. Pre-war details like high ceilings, tall windows, and polished herringbone floors frame generously proportioned rooms, updated for gracious 21st-century living.

see more, this way