TEXT2DRIVE™ Delivers High Customer Satisfaction Rates & Streamlined Communications to Tennessee Dealerships

Developed to fulfill the unique needs of auto dealerships, TEXT2DRIVE™ increases profitability for dealerships by gaining customers’ trust for repairs and giving them a top-notch experience overall. The full-featured communications platform does this while ensuring full legal compliance with federal and cellular provider regulations regarding text messaging and SMS marketing consumers. The software was created by an attorney who understands the stakes are high when it comes to communicating with customers.

Features such as automated alerts and Speed CheckOut™ allow dealerships to run more smoothly and increase revenue. These are some of the many reasons auto dealers, sales managers, service directors, and parts managers in Murfreesboro & Lascassas, Tennessee and across the United States, Mexico, Puerto Rico, and Canada trust TEXT2DRIVE™ to support operations on a daily basis.

WATCH TEXT2DRIVE™ FEATURES OVERVIEW IN ACTION

0%

0%

0seconds

0%

94% of Consumers Prefer Auto Dealers That Can Text Message

Key Text Messaging Features

Eliminate the risk of fines with full legal compliance

Two-way text communications

Unlimited users and unlimited texting with no hidden usage costs

Protection of personal privacy

High response rate courtesy of service reminders

Individuals and departments can communicate with text messaging and group chat capabilities

Eliminate telephone tag and unanswered voicemails

DMS certified & integrated

No need for manual text entry thanks to standard templates

Single, central source for all dealership communications

Compatible with any computer or device

Website integration

Cloud-based, real-time

Improved mobility due to the ability to text message onsite or offsite

Security

Click to See Full List of Features

Streamline Service Department

Status updates are lightning fast

Eliminate misunderstandings with crystal clear, fast Repair Order (RO) authorizations

Service completion notification alerts

Automated CSI surveys

Accept customer payments via text message

No more long checkout lines and unwelcome surprises

Click to See More Service Dept Features

Close More Sales

Highest communication open rate

Make communications 10x faster and protect personal phone numbers

Potential for 100% increase in sales conversions

Expanded marketing database

Intuitive software is easy for anyone to learn

More time to sell thanks to less time spent struggling to learn technology

The freedom to move around freely while using the system

Click to See More Sales Dept Features

Tennessee Is an Automobile Manufacturing Powerhouse

When it comes to manufacturing automobiles, Tennessee is an industry leader. The state has automotive operations in 88 of its 95 counties and is home to three major assembly plants – Nissan, General Motors and Volkswagen. Collectively, the assembly lines at these plants cover a staggering 15 million square feet.

As the leading automotive state in the Southern industrial spine and second in the United States behind Michigan, Tennessee’s automotive industry produces a new automobile every 20 seconds. With a strong presence like this, it comes as no surprise that automotive industry employment in Tennessee is 4.09 times the national average.

Regardless of whether your dealership is located in a sleepy small town like Lascassas, a growing mid-size city like Murfreesboro or a bustling metropolitan city like Nashville, you can boost profitability by keeping your customers informed and happy. When you streamline communications internally and with customers, you improve productivity and customer satisfaction. Plus, customers prefer to communicate with dealerships via text messaging and the widespread use of text messaging makes the software easy for employees to learn.

TEXT2DRIVE™ Services Your Auto Dealership Needs

Drive More Sales When You Text Message

TEXT2DRIVE™ has become a "must" for Sales Managers focused on improving ROI and increasing sales for dealerships:

Manage sales staff more easily

Save time on training workers who lack technology proficiency because most people already know how to text message

Easily answer questions from leads and provide vehicle descriptions to them

Locate and target pre-owned cars to offer for "buy-back" programs by effortlessly searching product inventory

Streamline internal communications within the dealerships and external communications with customers

Achieve Smoother Overall Operations When You Text

TEXT2DRIVE™ is the solution Service Managers trust when they want to improve efficiency in the service departments and achieve customer satisfaction:

Reliable and streamlined communication bolsters CSI scores

Better management generates higher commissions, benefitting repair schedules and reducing downtime from missed appointments – ultimately increasing shop revenue

Text message eliminates telephone tag by removing the need for employees to wait for customers to respond

Templates eliminate the need to manually key

Manual entry of customer cell phone numbers is no longer required

Text messages and calls get automatically routed to the appropriate person or department

The widespread use of text messaging allows employees to quickly and easily learn and adopt the software

The TEXT2DRIVET&trade:

Difference Trusted Partner. Proven Performer. Industry Leader.

"T2D is a very easy and effective tool it makes communication simple and fast. The phone application allows for on the fly updates with customers. The ability to keep customers updated at a rapid pace allows for multiple tasks to be handled efficiently!"

— Dan Ostenski, Service Advisor at Roadshow BMW

New Features

E-Signature Speed CheckOut™

Authorize, approve and pay and invoices in just 3 easy steps.

Vehicle Health Report (VHR)

When a customer’s check engine light comes on, an alert is sent to the dealership.

Upgraded History Profiles

Easily accessible vehicle search history and customer profiles.

Calendar Invite

Clickable invites allow customers to save service dates in their smartphone calendars.

Click-to-Call

Record/archive conversations and conceal your personal cell phone number when you call customers.

Group Chat

Easily and instantly communicate with individual departments, a group of employees or even the entire dealership.

TEXT2DRIVE™ Mobile App

This extension of the communication platform allows you to communicate with customers legally and securely.

Video Capabilities

Send customers videos of service issues and before-and-after pictures of car repairs using the mobile app to gain their trust.

Online Payments and Invoicing

E-Signature allows customers to sign their invoice electronically and securely from their phone. You can send customers invoices and accept payments via text messages.

Tablet Text Communications Interface

Full desktop functionalities are available for iPad, Android and Surface tablets.

Drive Your Tennessee Dealership’s Sales Department

Lead Generation

Photos and videos enhance videos and text responses to customer inquiries. Text messages that include stock numbers engage shoppers.

Sales Interactivity

Share information about vehicles via text and connect to the sales department with interactive website widgets.

Service to Sales Mining

Using the make, model and year of desired vehicles, quickly locate pre-owned cars in the service bay.

Business Development Center eMarketing Functionality

Optimize customer communications using full-featured text messaging service and sales software available via BDC eMarketing.

Drive Your Tennessee Dealership’s Service Department

Automated Text Messaging

Service department messages that are automatically routed to the appropriate team member improve the odds of customer satisfaction.

Automated Workflows

Beginning with the point of purchase and including the purchase of a replacement or additional vehicle, the entire customer service and vehicle maintenance process is automated.

Automated Service Reminders

Higher response rates achieved without the need for discounts or coupons improve ROI.

Text Recalls

Text message alerts let customers know there is a recall on their vehicle. You can set preferences based on data gathered from your dealership database.

Drive Your Tennessee Dealership’s Marketing Department

Website Interactivity

Keep a detailed record to securely archive all communications. Give customers the option to get vehicle information, download coupons, communicate with employees via live chats and TEXTconnect with any employee.

Simplicity

Templates for text messages streamline communications, multi-messaging capabilities conserve time and effort and the easy-to-use Dashboard Interface saves time on training.

Mobility

Legally compliant (with mobile devices), secure text messages make it easy to stay in touch with customers.

Compliance

Fully legally compliant text message communications and associated programs.

Reporting and Analytics

Securely record and archive all inbound and outbound text messages. A large variety of reports provide insight into consumer behavior and needs.

What Major Manufacturers & Our Customers Are Saying About TEXT2DRIVE™

Rick Stubbs Talks About His Experience With TEXT2DRIVE

"The ability to send out recall notifications has netted us about an additional $48,000 a month in warranty revenue."

Text Marketing Software For Car Dealerships That WORKS!

"It’s going really well for us. It allows us to communicate with our customers more effectively in a fashion they prefer."

What Rick Walters Thinks Of TEXT2DRIVE

"I do not embrace technology in any way… but it has made my job a lot easier and customers are just elated."