Matt, Ben and John McBain also formed Wellwater Conspiracy in 1993, and released singles including Sleeveless the same year, eventually releasing 3 albums: Declaration of Conformity (1997), Brotherhood of Electric: Operational Directives (1999), The Scroll and Its Combinations (2001), and Wellwater Conspiracy (2003)

I found the song "What Becomes Of The Clock" as an Amazon MP3 exclusive bonus track and it's always been my favorite track from the band.

Guest artists on Wellwater Conspiracy albums include Kim Thayil on a few tracks of The Scroll and Its Combinations, and Josh Homme on Team Lambchop, Red Light Green Light, and Ladder To The Moon (all on Brotherhood of Electric).

(Plus Eddie Vedder on Felicity's Surprise)

Matt Cameron – vocals, drums

John McBain - guitar

Ben Shepherd – vocals (1993–1998)

Glenn Slater – keyboards (2002–2004)

Listen To Wellwater Conspiracy: Spotify | Apple Music/iTunes

(For some reason, they're listed on some services as both "Wellwater Conspiracy" and "The Wellwater Conspiracy" and they come up as two different bands. So if there's an album missing or something, it could be that. Or it could be that music services don't have their shit together and are still missing songs, even from bands that already feature)

Ten Commandos

Ten Commandos started early August 2008 after a conversation between Matt Cameron (Soundgarden, Pearl Jam) and Alain Johannes (Eleven, Queens of the Stone Age) following a memorial concert for Natasha Shneider (Eleven). Alain had the idea to write and record songs using Matt and Ben Shepherd (Soundgarden, Hater) as the rhythm section. The three convened in Seattle in late 2008 and for 7 days and wrote the bulk of the record. Matt and Alain’s schedules cleared up enough in the spring of 2014 to finally finish the songs in Seattle. With the addition of Dimitri Coats (OFF!, Burning Brides) on guitar, the band entered famed Studio Litho with engineer Don Gunn. In the summer of 2014, the band finished recording at studio 11ad in Hollywood CA. All members contributed in the writing of the record. Guest musicians include Mark Lanegan (Staring Down the Dust), Nikka Costa (Come) and legendary guitarist Peter Frampton (Sketch 9). [SOURCE]

Soundgarden

Soundgarden isn't Soundgarden without Matt Cameron, and that goes for every song, but this playlist of "Matt's Songs" are songs he was given songwriting credit for.

Matt was originally going to do vocals on Rhinosaur too, but we don't know if that was ever recorded, or if the idea was scrapped too early for a recording to exist in the vaults.