Roy Dane Webb Dec. 13, 1919— Oct. 12, 2011 Roy Dane Webb, 91, passed away Wednesday, October 12, 2011, in Duncan. Service will be held at 2 p.m., Friday, Oct. 14, 2011, at the First Baptist Church in Marlow, with Rev. David Standifer and Rev. Tracy L. Wilson officiating. Burial will be in the Marlow Cemetery under the direction of Callaway-Smith-Cobb Funeral Home in Marlow. Roy was born Saturday, Dec. 13, 1919 in Pocasset, to Firm and Myrtle (Hurd) Webb. Roy graduated from Cox City Schools and lived in Cox City and Bray before moving to Duncan in 1984. Roy was in the U.S. Army during WWII and served in France and the Aleutian Islands. Roy married Patsy H. Davis on Feb. 21, 1947 in Oklahoma City. He was self-employed and worked as a pumper in the oil business for over 50 years. Roy loved to fish, especially in farm ponds for bass out of a tube and recently from docks for crappie. He was the last of the founding members of the Rhythm Riders, and he played rhythm guitar for them. He played Western swing but also played all kinds of music from classical to hymns, and often would play along to records. Roy loved his kids, grandkids and great grandkids, and loved to pull pranks on them. He was known for his “invisible rock” tricks. Roy was a member of the VFW and attended the Bray Baptist Church. Survivors include his wife, Patsy H. Webb, of the home; two sons, Michael Dane Webb of Nashville, Tenn., and Gary Lynn Webb of Bray; one daughter, Karla Jean Griffin of Norman; grandchildren, Brian Lynn Webb, Craig Webb, Daniel Webb, Jacob Webb, Karmen Farmer, Sara Long and Chris Webb; 14 great-grandchildren; one great-great granddaughter; two brothers, Calvin E. Webb of Glen Ellyn, Ill., and Armond C. Webb of Coarsegold, Calif.; and numerous nieces and nephews. Roy was preceded in death by his parents; three brothers, Durwood Webb, William J. Webb and Paul V. Webb; and three sisters, Ovella Kuykendall, Julia Kuykendall and Delores Huey. Pallbearers will be Brian Webb, Craig Webb, Dan Webb, Jacob Webb, Nathan Farmer, Jeff Long. Honorary pallbearers will be Daniel Harrison, Billy Beams, Leo Heffington, Bill Morgan, John Maxwell, Jeff Turner and Gary Jones. Memorial contributions may be made to the Chisholm Trail Hospice. Online condolences may be made to www.callawaysmithcobb.com