WHEELING, WV- The Wheeling Nailers, proud ECHL affiliate of the Pittsburgh Penguins, are excited to announce their 17th player signing of the 2018 offseason. Wheeling has signed forward Christian Isackson to an ECHL contract.

Isackson, 26, returns to North America after spending the last two seasons in Europe, suiting up for Gap HC in France and the Milton Keynes Lightning in the United Kingdom. Christian's professional career began in the ECHL during the 2015-16 campaign, when he split the season between the Colorado Eagles and Wichita Thunder. After producing five points in 28 games with the Eagles, the forward ramped up his offensive game, tallying 11 goals and 24 points in 42 contests with the Thunder.

"Having played in the league before, Christian Isackson gives us some experience," said Nailers Head Coach Mike Bavis. "He has a big body with skill, and can make plays for his linemates. We are excited about seeing his best hockey in Wheeling."

Prior to turning pro, the Pine City, Minnesota native attended the University of Minnesota, where he majored in Business, while playing four years of college hockey for the Golden Gophers. Isackson's best season in the Twin Cities was his sophomore year of 2012-13, when he compiled 20 points in 40 games. The Golden Gophers reached the NCAA National Tournament all four years that Christian was in the lineup, which included two trips to the Frozen Four. The University of Minnesota also won the Big Ten Tournament Championship during his senior year of 2014-15. Isackson also played one season with the USHL's Sioux Falls Stampede, after being selected by the Buffalo Sabres in the 2010 NHL Entry Draft.

"I spoke with Danny Fick, who spoke very highly of the organization, the city, and the fans," Isackson said. "This is a good opportunity for me to get back into the United States, get close to home, and see if I can move up. I see myself as a skilled forward, who likes to play a fast, hard two-way game.

Christian Isackson and the Wheeling Nailers will begin the 2018-19 season on October 13th, when they visit the Norfolk Admirals. Wheeling's first home game will take place on November 3rd against the Indy Fuel. The Wheeling Nailers, considered one of the top things to do in Wheeling, West Virginia, provide affordable family entertainment for fans throughout the Ohio Valley. For information on season tickets, group tickets, flex plans, and more, call (304) 234-GOAL.