Pancham (Japanese: ヤンチャム Yancham) is a Fighting-type Pokémon. It evolves into Pangoro starting at level 32 while the player has a Dark-type Pokémon in their party.

Voice Actors:[]

Erica Schroeder - English

Noriko Shitaya (Episodes 846-908, 923) - Japanese

Yuka Terasaki (Episode 913) - Japanese

User Serena:[]

Foxglove

Georgette

Kim Possible

Mrs. Brisby

Kanga

Zoe Drake

Jasmine

Sawyer

Becky Thatcher

Twilight Sparkle

Raye/Sailor Mars

Gallery:[]

Trivia[]

Pancham is one of only two Pokémon whose ability to evolve depends on having another Pokémon in the party, the other being Template:P, who can only evolve when a Template:P is present in the party. Pancham can evolve if a non-Dark-type Pokémon evolves into a Dark-type Pokémon, such as Template:P to Template:P, but only if it is in a party position before Pancham (i.e. Pancham evolves last). Pokémon that can become Dark-type only while in battle (due to Mega Evolution, or a type-changing move or Ability) cannot cause Pancham to evolve.

Pancham shares its Template:Pkmn with Template:P. They are both known as the Playful Pokémon.

He is also Stephen's new Pokemon in Kung Fu Owen.

His appears in the Stephen Squirrelsky and Friends' Movie Spoof Travels are Kung Fu Owen, Nikki's Adventures of Sing Along Songs Episode 8, The Thomas O'Malley Movie, Kermit Returns, Fievel the Red Nosed Mouse and The Island of Misfits, Nikki's Adventures of Sing Along Songs Episode 9, A Cartoon Character's Life Activity Center, Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs (Justin Quintanilla's Style), Finding Alvin (J.B. Eagle's Style), Animated Tale (TheTure DisneyKing's Style), The Forest Book 2 (TrainBoy43's Style), Nikki's Adventures of Sing Along Songs Episode 10, Madagascar (FamousImagination50's Style), Sleeping Beauty (Justin Quintanilla's Style), Aurorastasia, Despicable Me (Justin Quintanilla's Style), We're Back!: A Jungle Animal's Story, Jimmynocchio, The Wizard of Oz (Uranimated18's Style), Isabellan, 101 Trains, Goku's Travels, Beauty and the Grizzly Bear 2: The Enchanted Christmas, and The Road to El Dorado (FamousImagination50's Style) and will even be in more movie spoof travels.

Origin[]

Pancham is based on a Template:Wp cub. Its Template:Shiny coloration could be a reference to the Template:Wp, whose coloring tends to be more brown than black.

Name origin[]

Pancham may be a combination of panda, punch and champion.