Pancham( ) is a species of Pokémon in the series of the same name. It is a Fighting-type Pokémon that made its first appearance in the sixth generation games, Pokémon X and Y. It evolves into the Pokémon Pangoro at level 32 while the player has a Dark-type Pokémon in their party.

Physiology and Behavior[]

Pancham is a bipedal, mammalian Pokémon that resembles a young panda. Its head and short, puffy tail are white. It has a triangular black nose, rounded black ears, black circles around its eyes, and tufts of fur on top of its head and on each cheek. Its upper body and hind feet are black, while the lower body is a dark gray. Where the two colors meet the dark gray forms a three-pointed pattern on its chest. There are three digits on each paw and small, dark brown circular pads on the soles of its black hind paws. Pancham carries a small, green leaf in its mouth. There is no actual purpose behind this leaf, aside from an attempt to look cool.

Pancham looks up to Pangoro as a leader and tries to emulate its behavior in an effort to learn how to battle and hunt for its prey. If Pancham makes a big mistake, Pangoro will take away its leaf. It tries to make itself look serious to its foes, but its glare is not intimidating enough, and if it is distracted, it ends up grinning. Despite its attempts to look frightening, it cannot help grinning if patted on the head.

Appearances[]

Main Pokémon games[]

Other Pokémon games[]

Pokémon Super Mystery Dungeon: Pancham appears as one of the students, he along with Shelmet are often picking on the player and partner, though after being rescued from the Ancient Barrow they become friends with them.

In the anime[]

Serena obtains one in Episode 47 of Pokémon the Series: XY. Pancham was also focused on the Pokétoon short, The Pancham Who Wants to Be a Hero.

Origin and inspiration[]

In-game information[]

Pokédex entries[]

Title Entry Sixth Pokémon generation Pokémon X It does its best to be taken seriously by its enemies, but its glare is not sufficiently intimidating. Chewing on a leaf is its trademark. Pokémon Y It does its level best to glare and pull a scary face, but it can't help grinning if anyone pats its head. Pokémon Omega Ruby It does its best to be taken seriously by its enemies, but its glare is not sufficiently intimidating. Chewing on a leaf is its trademark. Pokémon Alpha Sapphire It does its level best to glare and pull a scary face, but it can't help grinning if anyone pats its head. Seventh Pokémon generation Pokémon Sun It grows up imitating the behavior of Pangoro, which it looks up to as a leader. Pokémon Moon There's no point to the leaf in its mouth, aside from an effort to look cool. It's mischievous, so it's not well suited to inexperienced Trainers. Pokémon Ultra Sun It follows Pangoro around like a henchman. When Pancham makes a big mistake, its leaf gets taken away. Pokémon Ultra Moon It's desperate to intimidate its opponents. Be nice and pretend to be scared if you catch it glaring at you intensely. Eighth Pokémon generation Pokémon Sword It chooses a Pangoro as its master and then imitates its master's actions. This is how it learns to battle and hunt for prey. Pokémon Shield Wanting to make sure it's taken seriously, Pancham's always giving others a glare. But if it's not focusing, it ends up smiling.

Game locations[]

Title Location(s) Sixth Pokémon generation Pokémon X Route 5, Friend Safari (Fighting) Pokémon Y Route 5, Friend Safari (Fighting) Pokémon Omega Ruby Trade Pokémon Alpha Sapphire Trade Seventh Pokémon generation Pokémon Sun Routes 10, 11, and 17 Pokémon Moon Routes 10, 11, and 17 Pokémon Ultra Sun Routes 10, 11 Pokémon Ultra Moon Routes 10, 11 Eighth Pokémon generation Pokémon Sword Route 3, Rolling Fields, West Lake Axewell, East Lake Axewell Pokémon Shield Route 3, Rolling Fields, West Lake Axewell, East Lake Axewell

Evolution[]

Base Stats[]

Base Stats HP 67 Attack 82 Defense 62 Sp. Attack 46 Sp. Defense 48 Speed 43 Total 348

Moveset[]

Main article: Pancham/moveset

Gallery[]

Renders[]