Superbad used to be a coming-of-age comedy released in 2007 that has since grow to be a staple film nonetheless watched and adored to this very day. The film starred some of Hollywood's biggest names including Seth Rogen, Jonah Hill, and Emma Stone, to call a couple of.

Related: The Truth About Jonah Hill And Seth Rogan's Relationship

The film itself launched the careers of its leading cast, such a lot that two Superbad stars have since long gone on to turn out to be Academy-Award nominated actors. With the good fortune of its cast, fanatics are now curious as to what their favorites have been up to lately. While we all know Seth Rogen went on to have a huge profession in comedy, all while Michael Cera took a quieter path, what have the different cast members been as much as since? Let's find out!

10 Jonah Hill

Jonah Hill, who co-wrote the hilarious movie, played the function of Seth, who was once loosely in response to film co-writer, Seth Rogen in real lifestyles. While he have been recognized for his roles in films reminiscent of The 40-Year-Old Virgin and Knocked Up, Superbad was simply the function that catapulted him to global reputation and good fortune.

Today, Jonah is not only an Academy-Award nominated actor however he's long past from in entrance of the camera to at the back of the scenes as a writer and director. The celebrity wrote and directed the film Mid90s in 2018 and was once the co-executive producer for the film, Beastie Boys Story

9 Michael Cera

Michael Cera performed the role of Evan in Superbad, which was once based on the movie's other co-writer, Evan Goldberg. Prior to his time in the hilarious flick, Cera was once widely recognized for his time on the hit Fox comedy collection, Arrested Development.

While Cera has no longer been as lively in the leisure business as many of his Superbad co-stars have been, he is still a successful TV and film actor. In addition to final part of the AD cast up till 2019, Michael landed roles in motion pictures similar to Sausage Party, The Lego Batman Movie, and This Is The End, to name a few.

8 Seth Rogen

Seth Rogen took on the role of Officer Michaels, wherein he acted along co-star, Bill Hader. The actor originally set out to play the role of Seth, alternatively, by way of the time the movie used to be made, Rogen figured he was once too previous. After showing along Jonah Hill in the motion pictures The 40-Year-Old Virgin and Knocked Up, the duo reunited for the hit comedy movie.

Seth went on to have an incredibly a hit profession in movie starring in movies Pineapple Express, This Is The End and Bad Neighbors. In 2014, Seth wrote, produced, and directed The Interview, a movie that went directly to make headlines for its portrayal of North Korea. The actor's most up-to-date position used to be in the live-action remake of The Lion King where he voiced none instead of Pumba.

7 Christopher Mintz-Plasse

Christopher Mintz-Plasse performed the iconic function of none rather than Fogel, who went on to transform widely referred to as his ID alias, McLovin'. This marked the actor's first actual skilled acting position, which catapulted him to stardom.

Related: The Awkward Thing Chris Mintz-Plasse Had To Do When Filming 'Superbad'

Following his time on Superbad, Mintz-Plasse went directly to celebrity in a bunch of motion pictures akin to Role Models, Kick-Ass, Pitch-Perfect, and This Is The End. Christopher's most up-to-date function was in the 2020 comedy-drama Promising Young Woman, wherein he starred alongside big names similar to Bo Burnham, Laverne Cox, and Carey Mulligan. Since then, fanatics were wondering what Christopher has been up to, as he's yet to appear in anything since!

6 Bill Hader

Bill Hader played the function of Officer Slater opposite Seth Rogen in the hilarious flick. The actor first got here to prominence as a cast member on NBC's Saturday Night Live all whilst showing alongside Seth in Knocked Up.

Bill Hader went on to seem in a slew of a hit motion pictures similar to Inside Out, Finding Dory, and Trainwreck, wherein he performed the love passion to movie lead and screenwriter, Amy Schumer. Most just lately, Bill has appeared in the classic horror movie, It Chapter 2, and the Disney Plus vacation movie, Noelle.

5 Martha MacIsaac

Martha MacIsaac performed the function of Becca, Evan's overwhelm in the hit film. Prior to joining the cast of Superbad, the actress seemed on a handful of television shows and TV movies, including her role in the CBC drama, Emily Of New Moon.

The big name is still very much involved with acting and has seemed in Unicorn Store, and What Keeps You Alive. Most just lately, Martha landed roles on Greek, 1600 Penn, and the syndicated series, The Pinkertons, to call a couple of.

4 Emma Stone

Emma Stone performed opposite Martha MacIsaac as Jules, Seth's crush. The film was once Emma Stone's very first, as she had handiest worked on a number of TV presentations prior. Following her time running alongside Michael Cera and Jonah Hill, Stone went on to seem in Easy A, Zombieland, and Crazy, Stupid, Love.

Related: Inside Michael Cera And Aubrey Plaza's Secret Relationship

Today, the big name is an Academy Award-winning actress for her role in La La Land. Emma is now set to take on the titular Disney position of Cruella de Vil in Cruella.

3 Dave Franco

Dave Franco will have most effective appeared in a single scene in the hit movie, it remains the role that introduced him to stardom. While his older bro, James Franco, was widely known at the time, Dave's role as one of Seth's classmates is one enthusiasts did not omit.

Since then, Dave has change into a household name showing in motion pictures reminiscent of 21 Jump Street, Friday Night, and each the Bad Neighbors films along Seth Rogen. Today, Dave is married to fellow actress, Alison Brie, who is known for her roles in Community, and Mad Men.

2 Joe Lo Truglio

Joe Lo Truglio took on the position of Francis, a creepy driver who takes Seth and Evan to their area celebration! Lo Truglio used to be well known prior to his time on Superbad, as he'd already appeared in The State and Wet Hot America Summer alongside David Wain, and Michael Ian Black.

The megastar later reunited with Seth Rogen in Pineapple Express earlier than landing the position of Charles Boyle in the hit comedy sequence, Brooklyn Nine-Nine.

1 Kevin Corrigan

As Seth and Evan crash any other area birthday celebration to scouse borrow their booze, they come across Mark, performed by way of none other than Kevin Corrigan. The actor is easiest know for his leading position as Uncle Eddie in the Fox series, Grounded For Life.

In addition to his brief, yet iconic function in Superbad, Kevin has taken on an array of gangster-esque roles all through his career, landing himself roles in motion pictures similar to The Departed, Bad Boys, Seven Psychopaths, and True Romance. Much like his fellow Superbad co-stars, Kevin reunited with Seth and Joe in the comedy, Pineapple Express.

Next: How Close Are Jay Baruchel And Seth Rogen?

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGiroZ1dmK60wIyonWarpaWys67AnWSwoJWnsm6t0Z5kraCVrnqvu9Zo