Superbad screenwriter Seth Rogen found a funny way to pay tribute to the biggest scene stealer from Greg Mottola's 2007 coming-of-age comedy on Thursday.

The 39-year-old frat packer wished the Superbad character Fogell (Christopher Mintz-Plasse) a happy 40th birthday based on his hilarious McLovin fake ID.

The LA native - who technically turns 32 on June 20 - was only 17 when he made his big-screen debut as the confident, eccentric high schooler attempting to buy booze for his pals.

Despite being a newcomer, Christopher's impressive comedic chops managed to intimidate his castmate Jonah Hill on set, and he scored an MTV Movie Award nomination for best breakthrough performance.

'I'm very grateful for all of it,' Mintz-Plasse told CBS Minnesota in January.

'The McLovin thing was definitely intense when I was 20 and 21 and I was trying to discover who I am as a person and I have all these people kind of screaming something at me.

'I'm like, "I'm more than McLovin! I'm an actor!" But now, I'm [almost] 32 and a lot more comfortable in my own skin and I think it's honestly kind of great that people want to talk about the character and the movie.'

The Bear on Fire guitarist still gets recognized whenever he shops at Whole Foods or stops by In-N-Out Burger or Chipotle.

Christopher noted: 'That kind of speaks to, I guess, the movie a little bit that 14 years later, people still care. It's really endearing. It's exciting.'

Superbad amassed $170.8M at the global box office and received a 'certified fresh' 88% critic approval rating (out of 209 reviews) on Rotten Tomatoes.

The Judd Apatow-produced comedy also starred Michael Cera, Emma Stone, Bill Hader, Dave Franco, David Krumholtz, Joe Lo Truglio, as well as Seth's future wife Lauren Miller.

Mintz-Plasse last graced the silver screen as potential date raper Neil in Emerald Fennell's critically-acclaimed revenge thriller Promising Young Woman.

Christopher also produces and voices the character Son in Comedy Central puppet show Blark and Son, which aired its second season earlier this year.