Seth Rogen opened up about his 2007 hit comedy, Superbad, and joked to People that since the film's release, 'No one's made a good high school movie.'

The talented comedian, 40, further supported his opinion by explaining that his The Fabelmans co-star, 20-year-old Gabriel LaBelle, gushed that the coming-of-age teen comedy was both his and the actor's friends' 'favorite' movie.

The Neighbors star, who recently voiced that Marvel films were 'geared' towards children, added that LaBelle's feelings towards Superbad has, 'never changed for some reason.'

Superbad was released back in August 2007, and starred Michael Cera and Jonah Hill in the leading roles of Evan and Seth.

The premise of the comedy follows both Evan and Seth, who are high school seniors preparing to graduate. The two pals decide that they want to party and lose their virginity before the big graduation ceremony.

However, their 'plan' faces a few obstacles along the way, including two officers, played by Saturday Night Live alum, Bill Hader, and Seth Rogen himself.

Other talented stars that were cast in the film included Emma Stone and Christopher Mintz-Plasse.

Shortly after its premiere in theaters, the feature received positive reviews from critics, and garnered a box office total of $170.8 million on a budget of around $17-$20 million.

Seth also penned the script along with Evan Goldberg, which the two began when they were only 13-years-old, and was loosely based on their own lives.

Last year in August, Seth talked to Vanity Fair about Superbad to celebrate the film's 15th anniversary. While he admitted that currently, R-rated movies are quite 'commonplace,' years ago they were not.

'At the time, the idea of a big theatrical comedy that was very R-rated—especially one about high school kids—was really unheard of.'

Rogen acknowledged that although the American Pie franchise had already come out, Superbad, 'was just so much different than American Pie...We like American Pie. But I think in a lot of ways, Superbad was reactive to those types of movies.'

'In those movies, there's no sense that anything other than maybe raw sexual energy is what's good and right. I think Superbad is more about these guys that grew up being exposed to that, not being uncomfortable with it, and how they don't ultimately subscribe to that mentality,' the Knocked Up actor expressed.

Judd Apatow, who executive produced the film, also joined in on the conversation, and revealed that he had 'encouraged' Seth and Evan to write the script.

'It became about friendship, and the panic of starting a new phase of your life without your best friend.'

The 2007 movie went on to receive various nominations at the 2002 MTV Movie Awards, such as Best Movie and also Best Comedic Performance for Jonah Hill.

However, other coming-of-age teen films have been released to critical acclaim since Seth's teen comedy, including Easy A, Lady Bird, and Booksmart.

Since Superbad, Seth has been involved with a number of popular projects, such as Paul (2011), Step Brothers (2008), and also the Kung Fu Panda franchise.

Most recently, the actor has received recognition for starring in The Fabelmans alongside Gabriel, and also Michelle Williams. The movie has been nominated for a grand total of 7 Oscars, and recently won two Golden Globes, included Best Picture-Drama.

He also portrayed the role of Rand Gauthier in the Hulu limited series, Pam & Tommy.

Pamela Anderson recently stated on her Netflix documentary, Pamela, A Love Story, that the idea of the show had given her 'nightmares,' reported Entertainment Weekly.

While talking to People, Seth also discussed his latest collaboration with Airbnb which was 'inspired' by his own cannibis home goods brand called, Houseplant.

The actor's Los Angeles getaway is full of ceramic items and other goods from his company, according to the publication. Lucky guests can have the chance to visit the home from February 15 until the 17th for only one-night stays.

Those who secure a booking for just $42 will have the opportunity to take a closer look at Rogen's design studio with the actor himself.

The Canadian-born star officially launched Houseplant in California in 2021, and is known for his love of cannabis. He told Forbes around the time of the launch that, 'If you know anything about me at all, I'm going to assume it's that I really love weed.'

Earlier last year in November, Rogen notably smoked three joints simultaneously while promoting ashtrays from his brand.