[i started this piece as a post for here on AtariAge, but decided to flesh it out a little to post elsewhere. Pardon some of the more obvious stuff laid out for laypeople. I just thought I'd post it here anyway.]

I'm thinking Double Dragon is the E.T. of Atari 2600 action/fighting games.

Both of them were ambitious in concept. They're graphically advanced games on the system (for their respective times, a very long 6 years between E.T. in 1983 and Double Dragon in 1989). Both are very difficult thanks to design shortcomings of one kind or another. Neither is a truly great game because of problems with gameplay. In E.T.'s case, the infamously rushed six-week production schedule was to blame -- even Howard Scott Warshaw admitted there were some big problems with it. (Recent hacks of E.T. have apparently significantly improved a lot of the issues.) Collision detection with those damn pits was too sensitive for most, among other things. Double Dragon suffers most from trying to cram a 1987 game into a 1977 piece of machinery. The problems most people have seem to be the difficulty and the way controls are strange and a little unwieldy at first.

Granted, there are plenty of differences. E.T. seems like it was cutting-edge in concept (with its quest/items/multiscreen/multi-enemy world) at the height of the system's power (just before the industry crash). A "manual reader", so to speak. Double Dragon was a quickie cash-in on an antiquated system ("Let's do a whatever we can for a 2600 version, to squeeze a few more bucks outta the licensing deal."), in a pre-"retro-gaming" era where it seemed kinda futile to even bother with outdated consoles. Though, I think despite the "quickie cash-in" origins, programmer Dan Kitchen really did a great job. (Just based on my limited experience.)

For Double Dragon, the idea of having three or four non-flickering sprites on a a variety multi-colored backgrounds and environments seems absurd. And with several different musical themes! Frankly, not even the NES version did all that without flicker. And this is a Pong machine. Of course, people don't usually complain about the graphics. It's the fighting. The enemies never seem to get stunned by your punches and kicks. Meaning you don't have enough time to follow up your first strike. The enemies move so fast, it's hard to use the joystick to move, and then immediately slam into a counter-intuitive "button+direction" combination to attack. It's clumsy, but on a controller with one button, it seems like the most reasonable option. Graphical shortcomings and the "enemies can't cross the equator of the play field" thing are weird workarounds to bring the game to the 2600, but what can you expect? The arcade version of Double Dragon was dedicated hardware equivalent to roughly, what... the 16-bit Genesis/SNES era of fifteen years later? The 2600 cartridge was, what... a $20-$30 quickie?

"Is it a great game?" Probably not. Technical marvel doesn't mean much without gameplay. And while I don't think this is as bad as everybody says, it's not one of those instantly-perfect combinations of player interface and onscreen action. Muuuuch better than its reputation would have you believe, though. Just like E.T.

"Should it have been attempted?" I think that's kind of a strange question to ask. Why should anything be attempted? But it was, and it's got about as much Double Dragon as one could reasonably fit into a cart. Two player multiplayer, weapons you could pick up and use, different kinds of enemies, colorful backgrounds and worlds... and Abobo.

I'm relatively recent to the wide world of 2600 games -- I haven't been playing consistently since back in the day like many people here. But I loooove me some beat 'em ups. And the Double Dragon series has probably been my favorite since about '87 (when I was a kid). Strike that. The first two games, mostly. Over and over. With some of the others for later generations along the way. When I got into the VCS, finding out there was a Double Dragon port was a spit-take kind of a moment. Even though it was said to be bad, I had to have it. I wanted to see. So I bought one in the AtariAge marketplace last week from a helpful member. I've had it for about two days, and I'm getting my butt kicked by Abobo. But that means I'm making it through the first screen, the second screen with the beefy guys (one with a stick), the back alley full of ladies (I use the term loosely... they're mean!), and another screen or two of baddies before a pair of Abobii kill me.

And I STINK. I'm a casual gamer at best. I love the games, but comparing myself to the lists in the HSC almost makes me embarrassed. I can't even play Asteroids. It's my secret shame. Sometimes *gasp*, I even play games in Teddy Bear mode for a while when I get a new game. I've never beat the NES Double Dragon, either. But if a gorilla like me can make this game work on a worn-out joystick, it means it can't be as impossible as everybody says. I haven't even figured out how to use the reverse elbow yet.

I say it's the the audacity of even porting the game to such limited technology and the relatively high profile of the Double Dragon name has led to the game being the pariah of 2600 fighting games, much like the infamous landfill has made E.T. the perfect target for scorn of other kinds, some of which it probably doesn't deserve (though I still haven't figured out how to get very far myself). But seriously, what's the competition among 2600 beat 'em ups? People say good things about Kung-Fu Master, but I'm hard pressed to come up with many other side-"scrolling" beat 'em ups for the 2600 at all, much less ones that are any easier to navigate than Double Dragon. And I can't get ANYWHERE in Chuck Norris' Superkicks.

(Sadly the one joystick button is not just "roundhouse kick". That might help.)

Ranting and raving about how Double Dragon stinks also opens up the "There was a Double Dragon on the 2600?" conversation. (And let's face it, there are some people love to show off like that.) People wouldn't care about some random really hard game called "Street Punch" on the 2600. People care that this game's "bad" because it's a Double Dragon game that's supposedly bad. An easy punching bag, ironically.

But yeah, it's still "stupid tough". And flawed. And I don't blame people for not liking it. I'm just saying I don't think it deserves the hate it gets.

Share your love, share your hate. You're not gonna sway me. It's flawed, but I like it. I'll probably never make that short list of people that have finished the game, but even though I went into it as a Double Dragon fan wanting to find a reason to like a bad game, it's proven to be much more enjoyable than expected.

(My high score... so far.)

(And I know all this has been discussed before, in threads that pop up every few years. Well, that was then, this is now. I was thinking of it as "tabula rasa" for Double Dragon opinions. And I didn't want to get griped at for gravedigging an old thread. Sorry either way. Go nuts.)

I like it too.

I take it for what it is.

There's a version of Halo on the VCS now for pity's sake.

If this game wasn't released in 1989 and was a homebrew from 1999-2001-ish, it would instead be praised for what some programmer accomplished rather than being considered an "abomination", I believe.

And, not to insult, but anybody who saved up their allowance/paperboy money/whatever and bought this in 1989 EXPECTING something even close to the arcade game was only deluding themselves. It'd be like someone buying the Halo VCS port and griping that it's "nothing like the original!". What the heck did you expect??? The VCS couldn't do accurate arcade ports in 1983, what made you think it was suddenly capable of doing accurate arcade ports of games 5+ years advanced in technology??? However in that respect, it's amazing what it DID pull off considering how bad some some MUCH earlier arcade ports were handled!

As for the game's difficulty; it IS difficult, but once you get the timing down of being able to pull off different moves at will it gets much easier. It would be nicer if it had the "C-64" control style of HOLD fire button and then press a direction to pull of an attack rather than having to push a direction and the fire button simultaneously, but, oh well.

You also have to play it like TMNT II: The Arcade Game on NES, by which I mean the enemies seem to have a momentary invincibility after being hit so you CAN'T really string together multiple moves, you gotta hit and run (and apparently everyone LOVES that game so I guess that mechanic can't be bitched about, now can it!) OR, if you're clever, knock 'em down and then hit them JUST as they get up (which you may have noticed is a strategy the CPU likes to use against you!)

Also, like many other iterations of Double Dragon the ELBOW is your best friend. To pull it off in this version you push the joystick in the opposite direction your facing and the fire button at the same time. If you're smart and good at pulling it off it's the ONLY move you'll use. It always knocks 'em down and you can hit them with it again as soon as they stand up; basically elbowing them to death from the first contact. That may make it sound like it gets easy, but it doesn't. You have to have your timing down to a tee to hit them as they get up and NEVER screw up and NOT pull off the elbow. However, that's not the only strategy. A quick punch or kick followed up with a jump kick is a good method of attack too, just remember their momentary invincibilty. The baseball bat is your friend as well, and while it can be tricky to get the knife from an enemy, it's a one-hit kill if you CAN get it from them! The barrel is a little tricky to use, because it tends to land right next to your target resulting in them having it now to throw at you and it CAN be tricky to dodge. You wanna throw it when you REAL close to them so it'll land far away from them.

That's all I can think of for now...

Edited April 1, 2015 by Torr

If this game wasn't released in 1989 and was a homebrew from 1999-2001-ish, it would instead be praised for what some programmer accomplished rather than being considered an "abomination", I believe.

Of course. But that is a big part of what the homebrew scene is all about--little hobbyist projects to see what can be achieved with known IP's on retro hardware. This is not nearly the same thing as commercially releasing a title--right in the midst of a time period when that title is hot--and charging $40 (or whatever) to buy it.

And, not to insult, but anybody who saved up their allowance/paperboy money/whatever and bought this in 1989 EXPECTING something even close to the arcade game was only deluding themselves. It'd be like someone buying the Halo VCS port and griping that it's "nothing like the original!". What the heck did you expect??? The VCS couldn't do accurate arcade ports in 1983, what made you think it was suddenly capable of doing accurate arcade ports of games 5+ years advanced in technology??? However in that respect, it's amazing what it DID pull off considering how bad some some MUCH earlier arcade ports were handled!

Of course anybody with a clue would know that the 2600 was not capable of playing a decent Double Dragon, but the philosophical question I'm raising is, just how bad does the game have to be for it to cross over from being "a solid effort, considering the constraints" to a "complete ripoff"? As you said, it should have been obvious that the platform would struggle with the game... so presumably the publisher should know this as well, and not do it.

After all, it's not just kids-in-the-know who buy games. What about clueless moms and grandmas, for example? "I've heard Johnny talk about Double Dragon a lot lately... I'll buy this for him so he can play at home!"

In retrospect, it's neat for people like us to look back and say "hey cool, Atari 2600 Double Dragon... very clever programming right here... imaginative use of the hardware sprites... that guy is totally racing the beam... amazing that he was able to get the result he did out of a pong machine." But if you're a consumer in 1989 who just bought Atari 2600 Double Dragon, none of that techno-babble means shit, nor is it any consolation--you're just somebody who bought something that sucks and that doesn't live up to the name on the cover.

And nobody said that the game needs to be "accurate". There are lots of Double Dragon ports out there, and I can't think of a single one that I'd call "accurate". But many of them are still good, fun games because they're running on hardware that is appropriate for the task.

If you enjoy the game, great, have at 'er. I tend to get kind of ruthless on these latter-day arcade ports on the 2600 because I was majorly disappointed by a few of them at the time, and I think they kind of sully the legacy of the system. Kind of like that star athlete who decides to come out of retirement, but ends up making an ass of himself.