We offer Double Dragon in multiple Game Console Emulators

NES Emulator Atari 2600 Atari 7800

Double Dragon is one of my favorite arcade games from the 1980’s. I spent countless hours playing this game in the arcade while growing up in the 80s. I hope you enjoy playing this free version online. No tokens required to play this emulated version of Double Dragon! Free 80s Arcade is a 100% free online arcade website. This game is mobile phone and Iphone compatible.

NES EMULATOR: Instructions and Game History towards bottom of page.

(Load Game then Press Enter Key to Start Game)

FPS =

Keyboard Controls Gamepad Button Keyboard Button Left Left Arrow Right Right Arrow Up Up Arrow Down Down Arrow A X B Z Start Enter or Spacebar Select Ctrl

Instructions:

Click on the “Load Game” button to load Double Dragon into your web browser. Click on the game window and hit the ENTER key to start the game (you might have to hit start twice) . On a computer you can click the Zoom to expand the game to a larger size. On mobile phones and Iphone use the gameplay control buttons shown on your screen (only on mobile) to play and start the game. If you grew up in the 80’s you shouldn’t need additional gameplay instructions. Sorry, no sound on mobile devices in this NES emulator.

Game History:

Double Dragon is a 1987 beat ’em up developed by Technos Japan and distributed in North America and Europe by Taito Corporation. The game is a spiritual and technological successor to Technos’ earlier beat ’em up, Nekketsu Koha Kunio-kun (released outside of Japan by Taito as Renegade), but introduced several additions such as two-player cooperative gameplay and the ability to arm oneself with an enemy’s weapon after disarming them. Double Dragon is considered to be one of the first successful examples of the genre, resulting in the creation of two arcade sequels and several spinoffs, as well as inspiring other companies in creating their own beat ’em ups. The player takes control of martial artist Billy Lee, or his twin brother Jimmy (also known as Hammer and Spike in the supplementary materials for the American arcade release), as they fight their way into the turf of the Black Warriors gang in order to rescue their common love interest Marian.

Video Game Emulation

(Download and play on your computer)

ColecoVision Emulator for Windows

Games: Tapper, Football, Jungle Hunt, Baseball, Galaxian, Zaxxon, Star Trek, Super Donkey Kong Jr, Popeye, Donkey Kong, Donkey Kong Jr, Time Pilot, Frogger, Fury, Burger Time, Centipede, Qbert, CosmoFighter, plus many more…

Nintendo Emulator (NES) for Windows

Games: Adventure Island, Commando, Bad Dudes, Baseball, Bill and Teds Adventure, BurgerTime Castlevania, Commando, Dig Dug, Donkey Kong, Donkey Kong Jr, Elevator Action, Frankenstein, FunHouse, Galaga, Gauntlet, Jurassic Park, Mario Brothers, Millipede, Ms. PacMan, Pipe Dream, Popeye, Qbert, Super Mario Brothers & Duck Hunt, Tetris, Ultima4, WWF, plus many more…