HOLLYWOOD -- MGM and Dino De Laurentiis' 'Body of Evidence,' starring Madonna and Willem Dafoe, has received an NC-17 rating from the Motion Picture Producers Association, equivalent to the old X rating.

The association's classification and rating administration tagged the film with an NC-17 for what it said was explicit sexual scenes. It is scheduled for release next January.

Advertising

'Body of Evidence' involves a woman accused of murdering her lover who seduces her attorney during the course of her trial. The studio has the option of releasing the film as is or to make cuts necessary for an R rating.NEWLN: ------NEWLN: Ullmann project

HOLLYWOOD (UPI) -- Actress Liv Ullmann's film, 'Sofie,' which marks her directorial debut, is among some 50 new movies scheduled for exhibition at the Puerto Rico International Film Festival in November.

Ullmann will be present with the Nordisk Film production and will participate in a panel discussion on women filmmakers with Whoopi Goldberg.

Ten Spanish-language films will be among pictures shown along with movies from China, Germany, Czechoslovakia, Argentina and several Hollywood films.NEWLN: ------NEWLN: Foster film

HOLLYWOOD (UPI) -- Jodie Foster has been tabbed for the starring role in 'Dead Reckoning,' dealing with a woman lawyer involved in a plot to assassinate a U.S. senator.

Producer Arnold Kopelson compares the plot to 'Three Days of the Condor,' a Robert Redford thriller of a decade ago.

Academy Award-winner Foster is scheduled to begin work on the Warner Bros. film early next year. Kopelson and Warners acquired the script for $1 million from writer Christine Roum.NEWLN: ------NEWLN: New trek

HOLLYWOOD (UPI) -- Paramount Television has set the cast for the new syndicated spinoff series 'Star Trek: Deep Space Nine,' which makes its debut in January.

Spun off from the studio's 'Star Trek: The Next Generation,' the new series follows the adventures of a Starfleet force on a remote space station in the 24th century.

The cast features Avery Brooks, Rene Auberjonois, Siddig El Fadil, Terry Farrell, Cirroc Lofton, Colm Meany, Armin Shimmerman and Nana Visitor.NEWLN: ------NEWLN: 'Lambs' sequel

HOLLYWOOD (UPI) -- Independent producer Dino De Laurentiis has agreed to give Universal Studios first negotiation/last refusal rights to bid on domestic distribution to the sequel to 'Silence of the Lambs.'

Under the agreement, Universal also will distribute De Laurentiis' 'Army of Darkness,' directed by Sam Raimi, early next year.

Earlier this year the studio and De Laurentiis were locked in a legal dispute over distribution rights to both projects.NEWLN: ------NEWLN: Gibson directs

HOLLYWOOD (UPI) -- Actor Mel Gibson makes his directorial debut with 'The Man Without a Face' currently shooting on locations in and around Rockport and Deer Isle, Maine.

Gibson will star in the Warner Bros. film with Nick Stahl, 12, in a story about the relationship between a young boy strugging with the loss of his father and the town recluse played by Gibson.

Scheduled for release next spring, 'The Man Without a Face' also features Margaret Whitton, Gaby Hoffman, Fay Masterson, Geoffrey Lewis and Richard Masur.