Marvin Williams has seen a lot in his 15 years in the NBA. By signing with the Milwaukee Bucks on Monday, he joined his fourth team after playing 1,055 regular-season games split among the Atlanta Hawks, Utah Jazz and Charlotte Hornets.

But Monday brought a new experience. For the first time in his career, Williams changed teams midseason.

"Life’s been moving kind of fast, but I’m very thankful, very excited for the opportunity," Williams said in his first media session ahead of Monday's game against the Sacramento Kings, a game for which he was active for but did not play.

"People in Milwaukee have been so welcoming to me and my family. ... This is all kind of new to me. The one thing about the NBA, man, it’s always full of surprises no matter how long you’re there.”

Williams completed a buyout agreement with the Hornets on Saturday and was waived that day, setting him up to sign with the Bucks as a free agent. He could have had his pick of destinations – a versatile 6-foot-8 forward who can shoot three-pointers and defend at a high level is undoubtedly a valuable commodity on the open market – but he was particularly interested in joining the Bucks.

That interest came in part due to respecting coach Mike Budenholzer's style and philosophies, things that impressed Williams dating back to playing against Budenholzer's Hawks teams a few years ago. Whether it was Atlanta or Milwaukee, Williams always liked the way Budenholzer's teams played and he's only heard good things about the Bucks locker room.

It doesn't hurt, either, that Williams competed against and watched this Bucks team from afar and legitimately believed they could win a title this year. He promises he isn't just saying that because he's in Milwaukee now; it's part of what got him here in the first place.

"What these guys are doing right now is incredible," Williams said. "I’m not here to ruffle anybody’s feathers, I don’t want to step on anybody’s toes. I just want to be a little piece to what they’re trying to accomplish. Obviously, winning a championship is their goal and it’s certainly been mine throughout the course of my career, so this is a great opportunity for me to make that happen.”

Of course, Williams wouldn't be in Milwaukee if the interest wasn't mutual. The Bucks pounced on the opportunity to bring in Williams at the beginning of the NBA's buyout season, clearing a roster spot by waiving Dragan Bender.

Before the move was finalized, Budenholzer spoke with Hornets head coach James Borrego – the two are longtime friends dating back to their days in the San Antonio Spurs video room – and got the skinny on Williams. Borrego confirmed Budenholzer's assessments of Williams, raving about him as "the ultimate professional, the ultimate teammate," Budenholzer said.

Budenholzer, too, was effusive in his praise of Williams.

“Certainly, Marvin is a very, very good player in a lot of different regards," Budenholzer said. "I think what he brings defensively stands out to us as someone who can guard multiple positions, brings a physicality, a strength to his game, in our minds where we can maybe stay bigger against teams that are playing smaller.

"Offensively, his ability to make threes and kind of play pick-and-pop game and then drive and (his) IQ and just understanding – I think he’s a high, high IQ guy. We feel like he’s a great fit on both sides of the ball with us.”

When told what Budenholzer had to say about him, Williams quipped that he hopes Budenholzer is still saying those things a month from now. For now, he is just trying to get acclimated. Before Monday's game, he looked both bemused and perplexed as he poked his head out of a doorway to watch his teammates engage in their pregame wrestling routine, one that ended in both Lopez twins getting dropped by Stone Cold stunners.

Williams has been to Milwaukee plenty of times, but he seldom left the hotel, so he's going to have to take some time to get used to the city, too. But as he adjusts, Williams promises he will be the only one doing so.

“Guys are not going to have to adjust to playing with me," he said. "I’ll adjust to playing with everybody in that locker room. I’m totally about winning. &mldr; When winning is the only thing that matters, everything else comes easy.

"For me it’s not about minutes, it’s not about shots, it’s not about rebounds, it’s just about how can I just help? If tonight is not the night that I can help, then I’m perfectly fine with that too. I’m just going to, like I said, get in where I fit in and just try to enjoy the ride.”

For Williams, jumping on board the Bucks bandwagon meant making the difficult decision to leave home. Although he's originally from Bremerton, Washington, Williams has called North Carolina home since starting at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 2004.

That's where he's gone every offseason over the course of his NBA career, living there, training there and for a long time studying there and eventually earning his degree in African-American studies in 2014. When he signed with the Hornets in 2014, it was very much homecoming for him.

It was difficult to leave that situation – he got along well with the young, rebuilding Hornets team around him – but he felt like now was the right time to make the move and everyone understood.

Williams joins the team that spurned him in 2005. That was when the Bucks elected to pick Andrew Bogut with the No. 1 pick in the draft, leaving Williams to go No. 2 to Atlanta.

He and the Bucks are both hoping it was well worth the wait.

"I had an opportunity to be here 15 years ago. It’s a long time ago, it’s crazy to say that," Williams said. "It’s just funny sometimes how life will kind of bring you full circle. There’s no better time to be here than now, so I’m glad I’m here.”