History

On January 29, 1436, Otto IV of Maissau, with the consent of Duke Albrecht V of Austria, bequeathed the castle and lordship of Wilfersdorf to Christoph II of Liechtenstein. The will names among other things vineyard areas as "accessories" of the possessions.

This text from 1603 contains precise work instructions for the Wilfersdorfer waiter (manager of the stately wine cellar). Prince Gundakar von Liechtenstein (1580 - 1658), who was residing at Wilfersdorf Castle at the time, personally supplemented and corrected the concept in a number of places: The stipulation that the waiter should not entertain strangers in the cellar and should not "drink" with them (a apparently common practice), Gundaker added the following: if he acts against it, he shall be "seriously punished" by the caretaker (the supreme ruler).

In 1699, Prince Hans Adam von Liechtenstein acquired the lordship of Schellenberg and in 1712 the county of Vaduz. On January 23, 1719, a diploma from Emperor Charles VI united the County of Vaduz and the Dominion of Schellenberg and elevated them to an imperial principality called Liechtenstein.

The purchase of the rule of Schellenberg and the county of Vaduz was made on March 7, 1712 by Emperor Karl VI. ratified. With the acquisition of the County of Vaduz, the Herawingert also became the property of the Princely House. The Herawingert is probably the most traditional and most important vineyard in the Principality of Liechtenstein and is one of the best vineyards in the Rhine Valley.

The map of the Wilfersdorf estate also shows the location of the vineyards, among other things. Up until the 18th century, one had to rely on vague and rather random information regarding the manorial self-economy. In 1751, when the income of the dominions was first precisely recorded, the Wilfersdorf dominion comprised 61.5 yokes (35.4 ha) of self-cultivated vineyards.

The "basic relief" in 1848 led to the omission of the so-called "rustic" and thus to the dissolution of the domains. The property of the princes of Liechtenstein, reduced to the former “Dominikal”, was combined into estates and reorganized. For this reason, the Wilfersdorfer vineyards were replanted in the 1860s. The extent of the self-managed vineyards was about 11 acres (6.3 ha) at the Wilfersdorf and Eibesthal farms until 1880. Through the direct takeover of previously leased grounds, the proportion of vineyards rose to 13 yokes (approx. 7.5 ha) by 1886. At the time, around 21 acres (12 ha) of vineyards were managed by the Feldsberg and Herrnbaumgarten farms.

Domain Wilfersdorf

For centuries, the name of Liechtenstein has been inextricably linked to the town of Wilfersdorf in the Weinviertel.

The Hofkellerei, which has been family-owned since 1436, numerous historical monuments in the community such as Wilfersdorf Castle and the long tradition of princely wine-growing tell of this. A distinctive, rather cool climate and fertile loess soil characterize the terroir of the region and produce characteristic wines with fine acidity. On the individual sites of Karlsberg and Johannesberg, the vines from the princely domain of Wilfersdorf grow to fresh maturity and are vinified with a sense of tradition and an innovative spirit.

Domain of Vaduz

As early as 1712, Prince Johann Adam I of Liechtenstein acquired the County of Vaduz, which made the Herawingert property of the Princely House.

The Herawingert is probably the most traditional and most important vineyard in the Principality of Liechtenstein. With its 4 hectares of contiguous vineyards, it is considered the heart of viticulture in the state and is one of the best vineyards in the Rhine Valley. Thanks to the south-west location, the mild foehn climate and the slate and lime-rich soil, Pinot Noir and Chardonnay find ideal conditions for the cultivation and ripening of the grapes.