Joyce De Leo, Ph.D. (she/her) applies the knowledge, experience, and dedication to proven research techniques gained during a distinguished career in academia to her role as a senior partner in WittKieffer’s Academic Medicine and Health Sciences Practice. With an appreciation for the unique qualities needed in today’s leaders, Joyce recruits senior executives, clinician leaders, and senior scientists on behalf of prominent academic medical centers, hospitals and health systems, research institutes, faculty group practices, health sciences universities, colleges and universities, public health organizations and not-for-profit institutions.

Based in the Boston area as well as Charleston, South Carolina, Joyce has more than 25 years of experience in research, academic program building, strategic planning, mentoring, and teaching. Prior to joining WittKieffer, Joyce served as Vice President of Academic Affairs for Emmanuel College in Boston, MA. In this role, she oversaw undergraduate and graduate academic programs, faculty and community research, and education partnerships in the Boston area. Before this, Joyce held several leadership positions in more than 20 years with Dartmouth College and Dartmouth Medical School in Hanover, NH, including Chair of Pharmacology and Toxicology and founding Director of the Neuroscience Center at Dartmouth. Joyce was Dartmouth’s first ELAM (Executive Leadership in Academic Medicine) fellow and currently serves as faculty for the annual ELAM meeting. Federally- and industry-funded for over 20 years, her laboratory investigated novel drug targets for the treatment and prevention of chronic pain.

Joyce completed the Fulbright Scholar Program at Max Planck Institute for Psychiatry in Martinsried, West Germany, and completed postdoctoral training at Dartmouth Medical School and Harvard Medical School. She is a widely published author, having written more than 100 articles in peer-reviewed publications, and frequently speaks, both nationally and internationally.