Caribou - CARIBOU - CARIBOU - Mary Patricia "Pat" Kieffer,78, wife of Robert Leo Kieffer, died March 21, 2015 at Bangor. She was born in Milwaukee, WI, May 5, 1936 the daughter of the late Oliver and Catherine (Barsch) Hoye.

Pat was a graduate of Messmer High School in Wisconsin. She was a member of the Holy Rosary Catholic Church, a former member of the Cary Medical Center Auxiliary and was recognized by the Caribou Rotary Club as a Paul Harris Fellow. Mrs. Kieffer loved to cook for family gatherings where she used recipes from her collection of cookbooks. Pat loved the outdoors especially their camp on the Machias River, where she enjoyed many wonderful meals of fresh trout and fiddleheads. Many will remember Pat for her keen sense of humor and quick wit. She was a tremendous homemaker and truly enjoyed spending time with her family, grandchildren and her dogs.

Surviving in addition to her husband of nearly 59 years, Robert Leo Kieffer of Caribou are her children, Catherine and husband Robert French of Kennesaw, GA, Robert and wife Lehrle Kieffer of Woodland, Colleen Leon of Charlotte, NC, Scott Kieffer of Topsham, Elizabeth and husband Tim Harms of Navarre, FL, Keri and husband David Hentosh of Bridgewater, her grandchildren, Alison, Lydia, Ginger, Katie, Elise, Jacob, Rebecca, Amanda, Kelsey, Sarah, Hannah, Laura, Chase, Jack and Luke, three great-grandchildren, Eloise, Olivia and Ford, a son-in-law Rick Taylor of Portland, several nieces and nephews. Mrs. Kieffer was predeceased by a daughter, Maureen Taylor, two sisters, Marilyn Hoye and Kathleen Backus, two brothers, Daniel Hoye and Oliver Hoye, Jr.

A Mass of Christian Burial will be celebrated 1pm Saturday, March 28, 2015 from the Parish of the Precious Blood Holy Rosary Catholic Church. Interment will be in the Northern Maine Veterans Cemetery, Caribou. In lieu of flowers, friends who wish to contribute in memory of Mrs. Kieffer may do so through the Caribou Athletic Boosters Building Project c/o Lehrle Kieffer, 101 High Street, Caribou. Following the service all are invited to continue to celebrate Pat's life at the home of Rob and Lehrle Kieffer, 571 Margison Road, Woodland. Arrangements by Mockler Funeral Home, 24 Reservoir Street, Caribou.