February 1, 2016 – Executive search firm Witt/Kieffer has expanded its academic medicine and health sciences practice with the additions of Joyce De Leo, Ph.D. and Bruce Schroffel.

Dr. De Leo, who joins the practice as a consultant in the Boston area, has more than 25 years of experience in research, academic program building, strategic planning, mentoring and teaching mentoring and teaching. She recruits senior executives, clinician leaders, and senior scientists on behalf of leading academic medical centers, hospitals and health systems, research institutes, faculty group practices, health sciences universities, colleges and universities, public health organizations and not-for-profit institutions.

Prior to joining Witt/Kieffer, Dr. De Leo served as vice president of academic affairs for Emmanuel College in Boston. In this role, she oversaw undergraduate and graduate academic programs, while enhancing faculty shared governance, collaboration and collegiality between faculty and administration.

Before this, she held several leadership positions in more than 20 years with Dartmouth College and Dartmouth Medical School in Hanover, NH, including chair of pharmacology and toxicology and director of the college’s Neuroscience Center.

Mr. Schroffel has more than 30 years of experience leading and managing large, complex healthcare organizations. He previously served as president and chief executive officer of University of Colorado Health/University of Colorado Hospital in Denver from 2006 to 2014. In that time, he led a significant financial and cultural turnaround and managed tremendous growth.

Mr. Schroffel also held the role of director and CEO from 2001 to 2006 at Stony Brook University Hospital in Stony Brook, NY and served for nine years at University of California San Francisco as director of operations and UCSF-Stanford as senior vice president and chief operations officer.

He serves on a number of professional and community boards and formerly served on the boards of the Council of Teaching Hospitals and Health Systems (COTH) of the Association of American Medical Colleges, American Hospital Association, University Health System Consortium, Colorado Hospital Association and Greater New York Hospital Association.

Witt/Kieffer’s academic medicine and health sciences practice specializes in finding university hospital CEOs, presidents and senior administrators, deans, chairs, division/section chiefs and others. Karen Otto is managing partner and practice leader. She has experience is recruiting senior level professionals for academic medical centers, medical schools, health science centers, faculty practice plans and related organizations. According to recent labor reports, the healthcare sector remains among the most rapidly growing employment fields.

Contributed by Dale M. Zupsansky, Managing Editor, Hunt Scanlon Media