Family business purchased by Rob and Lehrle Kieffer in 1989

CARIBOU, Maine — The success and longevity of Kieffer Insurance Agency, located on High Street in Caribou, can be attributed to their loyal staff, a willingness to embrace new technology, and a leader who genuinely cares about the community. Owned by Robert “Rob” Kieffer, this local business will mark 90 years in business this summer.

The history of Kieffer Insurance dates back to 1926, when the MD McGrath Insurance Agency first opened. Three branches of the McGrath agency were purchased in 1957 by Robert’s father Leo Kieffer, who later served in the Maine State Senate from 1992 to 2000. Leo ran the business until 1989, when his son Robert purchased the business with his wife Lehrle.

Initially, Kieffer faced significant challenges, as the Loring Air Force Base shut down soon after he purchased the business.

“It was a little upsetting since we were also in the real estate business,” said Kieffer. “We do a significant amount of commercial business, so a lot of things changed when the base closed. There was a five-year period where things were a little bit touch and go as far as the community’s future was concerned, but it seems that, with the hard work of surrounding communities and the efforts of the redevelopment group at the base, there has been a rebound.”

Prior to taking over Kieffer Insurance, Rob and Lehrle started a real estate business in the late 1970s called Kieffer Insurance and Real Estate. Eventually, this business became separate from Kieffer Insurance.

“Like many industries, real estate had become pretty specialized and the business grew to the point where it needed to stand on its own,” explained Kieffer. “In the past, it was nothing for an insurance agent to also be licensed in real estate and easily do both. However, with new laws and a rapidly changing marketplace, it became difficult to do both, so we joined forces with RE/MAX, which is a worldwide franchise. We have it set up as a separate business model which my wife and her partner Jane Towle operate.”

In a move to expand the number of companies that Kieffer Insurance does business with, Kieffer teamed up with United Insurance Group, which has 16 offices throughout Maine and New Hampshire.

“In the past we might have had about 15 different insurance companies to work with,” said Kieffer, “but now we have upwards of 30 since joining forces with the United Insurance Group.”

Kieffer has succeeded in the highly competitive insurance business by establishing positive customer relationships and embracing new technology.

“We’ve had a lot of good customer support over the years,” said Kieffer. “We pride ourselves in not being ‘one and done,’ so to speak. We rely on repeat business from our loyal customers and also try to keep up with the latest technology. We have a cutting-edge computer system where everything is stored in the cloud. We don’t even need to use file servers anymore. Everything is in the cloud and it works great.”

Aside from operating the insurance agency, Kieffer is very involved with the local community. He has a position on the hospital board, and has also coached cross-country skiing for over 10 years.

“I love it in this area,” said Kieffer. “I love the people and I love what the area has to offer, whether it’s hunting, fishing, skiing, or snowmobiling. I’m a registered Maine guide, so I enjoy outdoor activities. I also volunteer as a guide for a week-long camping trip that Cary Medical offers for kids with diabetes. We’re very pleased with the way the community has supported us and, as a result, we try to give back as much as we can.”