Nicehck NX7 MK4- The Great All-rounder

Pros: Unfatigued sound

Tuning nozzles caters to different sound preferences.

Beautiful Aesthetics

Great All-rounder

Cons: BA Timbre

Nicehck NX7 MK4 review

I am an audiophile from sunny South Africa and I do these reviews to introduce these awesome products to audiophiles in my country and to further this wonderful hobby. This package was sent to me by Nicehck in exchange for my honest opinion and Vivian from Nicehck is such an angel to deal with. This company answers emails over weekends and that is almost unheard of in my country so Nicehck can take that as a win. In-between preparing for a big audio show, these guys got my package to me promptly.

Unboxing

The NX7’4 sell for R1980-00 in my country. They came packaged in a very sturdy black box with white card box wrapper with a very big image of these beautiful monitors. When you open the black box the faceplates of these NX7’4 jump out at you and you think you are staring at a beautiful piece of jewelry. Also visible is the top part of the blue leatherette case and the accessories like ear tips and those wonderful tuning nozzles. There is also a little card board container with your QC checked card and obviously a user manual.

Specs

Brand- NICEHCK

Model- NX7 MK4

Connector- 0.78mm 2Pin

Frequency- 20-28KHz

Impedance- 39Ω

Face Panel- Stabilized Wood

Shell Material- Environmental PC

Plug- 3.5mm/4.4mm Optional

Cable- OCC and Silver-Plated Mixed Cable

Sensitivity- Gold Filter 112dB/mw, Red Filter 113dB/mw, Black Filter 110dB/mw-

Driver Unit- 4BA+10mm Beryllium Plated Composite Dual Dynamic+ Seven Layers PZT Driver, Hybrid 7 Units

Filter Timbre- Gold Balanced, Red Mid High Frequency, Black Heavy Bass

Look & Build

I have to be honest, the thing that sold me on the NX7’4 was the looks. Before I even looked at specs, I wanted these. That stabilized wood faceplate the glitters in the sun is absolutely beautiful. It is as if a jeweler made these. There is golden metal border around the faceplate that reminds me of jewelry and the whole design is exquisitely done. I found myself many times during listening session taking the faceplate itself is stabilized wood but looks like crystal jewelry and has a nice feel to it as well. The case is a beautiful box in blue leatherette. It feels really premium and I like it a lot. I had a few times that the case won’t stay closed but then I would rearrange the NX7’4 and it will remain close. The cable is very stylishly done and with Nicehck also being a producer of aftermarket cables it feels real quality and durable. It also hooks nicely behind the ear and a chin slider is also included for a perfect fit. The tips included are 3 pairs black normal silicone tips and then 4 pairs of white silicone tips. There is really not much to say about the black except that they muffled the sound for me somehow so I did not use them at all. The NX7’4 fits very snugly in your ear and is not heavy at all. Changing the nozzles makes me feel so much more hands on than tuning switches and I prefer tuning nozzles.

Connectivity

The NX7’4 comes in a standard 3.5mm and 4.4mm terminations and my review unit was the standard 3.5mm. I am dying however to hear these on a balanced 4.4mm connection. I spend the most with these connected to my laptop and a Dac/amp. I also tested these with the normal 3.5mm on my Oppo A78 and LG V40 phones. My unit did not come with a mic so I did not test it as a headset.

Sound

One of the nice things about this hobby is you get to discover new music while testing out gear. So, I put the White silicon tips with the yellow inside and I fitted the Black (Heavy bass) nozzle and fired up tidal. Not really knowing what genre to test first I hit play on my Tidal suggestions and man this comes up from no where from a guy in Kazakhstan which I did not know it existed until hearing this song and googling its origin and meaning. The song is Zhurek by Adam and man what a way to kick of this review. In the beginning of the song there is a crackling like you get with vinyl and my first thoughts were, I hope this is not cable microphonics but I tested with other monitors and it’s the way the song is recorded. Even though I could not understand a word the guy was singing the NX7’4 produced that male voice so faithfully it sounded as if the guy was singing to my soul. When music grabs you like this you can be assured that the gear you listening on is top notch.

Carrying with the black bass nozzles I explored some EDM dance music and I can really not recommend these for bass heads. On BANG- Joe Fletcher I was looking for that thick bass sound I am used to and it was not there. There is a lot of emphasis on mid bass and it slams but man I want that sub-bass to come in and support that glorious mid bass. The bass is there but not in a bass head kind of rattle your skull way. This is much more mid bass focused and only when I applied a bass boost did the sub bass come through on a song like Muse-Madness did the sub bass show itself. I immediately realized that these NX7’4 was meant for a different kind of more sophisticated bass like cello’s, organs and the like.

I searched for cello music and stumbled upon Yo-Yo Ma- Bach- Cello suite no. 3 in C major and man was my ears in for a treat. As the cello being the bass voice of the orchestra, I really enjoyed its authority and the NX7’4 faithfully reproducing that authority. One of my favorite classical albums is the TELARC Tchaikovsky 1812. I know that recording on vinyl and digital out of my head and I know how those cannons on the overture should sound like as in my listening room many times listening to 1812 on my Thorens TD-125 through my Dynaco St70 my one friend would always say “Hier kom die kanonne” which means “Here come the canons”.

After writing all this I was determent to see if it was not the seal that was not giving me the bass I was craving because my thoughts were if I only I could get more bass this would be the perfect all-rounder set so I changed tips to the white tips with blue inside and man there was the bass. Still not bass head but satisfactory now. On Soda- Pullin up the bass had a real presence which I totally enjoyed. It seems the smaller size gave me a better seal and now the bass was more prominent but not in an over powering way and this just shows you the importance of seal and tips.

Specifically trying to listen for BA timbre as it a subjective subject for me, I fitted the Gold (Balanced) nozzles. I pulled up Rodrigo Y Gabriela songs as I know those two mad guitarists songs by heart and how those acoustic guitars should sound. On sound maker the higher notes on the guitar sounded really authentic but whenever Rodrigo hits the guitar base with palm of his hand it did not sound natural as I remember it. So, BA timbre is there but as it being subjective it does not bother me at all. From Rodrigo Y Gabriella I went to straight to Falo- Rock me Amadeus (Soleri version) as the violin on there is so familiar to me. There is some BA Timbre there because the violin sounded a bit shrill to me. I really enjoyed the song as the drums came through very nicely and all the instruments blended well together.

For me the highlight of this NX7’4 is definitely treble. I screwed on the Red (Mids. and Highs) nozzle, popped on Pink Floyd- Time and I was exposed to the perfect reproduction of those clocks. The high notes on David Gilmour’s guitar and if you are a Pink Floyd fan then this set is for you. Mids. are definitely boosted and Roger Water’s voice into a Roger Scotch voice with velvety sound to male voices. There is so much treble detail going on in Steely Dan’s debut album that I just had to take the NX7’4 on a tour with those congas, ride cymbal, guiro and electric piano. Boy did the NX7’4 not disappoint, so I can clearly endorse these for treble heads. I ended the last session with these with some Miles Davis as I wanted to check out the attack and the flugelhorn really stood out more than Mile’s trumpet in Sketches of Spain.

Conclusion

If you are the type of a person that just want one pair of headphones, I think this set makes a lot of sense with the included tuning nozzles so you can cater to most music genres. The price is very competitive if you look at what you are getting. Coming in at less than 2k ZAR I think these are worth it. Overall, I am very happy with the sound and I would add to these monitors I would definitely buy a more beautiful Nicehck upgrade cable and also experiment with some aftermarket tips as I feel this set is worth it.

Fourth Time's The Charm

Pros: With the Gold filter the sound is quite balanced and equilibrated.

- Good midrange.

- Excellent ergonomics, adjustment and fit.

- Very lightweight capsules.

- Good accessories.

Cons: The tips included are too generic, at a time when every brand is making an effort to improve in this area.

- The Black filter can be dark sounding, while the Red filter is more piercing and less natural than the reference filter.

- The design is somewhat heterogeneous, which detracts from its appeal.

- The sound is slightly dark and subtle, not characterised as very technical.

- Scene and image are average.

Introduction

NiceHCK, the AliExpress shop, persists in the continuous improvement of its products and returns to the charge with the 4th generation of its 7 hybrid driver model, consisting of a 10mm dual dynamic driver with beryllium-plated diaphragm, four BA drivers and a seven-layer PZT driver. This is the NiceHCK NX7 MK4, a small-capsule IEMS, which has "stolen" the external plate from its partner Topguy. They have three filters for fine-tuning the sound, just like their previous generations. Most importantly, NiceHCK seems to have tamed the frequency response, achieving greater linearity and balance in all ranges. The set is completed with a kit of accessories that is not new, but is the top of the range with which the brand accompanies its best creations, such as the previously reviewed NiceHCK F1. The cable is the same and the capsule consists of several parts made of different materials. The outer face is made of stabilised wood and resin, encased in an aluminium alloy rim, and the inner face is made of polycarbonate. Let's take a look at the performance of these IEMS which are priced at just over $100.

Specifications

Driver Type: 1DDD dual 10mm, beryllium-plated diaphragm, 4 BA drivers and 1 seven-layer PZT driver.

Frequency Response: 20Hz - 28kHz

Sensitivity: Gold Filter 112dB/mW, Red Filter 113dB/mW, Black Filter 110dB/mW

Impedance: 39Ω

Jack Connector: 3.5mm SE, 4.4mm BAL

Capsule Connection Type: 2PIN 0.78mm.

Cable length: 1.2m ± 3cm.

Packaging

The presentation is very similar to that of its F1 companion. It is a white box with a real photo of the capsules in its centre. Its size is 172x127x55mm. At the top left is the brand logo in holographic ink. A little lower, in the centre and in orange, is the name of the model. There is an additional description at the bottom of the box. On the back are some of the specifications, in Chinese and English. There are also the brand's contact details at the bottom. With the outer cardboard removed, there is a black textured box with the logo inscribed in the centre. The box opens like a book and inside a thick layer of foam are the IEMS with its cable and underneath, the classic leather box of the brand, in blue. Inside are the rest of the accessories. In a nutshell:

The two NiceHCK NX7 MK4 capsules.

One OCC-silver-plated mixed cable, with 4.4mm balanced connector.

4 pairs of white silicone tips, sizes SxMxLxXL.

3 pairs of black silicone tips, sizes SxMxL.

One branded velcro strap.

A blue leatherette case.

3 pairs of filter tips (Gold, Red, Black). The Gold mouthpieces are attached to the IEMS.

User's guide.

Inspection certificate.

The idea is a continuation of the previous models and still uses a good carrying case. The cable is good and soft, but I have to say that NiceHCK has more attractive cables. The set of tips is the classic one and I miss a point of innovation in this sense, as well as some foam tips. But for the price of the product, the fact that it has the same packaging and level of accessories as other more expensive products is to be appreciated.

Construction and Design

NiceHCK has made various modifications to the capsule design over the four generations. The NX7 MK4 is a somewhat heterogeneous mix. It has the same outer plate as the Topguy, made of stabilised wood and resin. Around it, there is a golden aluminium alloy rim, while the inner face is made of polycarbonate. The outer face is protected by a transparent plastic and its shape is the classic African continent shape, but with rounded edges. The inside is very rounded, transparent, not very thick. There is a hole in the centre of the DD, on the outer side. The whole is light and of medium size. On the gold rim you can read the full name of the model and the mole with the letter indicating the channel, in dark ink. There is a rectangular, shallow plate, which contains the 2PIN 0.78mm female connection. The cable is fitted to match this plate. The nozzles are gold-plated brass and the filters are screw-on. There are three, Gold, Red and Black.

The cable consists of a rather soft double braid. The material is mixed OCC copper with silver plated cores. It is soft, mouldable and shiny. The sleeves of the 2Pin 0.78mm connectors are angled, transparent pieces, with the channel letters inscribed on the outside. The sleeve of the plug is smooth, cylindrical, shiny and metallic, with a roughened strip for easy gripping. The plug is 4.4mm balanced. The splitting piece is completely smooth and the pin is a metal ring with a rough surface. It has guides on the ear, but they are soft, like the whole cable, which is very mouldable.

The mix of designs and parts already known from previous models gives it a somewhat heterogeneous look. But I must admit that the ergonomics are very good, as I will explain below.

Adjustment and Ergonomics

After having tried several IEMS that didn't fit my morphology very well, I was afraid of losing the universality of my ears to the new models. But fortunately this is not the case with the NX7 MK4. Their rounded, depressed inner shape barely touches the outer parts of the ear. The weight is very light and I had no problem using my large, foam-filled silicone tips. The fit is precise and immediate, no additional placement is required, it adjusts right out of the box. The seal is quite occlusive. There is no movement, no rotation, the shape of the outer face contributes positively to this. The size is medium-small and gives a floating sensation although the anchorage works very well. The mouthpiece has a good slope and, although it is not very long, the insertion could be shallow to medium.

Although there doesn't seem to be any innovation, the design works excellently in this area.

Sound

Profile

I tried the first version of these NX7s and I think that in these MK4s there is a clear idea of softening the exalted FR of those. In that sense, the current frequency response, with the Gold filter, moves in a vertical band of 10dB in almost all its totality, something that gives an idea of the smoothness and balance that this filter provides. It is a smoothed w-tuning, which presents a linear low end, starting from a slight increase in the sub-bass. The drop towards the bass is slight, as is its subsequent plateau in the upper mids. The treble starts with a small control zone, to climb into the typical PZT peak, between 6kHz and 8kHz. But, on this occasion, the treble is very controlled and moves in a narrow band of back-and-forth. In addition, it ends up with a very interesting and extended air presence, superior to many models in its price range. The Red filter is lightened in the low end, and is excited in the 2kHz and 4kHz peaks, to gain sparkle and transparency. Although I would have preferred if the Red filter had not altered the bass, but only served to raise the sense of light and closer detail. There is little difference in the treble. The Black filter lifts more in the low end and suppresses the 2kHz and 4kHz peaks, however, it gets slightly excited in the highs.

The Gold filter has a good balance, but I find it a bit soft in both the amount of light and the level of transparency. However, I find it very adequate in bass, with a presence that I consider fair. The Black filter loses this balance in favour of a more powerful bass, but at the cost of losing more illumination in that phase, which I find fair. The mid-highs become more muted and lacking in sparkle. The sound is warmer and too subtle for my taste. With the Red filter the opposite happens, the greater emphasis on those 2kHz and 4kHz excites the sound, but the sound is a bit more metallic and a bit more uncontrolled. The ideal for me would have been a mix between the Gold and Red filter. But seeing as the Mid-High filter gets a little spicy and subtly unnatural, I'll continue the review with the Gold filter, whose compromise is good, accurate, smooth, balanced and the most well-rounded of the three.

Bass

What do you know! But the NX7 MK4s with the Gold reference filter are even a little dark. It's that darkness mixed with warmth, a characteristic that adds creaminess to the low end, generating a more unctuous and pleasant bass. But this ability is not at odds with the quality of presentation, nor is it at odds with the speed of execution. The hit feels complex, tight and concise, the execution is beautifully executed with good roughness. The sound is natural and the test of the very low frequency pure tones is remarkably well executed, with an uncoloured timbre and a quite pleasant and adequate sonority. The recovery feels relatively fast and there is little sediment left behind. You can tell this is a specialised bass driver because the recreation of the lower range feels very complete, while the properties of the beryllium try to contain its controlled power. As a result, the bass is round, solid, full, physical, full-bodied, powerful, punchy and very appealing. They have a sweet spot that encourages you to turn up the volume and enjoy the fullness of the range. Even in these situations, the bass doesn't get out of control, but fills the sound and adds a beautiful depth. It is agile in complex situations and able to execute unfiltered bass without distortion. It withstands high sound pressure situations, being adept at recreating multiple bass lines and layering separate layers.

Without being perfect or the most defined bass, it feels pleasant and improves with analytical sources, because it perhaps compensates for the thickness of the lower range.

Mids

That subtly dark aspect lends a touch of dryness to the mids, but without any loss of sweetness or richness. There is a good balance between physicality, fullness and density, without the sound of the first half of the mids feeling totally near or close. The combination of the first half and the second half is very well achieved, resulting in a compensated and balanced midrange. I think this Gold filter generates a nuance in the sound that makes it more analogue, that mix of darkness that softens the momentum of the BA drivers, to give them a more pleasant, silky and velvety sonority. It seems to lose precision or definition, but it gains in musicality, in a more harmonious and melodious sound, which gains in exuberance, but without losing transparency, separation or resolution. In this way, the midrange is quite full, rich and present, but without being opulent or bold. The vocals are very well combined with the bass area, as well as being well separated. They know how to stay behind the low end when the song so presents itself, or get ahead of it when the opposite is the case. There are no overbearing outbursts and the blend is quite natural, with that subtle patina that smoothes out the rough edges. The equilibrium and good tuning prevents any hint of muddiness, nor is there any sibilance. And from all of this comes that feeling of an analogue, yet rich and rounded sound.

The midrange, without being spectacular, has everything I could ask for to enjoy for hours, for listening that is not too critical. Not too clear, but still maintaining a level of transparency and detail that is quite natural and pleasing.

Treble

In the treble you can feel that control zone or roll-off at around 5 or 6kHz. It is clear that NiceHCK has learned from its mistakes and has forced the first treble to be more shaded. I think that instead of improving the quality of the BA drivers or refining the PZT driver, they've agreed on a link between the tuning and the filters, to soften the high end and move it away from the excess of that first version. You can feel the layer of shade in the early treble and how it affects the definition of the highs. I can feel that they are not free, but I still prefer them, because they move away from a more metallic or over-emphasised sonority, which would not bring naturalness to the sound. I don't think the choice of the word "natural" is the most convenient either, but it is true that no faults are shown. The high range starts securely and extends with the virtue of the PZT driver, educated in its 8kHz hot spot and stretched all the way to 15khz. There is ample presence throughout the treble, but with that characteristic focus on not exceeding a red line of presence that makes flaws in the sound visible. The result is a sound that parades on a thin sonic line that avoids making missteps, but also doesn't reflect reality to an audiophile degree. It is an attempt to sound with a lot of definition and resolution, but without achieving genuine fidelity. But it's true that many amateurs won't be affected, because the treble integrates quite well with the tuning of the lower ranges. In addition, it has a limited sparkle capable of providing good macro detail and some more exposed micro nuances.

Soundstage, Separation

The subtly dark and shaded analogue sound mix prevents a certain expansiveness. The scene lacks a more visible three-dimensional feel, although the laterality and stereo sensation reaches 180º, but does not exceed this limit. Recreation is frontal, of average height, though good depth. The sound is perceived as cohesive, musical and silky, something that binds its exposition together. It's not a tight scene, but it doesn't stand out in this respect either. Separation is good, this is not a technically adept IEMS in this respect, but it is not flawed either. It is a good all-rounder, it can be used for hours on end and on a daily basis without overwhelming. The level of transparency is adequate, good for providing a good level of definition, but without being analytical or overly expressive. It gets to a point and the tinted layer prevents more resolution. Perhaps the red filter offers more detail, but with a risk in sonority and timbre.

The image is good, but without being explicit in a totally precise and distinguishable location. Nor does the size of the scene help in this respect.

Comparisons

TRI KAI x HBB

I've said before that I like to compare IEMS with similar tunings and similar prices. This time it's the TRI KAI x HBB, a premium looking model, made of aviation grade aluminium alloy level 7. They can now be found for just under €100, while the NX7 MK4 is around €125.

The Kai's packaging is pared down, without much in the way of frills or accessories. It does, however, come with a good cable and a good case. In this respect, both are similar, although the NiceHCK package is larger. Looking at the looks of the two, I wouldn't choose either for a design contest. I wouldn't choose the Kai for its gold colour, nor the NX7 MK4 for its heterogeneous mix of flavours.

In terms of ergonomics, the NX7 MK4s are a blessing, while the TRIs are not bad in this respect, but the weight and size penalise, comparatively speaking.

Sound-wise the difference is in the nuance. The Kai's seem freer and clearer, while the NX7 MK4's have that layer of softness that limits their exposure. Also in the bass area, you can feel the depth and better definition in the low end, as well as the bass shift towards the LFOs. The NX7 MK4s have more rounded bass. The result is an abyssal bass in the Kai's, which is absolutely stunning. While the comparison is watered down when you switch to the NX7 MK4s. They don't have the resonance, the texture, the punch or the physicality. The NiceHCKs just show more dryness and a more compact tendency.

While it might seem that the mid-range of the NX7 MK4s would be fuller, the Kai is no slouch in this respect. In addition to better clarity, there is also more transparency and a less nuanced sound. This gives the TRIs a little more texture, but also a point of richness, with more surface detail and descriptiveness. The level of brightness and sense of dynamics is also greater in the Kai.

Despite the arsenal of drivers, the Kai's highs seem more coherent and natural. Although the control zone is deeper and wider in the TRIs, their simplicity works in their favour. More extension and more air in the NiceHCKs, but with that ambivalence of the PZT timbre.

The technicalities are more evident in the TRIs, as opposed to the opacity and relative darkness of the NiceHCKs. The greater illumination, clarity and transparency of the Kai offers a more explicit sense of definition, resolution and detail, as opposed to the velvety smoothness and nuance of the NX7 MK4. In this way, the Kai's scene feels wider and more expansive, as well as possessing a clearer and more evident image, with more obvious and precise positioning. In the same vein, separation is also more perceptible and despite the verve it possesses, it is also a little more refined in these abilities.

Conclusion

NiceHCK has managed, after four iterations, to make its NX7 sound pretty good. As with previous versions, it is a tri-hybrid with a 10mm dual 1DDD, beryllium-plated diaphragm, 4 BA drivers and 1 seven-layer PZT driver. It also incorporates 3 pairs of tuning filters, to adjust the sound to our taste, of which the Gold series filter stands out. With these, the sound is quite balanced, equilibrated, without any unpleasant treble, even smooth and slightly shaded/dark. The result is a pleasant IEM, quite all-round and suitable for everyday use. The design combines the beautiful outer sides of the TopGuy and a polycarbonate inner part. The mix is a bit heterogeneous and detracts somewhat from the overall attractiveness. The accessories are still the best of the house and that brings that premium character that NiceHCK gives to its best creations.

Possibly, these NiceHCK NX7 MK4 are one of the most comfortable IEMS, with the best ergonomics and fit of the last models I have reviewed. They fit like a glove and it's extremely easy to find the best sound in them, using any tip on the market.

But the crux of the matter is that, for price, they fit in a range where the competition is simply brutal and where every day there are qualitatively tremendous models on the market. Thus, despite being a remarkable model, it is very difficult to stand out among them all. But what is really positive is that NiceHCK has achieved a good and pleasant tuning. Now it only remains to improve on the technical side. I'm sure it will succeed.

Sources Used During the Analysis

Aune X8 XVIII Magic DAC + iFi Zen Can.

TempoTec Serenade X + iFi Zen Can.

Earmen Angel.

TempoTec Variations V6.

ACMEE MF02s.

xDuoo XD05 BAL.

Ratings

Construction and Design: 70

Adjustment/Ergonomics: 93

Accessories: 75

Bass: 76

Mids: 78

Treble: 70

Separation: 70

Soundstage: 70

Quality/Price: 80

NiceHCK Audio Store, offered me this model, in exchange for writing an honest review. I want to make it clear that all my opinions written in this review have not been conditioned by this fact, nor will I ever write anything that I do not really think or feel here. I will only write about my personal opinion in relation to the revised product.

Purchase Link

You can read the full review in Spanish here

NiceHCK MK4 one step forward, two steps..

Pros: Afordable tribrid forumla utilizing 7 drivers.

Beryllium plated dual dynamic + 4BA+Piezo ceramic tweeters

Smallish side of medium, excellent fit due to size

The best sounding NX7 to date with a revised more balanced tuning

Nozzle caps that works to affect tuning balance depending on your taste.

Good quality included silver plated OCC cable in any termination you choose.

Decent set of included tips. Nice box case.

Slow decaying bass that sound like woofers

better mids tuning vs prior versions

Perfect for media watching or casual gaming.

Easier to drive vs prior NX7s

Price.

Cons: Slightly below average passive isolation

Using the exact same all plastic housing from prior NX7s which gives you

the exact same intimate head stage.

Thinner BA and Piezo treble note vs thicker fuller mids and even beefier bass.

NiceHCK NX7 MK4

NiceHCK is a manufacturer that always tries to improve upon their former successes. Their line of NX7 tribrids were for NiceHCK just this. Tribrids overall are not too common but if tuned correctly they can provide something different for your musical listening and the NX7 series of earphones are utilizing 7 drivers per side of the MK4 version to come up with one complete sound.

I remember being contacted by NiceHCK to review their very first NX7 and if anything those stood out for several reasons. It had extensions on both ends of the sound spectrum that was clearly above what most IEMs produce for the price and had arguably some of the best quality bass presentation at the price. Today we see an entirely new 4th gen version of the same formula. To be completely honest, I was hoping/expecting for a new shell type. Even with last year's MK3 version I was thinking there is no way NiceHCK is going to reuse the same shells.

Well I was wrong. The shells are no different than what they used for their first version over 3 years ago. There are several improvements from the prior MK3 version that would make MK4 to be an advancement. It uses some newer dual dynamics as it is now using a dual beryllium coated composite dynamic from their prior carbon nanotube dynamics. Most importantly after re-tuning the NX7 over and over again NiceHCK has now optimized each of the drivers used for the NX7 for the absolute best SQ they can squeeze out from this configuration. I can tell immediately the balancing is better from their prior designs. Not exactly a leap from the MK3 but still has some upgrades worth noting.

With that I would like to thank Jim of NiceHCK for providing a sample of the MK4 for review purposes. You can get yourself a set here on their aliexpress page. The MK4 has been burned in for a period of a week and are now ready for review using my sources Fiio K9 Pro ESS, IBasso DX300Max, Fiio M15, BTR7, Shanling M6 pro, IFI Gryphon, IFI Signature.

Its outer shell now uses stabilized wood design which gives a unique look to the shells but that's just for a newer upgraded look, the actual shell chassis are the same as all their previous NX7s.

Plastic builds are ok and I suppose in reusing the same design as their prior NX7s this is a way to save on cost of production. I feel this is a bit of a lost opportunity for NiceHCK however. This housing is about as generic as it gets. This housing is not only used for NiceHCK but a myriad of other IEMs in the market. Look up TFZ,KZ,KBear,CCZ, and TRN earphones for example.

Some newer updated drivers, a new tuning that improves on its balance, easier to drive vs prior NX7s, a new cable, a new color scheme and you get an updated version of their NX7 complete with interchangeable nozzle caps that actually works. The lack of moving onto a newer housing is made up for not charging the consumer more for these advancements but for me anyways. I would gladly spot an extra $20 for a more spacious housing that will allow all the drivers inside the cramped NX7 shells to have some space with an added effect of throwing out a larger grander sound stage.

What you get.

The NX7 MK4 comes with NiceHCKs blue magnetic faux leather squarish clam shell box case, 2 pairs of silicone tips, 3 different tuning nozzle caps in different colors, and lastly a well matched 2 core silver plated OCC cable in either single ended, 2.5mm or 4.4mm balanced depending on what you choose when you order the NX7 MK4. NX7s in general sound better amped or with some more power. Balanced is recommended for best sound performance.

Sound

I have to give props to NiceHCK team for maximizing a whole bunch of drivers in the smaller medium shell of the new MK4 version. The new sound tuning of the MK4 sees several advancements to its sound formula. The idea of the 3 tuning nozzle filters is to give varying degrees of upper mids and lower trebles for the MK4 which effectively changes the balancing of the MK4. Out of all the variations of the NX7, these make the absolute best use of tuning caps. I would have liked to see a cap somewhere between the gold balanced and the red treble cap but what you get here is an actual variety based on how you like your trebles. The bass black cap lowers the upper detailed aspects of its tunings for warmer bass focused sound. The red more treble enhanced and is the most v shaped borderline brighter tuning out of the cap varieties.

My take on the MK4 here is more based on the balanced gold cap which NiceHCK apparently thinks is the best out of the 3 as it comes with them installed out of the box.

Hybrids and tribrids here for the MK4 brings about a bit of a challenge for manufacturers that make these as they have to have proper cohesion, Crossover techniques to get the best out of each driver used and all of it has to jive. Truth is, some do it better than others as I suppose given that NiceHCK has been constantly reformulating the same tribrid techniques for the NX7s they got it to a point where the NX7 now sounds the best I have ever heard it, however it has one glaring flaw that you can probably guess that limits them to becoming a true special IEM.

The new MK4 sound has good balancing for what it does much better than their previous efforts.. It has a boat load of drivers Dual beryllium coated composite dynamic handling the bass to mids, 4BAs handling upper mids to highs and a 7 layer piezo driver handling the ultra highs. Ultimately the main difference between the MK4 vs their prior versions is that they have fine tuned the balancing especially the treble aspect. It has a moderate pinna gain and even more so with the red filter which changes the tonal quality to be slightly brighter just on the cusp of being edgy. The gold filter is just right, the balancing is the best among the NX7 versions thus far in this configuration. The black filter brings a slight warmth due to lesser upper mids and brings the most bass influence to the MK4 sound. This brings a smoother slightly warmer take on the tonal character with the bass playing a bigger role.

I can tell NiceHCK has maximized each driver to bring out the complete sound. Its technicals clearly shows a proper imaging and its note weight for sonics is just about right for the given presentation. Its technicals are generally good and has the right amount of note weight to music. Its mids for vocals are tonally correct, has average note separation, images well and generally has a good foundational macro details to its sound. Where the NX7 and all their prior versions are not good at is again their sound stage.

I know I seem to keep pointing that out here but to be fair most IEMs have an intimate sound in the first place but when all the drivers actually sit inside the concha of the ear due to the tight cramped space limitations of the housing it uses. You get an even more intimate stage. They're as well tuned as the MK4 version. I can't help but point that aspect out. Throwing in 7 drivers inside a tight smaller side of a medium shell, to fit right and sound right is a small miracle unto itself however as much as folks want to claim these actually get an increase of stage. Actually I beg to differ, they have the exact same stage as all the prior NX7s. I have all of them side by side and I can confirm MK4 has the best tuning out of all of them, but all of them share practically the same intimate stage.

Trebles

This time trebles is balanced well the first gen NX7 had the most treble emphasis and extension out of all of the NX7s with each newer version NiceHCK has started utilizing the tuning caps that actually not only tamed down the treble aspect of the tunings but now sees the most balanced version of it thus far. The bulk of the sound is done by the dynamics and the 4 BAs. Piezo is to provide for the brilliance aspect of the sounds. I have heard Piezos being utilized on a handful of IEMs and Piezo upper treble gives a distinctive after treble note that is a touch thinner in presence Its bright accent quality is a bit thinner than something like BA or EST treble but at the same time can and does hit the highest notes easily. Extra sizzle is noticeable with the NX7 IEMs. NiceHCK could have ditched the Piezos altogether and tuned a set of the dual BAs for the high and ultra high notes with ease but instead they relegated 4 BAs for its trebles with the Piezo doing the upper brilliance accents. This works but here is where the coherence aspect of the NX7 suffers a touch. The actual treble note is defined well enough but the sizzle aspect of the trebles sound a touch artificial. If you take it as being an aspect of the Piezo effect on trebles than it is ok but. Upper trebles are highlighted to be sharper than the lower treble aspects.

What's important here is the trebles have good coverage and are as extended as you will ever need for the trebles. Good details with a quick transient quality the treble tuning is nicely done on the NX7 especially for the gold cap tuning. Some might have some issue with the red cap having the most treble with the most sizzle and a slight bit of glare. Overall trebles is really what NiceHCK has tuned better on these, Piezos and all it clearly shows a better balancing as a result.

Mids

Mids of the NX7 are handled by the dynamics not the BAs so the timbre aspect of the mids are the best of the NX7s. Is a bit more forward vs the previous NX7s. Shows a touch of richness, good note weight and depth for a proper mids presentation. It will depend on how much clarity you like in your tuning but the Red cap which shows the best clarity for the mids the black cap with the most warmth. Gold cap again is just right, mids actually get the benefit of using a nicer Beryllium coated composite dual dynamic which seems to add a richer tonal quality with better definition than what they have used in the past. MK4s mids sound a touch more focussed vs their prior NX7 IEMs. Which is one of the reasons why I have some issues with its stage presence. Give the richer mids character a larger head room to work with in a bigger stage and NiceHCK could have made a statement IEM at the price point. As they are, their average to confined stage presence just seems a bit tight sounding in the ear.

The sound design could be due to how all the drivers are tight inside the shells. Sound separation and imaging is average for the price point. The presentation does not sound cramped but at the same time their lack of stage really hampers what these have the potential to sound like. If listening casually the MK4 performs exceedingly well but it is because they are starting to show signs of a higher end balancing and refinements they get so remarkably close to achieving a higher tier of IEM. For the asking price they are good, very good. Definitely the best NX7 tribrid and probably the best sounding tribrid at the price point, well considering there are not too many tribrids at this price actually. It's like throwing in a V8 engine inside a small VW bug. You get power for days but does that really fit?

Mids detail aspect is commendable and has proper layering albeit a bit more intimate in presentation than I would like. On the other hand they certainly don't sound confined or canned either but nowhere close to being open or diffused sounding.

Bass.

This is the one aspect of the NX7 IEMs that excel. The dual dynamic being used for the MK4 brings a nice quality woofer like bass output for the new NX7. The bass end is not exactly at a basshead level of emphasis but the combination of its tonal quality, good texture albeit a touch on the slower decay is nicely rounded in its bass quality. MK4s bass is more moderate in emphasis yet has a solid punch giving the MK4 a proper bass end to round out its presentation. Its not the quickest of bass note or does it have the best authority when it comes to bass but for what its got. It does show some of that beryllium type bass dynamics that ends up being really good for watching movies and playing games.

Beryllium plated dynamics have always done bass better than most. A combination of using this material and also utilizing a dual design puts the power behind its bass presence. Its weighty punchy bass end is addictive, and I can easily recommend bass lovers to get themselves a set just for its bass presentation slower bass and all. NiceHCK does not do too many true neutral tunings. All their IEMs have bass emphasis to a certain degree, so it is a part of their house sound philosophy to tune with some authority in the bass and we get that for the MK4. If nicely textured rumbly deep hitting woofer like bass is your thing. The MK4’s bass presentation makes for awesome explosions and does bass genres for music some justice.

Overall

The NX7 MK4 was a surprise both good and bad. I am happy for NiceHCK for finally nailing the tribrid formula at the price point to have the best absolute sound quality they could squeeze out of these drivers. There are flashes of a higher end tuning, and its balancing is done well the best among the NX7s. The addition of nozzle caps to tune these to your liking is an added plus for the MK4. However it is due to just how good these things can sound that I find that this was such a lost opportunity for NiceHCK to make a clear upgrade on the NX7 formula by using a more roomier spacious shell for the MK4. I really can’t see these guys reusing that shell again. ( But I said that on their MK3 review). If I wasn’t clear enough from my review of the MK3 version. Well let me be very clear on this one. This exact tuning and drivers in a larger more bigger shell that lets the drivers have more space and room to expand it sound and these NX7 could be easily sold at double the price and I don’t think folks would bat an eye about just how good these could sound. The sound quality is there, but that stage is hampering these from greatness.

As they are, these are enjoyable to listen to especially if you're using them for media purposes. But it is time to take it to the next level. 4 versions of the same formula is good enough. Give the consumer a greater reason to buy into the NX7s again. How about the NX8 with a bigger roomier shell? Thanks for taking the time to read. Happy listening always.