The weather remained poor on the Western Front today to the extent that flying was only possible intermittently. The commander of Jasta 18, Leutnant Rudolph Berthold may have wished he had stayed on the ground. He was leading a ten strong flight late in the afternoon when they came across a formation of Bristol F2bs and Se5a’s from 5, 22 and 56 Squadron RFC and A Squadron RNAS.

At the end of the combat Berthold had been shot down with a smashed upper right arm. A number of claims were made that day by British pilots in the area. Lieutenant William Geoffrey Meggitt and Arthur George J Whitehouse from 22 Squadron claimed an Albatross Scout destroyed. Captain Gerald Joseph Constable Maxwell from 56 Squadron also reported ‘..I got on to one EA’s tail and fired a drum of Lewis and about 100 rounds Vickers at very close range. EA went down very steeply and I lost sight of him…’

There are a number of competing claims for the victory but the prevailing wisdom currently is that Maxwell is the most likely candidate (See the discussion on the Aerodrome Forum).

Leutnant Otto Schober was also forced down with a shot up radiator but was otherwise unharmed.

Also lost in the combat was 2nd Lieutenant Geoffrey Miles Wilkinson from 56 Squadron who was shot down in his SE5a (B23) by Xaver Dannhuber from Jasta 26.

Berthold overcame the handicap of half-severed ailerons and remained conscious long enough to land one-handed at Jasta 18’s home airfield. He passed out after his arrival. He was rushed to the field hospital who were able to keep him alive. He was later sent, due tot influence of his older sister Franziska to the Berlin clinic of Doctor August Bier, who pioneered use of cocaine in spinal anesthesia. Berthold remained in hospital for four months. His arm never recovered but amazingly he recovered sufficiently to fly again in combat, one-handed, in May 1918.

Rudolph Berthold 5 Squadron RFC, 22 Squadron RFC, 6 Squadron RFC, A Squadron RNAS. William Geoffrey Meggitt, Arthur George J Whitehouse, Gerald Joseph Constable Maxwell, Otto Schober, Geoffrey Miles Wilkinson, 56 Squadron RFC, Xaver Dannhuber, Jasta 26, Jasta 18.

The poor weather continued for much of the day on the Western Front, but started to clear by the evening. As is becoming common these days due to the presence of almost half of the German air strength in the area, a mass dogfight ensued over the Ypres Salient around 1915 and carried on for some two hours.

The fight developed when two flights from 56 Squadron RFC attacked a group of German scouts, and were joined by flights from 19, 66 and 70 Squadrons RFC, and 10 Naval Squadron. Other German scouts from Jastas 11 and 27 then joined in. The Official History suggests there were more than 90 aircraft involved! Despite the size, or perhaps because of it, much of the fighting was indecisive with only one pilot on each side killed.

Early in the combat Captain Noel William Ward Webb in Camel B3756 from 70 Squadron shot down an Albatross with Jasta 11’s Leutnant Otto Brauneck on board. Brauneck crashed near Zonnebeck and was killed. Webb reported:

“There were about 6 EA below me and on the way back to lines I dived on the leading machine, letting off a burst of about 50 rounds. I saw the EA wobble and then fall plane over plane and finally spin. Later, I thought I saw this EA crashed on the ground”

Around the same time, 2nd Lieutenant Joseph Cecil Smith in Camel B3814 from the same squadron also claimed an Albatros out of control, though this could not be confirmed. Smith’s aircraft was also badly shot up but he was uninjured.

Captain Gerald Joseph Constable Maxwell and 2nd Lieutenant Leonard Monteagle Barlow from 56 Squadron both claimed enemy aircraft forced down. Shortly after this their Flight Commander Captain Phillip Bernard Prothero was killed when the wing of his SE5’s (A8925) wing collapsed. Vitfeldwebel Alfred Muth from Jasta 27 claimed this but Barlow and Webb reported the aircraft breaking up in a dive. Webb stated:

‘Early in the operation I saw a red nosed SE5 diving on an EA. The pilot seemed to me to dive his machine over the vertical and then both planes on one side folded back and the machine descended in a spinning nose dive.’

2nd Lieutenant A Wearne from 19 Squadron was taken prisoner when his rudder cable was shot through and unable to steer he landed at Faumont aerodrome escorted in by 3 Albatrosses.

As the combat came to a close, Lieutenant James Thomas Byford McCudden flying Sopwith Pup B1756 from 66 Squadron also claimed an Albatross Scout out of control. It was his second and last victory in the Pup before switching to the SE5a.

British activity on the Western Front was curtailed today. There were no bombing or reconnaissance missions as crews were given a rest and offensive patrols were reduced.

Despite this Albert Ball claimed to have shot down two enemy aircraft. He had started off in a five man 56 Squadron patrol with Captain Edric Williams Broadberry, 2nd Lieutenant Reginald Theodore Carlos Hoidge, Lieutenant Cecil Arthur Lewis, and 2nd Lieutenant Gerald Joseph Constable Maxwell. Broadberry and Maxwell dropped out early with engine trouble. Ball then went off on his own in A8898 and encountered two enemy scouts. Ball allowed them to approach the tail of his aeroplane and then did a rapid turn and attacked one at close range from underneath. This one fell out of control and Ball then flew head-on at the other before it dropped seemingly out of control. Ball’s aircraft had been shot up and his engine hit, covering him in oil. He flew back home but on the way claimed to have spotted the two downed aircraft on the ground. Ball’s aircraft was so damaged that he was forced to fly his Nieuport the next day.

Separately Hoidge, and Lewis, also claimed to have shot down an enemy aircraft each. They were joined in the fight by 5 Sopwith Triplanes from 1 Naval Squadron – Flight Commander Roderic Stanley Dallas, Flight Lieutenant Brian Charles Clayton and Flight Sub-Lieutenants Thomas Grey Culling, Cyril Burfield Ridley and Donald Wyand Ramsay). Culling and Dallas made one claim each.

British losses today were Captain Horace Clifford Lomer and Lieutenant Charles Tupper Bruce from 10 Squadron in BE2g 7228. Their aircraft was hit by AA fire. They went down in a spinning nose-dive from 8,000 feet and crashed. Both were killed.

2nd Lt Charles Chesterfield Cheatle from 23 Squadron set off to attack a balloon in his Spad VII B1525. He did not return. Leutnant Karl Schöck from Jasta 12 claimed to have shot him down.

Finally, 2nd Lieutenant Leonard Guy Bacon and 2nd Class Air Mechanic Gerald Worthing from 20 Squadron failed to return in their FE2d A1942. Walter Göttsch from Jasta 8 and Unteroffizer Flemming from Jasta 18 both claimed the victory.

56 Squadron was formed back on 8 June 1916, based at London Colney. Today the Squadron took possession of their new aircraft, the first production batch of the new SE5 fighter in preparation for moving to the front – the first Squadron to do so. (In fact they are the only Squadron to do so as later Squadrons were equipped with the Improved SE5a – the main change being a 200hp engine instead of the 150hp in the SE5).

Major Richard Graham Blomfield took command of the Squadron on 6 February 1917, but perhaps their most famous member is Captain Albert Ball who joined as a Flight Commander following a period of home leave and service as a trainer. The other pilots are:

2nd Lieutenant Leonard Monteagle Barlow

2nd Lieutenant Roger Michael Chaworth-Musters

2nd Lieutenant Reginald Theodore Carlos Hoidge

Lieutenant Maurice Alfred Kay

2nd Lieutenant Kenneth John Knaggs

2nd Lieutenant Clarence Raymond Wentworth Knight

2nd Lieutenant John Owen Leach

Lieutenant Henry Maurice Talbot Lehmann, MC

Lieutenant Cecil Arthur Lewis, MC

2nd Lieutenant Thomas Bertrand Marson

2nd Lieutenant Gerald Joseph Constable Maxwell

Captain Henry Meintjes

2nd Lieutenant William Beresford Melville

2nd Lieutenant Lieutenant Arthur Percival Foley Rhys-Davids

It remains to be seen how Ball will get on. He did not much like the SE5 at testing, preferring the more manoeuvrable Nieuports. Due to this, the Commander of the RFC Sir Hugh Trenchard has given him permission to retain his Nieuport 17 (B1522) for solo missions though he will fly the SE5 on group missions.