The founding ideology of the Turkish Republic, otherwise known as “Kemalism,” plays an important role in Turkish political history. The extensive studies on the topic, however, do not possess much comparative perspective. This absence is a necessary component in understanding how the period’s dominant ideologies perceived one another. In this study, it is tried to show how different factors and appliances of Kemalism have been perceived and interpreted within nazi perspective. In the National Socialist press, the success in the national unity, Party and State solidarity, the principle of leadership and the reforms that has been done for the Europeanization of Turkey have been appreciated and the parallelisms that Kemalism had with the National Socialism have been stressed. Türkiye Cumhuriyeti'nin kurucu ideolojisi Kemalizm, kuşkusuz Türk siyasal düşünce tarihinde önemli bir yere sahiptir. Fakat bu konudaki yaygın çalışmalar karşılaştırmalı perspektife çok fazla yer vermemektedir. Bu eksiklik, dönemin baskın ideolojilerinin birbirlerini nasıl algıladıklarını ve birbirlerinden ne kadar etkilendiklerini anlamada gerekli bir parçadır. Bu çalışmada Kemalizm'in çeşitli unsurlarının ve uygulamalarının Nazi Almanyası perspektifinden nasıl algılandığı ve değerlendirildiği ortaya konulmaya çalışılmıştır. Nasyonal Sosyalist yazında; Türkiye'de milli birliğin sağlanmasında gösterilen başarılar, parti-devlet bütünlüğü, liderlik prensibi ve Türkiye'nin Avrupalılaşması yönünde uygulanan reformlar takdir edilmekte, Kemalizm'in –yerli yersiz de olsa-Nasyonal Sosyalizm ile taşıdığı paralelliklerin öne çıkarıldığı göze çarpmaktadır.

Co-authored together with Dr. Erdem GÜVEN, Asst. Prof. While anti-Semitism had been manifested in Europe since the Middle Ages, the emergence of the Nazi regime raised that phenomenon to a new level. Some publications supported by Nazi Germany tried to effect public opinion in Turkey regarding “scientific” anti-Semitism. The authors of this study support the view that this ideology has not been able to achieve broad support from the Turkish nation or its government. Nevertheless, anti-Semitism did reach Turkey through foreign publications. The specific anti-Semitic events that occurred in the Thrace Region of Turkey in 1934 and the anti-Semitic Milli Iṅ kılap (National Revolution), which had a pivotal role in those events, were inspired by Nazi Germany. Nevertheless, Germany does not seem to have played an active role during the events. This article will examine the issues of the openly anti- Semitic Milli Iṅ kılap, published from 1 May 1934 to 1 July 1934 and try to compare the influence of Julius Streicher’s infamous Der Stürmer on the ideology and content of Milli Iṅ kılap.

This article primarily focusses on interaction, exchange and selective adaption between the Kemalist regime in Turkey in the period between 1920-1940 and Fascist regimes in Italy and Germany. The selective adaption of Fascist ideas and concepts by Kemalists in the period of 'High Kemalism' (1930-1945) on the one hand can be explained by the ideological origins of Kemalism in early 20th century France and the trauma from the Balkan Wars and on the other hand by the fact that Kemalists saw Fascism suited for their authoritarian Westernization project. Ultimately, Kemalism in this period was not just seen by outsiders as closely connected and related to Fascism, but also Fascists and Kemalists themselves often spoke about their friendly connection and similarities. Please use references when taking ideas or information from the article.

This article examines Turkey’s wartime diplomacy between the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact and Hitler’s unleashing of Operation Barbarossa. Rather than a survey of Turkish foreign policy as a whole, it takes a critical episode from July 1940 as a case study that – when put in context – reveals how fear of Nazi power and even greater fear of the Soviet Union created in Turkey a complex view of a desired outcome from the Second World War. Juxtaposing archival materials in Turkish, Russian, German, and English, I draw heavily on the hitherto untapped holdings of the Turkish Diplomatic Archives (TDA). Overall, this article demonstrates both the breadth and limits of Nazi Germany’s sweeping efforts to orchestrate anti-Soviet propaganda in Turkey; efforts that helped end interwar Soviet-Turkish cooperation. Against previously established notions in historiography that depict Soviet-Turkish relations as naturally hostile and inherently destabilizing, this article documents how the Nazi–Soviet Pact played a key role in their worsening bilateral affairs between 1939 and 1941. The argument, then, is in keeping with newer literature on the Second World War that has begun to compensate for earlier accounts that overlooked neutral powers.