Some companies have been brought to greatness by people who took over after the founders left. We tracked down the founders. What lessons did they learn? Do they regret having moved on?

Nickelodeon Geraldine Laybourne, now head of Oxygen Media, gave the kids cable service its sizzle. Its founder, Vivian Horner, is now a partner in media consultants Construction Crew LLC.

I conceptualized Nickelodeon and got it off the ground. I left Warner in 1983, when the cable programming division was sold off to Viacom.

Gerri came to Viacom in the 1980s, when cable was beginning to be big business. It was a totally different game than the noncommercial cable channel that I started. The new programming had to have broadcast formats for commercials and syndication.

She really understands what kids want: Her Nickelodeon has an attitude, like Angelica from Rugrats. I appreciate it, but I like softer programming myself. Im a bit old-fashioned. Im not sure if I could have made Nickelodeon such a big hit.

Oracle Corp.

Larry J. Ellison is one reason this company is so successful. Hes also one reason cofounder Bruce Scott left and eventually started PointBase, a software developer.

When we started Oracle, I was writing code and Larry Ellison was the first salesman. I sold my shares two years before Oracle went public because I didnt share Larrys vision of success for the company, and I didnt like the culture he created.

I want to get rid of the misconception that success only comes from being hurried, tense, terse and full of stress. As chief executive of PointBase, I want to create an organization that shows respect for all individuals. Our receptionists should feel just as respected for their contribution as our vice presidents.

1-800-Flowers Chief Executive James McCann is the ubiquitous face of this company in its advertising. Nobody would recognize founder John F. Davis III, now chief executive of Pegasus Systems, a hotel industry transaction-

processing and reservation system.

My partner Jim Poage and I raised $15 million and set up a business, but we made many mistakes. We spent way too much money too fast, most of it to build our own network of florists. It would have been cheaper to use FTDs existing florist network instead.

We ended up selling the company in the mid-1980s to Jim McCann. He has learned from our mistakes and has done a hell of a job with it. But I would not be where I am today without all the lessons I learned from 1-800-Flowers. So it has worked out very well for both of us.

America Online Chief Executive Steven Case gets the spotlight today, while cofounder Marc Seriff is merely a passive investor in it.

Im an entrepreneurial engineer--once the idea is on the table, its my role to make it a reality. I consciously maintained a low profile during my years at AOL. Steve is a natural when it comes to being the face of the company, and I am not. After I left AOL in 1996, my wife and I moved back to central Texas, where I grew up. We live on a lake in the Hill Country, and I divide my time between nonprofit work and investing in Austin-based startups. In this way, I can share in the excitement of a startup without being encumbered by managing.