Who is Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc

View Company Salary

Advanced Oxygen Technologies, Inc., through its subsidiaries, owns and leases a commercial real estate property in Vojens, Denmark. Its property is land only, as well as a parcel that is used as a fuel station. The company also distributes and sells cargo security straps and tie downs. The company w...

1. Where is Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc's headquarters?

Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc's headquarters is at 653 Vt Rte 12a, Randolph, Vermont.

2. What is the official website of Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc?

The official website of Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc: aoxy-ca.com.

3. What is the revenue of Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc?

The revenue of Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc is $0Million - $1Million.

4. What is the SIC code for Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc?

The SIC code for Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc is 6531. The SIC Industry means Real Estate Agents and Managers.

5. What is the NAICS code for Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc?

The NAICS code for Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc is 5313. This code means Activities Related to Real Estate.

6. How many people does Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc employ?

There are 1-5 people at Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc.

7. What industry is Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc in?

Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc is in the industry of Business Services.

8. What technologies does Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc rely on?

Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc is powered by such technologies as Quali, NetSuite, NetSuite ERP, NTENT Hosting.

9. What social media platforms is Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc on?

Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc is on these social media platforms: LinkedIn, Twitter, Fackbook.

10. What is the company type of Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc?

Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc can be distinguished as a public company.

11. What is the founding date of Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc?

Advanced Oxygen Technologies Inc was founded in 1981.