AddThis

On January 5, 2016, Oracle announced that it signed an agreement to acquire AddThis, a leading provider of publisher personalization, audience insight and activation tools that powers 15 million websites and enables unmatched audience segment quality, scale and insight.

Login

Adi Insights

On May 6, 2022, Oracle announced that it has entered into an agreement to acquire Adi Insights. Adi Insights is a leading provider of workforce management solutions. The acquisition will bring overtime management, time capture, demand forecasting and shift scheduling capabilities to SuitePeople, NetSuite’s human resource management solution.

Cerner

On June 8, 2022, Oracle’s acquisition of Cerner became official. With the addition of Cerner to Oracle Health’s portfolio, we will advance how health happens by providing secure and reliable solutions that deliver better health insights and people-centric experiences.

Support

CrowdTwist

On October 2, 2019, Oracle announced it signed an agreement to acquire CrowdTwist, the leading cloud-native customer loyalty solution to empower brands to offer personalized customer experiences. The CrowdTwist solution offers over 100 out-of-the-box engagement paths, providing rapid time-to-value for marketers to develop a more complete view of the customer.

Login

DataFox

On October 22, 2018, Oracle announced that it has signed an agreement to acquire DataFox, whose cloud-based artificial intelligence (AI) data engine and derived business content provide the most current, precise and expansive set of company-level information and insightful data to optimize business decisions.

Login

DataScience.com

On May 16, 2018, Oracle announced it has entered into an agreement to acquire DataScience.com. DataScience customers leverage their industry-leading tools to organize work, easily access data and computing resources, and execute end-to-end model development workflows.

Dyn

On November 21, 2016, Oracle announced that it signed an agreement to acquire Dyn, the leading cloud-based Internet Performance and DNS provider that monitors, controls, and optimizes Internet applications and cloud services to deliver faster access, reduced page load times, and higher end-user satisfaction.

Logins | Support

Dyn Customer Logins

HOME USER PORTALS

Dynamic DNS (DDNS)

Standard DNS

PRODUCT PORTALS (DYNID)

Managed DNS

Email Delivery

FarApp

On April 6, 2021, Oracle announced that it has entered into an agreement to acquire FarApp. FarApp is a leading provider of eCommerce, logistics, retail and hospitality connectors for Oracle NetSuite. The acquisition is expected to enable a more seamless and unified experience for NetSuite customers.

Support

FOEX

On August 3, 2022, Oracle entered into an agreement to acquire FOEX. The acquisition extends Oracle APEX capabilities by adding a longtime partner that brings deep expertise in modernizing application user interfaces with APEX.

Support

GloriaFood

On June 25, 2021, Oracle completed the acquisition of GloriaFood. The acquisition extends the Oracle MICROS Simphony Cloud POS platform by adding a global online ordering system and marketing solutions to enable restaurants of all sizes to go digital and serve customers directly through the web, mobile, and apps.

Support

Grapeshot

On April 24, 2018, Oracle announced that it signed an agreement to acquire Grapeshot, a provider of brand safety and pre-bid contextual solutions to over 5,000 of the world’s leading marketers. Grapeshot’s Contextual Intelligence Platform enables the rapid creation of highly-customized segments that allow marketers and their agencies to confidently avoid unsafe content and extend global audience reach.

Login

Iridize

On September 20, 2018, Oracle announced that it has signed an agreement to acquire Iridize, a leading enterprise platform for personalized and contextual user onboarding and training for cloud applications.

Login

LiveData Utilities

On March 31, 2020, Oracle announced that it has entered into an agreement to acquire LiveData Utilities. The acquisition extends Oracle Utilities’ Network Management System by adding a long-standing partner that provides leading operational technology (OT) middleware solutions and SCADA capabilities to monitor and control utility equipment while reducing the complexity of real-time systems.

MICROS Systems

On June 23, 2014, Oracle announced that it had entered into an agreement to acquire MICROS Systems, a provider of integrated software and hardware solutions to the Hospitality and Retail industries.

Hospitality and Food & Beverage Support | Retail Support

Moat

On April 18, 2017, Oracle acquired Moat, the fastest-growing digital measurement cloud company that uses data and analytics to enhance media for leading marketers and publishers. Moat will remain an independent platform within Oracle Data Cloud, providing trusted measurement, analytics, and intelligence to the world’s largest brands.

Login

NetSuite

On November 7, 2016, Oracle’s acquisition of NetSuite became official, bringing together the reach of NetSuite’s cloud ERP solutions for small to midsize businesses with the breadth and depth of Oracle's enterprise-grade cloud solutions for the back and front office.

Login | Support

Newmetrix

In October 2022, Oracle completed the acquisition of certain assets of Smartvid.io, Inc. (d/b/a Newmetrix). The acquisition included specific intellectual property underlying Newmetrix’s AI-enabled construction safety product suite, which Oracle intends to incorporate into its Construction Intelligence Cloud. Newmetrix’s former CEO/Co-founder and key leaders joined Oracle as part of the acquisition.

Next Technik

On September 25, 2023, Oracle announced that it has entered into an agreement to acquire Next Technik. Next Technik provides field service management capabilities for NetSuite customers, which enable businesses to digitize and streamline scheduling and dispatch and the management of inventory and assets for increased productivity, and customer satisfaction.

Nor1

On November 18, 2020, Oracle announced that it has entered into an agreement to acquire Nor1. The acquisition extends Oracle Hospitality’s OPERA Cloud Suite by adding Nor1’s Merchandising platform that enables hotels to provide personalized offers throughout the guest journey using AI & machine learning.

Support

Oxygen Systems

On June 26, 2019, Oracle announced its acquisition of Oxygen Systems, a NetSuite SuiteCloud Developer Network partner that provides localization solutions to address the complex tax and reporting requirements for companies with operations in Brazil.

RightNow

On October 24, 2011, Oracle announced that it signed an agreement to acquire RightNow Technologies, Inc. RightNow's Customer Service Cloud helps organizations deliver exceptional customer experiences across call centers, the web and social networks.

Support

Sauce Video

On April 27, 2020, Oracle completed the acquisition of Sauce Video, a content creation and sourcing solution that allows companies to collaborate with their employees, customers, and fans. Sauce Video’s solution reduces the complexity and cost of video creation, enabling customers to easily capture, collect, and create videos for a wide range of use cases, including marketing, sales enablement, recruiting, and employee engagement.

Login

Textura

On April 28, 2016, Oracle announced that it has entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Textura, a leading provider of construction contracts and payment management cloud services. Textura offers its cloud services in a consumption model preferred by the engineering and construction industry whereby the companies involved pay based on project activity.

Logins | Support | Webinar Training

TOA Technologies

On July 31, 2014, Oracle announced that it signed an agreement to acquire TOA Technologies (TOA), adding the leading Field Service SaaS to Oracle Service Cloud and Oracle ERP cloud solutions to deliver effective and timely home- and facility-based customer service.

Verenia

On January 4, 2022, Oracle announced that it has entered into an agreement to acquire Verenia’s NetSuite CPQ business. This acquisition will bring NetSuite customers native configure, price and quote (CPQ) functionality to enable fast and accurate guided selling. Verenia’s non-NetSuite CPQ and CRM product lines and customers are retained by Verenia LLC.

Support