(1918) - Directed by Abel Gance

--------------------------------------------

Melodrama / Romance / French Impressionism

-------------------------------------------------

"He and society, will they forgive your crime?"

Having found myself in a very rare mood for silent films, I am focusing on the possibility of constructing a list of my top 50 movies of the 1910's. I guess something rare came out of my D.W. Griffith marathon. But who I really wanted to focus on was Abel Gance, director of the brilliant silent films Napoleon and J'Accuse. I am honestly extremely happy to find The Tenth Symphony. I was afraid the only other Abel Gance movie I had access to was The Wheel, which is 4 1/2 hours on the easiest cut to find, and apparently the most complete edition is SEVEN HOURS. Having said that, if it came to that, I would watch the whole thing in three days just as I did with Satantango. But if possible I'd like to find ANY movie I can by a director I admire and haven't explored thoroughly, even if the only movie I can find stinks. Many of the Abel Gance movies on Archive.org are in French and don't have English subtitles. So I'm extremely happy that someone uploaded The Tenth Symphony onto YouTube with English subtitles.

Eve is an orphan in a relationship with Fred Rice, who manipulates her into murdering her sister and blackmailing her. Unwilling to comply with his demands, she pays him off to let her go. A couple years later, she marries Enric, a struggling composer who already has a young daughter getting ready for the world. But Rice becomes the girl's new fiancee, and Eve will take whatever steps are necessary to stop the marriage, even if it means killing herself. Eventually, Enric finds out about her past relationship and is lead to believe that Eve still loves Rice, which leads him to finish his music out of depression.

This is considered to be the first French Impressionist film, and there are many scenes which show early visual tricks for symbolic and emotional purposes. Some of these scenes feel a little cartoonish, but others have a strong sense of mystique. Within the first few minutes of the storytelling, I felt like I was going to be hooked. It sets up the moods necessary for personal intrigue and crime plotting. Unfortunately, after the first ten minutes, there was a scene that dragged on a bit too long, and that told me it was going to be common throughout the whole movie. And both pros and cons either shined or dimmed throughout the whole.

I suppose my favorite part of the movie is Eve's characterization. She's an unstable woman who's willing to even kill herself in manipulative efforts to bring someone down with her. This defines at least a good half of the story, and keeps things more interesting when the movie doesn't feel jumbled. I suppose it's all consistent storytelling, but the only one who really shines as a character is Eve. The end result is detailed storytelling which loses some of its emotional grip. But I commend Abel Gance for trying to tell a more packed story than what was normal for the era. Hell, the 1911 movie The Black Dream was a 15-minute story that was told across 53 minutes.

The final thing I should mention is the score. The music is grandiose and quite engaging, much more emotional than the movie is sometimes. But despite the skill present in the score, this is also a flaw as the music is more melodramatic than what the story calls for in many occasions. This brings another movie, The Outsiders by Coppola, which originally had a very emotional score by Carmine Coppola, Francis' father, which Coppola wasn't really happy with and changed after Carmine's death. This also brings to mind Karl Bohm's 1971 version of Mozart's Requiem, which displays a plethora of emotions with exceptional delivery, but also bears the flaw of forgetting that these happy, angry, sad and intriguing emotional sounds are playing a REQUIEM MASS, which Karajan certainly never forgot when recording his 1987 masterpiece.

Well, this certainly isn't the quality I was hoping for from an Abel Gance classic, but it certainly has its merits as a fairly well-directed French Impressionist piece. But as a story, it's standard drama that we see all the time. In fact, the subplot of finishing a classical piece wasn't fully necessary. It has good acting and music to keep it watchable, but in comparison to other movies of its time, everything about it save the music was already beaten by Intolerance. This really isn't getting the score I was hoping to give it to get Abel Gance on my best directors list, so I'll just have to hope the other Gance movies I have access to can live up to Gance's two perfect silent war movies.

= 63

Abel Gance's Directorial Score (3 Good vs. 0 Bad)

Napoleon: 100

J'Accuse: 100

The Tenth Symphony: 63

Score: 87.66 / 3

Abel Gance debuts on my Best Directors List at #82 between James Gunn and Byron Howard.