RECOMMENDED

Belgian director Lucas Belvaux’s unfortunately-titled yet taut and twisty hostage drama “Rapt,” based on the real life 1978 abduction of a French millionaire, boasts the formal elegance of earlier work like 2002’s ambitious, interlocking “The Trilogy,” (“On the Run,” “An Amazing Couple,” “After the Life”) including an opening series of narrative gambits that set his protagonist into orbit as politician, lover and gambler. But that’s not the best element of this sleek, captivating thriller: Belvaux’s patience as a dramatist rewards the viewer aplenty as the strands of his anti-hero’s life criss, cross, accumulate, detonate. A splendid last half hour impresses mightily. Any resemblance to the hauteur of plutocrats like Dominique Strauss-Kahn resounds to “Rapt”‘s lasting benefit. With Yvan Attal, Anne Consigny, André Marcon, Françoise Fabian. 121m. Widescreen. (Ray Pride)

“Rapt” opens Friday at the Music Box.

Ray Pride is Newcity’s Senior Editor and Film Critic. He is a contributing editor of Filmmaker magazine.

Ray’s history of Chicago Ghost Signs is planned for publication next year. Previews of the project are on Twitter and on Instagram. More photography on Instagram.

Twitter. Substack.

Related Stories

Seeing The Elephant: A Review Of Babylon The boisterous, brawling yet melancholy "Babylon," is a variation on film history, but more drawing for drama. It's gaudy and mean, celebratory and sorrowful.

A Drag Getting Old: A Review Of Indiana Jones 5 In the protracted opening couple of reels, a very young, computer-crafted Harrison Ford plays a younger cultural marauder who first encounters the dull MacGuffin of the title.

Fine Line: A Review Of Shortcomings It's a season for the comeuppance of a curmudgeon in Randall Park's smart, biting "Shortcomings," adapted by Adrian Tomine from his graphic novel of the same name.

Heart of Darkness: A Review of The Batman The three-hour film noir unfolds briskly, an intensive study in the pervasive interplay of power, money and corruption in what seems like perpetual rainy night.

Survivors: A Review Of Clerks III Yes, there are dick jokes after suffering a "widow maker."

Ten Little Bores: A Review Of The Eternals Marvel mixes it up.