1.

Sisak

City in Sisak-Moslavina, Croatia

Overview: Sisak (Hungarian: Sziszek also known by other alternative names) is a city and episcopal see in central Croatia, located at the confluence of the Kupa, Sava and Odra rivers, 57 km (35 mi) southeast of ...

0 0

2.

Pannonia Superior

Province of the Roman Empire (103-3rd century)

Overview: Pannonia Superior, lit. Upper Pannonia, was a province of the Roman Empire. Its capital was Carnuntum. It was one on the border provinces on the Danube. It was formed in the year 103 AD by Emperor Trajan ...

0 0

3.

Overview: The Orpheus Monument (Slovene: Orfejev spomenik) is a Roman monument in Ptuj, Slovenia, an almost 5 metres (16 ft) high and about 1.8 metres (5 ft 11 in) wide stele, carved of white Pohorje ...

0 0

4.

Andautonia

Ancient Roman settlement in Pannonia

Overview: Andautonia was a Roman settlement located on the southern bank of the river Sava, located in the modern-day village of Šćitarjevo, southeast of the city of Zagreb, Croatia.

0 0

5.

Slabinja

Village in Sisak-Moslavina County, Croatia

Overview: Slabinja (Hungarian: Szlabina; Serbian Cyrillic: Слабиња) is a village in the Sisak-Moslavina County in the central part of Croatia. It is in the Una Valley near the border with Bosnia and Herzegovina ...

0 0

6.

Ludbreg

City in Varaždin County, Croatia

Overview: Ludbreg is a town in Croatia, located halfway between Varaždin and Koprivnica near the river Drava. It has 3,603 inhabitants, and a total of 8,478 in the entire municipality (census 2011).

0 0

7.

Daruvar

Town in Bjelovar-Bilogora, Croatia

Overview: Daruvar (Czech: Daruvar, German: Daruwar, Hungarian: Daruvár, Latin: Aqua Balissae) is a spa town and municipality in Slavonia, northeastern Croatia, with a population of 8,567, as of 2011. It is located ...

0 0

8.

Pannonia Savia

Roman province (295 - 5th century)

Overview: Pannonia Savia or simply Savia, also known as Pannonia Ripariensis, was a Late Roman province. It was formed in the year 295, during the tetrarchy reform of Roman emperor Diocletian, and assigned to the ...

0 0

9.

Szombathely

City with county rights in Western Transdanubia, Hungary

Overview: Szombathely (see also other alternative names) is the 10th largest city in Hungary. It is the administrative centre of Vas county in the west of the country, located near the border with Austria. Szom ...

0 0

10.

Overview: Halikan (Latin: Halicanum, Halycanum, Alicanum) is an ancient Roman municipium located in present-day Croatia. It is situated in the municipality of Sveti Martin na Muri in Međimurje County. Founded in ...

0 0

11.

Győr

City with county rights in Hungary

Overview: Győr (German: Raab, Slovak: Ráb, names in other languages) is the most important city of northwest Hungary, the capital of Győr-Moson-Sopron County and Western Transdanubia region, and—halfway between ...

0 0

12.

Sopron

Place in Western Transdanubia, Hungary

Overview: Sopron (German: Ödenburg, Slovene: Šopron) is a city in Hungary on the Austrian border, near the Lake Neusiedl/Lake Fertő.

0 0