Maçanet-Massanes, formerly called Riera de Santa Coloma and also Empalme, is a railway station located in the Spanish municipality of Maçanet de la Selva, in the province of Gerona, autonomous community of Catalonia. It has Media Distance services. In addition, it is part of lines R1 and R2 of Cercanías Barcelona. Junction point for two railway lines born in Barcelona, one along the coast and the other inland, hence its old name of Empalme, the station is located at kilometer 69.3 of the Barcelona-Cerbère railway line and at the kilometer point 75.1 of the Barcelona-Empalme route through Mataró, an extension of the first railway line built in Spain. Joining both lines in Maçanet, it becomes kilometer zero of the route towards Cerbère in the Maçanet Cerbère section. The section is double track and is electrified.

The station was inaugurated on August 27, 1860 with the start-up of the Granollers - Empalme section (located in Massanet), this last point being the place where the inland route through Granollers joined the coastal route that extended the Barcelona-Mataró line. The works and initial exploitation were carried out by the Company of the Iron Roads of Barcelona to Granollers also called the Company of the Northern Iron Roads of Barcelona. Several mergers and business unions so common on the railways at the end of the 19th century meant that the station passed through different hands until it became the TBF in 1875, which brought together several of the small companies of the time that operated in the Catalonia area. In 1889, TBF agreed to merge with the powerful MZA, this merger was maintained until in 1941 the nationalization of the railway in Spain led to the disappearance of all existing private companies and the creation of RENFE.

The building for travelers is a structure with a rectangular base and a ground floor that does not correspond to the original building. This is located in the middle of a beach of tracks, in the shape of a Y that is marked by the fact that two railway lines join in the place. The layout that runs through the interior of Catalonia has four tracks and two platforms, likewise and in a completely symmetrical way the layout along the coast gives rise to four tracks and two platforms. Due to this scheme, one of the platforms is shared by both lines. There is also a siding and a viaduct that crosses the tracks and corresponds to the new high-speed route between France and Spain.