Ben-Ami and Alexander. Born on 14 June 1964 in Kibbutz Ramot Menashe, he was educated in the elementary school in his kibbutz and completed his studies at the “Ephraim Mountains” educational institution in the Ramot Menashe region, and his love for man was derived from his great attachment to the individual and the society. Ari’el, his childhood caretaker, describes him: “This desire to maintain contact, to consider others, to be willing to contribute at every opportunity, to be pleasant and delicate, is the line in which your character is drawn.” Amiram was an active member of the organization, And during his years in the educational institution, he devoted himself to work in the cowshed, which he liked to draw To see him lean over the placard, and with pleasure he draws what is needed, forgetting the whole world. “After completing his studies, he volunteered for a year of youth-oriented tutoring, which he conditioned on sending him to a place that had a human and social challenge. On the counselors and apprentices, as the director of the rehabilitation project, Maozia Segal, wrote: “Amiram is engraved in memory as one of the best Hashomer Hatzair counselors in the neighborhood. His seriousness, responsibility and love for the neighborhood created a deep and unbreakable connection. “In 1984 he traveled with a delegation of young people to visit Poland, and his experiences and impressions of the difficult journey through the concentration and death camps were immortalized in terms of photography and painting. He was connected to his family, proud of them and a source of pride for them, he wrote to his parents on their wedding day: “Thank you for everything. The combination of demand and pushing for coping and independence, but also constant attraction to a warm home, helps and encourages. And above all, the understanding that being independent and mature does not mean being alone. “In mid-November 1984, Amiram was drafted into the IDF and joined the Signal Corps. After completing his basic training he completed his course in the Naval Training Course (code, decoding, radio) and in a course of instructors and graduated cum laude, and despite his health limitations, he went to an officers’ course and finished as a model apprentice. In December 1987 Amiram, at his request, moved to the position in the field as a liaison officer in a classified unit. After his death, his commander testified about him. “With reasonable and confident steps, we will advance the unit in the field of communications, toward new operational capabilities, while being proficient in every area to which it has penetrated.” He was appointed to the liaison officer of the Sayeret Matkal commando unit, a position considered to be the summit to which every liaison officer aspires: According to his commanders, in his personal file Amiram was “an excellent, intelligent, proactive, responsible, His subordinates and the officers who work with him. “In summaries of interviews with him, he wrote:” Amiram took over the job very quickly and performed it on a high level with great dedication and dedication. “On April 28, 1989, Amiram was killed during his service, Zvitan, on the Golan Heights, and was brought to rest in Kibbutz Ramot Menashe, left behind by his parents, sister Varda, brother-Yaron, and friend Vered. His letter of condolence to the bereaved family was written by his commander R. “At the beginning of his career, he was prominent in his quick grasp and his ability to explain sophisticated communication systems in an intelligent manner and, of course, to the last of the soldiers. His talent, thoroughness and infinite investment ability made Amiram an excellent liaison officer. Above and beyond the professional qualities, Amiram was the man – a cute boy with a child’s face and an irresistible smile. The optimism inherent in his character and his willingness toHis former commander, Moshe Ya’alon, wrote: “Amiram, one of the people I would choose to serve with them in the army, to live with them on the kibbutz, or even on a desert island.” His family published a booklet in his memory, “The love of man, the land and its landscapes, the taking of unlimited responsibility and dedication, and great human sensitivity and sensitivity – all these were the answers of Amiram and his family, friends and commanders. Amiram to the question of the meaning of his life. “