October weather brought a record-breaking Canadian chill to Central Texas and torrential flooding in the Hill Country that largely erased any signs of drought in the state but left Austin struggling to supply residents with clean water. Here's a breakdown of some key numbers:

91 degrees: Warmest temperature in Austin, daytime high recorded Oct. 3 and 4 by the National Weather Service. Although Austin's normal average high temperature in October is 81.8 degrees, frequent cloudiness and a Canadian chill in the middle of the month helped drag the average high for October down to 77.2 degrees, as of Sunday.

44 degrees: Coldest temperature in October, overnight low recorded Oct. 15. A blast of cold air from Canada swept away the humid, tropical air that only a day before had pushed temperatures to a daytime high of 90 degrees.

10.5 inches: Total rainfall in the past two weeks in Llano, according to rain gauges monitored by the Lower Colorado River Authority. Downstream in Kingsland, where the Llano meets the Colorado at Lake LBJ, the two-week total was 9.01 inches.

39.9 feet: Highest crest of Llano River at Llano, recorded Oct. 16. In mid-October, heavy storms soaked Hill Country watersheds that were already saturated by above-normal rainfall in September, triggering a massive inflow of floodwaters from the Llano into the Colorado River.

126 percent: Capacity full at Lake Travis, as of Sunday. Floodwaters pouring into the Colorado forced the LCRA, which manages the Highland Lakes for flood control as well as for water supplies and power generation, to release more water into Lake Travis and Lake Austin farther downstream.

694.9 feet: Elevation above mean sea level for Lake Travis as of Sunday. The LCRA has had four floodgates open this week at Mansfield Dam, which forms Lake Travis. Lake levels have dropped by nearly 10 feet in the past seven days.

7.55 inches: Total October rainfall in Austin so far. That's already nearly twice the amount of rain the month normally produces in October. But more rain could arrive on Halloween, which has a 50 percent chance of rain, according to the weather service extended forecast.

6.81 percent: Portion of Texas seeing signs of drought this week. U.S. Drought Monitor data show areas that fall into a range between abnormally dry and extreme drought are mostly concentrated in a handful of Panhandle counties and in far West Texas near the New Mexico border. Only a month ago, as much as 42.5 percent of the state was experiencing drought conditions.