Saint-Malo (or St-Malo) is a historical walled port city and a true pearl of Brittany, a northwest French region. In the 16th and 17th century, the shipowners of Saint-Malo were licensed to assist the French navy by chasing enemy ships and boarding them. Thanks to the spoil, Saint-Malo became very wealthy. Today, the best way to discover the rich history of Saint-Malo is to start a tour of the ancient walls. But I promise you, I will also take you to some very delicious restaurants and well-being treatments.

“To do” list

In Saint-Malo, you should definitely put on your “to do” list the visit to the old ramparts. This is the best way to see the city as it used to be. Here, you can perfectly imagine the picture of the big sailing ship disappearing on the horizon, on the way to an overseas adventure. Do not miss the St-Vincent gate, the main entrance to the city, built in 1708 nor the Grate Gate, the former main entrance and its two massive towers built in the 15th century to defend the city. Once you get in the old “intra-muros” Saint-Malo, I encourage you to stroll around and discover on your own the picturesque cobblestone streets with plenty of little shops, traditional pancake restaurants and bars.

St-Malo is all about well-being

St-Malo is all about taking your time, relaxing and enjoying life. Find a place on the terrace of the traditional restaurant the “Creperie le Tournesol”, and order like a real local a buckwheat pancake and a bolée of demi-sec cider. After your delicious lunch, it is a perfect moment for a relaxing massage with essential oils in the famous “Thermes Marins de Saint-Malo”, an extraordinary universe entirely dedicated to your well-being. And of course, after taking care of your body, you also need something for your soul. So, don’t forget to treat yourself with something sweet. I have a perfect suggestion for you, an amazing homemade cake with pecan chips, creamy vanilla and raspberry jelly and dark chocolate mousse from probably the best tea salon in the city – Patisserie Stephane Denis.

A little bit of unknown History

Saint-Malo, the true pearl of Brittany, was heavily bombarded by the Allies in 1944 in order to drive the German soldiers out of the city. Almost 80 percent of the city finished in ruins. The rebuilding began in 1948 and was completed in 1953. The large old hipped roofs and chimneys were all restored. Today, the restoration of the city of Saint-Malo is considered an outstanding success.