Louis of France, Dauphin of France (1 November 1661 – 14 April 1711) was Dauphin of France (heir apparent to the throne) as the eldest son of King Louis XIV and his consort, Maria Theresa of Spain. He became known as the Grand Dauphin after the birth of his own son, Louis, Duke of Burgundy, the Petit Dauphin. As he died before his father, he never became king. His grandson became Louis XV of France, while his second son inherited the Spanish throne as Philip V through his mother. He predeceased his father and never became King.

First marriage[edit]

Louis married Duchess Maria Anna Victoria of Bavaria by proxy in Munich on 28 January 1680; the couple met for the first time on 7 March 1680 in Châlons-sur-Marne and went on to have three sons all of whom survived infancy.

Children[edit]

Louis of France, Duke of Burgundy, Dauphin of France (16 August 1682 – 18 February 1712), Duke of Burgundy, later Dauphin of France; married his double-second-cousin, Princess Maria Adelaide of Savoy, and was the father of the future Louis XV of France;

Philippe of France, Duke of Anjou (later King Philip V of Spain) (19 December 1683 – 9 July 1746), Duke of Anjou and later King of Spain; married firstly his double-second-cousin, Maria Luisa of Savoy, younger daughter of the Duke of Savoy, and had children; married secondly Elisabeth Farnese and had children including a future Dauphine of France;

Charles, Duke of Berry (31 July 1686 – 5 May 1714), Duke of Berry married Marie Louise Élisabeth d'Orléans and had children all of whom died young.

Second marriage[edit]

in 1695 Louis secretly married his lover Marie Émilie de Joly, Mademoiselle de Choin. She was a Lady-in-waiting of his first wife and quickly became his mistress. Due to the marriage being between two people of different ranks the union was a morganatic one and the marriage was kept secret and she was not allowed to use the title Dauphine of France. The marriage remained without surviving issue. Pregnant at the time of her marriage, Choin gave birth to a son, who was secretly sent to the countryside; the child died aged two, in 1697, without having been publicly named.

Titles and styles[edit]

1 November 1661 – 14 April 1711 Monseigneur.

Honours[edit]

Knight of the Order of the Holy Spirit.

Knight of the Order of Saint Michel.

Recipient of the Golden Rose.

Ancestry[edit]