Zeenat Aman was born on November 19, 1951. Zeenat Aman was born to a Muslim father and a Hindu mother. Amanullah, her father was one of the writers for the movie Mughal-e-Azam and he died when Zeenat was just 13. Aman graduated from St. Xavier's School in Mumbai and went to Los Angeles for her studies. Upon returning to India, she first took a job as a journalist for Femina and then later on moved on to modeling. She was the second runner up in the Miss India Contest and went on to win the Miss Asia Pacific in 1970. She was considered a sex symbol during the 70s.

After having studied in Los Angeles, winning the Miss Asia pageant and a successful modeling career, Aman's film career began with a small role in O. P. Ralhan's Hulchul in 1971. A second role in Hungama , starring singer Kishore Kumar, was also not successful.

Zeenat Aman had won the Miss India contest and modelled quite a bit when she was signed by Dev Anand who was looking for a westernised girl for his 'Hare Rama Hare Krishna' (1971). Zeenat swayed to the music and became known as the 'Dum Maro Dum' girl, as the producers fell all over themselves to sign the uninhibited girl for their films.

'Yaadon Ki Baraat' and 'Dhund' (1973) and other films of this period, were successful at the box- office but Zeenie baby, as the media dubbed her, was considered only a showpiece. She happily signed Manoj Kumar's 'Roti Kapda Aur Makaan' (1974) but again, she was the glamourous angle.

When she heard that Raj Kapoor was making 'Satyam Shivam Sundaram', (1978) Zeenat got herself made-up as a village belle one side of whose face is burnt, and dropped in on the maker! She got the film. Raj Kapoor promised that Zeenat was a 'volcano of talent' which would erupt in this film. Nothing like this happened though viewers and voyeurs got to feast their eyes on her. But she got a lease of life and signed several more films. 'Don' (1978), 'Ram Balram' (1978) 'Shalimar' and 'Daku Hasina' ( with Rakesh Roshan) were some of them.

After the briefest turbulent marriage with Sanjay Khan which ended after Sanjay brutally assaulted her in a 5-star hotel, she tried picking up threads of her career and even gave memorable performances in 'Insaaf Ka Tarazu' (1980), 'Qurbaani' (1981), before settling down in marriage with character actor Mazhar Khan. She did a tele-film 'Gawahi', though, she kept away from acting but supported Mazhar Khan in making 'Gang'.

Zeenat Aman was the first Indian actress who wasn't a good dancer.

Zeenat married Mazhar Khan and was happily settled with her two sons Azhar and Azaan when fate played truant once again. Mazhar was ill with liver dysfunction and Zeenat spent all her savings for his treatment. The disease however was fatal. Mazhar Khan passed away in September 1998 . What followed was five traumatic years when her in-laws defamed her in public, snatched her son and brainwashed him to the extent that he refused to go back to his mother and even abused her.

Within a span of two years she lost her husband, her mother, and her son got estranged. Zeenat with the help of her former friends like Dimple Kapadia decided to let the world know her side of the story. She called a press conference and clarified all the allegations leveled against her.

Today, Aman lives with her two sons and makes many social appearances. She is seen on screen rarely, in films such as Bhopal Express and the Kaizad Gustad film Boom. In 2006, she acted in the film Jaana - Let's Fall In Love with Rajesh Khanna.

ABOUT HER SELF :

Nickname: Babushka

Date of Birth: 19 November 1951

Height: 5'9" or 1.75 m

Country: Germany

Father: Amanullah

Step-father: Mr. Heinz

Siblings: she is only child

Children: two sons

Marital status: widow

Ex-spouse: Mazhar Khan

Ex-spouse: Sanjay (Abbass) Khan

Boyfriend: Sanjay Khan

Education: Saint Xavier's school in Bombay than she studied in California

Other facts: winner in Miss Asia contest

Occupation: fashion model / bollywood actress

Debut Film: Hulchul

FILMOGRAPHY :

Sirf Romance: Love by Chance

Jaana: Lets Fall in Love

Boom

Bhopal Express

Gawahi

Tujhe Nahin Chhodunga

Namumkin

Daku Hasina

Aurat

Baat Ban Jaye

Haathon Ki Lakeeren

Amir Aadmi Gareeb Aadmi

Bhawani Junction

Yaadon Ki Kasam

Yaar Kasam

Meri Adalat

Jagir

Pakhandi

Sohni Mahiwal

Yeh Desh

Bandhan Kuchchey Dhaagon Ka

Humse Hai Zamana

Mahaan

Pukar

Taqdeer

Vakil Babu

Gopichand Jasoos

Ashanti

Daulat

Jaanwar

Pyaas

Samraat

Teesri Aankh

Katilon Ke Kaatil

Krodhi

Laawaris

Professor Pyarelal

Insaf Ka Tarazu

Dostana

Qurbani

Alibaba Aur 40 Chor

Abdullah

Bombay 405 Miles

Ram Balram

Takkar

The Great Gambler

Cinema Cinema

Don

Satyam Shivam Sundaram: Love Sublime

Chor Ke Ghar Chor

Heeralal Pannalal

Shalimar

Aashiq Hoon Baharon Ka

Chhaila Babu

Darling Darling

Dharam Veer

Hum Kisi Se Kum Nahin

Kalabaaz

Paapi

Deewangee

Chori Mera Kaam

Warrant

Ajanabee

Ishq Ishq Ishq

Manoranjan

Prem Shastra

Roti Kapada Aur Makaan

Dhund

Heera Panna

Yaadon Ki Baaraat

Hare Raama Hare Krishna

Hulchul

Hungama

The Evil Within