She's off the market! ET exclusively learned that the 37-year-old television personality and daughter of musician David Foster married the businessman on New Year's Eve in a Nashville, Tennessee, ceremony. Foster later shared photos from the wedding on Instagram, keeping her usual sense of humor in the caption. "I got to marry the love of my life, and hopefully will never have to look at a seating chart again for as long as I shall live," she wrote. The pair got engaged in August after a year of dating.

ET has exclusively learned that Gimenez -- best known for her roles in Charlie’s Angels: Full Throttle and The Bold and The Beautiful -- tied the knot with Ryan in Beverly Hills, California, on Dec. 31. The couple was married by a justice of the peace. Ryan’s daughter MacKenzie, and Gimenez’s mother, Nelida Gimenez, were at the private ceremony. The newly married couple -- who have forged careers as joint speakers on the subject of substance abuse, addiction recovery and mental health awareness all over the United States -- will have a second ceremony for friends and family in late summer 2020.

The U.S. Women's National Soccer team players and 2019 World Cup winners married in Miami, Florida, on Dec. 28, surrounded by their family and friends. The two confirmed the exciting news via Instagram. "THE BEST DAY OF MUH LIFE!" gushed Krieger, who had been engaged to Harris since September 2018. "Thank you to @timelinevideoproductions for capturing every detail, your team is incredible. Thank you @sarareneeevents for making our dream day a reality and to Karen @alwaysflowersevents we will never forget your attention to detail and breathtaking vision.. @ashlynharris24 and I are so grateful! ??❤️?? #TheATeam." Harris shared a similar sentiment in her own post, writing, "Wow! This was the most magical day of my life surrounded by the most incredible people. Thank you to everyone who made this special! @alikrieger I love you with all of my heart. #MyForever #WeDidIt #IcantWaitToEatCarbs."

The Ozark actress and the Foster the People frontman have officially said "I do," with both taking to Instagram to confirm the news. "12/27/19 ?," they captioned their posts, which featured a beautiful black-and-white shot of the newlyweds. Garner and Foster reportedly got engaged in May. He was by her side as she took home the Emmy for Supporting Actress in a Drama for her role in Ozark in September.

The Younger star and the musician married in an intimate ceremony at their Los Angeles home on Dec. 21. The pair's wedding comes seven months after Koma proposed in May. "Over a week ago I married this handsome devil," Duff later captioned an Instagram post with one of the first photos from the nuptials. "Love you @matthewkoma so grateful that I found the one person that gets sad at Christmas too. Now I don’t have to be alone. ♥️." Duff and Koma were first romantically linked in early 2017. They split in March of that year, but got together by the fall and have been together ever since. They welcomed their first child together, daughter Banks Violet Bair, in October 2018. Duff is also mom to 7-year-old son Luca, whom she shares with ex-husband Mike Comrie.

They're officially husband and wife! A source told ET in mid-December that the Affair star and the British model are married. According to Us Weekly, the two are also expecting their first child together. ET has reached out to both actors’ reps for comment. The exciting news came just over a month after the lovebirds fueled marriage rumors when they made their red carpet debut as a couple at the Queen & Slim premiere at AFI Fest 2019 in Los Angeles. At the time, people couldn't help but notice that they were both wearing rings on that finger. Jackson, 41, and Turner-Smith, 33, reportedly obtained a marriage license back in August, when they were spotted leaving a courthouse together in Beverly Hills, California. "Two people who only fancy each other a little bit," Turner-Smith captioned an Instagram photo of her and Jackson just a few days later. Since first sparking romance rumors last November, the two have kept the details of their relationship private.

This girl in a country song just got hitched! ET confirmed that the 24-year-old singer from country duo Maddie & Tae wed her longtime boyfriend at The Barn at Sycamore Farms in Arrington, Tennessee, on Nov. 22. The couple was surrounded by their closest friends and family. For her special day, the singer wore a custom-designed gown by designer Anne Barge, Badgley Mischka heels and art deco diamond earrings from Williams Galleries Fine Period Jewelry, per People, who was first to report the wedding. After seven years of dating, the two got engaged during a trip to Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, in June 2018. Marlow met Font when she was a sophomore in high school in Texas.

ET can exclusively confirm that the 33-year-old Jersey Shore Family Vacation star and Larangeira tied the knot at the Park Château Estate & Gardens in East Brunswick, New Jersey, on Nov. 20. The blushing bride wowed in a strapless, white lace Castle Couture dress, which she styled with a gorgeous matching veil, silver tiara and jewelry. For his part, Larangeira looked dapper in a classic black tuxedo custom made by Karako Suits. Following Larangeira's sweet proposal last January, Pivarnick couldn't contain her excitement while speaking to ET at the time. "I am sooooo excited about becoming a wife and having kids," she shared. "We are going to work on [the kids] rather quick."

The 29-year-old Bachelor alum and the 34-year-old country singer wed on Oct. 25, ET confirmed. People was first to report the news, noting the pair's nuptials were a "secret garden" ceremony taking place in Nashville. This is the first marriage for both. Bushnell was previously engaged to Bachelor season 20 star Ben Higgins, but they split in May 2017 after a year and a half together. ET broke the news that Bushnell and Lane were dating in November 2018, after having been just friends for a few years, and the pair got engaged in June.

ET has learned that the 36-year-old rapper is married after she took to Instagram on Oct. 21 to share a video that suggested she tied the knot with Petty. The brief video, which Minaj captioned, "???????? 10•21•19," showed two cups and two hats laid next to each other on a table. The words emblazoned on the items spelled out "Mrs. Bride" and "Mr. Groom." Just one week earlier, Minaj opened up about wedding plans while talking with ET's Keltie Knight at the launch party for her new fashion line, Fendi Prints On. "We got the marriage license, now I just have to wait until my pastor that I love comes and does it for us," she shared. "The big wedding and all that stuff, that will happen, but just not at this moment." This is the first marriage for Minaj, who has previously dated rappers Meek Mill and Safaree. She went Instagram official with Petty last December, though the two first met when she was a teenager growing up in Queens. Since confirming their romance, she's defended Petty multiple times after some fans have criticized their relationship due to his past. Petty was convicted of attempted rape in the first degree in 1995, and years later, he was also convicted of manslaughter and served seven years in prison, TMZ previously reported.

J.Law is a married lady! A source told ET that the 29-year-old actress and the art gallerist tied the knot on Oct. 19 at Belcourt of Newport in Rhode Island, the home of Alex and Ani CEO Carolyn Rafaelian. According to the source, it was a star-studded affair. "Among the A-listers in attendance were Adele, Cameron Diaz, Nicole Richie and husband Joel Madden, who all enjoyed a late-night bite Friday evening in a private dining room at Scarpetta at Gurney’s Newport," the source says. Additional attendees included Emma Stone, Kris Jenner, Sienna Miller, Ashley Olsen and director David O. Russell. The couple got engaged in February, after less than a year of dating. They were first linked together last June, and a source previously told ET that the two had an instant connection when they began dating last spring. The source described Maroney as "down to earth," as well as "fun, super social and a really hard worker."

Hey, oh, listen what we say, oh... Flea is a married man! The Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist (real name: Michael Peter Balzary) announced via Instagram on Oct. 22 that he said "I do" to his fashion designer girlfriend the previous weekend. Flea shared a stunning shot from their special day, with the bride looking breathtaking in a long-sleeved embroidered dress and veil, while the 57-year-old rocker dressed to impress in a tailored lavender suit and mint green bow tie. "My life has changed forever and I am eternally humble and grateful," Flea gushed in the caption. "The person who sees all of me and knows who I am. My wife @melodyehsani ❤️❤️❤️." Melody shared an additional wedding photo to her own page, writing, "This weekend I got to marry my best friend. Surely, my best collaboration to date ?☺️you’re my whole heart @flea333 ?♥️?." While few details are known about Flea and Melody's relationship, it appears the two got married nearly a month after they got engaged.

No shame here! The actors reportedly tied the knot at the Beverly Hills courthouse in Southern California on the morning of Oct. 18, just two days before their daughter, Ezer, turned one. Coldplay frontman Chris Martin and Dakota Johnson attended the ceremony, with Johnson photographed holding Ezer inside the courthouse as Martin looked on smiling. Timlin, who appeared in the film Fallen and on the television series Californication and StartUp, took to Instagram on Saturday to share photos from her “big day.” White, who plays Lip Gallagher on Shameless, and Timlin welcomed their little girl in October 2018 and got engaged in April. ET has reached out to White's rep for comment.

The Bold Type leading lady and her fiancé tied the knot in Nashville on Oct. 12, ET can confirm. The gorgeous couple celebrated becoming husband and wife surrounded by 250 of their closest friends and family, with the beautiful bride wearing a long-sleeved Flora wedding dress and L’Dezen jewels, per People. Among the attendees was Stevens' Bold Type co-star, Meghann Fahym, as well as Molly McCook, Betty Who, Ryan Pinkston and Katie Welch. Prior to walking down the aisle, Stevens, 26, reposted photos and videos on her Instagram Story from her guests, who couldn't help but express their excitement for their friend. ET confirmed in January 2018 that Stevens and DiGiovanni got engaged. The Freeform star later confirmed her engagement on Valentine's Day, writing on Instagram, "When someone asks if you’re engaged and you flash them some sparkle ? love you endlessly @paulblg thanks for wanting to be my Valentine forever! ♥️."

The Love & Hip Hop couple revealed that they got hitched on Oct. 7, with both sharing social media posts to mark the occasion. The 38-year-old rapper posted a clip of their matching rings, which are covered in diamonds. Less than a week before exchanging vows, Samuels and Mena revealed that they are expecting their first child together. The pair got engaged in December 2018. Mena is already the mother of a 12-year-old boy, King, with her ex, Raul Conde.

The "Me & U" singer confirmed that she and Fine tied the knot in September by posting pics from their big day to social media on Oct. 9. In an interview with Vogue, Cassie opened up about the intimate Malibu nuptials, which featured just 14 guests. "We wanted a simple venue with a beautiful view that felt warm and romantic," she said. "We wanted the aesthetic to reflect how comfortable and content we feel with each other." Fans initially speculated that the couple had wed after director Peter Berg posted a photo on Instagram officiating what looked like the couple's wedding ceremony. In the pic, which was geotagged as Malibu, Cassie looked gorgeous in an off-the-shoulder gown and white lace veil as she held hands with her fiancé. The duo got engaged in August, not long after they announced that they were expecting a baby girl, due in December.

The One Tree Hill alum and the Walking Dead star tied the knot on Oct. 5, with both revealing news of their secret wedding two days later on Instagram. The couple started dating in 2009 and have two children together -- 9-year-old son Augustus and 1-year-old daughter George. Burton announced the news with a stunning black-and-white picture of her new husband embracing her, which showed off her gorgeous backless wedding dress. "This past weekend was the best of my entire life... Jeff and I just want to put it out there that WE GOT MARRIED! For real," she wrote in part. "We’ve lived as husband and wife for a decade. We’ve built a family, and a farm and found our community. For years, publications have reported that we got married in 2014 or 2015 and that I’ve been married and divorced before. All untrue. But WE knew our truth." This is Burton's first marriage and Morgan's second. Morgan was previously married to actress Anya Longwell, but they divorced in 2007. He was also once engaged to his Weeds co-star, Mary Louise Parker, but they broke up in 2008.

The country-singing lovebirds tied the knot on Oct. 6, ET can confirm. The wedding was held inside a rustic barn located on the rolling hills of the Drakewood Farm in Nashville, according to People, who were the first to report on the singers' nuptials. The lavish nuptials also featured a performance from fellow country crooner Jake Owen, who performed a song for the couple's first dance. The couple got engaged in December during a laid-back vacation in Tulum, Mexico, several months after they first confirmed they were dating.

The pair has said "I do" for the second time, ET can confirm. After legally tying the knot last September at a private courthouse ceremony in New York City, the couple wed again, this time with a more formal wedding party and surrounded by their family and friends at the Montage Palmetto Bluff in Bluffton, South Carolina, on Monday. A reported 154 guests were in attendance for the ceremony at Somerset Chapel, including Kendall Jenner, Scooter Braun, Camila Morrone and Joan Smalls. Before the wedding guests were treated to cocktails at the Inn lobby lounge, and afterward, they enjoyed another cocktail hour ahead of a formal reception. According to People, Daniel Caesar is expected to perform later in the evening.

The American Pie star is married, the actor’s rep confirmed to ET on Sept. 27. At this time, no further details are available including who Scott secretly married. The 42-year-old actor has always maintained a private personal life. However, earlier this month, he told Us Weekly, who broke the news of his wedding, that he was "dating somebody." "She’s a great girl," he said, adding that he's "pretty private" but “super happy." Scott was previously engaged to former Victoria's Secret model Lindsay Frimodt in 2012, but the two called it quits a year later.

The Charmed alumna got hitched to her restaurateur beau in an outdoor ceremony in Carmel, California, in early September, with Combs confirming the news via Instagram on Sept. 10. The pair said "I do" in a redwood grove at the Santa Lucia Preserve before family and close friends, including Combs' former co-stars, Drew Fuller and Brian Krause, according to People. Combs met Ryan while dining at his Los Angeles restaurant, Xoc, in 2016. This is the third time Combs has walked down the aisle. She split with her first husband, Bryan Travis Smith, in 1997 after four years of marriage, then married her second husband, David Donoho, in 2004. The pair had three sons, Finley, 15, Riley, 12, and Kelley, 10, before divorcing in 2011.

Supergirl has wed her superman! ET confirmed that Melissa Benoist, who plays the title role in The CW superhero show, tied the knot with her former on-screen love, Chris Wood, on Sept. 1. According to E! News, the poolside wedding took place in Ojai, California, and was attended by famous friends like Paul Wesley, Odette Annable and Kevin Smith. The ceremony came just months after the actors announced their engagement with a cute Instagram post, in which Benoist beamed at the camera while Wood gave her a kiss on the cheek. “Yes yes yes it will always be yes♥️,” the 30-year-old captioned the post. The couple met on Supergirl, after Wood, 31, was cast as Benoist's character Kara's love interest, Mon-El, in 2016.

The Whiplash star and his girlfriend of six years wed in Hawaii on Sept. 1, the bride revealed on Instagram in a series of pics and videos. The couple reportedly had their rehearsal dinner in Maui on Friday before saying "I do" on Sunday in a scenic ceremony attended by their famous friends, including Shailene Woodley and Nina Dobrev, and family. Teller, 32, and Sperry, 26, met in 2013 at a GRAMMYs after-party and got engaged in August 2017 while on safari in South Africa.

The couple tied the knot at a ceremony held at Russell's mom, Goldie Hawn's, home in Aspen, Colorado, over Labor Day Weekend, People reported. ET has reached out to Russell and Hagner's reps for comment. According to the mag, Hawn and Russell's father, Kurt Russell, were in attendance at the Western-themed wedding, as were his acting siblings, Kate and Oliver Hudson. The pair's nuptials came just over eight months after Russell, 33, proposed to Hagner, 32, as they spent time with family in Colorado over the December holidays. Russell and Hagner met in 2016 on the set of Folk Hero & Funny Guy.

The "Love Me Like You Do" singer and her longtime boyfriend said "I do" at York Minister Cathedral in Yorkshire, England, on Aug. 31, ET confirmed. The pair looked happy as could be as they had their first kiss as husband and wife in front of their friends and family. The 32-year-old singer wore a bespoke Chloé wedding dress designed by Natacha Ramsay-Lévi that featured long sleeves, a high neck with ruffles and small beading all over. Her blonde locks were in an elegant updo, which showed off her drop pearl and diamond earrings. The groom looked equally as regal in a custom morning suit by Huntsman. The newlyweds were accompanied by a slew of famous faces on their special day, including engaged couple Orlando Bloom and Katy Perry, Sienna Miller and Princesses Eugenie and Beatrice. Goulding and Jopling announced their engagement in August of last year.

Lindsay is a Bachelorette no more! A rep for Lindsay confirmed to ET that she and Bryan Abasolo had their wedding in Mexico on Aug. 24. The special day comes over two years after fans saw the pair get engaged on the season 13 finale of The Bachelorette in 2017. A few Bachelor Nation favorites were in attendance, including Kevin Wendt, Alex Bordy and Eric Bigger. Lindsay walked down the aisle in a stunning gown by Randi Rahm, who also designed former Bachelorette Ashley Rosenbaum's (nee Hebert) dress for her 2012 televised wedding, as well as many dresses for past Bachelorettes on the show over the years. Lindsay is the fourth Bachelorette to marry her final pick, behind Trista Sutter, Rosenbaum and Desiree Siegfried (nee Hartsock).

Congratulations, Mr. and Mrs. Rock! Johnson took to Instagram early on Aug. 19 to share the joyful news of his union, captioning two stunning wedding photos with his blushing bride, “We do. August 18, 2019. Hawaii. Pōmaikaʻi (blessed)." For his big day, the Jungle Cruise star wore white pants and a semi-sheer white shirt, and he embraced Hawaiian tradition with two draped leis around his neck. His bride dazzled in a white, lace-covered gown and a long veil. The couple shares daughters Jasmine, 3, and Tia, 1, while Johnson is also dad to daughter Simone, 18, with his ex-wife, Dany Garcia.

The Grey's Anatomy star wed her main man on the California coast on Aug. 17, ET confirmed. Seventy of Luddington and Alan's closest friends and family, including Luddington's Grey's co-star, Jessica Capshaw, were in attendance, with Luddington saying "I do" in a gorgeous couture gown by Mira Zwillinger. The bride walked down the aisle to Temper Trap's "Sweet Disposition," 11 years after she and Alan went on their first date at a Temper Trap concert. People was first to report the news. Luddington revealed to fans in April 2017 that she had given birth to her and Alan's first child together, a daughter named Hayden, and the pair got engaged less than a year later in January 2018.

Wedding bells are chiming! The Outlander star exchanged vows with the music producer in a small intimate ceremony at St. Mary's Church in Somerset, England, on Aug. 10, according to multiple reports. The traditional Roman Catholic service was reportedly a "close-knit family affair officiated by Rev. Louis Beasley-Suffolk," sources confirmed to People, who first reported the news. While the couple's reps have not officially commented on the ceremony, a calendar of events for St. Mary's included a wedding for "A McGill" on Saturday's schedule. The 39-year-old actress first revealed that she and McGill were engaged back in January 2018, when she debuted her shiny sparkler on the red carpet at the Golden Globes, noting that she was "very happy." Balfe and McGill have been together for three years.

The Bachelor in Paradise alums wed in a gorgeous Rhode Island ceremony on Aug. 11, according to People. The news comes just over a year after Haibon proposed to Iaconetti during a special appearance on season five of Paradise. Iaconetti exclusively revealed to ET in June that American Idol alum David Cook would be singing at her and Haibon's wedding. "He is one of my favorite artists ever and, I mean, my favorite American Idol ever. So it's really cool that he is going to perform at our wedding," she raved. "He has, like, the warmest voice ever. He just can, like, warm up an entire room, so we love that romanticism." The couple also shared that plenty familiar Bachelor faces would be invited to the affair -- though confessed they were worried about their officiant, Tanner Tolbert, making it, as he and Jade Roper were expecting their second child, and, sure enough, the pair revealed on social media on Aug. 10 that they would not be able to make it to the ceremony.

The Muse frontman and his model fiancée have tied the knot. They revealed the exciting news on Instagram on Aug. 10 alongside the first photos from their gorgeous wedding. In the Instagram pic, the pair are beaming after having just become husband and wife. They proudly walk back down the aisle to cheering family and friends. "Mr. & Mrs. Bellamy ???," the singer wrote alongside the photo. Evans used the same caption on the snap she shared. The pair started dating in 2015 and got engaged in December 2017. This is the first marriage for Bellamy, who has been engaged twice before to Italian psychologist Gaia Polloni and Kate Hudson, with whom he shares an 8-year-old son, Bingham.

The former America's Got Talent judge and the Tokio Hotel guitarist said "I do" in a romantic Italian wedding ceremony aboard their luxury yacht, Christina O, in Capri, Italy, on Aug. 3. Klum shared a photo from the ceremony to social media, writing “We did it! Mr. & Mrs. Kaulitz,” along with a series of heart emojis. According to German magazine The Bunte, Klum's four children from previous relationships -- Leni, 15, Henry, 14, Johan, 12, and Lou, 10 -- stood by the pair's side. The beautiful event marked the second wedding for the couple, who secretly tied the knot in a private California ceremony earlier this year. This is the third marriage for Klum, who was previously wed to Seal from 2005 to 2014 and celebrity hairstylist Pic Pipino from 1997 to 2002. As for Kaultiz, he was previously married to Ria Sommerfeld from 2015 to 2018.

What a stunning setting! The 40-year-old Czech model took to Instagram on Aug. 2 to share the happy news that she wed the Osham Group co-founder in a boho ceremony in Arizona. "We feel so incredibly blessed to share with all of you that we got married ??? in a private ceremony with our spiritual guide in a sacred site of Cathedral Rock vortex in Sedona. ???," she wrote. "This location is very special to us because of its powerful energy field and it’s rich indigenous traditions. ✨?✨ During our sacred union all the elements & angels gathered together and created magical golden cloud above us. ? We were moved beyond words. ?

We are so excited to join our paths and co-create our future together. ✨?✨We thank everyone for your love and we send you many blessings. ???." Nemcova was engaged three times previously; she had a brief engagement to English actor Jamie Belman in 2012, her then-fiancé, Simon Atlee, was killed in a tsunami in Thailand in 2004; and she broke up with Alejandro Grimaldi in December 2018, 18 months after the investment banker popped the question in St. Tropez.

The YouTube stars tied the knot on July 28 in an appropriately raucous ceremony that saw the pair's cadre of friends fly out to Las Vegas for the occasion. Leading up to the big night, Mongeau took to her Instagram Story to share a slew of snapshots showing her and Paul getting ready for the event, flying out to Sin City with their friends, and generally having a wild time as they prepared to tie the knot. While the event itself could be watched by fans -- who were willing to pay -- as it streamed online, Mongeau herself confirmed that they'd officially gotten married when she took to Twitter to explain how a fight had broken out at the ceremony, a dustup that an eyewitness told ET appeared to be staged. "Someone just threw a glass of champagne at Jake and I at the f**king altar holy f**k HAAHAHAHAHAHA. Jana don’t need no press," she tweeted. "Wow. Just married. Honestly made it better.... to slow dance while they scream. I love you @jakepaul." In true Jana fashion, the newlyweds had their names and wedding date painted on the building of the wedding venue. This is the first marriage for both 22-year-old Paul and 21-year-old Mongeau, who was previously in a relationship with Bella Thorne. Paul proposed to Mongeau last month as she celebrated her milestone birthday in Las Vegas when he brought Mongeau on stage at Drai's Nightclub and popped the question.

She's bleeding love! The X Factor alum reportedly tied the knot with her longtime boyfriend and choreographer, Dennis Jauch, in late July at a vineyard just south of Florence, Italy, according to Hello!. ET has reached out to Lewis' rep for comment. The 34-year-old songstress reportedly wore a full-length white tulle gown for the picturesque ceremony, walking down the aisle to "Ave Maria" as 180 guests looked on. Following the vows, she reportedly threw on a beaded blush dress for the reception, which she later traded in for a jumpsuit featuring crystal embellishment to party the night away. Prior to the big day, Lewis’ future hubby shared that he was in Italy with a number of photos featuring him in and around Florence. In November, Lewis broke the news that she and Jauch -- who met in 2010 while he was performing as a backup singer on her tour -- had gotten engaged with a sweet black-and-white photo featuring the pair grinning while slyly showing off her new engagement ring.

The 27-year-old YouTube super star and her girlfriend tied the knot at Rosewood Miramar Beach in Montecito, California, on July 12. The beautiful beachfront wedding was attended by 220 people, including YouTubers Kandee Johnson, Hannah Hart, Grace Helbig and Trisha Paytas, according to People, who was first to report the news. For her special day, Gigi donned a custom-made Michael Costello strapless ball gown while Nats looked elegant in a white suit she designed from her own label, Strike Oil. Both shared a few pics from their nuptials, including a photo of Gigi looking ecstatic while holding her new wife's hand, which Getty captioned, "IM F**KEN MARRIED PEOPLE." Gigi and the great-granddaughter of billionaire tycoon J. Paul Getty began dating in 2016, and Nats proposed to Gigi during a March 2018 trip to Paris.

Surprise! After attending the 2019 Billboard Music Awards, which took place in Las Vegas, the Game of Thrones star and DNCE frontman decided to hit up a local wedding chapel. The secret ceremony was first shared on Diplo's Instagram Stories, including the couple's vows. ET confirmed the union with a copy of the couple's marriage license, which was signed on May 1. A source told ET that this won't be the pair's only ceremony. "Joe and Sophie are a couple that loves to have fun and live in the moment, and that’s exactly what getting hitched in Vegas was," they said.

The couple then had a more formal wedding with their family and friends, marrying a second for the second time at Le Château de Tourreau in France on June 29. "Joe and Sophie were married today in front of family and friends," a source told ET. "The couple enjoyed a nice week having fun at numerous events celebrating their union. [This ceremony] was everything they wanted." Turner said "I do" in a Louis Vuitton gown. Turner and Jonas were first linked in November 2016 and got engaged the following October.

The 30-year-old actress married her longtime love at her father, Lenny Kravitz's, home in Paris, France, on June 29. A source told ET that Kravitz was "incredibly emotional" at the event. "Despite the fact that Zoe and Karl had already tied the knot, Zoe was incredibly emotional throughout the ceremony. She was touched that so many of her loved ones had made it to Paris to celebrate her big day," the source said. "Lenny was thrilled his daughter decided to have her wedding at his home in Paris. He was gushing about how happy he was she had found the love of her life, and how proud he was of all her incredible accomplishments." One day earlier, the couple and their A-list pals -- including Denzel Washington, Chris Pine and Reese Witherspoon -- were all snapped at Restaurant Lapérouse in Paris attending what had been reported as Kravitz and Glusman's rehearsal dinner. Kravitz and Glusman have been dating since 2016 and already had a civil ceremony, according to multiple reports in May.

The Vanderpump Rules stars have officially tied the knot! Cartwright and Taylor wed at Kentucky Castle, a fairytale-like boutique hotel, in Versailles, Kentucky, on June 29. Attendees of the wedding shared pics and videos of the incredible moment when Taylor kissed the bride, who wore an absolutely stunning white gown. The ceremony was officiated by *NSYNC singer Lance Bass, a longtime friend of Taylor's, as well as his new business partner in their non-alcoholic mixers line, JAX. The couple got engaged in June 2018, with Taylor telling ET he was so nervous, he blacked out when it came time to pop the question, having already asked for Cartwright’s parents’ blessing.

From beach babe to blushing bride! The Sports Illustrated swimsuit model walked down the aisle on June 16, sharing a gorgeous photo with her new husband from their wedding day on Instagram. "In a room full of people, my eyes will always find you. 06.16.19 and forever babe," she wrote the following day. "Special thanks to the most spectacular team who made my Dream day possible. More photos to come! I am in complete and utter bliss ?? This Day couldn’t have been made possible without the vendors below. Thank you for making our wedding everything we dreamt of and more ❤️ Cannot wait to share more photos from this incredible day! To be with all of our loved ones under one roof was the most special thing in the world." The couple met on Snapchat and dated for more than a year and a half before Keys popped the question in New York City's Central Park in December 2017.

The Bachelor in Paradise couple are officially husband and wife after tying the knot in Mexico, ET has learned. The newlyweds first confirmed the news to People. Randone and Nielson, both 31, met just over a year ago on season five of BiP, ending their weeks in Mexico together engaged. The pair celebrated their love with an elaborate engagement party in May -- which their guests actually thought was a surprise wedding. Both reality stars were considered villains on their first appearances in the Bachelor franchise but redeemed themselves on Paradise. Nielson competed for Arie Luyendyk Jr.'s heart on season 22 of The Bachelor in 2018, and Randone dated Becca Kufrin on season 14 of The Bachelorette the same year.

These newlyweds are on cloud nine after getting hitched! The pair wed in an intimiate ceremony at San Ysidro Ranch in Montecito, California, on June 8. "The couple wanted to keep it simple, but have the most important people in their lives there," a source told ET. The following day, Pratt took to Instagram to share the first photo from the wedding, captioning a photo with his new wife, "Yesterday was the best day of our lives! We became husband and wife in front of God, our families and those we love. It was intimate, moving and emotional. We feel so blessed to begin this new chapter of our lives. We are so thankful to our families and our friends who stood with us and grateful to Mr. Giorgio Armani who created a once in a lifetime dress for Katherine to wear and for me, the perfect suit. This morning we feel nothing but blessed."

The actor was first romantically linked to Schwarzenegger last June. They made their relationship Instagram official last December, and in January, he announced their engagement. This is Pratt's second marriage; he split from ex-wife Anna Faris, with whom he shares a 6-year-old son, Jack, in August 2017 after eight years of marriage.

The former Melrose Place star and her longtime boyfriend wed in a private ceremony at Oleana Restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on June 8, Zuniga's rep confirmed to ET. Zuniga, 56, first met the Signature Green PR company co-founder 12 years ago when they were set up on a blind date. They got engaged a decade later. The pair were surrounded by almost 30 members of their family and the bride wore a Nicole Miller gown for the nuptials, according to People. This is the first marriage for Zuniga and second for Mleczko.

The 100 stars took fans by surprise with an announcement on June 7, not only going public with their relationship for the first time but revealing that they had gotten married! "Recently I married my best friend and soul mate @WildpipM. We are very happy and ask that you keep your comments kind and respect our privacy at this time." Taylor tweeted, along with a picture of the pair's hands -- wedding bands and bouquet included -- on their big day. Morley shared his own announcement, tweeting, "It is with such a full heart that I call @MisElizaJane my wife This is something we both cherish very deeply and are beyond happy. Please remember to be respectful and kind to one another. Be well be kind." The pair have starred together on The CW's post-apocalyptic sci-fi series since 2014, with Taylor starring as Clarke Griffin and Morley as Bellamy Blake.

The longtime loves tied the knot at the Fairmont Grand Del Mar in San Diego, California, on May 23. The ceremony was attended by family and friends, with Lawrence's brothers, actor Joey Lawrence and singer-actor Andy Lawrence, serving as his groomsmen, while Burke's bridal party included matron of honor Leah Remini and Dancing With the Stars alum Kym Herjavec. The bride stunned in a Romona Keveža dress that featured a scalloped sweetheart neckline with off-the-shoulder detail, fluted skirt, and delicate Swarovski crystal buttons trailing down to the end of the cathedral-length train.

Burke and Lawrence's star-studded wedding came a year after their engagement on the dancing pro's 34th birthday last May, when her beau popped the question with a beautiful, sentimental ring incorporating the diamond that Burke's late father gave to her mother. Burke and Lawrence first met during the 2006 DWTS season when Joey competed. They dated for about a year before breaking things off before reuniting almost nine years later in 2017.

The Jane the Virgin star posted a clip on the morning of May 6 that confirmed she and LoCicero tied the knot two days earlier. In the touching vid, fans are treated to a dazzling montage beginning with the 32-year-old actor straightening his tie in a dressing room before Rodriguez's parents walk her down the aisle in the picturesque outdoor ceremony. After exchanging vows, the newlyweds share a kiss as the music swells. The clip then cuts to attendees gathering for photos before hitting the dance floor at the reception, which was held in a huge tent decorated with twinkling lights. It ended with LoCicero and Rodriguez slow dancing while surrounded by friends and family. "May 4th, 2019 was absolute MAGIC," Rodriguez later added. "To my husband Joseph, I am yours forever." In August 2018, the 34-year-old actress confirmed that she was engaged to LoCicero.

The Real Housewives of Dallas star and her longtime love got married at the Cathedral of Hope in Texas on April 27, ET confirmed. The pair were surrounded by family, friends and Locken's co-stars, with the stunning bride wearing a custom white gown by Texas-based designer Nardos Imam of NARDOS Design, per People, who was first to report the news. Emberlin looked dapper in a bespoke black tux by Don Morphy Prive Clothiers. The couple has been dating for 10 years and got engaged in September of 2017. This is Locken's first marriage and Emberlin's third. Earlier in the month, Locken gave ET an exclusive first look at her second outfit, a custom jumpsuit that she planned to wear at her reception, and she shared this exclusive photo from her wedding as well.

The 46-year-old actor and his fiancée wed in a gorgeous ceremony in Morocco on April 26, just over a year after they got engaged. Dhowre, who was Miss Vancouver 2014, met and fell in love with Elba while he was in Canada filming The Mountain Between Us. Elba surprised her with a proposal at a screening of his movie, Yardie, in London in February 2018. According to British Vogue, the pair tied the knot at the Ksar Char Bagh hotel in Marrakesh one day after hosting an extravagant rehearsal dinner at Amanjena. For their special day, Dhowre wore two custom Vera Wang gowns, while Elba looked sharp in a black suit by Ozwald Boateng.

ET has learned that the Dancing With the Stars duo tied the knot on the evening of April 13 at Terranea Resort in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, surrounded by their family, friends and fellow dancers. The blushing bride wowed in a fitted white wedding dress by Vera Wang that featured sheer sleeves and turtleneck. Her hair was swept in an elegant updo and had a beautiful crystal hairpiece and long veil designed by Bridal Styles Boutique, according to People. Val looked equally charming, suiting up in a classic tux from Brooks Brothers. (The dress is actually the first one Johnson tried on while filming an episode of Say Yes to the Dress at the famous Kleinfeld Bridal shop.) As the pair exchanged their vows, their family members and closest pals stood by their side. Chmerkovskiy's brother, Maksim Chmerkovskiy, served as Best Man, while Johnson's sisters Jillian and Stacy Johnson, fellow DWTS pro Lindsay Arnold and SYTYCD alum Gaby Diaz made up the bridal party.

The fashion icon tied the knot with the model-turned-candlemaker in New York City on April 6. After the ceremony, the newlyweds were joined by dozens of their favorite people for a luxe reception at The Grill, where festivities went on until around 3 a.m., according to an insider. Among the attendees were Lil Kim, Emily Ratajkowski, Kate Moss, Kaia Gerber, Justin Theroux, Christina Ricci, Chloe Sevigny, Rita Ora, Frank Ocean, and Bella and Gigi Hadid. "The ceremony was private and took place earlier on Saturday. Marc and his husband played video highlights of the ceremony during the reception," the source shared with ET. "It was the wedding of the year for sure. Marc and Char were so happy. They loved that their guests all dressed up so beautifully. Everyone had an amazing time and no one wanted to go home!" The pair began stepping out in public together in 2015, and Jacobs proposed to Defrancesco in the spring of 2018 with an unforgettable Chipotle flashmob.

The 25-year-old rapper, whose real name is Chancelor Bennett, married his longtime love on March 9. Corley posted a wedding photo of the two walking down the aisle on her private Instagram account, writing, "Mr. and Mrs," while the "No Problem" rapper shared his own stunning black-and-white snap two days after the wedding, captioning it simply, "the Bennetts." According to photos posted by The Shade Room, Chance's longtime friend, Kanye West, as well as West's wife, Kim Kardashian West, were in attendance. The newlyweds share a 3-year-old daughter together, Kensli, and are expecting their second child later this year. The pair got engaged last July, when Chance popped the question in front of friends and family at a Fourth of July picnic.

The former Glee star and her fiancé tied the knot in front of friends and family in Napa, California, on March 9, ET confirmed. Michele looked stunning in a white strapless gown, her hair slicked back in a sleek updo and a long veil, per People, who was first to report the news. Her pals, Becca Tobin and Darren Criss, were among the guests, and Ryan Murphy officiated the nuptials, according to US Weekly. The bride had previously announced that her best friend, Jonathan Groff, would be her maid of honor. The wedding comes a month after the actress had her bachelorette party in Hawaii. Michele and Reich were first spotted together in July 2017 and announced their engagement in April 2018.

Surprise! The "Vice" singer revealed via Instagram on Feb. 16 that she and McLoughlin, an NYPD officer, had secretly tied the knot. "In honor of Valentine’s Day I wanted to share some news. I met the love of my life. And we got hitched!" she wrote alongside two photos from her wedding day. "My heart is full. Thank you Brendan McLoughlin for loving me for.... me. ❤️ #theone." Lambert's marriage came as a shock to fans, many of whom didn't know she was dating Mcloughlin. The blonde beauty was previously married to Blake Shelton for four years before divorcing in 2015. She then dated singer Anderson East for two years, followed by Turnpike Troubadours frontman Evan Felker for six months in 2018. McLoughlin was previously engaged last year and has a 3-month-old son from a separate relationship, according to People.

The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story star said "I do" to his longtime love in New Orleans on Feb. 16, according to multiple reports. ET has reached out to Criss' rep for comment. The pair's wedding comes just over a year after they announced their engagement in January 2018. Criss' former Glee co-stars Lea Michele, Chord Overstreet, Harry Shum Jr. and John Stamos were just some of the famous faces on the star-studded guest list, People reports.

The Mötley Crüe rocker and the 32-year-old social media star celebrated Valentine's Day by getting married exactly one year after Lee, 56, proposed to his lady love. The two shared the exciting news on their Instagrams, alongside adorable photos of their dogs, Neena Da Weena and Wicket, all dressed up for the couple's nuptials. "It’s official!!!! We’re married!!! ☺️❤️MR & MRS LEE YAHOOOOOOOO," the bride wrote on her Instagram, which also showed her new last name. Lee, on his end, wrote, "Holy sh*tballs!!!! We did it!!!! Mr & Mrs Lee."

The Ace of Cakes star wed his longtime girlfriend at the Natural History Museum in Los Angeles on Jan. 19. The nuptials included a petting zoo, natural decor and a whopping five wedding cakes created by Duff's Charm City Cakes team, according to Martha Stewart Weddings. "At the end of the day you're marrying your girl," the famed pastry chef told the outlet. "There's going to be some food there -- that's cool -- family will hang out, but, honestly, everything else is just gravy." Duff proposed to Colbry in April 2018, a moment that was so impromptu that at the time, he gave his now-wife a ring out of butcher's twine.

This Bachelor is officially off the market. Luyendyk Jr. tied the knot with Burnham at Haiku Mill in Maui, Hawaii, on Jan. 12. Bachelor host Chris Harrison officiated the pair's wedding and fellow Bachelor Nation members Seinne Fleming, Marikh Mathias, Jenna Cooper and Maquel Cooper were by the couple's side, with Jenna serving as one of Burnham's bridesmaids, and many other alumni in attendance as well. A source tells ET the wedding venue was “beautiful" and Harrison officiating the wedding was both funny and emotional. The ceremony was followed by a two-hour cocktail hour and multi-course dinner -- all taking place at the same location; an old sugar mill decorated with chandeliers. For dinner, guests had prime rib and fresh local seafood, and Luyendyk's dad gave a toast during the meal. The pair are expecting their first child, a girl, later this year.