I will provide more details later but some very good questions have been brought up about the old Fire Station 16. The report Debbie Campbell asked for from See & Keenan were simply never provided as to why they shouldn't keep it as a 1st response Station and since Keenan retired before the report could be delivered, See is denying a request ever existed. I have been present at least 5 times when it was.

There were three other people here as potential buyers and as we all stood around discussing this at a break, no one believes that Station is worth much more than $250,000.00.

More to come............

Pocomoke City lost a bit of local history when the Worcester County Messenger was sold out to Nationwide Corporate Giant Gannett, then rolled into the Worcester County Times, AKA Ocean City Times. In reading through the web based content with letters to the Editor I noted two letters of support for Bruce Morrison in his bid for re-election to the Pocomoke City Council last Tuesday April 1st.

The letters of support were published in the Ocean Pines Independent. WOW Does anyone check what they print there?

Click here to read them, they are very nice and supportive but a little bit late.

I find it incredulous that this publisher does not proof read advertising nor do they check content for context or if it is even in the correct publication.

Yes we supported Councilman Bruce Morrison in his election bid and its nice to see that Reverend Greg Powell wrote a nice letter of support and that Jimmy Hammond on behalf of the Pocomoke Fire Dept supported one of their own.

I am baffled as to who in Ocean Pines really cares about a Pocomoke City Municipal election and why these were not published last week in the Worchester County Times?

This is just one more example of what happens to a small town when they sell their souls & community assets to big business getting nothing for the community in return.

Entertainment Line-Up Released

(Salisbury, MD) Do you love Bar-B-Que, the great outdoors and free live entertainment? The Wicomico County Department of Recreation, Parks and Tourism is excited to announce the schedule of its fifth annual Pork in the Park Bar-B-Que and Beer Festival to be held at Winterplace Park in Salisbury, MD on April 18-20, 2008.

Friday (4:00pm-10:00pm)

4pm Chris English

6pm The Bonedaddies

8pm The Couch Potatoes

Saturday (10:00am-10:00pm)

10:30am Mitchell’s Marshall Arts Demo

11am Feet of Fire Dance Co.

11am Red Knights Motorcycle Show

11:30am Northpointe Tabernacle Youth

1pm On the Edge

3:30pm Wi-Hi Steppers

4pm Jon Bolin, Acoustic Guitar

4:30pm Red Knights Motorcycle Awards

5pm KCBS BBQ Awards Ceremony

6pm Crawdaddies

8pm Tom Principato

Sunday (11:00am-5:00pm)

11am Squelin’ Wheels Car Show

11:30am Mitchell’s Marshall Arts Demo

12pm Jon Bolin, Acoustic Guitar

1pm Crossroads

3pm Julius Curcio

Strolling entertainers, including the Amazing Justini and Magician Chuck Flayhart will bring family-fun throughout the whole festival.

The festival is open from 4pm to 10pm on Friday, April 18, 10:00am to 10:00pm on Saturday and 11:00am to 5:00pm on Sunday. Admission is only $2 per person, and children under twelve are free.

The Pork in the Park National Bar-B-Que Cook-Off is sanctioned by the Kansas City Barbeque Society and sponsored by Wicomico County Recreation, Parks and Tourism as well as French’s, Harley Davidson of Ocean City, Perdue, Saturn of Salisbury, Farmer’s Bank of Willards, Comcast Spotlight, Delmarva Power, Pepsi, Froggy 99.9, Q105, Holt Paper, Clear Channel Outdoor, and WMDT 47.

For more information please visit www.PorkinthePark.org. If you would like to learn more about other upcoming programs offered by the Wicomico County Recreation, Parks and Tourism Department sign up for Recreation email alerts at www.wicomicorecandparks.org.

"Walk Hard:The Dewey Cox Story"(starring John C.Reilly) is among this weeks DVD releases and having seen it, I have to say it was as bad as I expected but in a good way-it spoofs practically ever "Behind the Music"-style movie about the rise and fall of a famed musician that has ever been made. It borrows heavily from "Walk the Line" and also incorporates scenes from others like "The Doors".

Any "rock star-movie" cliche you can think of is satired here. Look for cameos from very famous faces, including a hilarious turn as a young Elvis by musician Jack White and Jack Black as Paul McCartney. I loved this movie but sadly admit some people will not find it funny. BTW, the unrated DVD version has a gratuitous male full-frontal nudity shot in deference to "Boogie Nights" (John C.Reilly also starred in this!)but this guy is not as developed as Dirk Diggler.

As each decade brings a different music style, Dewey adapts and does a "crossover" between stints in rehab. Hysterically funny movie!

Available in widescreen.

Other Theatrical Releases this week:

"There will be blood"-deleted scenes on DVD

"The Water Horse: Legend of the Deep"- widescreen DVD

"Lions for Lambs"-widescreen DVD

Classic re-releases

"The 6th Day"-Bluray release

"All about Eve"(1950)-2 disc DVD set

Tv on DVD

"Matlock-The 1st Season"-7 disc DVD set

"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles-Season Six" Animated TV series on DVD

Also,George Romeros' "Day of the Dead" remake (2007) will be released this week on DVD,it stars Ving Rhames,Nick Cannon,and Mena Suvari(American Beauty). A must-see for true horror-philes.

Boy, people are passionate about their opinions. Here is what is correct. It IS economically feasible to place solar panels on a commercial application. Even with the lousy rebates in Maryland, it makes good economic sense AND--it is the RIGHT thing to do. I should know, I own the Wash 'N Vac Car Wash on Northwood Drive that was referenced in this piece.

I have a solar water heating system to aid in wash water heating that will pay back in less than three years, including the $2k rebate from the state.

The solar electric system is 6.3kW. This system will pay back in 10-12 years, maybe sooner if electric rates keep going up.....oops, I mean as electric rates continue to go up. The rebate from the state is $5k. I will also be able to sell renewable energy credits back to the power company. The details of that are still being worked out. Anyhow, the solar panels have a full 25 year warranty, the inverter has a ten year warranty. Where can this go wrong? I think the Sun is going to keep shining.

We also recycle part of our water; up to 50%. These are the right things to do as business people. It is a win, win.

I wanted to place more solar electric panels on this roof, but have decided to install some at my two Delaware locations. Delaware rebates 50% of the system costs up to $250k. The pay back will be much quicker there.

Brian Dayton

Wash 'N Vac, Inc.

P.O. Box 959

Seaford, DE 19973

Brian, THANK YOU! I have been trying to make this point for a good year or more and they always have excuses/lies. Wisdom and experience is what was needed to settle the minds of the Taxpayers and even though my Father In Law proved this years ago in the Library Downtown, having someone else come on board and share their experience is what was really needed. The Mayor and Fire Chief have once again failed the Taxpayers.

A very good friend in the mortgage business told me that a LOT of banks are freezing peoples home equity lines and lines of credit due to the nationwide foreclosure rate and real estate market, and the fact Maryland has been placed in a "declining market".

An example of what a travesty this is would be a couple that uses that line to pay for their kids education, after they worked to pay down their primary mortgage. No funds any longer. The same with retired people, they have a small mortgage (can't qualify to get another) yet have lived responsibly, and now have that "line" for emergencies and to live from, but they have found it's no longer honored.

These decisions are based on what's called a "declining market", which I am told all of Maryland is in. This is one of the standards the lenders look at.

Now, if a lender has not already done this, some people have "cashed out their line", or equity in full, for fear this is going to happen, and put it in an under funded savings account, which now puts the lender in more of a profitable position, and putting the person in a real debt, with payments that otherwise would not have happened. All of this is just compounding the position of once a strong country, now in DEBT more than ever, and growing.

IF this is happening as much as I am told, I sure hope the average person knows it's a possibility, because not everyone over financed, over spent, but considered these line of credits good planning, to now have the rug pulled from under them could be a real hardship. Just another step to sending the current economy into the worst free fall for the last 75 years.

Legislation opposed by both MML and the Maryland Association of Counties (MACo) cleared the House of Delegates and was heard in the Senate Judicial Proceedings Committee last week. Testifying in opposition to the bill was MML's Director of Government Relations Candace Donoho, MACo Executive Director David Bliden and a representative of Baltimore City's Office of the Solicitor. HB 16 extends the time required to file a claim against a local government from six months to one year. MML cited increased exposure to lawsuits, potential increased legal fees and increased insurance costs as reasons the bill would hurt local governments. The legislation will be voted on by the full Senate committee this week.

[source: Maryland Municipal League e-bulletin of March 31, 2008]

Talk about Absurd!

Case #: 08-133, 08-570, 08-657, 08-707 and 08-859

Incident: Malicious Destruction of Property (MDOP)

Charged: Two (2) juveniles, 14 yoa white male and 16 yoa AA male

During the month of March, both juveniles sprayed-painted several buildings, sheds, dumpsters and construction trailers in the Fruitland area. Subjects were released to the custody of their parents.

* * * * *

Case #: 08-818

Incident: MDOP and Theft

Charged: TROY ALAN CALLOWAY Buena Vista Ave, Salisbury, MD

W/M, DOB: 10/25/75

An Arrest Warrant was served on April 5, 2008 for charges pertaining to the MDOP and theft from soda machines in Fruitland.

We were told it wasn't cost effective for the Salisbury Fire Department, (a $10,000,000.00 Fire Station) to go green and save taxpayers money by going solar. OK, so do tell me how this local Car Wash was able to do so and let me assure you, they don't have $10,000,000.00 invested into that building! I'll add, the Wicomico County Library in Downtown Salisbury also went Solar.

What say you now Chief See and Deputy Chief Gordy?????????

Furthermore:

OK, now that the BS has been spread by See & Gordy, NOW here's some FACTS and TRUTH.

Ladies & Gentlemen, when the Library Downtown was taken over, they had a 6,000 gallon boiler system in there costing the taxpayers $6,000.00 a year in oil. That was for the original 24,000 square foot building.

My Father In Law had Solar Panels installed back in, (ARE YOU READY) 1978 when they expanded the building to more than 50,000 square feet!

That being said, the solar panels, (which are STILL there today) covered 75% of the heating bills from that point forward and the oil heating system, which kicked in below 30 degrees only cost the taxpayers $1,200.00 PER YEAR after the solar panels were installed.

Yes, I waited till some of the Idiots got on here to defend why they DIDN'T install solar panels because I wanted to show just how stupid and uninformed they really are.

Many businesses are going solar because it makes sense! Barrie, See & Gordy don't care about YOUR tax dollars and the Library is living proof they're liars in more ways than one.

I guess I'll be seeing yet another lawsuit coming soon because every time I'm right about something and it makes them look really bad, they sue me. Oh well, I'm up for it.

Wymzie has started her own blog. I think I need a place to write about my many other interests other than politics.

As opinionated as I am, I feel strongly about a variety of issues and a political blog is not always the place to share them.

My blog will focus on my experiences and other woman who can identify with me. I will post topics regarding gardening, motherhood, spirituality, friendships, beekeeping, birdwatching, great recipes, the arts, living in mid-life, having an aged grandfather, and all of the wonderful things I learn from him, owning an old home, sex, marriage, great books I have or am reading and poetry, and car repair for girls.

All around life issues from the world according to wymzie.

I hope that all of you will check it out. Contribute to it, and share with me any ideas that you may have to make it a better, more fun, relevant and informative place to be .

I will continue to contribute to the Pocomoke Tattler, and to SalisburyNews.com, but I often times have writing that I have wanted to share and a political forum is just not the place to do so.

You can find me by Clicking on wymzie.blogspot.com

Hope to see you all there!!!

The Ben Layton Memorial Committee, whose members consist of Team in Training for the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society participants, are holding a Silent Auction this Wednesday, April 9th. The Silent Auction will be by invitation only and will be held at the Cactus Taverna from 6:30 to 9pm. All proceeds will go to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.

This event is the first of two this year, with the second being the Ben Layton Memorial 5k run on Saturday, April 26th.

You don't like the title, turn off this Site!

Now I'm mad! I learned this morning that the City of Salisbury, Mayor Barrie Tilghman, Chief See and Deputy Chief Gordy are ONCE AGAIN trying to FIRE yet another 18 year veteran of the City, Mr. David Merritt of the Salisbury Fire Department.

That's right Folks. Here's yet another victim of their bullshit brotherhood crap where they'll do anything to advance and forget where they came from. They did it to my Wife after 18 years too.

If ANY ONE OF YOU have had the pleasure of getting to know this man, they do not come any finer! Dedication, honorable, fair and a true Brother, yet his Brothers are standing there watching yet ANOTHER person fall and get screwed by the system and those dumb Idiots just stand there and watch because they're getting flat screen tv's and new Fire Trucks as well as a new station.

So please, each and every one of you pieces of sh!t, don't come on here and talk Brotherhood to me. And as far as See & Gordy go, game on, you pieces of sh!t! Thank God your fat asses never got hurt on the job so bad you couldn't perform 100%, right?

I have lost all respect for these two and as it was my goal to rid of John Jacobs, Jim Rapp & Carrie Samis, See & Gordy are now next. Oh, if you think it's not possible, just look at Jacobs, Rapp & Samis. I'm batting a thousand!

If you missed the past couple of games, you also missed the Fireworks! Above are some samples of the fantastic show they put off the other night.

One dedicated Fan showed up to the Shorebirds game yesterday but was obviously disappointed when there was no Usher standing there to wipe off his seat. But hey, wait a minute, where are the Players too? The game was rained out unfortunately and some went home to their crossword puzzles and blogs instead. Not to worry thought, the Shorebirds will be home again this Friday. In the mean time you can go out and watch a local Band play? NOT!

The Salisbury Fire Department has ordered a new Tower Truck and apparently two new Engines as well. The new Deputy Chief (Hoppes) wanted the color changed to Chicago black over red. Yeah, that should be well seen! Do these Idiots know why the colors RED and Green are used in the first place?

The Sheriff's Department was ragged on the other day because of their black Chargers. There is the element of surprise necessary with those vehicles. However, I don't believe the element of surprise should be a part of the Fire Department, do you?

Let's stick with the two additional Engines ordered the other day. We were all aware of the $1,200,000.00 Ladder Truck. However, there's been NO MENTION of two additional Engines? Uh oh, did I just OUT SCOOP the Daily Times again?

Deputy Chief Gordy did mention they were going to replace them all when we did the tour through the new Fire Station but I didn't realize the City of Salisbury was so rich right now that they could afford to purchase even more multi million dollar vehicles?

Like I said in an earlier Post. This is up to you Folks now. We can only do so much here at Salisbury News. Once again, even after a very lengthy conversation with Greg Bassett the other day, the Daily Times article stated the Fire House was once again at $8,000,000.00 and now the actual $10,000,000.00. Perhaps the additional $2,000,000.00 difference is in purchasing all these new Fire Trucks?

All in all Folks, while the United States is going broke and the State of Maryland is raising their taxes, as well as the City of Salisbury, are you Idiots just going to sit there and take this crap day in and day out? Well, are you?

Friends,

Tonight at midnight, the 2008 General Assembly Session comes to a close. In short that means for the next 9 months you can relax because the politicians in Annapolis cannot continue their assault on your wallets.

During the last 89 days, I fought against tax increases. I fought against the radical liberal Democrats continued assaults on our personal liberty. Liberal Democrats showed once again they believe the government knows how to spend your money better they you do. They continued to show they believe that the government knows the best way for you to live your life more than you do. In contrast, I believe you know how to spend your money better than the government does. I also believe that you know what is best for you, not the government.

These are clear philosophical differences between radical liberal Democrats and common-sense conservative Republicans. I will continue to fight for common-sense conservative principles right up until midnight tonight.

With your help, I hope today marks my last day in the General Assembly Session. Next January, I hope you will give me the pleasure of representing you as your member of Congress.

God Bless,

Andy

APRIL 7, 2008

ROOM 305 - GOVERNMENT OFFICE BUILDING

4:30 p.m. Presentation for Dalian, China to become a Sister City to Salisbury, Maryland – Sister Cities Association of Salisbury/Wicomico County (George Whitehead/Derek Wu)

5:00 p.m. Affordable Housing and Revitalization Fund proposal – Councilwoman Deborah Campbell

5:45 p.m. Review of RFP for old Fire Station #16 – Karen Reddersen

6:10 p.m. Review of RFP for efficiency study on Internal Services Department – Pam Oland

6:35 p.m. Appropriations

• Update from Administration on supplemental appropriations and discussion of Council-Administration joint plans

• Ensuring compliance with State law on supplemental appropriations

7:05 p.m. Establishing a policy for City involvement in litigation (introduction)

7:15 p.m. Discussion – posting work session minutes on web site

I'm told if you go to the Briefing Book you'll learn this scam of a Mayor is planning on proposing to offer the building not to the highest bidder but to the person willing to do exactly what the City wants them to do with the building.

Ladies & Gentlemen, don't let this one lie. You must do something about this woman as they'll do anything for the FOB's and anything to keep me out, similar to the Mounted Patrol Horses, purchasing a surplus Fire Truck and yes, even a Grandparents Membership to the Zoo. To take it a step further, they'll even sue me for no good reason.

Before Barrie Tilghman GIVES away the City before she leaves, you need to stop her from playing these games. Now, if you don't care, so be it. It's only a building to me. If you liked that staged picture I had up months ago showing what the Art's people want to do with it, go for it.

I'm tired of doing ALL of your fighting, along with the rest of the original Dirty Dozen, as we were named. It's time for you people to start acting responsible and get out of those diapers.

More to come on the Fire House.

This Wednesday Station 7 in Pittsville will be holding a fundraiser to benefit Tommy Forsythe, an 11 year old who has a rare form of Leukemia. Tommy is the son of a Maryland State Trooper. The fundraiser starts at 6pm and goes till close. 10% of sales will go to help his family with medical expenses and there will be give-a-ways as well.