Help us continue to cover more Australian films by making a donation to Cinema Australia.

Production has commenced on survival thriller The Reef: Stalked from creature feature master Andrew Traucki.

Traucki’s credits include The Reef, Black Water and Black Water: Abyss.

Filming is underway in Bowen in The Whitsundays, with the region’s tropical landscape and beautiful reefs doubling for the story’s location in the islands off Papua New Guinea.

Written and directed by Traucki, the film is produced by Neal Kingston, Michael Robertson and Jack Christian.

“I’m thrilled The Reef: Stalked is in production and back to Bowen where we shot parts of The Reef eleven years ago,” Traucki said.

“As a lover of survival tales, there is nothing I enjoy more than storytelling that pits humans against nature and asks the question ‘how would I survive?’. In this genre, there’s nothing scarier to the audience than encountering an apex predator, one of the sea’s most magnificent creatures, the great white shark.”

Starring Australian actors Teressa Liane (Neighbours, The Vampire Diaries), Ann Truong (Cowboy Bebop, Strike Back), Kate Lister (Unhinged, Fox Trap) and newcomer Saskia Archer, the story follows four girlfriends on a kayaking and diving adventure that goes horribly wrong, and draws on themes of resilience, healing from trauma and strength in sisterhood and female friendship.

In the tradition of 47 Metres Down, The Shallows, and like its predecessor, The Reef: Stalked plays with our most primal fear of the deep, being eaten alive and of terrifying predators lurking unseen somewhere below.

The voracious appetite for genre thrillers has Thrills & Spills producing partners Michael Robertson and Neal Kingston on their toes and happy to keep audiences well fed. “We’re excited to be filming The Reef: Stalked in the same week Great White hits the cinemas in Australia and with our new partnership with Filmology Finance, we plan to bring many more thrills to the theatres and the fans.”

The Reef: Stalked is produced by Thrills & Spills and financed by Filmology Finance, with world sales (excluding Australia/New Zealand) handled by AMP International. The film is slated for release in 2022.