"Kneecap" (R)

At the Myrna Loy

Grade: A-

The future extinguishes the past.

We’re all familiar with the battle to preserve endangered species. Our own 800 Montana grizzly bears are on the list of threatened creatures.

Living in Montana, we’re also aware of the battle to preserve native land and native culture. And occasional glimpses of Hutterites reminds us of their dedication to preserving their culture.

On the world stage, there’s a movement to revitalize and speak dying languages, which parallels efforts to preserve indigenous cultures. Scholars have identified 7,000 “living languages.” They warn that languages are dying off rapidly.

One such language is embedded on a well-watered island.

“Kneecap” is a film about preserving the Gaelic language, a movement closely tied to the long history of Irish political, religious and cultural struggles.

Rich Peppiatt’s “Kneecap” is not a tedious documentary about linguistic evolution, however.

Instead, “Kneecap” is a wild comedy about Belfast rappers – Mo, Moglai and DJ – who use unprintable lyrics and contagious rhythm to protest the slow fading of their traditional Irish language.

The rappers do not sing in the King’s English, of course: Their outrage is often spewed in colorful Gaelic.

Needless to say, their protests upset the tea-sipping set.

Honoring an actual band, and starring the band’s three members, the loosely historical “Kneecap” gleefully and irreverently recounts this linguistic rap revolution.

Articles about the Kneecap band proudly boast that they have been “banned by Irish State Broadcaster RTE, kicked out of their own headline show in Dublin and publicly condemned by the political party the DUP (Democratic Unionist Party).”

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack

“Kneecap” refuses to tidy up the tale, choosing instead to be as random and unfocused as the three gents themselves. One was a teacher and the others were, well, in their own words: “Low-life scum.”

Initially, no one cares about them or their music. They play in sleepy Belfast pubs to the snores of bored elders.

But a young bartender loves what she hears and passes on a viral video to a booker. Soon they are playing to screaming young believers ready to guzzle their Guinness and join the Gaelic revolution.

Meanwhile, the cops are circling the hip hop trio, with concerns about drugs, crimes and disrespect of the crown. Guilty on all counts, of course, but the show goes on.

“Kneecap” requires a European sensibility, I would say. Even when our heroes speak in English, we welcome subtitles to follow the flow. Thankfully, their Gaelic is always translated.

What emerges is a musical call to arms. Like the best of rap, their songs demand full body response – or, at least, the tapping of the feet. If toes don’t move, check for a pulse.

I suspect this movie will be loved by those who belly up to the bar at Kelly’s Cellars in Belfast.

Kelly’s was built in 1720, and it’s alive with the ghosts of Irish history. A member of the 1798 Irish rising supposedly hid under the bar when British soldiers came for him.

I’ve visited Kelly’s, which takes pride in missing the Irish train to progress. A Dublin friend warned me not to talk politics. He said that to be an American was mostly safe, but if I wandered around Belfast I should not linger in front of political murals, colorfully painted on sides of buildings.

I did witness a student protest in Belfast.

A half-dozen students with tame signs were stationed outside government buildings. I walked by and continued down a side street.

As I rounded the corner, just out of sight of the students, I saw a well-armed Garda vehicle, with room for many passengers. Designated drivers, perhaps?

On that day, nothing happened.

Irish history remains in the present tense throughout the green island.

It’s reassuring to see art addressing urgent issues – and it’s delightful that this script speaks the language of youth, rather than being an academic snore-fest.

I’ve met many Irish youth who take pride in being fluent in Gaelic, and will greet me accordingly, if invited.

Only if the young learn to speak Gaelic, will the language live on.

Rap on, Kneecap, rap on.

Marketing tip to the Myrna staff: Irish beer on tap this week, perhaps? Dark?

Brent Northup has been reviewing movies for 48 years in Helena, Seattle and Houston. He is a professor of communication and journalism at Carroll College.

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

Stay up-to-date on what's happening

Receive the latest in local entertainment news in your inbox weekly!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.