Download the app

educalingo

Search

No acting, no production, could take the place of that moment when you come out in the dark on to the stage and the drummer plays four beats on the hi-hat and then lights and music. It just takes your breath away. No words can do what music can.

Ken Stott

Meaning of "hi-hat" in the English dictionary

DICTIONARY

PRONUNCIATION OF HI-HAT

WHAT DOES HI-HAT MEAN IN ENGLISH?

Hi-hat

A hi-hat, or hihat, is a type of cymbal and stand used as a typical part of a drum kit by percussionists in R&B, hip-hop, disco, jazz, metal, rock and roll, house, reggae and other forms of contemporary popular music. It is a standard part of the modern drum kit. The hi-hat consists of two cymbals that are mounted on a stand, one on top of the other, and a pedal which can be used to clash and hold the cymbals together.

WORDS THAT BEGIN LIKE HI-HAT

hihi techhi-defhi-fihi-fi systemhi-tec(h)hi-techHialeahhianthiatalhiatal herniahiatushiatus herniaHiawathaHibhibachihibakushahibernaclehibernaculahibernacules

WORDS THAT END LIKE HI-HAT

all that

and all that

and that

as all that

be all that

been-there done-that

chat

for all that

hard-hat

hat

high-hat

I know what

in order that

in that

in the event that

like that

lum-hat

on condition that

re-hat

white-hat

Synonyms and antonyms of hi-hat in the English dictionary of synonyms

SYNONYMS

WORDS RELATING TO «HI-HAT»

hi-hat film sound stand light gordy choreographer coffee fish hihat type cymbal used typical part drum percussionists disco jazz metal rock roll house reggae other forms contemporary popular music standard lounge home continues forefront milwaukee craft cocktail movement while garage carries over beers open brunch public austin texas serving freshest contact more info rights reserved webpage designed michael gonzales photography design guitar center results enjoy lowest prices best selection most orders eligible shipping famous hamburgers since opened marilyn lundqust still independently owned operated

Translation of «hi-hat» into 25 languages

TRANSLATOR

TRANSLATION OF HI-HAT

Find out the translation of hi-hat to 25 languages with our English multilingual translator.

The translations of hi-hat from English to other languages presented in this section have been obtained through automatic statistical translation; where the essential translation unit is the word «hi-hat» in English.

Trends of use of hi-hat

TRENDS

FREQUENCY OF USE OF THE TERM «HI-HAT» OVER TIME

The graph expresses the annual evolution of the frequency of use of the word «hi-hat» during the past 500 years. Its implementation is based on analysing how often the term «hi-hat» appears in digitalised printed sources in English between the year 1500 and the present day.

Examples of use in the English literature, quotes and news about hi-hat

EXAMPLES

2 QUOTES WITH «HI-HAT»

Famous quotes and sentences with the word hi-hat.

1

Ken Stott

No acting, no production, could take the place of that moment when you come out in the dark on to the stage and the drummer plays four beats on the hi-hat and then lights and music. It just takes your breath away. No words can do what music can.

2

Robert Wyatt

When I lost the use of my hi-hat and bass drum legs, I became basically a singer. I was a drummer who did a bit of singing, and then I became a singer who did a bit of percussion.

10 ENGLISH BOOKS RELATING TO «HI-HAT»

Discover the use of hi-hat in the following bibliographical selection. Books relating to hi-hat and brief extracts from same to provide context of its use in English literature.

1

Guide to Vintage Drums

No one is quite sure how the Hi-hat grew out of the Low boy, but by 1928, Ludwig , Slingerland and other companies showed both Hi-hats and Low boy stands. Papa Jo Jones stated that he had invented the Hi-Hat in 1926 out of necessity ( he ...

John Aldridge, 1994

2

The Cymbal Book

Even a small collection of hi-hat cymbals provides the owner with numerous sound combinations. Having two different bottom cymbals and one top, for instance, will make two quite different pairs of hi-hats. Combining hi-hats from different ...

Hugo Pinksterboer, Rick Mattingly, 1992

3

Nuts and Bolts Filmmaking: Practical Techniques for the ...

Containing construction details describing how to replicate expensive tools for under $30 a piece, this book provides quick and inexpensive remedies to both the most common and most difficult production challenges.

Dan Rahmel, 2014

4

Drums For Dummies

Rhythm 3 has a double bass drum stroke that you play at the same time as both a hi-hat beat (right hand) and a ghost note (left hand). The coordination that you use to play this rhythm is similar to the sixteenth-note pattern from Figure 8-9 (see ...

Jeff Strong, 2011

5

Bass Drum Essentials for the Drumset

Heel Down, 2. Heel Up 9 THE HI-HAT 10 Adjusting the Tension of the Hi-Hat Pedal 10 Two Fundamental Techniques for Playing the Hi-Hat: 1. Heel-Toe, 2. Toe 10 Playing the Hi-Hat with a Stick 12 General Practice Tips 12 The Drummer/ Bass ...

Dave Black, Brian Fullen, 2001

6

Drum Backbeats Encyclopedia: Hundreds of Useful Backbeats ...

... OSTINATOSll The Hi-Hat Groovesl2 Part ... Hi-Hat Development Exercises with ; More lnvolved Groove, Mixing Eights and Sixteenths Part ...

John Thomakos, 2001

7

The Art of Bop Drumming

The. Bass. Drum. &. Hi-hat. There has been much discussion in recent years about whether or not the jazz drummer should play quarter-notes on the bass drum (commonly referred to as "feathering"). All "bop" drummers played time on the ...

John Riley, Dan Thress, 1994

8

Jungle/Drum 'n' Bass for the Acoustic Drum Set: A Guide to ...

Gear needed for this chapter: kick, snare, hi-hat, and ride cymbal. You can set up a drum kit with only these pieces to practice this section: The following hi-hat techniques and exercises will expand your sound possibilities for all exercises ...

Johnny Rabb, 2001

9

The Erskine Method for Drumset

In many of the following exercises, the hi-hat will be played as follows: the left foot will depress and hold down the pedal, while the right hand plays quarter-note or eighth-note rhythms with a drumstick on the closed hi-hat cymbals. You will ...

‎2004

10

Rock Drums for Beginners

.xteenth-Note Hi-Hat & Cymbal Beat: A great way to create excitement in a beat is by playing sixteenth notes on the hi-hat. This can be achieved in two ways. You can play hi-hat sixteenth notes on the closed hi-hat as single strokes of the sticks ...

Pete Sweeney, 2002

10 NEWS ITEMS WHICH INCLUDE THE TERM «HI-HAT»

Find out what the national and international press are talking about and how the term hi-hat is used in the context of the following news items.

1

Dustin Lancaster & Co. Take Over Grungy Highland Park Billiards …

As for what Hi-Hat will eventually morph into, there are no official plans yet. Apparently the spot was too good to pass up for Lancaster and team ... «Eater LA, Jul 15»

2

New features at Tales of the Cocktail

... featuring four different venues all working together: Cure, Company Burger, Publiq House, Hi-Hat that will all be featuring special cocktails. «WGNO, Jul 15»

3

Awesome first tracks: 29 perfect album openers

The Strokes - 'Is This It' (Is This It, 2001): The first few seconds of loose hi-hat work tell us more about the whole album than the rest of the song. «Gigwise, Jul 15»

4

Archt One all-in-one speaker review: Call this one the anti-stereo

The hi-hat on the opening of Steely Dan's “Jack of Speed,” from the band's Two Against Nature release, came across with all the sizzle it should ... «TechHive, Jul 15»

5

BOSTON: Rents Put Squeeze on Black, Chinese Elders

“This right here used to be a nightclub,” said “Spider” Edwards, 85, recalling the old Hi-Hat club where Count Basie and other jazz luminaries ... «New America Media, Jul 15»

6

Soundtrack, Various Artists, 'Bessie (Music from the HBO Film …

Back then, for instance, producers hadn't yet discovered how to record drums. Today, with every hi-hat ping or crisp trebly rim shot on the snare, ... «Classicalite, Jul 15»

7

360 First Spins: Ghostface Killah, Years & Years,...

Reuniting the original lineup for their first album together since 1997, “Ghost Notes” rides driving guitars, hi-hat tics and snotty “oh-way-oh” ... «austin360, Jul 15»

8

Doppler Labs wants to change how you listen to concerts with …

The system will also target specific frequencies with anti-noise to further suppress, say, the frequencies of a baby crying, or an overactive hi-hat ... «The Verge, Jul 15»

9

Mix Regional Sessions: Bay Area

Autie used the four preamps from Apollo for the three toms and the hi-hat, and the preamp UA 4-710d for the kick, snare and room mics. «MIX, Jul 15»

10

Great Drummers Break Down Ringo Starr's Style With The Rock …

Taylor Hawkins imitates Ringo's hi-hat playing by swinging his arm while describing his movements, “It kind of washes the windshield on the ... «Zumic, Jul 15»