Hypertension or high blood pressure is a common condition impacting nearly half of U.S adults. High blood pressure is consistently 130/80 mmHg or above. It occurs when your blood pushes against the walls of your blood vessels with excessive force. It forces your heart to work harder and weakens the inside of your arteries, which can lead to life-threatening conditions like heart attack and stroke.

Many different factors cause high blood pressure, including your lifestyle, family history, genetics and existing health conditions.

Fortunately, you can bring your numbers down with a few simple lifestyle changes. A recent study by the Journal of the American Heart Association found you may help improve your blood pressure with five minutes of breathing exercises six days per week. By strength-training their breathing muscles, test subjects experienced similar improvements than if they walked 30 minutes per day or took blood pressure medication. Many patients look to lower blood pressure through breathing as an alternative to medication.

Breath control therapy relaxes your involuntary nervous system, helping regulate your heart and other bodily functions. This guide includes several breathing techniques to help lower your blood pressure and improve your health.

Sama Vritti, or equal breathing as some call it, focuses on taking consistent breaths. This exercise aims to clear your mind and balance your body. It’s a breathing technique that has a calming effect that reduces stress and slows down your heart, helping stabilize your blood pressure.

You can perform this exercise anywhere you feel comfortable at any time. It’s especially effective at helping you relax before bed since insomnia, sleep apnea and lack of sleep may lead to high blood pressure.

Sama Vritti is extremely simple and only takes a few minutes. Here’s how you do it:

Rest in a quiet space that feels comfortable. Close your eyes and relax your entire body.

Slowly inhale through your nose while silently counting to four.

Hold your breath to the count of four.

Exhale through your mouth to the count of four.

Rest without taking a breath for another count of four before starting over.

Repeat this breathing cycle two to six times per day.

If you have a hard time breathing, lower the count to two or three seconds until it feels more manageable. The key is to maintain an equal ratio.

Take a deep breath and fill your abdomen with air. There should be little to no movement in your chest.

As you become more comfortable with Sama Vritti, you can repeat this exercise for up to 10 minutes.

Consider these tips to make the equal breathing exercise more relaxing and effective: