Man of the Moment (1935 film) — Man of the Moment Directed by Monty Banks Produced by Irving Asher Written by Yves Mirande (play) Guy Bolton Starring … Wikipedia

Man of the Moment — may refer to: Man of the Moment (1935 film), starring Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and Laura La Plante Man of the Moment (1955 film), featuring Norman Wisdom Man of the Moment (play), a 1990 play by Alan Ayckbourn Man of the Moment, a horse which won… … Wikipedia

The Man with the Golden Arm (novel) — The Man with the Golden Arm is a novel by Nelson Algren that recounts the life of Frankie Machine , a card dealer in an illicit poker game being run not far from the tenement in which he lives. Machine is a morphine junkie just back to Chicago s… … Wikipedia

The Masque of the Red Death (film) — The Masque of the Red Death Film poster by Reynold Brown Directed by Roger Corman … Wikipedia

One Good Turn (1955 film) — One Good Turn is a 1955 British comedy film directed by John Paddy Carstairs and starring Norman Wisdom, Joan Rice, Shirley Abicair and Thora Hird.[1] Norman tries to raise money for the orphanage where he grew up and where he now works as a… … Wikipedia

Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (film) — For the 1971 film, see Willy Wonka the Chocolate Factory. Charlie and the Chocolate Factory Theatrical release poster Directed by … Wikipedia

The Caine Mutiny (film) — Infobox Film name = The Caine Mutiny image size = 225px caption = original film poster director = Edward Dmytryk producer = Stanley Kramer writer = Herman Wouk (novel) Stanley Roberts Michael Blankfort (add l dialogue) starring = Humphrey Bogart… … Wikipedia

The Pit and the Pendulum (1961 film) — Infobox Film name = The Pit and the Pendulum image size = caption = Original 1961 theatrical release poster by Reynold Brown director = Roger Corman producer = Roger Corman James H. Nicholson (Exec Prod) Samuel Z. Arkoff (Exec Prod) writer =… … Wikipedia

The Man in the White Suit — L Homme au complet blanc L Homme au complet blanc Titre original The Man in the White Suit Réalisation Alexander Mackendrick Acteurs principaux Alec Guinness Joan Greenwood Scénario John Dighton Alexander Mackendrick Roger MacDougall d après la… … Wikipédia en Français

Not So Quiet on the Western Front (film) — Not So Quiet on the Western Front is a 1930 British comedy film directed by Monty Banks and starring Leslie Fuller, Mona Goya and Wilfred Temple.[1] It was made by British International Pictures. Its title is a reference to All Quiet on the… … Wikipedia