On its surface, The Mob is a smart, tightly plotted movie about heroic cops disrupting waterfront corruption. Its emotional heart, however, is found in the relationship between Johnny Damico (Broderick Crawford) and Tom Clancy (Richard Kiley), two men who first come together as longshoremen living in the same flophouse only to, eventually, discover that they're also both cops, working undercover on various aspects on the same corrupt racket.

No matter the personas they're wearing at a given particular moment, though, there's an uncanny connection between the burly, gruff Damico and the slight, teasing Clancy. They're wary of one another but they're also instantly intrigued, both drawn to the other by curiosity and a desire for intelligent conversation, conversation that, almost always, has…

"I have to go underground. You know, like gophers and Communists."

A reasonably entertaining precursor to similar storytelling in On the Waterfront, Robert Parrish's The Mob starts extremely strong with a rain-drenched murder and never quite regains its footing, at least not to the degree that I would hope for in a film chosen by Eddie Muller for TCM's Noir Alley. Even so, despite the merely okay plot and lack of emotional investment, if you think you'd enjoy seeing tough cop Broderick Crawford masquerading as a dockhand (he gets a few good zingers in courtesy of screenwriter William Bowers), a mild investigation into corrupt longshoremen and police (it was never as incisive as I wanted), some brief flirtation with sort-of-femme…

A beer and a glass of white wine just sounds awful. I was glad to hear Crawford's undercover cop, Johnny Damico, confirm my suspicions. I don't know that I could maintain my generally warm feelings for the Big Easy if I thought that was truly a local favorite.

This is the second Robert Parrish directed film I've seen, and the screenplay was by William Bowers in Cry Danger as well. This is a tight little crime film about corruption among longshoremen, and while it doesn't quite match their other pairing, it's got some great dialog, spit out by Crawford, and some solid support from Richard Kiley, John Marley, Ernest Borgnine, Neville Brand, and Matt Crowley.

In short, Damico fouls up…

Payphones don't exist much anymore and that's a shame. No more phone booths in crime movies.

Crime movies always seem to have a phone booth scene.

With no new ones, we will have to appreciate the great ones we have: They are small wonders that put us right into the mind of the protagonist. The director goes in close on the actor's face and we see everything we need to.

Broderick Crawford seems to distill his whole character in a couple of quick scenes on the phone in The Mob.

He is an undercover cop, calling his lieutenant back at the police department. The rare moments of privacy, with Crawford able to speak freely, open the character for us. They…