Eisenhower Army Medical Center vintage style military aviation travel poster art by – Squadron Posters!

The 32d Medical Brigade is a medical brigade in the United States Army formed in 1940. The unit is a part of the United States Army Medical Department Center and School. Organized 1 June 1940 in the Regular Army at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania, as Provisional Medical Battalion, The Medical Field Service School. Consolidated 11 August 1940 with the 32d Medical Battalion (concurrently constituted in the Regular Army), and consolidated unit designated as the 32d Medical Battalion. Inactivated 30 April 1948 at Fort Sam Houston, Texas. Redesignated 19 August 1992 as the 132d Medical Battalion. Headquarters, 132d Medical Battalion, redesignated 1 October 2002 as Headquarters and Headquarters Company, 32d Medical Brigade (remainder of the battalion disbanded); concurrently transferred to the United States Army Medical Command and activated at Fort Sam Houston, Texas.

Fort Eisenhower, formerly known as Fort Gordon and Camp Gordon, is a United States Army installation established southwest of Augusta, Georgia in October 1941. It is the current home of the United States Army Signal Corps, United States Army Cyber Command, and the Cyber Center of Excellence. It was once the home of The Provost Marshal General School and Civil Affairs School. – Check out this stunning Augusta Georgia 187th Medical Battalion 32nd Medical Brigade art by – Squadron Posters! (See our Facebook page HERE)

Squadron Posters offers the world’s largest collection of Squadron Specific Art! Check out our stunning vintage style military aviation themed travel posters, honoring All Branches of Service. Our artwork not only represents aircraft, armored cavalry, or ships, it represents adventure and travel. This means we create posters featuring the Space Needle, New Orleans, the Golden Gate Bridge, Mt Rushmore and the National Mall. Of course, McChord AFB isn’t in Seattle but if you’re stationed there your adventure surely involves the Space Needle!