Fort Fairfield - Christine E. Leach, 87, passed away Saturday evening, February 11, 2023, at the Aroostook House of Comfort, Presque Isle, following an extended illness. She was born June 20, 1935 in Presque Isle, the daughter of George I. Sr. and Evelyn C. (McIntee) Leach.

She was a graduate of the Presque Isle High School, Class of 1954 and was a communicant of the Parish of the Precious Blood, St. Denis Catholic Church, Fort Fairfield. Christine had been employed by the Presque Isle Chamber of Commerce as a secretary for more than 20 years and was instrumental in facilitating the yearly Spudland Open Golf Tournament. She also took part in the preparations for the Trans-Atlantic Balloon Expedition from Presque Isle to France. Christine also worked with the Aroostook Area on Aging and was a C.N.A. at the Presque Isle Nursing Home for a number of years. She was a member of the Daughters of Isabella, Santa Maria Circle No. 427, Fort Fairfield, where she served as past treasurer and the Fort Fairfield Sunshine Club. Christine loved to sing and play the guitar.

In addition to her parents, Christine was predeceased by four brothers, Richard, Morris, George Jr. and Darrell Leach; two sisters, Phyllis Pendexter and Evelyn Miller; a special nephew, Danny Witham. She is survived by her special friend, Veronica J. Rochford of Fort Fairfield; special nieces and nephews, Mike Leach and Glenn Leach, both of Presque Isle, Jim Witham of Caribou, Karen Yencha of Scarborough, Rene Larson of Fort Fairfield; great-niece and great-nephew, Jade and Josh Larson, both of Fort Fairfield. She also leaves behind her beloved Godchildren, Tracy Rochford LeVasseur, Ryan Drost and Jade Larson; and a wonderful family friend, Sandra Thornton.

A Mass of Christian burial will be celebrated Thursday, February 16, 2023, at 11 a.m. a the Parish of the Precious Blood, St. Denis Catholic Church, 147 Main Street, Fort Fairfield. A time of continued fellowship with refreshments will take place after the Mass at the Knights of Columbus, Council No. 1753, 260 Main Street, Fort Fairfield. Interment will take place later in the spring at the Fairmount Cemetery, Presque Isle.

Those who wish may contribute in memory of Christine to the American Cancer Society, New England Division, One Bowdoin Mill Island, Suite 300, Topsham, Maine 04086. Envelopes will be available at the service. Christine's family wishes to extend their sincere gratitude to the doctors and nurses at the Aroostook House of Comfort for the wonderful care given during her stay there. Arrangements have been entrusted to the Giberson-Dorsey Funeral Home and Cremation Service, 144 Main Street, Fort Fairfield. Online condolences may be expressed at gibersondorseyfuneralhome.com.