George E. Leach, 92, of Marshall, formerly of Homer, died November 20, 2004, at Oaklawn Hospital, after a courageous battle with diabetes and cancer.

Mr. Leach was born July 7, 1912, in Fredonia Township, to Espie W. and Maggie D. (Nelson) Leach. He married Ruth N. Kenyon January 3, 1931, in Angola, Indiana, and she survives.

He farmed for many years in both Fredonia and Eckford Townships. He retired in 1976 from Permabilt Manufactured Homes after 15 years of service. He had previously worked at Clark Equipment in Battle Creek, Crowell Carton, Oliver Aviation, Marshall Lumber, Marshall Public Schools, New York Central, Albion Malleable and Marshall Furnace Company.

Mr. Leach was a member of Marshall's First Baptist Church, and was a past member of the Fredonia Grange and St. Albans Lodge #20 F & AM.

In addition to his wife of 73 years, Mr. Leach is survived by two daughters, Kathleen (Anthony) VanDenberg of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and Patricia (Verser) White of Saugatuck; two sons, Michael G. Leach and Thomas L. (Margaret) Leach, both of Marshall; 16 grandchildren; and numerous great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren.

He was preceded in death by a son, Curtis Edward, and a sister, Dena Nichols Newman.

Funeral services celebrating his life were held Monday, November 22, at the Craig K. Kempf Funeral Home in Marshall, with the Rev. John Rowe officiating. Interment followed in Lyon Lake Cemetery. Serving as pallbearers were Matthew Leach, Kim Leach, Jim Leach, Randy Leach, John Leach, Brad White, S. Sgt. Jason VanDenberg and Joel White. Doug Leach, Todd White and Norman Leach served as honorary bearers.

Memorial contributions may be made to American Cancer Society or American Diabetes Association. Assistance with memorial contributions is available at Kempf Funeral Home.

Birth: Jul. 7, 1912 Marshall Calhoun County Michigan, USA Death: Nov. 20, 2004 Marshall Calhoun County Michigan, USA

Obituary

George E. Leach, 92, of Marshall, formerly of Homer, died November 20, 2004, at Oaklawn Hospital, after a courageous battle with diabetes and cancer.

Mr. Leach was born July 7, 1912, in Fredonia Township, to Espie W. and Maggie D. (Nelson) Leach.

He married Ruth N. Kenyon January 3, 1931, in Angola, Indiana, and she survives.

He farmed for many years in both Fredonia and Eckford Townships.

He retired in 1976 from Permabilt Manufactured Homes after 15 years of service.

He had previously worked at Clark Equipment in Battle Creek, Crowell Carton, Oliver Aviation, Marshall Lumber, Marshall Public Schools, New York Central, Albion Malleable and Marshall Furnace Company.

Mr. Leach was a member of Marshall's First Baptist Church, and was a past member of the Fredonia Grange and St. Albans Lodge #20 F & AM.

In addition to his wife of 73 years, Mr. Leach is survived by two daughters, Kathleen (Anthony) VanDenberg of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and Patricia (Verser) White of Saugatuck; two sons, Michael G. Leach and Thomas L. (Margaret) Leach, both of Marshall; 16 grandchildren; and numerous great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren.

He was preceded in death by a son, Curtis Edward, and a sister, Dena Nichols Newman.

Interment followed in Lyon Lake Cemetery.

Family links:

Parents:

Espie Winfield Leach (1883 - 1968)

Maggie D. Nelson Leach (1889 - 1985)

Spouse:

Ruth Nettie Kenyon Leach (1913 - 2007)*

*Calculated relationship

Burial: Lyon Lake Cemetery Wrights Corners Calhoun County Michigan, USA

Maintained by: Genealogy Bug Kate Originally Created by: Bushong Weiss Record added: Jan 14, 2012 Find A Grave Memorial# 83446788