Would have kept that last tweet to myself personally! I hope whatever she wants works out for her!

My first thought lol

MTE. Oof 😬

Right? That was wild

Oh hell no she should get payed.

lol at her casually admitting she possibly knew things about the allegations against Diplo 🙃

Yeah just read the rest 😬😬

WHEW what a blast from the past omg! I haven’t heard rye rye’s name in like 10 years

Hello! Your entry got to top-25 of the most popular entries in LiveJournal!

Learn more about LiveJournal Ratings in FAQ.

yassssssssssssss

I feel like...her lyrics kind of go against the original song in some way? Or at least it's a different message.

You had me until the last one sis, but do get your credit and coin

She should get her credit and a fair compensation.

Also, girl, delete that last tweet. Not a good look.

I saw a Rye Rye vinyl at a West Virginia TJ Maxx like five years ago and I thought it was the most random thing, literally the only vinyl in the entire store.

The Dom Rimini Nasty Boy remix of "Hardcore Girls" was my jam back in the day. Hope she gets properly acknowledged and paid. She didn't record that for charity.

Edited at 2022-07-07 04:58 pm (UTC)

She has people and has never gotten credit for anything. You need new people.

And you thought being loyal to an abuser and he would somehow shine back on you.

Some hard lessons to learn.

Keep at it I'm sure they will write a check quick but still no edit credit.

Yikes at that last tweet, but I think it also shows the power dynamic of why people stay loyal to abusers, especially in the entertainment industry. She just said it outloud.

If I'm not making sense, forgive me. I'm still trying to wake up from my meds.

You're making sense, bb. It's true. She most likely didn't say anything, because of Diplo's position in the industry. Also she's a Black woman, so there's another layer of why she decided to stay mum. He's a powerful white man and we know how those who speak out often get treated by the industry and the public.

Edited at 2022-07-07 01:05 pm (UTC)

I hope that now that she opened the gate, that she'll slam open that door and spill since he acts like she doesn't exist.

(no subject) - (Anonymous) Expand

(no subject) - slinkydinks Expand

(no subject) - (Anonymous) Expand

(no subject) - slinkydinks Expand

Makes me think of Doja and her contractual loyalty to Dr.Puke

MTE

Love the songs she did with Laganja Estranja and Bassnectar, give her her money!!!

I love I’m gonna celebrate my legendary ass voice 😆😆

Just remember her from this. Classic!

the rest of those tweets yikes😬😬😬

Edited at 2022-07-07 01:56 pm (UTC)

😂 Why is this moment literally the only thing I remember from this movie??

I wonder when Diplo and his constant grooming of male and female POC is going to come out, it's been like an open secret and I don't get it.

that last tweet. men will never stand up for you, why cover for them? ugh.