Smart Film® electric smart glass switchable film applies to any new or existing smooth glass surface. Easily control our switchable film™ from clear to frosted (opaque) with the click of a button or command from your smartphone. Third party control avabilble. Smart Film® switchable glass privacy film™ is private frosted and opaque when powered off and transparent clear when powered on. We also manufacture the World's First reverse operating Smart Film that powers off clear and powers on frosted private also know as FlipTint™

Smart Film® is available in 2 installation types: Self Adhesive and Non-Adhesive. Our trademarked, proprietary, and industry-leading Smart Cling®; Self Adhesive products are easily installed utilizing a peel-n-stick Smart Cling® self-adhesive backing. Smart Film® Non-Adhesive is a mechanical install technique using a 3M double-sided clear tape (included with your purchase).

We offer a complete hard wired system, which is custom manufactured to your project's specifications, as well as a Plug and Play System available in 7 colors. We include all orders with engineering time to assist with methodizing and implementing all aspects of your project scope. Trusted by industry leaders worldwide, we have the most comprehensive online database of completed projects and product information available.

Both types offer durable Privacy on Demand™, extreme clarity, and maximum performance when powered on and off, and both kinds of Film are dimmable! Smart Film® is 100% compatible with smart home automation systems. This unique technology blocks 99% of UV rays and solar heat!

Dim it, Project on it, stick it, hang it, use it as a whiteboard or high-tech window treatment, and more! Smart Film® switchable electric films are designed to variably adjust the light between a transparent and an opaque state with AC power. Our technology allows for instant privacy of windows on demand with the flick of a switch or the turn of a dimmer. It is the next generation in switchable privacy glass as well as electronic dimmable window treatments.