Blake Lively has been keeping a low profile since welcoming her fourth child with husband Ryan Reynolds quietly in February.

However, the Hollywood star has come out of the shadows as she made a show-stopping appearance at the Michael Kors Collection Show for Spring/Summer 2024 during New York Fashion Week.

The Gossip Girl alum wowed in a 1970s disco-style gold skin-tight jumpsuit, showing off her incredible postpartum body.

The jumpsuit was covered in gold sequins, with Blake cinching in her waist with a thin beige belt.

She wore her signature blonde tresses down in voluminous waves and accessorized with dangly earrings.

Blake has been a long supporter of Michael Kors, attending the Fall/Winter 2022 runway show, and explained how great it was to escape from her house.

She told E! News: "I could put my kids to bed and then secretly sneak out and go have a whole alternative life.

"I like not wearing pajamas. Anything is a level up from that."

Sitting front row at the show alongside the Hollywood star was the likes of Halle Berry, Olivia Wilde, Ellen Pompeo, and Rita Ora.

Rita, who recently returned from the Venice Film Festival, looked sensational in a one-shouldered glittering bodysuit, paired with matching flares.

Meanwhile, Halle wore an all-black ensemble, consisting of a low-cut bust and two large thigh slits in the midi dress.

By her side was her beau of several years, 53-year-old musician Van Hunt, who had on a Kors top and a groovy hat.

Olivia Wilde dressed a bit differently for the event, wearing a chocolate brown top and matching hot pants.

She was seen chatting up pals Kaitlyn Dever and Molly Gordon while they all sat in the front row.

The two starred in Olivia Wilde's 2019 teen comedy Booksmart, which also saw her ex Jason Sudeikis take on a role.

Vanessa Hudgens meanwhile looked very elegant in a caramel beige ensemble and made sure to pull her hair back in an updo to let her outfit do all the work.

Grey's Anatomy actress Ellen Pompeo arrived with her husband Chris Ivery in a grey blazer and a matching fringed long skirt.