Kit Harrington and Rose Leslie

These two Game of Thrones stars hit it off pretty quickly when they were coupled as Ygritte and Jon Snow in the show’s second season.

But they kept their actual romance hidden until going public in 2016. Two years later, they tied the knot in a beautiful ceremony in Scotland.

Ryan Reynolds and Blake Lively

These two hilarious (and gorgeous) A-listers have been together now for nearly a decade, and just welcomed a third child earlier this year. The stars first met on the set of 2010’s superhero film, The Green Lantern.

At the time, Reynolds was married to Scarlett Johansson, but by the following year, those two had split and he and Lively began dating.

Goldie Hawn and Kurt Russell

This couple is celebrating their 35th year together – but they never tied the knot. The two, who met on the set of a Disney film in the 1960s, have several children together.

Their daughter, Kate Hudson, is a successful actress and entrepreneur in her own right. Their relationship is widely regarded as one of the strongest (and longest) that Hollywood has ever seen.

Lauren Morelli and Samira Wiley

According to an interview Wiley gave with BUST magazine, she fell in love with wife Lauren Morelli’s mind long before she even met her in person.

That’s because when she read the Orange is The New Black script she wrote, which included Wiley’s breakthrough character, Poussey, she just knew she was something special. The women were married in Palm Springs in 2017.

Halle Berry and Oliver Martinez

This pair fell for one another in the midst of the production of 2010’s Dark Tide, and made things official in 2013. They had a son during their marriage but wound up getting divorced just two years after they’d tied the knot.

Berry is currently in a heated custody battle over her daughter, Nahla, that she has from one of her other past relationships with model Gabriel Aubry.

Will and Jada Pinkett Smith

These two are just one of the most adorable (and longest-lasting) relationships in Hollywood. The pair met when they were both auditioning for the 90’s hit comedy, The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.

They tied the knot later that same decade and they’re still married today. The couple has two children together, Willow and Jaden Smith, both of whom have followed in mom and dad’s footsteps and already made their own pretty major marks on the entertainment world.

Kaley Cuoco and Johnny Galecki

Galecki and Cuoco met on the set of primetime favorite, The Big Bang Theory. They dated for a while but ultimately decided they were better off as friends.

Now, their characters on the show are married, which you’d think may make it awkward between exes. But Cuoco told CBS that Johnny is “one of her best friends.”

Zoe Saldana and Bradley Cooper

Saldana met Cooper on the set of The Words, in 2011. They spent several months as a couple, but broke up just before New Year’s Eve the following year.

Apparently, there were no hard feelings between the two, who later on shared the red carpet at the L.A premiere of Guardians Of The Galaxy.

Ryan Gosling and Eva Mendes

You may not hear about the romantic relationship between these A-listers, that’s spanned decades. That’s because the stars, who met while working together on The Place Beyond the Pines, in 2012, keep everything pretty private.

The gorgeous couple has two daughters and a rescue dog.

Anna Paquin and Stephen Moyer

These True Blood co-stars had some seriously steamy moments on the HBO series about vampires, werewolves and other creatures of the night. But as it turns out, what they shared on-screen turned into a real, off-screen romance.

The couple tied the knot in 2010 and are still together. Paquin gave birth to twins in 2012.

Gina Torres and Laurence Fishburne

The actors met while filming the second installment of The Matrix trilogy, in 2001.

Things got serious and they tied the knot the following year. After 14 years as a married couple and one child, however, they split.

Penelope Cruz and Javier Bardem

Cruz and Bardem first met on the set of the 1992 film, Jamón Jamón, when Cruz was just a teenager. But when they met again a decade later, things took a romantic turn.

The two were married in 2010 and have two children together.

Josh Dallas and Ginnifer Goodwin

Like in any good fairy tale, these two met once upon a time…or, they met on the set of Once Upon a Time, on which Josh plays the actual Prince Charming and Goodwin, his princess. Josh recalled the moment he woke Sleeping Beauty with a kiss in one scene and it started snowing in real life.

The actor said it seemed so “symbolic and magical.” And it seems it was, because a few years later, the two were married and have lived happily ever after ever since.

Jennifer Aniston and Justin Theroux

Jennifer Anniston’s extensive list of costars she’s gotten romantic with continues on with Justin Theroux. The stars met on the set of Wanderlust, in 2012, and started dating after filming wrapped.

They tied the knot in 2015 but divorced just a couple of years later.

Hugh Dancy and Claire Danes

This pair met on the set of Evening, in 2007, and started dating almost immediately. Two years later, they got married and are still together today.

The actors live in New York City with their two sons.

Emma Stone and Andrew Garfield

These two hilarious actors have had an extensive on-again, off-again relationship over the course of basically the last decade. They first hit it off while filming The Amazing Spider-Man, in 2010.

They dated for four years before splitting up in 2015, although they remain friends.

Natalie Portman and Benjamin Millepied

The actress first met her husband, French dancer and choreographer Benjamin Millepied, on the set of Black Swan, in 2010.

The couple shares two children together - a son, Aleph, and daughter, Amalia. They recently helped raise over $1 million to fund the LA Dance Project Gala together. In 2023, it was revealed that the couple were separating after 11 years together.

Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt

These two superstars probably have one of the most publicized relationships of all time. Maybe it has something to do with the fact that, while they got together, Brad was still married to Hollywood’s golden girl, Jennifer Aniston. The world was not happy when they heard what came next.

Jolie first met the actor when they worked together as the sultry spy couple, Mr. & Mrs. Smith. Apparently, things got pretty hot and heavy fairly quickly, and they were together not long after. The two ended up having several children of their own and adopting several more from multiple countries.

Charlie Heaton and Natalia Dyer

These two stars both made their breakthrough debuts and met each other on the Netflix hit show, Stranger Things.

They are still together a year after, making their couple’s debut at the Emmy Awards in 2018.

Alexis Bledel and Vincent Kartheiser

The Gilmore Girls and Handmaid’s Tale star met fellow actor and husband, Vincent Kartheiser when she played his mistress in the ’50s set drama, Mad Men.

The stars started dating when they wrapped filming, got married in 2014, and welcomed their son into the world the following year.

Camila Mendes and Charles Melton

These two Riverdale stars fell head over heels for each other on the set of the popular CW series and announced their official relationship in 2018.

They are still going strong, although there have been recent rumors of potential turbulence between the two. They very well may just be that though, since they are known to be very private people.

Sarah Michelle Gellar and Freddie Prinze Jr.

The former vampire slayer met her future husband while they were filming 90’s teen slasher flick, I Know What You Did Last Summer, near Wilmington, North Carolina in 1997.

The couple just celebrated their 17th wedding anniversary earlier this year. They have a son and daughter together and currently live in Los Angeles.

Jennifer Carpenter and Michael C. Hall

They may have played siblings on the primetime serial killer series, Dexter, but off-screen they had an entirely different relationship going on.

The two dated for a year before tying the knot in 2008. Unfortunately, things didn’t work out between them and things ended in divorce in 2011.

Ryan Gosling and Rachel McAdams

The Notebook may be one of the most popular romance movies of the 21st century, but as it turns out, the main actors actually couldn’t stand each other during filming.

Gosling and McAdams may have first met on the set of the 2005 film, but they didn’t realize their feelings for one another until they wrapped. They dated for a few years until calling it quits in 2007.

Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise

These two stars were perhaps one of the most famous married couples of the 1990s. They first met during auditions for Days of Thunder and hit it off almost immediately.

They were married and stayed that way throughout the majority of the decade, until they called it quits in 2001. The stars had two adopted children together during the course of their marriage, Connor and Isabella.

Hayden Christensen and Rachel Bilson

Bilson and Christensen first started dating while filming Jumper, in 2007. They officially split in 2017, but they share a 4-year old daughter named Briar Rose.

Recently, the two were spotted together in Los Angeles – perhaps on co-parenting duty.

Jennifer Aniston and Vince Vaughn

These two Hollywood veterans met on the set of their 2006 rom-com, The Break-Up. Things didn’t last very long, although Vince later said that he thought she “is great.”

The couple said they spent a lot of their time trying to avoid drawing too much attention to themselves, especially considering they started dating right around her (very public) divorce from Brad Pitt.

Kristen Stewart and Robert Pattinson

Teenagers all across America swooned when these Twilight costars first took their romance off-screen in 2008. But in 2012, rumors of Stewart being unfaithful led to their ultimate split.

She later had a steamy relationship with model Stella Maxwell and is currently reported to be with screenwriter Dylan Meyer.

Lili Reinhart and Cole Sprouse

Reinhart and Sprouse are the second set of Riverdale stars on this list to have evolved from an on-screen couple to an off-screen relationship.

They are still happily together and frequently post adorable couple stuff on their Instagram pages. The two are still very much together as Betty and Jughead on the show, as well.

Jennifer Lawrence and Darren Aronofsky

The Hunger Games star first met Aronofsky while he directed her in the 2017 psychological horror thriller, Mother!.

But the same thing that brought them together would eventually drive them apart, as the turbulence and stress of the press tour and negative reviews took their toll on the relationship, which ended just a year after its inception.

Billy Bob Thornton and Angelina Jolie

These mega celebs met while filming the 1999 drama, Pushing Tin. The stars got married the following year. The actress even went so far as to get her new husband’s name tattooed on her shoulder.

Unfortunately, the marriage was short-lived, and they broke things off in 2003.

Jared and Genevieve Padalecki

The Supernatural co-stars had a steamy on-screen romance as a star-crossed demon and demon hunter couple. But while on set, they discovered their very real feelings for each other.

They have been together for a decade, but just recently tied the knot last year. The stars have three children together, sons Thomas and Austin, and the newest addition to the family, two-year-old daughter, Odette.

Megan Fox and Brian Austin Green

Brian Austin Green first met Megan Fox on the set of her 2004 show, Hope & Faith. The actress recounts that she felt “electricity shoot through and out of her” when she first met him.

They were together for 11 years before breaking things off in 2015.

Shia LaBeouf and Mia Goth

Actors Shia LaBeouf and Mia Goth’s romance was born on the set of Nymphomaniac, in 2012.

The two got married in Las Vegas in 2016, which fans originally thought was some type of performance art. In 2018, however, Shia filed for divorce.

Zac Efron and Vanessa Hudgens

These two stars met while filming the 2000’s show that is responsible for fast-tracking them both to fame: High School Musical.

Things got pretty serious between the two, who were together for five years before ultimately breaking things off in 2010.

Johnny Depp and Winona Ryder

It would only make sense that two brilliant, yet peculiar stars like Depp and Ryder would have started dating after filming their 1990’s film, Edward Scissorhands.

The relationship did get pretty serious, but was short-lived and ended after just a couple of years.

Rachel Weisz and Daniel Craig

James Bond actor Daniel Craig and the beautiful Rachel Weisz had been friends for a while, but wound up working together in the 2010 film, The Dream House.

It was then that they realized their attraction for one another. The following year, they tied the knot and have been married ever since.

Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan

Tatum and Dewan met while starring together in the 2006 teen dance drama, Step Up. By the time the film premiered later that year, they had gone public as a couple. They got married a few years later and gave birth to their daughter, Everly, in 2013.

But just last year, they announced their legal separation, and earlier this year, it was announced that Jenna was having a child with her new boyfriend, Steve Kazee.

Gwyneth Paltrow and Brad Pitt

These A-listers met on the set of the 90’s creepy psychological thriller, Seven. In 1996, Pitt proposed to Paltrow and they were set to be married.

However, things didn’t end up working out and the pair split before actually going through with it. Paltrow later revealed she felt Brad was “too good for her.”

Macaulay Culkin and Brenda Song

The former child stars met while filming Changeland, and started dating in 2017. They are still going strong, and Culkin recently joked that he wanted to “put some babies” in Brenda. He recently appeared as a guest on the Hulu original, Dollface, on which Song has been starring this year.

Song recently came out in an interview saying that one of the reasons that their relationship is so wonderful, is because they share the bond of being in the spotlight since a very young age.

Dev Patel and Freida Pinto

British actor Dev Patel first met Freida Pinto while filming Slumdog Millionaire, the Oscar-winning 2008 drama. The couple was together until 2014, when they split after their 6-year relationship.

When asked why they broke up, Freida said she “had a midlife crisis at 28.” They remain good friends to this day.

Emily VanCamp and Josh Bowman

Bowman met his future bride, both on-screen and off, when they started working together on the first season of Revenge. On the show, they played Daniel Grayson and Emily Thorne, who tied the knot, just as the couple did in real life.

They recently celebrated their eight-year anniversary as a couple, though they just made things (legally) official in 2018.

Blake Lively and Penn Badgley

Long before Lively was with current husband, Ryan Reynolds, she and Gossip Girl costar, Penn Badgley, reportedly had a brief coupling.

The two started dating during the first season of the show but cut things off before the start of season three. Things didn’t work out with them as an on-screen couple, either.

Miley Cyrus and Liam Hemsworth

The country turned pop star met the Hunger Games actor when they filmed 2009’s The Last Song. In it, the two played a couple of forbidden lovers that find a way to be together. But as it turns out, their romance then budded into a long-term relationship off-screen.

Cyrus and Hemsworth were together off and on for years, until they decided to get married in 2018. But not long after, rumors of turbulence between the pair started to emerge, until they publicly announced their split earlier this year.

Linda Cardellini and Jason Segel

The show that launched the career of the beloved comedy director, Judd Apatow was also responsible for teh wonderful relationship between two of its co-stars. Linda Cardellini and Jason Segel fell in love on the set of the show. Ir helped that their characters, Nick and Lindsay, were also on-screen lovers.

Their relationship faired better than the one screen and the two continued to stay together for another 5 years after the show. Unfortunately, the time came for them to call it quits. Jason Segel's hit breakup film Forgetting Sarah Marshall is said to be inspired by his break up with Cardellini.

James McAvoy and Anne-Marie Duff

This talented couple met while they were shooting 'Shameless', and they instantly felt sparks. Very soon into their relationship, they decided to tie the knot were married by 2006. McAvoy is 9 years younger than Anne-Marie, who played Fiona Gallagher for the initial 2 seasons of the UK show.

Sadly, after 10 years of marriage, they decided to part ways and announced that they would be filing for divorce in the year 2016. The actors recently reunited for the BBC version of 'His Dark Materials', by Philip Pullman.

Warren Beatty and Annette Bening

During his legendary days, Warren Beatty was a notorious player. He could be seen on the arms of all of the hottest stars from the ’60s-’80s such as, but not limited to Madonna and Diane Keaton. However, when he met the Academy Award winner Annette Bening on the set of his film 'Bugsy', that all changed, and made the move to settle down.

In 1992, the Hollywood power couple tied the knot and had four children together; their oldest son Stephen, who is 25, and their youngest daughter Ella, who’s 17. Today, the 14-time Academy Award nominee at 82 is no spring chicken years old and his wife, 61. They have now been happily married for almost 30 years.

Michael Fassbender and Alicia Vikander

The way these two met sounds like a story taken straight out of a fairytale. The couple initially met on the set 'The Light Between Oceans', a charming romance about a lighthouse keeper and his wife. However, according to Vikander, they didn’t actually talk to each other at all at first.

Vikander, who is about 11-years younger than husband Michael, eventually got chatting, and the rest is history. The stars tied the knot in an intimate and small wedding ceremony in 2017 and have been blissfully married ever since.

Cheryl Cole and Liam Payne

Liam Payne from the band One Direction met the love of his life, Cheryl Cole in the year 2009, on the set of reality show'X-Factor'. Liam was performing and Cheryl was a judge, so clearly she was impressed. After the show, the continued to see each other over the next several years in professional situations. Then, in 2016, things took a turn and the two started to gradually ot involved in a blossoming relationship.

While Liam is 10 years younger than his girlfriend Cole, it didn't seem to matter much at all. Let's not forget how Cheryl is a total babe and Liam’s fans are probably super thrilled that this romance worked out. Let’s hope the cute couple stays together forever!

Johnny Depp and Amber Heard

Megastar actor Johnny Depp met starlet Amber Heard in the year 2009, on the set of the film 'The Rum Diary'. A couple of years later the two began a relationship in 2012. Two years later, the two decided to get married – when Johnny was 51 years old and Heard was just 28. That's a pretty big age gap.

Unfortunately, things between the stars started to get seriously rough, and there were even accusations of physical abuse on both sides that began swirling around. in 2017, they decide to call it quits and have been deep in legal battles ever since.

Aaron and Sam Taylor-Johnson

Director Sam Taylor-Johnson met her husband Aaron on the set of her 2009 film, 'Nowhere Boy.' The 19-year-old Aaron was acting in the film and was clearly noticed in more ways than one by the 42-year old Sam. Yet the age gap didn’t seem to have any impact on the connection they made, and they started dating quite shortly after meeting.

While they didn't have any issues, the couple was ripped apart by many media publications who ridiculed the relationship. Still, the two had real chemistry and in 2012, tied the knot. They have since had two daughters.

Michelle Williams and Heath Ledger

Countless actors have stated how beautiful it is to watch two actors fall for each other on set. For the Brokeback Mountain crew, it was Michelle Williams and the late Heath Ledger. One of the film's writers Diana Ossana recalls seeing them develop feelings for one another.

Ossana remembered the first day of shooting when Michelle had to be taken to the hospital, Ledger was so tender with her.“[Heath] was…smoothing her hair back. I remember [her] looking up at him with these wide eyes…You could see it every day from there…He was so taken with her.”

Fergie and Josh Duhamel

The iconic singer Fergie doesn't need a last name to be recognized. she met her American actor husband, Josh Duhamel on the set of his show, Las Vegas, in 2004. When she appeared alongside him, the click was instantaneous. The two eventually got together and, after years of dating, wed in 2009. They’ve since been gifted with a son named Axl Duhamel.

Their union only lasted so long and in 2018, they ultimately separated, Still, considering showbiz, that's a pretty long run.

Daniel Radcliffe and Erin Darke

All grown up now, Harry Potter finally found the love of his life. Two years after the release of the last movie in the franchise, the star, Daniel Radcliffe, explored both theater and more mature cinema-like Swiss Army Man and Kill Your Darlings. It was on one of the set of the latter that he also happened to meet the love of his life.

Erin Darke is an actor and has frequently starred in both film and theatre. She is also known as Cindy, in Good Girls Revolt. After meeting on set, Darke and Radcliffe began their relationship and are still together six years later.

Tracy Pollan and Michael J. Fox

Tracy Pollan and Michael J. Fox met on the set of Family Ties, where she played his girlfriend on the show. For some time their romance remained strictly on-screen, but fate had more in store for the couple. They met again on the set of Bright Lights, Big City, years after the sitcom that shot them both to stardom. Then, the sparks were indisputable and a beautiful relationship began to flourish.

In 1988, they decided to tie the knot, and now have four kids, including a set of twins! Their eldest is Sam Michael, followed by the twins, Aquinnah Kathleen and Schuyler Frances Fox, and the youngest, Esme Annabelle Fox.

Reese Witherspoon and Jake Gyllenhaal

The actress also dated actor Jake Gyllenhaal after meeting him in the year in 2007, on the set of the film Rendition. The loveable actors actually did not appear in the film together a single time, but it was in all these behind the scenes moments where sparks really flew.

These two have found many loves on set, so it seemed only natural for it to happen to them. Unfortauneylu after two years of dating, teh couple split in 2009.

Christina Ricci and James Heerdegen

In 2008, Christina Ricci and James Heerdegen met each other on the set of the ABC series Pan Am. Heerdegen was a crew member, specifically a dolly grip. Shortly after getting together, the two announced their engagement.

In October 2013 she gleefully told her family and friends that she was engaged to the camera technician. That same month, they got married and ultimately had a son together.

Lady Gaga and Taylor Kinney

You may recognize Kinney from his portrayal of Mason Lockwood, in The Vampire Diaries. Gaga certainly did. The two met in 2011, during the shooting of her music video for “You and I.” The chemistry was undeniable and in 2015 the romance turned into an engagement.

By July 2016, however, the "bad romance" came to an end. The two cited “personal reasons” as the reason for their split. And that was the end of that.

Shakira and Gerard Pique

This couple initially met when the soccer player Gerard Pique was featured in Shakira’s “Waka-Waka” music video, for the 2010 World Cup. The athlete had piqued Shakira’s interest, but the romance blossomed only a year after filming the music video.

The couple made their relationship official and went on to have two kids together but never stopped pushing their respective careers. Shakira has continued to be a sold-out artist, even after years of being active in the industry; and Pique is still one of the most successful center-backs in both FIFA and EUFA. Sadly, in 2022, the two decided to part ways.

John Travolta and Kelly Preston

It was back in 1987, on the set of The Experts, that the pair first laid eyes on each. The two fell for each other and four years later, they got hitched. The couple even had two wedding ceremonies; one traditional and the other a traditional Scientology ceremony.

The couple had three children together, but sadly their eldest son Jett passed away at just age 16 in 2009. The couple held strong until Kelly's unfortunate passing in the summer of 2020.

Jeff Bridges and Susan Geston

While filming Rancho Deluxe back in 1974, Jeff Bridges noticed a waitress on set. That was his future wife, Susan Geston. The accomplished actor was even shy to approach her but eventually mustered up the courage. She was having none of it. It was only at the wrap party of the film that he finally managed to woo her. By 1977, the pair married. They now have three daughters.

In his most recent Oscar win, he said in his speech, “I especially want to thank my gorgeous wife, Sue. We’ve been married 33 years. We have a beautiful family, three girls, Isabelle, Jessie and Haley. Thank you guys, I wouldn’t be up here without you.” That's some marriage!

Ben Stiller and Christine Taylor

Ben Stiller and Christine Taylor fell in love in 1999 when they met on the set of the TV show Heat Vision and Jack. Just a year later, and they tied the knot a beautiful oceanfront ceremony in Hawaii. Together they have a daughter, Ella Olivia, and a son, Quinlin, together.

In May 2017, fans were shaken by the sad news. After 17 years of marriage, the couple announced that they were separating. Talk about heartbreak.

Jim Carrey and Lauren Holly

After denying the countless rumors about their on-screen romance, Jim Carrey and Lauren Holly finally came clean. They met on the set of Dumb and Dumber and became an item. A year later they were even married!

Jim Carrey and Lauren Holly married on September 23, 1996. Sadly, their union lasted just less than a year. At least they nipped it in the bud.

Kelly Ripa and Mark Conseulos

Kelly Ripa and Mark Consuelos were united on the set of the popular soap opera All My Children. By 1996, the two had actually eloped in Las Vegas.

That wasn't some drunken mistake as they are still together all these years later and even have four children together.

Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner

Known affectionately in gossip magazines as "Bennifer", the two began their love story in the summer of 2000 on the set of Pearl Harbor. While both were involved with other people, Affleck with Jennifer Lopez and Garner with Scott Foley, the two had two couldn't pursue what they felt.

About two years later Affleck and Garner once again reunited, this time on the set of Daredevil. By 2003, both of them had broken up with their respective partners. While the breakup destroyed Jennifer Lopez, it was a new chapter for Ben and Jen Garner. What turned out to be a beautiful marriage sadly ended in 2017.

Mila Kunis and Ashton Kutcher

These two have a magical story that spanned a decade. Mila Kunis and Ashton Kutcher initially met on the set of That 70s Show when he was 19 and she was only 14! Due to Mila's age, there were no romantic feelings then, even though the couple had one of TV's greatest on-screen relationships. They filmed together for seven years until Kutcher left the show. Towards the end of filming, however, there was some sort of mutual attraction but they were both involved with other people.

Years later, the two reunited at the 2012 Golden Globes. Conveniently, Ashton was ending his marriage to Demi Moore and Kunis was breaking up with Macaulay Culkin (the two were together for 8 years!) It took a second round at the award ceremony for the two to really cement things. The rest, as they say, is history. They now have two kids together.

Donald Sutherland and Francine Racette

Legendary actor Donald Sutherland met theFrench Canadian actress, Francine Racette the set of the Canadian drama, Alien Thunder. Thye hit it off immediately. In 1972, Sutherland and Racette tied the knot and have remained strong ever since.

They are the parents to three sons, two of whom are actors themselves. That's one talented family.

Gary Oldman and Uma Thurman

Gary Oldman and Uma Thurman fell for each other when they met on the set of State of Grace. The impulsive couple got hitched in 1990. Unfortunately, it was all over just two years later. This should not come as a big surprise as Gary Oldman has been married four times. His marriage to Uma was his second.

Oldman got remarried in 2017 to Gisele Schmidt. This might be his last one, who knows. Oldman has been vocal for his admiration for women saying “Speaking very generally, I find that women are spiritually, emotionally, and often physically stronger than men.” Nice one, Gary.

Ewan McGregor and Eve Mavrakis

It's not always actors who cozy up on set. The Scottish actor Ewan McGregor met the Greek-French production designer Eve Mavrakis on the set of Kavanagh QC. The two were inseparable and by 1995 and the pair exchanged vows. Their wedding ceremony was dreamlike, which makes sense because Mavrakis is a production designer.

In addition to having three daughters, the couple also adopted a baby in need in 2006. Their adopted daughter is named Jamiyan in 2006 and she is from Mongolia. Sadly, while they do still co-parent, the couple have since gotten divorced. Such is life.

Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward

Known as one of Tinseltown's beloved couples of all-time, Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward were together 50 whole years until Paul passed away in 2008. After meeting on the set of The Long Hot Summer in 1953, they married only five years later and had three daughters.

These two proved to the world the power of everlasting love. Woodward has been nominated for three awards for her performance in Empire Falls in 2015 and Newman is a legend in his own right.

Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson

Another celebrated couple that seems to last forever, Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson have been together for over 30 years. They first met in 1988 on the film set of Volunteers. As far as Hollywood love stories go, they rank pretty up there on that list. The couple has two sons together, one of which is also a famous actor.

Aside from acting Wilson is also known for her philanthropic efforts. One of her most generous donations was the “True Hearts” jewelry made of sterling silver and 14k gold to the Moffitt Cancer Center. She herself suffered from breast cancer.

Ethan Hawke and Uma Thurman

This celebrity power couple met on the set of Gattaca in 1996. Crazy chemistry led them to married just two years later. Furthermore, they have a daughter and son together. However, in 2003, following Hawke’s infidelity, the couple filed for divorce.

Thurman was once reported saying, “It is better to have a relationship with someone who cheats on you than with someone who does not flush the toilet.”She called it.

Dennis Quaid and Meg Ryan

The sweethearts of the 90s, Dennis Quaid and Meg Ryan met on the set of the 1988 film D.O.A. The pair instantly fell madly in love and by February 1991 they were married. The two even had a son together, Jack Henry Quaid, who was born on April 24, 1992.

In 2000 the couple sadly got divorced. In a recent interview, Ryan shared that during their marriage Quaid had been unfaithful. a claim which he strongly denies. Either way, something didn't work.

Alyson Hannigan and Alexis Denisof

Their show, Buffy the Vampire Slayer might be long over, but the love story that began on that set is far from it. Actors Alyson Hannigan and Alexis Denisof met each other for the first time in 1999 while filming the series together. Things went swimmingly and in 2003, the pair got married in Palm Springs, California.

The How I Met Your Mother star has had two daughters with her former co-star. They are named, Satyana and Keeva, and the four of them are still one big happy family.