The actress and her singer-songwriter beau enjoyed a stylish date at the designer's Spring 2024 show on Monday

Halle Berry and Van Hunt brought their love front row at New York Fashion Week.

The Oscar winner, 57, and her singer-songwriter boyfriend, 53, stepped out hand-in-hand at Michael Kors’ Spring 2024 show on Monday in coordinating neutral tones.

Berry wore a plunging black dress cinched at the waist with a wide leather belt. The ensemble also featured flowy long sleeves with triangular slits at the elbows and two similar thigh-high slits in the skirt that gave a peek at her pointy-toed black leather boots.

The actress accessorized with a large link chain necklace, a silver structural bracelet and an oversized ring. She styled her ombré hair in soft waves.

Hunt, meanwhile, opted for an embroidered sweater with Michael Kors’ initials in gray, accented by a solid black collar and cuffs. He paired the top with dark gray slacks and black dress shoes and accessorized with a black beret, tinted shades and a tan jacket thrown over his shoulder.

Related: Blake Lively, Halle Berry and More Celebs Turn Out for Michael Kors' NYFW Show — See the Photos

Related: Blake Lively Lights Up Michael Kors' NYFW Show in Plunging Gold Jumpsuit and Disco Curls

The pair sat front row on the show with Blake Lively to the right of Hunt and Tiffany Haddish in the second seat to the right of Berry.

The couple’s NYFW outing comes after a source recently told PEOPLE that Berry "is truly the happiest" with Hunt, adding that their relationship "is on another level.”

"He is incredible. He treats her like a queen," the source said of Hunt, whom Berry began dating in 2020. "She calls him her 'soulmate.' They love traveling, spending time at her Malibu beach house and hanging out with her kids."

According to the insider, Hunt is the Monster's Ball star’s "dream guy." "She feels so lucky to share her life with him," adds the source.

As for whether a trip down the aisle is in the cards, the source said of Berry, "She wants things to stay this way. She hasn’t talked about marriage at all.”

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer, from juicy celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.

Berry and Hunt first went official with their relationship in September 2020. At that time, a source told PEOPLE the couple had been seeing each other for "several months" and that Hunt had met Berry's daughter Nahla, 15, and son Maceo, 9.

Prior to dating Hunt, the Bruised director-star was married to Olivier Martinez for two years before the two split in 2015. Before that, Berry was married to former MLB player David Justice and singer/actor Eric Benét.

Berry’s divorce settlement from Martinez, with whom she shares Maceo, was finalized a few weeks ago after nearly eight years. (She shares Nahla with ex-boyfriend Gabriel Aubry.)

According to a source, the actress is “relieved” that the divorce settlement has been finalized, with the insider adding that she is “so ready to move on” as “it’s been way too drawn out."

For more People news, make sure to sign up for our newsletter!