Today marks what would have been Robert Shaw’s 93rd birthday. The actor, playwright and novelist is best known for playing ‘Quint’, the ill-fated fisherman in Steven Spielberg’s 1975 shark thriller “Jaws”.

Shaw’s screen acting career began in 1947 with an appearance in TV movie, The Cherry Orchard and earned an Oscar nomination for his portrayal on Henry VIII in “A Man For All Seasons” (1967).

Shaw’s body of work is sometimes overshadowed by his towering achievement of “Jaws” so we felt what better way to honor Robert’s birthday than with a look back at what we consider to be his 10 best acting performances.

10. The Deep (1977)

Based on ‘The deep’, written by Jaws author Peter Benchley, two amateur treasure-hunting divers have a run-in with local criminals when they inadvertently discover the secret cargo of a World War II shipwreck.

Robert Shaw was paid $650,000, plus percentage points for starring in this movie. Shaw once said: “This is the first time in my career that I’ve committed myself to a movie without reading the script. So why this time? Just instinct. This production has terrific potential. It smelled like a winner from the beginning.”

8. Figures In A Landscape (1969)

Two escapees are on the run in the wilderness of an unspecified country. Wherever they go, they are followed by a menacing black helicopter.

This project was in the works for a long time before the film finally emerged. There were various changes of cast and director, and many writers, including James Mitchell and Stanley Mann, produced drafts of the script before Robert Shaw, who was also a novelist, agreed to do a final rewrite immediately before shooting was due to begin. Although he assured Joseph Losey that he would finish it before the first day of shooting, he did not, in fact, complete it until the end of filming, with changes being seemingly made almost every day. The film was a box-office failure and was mostly shown in Britain in a heavily-cut version, although television showings have been complete.