Charles Durning’s memories of D-Day were so painful that for decades he suppressed them.

Drafted at age 20, Durning eventually earned a Silver Star for valor, a Bronze Star for meritorious service in a combat zone, and three Purple Hearts, given in the president’s name to those wounded or killed in military service.

Just out of high school, which he didn’t complete until the war ended, Durning was the only survivor in a unit that landed on Omaha Beach on June 6, 1944.

Durning’s World War II experiences are unfathomable, and his actions in defense of his fellow soldiers, selfless and heroic.

During the Normandy battle, Durning killed seven German gunners, but suffered serious machine gun wounds to his right leg and shrapnel wounds throughout his body.

After a six-month recovery in England, Durning was rushed back to the front lines to fight against the German Ardennes offensive.

During the Battle of the Bulge, he suffered more wounds, this time in hand-to-hand bayonet combat when he was stabbed eight times. Despite the vicious assault, Durning summoned up the strength to kill his attacker with a rock, which earned him a second Purple Heart.

Soon after, his company was captured and forced to march through the Malmedy Forest; in the ensuing “Malmedy massacre,” German troops opened fire on the prisoners, and Durning was among the few who escaped.

Durning would earn his third Purple Heart when, in March 1945, he moved into Germany with the 398th Infantry Regiment, where he was severely wounded when a bullet struck him in the chest.

A private first class, Durning was evacuated to the United States to spend the remainder of his active Army career recovering until he was discharged in January 1946.

Born in 1923, Durning grew up in Highland Falls, New York, near the U.S. Military Academy at West Point.

His father, James, an Irish immigrant who had joined the Army to gain U.S. citizenship, lost a leg during World War I and died when Charles was 12. James’ widow, Louise, supported her five children by working as a laundress at West Point. Four other children died from scarlet fever.

After the war, Durning used dance as physical therapy to strengthen his badly injured leg and speech therapy to smooth out a stutter that had developed.

He began training at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, but was told he lacked talent. Undeterred, he took small roles with Joseph Papp’s famed New York Shakespeare Company and taught ballroom dancing at the Fred Astaire studio.

Eventually, Durning achieved his lifelong goal when he landed parts in television and the movies.

His most memorable silver screen appearances among his 200 films include The Sting, Dog Day Afternoon and Tootsie. His significant honors include numerous Academy, Emmy and Tony award nominations.

Reluctant to visit the site where so many of his comrades lay, Durning returned to Normandy only once after the war ended.

Looking back during a 1994 Memorial Day service to recognize the invasion’s 50th anniversary, he noted remorsefully that the United States had engaged in at least five wars since World War II: Korea, Desert Storm, Panama, Grenada and Vietnam. He said that each war is pertinent to only the individual who was there.

“I don’t know what they went through; they don’t know what I went through,” Durning said. “Each person fights his own war. Each person is on a one-to-one basis with whoever’s opposite him.”

He added: “That war changed history as we knew it. It was the greatest armada that ever hit any country, anywhere, anytime in the history of mankind. No one will ever see anything that enormous again.”

World War II was, Durning said, the last war that had a well-defined purpose.

In 2007, Durning was honored with the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award, and his star was placed on the Hollywood Walk of Fame adjacent to the actor he most admired, Jimmy Cagney.

Durning died of natural causes at his Manhattan home on Christmas Eve, Dec. 24, 2012, at age 89. Two days later, Broadway theaters dimmed their lights in his honor.