This month, Studio 7 is celebrating 17 years in business, honouring many triumphs and a few frustrations, that continue to drive our agency to the forefront of traditional eLearning. I take this moment to thank you, our business partners whom, through the years, have tried and tested us, challenged our abilities and helped us refine our expertise in T&D. Thank you for your trust and for all the fun we have had so far.

It is also a time to, once again, recognize that business success is entirely dependent on the people we work with, their brains and their brawn, and the need to provide them with everything they require to love their job and be good at it. I will never thank you enough, my Team, my friends, for your dedication.

Before I begin this small history of Studio 7, I'm adding a link here of a video my Team and I created at the beginning of the current pandemic, in which I say thanks to everyone, and to show you how much fun we all have together. Admitedly, a number of people have moved on to other pastures, but my thanks still remain strong for everyone here (you may have to right-click and copy-paste the URL in your browser).

Studio 7's Story

Several people have asked for a short story on how it all began. If you have about 6 minutes, I invite you to keep reading.

17 years ago, after much personal debate and reflection on my future career I decided to launch Studio 7 Communications. I had dabbled in business before, to some success, and was on the tail end of nearly 10 years of experience working in marketing agencies and environments, as a Marketing Director. My latest stint at a marketing agency in 2003, however, convinced me I could only really be happy giving it a go for myself.

With much trepidation I quit my job and marched over to the Registraire des entreprises.

i-Genia Inc. (2003)

Now, let me be transparent: my first venture into business as a service provider in 2003 actually lead to the co-founding of an agency called “i-Genia Inc.”, that would pull together my 8 or 9 years of experience in communications and allow me to build on my future dreams of running my own company. At this point I was putting together an agency that would mix my marketing experience to that of T&D.

Having been exposed to training projects during some of my advertising gigs, I teamed up with a newbie Concordia Grad instructional designer and devised a strategy to move from marketing into a blend with T&D. At that time, the “i” in i-Genia was meant to reflect the digital era we were still segueing into, with the “genia” pointing to a mix of “great ideas and genius marketing & learning strategies”.

i-Genia was met with some success, although limited in T&D, as we dabbled in the backyards of bigger agencies, trying to elbow our way in, leading our creative minds to designing innovative training assets that also afforded beautiful UI that, at that point in time, were still trying to figure themselves out.

Footnote: this was our corporate website, built with a Flash template, in 2004. Can I get a "YIKES"! It is humbling to reread some of the texts and realize just how little I knew back then.

NH4 Communications (2005)

Eventually, however, as is always the risk in business partnerships, it became apparent that I would have to go at it alone if I wanted to build the type of agency that fostered the creativity and innovation I had in mind. Little did I know this would follow me my entire career; I’ll save this story for another time, but suffice it to say it was a hard time in my personal and professional history (Think "Pursuit of Happyness").

I purchased my associates shares and re-named the company “NH4 Communications”. I had selected this name because I thought NH4 had a nice ring to it, something marketing agencies were already used to doing. With the departure of my ID associate, and while I continued in the marketing space, I moved back to Montreal from Sherbrooke, met my current soul mate and decided to go back to school for a Master’s in Educational Technology at Concordia. With my first child in my left hand, a portable Pentium E2 in my right, and no sleep to speak of, this is when I fell in love with training.

In the following years, while I was fast tracking through my degree, T&D became a staple in NH4’s service offering and we managed to position ourselves well in a "low hanging fruit" market now looking for learning trends. I love to read, so gobbled up anything that had to do with “trends” in the industry. And with my marketing background, we could offer great training assets that were not only pedagogically sound, but also looked amazing for the age. By the way, when I say “we could offer”, I’m mainly talking about myself, in my musty basement, playing the role of ID, creative director, programmer and business developper. Yes, I had support, but wouldn’t hire my first full-time employee until 2009.

NH4 worked on about 200 design projects, and some training. It was this experience that helped move us into "public culture" when we worked on projects that would be displayed in places like Place des Arts and the such.

Here's a glimpe of NH4's website in 2006. Today, on my 27" screen, it covers about 1/8 of it. I'm embarrased to say that, if you go to nh4.ca using IE, this Flash site is still there. I had COMPLETELY forgotten about it (you have about 6 weeks left until Flash get's the final boot).

Studio 7 Communications (2009)

Admittedly, working alone for a few years, I was still hoping to find an associate I could work with to develop greater markets in the field, to enjoy the experience and to share the workload. So, at the end of my ID degree in 2009, with the recession still in swing, I co-founded Studio 7 Communications with a senior ID that already had many years of experience as a consultant. NH4 was then pushed into the background, still running today as a holding company.

The word “Studio” was meant to reflect our interest in creating a one-stop-shop for training assets, where all production work would be done in-house by a specialized media team (this is generally atypical in corporate environments, where IDs are often required to digitally produce their work); the “7” was a play on the seven principles that would guide our work for all time: Analysis, Context, Engagement, Innovation, Narrative, Responsiveness, Performance.

Studio 7 grew exponentially. And within a few months, we had our first ID and creative staff members onboard.

Our vision of marketing and ID helped us position ourselves as a unique traditional eLearning company that had an edge on what good design looked like, both back-end and front-end. It’s also at that point that I would start my everlasting side career as “the voice of eLearning”; yes, I still lend my voice to nearly all our eLearning modules, in both English and French. I figure I have lent my voice to at least….3000 projects in both languages? Is that exaggerating? I don’t think so, but if it is, the number is certainly right up there somewhere.

I will forever be grateful to that senior ID for working with me for a short time as it helped me better grasp where I wanted to take Studio 7. Eventually, though, I purchased her shares and decided to stay solo. I think there is some good in the experience as we still have some of our original staff onboard since the very beginning, including George Saridakis and Joëlle Foster.

The Future

Over the course of the next 11 years or so, Studio 7 would put together a beautiful portfolio of projects, dozens digital (i.e. mobile apps, websites, etc.), many thousands eLearning, some still in marketing, and now, more and more, in performance assessment.

Along this way, there are a few people that I will forever remain grateful to. These are the kind souls that take a leap of faith when you most need it, and whose actions allow you to build for the future. I am forever endebted to them.

I estimate that we have designed and developed over 5000 digital and learning assets over the past 17 years, and worked in hundreds of different markets, in several different countries. Admittedly, one of the most fun things about my job is the opportunity to visit our customers’ locations, watching how things are made, walking down “off-limit” corridors and speaking with SMEs that have mind blowing stories to share.

And, with the purchase of Marc Lalande’s agency “Learning Andrago” back in 2019, we have expanded our service offering to performance assessment, fostering excitement in both me and some of my fellow IDs who now have a truly better understanding of the scope of performance, and how training is just a part of it.

And yes, I am still the lone shark, hopeful to find a truly compatible associate one day, or perhaps someone to pass the baton over to as I segue to a more traditional consultant role, and less of an operations one. It will always come with risk, but you are not truly an entrepreneur if you don’t like taking chances.

The experience I have gained since founding i-Genia 17 years ago has led me to some fundamental understanding of who I am and what I would like to eventually provide as a legacy in T&D. There are still many years ahead, and still time to figure this out.