Aug. 31, 1957 - Laurence Harvey Arrives Home With His Actress Wife: Film star Laurence Harvey and his actress wife Margaret Leighton arrived back in London yesterday. The couple were married in Gibralter three weeks ago, but they were too busy to have a honeymoon. Harvey is working on a film in which he plays the late commander Crabb, the frogman. He resumes work on the film on Monday, then he is due to go to America for more work. Photo shows Laurence Harvey carries his actress wife Margaret Leighton into their Mayfair flat after their arrival in London yesterday.

Captions are provided by our contributors.

RMID:Image ID :E0R1KT

Image details

Contributor :

Keystone Press / Alamy Stock Photo

Image ID :

E0R1KT

File size :

55.2 MB (825.3 KB Compressed download)

Open your image file to the full size using image processing software.

Releases :

Model - no | Property - noDo I need a release?

Dimensions :

3767 x 5119 px | 31.9 x 43.3 cm | 12.6 x 17.1 inches | 300dpi

Date taken :

31 August 1957

More information :

This image could have imperfections as it’s either historical or reportage.

Aug. 31, 1957 - Laurence Harvey Arrives Home With His Actress Wife: Film star Laurence Harvey and his actress wife Margaret Leighton arrived back in London yesterday. The couple were married in Gibralter three weeks ago, but they were too busy to have a honeymoon. Harvey is working on a film in which he plays the late commander Crabb, the frogman. He resumes work on the film on Monday, then he is due to go to America for more work. Photo shows Laurence Harvey carries his actress wife Margaret Leighton into their Mayfair flat after their arrival in London yesterday. (Credit Image: Keystone Pictures USA/ZUMAPRESS)

Available for editorial and personal use only. Get in touch for commercial uses.

You can only use this image in editorial media and for personal use. Editorial media includes use as a visual reference to support your article, story, critique or educational text. Personal use allows you to make a single personal print, card or gift for non-commercial use. Not for resale.

It shouldn't be used for commercial use which includes advertising, marketing, promotion, packaging, advertorials, and consumer or merchandising products.

Taxes may apply to prices shown.