Mark Woodforde is a former tennis player from Australia. Learn about Mark Woodforde’s wife Erin Woodford and children through this artifact.

Mark Raymond Woodforde, a former professional tennis player’s wife Erin Woodforde is recognized as being a celebrity spouse.

Mark is best known as the one half of “The Woodies”, a double partnership with Todd Woodbridge.

Who Is Mark Woodforde Wife Erin Woodforde?

Erin Woodforde is reportedly an Australian model and also an influencer.

Woodforde tied a knot with her husband Mark in 1999 and has been happily together since then.

Further, their union has been blessed with two children.

We speculate that Erin Woodforde was a similar age to her spouse, who turned 55 years old this year.

However, her actual date of birth and early life information is still not disclosed.

Mark Woodforde Wife Erin Woodforde: How Many Children Do They Have?

Maddy Woodforede and Elyse Woodforde are the two Children of Mark and Erin Woodforde.

Mark Woodforde and his wife Erin have been tougher for almost 22 years now. The Woodforde family currently resides in California, The USA.

However, gathering more of Woodforde’s material details, nothing popped up.

It seems that Mark tends to keep his family’s presence away from the media attention.

We will update you more about Woodforde’s wife and children if anything comes up in the nearest future.

Mark Woodforde Wikipedia Details

Mark Woodforde has a Wikipedia profile written in his name.

According to Wikipedia, Woodforde(born 23 September 1965) joined the men’s professional tennis APT tour in 1984.

He won four single titles including his hometown Adelaide Tournament twice.

Woodforde is best known for his double success, having won 12 Grand Slam doubles titles in his career – one French Open, two Australian Open, three US Open, and a record six Wimbledons.

He also won five Grand Slam title mixed double titles; making an overall total of 17 Grand Slam double titles. Mark reached the World No.1 ranking in 1992.

The former Australian International retired from professional tennis in 2000 and was appointed to the coach of Australia’s Fed Cup team in 2003.

In January 2010 on Australian day, the Woodies were inducted into the Australian Tennis Hall of Fame for their achievement in Tennis.

Mark Woodforde Net Worth Details

The former tennis player has an estimated net worth of $6 million USD.

As per the source, Mark Woodforde has total career earnings of $8,551,305 USD, singles and doubles combined.

His main source of earning is by playing Tennis.

By winning the 2000 French Open, Mark Woodforde completed his Grand Slam.

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7u7PRZ6WerF%2Bau3DDyKSgaK%2BYpHqqv4ymmKujXay8sLDFqKmdnV2stqexjKacnqxdnba0edainZ5llae2r3nWqKadnp%2BnsaZ7