Due to its location as a road junction and a crossing site over the river Drava, the medieval Osijek became an important commercial and administrative seat, but the city’s Renaissance-Humanist development was halted by the Ottoman occupation in 1526. During the Ottoman rule, Osijek was built-up and fortified, and its oriental visage was supplemented by the Suleiman Bridge, constructed in 1566. Osijek remained under the Ottoman government until its liberation on 29 September 1687, and then it was integrated into the Habsburg Monarchy, along with the rest of the territory of eastern Croatia. Under Austrian authority, today’s Baroque-style Tvrđa was built (1712 – 1721), as well as other new city quarters. In 1690, the city government was established, and eight years later Osijek adopted its City Statute, taking after other Central-European cities. In 1798, Osijek was the largest city in Croatia with a population of 8,000 (at the time, the capital city of Zagreb had 7,706 residents). The first secondary school (a so-called “gymnasium”) was opened in 1729, the first printing house in 1735, followed by the establishment of the high theological and philosophical study (Studium Generalae Theologicum Primae Classis). Osijek was declared a free royal city on 28 August 1809, which marked the beginning of a strong development.

The economic and cultural growth of Osijek continued throughout the 19th century with new factories (brewery, leather factory, textile and food industries), one of the largest and most state-of-the-art hospitals (in 1874), secondary schools, teacher and merchant academies. Following World War I and the fall of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, Osijek became part of a new state, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, in 1929 renamed to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The economic and cultural development of Osijek was at a standstill during that time. The brief period after the breakup of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, during which Croatia was autonomous under the name of the Independent State of Croatia (1945), is still a subject of numerous scientific disputes and is associated with a sense of embarrassment among Croatian citizens and in some of the national historiography. Strong anti-fascist activity, in spite of the quisling creation of ISC, after World War II enabled Croatia to become a federal unit of the Federative People’s Republic of Yugoslavia, later called the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia. The foundation of the University in 1975 marked the beginning of Osijek’s development as a university city. In that period, numerous cultural edifices, industrial facilities, individual faculties and primary and secondary schools were built. The breakup of SFRY and Croatia’s gaining of independence in 1991 was followed by the Homeland War in which Osijek suffered heavy devastation and significant human losses. In spite of being surrounded by enemy forces from three sides, electricity, drinking water and food supply unfolded without disturbance thanks to the immense efforts of citizens, defenders and the entire Croatia. In mid-1992, due to international peace mediation and the arrival of the transitional UN administration to the occupied Croatian areas in the vicinity of Osijek, the shelling of the city ceased and its gradual post-war revitalisation and reconstruction began.