Info about Osijek, Osječko-Baranjska Županija (Croatia)

Osijek region is Osječko-Baranjska Županija, with country Croatia (HR).

Other names for Osijek are Colonia Aelia Mursa, Esseg, Essegg, Essek, Eszek, Eszék, Mursa, Mursia, OSI, Osek, Osiek, Osigiek, Osijek, Osijeka, Osijekas, Osik, oshieku, xo siyekh, Οσιγιέκ, Осиек, Осијек, โอซีเยค, オシエク, latitude is 45.5511100, and its longitude is 18.6938900.

Its population is 90.411 citizenry, this location timezone is Europe/Zagreb (Europe/Zagreb_cet).

Some of the activities you can do in Osijek are casinos, mosques, nightlife, escape room, towers, hunting, zoo, monuments, abseiling, fishing, clubs, disco, volcanoes, shopping, bridges, museums, geological formations, theme parks, bars, music, countryside, food, aquariums, statues, mines, cathedrals, architectural buildings in Croatia.

.

More details about Osijek in Croatia (HR)

It is the capital of Osijek-Baranja County. Its official name is Osijek (OS).

Osijek has timezone UTC+01:00 (in standard time).

In Osijek there are 90.411 citizenry, according to 2001 last census. Do You want to call local telephones? You can call phone numbers by dialing 31 as local dialing code. It’s postal code is 31000, so for sending postcards to family in Osijek you can use this code as explained.

Osijek dimension is 169000000 km2, ideal for visiting a big city, crowdy full of things to do or entertainment. If you stay in this city you can find high budget accommodations because of its high accommodation prices, so for this reason you could find Osijek as base to find SPAs and Thermal baths after walking the metropolis.

Its altitude above mean sea level, called also meters above sea level (MASL), is over 94 mt. That’s why Osijek an ideal place if you and your partner like flat land to travel to in your next vacation.

Osijek shares borders with nice cities like Trpinja, Erdut. As those cities are very close you could very quickly visit those close destinations to visit for new adventures in Croatia.

For data for this city check Osijek website https://www.osijek.hr.

Important ancient memorabilia nice to mention for your trip to Osijek are:

Gradski vrt Hall, Jug Sport Hall, Stadion Gradski vrt, Zrinjevac Sport Hall

Osijek things to do and activities: best trip destination for: