As chafing as the sight remains for Celtics fans, Ray Allen has found a way back to the Eastern Conference finals.

All but forgotten for many is the imprint left in Boston by LeBron James’ newest wingman.

And it’s sad for some to think it has to be that way. Carol Johnson, the outgoing superintendent of Boston Public Schools, paused when asked recently about the conflict between Allen’s good deeds in the community and his unpopular career decision.

“I have to be careful with this,” Johnson said, understanding the local dynamics at play.

But there is a list of Boston middle schools with students who may be forever indebted to the Miami guard. At a cost of roughly $30,000 per school, Allen funded media labs in the Sarah Greenwood, Timilty and Tobin middle schools via his Ray of Hope Foundation. The Celtics funded similar labs in the Edison, Kilmer, Jackson/Mann, Dearborn and Hernandez middle schools, and have plans through the Shamrock Foundation to fund a sixth this summer.

But Allen, who also funded two computer labs in Hartford, chose a particularly viable, focused way to enhance education — via computer/Internet literacy.

“(Allen) would come out to the schools, sit with the kids and teach them how to work on the computers. He, his wife and kids would all come out, and it was a special touch,” said Johnson. “They didn’t do it for the recognition, there weren’t a lot of cameras, and they would sit for two or three hours, working with kids, helping them, and teaching them to do research. Sometimes they would research what he did in his life. But they learned technology skills, they learned there was someone who cared about them who was pretty special.

“Athletes are in our communities, there’s a lot of fans among our students, and I think it’s important that they give back and be members of our community. We have lots of athletes who do it, but (Allen) is certainly an example of someone who took a personal interest in creating access to technology. For a lot of poor kids access to technology just isn’t there.”

It was, in short, a particularly savvy bit of targeting by Allen. Some athletes show up at a public service function and bolt shortly after the photo ops end. As noted by Johnson, Allen spent hours at each unveiling, leading the students through a kind of introductory workshop on the gleaming new equipment.

It may be too early to measure the impact of the computer labs, but, according to Johnson, the sheer enthusiasm generated in the schools is easy to chart.

“They’re staying after school to work on these computers,” she said.

More tangible results are sure to come in time, thanks in part to Allen’s initiative.

“First of all, the schools are totally appreciative because they know that more students have access to technology,” said Johnson. “Kids are using the labs after school, and that’s an important part of it. And the Celtics are going to help us open up one more lab. The Celtics have continued to invest. Ray Allen started something that others could continue. We have half a dozen schools with (tech labs) between the Celtics doing some and Ray Allen doing some.

“Ray does the entire lab, redecorates, it’s tremendous.”

Even the scorned Celtics faithful could agree with that.

C’S HAVE THE TICKET (WITH OR WITHOUT KG)

The season ticket retention rate in some of the NBA’s more fickle markets can be a perpetual headache for those team owners.

The Hawks have trouble bringing their public back even when they’re good. Prior to the Grizzlies’ latest success, the Memphis crowds were an embarrassment to the franchise, thanks to the number of fans who showed up in the jerseys of opposing teams whenever a contender was in town.

The Celtics, save possibly for a dip during the Rick Pitino era, have never had that problem.

And though the makeup of the current Green team could change dramatically by July 1 — the date when Paul Pierce could become a free agent — the Celtics are still flush with repeat business at the box office.

According to team president Rich Gotham, approximately “91 or 92 percent” of the season ticket base — the same as last season — has re-upped.

“We’re coming back with over 90 percent of our season ticket-holders, which is a good number,” said Gotham. “It’s above the league average, and it’s in line with past seasons for us. We have a loyal fan base, and we’ve quietly built a young nucleus with Jeff (Green), Avery (Bradley), Jared (Sullinger) and Rondo. The fans see that. Those are players the fans like.

“This is in line with last year,” he added. “We’re lucky. We have a base that loves our team, and intellectually understands that we’re not always going to have the same result, but also understand why. This year we were without Rondo in the playoffs, and they understand that doesn’t make it a bad season because we were knocked out earlier than planned. That makes it a reality check for us. We just didn’t have all of the players on the court that we needed.”

The uncertainty for next season, with the returns of Pierce and Kevin Garnett on hold, has apparently created more anxiety in the basketball operations office than the ticket office.

“We’re hopefully preparing for the fact that we will be (competing),” Gotham said. “Hopefully we’ll be able to include this team, keep key players, keep Kevin and put players around him. But it’s our job to also think about what could be a worst-case scenario, and kept the best team over time. We have to look at every angle.

“We’re evaluating everything right now,” said Gotham. “There’s a lot of moving parts. Paul’s contract, whether or not Kevin does another tour of duty. The draft, free agency. It’s hard to focus on any one thing in a vacuum. They’re all inter-mingled, so in the next 30 days we really have to think everything through from every possible angle. But it’s too early to say.”

SCAL JOINS CHORUS

Doc Rivers is one of the few NBA coaches who doesn’t back away from adding former players with little coaching experience to his staff. Perhaps that has something to do with the fact that Rivers took over the Orlando Magic in 1999 without any previous coaching experience.

Not surprisingly, other teams now see the value in one of those players, C’s assistant Tyronn Lue. As reported in last week’s Sunday Herald, certain coaches are interested in bringing Lue on board because of his ability to relate with players without caving in to their whims.

Brian Scalabrine, another former player who has popped up on lists across the league, considers Lue that special.

“Ty Lue would be an excellent head coach in the NBA,” said Scalabrine, currently a Comcast Celtics analyst. “If I got a job, the first people I would bring in (would be) him and Adrian Griffin.”

Indeed, Griffin interviewed last week with Ryan McDonough — the former Celtics scout who is now general manager of the Phoenix Suns — for the Suns’ head coaching opening.

Both, according to Scalabrine, have three important coaching qualities.

“It’s the ability to talk to players, sometimes to be mean, and be honest — like Doc was with me,” said Scalabrine, who currently plans to return in his Comcast role.

“I love being part of the game, and being able to talk to Doc and Danny (Ainge), and to learn from Mike (Gorman) and Tommy (Heinsohn),” he said.

Scalabrine remains skeptical of a place for coaching, or even a front office role, in his own future.

“They always call,” he said of teams. “But you have to make the right call.”