By Barry Janoff, Executive Editor

February 12, 2011: Ray Allen is already riding the wave of having claimed one of the most prestigious records in the NBA — the all-time leader in three-point shots made. He passed the former leader, Reggie Miller, during a game against the Los Angeles Lakers on Feb. 10, when he hit his 2,561st career three-pointer. Now, the Boston Celtics' all-star guard is turning that achievement into marketing success.

Dunkin' Donuts, which signed Allen to a deal last year and features him in multi-media marketing, said it would honor his basketball milestone by donating 20¢ from iced coffee cups sold in the Greater Boston area to Allen's Ray of Hope Foundation, with a target of $25,000. The one-day effort was on Feb. 11; the 20¢ was picked in honor of Allen's No. 20 Celtics uniform.

According to Allen, “The foundation supports a number of charities in the area such as the Boys & Girls Clubs and the Home for Little Wanderers, so I encourage people to head to Dunkin’ Donuts to support these and other great causes.”

Jordan Brand, a division of Nike, put Allen front-and-center at its Web site, where he talks about the three-point record, his place in NBA history and his time as a member of Team Jordan. Text offers, "On February 10, 2011, Ray Allen broke the all-time three-point record." 2,561 and counting. To the greatest three-point shooter of all time: Much respect."

Allen has been with Jordan Brand since he joined the NBA in 1996.

In a video, Allen explains, "Breaking this record as a [member of the Boston] Celtics, it sets you up there with so many great Hall of Famers. You talk the great Celtics of the past and say what they did and how they had an impact on the game when they played. [Now] I will feel like I belong."

Glaceau's Vitaminwater energy drink, a division of Coca-Cola, has posted a tribute to long-time endorser Allen on Allen's Ray of Hope Facebook site and also on YouTube. The company took to the streets of Boston with a sign, "3 Honks For Ray Allen" to film fans offering congratulations to Allen. Among them are Boston Mayor Thomas Menino; Wes Welker, wide receiver for the New England Patriots, who jokingly says, "Even though your toe was on the [three-point] line a few times, we're still going to give it to you. You did a heck of a job"; Celtics teammate Kendrick Perkins, who offers, "You have the three-point record. I want to know how that feels — I still haven't made one three-point shot"; and Allen's his mom, wife and kids. (See it here.)

The Celtics have made available a T-shirt from official NBA outfitter adidas that commemorates Allen's achievement. The T-shirt can be obtained via the Celtics Store online or Allen's Ray of Hope.

Webster Bank, a leading New England financial institution, said it has signed marketing partnership with Allen that runs through August 2012. Financial terms were not disclosed.

The alliance was launched with "The Webster Dream Team," a video that also stars Jim Calhoun, who was Allen's coach at the University of Connecticut, and a group of the bank's Boston-based employees. The video can be viewed on numerous sites, including Websterbank.com, YouTube, Bing, Flickr, Metacafe, Blip.tv, Viddler, Video Jug, Vimeo and Daily Motion.

Webster has had a marketing partnership with Calhoun in Connecticut since 2000.

Under the agreement, Webster said it would have "full marketing and endorsement rights from Allen throughout the bank's New England/New York geographical footprint through August of 2012." Allen will appear in video and still photography that will be used in Webster's advertising, marketing and collateral materials. He will also make special appearances at select Webster events.

The partnership was negotiated with Boston-based Altus Marketing & Management. The video was produced by Kelliher Samets Volk, Boston.

"Our new partnership with Ray Allen offers an incredibly unique way for Webster to strengthen and differentiate our brand from Boston through Connecticut," Michelle Crecca, CMO for Webster Bank, said in a statement. "Ray is a perfect match for us. His core values of teamwork, discipline and giving back to the community mirror our own. He is beloved by millions throughout our New England region, both for his NBA career and his college career at the University of Connecticut, where he played for the legendary Coach Jim Calhoun."

"Even though your toe was on the [three-point] line a few times, we're still going to give it to you. You did a heck of a job." — Wes Welker, New England Patriots

According to John Ivey, managing partner of Altus Marketing & Management, ""The emotional connection sports delivers in the Boston marketplace is unique and powerful, and it is critical that companies entering this market leverage that connection in as authentic a manner as possible. Not only does Ray possess the extraordinary personal attributes embodied by the best endorsement personalities, he also has meaningful roots in Webster's Connecticut home base -- providing a critical bridge from the bank's past to its future. We're very excited about this partnership and looking forward to seeing it unfold over the coming weeks and months."

Back to BostonSJ.com

Back to Home

Initial, the original Chanel bags but when you think you see the reality in your wallet to stand prior to you, due to the fact you may possibly not have enough

dollars to purchase the official Chanel bags and then how can you do? You might have the best alternative would be to buy it copy and save dollars. Only 1 thing to

keep in mind is that you decide on the best on line shop where you get chanel belt . Also select prom dresses under 100, which lets you shop online, the best high quality along with the greatest craft leather as well as the ideal price.In this

case, the appearance of discount Chanel handbags to solve financial troubles of most men and women.

Stamp in your unique someone the cheap bridesmaid dresses of life to their Hollywood stars and

sports wear. They will be glad you’ve them obviously high-priced gift. It is possible to put these Chanel bags, on numerous occasions like your Valentine’s Day,

wedding anniversaries, and a lot of far more.Now another question, from where you can buy these chanel handbags . So several choices for you, if you are making use

of the Net On the internet stores usually then seek the best option for Chanel bags and leather shops supply high top quality and reasonable costs of Chanel

bags.Chanel replica bags is significantly cheaper, but also for most people.

First, look closely and check what materials you use bags channels. Several Chanel bags are made of leather. You can clean, although some Chanel bag is suede dry

cleaning service wants to be taken. If your bag is leather, it is possible to follow the next step.chanel bags is one of the most respected names on the high grade,

ultra-expensive fashion nowadays. Chanel fashion 2011 prom dresses, the French brought a

revolutionary women’s “high sewing” or “high-clothes” style. Chanel revolutionized fashion, totally replacing the traditional corset comfort and casual elegance

of straightforward and suitable, and bags.

Chanel bag to represent the superior product quality and design in its comprehensive women’s accessories. Sign is equivalent to high high quality, set the style of

life, the integration trend has the highest comfort. Women all over the world desire to own a minimum of 1 low-cost chanel bags in their life, often each and every

effort to attain it.However, can not afford high priced Chanel handbag evening shoes, for most persons. Even though you will find some people inside the entire month

’s salary to purchase prom dresses, but do not possess reasonable. Maybe simply because the whole month of debt, where is

the fun end it.

You might have spent plenty of money on your golf clubs and Louis Vuitton Bags for cheap, but it is also important to have the right golf Cheap Louis Vuitton Bags to carry your equipment in. Most golfers don't have the benefits of a caddy like the professionals, and it can be a long way around the course. Choosing golf Coco Chanel Bags that can carry all your equipment easily and are comfortable and easy to move around is important. Also, you want a golf bad that looks good and reflects your style and personality on the course. The wrong golf Burberry Bag will leave you struggling to find and move your equipment, and perhaps even damaging your clubs or balls. If you want to know how to pick the best golf Louis Vuitton Bags Outlet for your equipment, then here are some tips to get you started. Right or left handed?Although it might not seem to matter whether you are right or left handed when buying a Chanel Purses, things are a little different when looking at golf Louis Vuitton Outlet Store. If you are right handed then it is probably not an issue, as most Louis Vuitton Outlet Store are designed for right handed players. However, there are left handed Louis Vuitton Outlet on the market as well. If you are left handed then choose one of these Louis Vuitton usa outlet, as you will then have the pockets and padding on the correct side, making it easier for you to carry around your equipment as you play.Cart or stand?Most golf Burberry Scarves require you to carry the Louis Vuitton Handbags around with you on your shoulder. However, there are two major types of Burberry Bags. Those that go in a cart or trolley, and those that stand on the ground. If you are being taken around in a golf cart more often than not, a cart trolley Louis Vuitton Outlet Online

is a good option.

There are many web sites out there claiming to sell authentic designer Burberry Bags.

Unfortunately, many of these web sites, although claiming to sell authenticCoach Bags,

are in reality selling fakes. Here are some simple tips that can help you figure out whether a web site is selling authentic goods.5

1. Guarantee: A web site selling authentic hand Louis Vuitton Bags

will always have a guarantee: Authentic or LV Bagsback.

If this policy is not listed on theCoach Outlet Onlinesite,

contact the web site operators to find out if they offer Louis Vuitton Outleta guarantee.

If they don't it indicates that they are not so very much Louis Vuitton Handbags that the goods

they are selling are Coach Outlet Storeauthentic. If the web site claims that the products

being sold are of the best quality, or something along these lines, something isLouis Vuitton Outlet.

If they are selling authentic goods, then the quality is Burberry Outlet

and is equal to the quality offered by Authentic Louis Vuittoncompetitor.

If they talk about offering good quality, they are really

saying that they have good quality fakes.Chanel Bagsconnections:

Companies based in China are almost always selling fakes. To find out where a company is Louis Vuitton Purses,

go to http://whois.sc and enter the Burberry Outletname.

You will Cheap Louis Vuittonsee who registered this domain.

If this is an address in China, Coach Factory Outlet Onlineaway. The domain information will also include the IP address.

Click on this IP address and see it's Coach Outlet.

You will, amongst other things, get a location. If theCoach Factory Outlet Online is in China, stay away.

Louis Vuitton: If a web site is selling Louis Coach Factory Outlet Onlinegoods,

this is usually a very bad sign. The only web sites that sell authentic Louis Vuitton goods are Coach Factory Online.

com and vuitton.com. Other web sites may have a Louis Vuitton choice available in limited qualities,

but even that is exceptional. Some people do sell authentic Louis Vuitton on Chanel Bags.

These sellers will usually be aCoach Factoryof MyPoupette.

Look for the MyPoupette logo before buying Louis Vuitton from Louis Vuitton Bags.

A trust worthy web site will list a street Louis Vuitton Sunglasses

.