Ray Allen Joins the NBPA Foundation’s Board of Directors

NEW YORK, NY (December 6, 2018) — The National Basketball Players Association (NBPA) Foundation is pleased to announce the addition of Ray Allen to its Board of Directors. Ray joins current NBA players Serge Ibaka and Lebron James as a director on the Foundation’s board as well as Chrysa Chin, NBPA Executive Vice President of Strategic Development and Engagement. NBPA Executive Director Michele Roberts serves as the board’s Treasurer and NBPA President Chris Paul also acts as the board’s President.

“Ray Allen is a great example of a player whose charitable work began in his playing days and has continued after his retirement,” said NBPA Foundation Executive Director Sherrie Deans. “Not only have Ray’s accomplishments on the court been recognized by the Hall of Fame, but the work of his foundation has earned praise and admiration from his peers and from those communities where his philanthropy is making a real difference in kids’ lives. We are honored to have him join our board.”

"I am honored to serve on the board for the National Basketball Players Association Foundation and look forward to participating with an organization not only vital to its members, but to professional basketball as a whole,” said Allen.

Ray had an accomplished 18-year NBA career, officially retiring in October 2016 after playing for four different teams; Milwaukee Bucks, Seattle Supersonics, Boston Celtics and the Miami Heat. He has won two NBA Championships, as well an Olympic gold medal in 2000 as a member of the USA Men’s Basketball team. He is a 10-time NBA All-Star, and the all-time leader in career three-point field goals. In 2018, Ray was inducted in the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame.

In 1997, Ray established the Ray of Hope Foundation which supports sports-related and community-based programs and provides avenues of opportunity for young people to realize their full potential. In 2011, Ray and the Ray of Hope Foundation embarked on an initiative to help reduce the technology divide within our communities. The “Ray of Hope Foundation Computer Lab Initiative” builds and refurbishes computer labs in public elementary and middle schools. To date, the foundation has completed 13 computer labs, 3 in Boston, 6 in Connecticut and 4 in Miami. Along with expanding the Computer Lab Initiative, the Ray of Hope Foundation envisions developing youth centers in underserved communities that provide after school programming designed to foster a mix of scholarship, culture, sports and imagination that can change the world.

Ray also sits on the boards of the University of Connecticut Foundation and the United States Holocaust Museum. In 2016, Ray and his wife, Shannon, opened their first organic, healthy fast food restaurant named GROWN in Miami. They currently own 3 GROWN restaurants in Miami, Orlando and Middletown, Connecticut. Ray has 5 children (Tierra, Walter III, Walker, Wynn, Wystan) and 3 dogs (Simba, Nala, Nike).

Editor’s Note: The NBPA Foundation’s newly elected Board consists of Chris Paul (President), Andre Iguodala (First Vice President), Ray Allen (Director) and Serge Ibaka (Director) as of January 2019.