Introduction:

James Cronin was an American nuclear physicist who won the 1980 Nobel Prize in Physics. Check out this biography to know about his childhood, life, achievements, works & timeline.

Natalie Portman

Natalie Portman is an acclaimed and award winning actress, producer and director. This biography offers detailed information about her childhood, career, work, life, achievements and timeline.

Born: 09 June 1981 American

Pete Davidson

Pete Davidson is an American comedian and actor. Check out this biography to know about his birthday, childhood, family life, achievements and fun facts about him.

Born: 16 November 1993 American

Adam Sandler

Adam Sandler is an American actor and comedian known for his roles in films like ‘Punch-Drunk Love’ and ‘The Wedding Singer’. This biography of Adam Sandler provides detailed information about his childhood, life, achievements, works & timeline.

Born: 09 September 1966 American

Carrie Fisher

Carrie Fisher is one of the most celebrated actresses of Hollywood of the Star Wars fame. Go through this biography, to know more about her childhood, life and profile.

Born: 21 October 1956 American

Anne Hathaway

Anne Hathaway is a multiple award winning American actress, singer and producer. This biography of Anne Hathaway provides detailed information about her childhood, life, achievements, works & timeline

Born: 12 November 1982 American

Matt Damon

Matt Damon is an actor-screenwriter who received the Best Original Screenplay ‘Academy Award’ for the movie Good Will Hunting. To know more about his childhood, profile, career and timeline read on.

Born: 08 October 1970 American

Yvette Prieto

Yvette Prieto the wife of legendary basketball player Michael Jordan. Check out this biography to know about her childhood, family life, achievements and fun facts about her.

Born: 29 February 1979 American

Chris Pratt

Chris Pratt is an American actor best known for films like ‘The Lego Movie’ and ‘Guardians of the Galaxy’. Check out this biography to know about his childhood, family life, achievements and other facts related to his life.

Born: 21 June 1979 American

Theodore Roosevelt

26th U.S. President

Theodore Roosevelt was the 26th President of United States of America. Go through this biography to know in detail about his life, profile, & timeline.

Born: 27 October 1858 American

George W. Bush

43rd U.S. President

George Walker Bush was the 43rd President of the United States. This biography of George W. Bush provides detailed information about his childhood, life, achievements, works & timeline

Born: 06 July 1946 American

Quentin Tarantino

Fimmaker

Quentin Tarantino is one of Hollywood’s most distinctive directors. This biography profiles his childhood, career, life, works, achievements and timeline.

Born: 27 March 1963 American

Blake Lively

Blake Lively is an American actress most famous for her role of Serena van der Woodsen in the CW drama series 'Gossip Girl’. Check out this biography to know about her childhood, family life, achievements and other facts related to her life.

Born: 25 August 1987 American

Melania Trump

Melania Trump is the current First Lady of the United States of America. This biography profiles her childhood, life, family, career, achievements, and also gives some interesting fun facts.

Born: 26 April 1970 American

Evan Rachel Wood

Evan Rachel Wood is an American actress and singer. This biography provides detailed information about her childhood, life, career, timeline and works.

Born: 07 September 1987 American

Christina Applegate

Christina Applegate is an award winning American actress and dancer. Check out this biography to know about her childhood, family life, achievements and fun facts about her.

Born: 25 November 1971 American