Gordon Alexander McKellar OBITUARY

Gordon Alexander McKellar died on Thursday, March 27. Born February 24, 1950, in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, he was proud to be a citizen of Canada and the United States. McKellar graduated from the University of Winnipeg with a degree in geography. He then completed a two-year program in photogrammetry at the Southern Alberta Institute of Technology; and, later, after moving to Colorado, he received his teaching certification from the University of Colorado in primary education. He retired from Adams12 Five Star School District, where he taught first grade, in 2005. A lifelong traveler, he met his future bride “on the beach,” in western Mexico, marrying Anne Strouss, of Hubbard, Ohio, on July 26, 1975. McKellar was a gentle soul who walked softly through life collecting friends along the way; always with a mischievous twinkle in his eye. He is remembered as adventurous, kind, humble, fun-loving and honest; a man who listened rather than spoke and a person dedicated to his family, students and community. He loved the outdoors, was an enthusiastic camper, skier (snow and water), loved the water, swam the world’s oceans, S.C.U.B.A. dived and snorkeled, and was a boater. His other hobbies included snowmobiling, gardening, turning wood and eating vanilla ice cream. He was an avid curler and was a member of the Denver Curling Club for many years and a member of the Homestake Trout Club of Leadville. A believer of open spaces, McKellar was a tireless and outspoken advocate for preserving “The Field,” in Broomfield, and a member of that city’s Open Space Foundation. McKellar was a type 1,”brittle” diabetic for much of his life and a grateful recipient of a donated kidney and pancreas in 1995. He was dedicated to the promotion of organ donor programs, particularly the Donor Alliance, and his eyes, tissue and bone will live on in others. He never allowed diabetes or its complications to get in the way of a good time or good–read all–company. He was the son of Donald Alexander McKellar and Helen Couch McKellar. He leaves his wife of thirty eight years, Anne, their children; Christopher, of Santa Barbara, California; Amy and her husband, Dave Turnbull, grand-puppy Aldo Piglet Sanchez of Sayulita; a sister, Donna Ings, of Winnipeg, and Donna’s children, niece Terry and nephew Shaun, and their families. In addition, Gordon leaves a world of loving in-laws, outlaws, relatives and friends. An outside party in honor of Gordon will take place at The Broomfield Commons, Sheridan Blvd. at 13th Ave., on Tuesday, April 1, beginning at 11:00 a.m. In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to the City of Broomfield Open Space Foundation, care of: Pat Quinn, Treasurer, 14051 Cortez Court, Bromfield, CO 80020.