Reviewed by Colin Jacobson (May 1, 2022)

In past reviews, I’ve noted my lack of enchantment with Disney’s animated sequels. For the most part, these vary from bland to crummy.

Even when the movies included the original voice talent – like with The Hunchback of Notre Dame II - the pictures tend to seem plodding and contrived. Most just remake the original flicks with some minor twist, and none of them feel inspired or even marginally fun.

We get an exception via 2003’s 101 Dalmatians II: Patch’s London Adventure, though. When I first saw previews for it, I thought it looked like another message-heavy piece of tripe.

The ads pushed the quest for individuality of Patch, one of the puppies from the original flick. Disney’s DTV releases tend to favor blandly explored themes over all else, and I observed no reason to believe London would be any different.

To my exceedingly pleasant surprise, however, London actually works pretty well. No one will confuse it with the delightful original or think that it lives up to the level of most Disney theatrical releases, but London proves light and lively.

Humans Roger (voiced by Tim Bentinck) and Anita (Jodi Benson) plan to take their canine brood from their London flat to their giant “Dalmatian Plantation” outside of London. Patch (Bobby Lockwood) starts to feel like nothing more than one in 101 and he doesn’t think anything makes him stand out as an individual.

We see that Patch maintains an obsessive interest in his favorite TV show, The Thunderbolt Adventure Hour. When he learns that the program’s star will visit London the next day, he desires to go, but since this conflicts with moving day, this looks unlikely. A glum Patch sleeps in a bag of empty dog food, which means the family loses track of him when they move the following morning.

Feeling ignored, Patch ventures into town and attends the auditions for a guest spot on Thunderbolt. There he meets the big “T” himself (Barry Bostwick), and we also get to know Thunderbolt’s TV sidekick Lil’ Lightning (Jason Alexander).

The long-neglected partner tells Thunderbolt that they’ll write the star out of the show and suggests that the egotistical hero do something special to attract positive attention. Thunderbolt goes out to perform heroic deeds, but he lacks ideas.

To assist in that matter, he recruits Patch, whose encyclopedic knowledge of the TV series gives Thunderbolt possibilities for actions. When the show’s producers can’t find the star, the sneaky sidekick Lightning then promotes himself as the new lead.

In the meantime, we see that the authorities let Cruella de Vil (Susanne Blakeslee) stay out of jail on probation, but she can’t buy any more furs. Left adrift, she finds new meaning for her life when she encounters abstract artist Lars (Martin Short).

He works exclusively in spots, and she becomes his muse. However, when he doesn’t achieve what she wants, Cruella decides to kidnap the Dalmatians to inspire him.

Of course, Cruella being Cruella, she harbors nasty motives. She wants Lars to use their carcasses as canvases. To that end, she bails her old stooges Horace (Maurice LaMarche) and Jasper (Jeff Bennett) to do the deed.

From there, London essentially becomes a big chase flick to stop Cruella and save the pups. Yes, that seems awfully similar to the plot maintained by the original film, and I can’t say that London does much to differ from its blueprint. However, even without a tremendous amount of originality, the flick still manages to prove entertaining.

London doesn’t do anything exceedingly well, but it makes very few missteps either. Though not excellent, most of the film seems reasonably positive.

Animation often holds back these DTV releases. For example, efforts like Cinderella II: Dreams Come True showed exceedingly clumsy and awkward movement.

No one will mistake the art in London with better efforts like Fantasia, but compared to its DTV brethren, it holds up well. Perhaps I noticed fewer flaws because I felt more involved in the story than usual, but I thought the animation seemed acceptably smooth and vivid.

The artwork nicely recaptured the look of the original film. While the sequel’s animation didn’t compare with that effort, it still came across as more than acceptable.

The story doesn’t seem like anything special, and one could easily argue that it mostly just rehashes the plot to the first flick. However, the directors execute it with fun and panache, and the voice talent helps make it more entertaining.

The three stars in the cast do well, and Short seems especially amusing as tortured artist Lars. Coming off his delightful work in the underrated Treasure Planet, Short appears destined to steal every animated flick in which he voices a character, and he makes Lars quite entertaining.

Would I rather watch 101 Dalmatians II: Patch’s London Adventure instead of most Disney theatrical releases? No, but it’s arguably the studio’s best direct-to-video flick, and it seems stronger than quite a few of Disney’s “animated classics”.

For instance, I’d definitely take London over stuff like Oliver and Company or The Aristocats. This may be blasphemy, but I might even select London over the vastly overrated Jungle Book.

London doesn’t dazzle me, but the briskly-paced and amusing adventure works well nonetheless, and Disney fans should definitely get a kick out of it.

Footnote: make sure you stick around through the end of the final credits. The movie includes a fun bit for those who make it that far.

101 Dalmatians II: Patch’s London Adventure appears in an aspect ratio of approximately 1.66:1 on this Blu-ray Disc. This turned into an appealing presentation.

Sharpness worked fine. Outside of some “off” looking shots that related to the original animation, this became a tight, precise image.

No signs of shimmering or moiré effects materialized. I saw no edge haloes or source defects.

London enjoyed a suitably cartoony and lively palette, and the disc replicated those tones well. The colors always came across as tight and vibrant.

Black levels also seemed deep and rich, while shadow detail looked appropriately dense but never became too thick or opaque. I thought this became a terrific image.

The DTS-HD MA 5.1 soundtrack of 101 Dalmatians II also seemed satisfying. The soundfield maintained a noticeable bias toward the front speakers, and it displayed decent spread and imaging there.

Music showed nice stereo separation, and a lot of environmental and other specific effects cropped up from the sides. The soundfield showed a good level of activity and made the front domain reasonably lively, though elements tended to seem somewhat “speaker specific” at times. The track didn’t blend together as smoothly as I’d like, and panning could appear a bit awkward.

Surround usage was relatively minor, though the movie enjoyed some active moments. For the most part, the rear speakers simply reinforced the front ones, but periodic instances of unique audio cropped up from the rear.

I even detected some split-surround usage. For example, when Cruella shouted “spots!” and ran around the art gallery, her voice moved nicely across the rear speakers.

Audio quality appeared solid. Speech came across as natural and concise, and I noticed no issues related to edginess or intelligibility.

Music sounded fairly tight and brisk, with good dynamic range evident. Effects also seemed clean and accurate, and they could provide some nice low-end response when appropriate. Although the audio of 101 Dalmatians II didn’t excel in any particular way, it still worked well for the material.

How did the Blu-ray compare to the 2009 Special Edition DVD? The Blu-ray’s lossless audio offered a similar soundscape but seemed a bit warmer and richer.

As for visuals, the Blu-ray became a major upgrade over the inconsistent DVD. This was a better defined and more vivid image, so expect a significant step up in quality.

Only minor extras appear. A light attempt to relate some information about the film’s creation, the Behind the Scenes Dog-umentary lasts seven minutes. It shows some pooches as they roam the Disney studios and learn a little about how they made London.

We hear from directors Jim Kammerud and Brian Smith, art director Bill Perkins, and anonymous animator “Dave”. Veterans won’t learn anything hear, but it’s fun to see some of the voice recording sessions, and kids should get a kick out of this creatively-done documentary.

Next we find a music video for “You’re the One” by LMNT, which just runs film pieces along with the song. Neither tune nor video seem memorable.

As the disc starts, we encounter a mix of ads. We find trailers for Aladdin and Cinderella (2015).

Sneak Peeks adds promos for Doc McStuffins, Star Wars: The Clone Wars – The Lost Missions and TinkerBell and the Legend of the NeverBeast.

A second disc provides a DVD copy of London. It includes the same extras as the Blu-ray. It seems odd that Disney didn’t include the 2009 DVD so Blu-ray purchasers could get its extras.

Most of Disney’s “direct-to-video” releases seem cheap and cheesy, but 101 Dalmatians II: Patch’s London Adventure stands out from the pack. It never takes itself too seriously, and it offers a reasonably clever and lively romp. The Blu-ray features strong visuals along with good sound and a small roster of supplements. Families looking for some animated entertainment should give 101 Dalmatians II a look, as it seems like a fun choice for both kids and adults.

To rate this film visit the original review of 101 DALMATIANS II: PATCH'S LONDON ADVENTURE