Cruella De Vil dognaps all of the Dalmatian puppies in London and Pongo leads a heroic cast of animal characters on a dramatic quest to rescue them all in a story the whole family will enjoy again and again. 101 Dalmatians has charmed audiences for generations with its memorable story and wonderful blend of humor and adventure.

The adventure begins when Patch, gets the chance to meet his TV hero, Thunderbolt, the "One-Of-A-Kind Wonderdog." When Thunderbolt realizes that the show's producers are on the lookout for a new star, the two strut out into the real world to perform true acts of heroism. And when Cruella De Vil returns, it's Patch and Thunderbolt's teamwork and friendship that will save the day.

Climb aboard the Nautilus and into a strange undersea world of spellbinding adventure with shipwrecked survivors who have been taken captive by the mysterious Captain Nemo. Wavering between genius and madness, Nemo has launched a deadly crusade across the seven seas. But can the captive crew expose his evil plan before he destroys the world?

Embark on an incredible journey with one little ant as he searches for a brave band of warriors to help him battle the bullying grasshoppers who threaten his home. When he stumbles on a bumbling troupe of circus bugs instead, their only hope for victory is the bond of friendship and the awesome power of imagination.

From Walt Disney Pictures comes the magical retelling of Charles Dickens’ beloved tale — Disney’s A Christmas Carol, the high-flying, heartwarming adventure for the whole family, starring Jim Carrey. When three ghosts take penny-pinching Scrooge on an eye-opening journey, he discovers the true meaning of Christmas -- but he must act on it before it’s too late. Complete with spirited bonus features, this exhilarating and touching Disney classic is destined to be part of your holiday tradition, adding sparkle and heart to all your Christmases yet to come.

Thrown together under incredible circumstances, two strangers must discover courage and strength when they begin a journey across the treacherous African desert! Equipped with only their wits and the expertise of a native bushman who befriends them, they are determined to triumph over impossible odds and reach their destination. But along the way, the trio face a primitive desert wilderness teeming with deadly obstacles, including wild animals, ruthless poachers, and severe weather conditions!

"A Goofy Movie" is a classic blend of irresistible characters, unforgettable music, and an endearing modern-day story about how the lovable Goof bonds with his teenage son Max on a hilarious cross-country road trip. En route to the ol' fishing hole, they find themselves up to their floppy ears in misadventure!

To 14-year-old little leaguer Calvin Fuller, life is like one big strikeout when he lets his team down. Then an earthquake sends him through a magical time rift, and he finds himself in King Arthur's court. But all is not well with the realm. An aged King Arthur is in danger of losing control to the evil Lord Belasco, and now it's up to Calvin to save the kingdom. But before he can find a way to vanquish Belasco, he must first find a way to conquer his own fears.

Vivien Morgan (Whoopi Goldberg) is a computer scientist who's accidentally flung back through the years to the colorful 6th-century England of legendary King Arthur (Michael York) and his Court! The fun then takes off when Vivien's attempts to make "improvements" produce outrageous and unexpected consequences!

When 11-year-old Jessica receives a free wish, she gets what she asked for and more – a mom for Christmas! A beautiful woman named Amy shows up at her door bringing life and laughter back into Jessica's family. Olivia Newton-John stars in this charming tale of love, family and starting over that will bring you great cheer each holiday season.