Disneys 101 Dalmatians II - Patch's London Adventure is a single-player game in which you play as Patch, a Dalmatian puppy who wants to be more than just one of the 101. After accidentally being left behind when the whole Dalmatian family moves from the city to the country, Patch sets out to find his TV hero Thunderbolt to help him learn how to become a hero. Patchs goal is to find and ultimately save his Dalmatian puppy brothers and sisters that have fallen into the clutches of the dasta

Following the similarly titled Disney animated film based on the puppies' latter-day adventures, this game casts players in the role of the irrepressible Patch. When the family moves to the country, Patch is accidentally left behind in the dangerous, busy city.

As usual, the puppy's ultimate goal is to rescue his brothers and sisters from the nasty Cruella De Vil, but he may need some guidance along the way. As he sets out on his mission, Patch seeks advice from his favorite TV character, "Thunderbolt," on how to become a true hero.

Manufacturer's description:

It's Patch to the rescue!

Lost in a sea of spots, Patch longs to be more than just "one of the 101" and dreams of being a "One-of-a-kind Wonder Dong" like his favorite TV star, Thunderbolt. His chance comes when the evil Cruella De Vil dognaps all his brothers and sisters!

With the help of Thunderbolt, rescue your family by performing heroic acts.

Run, jump, dig and roll your way through 29 colorful levels.

Outwit Cruella's sneaky henchmen and solve tricky puzzles.

Travel from London's bustling streets and lush parks to the surrounding countryside.

Features:

Third person perspective.

3D graphics

Cartoon graphics

Dogs & Fantasy themes.

Thanks to CORN POPPER for providing the game hires covers.

Infinite Health & Start with 100 lives Gameshark codes created by LUIGI.

Rest of the gameshark codes created by GLADIATOR.

We couldn't find some of the information and covers for this game. When more accurate information or covers are obtained, the entry will be updated adding the missing information. If you have information or covers that would complete this entry, please feel free to contribute them by clicking the CONTRIBUTE link in the menu on the left. You will find instructions on how to proceed.