90'+4'Thats all. Game finished - Deportivo La Guaira 1, Real Garcilaso 0.90'+4'Second Half ended - Deportivo La Guaira 1, Real Garcilaso 0.90'+3'Fouled by César Salazar - Deportivo La Guaira90'+3'Andrés Robles - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick in defence.90'+3'Substitution - Deportivo La Guaira. César Salazar for José Balza.90'+1'Substitution - Deportivo La Guaira. Guillermo Marín for Juan Azócar.90'+1'Pablo Míguez - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick in defence.90'+1'Fouled by Juan Pérez - Deportivo La Guaira90'Substitution - Real Garcilaso. Juan Tuesta for Cristian Souza.90'Missed chance. Pablo Míguez - Real Garcilaso - shot with right foot from outside the box missed to the left.86'Juan Azócar - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick on the right wing.86'Fouled by Alexis Cossio - Real Garcilaso85'Jhoel Herrera - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick in defence.85'Fouled by Jesús Lugo - Deportivo La Guaira85'Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso - receive yellow card for a foul.84'Mario Santilli - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in defence.84'Fouled by Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso83'Fouled by José Velásquez - Deportivo La Guaira83'Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick in defence.82'Substitution - Deportivo La Guaira. Juan Pérez for Luis Cabezas.82'José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick on the right wing.82'Fouled by Minzún Nelinho Quina - Real Garcilaso81'Missed chance. Cristian Souza - Real Garcilaso - shot with right foot from the left side of the box is close, but missed to the left. Assist - Reimond Manco.79'Missed chance. Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso - shot with the head from the centre of the box is close, but missed to the left. Assist - Alfredo Ramúa with a cross after corner.79'Offside - Real Garcilaso. Danilo Carando with a pass, however Andrés Robles is in offside.79'Corner - Real Garcilaso. Conceded by Diego Luna.76'Minzún Nelinho Quina - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick on the left wing.76'Fouled by Juan Azócar - Deportivo La Guaira75'Hand ball by José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira74'Missed chance. Jesús Lugo - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with left foot from a diffucult position and long distance on the right is high and wide to the left from a free kick.74'Substitution - Real Garcilaso. Alexander Lecaros for Javier Núñez.73'Minzún Nelinho Quina - Real Garcilaso - receive yellow card for a foul.72'Juan Azócar - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick on the right wing.72'Fouled by Minzún Nelinho Quina - Real Garcilaso71'Goal! Deportivo La Guaira 1, Real Garcilaso 0. Juan Azócar - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with right foot from outside the box to the left corner. Assist - José Balza.69'Corner - Real Garcilaso. Conceded by Mario Santilli.69'New attacking attempt. Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso - shot with the head from the centre of the box is saved in the left corner. Assist - Alexis Cossio with a cross.66'José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in attack.66'Fouled by Reimond Manco - Real Garcilaso65'New attacking attempt. Javier Núñez - Real Garcilaso - shot with left foot from the right side of the box is saved in the left corner. Assist - Danilo Carando.64'Missed chance. Arles Flores - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with right foot from outside the box is high and wide to the right. Assist - José Balza.62'Vicente Suanno - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in defence.62'Fouled by Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso60'Missed chance. Juan Azócar - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with the head from the centre of the box missed. Assist - Jesús Lugo with a cross after corner.59'Corner - Deportivo La Guaira. Conceded by Minzún Nelinho Quina.59'Shot blocked. Luis Cabezas - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with left foot from the left side of the box is blocked. Assist - Jesús Lugo.59'Fouled by Reimond Manco - Real Garcilaso59'Arles Flores - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in defence.58'Missed chance. Yohán Cumaná - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with left foot from outside the box missed to the left.57'New attacking attempt. José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with left foot from the right side of the box is saved by goalkeeper in the centre of the goal.56'Fouled by Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso56'Diego Luna - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in defence.56'Substitution - Real Garcilaso. Reimond Manco for Jean Pierre Archimbaud.55'Offside - Real Garcilaso. Cristian Souza with a pass, however Javier Núñez is in offside.55'Shot blocked. Cristian Souza - Real Garcilaso - shot with right foot from the left side of the box is blocked. Assist - Danilo Carando.55'Jesús Lugo - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick on the left wing.55'Fouled by Jhoel Herrera - Real Garcilaso53'Fouled by Diego Luna - Deportivo La Guaira53'Alfredo Ramúa - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick on the left wing.52'New attacking attempt. Jesús Lugo - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with left foot from outside the box is saved by goalkeeper in the centre of the goal.51'José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in attack.51'Fouled by Minzún Nelinho Quina - Real Garcilaso48'Corner - Real Garcilaso. Conceded by José Velásquez.47'Yohán Cumaná - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in defence.47'Fouled by Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso45'Second Half starts Deportivo La Guaira 0, Real Garcilaso 0.45'+2'First Half ended - Deportivo La Guaira 0, Real Garcilaso 0.42'José Velásquez - Deportivo La Guaira - receive yellow card for a foul.42'Fouled by José Velásquez - Deportivo La Guaira42'Alfredo Ramúa - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick in defence.42'Shot blocked. Arles Flores - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with right foot from outside the box is blocked. Assist - Juan Azócar.42'Shot blocked. Juan Azócar - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with right foot from outside the box is blocked. Assist - Vicente Suanno.39'Missed chance. José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with the head from few metres is close, but missed to the left.36'Hand ball by Jesús Lugo - Deportivo La Guaira36'Missed chance. Jesús Lugo - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with left foot from outside the box is close, but missed from a free kick.34'José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in attack.34'Fouled by Jhoel Herrera - Real Garcilaso32'Shot blocked. Alexis Cossio - Real Garcilaso - shot with left foot from outside the box is blocked. Assist - Cristian Souza.32'Missed chance. Edwin Peraza - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with right foot from a diffucult position on the right missed. Assist - Juan Azócar with a cross after corner.31'Corner - Deportivo La Guaira. Conceded by Andrés Robles.30'Fouled by Jean Pierre Archimbaud - Real Garcilaso30'Arles Flores - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick in attack.28'New attacking attempt. Danilo Carando - Real Garcilaso - shot with the head from the centre of the box is saved by goalkeeper in the centre of the goal.28'Shot blocked. Jean Pierre Archimbaud - Real Garcilaso - shot with left foot from outside the box is blocked. Assist - Alfredo Ramúa.28'Shot blocked. Cristian Souza - Real Garcilaso - shot with left foot from the left side of the box is blocked. Assist - Danilo Carando.27'New attacking attempt. Juan Azócar - Deportivo La Guaira - shot with right foot from outside the box is saved by goalkeeper in the centre of the goal.27'Missed chance. Javier Núñez - Real Garcilaso - shot with right foot from the right side of the box is close, but missed to the left. Assist - Jean Pierre Archimbaud.22'Fouled by Yohán Cumaná - Deportivo La Guaira15'Missed chance. Jean Pierre Archimbaud - Real Garcilaso - shot with the head from the centre of the box goes high. Assist - Alfredo Ramúa with a cross after corner.14'Corner - Real Garcilaso. Conceded by Yohán Cumaná.8'Pablo Míguez - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick in defence.8'Fouled by José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira7'Jesús Lugo - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick on the left wing.7'Fouled by Jhoel Herrera - Real Garcilaso6'José Balza - Deportivo La Guaira - won a free kick on the left wing.6'Fouled by Andrés Robles - Real Garcilaso6'Javier Núñez - Real Garcilaso - won a free kick in defence.6'Fouled by José Velásquez - Deportivo La Guaira3'Offside - Real Garcilaso. Alfredo Ramúa with a pass, however Danilo Carando is in offside.