Highly recommended by the team at Geekcore, we have played every game in the series and couldn't wait to bring these to the hands of our customers.

EXIT: THE GAME IS A NEW SERIES OF PARTY GAMES FOR UP TO FOUR PLAYERS THAT OFFERS A UNIQUE, UNFORGETTABLE GAMING EXPERIENCE. THESE GAMES ALLOW YOU TO BRING THE EXCITEMENT, INTENSITY, AND TEAM SPIRIT OF AN ESCAPE ROOM TO YOUR LIVING ROOM.

In each EXiT game, your team starts out locked in an imaginary room, or trapped somewhere. You must solve a series of riddles and puzzles in order to unlock doors and reveal new riddles. Each correct solution brings you to another riddle and eventually to freedom. The clock is ticking: You must solve all of the puzzles as fast as you can because the faster your team escapes the room and the fewer hints you use along the way, the more points you earn. Get ready to test your creative problem solving and logical thinking skills, because the rule book in an EXiT game doesn’t reveal all the rules like in other games. After the rule book gets you started, it’s up to your team to discover for itself how the rooms look, what the clues are, how to decipher them, and how to escape. Can you crack the codes and manage to escape the room?

Each game can be played only one time, because you markup, fold and tear the game materials.

UK Orders

For Orders Under £60 Royal Mail 48 £3.99 Royal Mail 24 £4.99 Royal Mail 24 Tracked £5.99 For Orders £60 and over Royal Mail 24 FREE Royal Mail 24 Tracked £1.00

All in stock orders received before 4pm will be dispatched the same day.

Delivery is estimated at 1-3 days, however these times can be slightly extended during particularly busy periods, or bad weather.

EU Orders

EU Order Conditions and Additional Fees For Orders Under €150 No additional taxes, duties, or charges For Orders €150 and Over Subject to additional taxes, duties, and fees in the destination country

All orders, unless otherwise specified by the customer are dispatched via Royal Mail Standard Airmail.

Delivery is estimated at 5-10 days, however these times can be slightly extended during particularly busy periods or periods of national inclement weather (UK or the country of delivery)

Your item will be declared as "lost" if you haven't received anything after 60 days. After this time, we'll be able to send you a replacement and enter a claim in with Royal Mail on your behalf.

For any orders over €150, taxes, duties and fees are the sole responsibility of the customer. Please refer to your country's tax authority to assess if any taxes are due prior to ordering as we cannot assist with queries relating to local tax matters.

USA, Australia & Rest of the World Orders

Standard delivery time on orders to the rest of the world is 8-15 days. However, we are not responsible for the amount of time your order is held by your country's customs control. They normally release imports within a few days, but it could be up to 90 days. Please contact your local customs authority for more information.

We offer expedited services which can get your item to you within 3 days - you will be able to see the price of this at checkout.

Please note that Loungefly products cannot be shipped to the USA (this is at the request of Funko, the brand owner).