Not to be confused with Douglas H. Turner.

Douglas William Turner (born January 3, 1969) was a Republican candidate for the New Mexico gubernatorial election, 2010.[1] Turner was defeated in the June 1, 2010 primary election by Susana Martinez. A native New Mexican, Doug owns and operates DW Turner, an 11 year old public relations firm in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Turner graduated with a Bachelor of Arts form the American University School of International Studies and has a Master’s degree in international relations from the Centre Europeen de Recherches Internationales et Strategiques, Universite Libre de Bruxelles/Universite de Paris Sud XI.

Turner was the state director (1994) and campaign manager (1998) for Gary Johnson's (R-NM) gubernatorial campaigns[2] and worked as general consultant for both administrations. He also served as a deputy political director for Steve Forbes' 2000 bid for president of the United States.[3] Turner managed campaigns for the U.S. Senate, the U.S. House of Representatives, the New Mexico state legislature and consulted on political campaigns in Asia and Europe.

He is a Term Member of the Council on Foreign Relations,[4] a life member of the American Council of Young Political Leaders and a co-chair of the United World College - USA Alumni Council. He is a board member of the New Mexico Coalition for Charter Schools[5] and sits on the Albuquerque Managing Committee of the National Dance Institute of New Mexico. Turner served three terms as Chairman of the New Mexico Judicial Standards Commission and a term on the Albuquerque Development Commission. Turner is a life member of the National Rifle Association.

Turner has also served as an adjunct professor for the Anderson School of Business at the University of New Mexico where he taught business for a semester.

A former syndicated columnist, Turner's articles have appeared in Time Magazine, the Financial Times, the Far Eastern Economic Review, the Carnegie Council's Policy Innovations and Japan's Daily Yomiuri.[6]

References