Victor Schertzinger was a man of many talents who utilized them all to the fullest. He was a musical prodigy who played violin with famous orchestras by the age of eight and toured Europe as a soloist while still in his teens. In 1913 he published his first song, “Marcheta,” for which he also wrote the lyric. After distinguishing himself as an orchestra conductor he scored his first silent film, Civilization, in 1916. By 1917 he was directing the films of Charles Ray, Richard Dix, and actress Mabel Normand, all famous stars in their day, and had established his own production company.

Schertzinger made a smooth transition to talking films, scoring The Love Parade with lyricist Clifford Grey in 1929, which starred Maurice Chevalier and introduced Jeanette MacDonald. The song “Dream Lover” enjoyed modest success and appeared in several other movies. In 1934 he directed and contributed original music to One Night of Love which won the first Oscar for Best Score and yielded nominations for best director, best picture, and best actress (Grace Moore). In 1935 he wrote the book and music for Love Me Forever which he also directed. He also wrote the book, scored, directed and produced Something to Sing About, starring Jimmy Cagney, which was nominated for a Best Score Oscar in 1937.

Schertzinger was nothing if not versatile. He directed the first filming of The Mikado in 1939 and then in 1940 moved onto Road to Singapore, the first of the comedic “Road” pictures he would direct with Bing Crosby and Bob Hope. He also contributed a novelty tune to the movie, sung by Hope and Crosby, and a ballad sung by Dorothy Lamour with lyrics by Johnny Burke. In 1941 he directed and wrote the music with lyricist Frank Loesser for Kiss the Boys Goodbye, starring Don Ameche and Mary Martin The film produced the marvelous song “Sand in My Shoes” which the Hi-Lo’s included in their 1960 album All Over the Place.

The Fleet’s In, released in 1942, introduced Schertzinger’s most famous songs, “I Remember You” and “Tangerine,” both with lyrics by Johnny Mercer. Schertzinger died suddenly in October, 1941, before seeing Jimmy Dorsey’s recordings of the two songs make the top ten.