“If Iceland didn’t exist, it would have been invented,” said Ukrainian writer Andrey Kurkow in his acceptance speech upon receiving the Halldór Laxness International Literary Prize in 2022 on last September 7th from Katrín Jakobsdóttir, the Prime Minister of Iceland. The occasion marks the third time the Halldór Laxness International Literary Prize is awarded. In 2019, English novelist and screenwriter Ian McEwan received the prize and in 2021, British-Turkish novelist Elif Shafak was awarded the prize.

The prize is the amount of 15,000 euros, awarded to internationally recognized authors for contributing to a renewal of the narrative tradition, as these were the grounds for awarding Laxness himself the Nobel Prize in 1955. The award is supported by The Prime Minister’s Office; The Ministry for Culture and Business Affairs; Business Iceland; Reykjavík International Literary Festival; Gljúfrasteinn and Forlagið, the Icelandic publisher of Laxness. The selection panel for the award this year includes Egill Helgason, literary critic and TV host, Stella Soffía Jóhannesdóttir, the director of the Reykjavík International Literary Festival, as well as the previous winner, Elif Shafak.

About Andrey Kurkow

Initially, Andrey Kurkow was acclaimed for his novel Death and the Penguin, and thereby, he became Ukraine’s best known contemporary author. The novel is a humorous and mournful description of the absurd realities of everyday life in post-communist Eastern Europe; a theme recurrent in his other works. Kurkow is a prolific writer. His books have been published in 42 languages. He writes for both children and adults, and numerous films have been adapted from his work. This September Kurkow’s latest book, Diary of an Invasion, will be published. It is a diary he began keeping while Russia was preparing its invasion of Ukraine. Kurkow is the president of PEN Ukraine and he has traveled widely in recent months to discuss the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Kurkow was a guest at the Reykjavík International Literary Festival in 2005, where he held a memorable reading from his works.

Words from the selection panel