Did you know that Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (technically Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde) is a short story? A novella, at best? The version I read (a trade paperback volume by Signet Classics containing an introduction by Stephen King and also Dracula and Frankenstein) runs to 75 pages. Which makes this Victorian, Gothic classic an easier read than usual. It goes down smooth, even with the old-fashioned gimmicks. It would be better if the reader did not know anything about the story, because mystery is one of the main draws, but I imagine this is nearly impossible these days. And there is still plenty to mine from this psychologically complex classic.

Just for the record: Lawyer Gabriel Utterson is an impartial man. He listens. He disappears into the background, refuses to register judgement. For this, everyone likes and respects him, including one of his oldest friends, Dr. Jekyll. He’s secretly really frustrated, though, about the will that Jekyll has left in his care, bequeathing his estate in entirety to one Mr. Hyde. Furthermore, Utterson starts hearing terrible things about Mr. Hyde around London, and when he finally meets him, he is horrified. What could possibly be the cause of Dr. Jekyll’s thrall under the violent, repulsive Mr. Hyde? And how far will this dark secret take all of them down the rabbit hole?

I pulled this story off the shelf right now for two reasons: October reading; and I just received an ARC for Christian Klaver’s Sherlock Holmes & Mr. Hyde. I am a Sherlock fan, already, and have read all of the stories, watched the shows, whatever, but I had never read Jekyll and Hyde. So, in order to give the new book a fair shake, I thought I would read the original. When I saw how thin it was, I was relieved. While some of my favorite books of all time are Victorian (Jane Eyre), Gothic even (Wuthering Heights), I also sometimes come across titles from the period which are tedious enough to make the reading experience difficult (like Dracula) though often worth it in the end).

The style of older writing can be quite tedious for many of us modern readers, but not only was Jekyll and Hyde short, it was actually remarkably good. And even with the old, tiresome conceit of having someone else bracket the story and tell it from a third-party perspective, it was written with great mystery, deft, and quick pacing. I mean, some of the wickedness of Mr. Hyde is pretty laughable to us, and who knows what depravity Stevenson was trying to imply behind the wall of Victorian regulation and strictures. Sometimes trying to put ourselves in the shoes of these bizarro people from this time period and place is a stretch, and yet readers and writers love to do it. Looking past a few of these awkward moments, however, there is a theme behind the novella which is universal: what would happen if you unleashed the evil side of your personality, if you could safely let loose the animal behind your human constraints? And what might happen, if you did? Could it possibly stay a safe experiment? Could it destroy you? These are interesting questions, and like Frankenstein and other Gothic horror, it’s these sorts of considerations that drive the narrative (coming, I think, from wondering if and how science would or could fill the hole left by religion).

It’d be best if you pretend that you don’t know anything about Jekyll and Hyde and then dive in. That’s what I tried to do, to varying success. I mean, I wasn’t really surprised, but I could stand back and appreciate what a tense, suspenseful tale this must have been for its first readers. Overall, the little book is well-written and interesting, deep in consideration of human nature and also a classic of monster stories for a reason. I enjoyed reading it. It’s not gory (by our standards), but it does send a chill down your spine every once in a while, especially if you cos-play into one of those really long and high skirts and a feather-bedecked, mini hat and reach for your smelling salts every once in a while.

Robert Louis Stevenson was a Scottish author from the late 1800s. (He died at only 44.) True to most Victorian authors, he was not just a novelist and short story author, but a poet and essayist. He was also a travel writer (which I think is cool). Some of his most famous works include, yes, Curious Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, but also Treasure Island and A Child’s Garden of Verses. Notably for some of the themes in Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, Stevenson suffered from bronchial issues his whole life, but travelled against doctors’ orders. (This seems similar to Dr. Jekyll wanting to do things that his culture won’t allow him to, and using science to create a part of himself who can be “free.”) One day I’ll get around to reading both Treasure Island and A Child’s Garden of Verses. Until then, I am fond of the Muppet version of the former.

“It is one of those affairs that cannot be mended by talking” (p21).

“Why, money’s life to a man. We have nothing to do but wait for him at the bank, and get out the handbills” (p27).

“…and it fell out with me, as it falls with so vast a majority of my fellows, that I chose the better part and was found wanting in the strength to keep to it” (p68).

“My devil had long been caged, he came out roaring” (p68).