Pakistan has always been known to produce quick and fast bowlers as well as outstanding batsmen who not only made their name but left their mark in the world of cricket.

Inzamam-ul-Haq is one of the finest batsmen Pakistan has ever produced. ‘Aloo’ is the name the crowd used to chant, while his friends and teammates, called him ‘Inzy’.

Multan is in the southern part of the Punjab province of Pakistan, and this is where Inzamam-ul- Haq was born on 3rd March 1970 in a Sufi religious family. It is at the age of 15 that he started playing for different domestic leagues.

1. Inzamam-Ul-Haq was the best batter in Pakistan

Inzamam-ul-Haq was a blend of strength and subtlety as a batter, power came with ease for a man of his bulk. His aggressive style of playing across his front pad or groping outside of stump made him the best batsman in the world against pace as rated by Imran Khan.

Being strong off his feet, fast and agile, with ferocious pulls and stuck drives, he played with shots all round the wicket with an unbeaten score of 138 to a thrilling one-wicket win against Bangladesh at Multan.

2. ‘Inzy’ the PlayMaker

He was the International Cricket Council’s number one ranked batsman in 1995 with a unique batting style that was highly appreciated. His batting style was made up of ease but sublime touch, class, and stealth fluidity stroke play that defied his sturdy figure.

The 51-year-old played 120 Tests and 378 One-Day Internationals in his illustrious life career. Inzamam is rated as one of the greatest World Cup innings in history, a match-winning knock of 60 against New Zealand in the 1992 semi-final against New Zealand.

3. From Winning to Chief Selector

As a former Pakistani cricket captain and Afghanistan’s head coach, he successfully guided the Afghans’ team to the Super 10 stage World Twenty-twenty in India where they were eventually crushed by the champions West Indies.

The departure and resignation of the Pakistan head coach Waqar Younis prompted the request by the Pakistani Cricket Board to release the former batting great from his contract with Afghanistan.

He served as the chief selector of the Pakistan team between 2016-2019 and it was during his tenure that Pakistan won the ICC Champions Trophy final against India in 2017.

4. Formidable Passenger on the field

While fielding, Inzamam is rarely seen. As cricket become more of an athletic game, ‘Inzy’ opted to be in the short mid-wicket, mid-on, or slip cordon if there was a match, or all together off the field.

Inzy explains, that due to his loath of exercising, he was seen as a poor fielder and a passenger on the field. However, he transformed into one indomitable passenger when he played off his pads, as is seen by the wins of the matches he played.

5. Inzamam the cream of Auckland

The international cricket of the 1992 World cup in Auckland was between Inzamam-ul-Haq against Martin Crowe invincible Kiwis. With the Kiwi’s score being 262 in their 50 overs favor, the high-spirited Inzamam-ul-Haq thwacked 60 off 37 balls to single handled carry the Pakistan team to victory.

6. His Favorite meals

It has always been rumored that the reason for Inzamam-ul-Haq being out of form in the field and dislike for exercise is his love and fondness for paranthas and sweets.

He says, “it is all a myth because people like Mohamed Yousuf came close (to breaking his record)run out has very little to do with fitness, it has more to do with the understanding with the partner.”

Chicken kadhai is the staple food of most people from Pakistan, he is also fond of omelets and plain rice as well. This food reminds him of his playing days.

7. Oops! stumbling regrets

Despite Inzamam being a fine batter, rescuing the team in difficult positions, he has been dismissed in bizarre circumstances a few times during his career. Let us take a look at one of them.

He was dismissed for obstructing the fielder against India in 2006. In the same year while Pakistan was playing against England and Inzy was on strike, he tried to sweep, missed completely, lost his balance fell back brushing the bails with his chest.

8. ‘Inzy’ against English mean

Inzamam-ul-Haq became the first ever captain to forfeit a Test match against England in 2006. Together with his team, they refused to re-enter the field after allegations of ball tampering from the English team.

Inzamam and his team protested at the decision, returning to the field to find the English team absent, altogether with the umpires. The match eventually was awarded to England

9. Inzamam awarded Sitara-e-Imtiaz

The Pakistani Government, 2005, awarded Inzamam ul Haq with the Sitara-e-Imtiaz translated as the Star of Excellence which is the third highest honor and civilian award in the hierarchy of Sitara. It recognizes the service that he contributed to the game of cricket

10. Inzy’s Family Legacy

Inzamam ul-Haq’s legacy in Pakistan and Afghanistan cannot be overlooked as far as Cricket is concerned. He is known for his batting game and most fans do agree. Inzamam’s footprints are being followed by a younger bespectacled man, who is his nephew by the name of Imam.

Inzamam and Imam have faced multiple accusations of nepotism which Inzamam has brushed off stating that Imam was selected by the coaches Mickey Arthur and Grant Flower.