The first coins were probably issued in Germany by Celtic tribes in the third century BC. Although Germany east of the Rhine was not incorporated into the Roman Empire, Roman coins circulated in Germany until the fall of the Roman Empire. During the early Middle Ages, Merovingian and Carolingian coins circulated in present-day Germany with coins issued at a number of local mints. Most coins were either silver denar/pfennigs or obole/half denars.

German coinage was reformed in the 1130s when silver bracteates generally replaced shrinking pfennigs. Hellers, equal to half a pfennig were introduced in southern Germany in the 1200s while groschen (equal to 12 pfennigs or 6 rappen), witten (equal to 4 pfennigs) and other coins were introduced across Germany. Gold coinage was introduced by Emperor Ludwig IV of Bavaria (1314-47) striking copies of French ecus, though Rhenish gulden imitating florins in the 1360s became the predominant gold coins of Germany.

The discovery of silver mines in the mid-fifteenth century led to the issue of the taler which was initially equal in value to a gold gulden. Frederick III of Saxony began the production of talers in Germany in 1500. These large silver coins enabled Germany princes, bishops and others to put their portraits on the coins or commemorate important events. The spread of mechanized coin production in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries further strengthened the importance of the Taler in Germany. The combination of large silver discoveries, regal vanity and technological innovations in coin production made the taler, and thus the dollar, the basis of currency systems for the next 500 years.

In 1701 the lands of the Hohenzollern margraves of Brandenburg were unified as the Kingdom of Prussia. Frederick II the Great (1740-85) extended Prussia to Silesia in Austria. During the eighteenth century, Germany was a collection of principalities, bishoprics and other political entities, which together had formed the Heiliges Romisches Reich (Holy Roman Empire) from the Middle Ages until the Empire was dissolved on August 6, 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars.

The Holy Roman Empire was succeeded by the Confederation of the Rhine, which was formed on July 25, 1806 with Napoleon as the Protector of the Confederation. The Confederation collapsed in 1813, and there was no formal political entity until the formation of the German Confederation on June 20, 1815. The North German Confederation (Bremen, Brunswick, Hamburg, Luebeck, Mecklenburg-Schwerin, Mecklenburg-Strelitz, Oldenburg, Prussia, Saxony, etc.) was formed on July 1, 1867, and the German Reich was formally declared on January 1, 1871 when the North German Confederation was combined with Baden, Bavaria and Wuerttemburg. Germany became a Republic on November 10, 1918. After World War II, Allied occupation began on May 23, 1945. The Federal Republic of Germany was formed on September 7, 1949. The German Democratic Republic was formed on October 7, 1949 and incorporated into the Federal Republic of Germany on October 3, 1990.

During the time of the Holy Roman Empire, and until the 1930s, German states, bishoprics, principalities, state banks, private banks and others were able to issue their own specie money and/or banknotes. Bishoprics could issue coins until 1803. State banks lost the right to issue banknotes under the Law of December 1933, which became effective on December 31, 1935. A book itself could be written on all the monetary variations that resulted from this multitude of issuers. Nevertheless, there were several monetary systems that the issuers tried to adhere to in order to simplify transactions and insure that coins and banknotes issued in one part of Germany were accepted in other parts of Germany.

There were basically three monetary systems in Germany, one for the Northern states, one for the Southern states, and a separate system for Hamburg and Luebeck. These three systems were consolidated in 1871 when the Mark replaced the Thaler, Gulden, and Schilling. There were numerous variations on the various units of account, specie money, ghost moneys and other moneys that circulated in Germany, so the discussion below reveals the system at its theoretical best. At various points in time, rulers and monetary conventions tried to give Germany a common monetary system, but the multitude of issuers, and the resistance of many of them to change and uniformity made this virtually impossible until political unification occurred.

The principal currencies in Germany were the Thaler and the Gulden. In 1524 Emperor Charles V (1519-58) established the guldiner/taler as the monetary standard for his domains. The Thaler was divided into 24 Groschen, 288 Pfennige and 576 Heller, while the Gulden was divided into 60 Kreuzer, 240 Pfennige and 480 Heller, and during the Holy Roman Empire 1 Thaler was equal to 1.5 Gulden. But these relationships rarely held. In 1566 the silver Reichsthaler was introduced, equal to 68 copper Kreuzer, but during the Thirty Years war, the rate fell to 600 Kreuzer in March 1622 as silver became scarcer than copper. Moreover, the divisions into subunits often varied from one city to another, as well as from one point in time to another. The taler was divisible into 72 kreuzer in Austria and northern Germany, but 60 kreuzer in Austria and in southern Germany and 68 kreuzer in Saxony. Gold coinage followed the standard of the Venetian ducat with 1 gulden equal to 75 kreuzer in the mid-sixteenth century and the ducat equal to 104 kreuzer.

The Thirty Years War led to a severe depreciation in silver coins, and after the war the taler, now equal to 90 kreuzer, became secondary to the silver gulden equal to two-thirds of a taler.

As the relationships fluctuated, rulers and monetary conventions tried to redefine the currencies they used, but as long as the issuers debased the currencies they issued, the fixed relationships could never hold and did not. This meant that the Thaler went through several reincarnations as the Reichsthaler, Speciesthaler and Conventionthaler. The Gulden had fewer reincarnations, but its value fluctuated over time as well. Although 1 Silver Gulden equaled 60 Copper Kreuzer in 1524, by 1736 it took 180 Kreuzer to obtain a Gulden.

The monetary systems we use to describe Germany before 1871 is a vast oversimplification of the real situation, but to be completely accurate, it might be necessary to create a 100 or more different monetary systems for Germany during the period from 1500 to 1871. Germany has a history of reforming and centralizing its currency, and has a fear of monetary chaos because of the experience with inflation after each of the World Wars. Given the repeated historical attempts at unifying the monetary system in Germany over the past 500 years, it should come as no surprise that having failed in their attempt to bring political unification to Europe in the 20th Century that Germany should settle for monetary unification in the 21st Century.

The Thaler represented both a silver coin and a unit of account, and the Joachimsthaler (XDHT) is the ultimate forefather of the today's Dollar. The Thaler, equal to 60 Kreuzer, became a unit of account in the Northern German states in 1555 and in 1566 became the money of the Holy Roman Empire under the name of the Reichsthaler (XDRT), equal to 68 Kreuzer and making it slightly heavier than the Thaler.

The Conference of Leipzig in 1690 extended the use of the Thaler to the entire Holy Roman Empire (except Hamburg and Luebeck) in 1693. It became known as the Speciesthaler (XDST), equal to 120 Kreuzer. Frederick the Great's wars led to a further debasement of the coinage, and at the Convention of Vienna in 1753, the Speciethaler was redefined as being equal to 1.33 Thaler, 1.5 Gulden in northern Germany, and 2 Gulden/Florins in southern Germany (Bavaria and Austria), creating the Convention Thaler (XDCT). Subdivisions of the Thaler vari