Score Academy - An Individualized Private School in Florida

Custom Schedules & Curricula • Intentionally Small Class Size • Open Enrollment

Words Our Students Use to Describe Score Academy...

Our School Environment Is...

Caring • Fun • Interesting

Our Teachers Are...

Respectful • Helpful • Trusting • Supportive

We Feel...

Happy • Supported • Confident

Do you feel your child’s school is meeting his or her needs?

Do you feel that your child's current teachers are inspiring your child to do his or her best?

Does your student need a more challenging curriculum?

Does your student’s school schedule need to work around a demanding extracurricular schedule?

Has your current school lost sight of your child's individual needs?

Could your student benefit from 1-on-1 instruction?

Does your student need a program that maximizes the chances of acceptance to his or her first-choice college?

Individualized Attention

Small-Group and 1-on-1 Classes Guarantee Personal Attention

College Guidance

College Admissions Focus with Expert Guidance

Rolling Enrollment

Open Enrollment and Year-Round Instruction to Fit Any Schedule

A Day in the Life of a Student. A small class or one-on-one education doesn’t limit friendships.

Our intimate, supportive environment lends itself to students developing strong relationships with their peers and teachers. The Score ‘Family’ includes faculty and staff who are vested in student success. Fostering a sense of camaraderie based upon responsibility, accountability, and collaboration is an important part of the school experience.

Time Activity 8:45 am - 9:00 am Advisory with mentor teacher 9:00 am - 9:45 am Period 1 9:45 am -10:30 am Period 2 10:30 am - 11:15 am Period 3 11:15 am - 11:45 am Advisory —Social/Emotional/Life Skills 11:45 am - 12:15 pm Lunch 12:15 pm - 1:00 pm Period 4 1:00 pm - 1:45 pm Period 5 1:45 pm - 2:30 pm Period 6

The above schedule is an example and other schedules are easily possible.

“Score Academy was just what our daughter needed at the time. Celine Badal (Director and Head of School) answered every question we had when we were looking to change schools. She is always available and cares a lot about the families who attend the school. The teachers communicate with you on a constant basis and are happy to answer any questions a parent has. The teachers and staff make sure every child feels seen and valued so they can truly be their best self. The curriculum is challenging, but fun, and inspires a love for learning. Our family has had nothing but a positive and wonderful experience.”

- Alyssa & David Lovitt

With its five locations, Score Academy is the only family of intentionally small schools in Florida accredited by Cognia and SACS CASI Cognia

Score Academy’s academic program is individualized to meet each student’s unique needs, from kindergarten through 12th grade and even Post-Graduate (13th year). Our emphasis on college preparation begins with the subjects that strengthen academic building blocks focused on custom tailored 1-on-1 and small-group education, creating an individual education plan and schedule for each student based on academic needs, learning style, and personality. We're in a position to accept any student who has the potential to succeed in our environment.

With open enrollment and flexible scheduling, we’re ready at any time to support your child’s academic success with courses at every level: honors, AP, remedial and so much more.

In addition to enrolling students in grades K-12 on a rolling basis throughout the year, we offer summer school at all grade levels, and individual courses for credit all year long for students who want to enhance their curriculum or improve their GPA. We're proud of the fact that virtually all Score Academy graduates have continued their education in 4-year universities across the nation.

Our accreditations reflect our commitment to providing students with the highest quality of private-school education coupled with continuous improvement of services.