2024 29er European Championships at Gdynia, Poland - Day 5

by International 29er Class 8 Jul 07:54 PDT

Sunday was the penultimate day of the 29er European Championship, held as part of the 25th edition of Gdynia Sailing Days. It was the hardest and most stressful day so far for all the crews. The wind was light and shifty and to the sailors disadvantage the forecast for tomorrow looks very similar.

After Saturday, two Polish crews lead the pack. Ewa Lewandowska and Krzysztof Królik took first place both in general and mix category. Just 15 points behind them stand leaders of the U17 category - Bartosz Zmudzinski and August Sobczak. The British crews of Finian Morris with Charlie Gran and James Crossley with Sam Webb took fourth and fifth place. The point difference between them is only seven, so the battle is very tight. The situation is very similar with the previously unbeaten Italian duo of Alex Demurtas and Giovanni Santi, who although have fallen into fifth position are just eight points behind the Brits. Sixth position overall and fifth in men belongs to Frenchmen Nolann Huet Des Aunay and Tituan Gresset.

"Today's conditions were pretty tricky, but we're not surprised by it anymore. Unfortunately, alongside that the wind was also the lightest we've had so far, which made the day that more challenging. We started with a bit of a shocker, but then worked up and managed to secure a fourth and first position, thanks to the breeze picking up. With the level of the gold fleet field anything can happen tomorrow, so we'll give it our best and see what happens.", said James Crossley and Sam Webb.

The U17 category is also marked by a tight rivalry between second and third place, as there is only a seven-point difference between Frenchmen Alexandre Mostini and Raphael Allain and Germans Lucas and Moritz Hamm. In the open category they managed to secure as followed the seventh and eighth place. The competition is way less stressful for the leaders- Poles Bartosz Zmudzinski and August Sobczak, who have a 40-point advantage over the French team.

"We started today's racing exceptionally early, at 9 AM, as that was when the strongest wind was expected. Our main goal for this regatta was to win a medal in the overall classification, not just the U17. Despite this, during the competition, we try not to focus on the results and just sail as well and consistently as we can. Today went much better than yesterday because our starts were as we wanted. We managed to secure two second places and one eighth place. We focused a lot on our strategy and sailing technique and it paid off greatly. The plan for tomorrow is to just keep going and not change anything.", summed up Bartosz Zmudzinski and August Sobczak.

Alicja Tutkowska and Alicja Dampc are still in the lead in the women's category, although their advantage of 45- points to the British team of Annabelle Vines and Amelie Hiscocks has dropped to just 12. Last on the podium, with a 31- point difference is the Finnish team of Una Heinila and Silja- Sophie Laukkanen.