At this point, fighting had broken out across the country as Polish units sought to repel the German invasion. The Polish coast had effectively been cut off from the rest of the country thanks to German attacks and the Armia Pomorze had been forced to retreat. The Land Coastal Defence had gradually been sucked into various battles since the first day of the invasion – 1st September.

Once again, the elderly German battleship, the Schleswig-Holstein, engaged with Polish land forces – as it had done so at the Battle of the Westerplatte several days previously, although with limited effect. Attempts by the battleship to edge closer to the Polish positions were repelled by Polish shore batteries.

The Germans experienced more success on land though as their ground forces made progress and managed to forge a link between Germany and Prussia – the chunk of German territory cut off by the Polish corridor on 4th September. Fierce fighting occurred neat Kartuzy the next day before the main German thrust towards Gdynia was launched on the 8th. Despite determined Polish resistance near Puck and Wejherowo, the defenders were gradually forced back by the Germans towards the coast.

Eventually, the defence at Gdynia were breached by the Germans on the 10th September and despite a fierce Polish defence which blunted the German Blitzkrieg and turned the battle into something more akin to the trenches of the First World War, Colonel Dąbek realised further resistance in the city would incur civilian casualties so on the 12th, all Polish units were ordered to withdraw towards Kępa Oksywska – a thin strip of land near Puck Bay. Further fighting occurred on the 11th and 12th and once again, the Poles were forced to retreat.

Gdynia fell to the Germans on 14 September and the remaining 9000 Polish soldiers at Kępa Oksywska found themselves in a city unprepared and lacking provisions for a siege. After a series of skirmishes and firefights and a final, failed Polish counterattack, the Poles were forced to surrender, with their wounded commander, Colonel Dąbek, committing suicide.