curley's wife is a very weird character. Steinbeck uses this charcter to illustrate many things. Her dream is to be (in the movies) and "wear nice cloths" and stay in :big hotels" and also to take many "pictures". Her dream is to be who she wants to be without anyone judging her and no one telling her no you cant do this (her mother) . We can call her dream as the American dream . because the american dream is all about opportunity and self_invention and be who want to be. But, unfortunately her dream was corrupted because of the society she is living in. Steinbeck wants to convey a very important message. he wants to give us a hint of how women are treated. steinbeck didn't even name curleys wife to show that she not an important individual. Her dream ended as a result of her loneliness. she is a very lonely person and no one wants to talk to her and so she went to the only person that she knows will talk to her, the mentally disabled man,Lennie.:dont you worry about talkin to me) while they were talking she is asked him to touch her hair and that leads to her death and the end of her dream.

her dream is important because steinbeck wants to show that everyone has some forces behind their attitudes and to not judge anyone unless we know all of the details of the persons story. he also wants to say that dreams are very important and they are the thing the keeps the person alive and gives life its taste.

This is my response that i did for a past paper question.

if you need to use my work please credit me for it please.

Thanks

Jack Whitbread 2015

(a) Explore how the language in the extract influences your view of Curley’s wife and her dreams. You must include examples of language features in your response. (16 Marks)

Steinbeck uses a lot of adverbs to describe how Curley’s wife is talking. For example, “quickly”, “cautiously”. Steinbeck uses these adverbs to show that Curley’s wife is talking rather fast but also watching what she is saying because she might not be able to 100% trust Lennie but as we read on we learn that she starts to trust Lennie as she opens up to him about her feelings and dreams. These adverbs give the reader a thought that Curley’s wife is rushing to say something this could be because she has been trying to talk to someone for a long time and now that she has the chance she’s going to say everything that she can. Steinbeck makes Curley’s wife sound like she is trying to convince herself that her dreams could come true. We see this when the book says. “I wouldn’t be livin’ like this, you bet.’”. Because Curley’s wife says, “you bet” to the end of her sentence could mean that she is trying to make herself believe that her dreams could come true. This makes the reader feel sorry for Curley’s wife as she is wanting a life in Hollywood but can’t because she has now married Curley and she can’t even talk to people on the ranch she won’t have any chance of getting to Hollywood as Curley won’t let her. Steinbeck uses repetition to make Curley’s wife look desperate for her dream to come true. We see this when Steinbeck says, “An’ had nice clothes” she repeats this 3 more times on the same page. This is because Curley’s wife is trying to make herself feel bad about herself because at the moment she is living at a ranch with all men and no women with a husband that she doesn’t love and no chances of getting her dream to come true in the future. Steinbeck uses verbs to make Curley’s wife look inferior for a split second. We see this when see says, “She demanded, ‘you listenin’?’”. The verb “demanded” shows that Curley’s wife is being authoritative as she is asking Lennie a question. This makes the reader feel overpowered by Curley’s wife and makes us feel that she can stand up for herself as she can be brusquely while asking a simple question.