S&G Technology Services, UK subsidiary of Sirma Group, sign up as a Temenos Exchange Service Provider to bring the innovative Cloud Architecture Roadmap (CAR) service to a wider connected audience.

This is a significant milestone for S&G. Having worked alongside Temenos for many years, the move to Temenos Exchange service provider with the innovative CAR service, confirms Temenos’s support in demonstrating our unwavering commitment to technological advancement for Cloud Migration and technology for banks and financial institutions worldwide.

The Cloud Architecture Roadmap service, powered by a unique, purpose-built, proprietary software product, offers a secure, well-informed, and comprehensive foundation for cloud migration and a clear understanding of the dependencies and optimal sequencing for Temenos core banking cloud migration, leading to cost and risk reduction. Stakeholders gain greater understanding and confidence, and it serves as a basis for budget estimates.

Fabrice Gouttebroze, Managing Director of S&G Technology Services, shares “This is an important and timely milestone for S&G Technology Services. It positions the company as a reference partner for all banks in the Temenos ecosystem considering a migration to cloud or SaaS. Thank you for the deep commitment of the entire team. S&G Technology availability on Temenos Exchange further extends our commitment to the banking community and enables Temenos customers to easily reap the benefits of the Cloud Architecture Roadmap. We look forward to leveraging the power of the Temenos platform to help us achieve our business goals”

Temenos Exchange brings innovation to the market faster, and at scale. The ecosystem offers pre-integrated and approved fintech solutions that can be easily deployed on top of Temenos open platform for composable banking, enabling banks to accelerate the creation of new financial services, while reducing the costs of development.

About S&G Technology Services

S & G Technology Services Ltd. is a part of Sirma Group Holding, providing IT services and system integration in South-East Europe. Our mission is to help banks adapt to a rapidly changing world by identifying and implementing small to medium-high-value technology transformation initiatives. We have worked with Temenos for almost a decade, adding innovative features to their portfolio. Our successful collaboration has enabled us to advise major banking groups worldwide to exceed customer expectations.

About Temenos

Temenos Group AG (SIX: TEMN), headquartered in Geneva, is a market-leading software provider that partners with banks and other financial institutions to transform their businesses and stay ahead of a changing marketplace. Temenos core banking is the world’s most successful and widely used digital core banking solution. Using cloud-native and agnostic technology, Temenos provides the most extensive and richest set of banking functionality across retail, corporate, treasury, wealth and payments, with over 1000 banks in 150+ countries relying on it to provide market-leading and innovative products and services to their customers.

Media contact:

Clair Dicker (clair.dicker@sngservices.co.uk) S&G Technology Services