For the third consecutive year, Temenos is running its Innovation Jam competition. This year, the Jams will be held in seven cities around the world, up from five in 2017. The Jam in Geneva is scheduled for 17 April. The winner from each Jam then travels to the final, held at the Temenos Community Forum – which this year will be in Dublin on 22-24 May – to compete to become the global Innovation Jam winner, which last year was won by Blue Code, a token-based payment scheme from Switzerland.

Chris Pirkner, CEO of Blue Code, last year’s global winner, added, “The Innovation Jam was transformational for Blue Code. It catapulted us into the limelight and, on the back of it, we have closed more business, including with tier 1 banking institutions, and raised a new round of capital to be able to fund this much faster growth. Now on the MarketPlace, we are working extremely collaboratively with Temenos to realise our global ambitions.”

Cedric Ullmo, CEO of Edgelab, last year’s Geneva Jam winner, said, ““Taking part and winning the Innovation Jam in Geneva has given us massive exposure. That, and our MarketPlace membership, has helped us to grow much faster and internationalize our business. Pretty much every day now we have a call or meeting with Temenos sales or Temenos customers.”

Launched at the start of 2016, the Temenos MarketPlace is a platform for facilitating the exchange of value between fintech providers and financial institutions. Its value proposition is based on curating the very best fintech solutions from around the world, certifying and integrating these solutions with the Temenos Suites, and making these solutions as easy to provision as possible. Today, MarketPlace is the world’s largest fintech store, with over 100 applications from more than 50 fintech providers.

Commenting on the 2018 Jams, Ben Robinson, Chief Strategy Officer at Temenos, said: “Our goal with the MarketPlace is to helps banks to accelerate innovation by finding the most innovative solutions and pre-integrating them to plug and play with their Temenos Suites. The Innovation Jam competition plays a very important role in helping us to uncover the best fintech solutions and over 20 of the current MarketPlace providers have joined through this route. This year, we have increased the number of Jams and I would encourage as many fintech firms as possible to apply, to have the chance to showcase their solutions directly to leading banks from all over the world.”

Picture: Fotolia.com / Chombosan

(Press release)