In his rich life experience Nikola Krstić made acquaintances and friends with a whole gallery of personalities not only in Belgrade and Serbia, but beyond Serbian borders as well. Curious and friendly, pleasant and eloquent, he was especially interesting conversationalist in female company. His observations about particular personalities provide answers to questions which were most difficult for historians, and these were questions about character, everyday habits, daily rituals and characteristics of each type. Therefore, his notes were significant in bringing to light the personality and character of certain members of the Obrenović family, especially Tomanija Obrenović about whom there are few direct documents. Tomanija Obrenović (1796-1881), though she was a secondary person in their family, was present in all important events, all crises, but also honours that came with the Obrenovićs. She had her personal opinion about everything, and she had influence on her family members, husband Jevrem, daughter Anka, grandson Milan, the prince of Serbia. However, we can draw only indirect conclusions about her own life, for there is a lack of sources. Therefore, diaries of Nikola Krstić give us an exceptional piece of evidence about one part of Tomanija’s life.

This paper presents the content of the library fund (a list of books, periodicals and manuscripts) of the library of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Principality of Serbia in 1846. The fund was quantitatively analyzed according to the languages in which the works were written. The paper also explains when, how and why some titles were acquired for the library. The paper was written on the basis of relevant literature and published and unpublished archival materials of Serbian origin.

This paper deals with Slobodan Jovanović’s (1869–1958) historiography and theory of historiography. He analyses the prejudices of the epoch, prejudices of different national historiographies, as well as personal and political prejudices of historians. Jovanović’s study on the French Revolution precedes French critical studies of the French Revolution (Furet). Jovanović stresses the importance of the history of English constitutional law (Dicey). Since Britain has two historical political parties, history is inseparable from politics, and vice versa. It influences the objectivity of English historians (e.g. “Whig” interpretation of history). The paper deals with Jovanović’s critique of Marxism and Marxian historiography. According to Jovanović, the Marxian division of society into two classes and economic monism are untenable oversimplifications. There are similarities between Jovanović’s history writing and the style of historiography of the Annales School.

This paper analyzes Slobodan Jovanović’s participation in the foundation and work of political and literary magazines Red, Srpski pregled and Srpski književni glasnik. Special attention is paid to political reasons for launching the magazines and to mutual relations between political and literary views presented in them. Jovanovic’s literary views cannot be completely reduced to his political ideas or his philosophy of politics and law, but without the context of his political theory his collaboration with literary and political magazines cannot be understood. This paper indicates the possibility of most general common foundations of political philosophy and aesthetics in his ideas. Key words: politics, literature, magazines, political theory, literary and theatre criticism"