Ben Gordon Biography

Ben Gordon was born in London, England and grew up in Mount Vernon, New York. During his prep career he led Mount Vernon High School to New York State Public and Federation Championships in 2000 and signed to continue his basketball career and education at the University of Connecticut. During his junior season at UConn he helped the Huskies to an NCAA National Championship, posted the second most single season three-pointers in history with 104 and averaged a team high 20.5 points per game. In the 2004 NBA Draft the Chicago Bulls selected him in the first round with the No. 3 overall pick. He went on to play five seasons in Chicago before heading to the Detroit Pistons from 2009 to 2012, the Charlotte Bobcats from 2012 to 2014 and the Orlando Magic from 2014-15. In 2005 he earned both NBA All-Rookie First Team honors and the NBA Sixth Man of the Year Award. He averaged 14.9 points per game with a career high 21.4 points in 2006-07. Gordon elevated his game in the playoffs, averaging 20.2 points per game in 29 career postseason contests.

Book Ben Gordon for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Ben Gordon for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Ben Gordon. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Ben Gordon, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Ben Gordon's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Ben Gordon, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Ben Gordon for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Ben Gordon for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Ben Gordon for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Ben Gordon’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Ben Gordon for your Virtual Meeting