Ben Gordon hopes to erase memories of his nightmare debut season and finally live up to his star billing with the Detroit Pistons.

London-born Gordon, 27, signed a five-year deal with Detroit worth £35million last summer after quitting the Chicago Bulls on a free.

But 6ft 3in guard Gordon, who has pledged to play for Great Britain next summer, missed 20 games injured.

The Pistons ended up finishing bottom of the central division of the Eastern Conference with a 27-55 record - their worst since 1994.

But Gordon, who notched 770 three-point field goals for the Bulls, now insists he is raring to go ahead of this week's start of the new NBA season.

"I am ready now and feeling really good," said Gordon, who had successful ankle surgery. "I have recovered and been playing in pre-season.

"We want to improve on last season, which was riddled with injuries. I want to play all 82 games healthy and play the way I am capable of. Then hopefully we will be able to get to the play-offs.

"Last season was definitely frustrating - you never want to miss games as a player.

"That was the first time I had missed that many games in my career and was something new to me.

"I am happy it is behind me and I am just looking forward to a good year and making this team better.

"Before I got hurt I was playing like my normal self so I am expecting to return to what I normally do and score a lot of points."

Detroit head coach John Kuester has tried to rebuild by signing Greg Monroe of Georgetown University with the seventh pick in the draft.

The Pistons also took Terrico White of the University of Mississippi in the second round.

But White, who has a broken foot, is one of five players crocked for Detroit's first game at the New Jersey Nets tomorrow.

Gordon's side visit his old club Chicago in their third game on Saturday.

He added: "It will be nice to go back to the old city and play in the old arena where I spent five years but really they are just another team now who I am trying to beat."

Gordon qualifies to play for Team GB because he was born in England before moving to New York when he was a youngster.

He is yet to represent his country of birth after spending previous close seasons recovering from injury, renegotiating his contract or moving clubs.

But Gordon flew "home" in August to prove he wants to play ahead of the 2012 Olympics.

Gordon watched Team GB beat Bosnia and Herzegovina in Liverpool in their EuroBasket qualifier. He now aims to play for Chris Finch's side in next year's European Championship in Lithuania.

Gordon added: "I had a great time in the UK. I went to practise with my team and went to the game.

"To see the team qualify was great and I am definitely looking forward to playing in the near future."