DENVER – Detroit Pistons guard Ben Gordon almost willed his team to an improbable victory Wednesday by tying his own NBA record with nine 3-pointers without a miss. But in the midst of that performance, he also was involved in the game's most important play on the other end.

A four-point possession by the Denver Nuggets in the final seconds yanked away a 116-115 victory in a game the Pistons trailed by 25 points at one juncture.

The Pistons led by three when Aaron Afflalo scored on a drive and was fouled by Gordon with 5.6 seconds left. Afflalo missed the free throw but JaVale McGee beat Greg Monroe for the offensive rebound, which he dunked in one motion for the game-winning points.

Gordon's 21-foot shot with 2.8 seconds left caromed off the back rim.

“We had our shots and we just had two bad possessions at the end,” Gordon said. “Obviously, the Afflalo drive, we fouled him while he was driving to the basket while we were up three. We should've just let him get the two. And the tip dunk by McGee, it just came off the rim so fast and he just got up there.”

The Pistons had a foul to give in the final seconds, and Gordon intended to do so after the Nuggets' initial play design to set up a 3-point shot for Wilson Chandler was denied.

“Once he (Afflalo) got the ball, I was thinking to kind of let him go, then I heard everybody screaming, 'Foul, foul, foul,' ” Gordon said. “I probably should've just stuck to my instincts, or just wrapped him up so he couldn't finish. Either way, I've got to make a better play. That was the biggest play of the game.”

Gordon, pressed into the Pistons' starting lineup by Rodney Stuckey's toe injury, was 9 of 9 on 3-pointers for the second time in his career. He shares the record for 3-pointers without a miss with Latrell Sprewell.

Gordon finished with 45 points and almost pushed his team to an electrifying victory, which would have been the biggest comeback in franchise history.

When the Nuggets began earnestly double-teaming him on the perimeter in the second half, Gordon turned into a facilitator, dishing out eight assists.

“The guy was freaking off the charts,” Pistons coach Lawrence Frank said of Gordon. “He was great. Not only did he make shots, he made plays. The guy made plays for everything. You can't say enough positive adjectives about the job that he did. He was phenomenal.”

Gordon's final 3-pointer gave the Pistons a 112-109 lead with 2:52 left.

But Chandler, caught in mid-air, threw in a no-look layup over his head to make it 112-111. Brandon Knight's 3-pointer made it 115-111, then a free throw by Al Harrington cut it to 115-112, setting up the decisive sequence.

Gordon's 45 points were the most by a Piston since Richard Hamilton scored 51 against the New York Knicks on Dec. 27, 2006.

The Pistons made the first 11 3-pointers they attempted before finishing 14 of 18.

The Pistons had every excuse to roll over after falling behind 45-20 in the final game of a five-game western swing, against a Nuggets team playing its ninth consecutive home game, and in the thin air of the mile-high city.

They trailed 40-18 after the highest-scoring quarter against them this season, as well as the Nuggets' highest-scoring quarter. Denver shot 16 of 19 in the first quarter, quickly pushed the lead to 45-20 in the second quarter, and appeared braced for a blowout victory.

That was before Gordon scored 21 points and made five 3-pointers in the Pistons' 39-point second quarter.