AUBURN HILLS, Mich. - Suddenly, it's a series.

Ben Gordon scored 28 points and the hot-shooting Chicago Bulls beat the Detroit Pistons 108-92 Tuesday night in Game 5 of the Eastern Conference semifinals, pulling to 3-2 in the series.

Detroit opened the second round with two routs and made a big comeback in the third game, leading some to predict it would end with a sweep - or in five games at the most.

Obviously, the Bulls had other plans.

Game 6 is Thursday night in Chicago and if Game 7 is necessary, it would be Monday night back on the Pistons' home court.

The Bulls started the game Tuesday night with a sense of urgency and didn't let up in a game they never trailed.

Chicago only missed one of its first seven shots while holding Detroit to 3-of-9 shooting and each starter scored to help build a 14-6 lead.

The Bulls made 72.2 percent of their shots in the first half - falling just short of an NBA record - but only led by eight at halftime.

They outscored Detroit 33-20 to take a 21-point lead into the fourth quarter.

Unlike the two previous games, the Pistons didn't rally at all and were frustrated against a team that looked much like the one that swept the defending NBA champion Miami Heat in the first round.

Gordon made shots early and often and had plenty of help.

Luol Deng scored 20, Kirk Hinrich had 17 and P.J. Brown scored a playoff-high 15.

The Pistons, meanwhile, didn't have a one consistently effective player on offense and allowed the Bulls to do whatever they wanted at the other end of the court.

Chauncey Billups scored 17, Richard Hamilton had 16 points and Rasheed Wallace added 15, but the trio combined to shoot just 16-of-42.

The Pistons fell to 12-3 when they have a chance to win a series, with the rare losses coming in the last two games and in Game 7 of the 2005 NBA finals against San Antonio.

Midway through the fourth quarter, a sellout crowd gave up on a possible rally as the aisles filled with fans leaving and the Bulls leading 101-81.

Detroit reserve Antonio McDyess scored 12, Tayshaun Prince had 11 and Chris Webber added nine points and eight rebounds.

Tyrus Thomas gave the Bulls a lift off the bench with 10 points, six rebounds, five steals and a block. Reserve Chris Duhon scored eight points and made two of Chicago's 10 3-pointers.

Chicago finished shooting 57 percent after coming close in the first half to the NBA record the Los Angeles Lakers set by making 74.2 percent of their shots against Seattle during the 1998 playoffs, according to the Elias Sports Bureau.