Stellent GmbH, the Munich-based subsidiary of Stellent, Inc. (Nasdaq: STEL), a global provider of content management solutions, announced today that its technology has been selected by HELIOS Kliniken GmbH as its enterprise content management standard.

With annual revenues exceeding 1.1 billion euros, HELIOS Kliniken GmbH is a major private healthcare provider in Germany. Currently responsible for 25 specialist clinics – including four maximum-care hospitals located in Erfurt, Berlin, Wuppertal and Schwerin – it has 19,000 employees and a total capacity of 9,600 beds, and treats approximately 330,000 in-patients every year.

The Stellent system's use of familiar desktop applications, such as Microsoft Office, makes creating and publishing content online easy – even for HELIOS' less technologically advanced users. Revision and release processes for Web content are automated, content is version-based and indexed, and content metadata is managed to help guarantee accuracy and relevance of search results.

"Today, delivering business-critical information protected by appropriate access rights is no longer simply a matter of choice – it is a key success factor," said David Macey, executive vice president of international sales for Stellent. "In the future, companies will depend even more heavily upon quick decision making, focused work, efficiency and excellent organisation. It will become increasingly important for content to be published in real-time with immediate availability for the entire company or business partners."

Macey added, "Stellent's multi-site management functionalities give our customers, such as HELIOS, a degree of freedom in the development and management of their Web sites, allowing them to develop specialised or local content in accordance with company guidelines, and to manage and publish it in real-time. At the same time, the technology allows company head offices to retain control over the content's general appearance, design and navigational structure."

About Stellent, Inc.

Stellent GmbH is the Munich-based subsidiary of Stellent, Inc. (www.stellent.com), a global provider of content management software solutions that drive rapid success for customers by enabling fast implementations and generating quick, broad user adoption. With Stellent Universal Content Management, customers can easily deploy multiple line-of-business applications — such as public Web sites, secure intranets and extranets, compliance processes, and marketing brand management — and also scale the technology to support multi-site management and enterprise-wide content management needs.

More than 4,400 customers worldwide — including Procter & Gamble, Merrill Lynch, Los Angeles County, The Home Depot, British Red Cross, ING, Vodafone, Georgia Pacific, Bayer Corp., Coca-Cola FEMSA, Emerson Process Management and Genzyme Corp. — have selected Stellent solutions to power their content-centric business applications. Stellent is headquartered in Eden Prairie, Minn. and maintains offices throughout the United States, Europe and Asia-Pacific.