DEBORAH James passed away aged just 40 in 2022.

The Sun columnist was diagnosed with bowel cancer in 2016 and was supported by her husband Sebastien Bowen and their family.

Who is Sebastien Bowen?

The late Deborah James' husband Sebastien Bowen is a London banker.

He works for Pomona Capital, and before that was a Director at MetLife Investments.

It is understood he attended London’s St Paul’s School and got his master's degree at the University of Edinburgh.

Meanwhile, Deborah was a former deputy head teacher turned writer, blogger, podcaster and cancer campaigner.

After being diagnosed with stage 4 incurable bowel cancer, Deborah started her blog, BowelBabe.

Shortly after her diagnosis, she began writing her column for The Sun Online, Things Cancer Made Me Say where she shared every step of her journey.

In May 2022 Deborah revealed she stopped her active cancer treatment.

In a heartbreaking goodbye message, Deborah said: "My body just can't continue."

You can read Deborah's message in full here.

Deborah also encouraged people to donate to her @bowelbabefun - which you can still do to this day on the website bowelbabe.org.

She said: "Please buy me a drink to see me out this world, by donating the cost to @bowelbabefund which will enable us to raise funds for further life saving research into cancer. To give more Deborah’s more time!"

When did Deborah and Sebastien meet?

The couple met at the former London nightclub, Cafe de Paris in 2005 and three years later they married in France.

In September 2021 they celebrated 13 years of marriage.

Taking to Instagram at the time to commemorate their anniversary, Deborah shared a heartwarming video of them dancing together in the South of France.

She wrote: "13 Years of marriage. My Rock.

"It was our wedding anniversary earlier this week. Some days the weight of what that means in an uncertain future can be too much.

"Then it’s the closing of new day. A new day you are grateful to see. A new day you didn’t think you’d feel well in.

"And you dance. As your kids laugh and film. The sun sets, and you realise how wonderful it is to reach another milestone (and you park the sadness).

"And you smile. And you are at one in the moment only. Because for any of us that’s all we ever have anyway.

"And you give thanks to have people in your life that are the very back bone you remain upright on.

"Sebastien - Thank you for holding my hand in the darkness and dancing me back into the light. I love you. Always."

How many children do Deborah and Sebastien have?

During their time together they had two children, Hugo and Eloise.

In 2020 Deborah hosted her The Good Stuff podcast with her kids.

The podcast was launched during lockdown, with the aim of helping families through the pandemic.