THE IMMIGRANT SHIPS

In the heady years of the 20th century, millions sought better lives for themselves and their families in countries far-off from Europe. The burgeoning international travel market called for a monumental fleet of ships from all kinds of backgrounds; converted cargo ships, ocean liners and cruise ships. All of these carried countless hopeful families to new beginning from Australia to America and Canada; today they are fondly remembered.

M/s Aurelia

Originally serving as a German cargo vessel during the Second World War, Aurelia was rebuilt by Italy’s COGEDAR line and served as a reliable immigrant liner between Europe and Australia.

M/N Australia

Australia was the first of three sisters ships commissioned and built to capitalise on the growing post-war migrant trade to Australia for Italy’s Lloyd Triestino line. These virtually identical sisters were the first ships built post-war for the Italian line and were a remarkable step forward in modernising the fleet.

SS AUSTRALIS

SS Australis - formerly the SS America - is a ship with a legendary career and one fondly remembered by thousands. Over her extraordinary fifty-year-long career she served as an ocean liner, troop transport and cruise ship.

SS Begoña

Originally ‘SS Vassar Victory’, a cargo vessel serving through World War Two (and later serving as Sitmar Lines’ ‘SS Castel Bianco’), Begoña earned a name for herself in peacetime after an important voyage to Australia from Greece in 1957 - bringing a shipload of brides to the country.

SS Begoña’s page is coming soon but prints are now available

SS BRITANIS

Britanis started life at Matson Lines’ ‘Monterey’, and Chandris added her to their fleet well after her sister Ellinis. Britanis began her career for Chandris on the immigrant run before converting to full-time cruise duties well into the 1990s.

ss cephée

Cephée began life as a German combination vessel carrying both cargo and passengers before being awarded to France’s Messageries Maritimes line as war reparations after 1918. She served in this configuration as an immigrant vessel carrying many families fleeing the beleaguered European continent to Australia in the 1920s.

ss cephée’s page is coming soon but prints are now available

rhms ellinis

The former Matson Lines vessel ‘Lurline’ was purchased and converted to serve the immigrant run to Australia. With a white hull and blue ribbon, this is how Ellinis looked when she first went to work for Chandris.

t/n GALILEO GALILEI

Galileo Galilei, along with her sister Guglielmo Marconi, was like a space-age leap for Lloyd-Triestino when the pair were introduced in the mid-1960s. Initially operating the Italy-Australia run, the two sister ships had long careers and, like so many others, became popular cruise ships in the later part of the century.

t/n guglielmo marconi

The second of two famous and stylish sister ships, Marconi served only a relatively short 15-year career with Lloyd Triestino before begin sold and converted to full-time cruise ship with Costa Cruises. Renamed ‘Costa Riviera’, she was finally laid-up and scrapped in 2001.

T/N GUGLIELMO MARCONI’s page is coming soon but prints are now available

SS GROOTE BEER

Groote Beer began life as the US Victory ship 'Costa Rica Victory' before being purchased by the Dutch Government after the Second World War. She was rebuilt and employed as a very successful and beloved immigrant ship, carrying passengers to new and better lives from Europe to Australia and America.

SS GROOTE BEER’S PAGe is coming soon but prints are now available

rms mooltan

Mooltan and her sister Maloja were constructed just after the First World War and went on to capitalise on the growing ‘Tourist’ market of the 20s and 30s. The vessels made frequent voyages between Australia and Britain after serving as troopships in the Second World War, taking part in the ‘Ten-Pound Pom’ scheme in the 1950s.

m/n neptunia

‘Neptunia’ was one of three sisters ships commissioned and built to capitalise on the growing post-war migrant trade to Australia for Italy’s Lloyd Triestino line. These virtually identical sisters were the first ships built post-war for the Italian line and were a remarkable step forward in modernising the fleet.

m/n neptunia’s page is coming soon but prints are now available

MS NELLY

Nelly was originally a C3 cargo vessel ‘Mormacmail’ before conversion to an aircraft carrier for the United States Navy in World War Two. As ‘Nelly’ the ship operated regular services from Europe to Australia and brought many migrant families - she was the first vessel to carry German migrants to Australia. She was eventually renamed ‘Seven Seas’ and served as a popular cruise ship.

MS NELLY’s page is coming soon but prints are now available

SS NEW AUSTRALIA

This vessel was originally launched as the ‘Monarch of Bermuda’ and was a popular liner to that nation until she was gutted by a fire. The hulk was purhcased and rebuilt into the ‘New Australia’, operated by the Shaw-Savill Line until the late 1950s, playing a major role in the ‘Ten Pound Pom’ scheme. After this she was sold to the Greek line and renamed ‘Arkadia’.

SS NEW AUSTRALIA’s page is coming soon but prints are now available

MS Oceania

‘Oceania’ was one of three sisters ships commissioned and built to capitalise on the growing post-war migrant trade to Australia for Italy’s Lloyd Triestino line. These virtually identical sisters were the first ships built post-war for the Italian line and were a remarkable step forward in modernising the fleet.

MS OCEANIA’S page is coming soon but prints are now available

RMS PRETORIA CASTLE

Pretoria Castle was one of Union Castle Lines’ sleek vessels operating regular services between Britain and South Africa. She was built by the famed shipyard Harland and Wolff in 1947 and had a 19-year long career with her original owners.

RMS PRETORIA CASTLE’s page is coming soon but prints are now available

SS Strathaird

Strathaird was one of the first two original ‘White Sisters’ along with Strathnaver. The vessel had a successful career spanning decades, being a popular liner and cruise ship in the 1930s before serving in the War as a troopship. Post-war she was modernised and resumed services between Australia and Britain.

SS STRATHAIRD’S page is coming soon but prints are now available

SS Stratheden

Circa 1959

One of P&O’s most successful immigrant liners of the 50s and 60s, Stratheden was the largest of her running mates at the time.

tSS STRATHNAVER

Strathnaver was one of the first two original ‘White Sisters’ along with Strathaird. The vessel had a successful career spanning decades, being a popular liner and cruise ship in the 1930s before serving in the War as a troopship. Post-war she was modernised and resumed services between Australia and Britain.

tsmv wanganella

The plucky little liner's pedigree was superb; she had been launched as 'Achimota' at Harland and Wolff, Belfast, in 1932 for Elder Dempster line but the company ran into post-crash financial troubles and could not take ownership. So it was that Melbourne-based Huddart Parker bought her and renamed her Wanganella.

tsmv wanganella’s page is coming soon but prints are now available