Casey Kasem was an American disc jockey, music historian, radio personality, and screen and voice actor of Lebanese Druze decent. He is best known as the host of the American Top 40, and for providing the voice of Shaggy Rogers from 1969–1997 and then again from 2002-2009. He is also known for doing the voice of Robin the Boy Wonder, Alexander from Josie and the Pussycats, Mark from Battle of the Planets (co-starring Keye Luke, Alan Young and Janet Waldo), Peter Cottontail from Here Comes Peter Cottontail (also starring Vincent Price), and Cliffjumper from the original Transformers series. His on-screen credits include The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries, Saved by the Bell (starring Mario Lopez), and a voiceover radio cameo in 1984's Ghostbusters.

Around 1972-1974 Kasem decided to stop eating meat[1]. In 1995, Kasem, by then a vegan, objected to reprising his role of Shaggy in a Burger King commercial, not only turning down the offer, but leaving the role entirely when the producers wouldn't make the character into a vegan. Until he returned to the role he was replaced by Billy West and Scott Innes. In 2002, he returned when it was decided that Shaggy would become a vegetarian; subtle references can be found in What's New, Scooby-Doo?

He continued until his retirement in 2009. He was succeeded by Matthew Lillard, who played Shaggy in the live-action theatrical films. His retirement also brought an end to his radio career on July 4 of the same year.

In October 2013, he was revealed to have Parkinson's disease (which he had been diagnosed with in 2007), until it was discovered he had Lewy body dementia, which has similar identifying symptoms; this sadly robbed him for his speech and his talent. In May 2014, a court order had been made to investigate the whereabouts of Kasem after he had been removed from his nursing home in Santa Monica, California and it had been announced he was "no longer in the United States". He had been found a little while later in the state of Washington. By the next month, he passed away on June 15, 2014, at the age of 82.

Voice roles[]

TV series[]

Scooby-Doo, Where Are You![]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!

Grouped under "Voices".

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy 104. Mine Your Own Business Miner Forty-Niner 114. Go Away Ghost Ship Captain 116. A Night of Fright is No Delight Col. Beauregard Sanders

Cousin Slicker 203. Scooby's Night with a Frozen Fright Talking fish 204. Jeepers, It's the Creeper Mr. Carswell 205. Haunted House Hang-Up Penrod Stillwall 206. A Tiki Scare is No Fair Lt. Tomoro/

Old man 208. Don't Fool with a Phantom Johnny Sands

The New Scooby-Doo Movies[]

Main article(s): The New Scooby-Doo Movies

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy 102. The Dynamic Scooby-Doo Affair Robin 103. Wednesday is Missing Ling-Poo 106. A Good Medium is Rare Valet 115. The Caped Crusader Caper Robin 202. The Haunted Showboat Alexander Cabot III

Ghost of Injun Joe

The Scooby-Doo Show[]

Main article(s): The Scooby-Doo Show

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy 111. A Bum Steer for Scooby Sam Farren

Sam Farren's foreman 114. The Ghost That Sacked the Quarterback Flash Granger 203. Hang in There, Scooby-Doo Hang-glider contest judge 2 204. The Chiller Diller Movie Thriller Train conductor

Passengers on train 205. The Spooky Case of the Grand Prix Race Mr. Osbourne 207. Creepy Cruise Investor 307. The Creepy Case of Old Iron Face Captain Morgan 309. Make a Beeline Away from that Feline Dr. B.B. Bell

Mr. Bixby 313. A Menace in Venice Gondolier

Laff-a-Lympics[]

Main article(s): Laff-a-Lympics (TV series)

Shaggy

Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo (first series)[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo (first series)

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy

Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo (second series)[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo and Scrappy-Doo (second series)

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy

The New Scooby and Scrappy Doo Show[]

Main article(s): The New Scooby and Scrappy Doo Show

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy 113. Wedding Bell Boos! Mr. Rogers

Mrs. Rogers

The New Scooby-Doo Mysteries[]

Main article(s): The New Scooby-Doo Mysteries

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy

The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo[]

Main article(s): The 13 Ghosts of Scooby-Doo

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy

A Pup Named Scooby-Doo[]

Main article(s): A Pup Named Scooby-Doo

This marks the first TV series to acknowledge which character an actor has played, in this case, Kasem as Shaggy. He and Don Messick were the only two actors to reprise the roles they originated.

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy 102. The Sludge Monster from the Earth's Core Mr. Rogers 106. The Babysitter from Beyond Mr. Rogers 207. Dog Gone Scooby Mr. Rogers

What's New, Scooby-Doo?[]

Main article(s): What's New, Scooby-Doo?

As Kasem and Frank Welker are the only two to reprise the roles they originated, they are included in the opening credits. Therefore, any additional roles are uncredited.

Episode Role Every episode Shaggy 314. E-Scream Virtual Shaggy

Shaggy & Scooby-Doo Get a Clue![]

Main article(s): Shaggy & Scooby-Doo Get a Clue!

Episode Role 102. More Fondue for Scooby-Doo Dr. Albert Shaggleford 103. High Society Scooby Dr. Albert Shaggleford 104. Party Arty Dr. Albert Shaggleford 105. Smart House Dr. Albert Shaggleford 106. Lightning Strikes Twice Dr. Albert Shaggleford 109. Chefs of Steel Dr. Albert Shaggleford 110. Almost Ghosts Dr. Albert Shaggleford 111. Pole to Pole Dr. Albert Shaggleford 112. Big Trouble Dr. Albert Shaggleford 113. Operation Dog and Hippy Boy Dr. Albert Shaggleford 201. Shaggy and Scooby World Dr. Albert Shaggleford 203. Inside Job Dr. Albert Shaggleford 204. Zoinksman Dr. Albert Shaggleford 205. The Many Faces of Evil Dr. Albert Shaggleford 206. Cruisin' for a Bruisin' Dr. Albert Shaggleford 207. There's a Doctor in the House Dr. Albert Shaggleford 208. Super Scary Movie Night Dr. Albert Shaggleford 209. Runaway Robi Dr. Albert Shaggleford 210. Don't Get a Big Head Dr. Albert Shaggleford 211. Scooby Dudes Dr. Albert Shaggleford 212. Zoinks the Wonder Dog Dr. Albert Shaggleford 213. Uncle Albert Alert Dr. Albert Shaggleford

Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated

Episode Role 101. Beware the Beast from Below Colton Rogers 102. The Creeping Creatures Colton Rogers 112. The Shrieking Madness Colton Rogers 126. All Fear the Freak Colton Rogers 226. Come Undone Colton Rogers (uncredited)

TV specials[]

Scooby Goes Hollywood[]

Main article(s): Scooby Goes Hollywood

Role Shaggy

Arabian Nights[]

Main article(s): Arabian Nights

Role Shaggy

TV films[]

Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers

Role Shaggy

Scooby-Doo and the Ghoul School[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo and the Ghoul School

Role Shaggy Mirror Monster

Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf

Role Shaggy

Direct-to-video films[]

Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire

Role Shaggy

Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico

Role Shaggy

Scooby-Doo! and the Loch Ness Monster[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! and the Loch Ness Monster

Role Shaggy

Aloha, Scooby-Doo![]

Main article(s): Aloha, Scooby-Doo!

Role Shaggy

Scooby-Doo! in Where's My Mummy?[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! in Where's My Mummy?

Role Shaggy

Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy![]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! Pirates Ahoy!

Role Shaggy

Chill Out, Scooby-Doo![]

Main article(s): Chill Out, Scooby-Doo!

Role Shaggy

Scooby-Doo! and the Goblin King[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! and the Goblin King

Role Shaggy

Scooby-Doo! and the Samurai Sword[]

Main article(s): Scooby-Doo! and the Samurai Sword

Role Shaggy

Audio books[]

Main article(s): Peter Pan Records

Book Role Exciting Christmas Stories with Scooby-Doo and Friends Shaggy Rogers

Watchman

Commercials[]

Kellogg's[]

Main article(s): Kellogg's

Uncredited.

For "Cinnamon Marshmallow Scooby-Doo! (Funny Bones Marshmallow)."

Role Shaggy

For "Cinnamon Marshamallow Scooby-Doo! (Funny Bones Marshamallow)."

Title Role "Ordering from waitress" Shaggy

Scooby-Doo roles in other media[]

Dynomutt, Dog Wonder[]

Main article(s): The Scooby-Doo/Dynomutt Hour

Episode Role 101. Everyone Hyde! Shaggy

Professor Orville 102. What Now, Lowbrow? Shaggy

Lowbrow's henchman 110. The Wizard of Ooze Shaggy

Swamp Rat

Hanna-Barbera's 50th: A Yabba Dabba Doo Celebration[]

Main article(s): Hanna-Barbera's 50th: A Yabba Dabba Doo Celebration

Role Shaggy

The Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera[]

Main article(s): The Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera (ride)

Role Shaggy

Johnny Bravo[]

Main article(s): Johnny Bravo

Episode Role Bravo Dooby-Doo Shaggy

Looney Tunes: Back in Action[]

Role Shaggy

"The Official BBC Children in Need Medley"[]

Main article(s): The Official BBC Children in Need Medley

Role Shaggy

Appearances[]

E!'s Scooby-Doo: Who Let the Dog Out[sic]

The Wiki-Tiki Tail of Aloha, Scooby-Doo[sic] featurette on Aloha, Scooby-Doo! (DVD)

Notes/trivia[]

In the What's New, Scooby-Doo? episode, A Scooby-Doo Valentine, he had a non-speaking cameo as the real identity behind a Hollywood extra pretending to be an evil Shaggy.

Be Cool, Scooby-Doo! is the first Scooby-Doo animated production not to feature any character voiced by Kasem.

As a tribute to Kasem, the ship in the Be Cool, Scooby-Doo! episode All Paws on Deck was christened the S.S. Casey.

Aside from his absence from the franchise from 1997-2003, he is the second longest running voice actor in the franchise behind Frank Welker.

"The Official BBC Children in Need Medley" came the same year he had retired from the voice of Shaggy. He only agreed to do the role if Shaggy was presented as a vegan and not credited, although there was very little reference to his vegetarianism and nobody involved in the song is credited, anyway. Producer Peter Kay was also told to give up trying to get Kasem, but found it more rewarding with him.

In the Velma episode Marching Band Sleepover, Piotr Michael impersonates Kasem, narrating a guided tour of the Crystal Cove Mine Experience.