Movie Details

Actors: Frank Welker, Casey Kasem, Mindy Cohn, Grey DeLisle, Kelly Hu

Director: Christopher Berkeley

Creators: Rob Desales, Joe Sichta, Vera Morales

Genres: Kids & Family, Television, Animation

Sub-Genres: Animation, Scooby Doo Animated Movies, 3-6 Years, 7-9 Years, 10-12 Years, Kids & Family, Animation

Studio: Warner Home Video

Format: DVD - Color - Animated

DVD Release Date: 04/07/2009

Original Release Date: 01/01/2009

Theatrical Release Date: 01/01/2009

Release Year: 2009

Run Time: 1hr 15min

Screens: Color

Number of Discs: 1

SwapaDVD Credits: 1

Total Copies: 0

Members Wishing: 0

MPAA Rating: Unrated

Languages: English

Subtitles: English, French, Portuguese

Similar Movies

Similarly Requested DVDs

Movie Reviews

Another good one!

D. Vance | Central USA | 04/17/2009

(4 out of 5 stars)

"I enjoyed this Scooby Doo. It is fast paced and entertaining. The animation continues to be top notch and there is no better voice cast. Our family enjoyed the Japanese setting and the story line.

However, it is another entry where the "monster" is real, albeit full of fantasy. I wish the makers of the new Scooby movies would stay with the "Pirates Ahoy" and "Loch Ness" ideas, the traditional type of story where the bad guys are just people. I like the resolution that it gives kids.(No matter how improbable the solutions seem to be for adults!) And it IS what has made the Scooby Doo franchise so successful.

I would rate "Samurai Sword" as way better than the "Goblin King" which we disliked enough to give away, but not nearly as good as "Chill Out"

"

Witch's Ghost Remake w/ A Kung-Fu Twist

Chatham6304 | 04/15/2009

(3 out of 5 stars)

"WARNING: This may be a spoiler for you if you have not seen the film before

This Scooby film is an alright addition to the movie series, but it just didn't really have the same enjoyable feel as previous films. When you first see the gang in the movie the scene appears awkward due to the 3D backgrounds complimented with normal cartoon characters standing in front of them causing a white outline of the characters for a few minutes.

After the beginning of the movie the gang (with the addition of Daphne's Japanese friend and a professor) go on a search for the sword of doom. The search and mystery are short due to the film then taking a similar (but much extended) ending to that of scooby-doo and the witch's ghost. The gang is then betrayed by Daphne's friend and martial arts teacher (Ben R. betraying the gang). Then the teacher explains how she used the gang to find the sword and how she was going to use it to bring the ancient warrior back to life so she can control the world(Ben R. using the gang to find sarah's journal and revealing he wants to release her from it to rule the world). As suspected though, the monster has ideas of it's own and knocks the teacher unconscious (Sarah traps Ben in giant bubble).Oh, and the monster forces every human nearby to bow down to him so the gang cant stop him.

Then Scooby and Shaggy train to become samurai so they can defeat the monster in a small sword fight. In the end the monster samurai is defeated and the teacher is not seen again in the movie (it's assumed that she went to jail). I wouldn't recomend this movie unless you don't really mind repeating plots, different animation techniques, or straight to the point conversations with little amusing side conversations as seen in what's new scooby doo."

Great movie for kids!

K. Serge | Los Angeles, CA | 09/09/2009

(5 out of 5 stars)

"My 3 year old and my 5 year old love this movie. Anything Scooby Doo is great by them! Buy this and you will probably laugh a few times with your kids. My son started Karate, this really gave him a smile when he saw Scooby and Shaggy doing karate like he does.

Won't let you down."

Good movie, but not as good as Chill Out Scooby Doo

L. Capuano | United States | 05/03/2009

(3 out of 5 stars)

"I am 21 years old who still enjoys watching the Scooby Doo movies and the show. I thought that this is a good movie but I also noitced while watching it that it is very simular, like another reviewer pointed out, to the movie "Scooby Doo and the witches ghost" Even though I think it was a good movie, I still think that it isn't half as good as "Chill out Scooby Doo" I enjoyed watching it, but "Chill Out Scooby Doo" is much better."