William F. Allen OBITUARY

William F. ‘Pete’ Allen of New Holland William F. “Pete” Allen, 88, of Garden Spot Village, New Holland, passed away on Tuesday, October 19, 2010. He was the husband of the late Margaret E. (Betty) Thompson Allen with whom he shared 60 years of marriage. Born on March 6, 1922 in Coatesville, he was the son of the late Laura J. and Lloyd L. Allen, Sr. A graduate of S. Horace Scott Senior High School class of 1940, he also attended Franklin and Marshall College. Pete served in World War II with the Fourth Marine Division in the Pacific theatre on the island invasions of Roi Namour, Saipan, Tinian and Iwo Jima. He was employed by the former Lukens Steel Company for 46 years in the accounting and sales department, retiring in 1986. He served as president of the Lukens Veterans Guild and was a member of the executive committee until his retirement. He was also a member of the Masonic Lodge #383 of Coatesville. He was a member of the Wagontown Union Chapel where he had served as President of the Men’s Brotherhood. Pete is survived by a brother Lloyd L. Allen, Jr. of Downingtown and one sister Vivian A. Spotts, wife of the late Richard E. Spotts of East Fallowfield, two nephews, Jeffrey A. Spotts and wife Susan of East Fallowfield and Matthew A. Simpson and wife Jeanette of New South Wales, Australia, three nieces Linda S. McGhee and husband Michael of Belle Mead, N.J., Drue E. Bellora and husband Anthony of of Pittsburgh and Beth A. Moore and husband Wesley of Newport News, Va. and two great nephews and three great nieces. He was preceded in death by two sisters, Geraldine Mae Allen and Betty Jane Simpson the wife of Malcolm J. Simpson of Exton and a great niece, Heather L. McGhee. Funeral services will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, October 23, from the Wagontown Union Chapel, 469 W. Kings Highway, Wagontown, followed by interment at the Fairview Cemetery in Coatesville. The family will receive relatives and friends from 10 a.m. to the time of service, at the church on Saturday. In lieu of flowers, memorial donations may be made in Pete’s memory to the Wagontown Union Chapel, P.O. Box 200, Wagontown, PA 19376. Services have been entrusted to the Wilde Funeral Home of Parkesburg. Online condolences can be posted at www.wildefuneralhome.com.