ISTANBUL,— A Turkish court on Friday ordered the release of a former Kurdish mayor who had been held for over two months on terror charges despite his widely-respected efforts to end the Kurdish conflict, his lawyer said.

Ahmet Turk, 74, former mayor of the Kurdish city of Mardin in Turkish Kurdistan (southeast Turkey), was ordered released after supporters expressed concern over his health, his lawyer Zeynep Ceren Boztoprak told AFP.

Dozens of pro-Kurdish mayors including Turk, have been detained under the state of emergency after the July 15 failed coup that sought to unseat President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

Boztoprak told AFP that Turk was currently being held in the southeastern city of Elazig and would be released later in the evening.

However, the mayor would be still subjected to judicial control measures and a ban on leaving Turkey, according to the lawyer.

Opposition MP from the secular Republican People’s Party (CHP) Sezgin Tanrikulu lauded the court verdict.

“This false decision against justice and conscience has finally been reversed,” he wrote on Twitter.

Turk was ousted from his office and arrested in November last year.

Because of his deteriorating health in prison, Turk had appealed to await his trial outside of prison and was taken to Istanbul to receive a health report.

But the Istanbul medical authorities turned down the request.

Television images showing him taken to hospital in Elazig in handcuffs and escorted by gendarmerie officers sparked outrage among politicians including from the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP).

AKP MP Garip Ensarioglu expressed dismay over the “disturbing” images, saying that Turk should have been treated to protect his dignity.

“The way Ahmet Turk was treated was not appropriate,” he said, quoted in Turkish media.

“People should be treated according to their age and position. Handcuffs are placed on people as a precaution against the possibility of fleeing,” he said.

The veteran politician played key role in now collapsed talks between Kurdish militants and the Turkish state aiming to end an over three decade conflict that has left tens of thousands dead.

Critics complain the authorities are using the state of emergency imposed following the July 15 coup attempt to crack down on all opposition, ahead ahead of a vote on changing the constitution expanding Erdogan’s powers.

In May 2016, parliament voted to strip lawmakers of their legal immunity, paving the way for the HDP legislators’ arrests.

In November 2016, 12 Kurdish HDP lawmakers, including the two co-leaders, Selahattin Demirtas and Figen Yuksekdag, were arrested on charges of links to the PKK which they deny. The party holds 59 out of the 550 seats in parliament.

Turkish prosecutors are demanding up to 142 years in prison for Demirtas on charges of links to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).

Demirtas and other MPs have denied any links to the PKK listed as a terror group by Turkey and its Western allies and slammed the case as political.

Thousands of officials from the HDP have been detained since 2015. Turkey detained 200 HDP members in December 2016.

The PKK took up arms in 1984 against the Turkish state, which still denies the constitutional existence of Kurds, to push for greater autonomy for the Kurdish minority who make up around 22.5 million of the country’s 79-million population.

A large Kurdish community in Turkey and worldwide openly sympathise with PKK rebels and Abdullah Ocalan, who founded the PKK group in 1974, and has a high symbolic value for most Kurds in Turkey and worldwide according to observers.

Copyright ©, respective author or news agency, AFP | Ekurd.net