MIAMI: This likely hasn’t been the season Shawn Marion envisioned, but there is still time. Although there is less than a month left in the regular season, the real reason for why he chose the Cavaliers hasn’t even arrived.

Marion returned to the floor for the fourth quarter of Sunday’s 106-92 loss to the Miami Heat. It was his first appearance in more than a month because of a strained left hip, and with how well the Cavs have played lately, it seems unlikely he’ll reclaim his rotational role immediately. But Marion came here to win, which is what the team is doing.

The Cavs wanted him in part for his vast playoff experience. This will be Marion’s 11th trip to the postseason in 16 years. He has played in more than 100 postseason games and won a championship with the Dallas Mavericks, experience that could be vital for guys like Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love who have never been there.

“We can help them a little bit, tell them a few tricks, but the playoffs are more about focusing in and paying attention,” Marion said. “Everybody is more focused on what your tendencies are and exactly what you’re doing. You can play a team seven times. They’ve got a chance to key in. It’s hard to beat a team [four] times.”

Marion still vividly recalls his first postseason. He was starting as a rookie when the Phoenix Suns eliminated the defending champion San Antonio Spurs with Tim Duncan and David Robinson.

The Suns brought Kevin Johnson out of retirement, Marion recalled, because Jason Kidd was injured toward the end of the regular season. It’s fairly common for most players to remember their first playoff experience. After the whirlwind summer and season experienced by both Irving and Love, they’ll always remember this postseason run — for better or worse — as well.

In an effort to ease that path, coach David Blatt laid out his plan to earn the No. 2 seed, which would give the Cavs home-court advantage through the first two rounds of the playoffs.

“We’ve got to finish in second place,” Blatt said in explaining why he’s not yet ready to start sitting guys randomly during the final 13 games. “We’re thinking about that.”

The Cavs entered Tuesday with a two-game lead over the Toronto Raptors for the second seed, but those two teams remain bottlenecked with the Chicago Bulls and Washington Wizards. The Cavs are only three games ahead of the Wizards, who begin a four-game West Coast trip Wednesday night at the Utah Jazz.

LeBron James, however, hasn’t been concerned with playoff seeding and isn’t going to start now.

“That’s what the coaching staff, that’s what they want,” James said. “For me, I never play for seeding. I just play. Wherever at the end of the season we land, I’m ready. Just get me in the playoffs. I feel like I can win on anybody’s floor, I feel I can win at home. I’m that confident in my ability and our team’s ability. I’ve never, in my 12-year career, played for seeding. That’s just not how I work.”

Regardless where the Cavs finish, getting guys like Love, Irving and Tristan Thompson acclimated to postseason play as quickly as possible will be the goal of the veterans. And the Cavs now have plenty of guys with playoff experience in their march for No. 2.

“There’s not that many games left. It’s pretty easy to see what you’ve got to do,” Blatt said. “Recognizing that, we want to go after that. It will not be at the expense of the health of the players, but we certainly want to do all we can to finish as high as we can.”