Shawn Marion Biography

Shawn Marion is former a professional small forward / power forward and shooting guard. Marion attended Vincennes College for two years before he transferred to the University of Nevada Las Vegas. The Phoenix Suns selected Marion as the 9th overall pick in the 1999 NBA Draft. In 2000, Marion was named to the NBA All-Rookie Second Team. Marion was selected in 2004 to play on the US Olympic men’s basketball team. During the 2004 Olympics, the men’s team brought home the bronze medal. The Suns traded Marion to the Miami Heat on February 6, 2008. On February 13, 2009, Marion was traded to the Toronto Raptors. He was traded again on July 9, 2009 to the Dallas Mavericks. On September 14, 2014, Marion signed with the Cleveland Cavaliers. Marion was a 4x NBA All-Star and a 2x All-NBA Third-team selection. He also won the 2001 NBA Championship and was the NBA Shooting Starts Champion in 2005.

Book Shawn Marion for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Shawn Marion for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Shawn Marion. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Shawn Marion, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Shawn Marion's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Shawn Marion, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Shawn Marion for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Shawn Marion for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Shawn Marion for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Shawn Marion’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Shawn Marion for your Virtual Meeting