“We suffer not from the events in our lives, but from our judgment about them.”

~ Epictetus

Epictetus is one of the founding fathers of stoicism, which is a branch of philosophy focused on the willing acceptance of the sufferings in life.

The main theme of his work is how we delude ourselves to pursue things that we think will make us happy. When in reality, happiness is more easy to come by than you or I would imagine.

“The actual root of happiness is derived from appreciating just how little we need to be happy or flourish and how abundant nature seems to be in supplying our needs.”

According to Epictetus, there are three delusions that we think will fulfill our lives: Romance, Wealth, and Luxury. Although these things have the capacity to give us pleasure: the pleasure is temporary.

In economics, the law of diminishing marginal utility states that the more we have of a certain good, the less we value each additional input of that good. In other words, there is always more to have. And regardless of the very thing we chase, we will always want more once we attain it.

The pursuit of these three goals is a never-ending cycle, and there are no winners — only losers.

But don’t worry, as there’s hope for all of us.

According to Epictetus, it’s easy to acquire the good things in life, and the happiness of one’s life is derived from much simpler entities than presumed: Friendship, Freedom, and Thought.

Friendship

According to a 80-year, generational study conducted by Harvard University, the most fulfilled individuals are those that have high-quality relationships.

Freedom

We all eventually aspire to be autonomous, and it’s once we are in full control of our lives for when we can be truly satisfied. This means not being confined by the means of student loans, a job that we hate, or anything else that limits our freedom.

Thought

“All of humanity’s problems stem from man’s inability to sit quietly in a room alone.” ~ Blaise Pascal

The one thing that distinguishes us from other primates is our cognitive ability. If we live our lives without exercising this aptitude, then we’ll never be fulfilled.

All in all, happiness is a vague term.

There are many theories regarding how to attain happiness, and it’s hard to pinpoint the “correct” one to implement in our lives. Any rational person would orient his or her mindset so that they could maximize their feelings of happiness — for what is more important in life?

With that being said, I encourage you to consider the principles laid out by Epictetus in order to improve the quality of your life.

“The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts.” ~ Marcus Aurelius

JL