JAMIE Lynn Spears rose to prominence as a child actor on Nickelodeon, and has since gone on to launch a career as a country singer and appear on Dancing with the Stars.

The sister of Britney Spears ended her stint in the 2023 season of I'm A Celebrity — but who is her husband Jamie Watson and do they have kids?

Who is Jamie Lynn Spears' husband Jamie Watson?

Jamie Watson, 41, is a Louisiana native who met Jamie Lynn, 32, back in 2010 following the split between her and Casey Aldridge — the father of her first child — when they were introduced by a mutual friend.

Watson is the owner of Advanced Media Partners, a Louisiana-based communications service.

The couple got engaged in 2013, were married the following year, and celebrated their ninth wedding anniversary in March 2023.

In a TLC special, Jamie Lynn Spears: When the Lights Go Out, that aired back in 2016, Watson described himself as a "normal guy with a normal job."

He even admitted to not knowing who Spears was when they first met.

What did Jamie Watson say about his sister-in-law Britney Spears?

After Britney's emotional testimony at her conservatorship hearing on June 23, 2021, Watson spoke out in support of his sister-in-law.

"I can assure you her family loves her and wants the best for her," Watson said to the New York Post at the time.

"I wouldn’t be around people who weren’t. Who wouldn’t want to be in support of Britney?"

Her testimony was the first time in over 13 years that Britney spoke out in open court about the conservatorship that was put in place back in 2008.

Britney called the conservatorship "stupid" and "abusive."

On Friday, November 12, 2021, Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Brenda Penny announced the termination of Britney's conservatorship.

Do Jamie Lynn Spears and Jamie Watson have children?

The couple has one daughter together: Ivey Joan Watson, who was born in April 2018.

"Ivey has brought us so much joy in these past 3 years, it was only fair that we had a celebration just for IVEY, with all of the things that fill her little spirit up with the same joy and love she shares with everyone around her," Spears said in an Instagram post celebrating Ivey's third birthday, back in April of 2021.

While the couple only shares one child together, Watson is also the stepfather to Spears' other child, Maddie Briann Aldridge, born in June 2008.

Back in 2008, Spears announced that she was pregnant at 16.

At the time, she was starring in the Nickelodeon series Zoey 101, which ended due to her pregnancy.

Following Ivey's birth in 2018, Spears spoke to People about being a mom for a second time.

"As we all know, there was a lot of chaos around my last pregnancy," she said.

"I would say that being a mom is being a mom: It doesn't matter if you're in your teens or not, there should be no excuse to not be a great mother. It doesn't matter what your age is."

Spears added that the only thing different between Maddie and Ivey's pregnancies is the support system around her.

Maddie's father Casey Aldridge, 34, was arrested and charged with five counts of burglary of a storage house and one count of burglary of a dwelling in 2020.

In 2017, Maddie, then 8 years old, was in a near-fatal ATV accident.

She and her mom appeared on an episode of Nickelodeon's Double Dare, where they won $15,000 to donate to the New Orleans Hospital that helped treat Maddie after the accident.

Did Jamie Lynn Spears leave I'm a Celebrity?

On November 29, 2023, I'm a Celebrity shared via X that Spears will no longer appear on the popular ITV reality show, writing: "Jamie Lynn Spears has left I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here! on medical grounds.

"She's been a fantastic campmate who has triumphed at trials and bonded well with her fellow celebrities."

At this time, the medical details behind Spears' exit are unclear.