Genesis 15:5

He took him outside and said, “Look up at the heavens and count the stars—if indeed you can count them.” Then he said to him, “So shall your offspring be.”

Want to hear something awesome?

no. 1 it refers to “offspring” not many offsprings.

The traditional teaching is that Abraham will have many children like the stars or as many of the stars…

it does not … it means “seed” one “seed”….

Galatians 3:16 “The promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. Scripture does not say “and to seeds,” meaning many people, but “and to your seed,”[i] meaning one person, who is Christ.”

No. 2 in the Hebrew it does not say count the stars. It means “demand an accounting of the stars”. this means “ask the stars to tell you a story”.

The gospel is actually in the stars. They speak of a woman who will give birth to a man with 2 natures who will be a great warrior that would kill the snake (or a scorpion) who will die as a lamb. He will be a servant ox to many and will reign as the Lion of Judah. Satan took what was written in the stars and made it into horoscopes…

Why wouldn’t God write the story of redemption in a place the whole world could see? Wouldn’t He put that story everywhere in our lives, the way He put it into the everyday lives of the Israelites in the times of the nation? The Ark is a type of Christ, the sacrifice, the marriage rituals, the temple, even the names of the first ten patriarchs tell the story. And that’s a fascinating little study.

Didn’t God have Paul tells us to look at the stars to see how the “wrath of God” is revealed in the heavens? Romans 1:18 Do you have another explanation that fits verse 23? What else can there be in the heavens that man could change from “the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things?” There isn’t anything up there to change but the pictures of the constellations. The Greeks changed the constellation of Coma from a seated woman with a child on her lap, to a swatch of hair, and called it Berinice. They obscured the picture that enhanced the main sign of Virgo. The woman holding the child fills out the “seed” concept offered by Virgo, with her stalk of wheat in one hand.

Astrology is Satan’s counterfeit for “life guidance”. Satan’s counterfeits are always self-oriented. His message through astrology is that your internal “clock,” which began with the star alignment at your birth, governs your life. If you apply this information properly, “You can “do” life on your own, you don’t need God.” Not needing God to have all His Knowledge and Power has been Satan’s tactic since Eden. Satan is VERY accomplished at covering God’s tracks.

The following tables harmonize the names of the forty-eight constellations of the twelve Signs with their meanings in various languages and selected scriptures. Following each table I have included a summary of the complete Sign which can be found in E.W. Bullinger’s 1893 book, “The Witness of the Stars, from Kregel Publications. Here is a key to the letter-abbreviations used to denote the names of the constellations in other languages.

KEY :

A=Arabic;

E=Egyptian;

H=Hebrew

Co=Coptic;

P=Persian

S=Syriac;

C=Chaldean

Ak=Akkadian

G=Greek

BOOK ONE: THE REDEEMER

BOOK ONE : VIRGO The Prophecy of the Promised Seed of the Woman

SIGN/DECAN

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE VERSE

VIRGO-The Virgin

H-virgin; A-branch/ear of corn Isa 7:14-A virgin will conceive

COMA-the desired

H-desired; P-woman feed baby boy Hag 2:7-desired of all nations shall come

CENTAURUS-the centaur

A,C-the despised; H-sin offering Isa 53:3-despised/rejected of men

BOOTES-the coming one

H-the coming; E-one who rules Ps 96:13-he cometh to judge the earth; Enoch 7&8

The Promised Seed of the woman, the Desired of all nations, a two-natured being, who will come to harvest.

BOOK ONE : LIBRA The Redeemer’s Atoning Work

SIGN/DECAN

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

LIBRA-the scales

H-weighing;A-purchase; Co-propitiation Isa 53:10-sin offering(balance our lacks)

CRUX-the cross

H-cutting off; H-limit/finish Dan 9:26- 62 weeks, messiah cut off

LUPUS-the victim

H,A-to be slain Isa 53:7-lamb to the slaughter; Ez18:4 blood remission

CORONA-the crown

H-royal crown; A-,jewel PS 110:1-thine enemies thy footstool

The price deficient balanced by the price which covers. The Cross endured by the Victicm slain, who receives the Crown.

BOOK ONE : SCORPIO The Redeemer’s Conflict

SIGN/DECAN

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

SCORPIO-the scorpion

H-the conflict; A-wound him that cometh Good vs Evil

SERPENS-the serpent

H,A-the serpent held Gen 3:15-bruise the head; Ps 91:13 tread on the adder

OPHIUCHUS-serpent holder:

No other names found Fighting with Satan

HERCULES-the mighty one

E-who cometh; A-strong one Rev 19:11-white horse; conqueror

The Scorpion seeking to wound, but itself trodden under foot. The Serpent and the Man struggling. The Mighty Man kneeling on one knee, humbled in the conflict, but holding aloft the tokens of victory, with his foot on the head of the Dragon.

BOOK ONE : SAGITTARIUS The Redeemer’s Triumph

SIGN/DECAN

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

SAGITTARIUS-the archer

H,E,G,A-arrow; Co-beauty of coming forth Ps 45:3-5-people fall under thee; Ps64: God shoots arrow

LYRA-the harp

No other names found [symbolizes rejoicing] Rev 19:7-be glad, give honor; 5:13 blessing & honor

ARA-the burning pyre

A-finishing; G-cursing Ps 21:9-fire shall devour them

DRACO-the dragon

G-trodden on; Co-serpent accursed Isa 27:1-slay the dragon; Ps91:13 tread on adder

The two-natured Conqueror going forth; Praise prepared for the Conqueror and the consuming fire prepared for His enemy the Ol serpent–the Devil.

BOOK TWO : THE REDEEMER’S PEOPLE

BOOK TWO : CAPARISONS Their Blessings Procured

SIGN/DE CAN

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

CAPRICORNUS-the sea goat

Replace of sacrifice; H,A-cut off Isa 53:8-stricken for my people;Lev 9:15; 16:22

SAGITTA-the arrow

No other names found[has no human connection] Isa 53:4-smitten of God(royal eagle fall)

AQUILA-the eagle

No other names found [royal symbol, falling in death]

DELPHINUS-the dolphin

H-pouring out water; A-coming quickly died but rose again(whole New Testament)

The goat of Atonement for the Redeemed slain by the arrow of God. the smitten One falling, and Rising again.

BOOK TWO : AQUARIUSTheir Blessings Ensured

SIGN/frostbitten

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

AQUARIUS-the water bearer

frostbitten of him coming down Isa 33:-Lord is rivers/streams;Joel 2:pours out Spirit

PISCUS AUSTRALIS-the Southern fish

A-mouth of the fish blessing is bestowed on the redeemed

PEGASUS-the winged horse

H-chief horse speedy bestowment of living waters

CYGNUS-the swan

Ethics from afar Ps 36:8-9-fountain of life

The living waters of blessing poured forth for the Redeemed who Drink in the Blessing. Bringing speedily the Good News of the returning Redeemer.

BOOK TWO : PISCES Their Blessings in Abeyance

SIGN/Blessings

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

PISCES-the fishes

E-fishes of him that cometh Blesings to Israel & Ethnos(Eph 3:6)

THE BAND-the band

E-He cometh Jer 31:11; Hos 11:4 [held in Satan’s grip]

ANDROMEDA-the chained WOMAN

H-the chained; E-set up as queen Jer 14:17-daughter broken; Isa 52:2 bands of thy neck

CEPHUS-the crowned king

H-the branch; E-one cometh to rule Jer 31:1-I will be God to all the families of Israel

The Redeemed blessed though bound. (The two Houses of Israel and Judah) by a Band to their great enemy. The redeemed in bondage waiting for their Redeemer coming to rule.

BOOK TWO : ARIES Their Blessings Consummated and Enjoyed

SIGN/Judas

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

ARIES-the ram

Ak-sacrifice of righteousness Lamb revives, full of life(New Testament)

CASSIOPEIA-the enthroned woman

A-the freed; E-set up as queen Isa 62:3-5-marriage of Christ; Isa 61:10, Isa 54:5-8

CETUS-the sea monster

E-subdued Ps 74:12-14-break dragon’s head; Isa 26:21; 27:1

PERSEUS-the breaker

E-who fights & subdues Christ is the agency of deliverance(many refs)

The Lamb that was slain. The captive to be delivered and prepared for her for her Husband, who is bound to Cetus, the sea monster, who will be Broken by the Deliverer.

BOOK THREE : THE CONFLICT WITH SATAN

BOOK THREE : TAURUS Messiah, the Coming Judge of All the Earth

SIGN/Fetus

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

TAURUS-the bull

E-who saves/delivers; H-coming/ruling Isa 34:2;26:21; Jud 14-rushing to judge; gore enemies

ORION-the glorious one

Ak-light of heaven Isa 60:1-3-glory of the Lord

ERIDANUS-the river

H-riverofthejudge[eri=river;dan=judge] Dan 7:9-fire/judge–>Ps 97;Ps 1; Isa 30;Isa 66; Nahum 1

AURIGA-the shepherd

H-shepherd; E-sceptre/power Isa 49:10-11-gather the lambs; Fez 34:22

Messiah coming to rule in the person of the redeemer. whose Wrath is breaking forth on His enemies, while He shepherd’s his Redeemed in safety.

BOOK THREE : GEMINI Messiah’s Reign as Prince of Peace

SIGN/breaking

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

GEMINI-the twins

breaking of him who cometh; H,A,G-the united Jer33:14 Righteous (2 natured) branch to rule; Jer 23:5

LEPUS-the hare

E-confounded/failing Isa 63:3-4-trample the enemy; Mal 4; Ps 60;12

Canis Major-the dog

E-the head; A-coming quickly Isa 59:19-redeemer shall come to Zion; Isa 49:24

Canis Minor-the 2nd dog

E-conquering/victorious Isa 59:19-redeemer shall come to Zion; Isa 49:24

The twofold nature of the King who treads His enemy under foot. The coming glorious Prince of Prices, the exalted Redeemer.

BOOK THREE : CANCER Messiah’s Redeemed Possessions

SIGN/Redeemed

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

CANCER-the crab

E-the cattle-folds; A-holds/binds; Ak-sieze seed Enfolding of the redeemed

Ursa Minor-the little bear

lesser sheepfold(ancient picture) EZ 34:12-16

Ursa Major-the great bear

A-assembled together(great sheepfold) EZ 34:12-16

ARGO-the ship

(many voyagers coming home) Isa 35:10-ransomed of Lord to Zion; Isa 51; Jer 31; Isa 60

The possessions held fast in the Lesser and greater Sheepfolds. The redeemed pilgrims safely journeying home.

BOOK THREE : LEO Messiah’s consummated Triumph

SIGN/Triumph

OTHER NAMES

SCRIPTURE

LEO-the lion

S-rending lion; A-vehemently leaping as flame Rev 5:5 Lion of tribe of Judah prevails

HYDRA-the serpent

means he is abhorred no other names found Rev 20:2- Satan chained

CRATER-the cup

pouring out something no other names found Ps 75:8-God’s cup; Ps 11:6 fire/brimstone in the cup

CORVUS-the raven

the enemy/breaking up[snake natural enemy] Rev 19:hybrids eat God’s enemy’s flesh

The Lion of the Tribe of Judah aroused for the rending of the Enemy, the old Serpent. the cup of Divine wrath poured out, while birds of prey devour him.

THE LUNAR ZODIAC

The Lunar Zodiac would seem from history to be more ancient than the Solar Zodiac. However, as we shall see, they undoubtedly have a common source. The Lunar Zodiac can be found in India, Arabia and China. Unlike China and Arabia, the Indian astronomy assigned figures to each of the Mansions of the Moon. The Lunar Zodiac travels around the same ecliptic as the Solar, but is divided into twenty-eight parts. Each of these Mansions has it’s own particular name.

Joseph A. Seiss has written a very complete account of the Zodiacs, including related subjects, like primeval man. I urge you to get this book called, “The Gospel in the Stars.” About the history of the Lunar Zodiac Seiss says, “Astronomers agree in regarding this LunarZodiac as containing the most ancient remains of the science of the stars. The Romans, Greeks, and Egyptians knew little or nothing about it, but it is a matter of record in China that it was known and understood in that country as early as the reign of Yao, about twenty-three hundred years before the Christian era, which was before the time of Abraham. In the Chinese astronomy it begins with Virgo, which would seem to indicate that the Chinese table came from the antediluvian times.”

If it was meant that the stars should carry a prophetic record of the Gospel, then we would find it also in the arrangement and naming of the Lunar Mansions. And, of course, it is.

For ease of comparison, I’ll table the Lunar Mansions as they occur in relation to the Solar Zodiac. And from E. Raymond Capt’s excellent introductory study of this subject, I’ll quote the summary for each of the four constellations that make up the twelve signs.

VIRGO:

Seed of the Woman, the Desire of nations, Man of double nature in humiliation, exalted Shepherd and Harvester.

LIBRA:

The Price to be paid, the Cross to be endured, the Victim slain, the Crown purchased.

SCORPIO:

The Conflict, the Serpent’s coils, the struggle with the Enemy, the toiling Vanquisher of evil.

SAGITTARIUS:

The double-natured One triumphing as a Warrior, he gladdens the Heavens, he builds the fires of punishment, he casts down the Dragon.

CAPRICORNUS:

Life out of Death, the Arrow of God, Pierced and falling, Springing up again in abundant life.

AQUARIUS:

Life-waters from on high, Drinking the heavenly flood, Carrying and speeding the Good News, bearing aloft the Cross over all the earth.

PISCES:

Multiplication of the Redeemer’s People, upheld and governed by the Lamb, the intended Bride bound and exposed on earth, the Bridegroom exalted.

ARIES:

The Lamb found worthy, the Bride released and making ready, Satan bound, the Breaker triumphing.

TAURUS:

The invincible Ruler come, the sublime Vanquisher, the River of Judgement, the all-ruling Shepherd.

GEMINI:

The Marriage of the Lamb, the Enemy trodden down, the Prince coming in Glory, his princely following.

CANCER:

The Possession secured, Lesser fold – the Church of the first born, Greater fold – Israel, the Bride, safe folding into the kingdom.

LEO:

The King aroused for the rending, the Serpent fleeing, the Bowl of Wrath upon him, his Carcass devoured.

Seiss finishes by saying, “The whole series of these names thus runs parallel with the signs of the Solar Zodiac, and ends up precisely in the same way, proving that they are of a piece with it.”

A last reminder for those who may have lost track. The Chinese had these Mansions, with their names long before the other cultures of history. This Lunar Zodiac wasn’t the product of some group of star gazers corrupting an existing Solar Zodiac.

Amazing, huh? But that’s God.

Inside this seed will be many many children. These children refers to us. See Galatians 3: 21 Is the law, therefore, opposed to the promises of God? Absolutely not! For if a law had been given that could impart life, then righteousness would certainly have come by the law. 22 But Scripture has locked up everything under the control of sin, so that what was promised, being given through faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to those who believe.

23 Before the coming of this faith,[j] we were held in custody under the law, locked up until the faith that was to come would be revealed. 24 So the law was our guardian until Christ came that we might be justified by faith. 25 Now that this faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.

26 So in Christ Jesus you are all children of God through faith, 27 for all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ. 28 There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus. 29 If you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.

The promises in Genesis 15 does not refer to the Israelites but to believers under grace. We are also told that we are under the seed of Sarah. Believers who do not revert back to the law.

Galatians 4

21 Tell me, you who want to be under the law, are you not aware of what the law says? 22 For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman. 23 His son by the slave woman was born according to the flesh, but his son by the free woman was born as the result of a divine promise.

24 These things are being taken figuratively: The women represent two covenants. One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to be slaves: This is Hagar. 25 Now Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present city of Jerusalem, because she is in slavery with her children. 26 But the Jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother. 27 For it is written:

“Be glad, barren woman,

you who never bore a child;

shout for joy and cry aloud,

you who were never in labor;

because more are the children of the desolate woman

than of her who has a husband.”[e]

28 Now you, brothers and sisters, like Isaac, are children of promise. 29 At that time the son born according to the flesh persecuted the son born by the power of the Spirit. It is the same now. 30 But what does Scripture say? “Get rid of the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman’s son.”[f] 31 Therefore, brothers and sisters, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.

As such the stars in the seed mentioned in Genesis 15:5 refers to you.

Be blessed.