When questioned about his Kangol Summer Spitfire and modified strap Gregory said: “I just saw it one day and said ‘I’m gonna put this on, I like it.’ It was before the music career.

“I was making soup. I was talking to girls. ‘This is my look.’ And they were going ‘ooh, it’s different.’”

Although not divulging into how he got his scars, Gregory has revealed that he had some form of surgery.

The singer continues to say: “I've had some surgery on my skin, so this has been my look for a little while and will continue to be for a while longer. People recognise me by it now. It is what it is."

READ MORE:Nadiya Hussain health: 'I feel like I'm going to die' - Bake Off star's condition

Accepting that his look is now a part of his brand, the singer now refers to the hat as his “jazz hat,” providing him with a kind of security blanket when he performs.

Despite the distinguishing look, Gregory still causes a stir when going through airport security.

I get recognised for the hat in airports. In the UK, they know me quite well but they don’t give me a free pass, I get fully checked and secured,” he elaborated.

“There has been a time or two when I have been asked to sing to let them know it’s really me.”

He said: “After I got out of the depression of her death, which took a solid year… I was properly depressed... but my escape was the music. It was just the release of the singing.”

Gregory has overcome many hurdles to achieve success, and his distinctive look is only one aspect to this extraordinary singer.

How to treat scarring

The NHS explains that scars are a natural part of the healing process. They come in a variety of forms and although most will fade, they might never completely disappear.

When the skin is wounded, the tissues break, which causes a protein called collagen to be released. Collagen builds up where the tissue is damaged, helping to heal and strengthen the wound. New collagen continues forming for several months and the blood supply increases, causing the scar to become raised and lumpy.