“Germany is more than beer and BMW's, and Porter House is much more than 'Oktoberfest' and nice rooms. The German section provides for house members a place where they can find out more about contemporary life in the German-speaking countries and hone their language skills outside the classroom in an informal setting.”

—S. Schütz. Senior Lecturer of German, Emerita

Image

The German House, located in the Porter residence hall, provides its residents with an environment that encourages and facilitates the speaking of German and the exploration of the culture of German speaking countries.

German House residents also automatically become members of the German Club, a campus-wide SFC-sponsored organization.

Students interested in learning more about the German House are encouraged to attend our annual Open House and Kaffeeklatsch, every December in the Porter Common Room.

Contact Information

For any questions regarding the German House, please contact House Advisor, Anna Schrade

When is the deadline for applications?

The deadline for applications to Theme Houses will be shared at a later date. Residents will be selected following an interview process. Once a student confirms their acceptance of a placement in the Theme House, their Room Draw application is withdrawn. Each House has a specific deadline for confirming your acceptance. However, after the initial deadline, Theme Houses continue to accept applications for a waiting list status to help fill any vacancies that might come up throughout the year.

Is it possible to change a room in a theme house if I'm unhappy?

All internal house room changes occur under the guidance of the House President, the House Advisor, and the specific guidelines in the constitution. Once the decision has been made, the House President will contact the Residential Life Office so that the change can be made official and a new key issued.

Do I have to speak in German all the time when I'm living in the house?

Please refer to the specific house constitution, but for the most part, speaking the language is a part of living in the house, so the short answer is yes.