This past Saturday I saw Jordan Peele’s latest film Us, a production that I would recommend to anyone interested in films classified within the thriller genre. While the film had more horror notes than other films given the “thriller” label, it was by no means a violent slasher cliché horror film. It balanced light, humorous moments with dark, dramatic storytelling and was able to seamlessly transition between the two emotional poles without interfering with the central plot. One of the key plot elements that defines this film and countless other thrillers is the use of nonlinear storytelling, which is undoubtedly one of my favorite techniques of storytelling.

The best way to describe this phenomenon is that a story does not necessarily flow in a sequential order, as long as all of the events relevant to the story are included. Notable examples of this type of story are Christopher Nolan’s Dunkirk and Inception and Drew Goddard’s Bad Times at the El Royale, where the viewer is presented with vital scenes from a film in the beginning, yet key moments or details of these scenes are only revealed as the film progresses. Just as works of literature act to grab your attention in the initial statements, nonlinear storytelling captivates the audience and then reveals the importance of a scene at a later time. Moments that seem as mere progressions of the plot are revealed to be crucial elements of the plot itself, with an additional five-minute segment referencing the initial scene having the ability to change the entire plot of the film as the conclusion is reached.

It is fascinating how this type of storying telling leaves the viewer feeling both deceived and satisfied. I suppose this is the nature of any plot twist, yet when the plot twist is not a further development in the linear story, but rather a clarification of an event that one has already rationalized into the backstory of the central plot, it leaves the viewer in partial shock in that their understanding of the story is entirely uprooted. This is why I enjoy nonlinear storytelling and thriller films from directors and writers like Peele, in that they artfully bring together the crucial plot elements in a moment of drama that is not present within other genres of film. They brilliantly channel the viewers assumptions and understanding in an intentionally off-course direction before jolting back to the reality of the story that they are telling, often doing so through a scene that is inherently subtle yet acts as the emotional peak of the entire story from the viewers perspective.

Jordan Peele has also been revealed to be a pivotal mind in the reimagination of the classic TV thriller series The Twilight Zone, which will hopefully carry the same impact that both the original series and his past two films have produced. It will be interesting to see how such a classic anthology of nonlinear stories and dramatic twists will be reincarnated, yet I am hopeful that Peele’s involvement in the project will produce a product that both pays homage to the original and has the ability to stand alone due to its own merit. Peele has distinguished himself as a leader within the thriller genre and is emerging as a leader amongst modern directors, which will allow him to dictate the direction of the industry and popular story telling techniques as he continues to produce works. As with any position of leadership, formal or informal, there is great opportunity and responsibility for him innovate and produce content true to his style and message as his career progresses.