Surprise Surprise! Look what we got yesterday late afternoon!

“Hardwired” is here! (Couldn’t they have named it “HardDrive?”) It surprised the hell out of us yesterday, actually. I had thought there was a chance we’d see something new in time for this weekend’s show in Minneapolis. So finally, something new from the band after several years. Do ya like it? Let me know your thoughts over on our Facebook page or hardDriveRadio App‘s Interact Live section.

The 2 CD / 2 Vinyl set is the Grammy® Award winning Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee’s first studio album since 2008’s multi-platinum Death Magnetic. Hardwired…To Self-Destruct is available for pre-order at www.Metallica.com in various configurations including: CD, Vinyl, Digital, Deluxe, and Deluxe Deluxe Versions. The album is produced by Greg Fidelman, who engineered and mixed Death Magnetic.

“Has it really been eight years? Doesn’t feel like it! Nudge, nudge, wink, wink,” said Metallica’s Lars Ulrich. “We’re obviously beyond psyched to share new tunes with all our friends out there. We’ve been rockin’ along in the studio with Greg on and off for the last 18 months firing up the creative engines again. Putting new music out there, getting in your faces once again and all that comes with it is what we love to do more than anything else, so strap yourselves in … INCOMING!“

Lars explained to me recently why new music from Metallica can take longer than other bands: “One thing I can tell you when you make a record at home, which I’ve realized in the last month or so, is that when you go away to a studio and make a record, you have to leave Sunday night at 10 p.m. ’cause the Arctic Monkeys are setting up, you know, at 10 a.m. Monday morning. Makes you finish what you’re doing. We don’t have the luxury of that. We have open-ended recording time at our own studio.”

“Hardwired,” the first track to be released from the forthcoming album was played for the first time earlier today during a live remote broadcast from Metallica’s HQ in the Bay Area. During an interview with Minneapolis rock station 93X discussing the band’s performance at U.S. Bank Stadium on Aug 20th, Lars Ulrich stunned 93X’s Pablo by unleashing the incendiary song for the first time, much to the surprise (and delight) of the station, as well as fans around the world. “Hardwired” will be delivered as an instant download to fans who preorder the album. The music video was also released yesterday.

Metallica will perform Saturday (Aug 20th) at U.S. Bank Stadium – the new home of the Minnesota Vikings. The band’s performance will be the first rock concert at the venue and tickets sold out in less than 10 minutes. Fans can tune in from home via a Pandora live stream beginning at 10 pm EST at http://pdora.co/metallicalive. Individual songs from the concert will also spin on Pandora. To listen, log in to your Pandora account or create a new one for free if you live in U.S., Australia or New Zealand. Fans outside of those countries can access the live stream at www.livemetallica.com.

Additionally, in celebration of Saturday’s performance, the band will be launching the official Metallica Pop-Up Store in Minneapolis this weekend. The store will have exclusive show merchandise and items not available anywhere else (including inside the stadium) as well as a wide selection of classic Metallica merch. The Metallica Pop-Up Store will be located at 401 2nd Ave North and open today, Aug 19th from 10:00 AM – 11:00 PM and Saturday, Aug 20th from 9:00 AM to 6:00 PM.

Here is the track listing:

Disc One

01. Hardwired

02. Atlas, Rise!

03. Now That We’re Dead

04. Moth Into Flame

05. Am I Savage?

06. Halo On Fire

Disc Two

01. Confusion

02. Dream No More

03. ManUNkind

04. Here Comes Revenge

05. Murder One

06. Spit Out The Bone

Disc Three (Deluxe Edition Only)

01. Lords Of Summer

02. Riff Charge (Riff Origins)

03. N.W.O.B.H.M. A.T.M. (Riff Origins)

04. Tin Shot (Riff Origins)

05. Plow (Riff Origins)

06. Sawblade (Riff Origins)

07. RIP (Riff Origins)

08. Lima (Riff Origins)

09. 91 (Riff Origins)

10. MTO (Riff Origins)

11. RL72 (Riff Origins)

12. Frankenstein (Riff Origins)

13. CHI (Riff Origins)

14. X Dust (Riff Origins)