More than 23 years after his passing, it seems that the spirit of Tupac Shakur still lives on, with a man of the same name being arrested in Johnson City, Tennessee over the weekend.

If you’ve got even a cursory knowledge of music history, you would be aware than September 13th, 1996 was a dark day for the world of hip-hop, with it being the day that Tupac Shakur was gunned down by an unknown assailant.

Aged just 25 at the time, Tupac left behind a legacy far greater than many of his contemporaries twice his age, with countless posthumous songs and records being released over the ensuing years.

However, despite his passing, numerous conspiracy theories have sprung up to offer the claim that Tupac isn’t dead after all. In fact, the son of Suge Knight – the man who was with Tupac on the night of his death – claims that the hip-hop icon is actually living in Malaysia and recording new music, even posting poorly-doctored photos to prove his point.

While we have to take that one with a grain of salt, it seems that his spirit is still well and truly alive, with a white man of the same name being arrested in the US over the weekend.

As the Johnson City Press reports, a 40-year-old white male by the name of Tupac A. Shakur was arrested on Saturday after pulling a knife on police, two years after a similar incident took place in Los Angeles.

A press release explains that he was charged with aggravated assault, resisting arrest, simple possession of methamphetamine and having unlawful drug paraphernalia.

Police reportedly were alerted to the presence of Shakur, who had warrants out for his arrest, but fled the scene when they came to arrest him. After officials finally caught up with him, he pulled a knife on the officers. Eventually he was subdued and arrested, with police discovering a syringe and methamphetamine on his person.

Currently being held on an $18,000 bond, the arrest of a man named Tupac Amaru Shakur (yes, the full legal name of the late rapper) did not go unnoticed by the general public, with many taking to social media to joke about the second coming of the late rapper.

Of course, while questions do remain about how this fellow happened to end up with such a name, some folks have suggested that if they ever decide to do another Tupac hologram tour, they should just give him a call.

Check out ‘Only God Can Judge Me’ by Tupac Shakur: