Welcome to Declassified, a weekly column looking at the lighter side of politics. You can find it in POLITICO‘s weekly print edition and online on Fridays.

On Saturday in Johnson County, Tennessee, Tupac Shakur was arrested and charged with aggravated assault, meth possession and having unlawful drug paraphernalia. Of course it wasn’t that Tupac Shakur, this one was white and slightly less dead. But it must be strange having the same name as someone famous (sadly, the only other Paul Dallison of note is the drummer in early ’90s indie band Pele).

Just ask Charles Michel. The Belgian prime minister and soon-to-be president of the European Council shares his name with an American surgeon and ophthalmologist who published the first ever clinical report on successful permanent hair removal using electrology, way back in 1875. Fortunately for the Belgian PM, nature has already done the hair-removal work for him.

But spare a thought for Maryland native Donald Trump Jr, who was given that name in the early 2000s when it merely made him the namesake of a weird businessman and skyscraper enthusiast. Fast-forward to 2016 and he has to go to high school with the same name as the president and also his feckless son.

Asked by Vice if he liked his name, young Donald said: “I like that I have the name of a presidential candidate. But I just don’t like him. I think he’s cruel and racist and he doesn’t have any hair. He has hair, but I don’t even know if it’s real.”

He added: “Sometimes when I play Playstation, random people who don’t know me will try to come kill me on the game because of [my name in] my handle.”

Then there’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. No, not the Turkish president but a man in his early 20s whose parents clearly hoped their son would grow up to become a power-crazed strongman. The young Erdoğan even stood for election this year. He lost.

There is, thankfully, only one Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson.

DOS AND DON’TS

DO Get TFUK

Michel Barnier’s next gig will be to lead the “U.K. Task Force” that will replace the existing “Taskforce on Article 50 negotiations with the United Kingdom.” One Brussels official said the Commission chose the name “U.K. Task Force,” because the acronym for Task Force U.K. (TFUK) sounds like an expletive. And is therefore perfect.

DON’T Miss out on Cher

There are lots of reasons why Leo Varadkar wants a Brexit deal agreed by October 31, but chief among them is that he’s got tickets to see Cher in Dublin on November 1. He’s not the only one who wishes he could turn back time.

CAPTION COMPETITION

“So I said to Xavier, ‘I’m just nipping to the toilet, you start the press conference without me.'”

Can you do better? Email [email protected] or on Twitter @pdallison74

Last week we gave you this photo.

Thanks for all the entries. Here’s the best from our post bag (there’s no prize except for the gift of laughter, which I think we can all agree is far more valuable than cash or booze).

“And also in the next session of parliament there will be a bill calling for a referendum on who should succeed me, between Charles and William” by Clive Ponsonby.

Paul Dallison is POLITICO‘s slot news editor.