TUPAC Shakur was murdered in a drive-by shooting in 1996.

The rapper, popularly known by his stage name 2Pac, is considered to be one of the greatest artists of his era, selling millions of albums long after his death.

How did Tupac die?

On the night of September 7, 1996, Tupac was gunned down in a drive-by shooting in Las Vegas as he headed to a gig at Club 662.

Tupac was shot four times - in the chest, arm, and thigh - and died six days later.

Hours earlier Tupac, 25, and his entourage had watched boxer Mike Tyson fight Bruce Seldon at the MGM Grand Casino.

In the lobby afterward, Tupac and his crew - some of whom were associated with the Los Angeles gang The Bloods - attacked Orlando "Baby Lane" Anderson after Pac threw the first punch.

Tupac died of his gunshot wounds on Friday, September 13, 1996.

Where was Tupac shot?

Tupac was gunned down in a drive-by shooting in Las Vegas as he headed to a gig at Club 662.

Death Row Records boss Suge Knight was driving the car and 2Pac was a front-seat passenger as they led a convoy of cars.

A shooter in a white Cadillac, which pulled up on the right-hand passenger side of Tupac's BMW at traffic lights, opened fire at 11.15pm.

Tupac's last words to his friend, Suge Knight, reportedly were: "You the one they shot in the head – you shot in the head," because he thought the Death Row Records boss had been injured.

Who shot Tupac?

In a Netflix documentary, it was claimed Tupac's killer was gang member Orlando "Baby Lane" Anderson.

In a bombshell confession, the alleged murderer’s uncle, Duane Keith Davis - known as Keefe D – said he was in the car that carried out the drive-by shooting in 1996.

Keefe D was arrested on September 29, 2023, in connection to Tupac's murder. He was placed in protective custody at Clark County Detention Center.

On January 9, 2023, the judge set Davis' bail at $750,000 at a hearing at Las Vegas District Court.

In the docuseries Unsolved, The Tupac And Biggie Murders, he explains his nephew went looking for revenge after he was beaten up by the acclaimed rapper and his entourage.

Describing the killing, he said: "I gave it to Dre and Dre was like 'no, no, no’ and Lane was like – popped the dudes."