A new housing development, targeted largely for seniors, could be coming to the Village of Dansville after a public hearing March 23 on zoning changes.

A public hearing is scheduled for 7 p.m. on the proposed rezoning of property bordered by I-390, Franklin Plaza, Franklin St., Barrett Ave. and Ossian St. in the village.

The project would create a total of 60 units, according to developer DePaul Properties. Repurposing the historic King’s Daughters mansion will result in twelve units designed specifically for senior residents, and another 48 units will be in a newly-built apartment building next to the Tops supermarket.

More: Perkins, Parks among winners in Dansville, Wayland village elections

More: J. Chad Teeters to lead UR Medicine Noyes Health in Dansville

That building will also serve seniors, as well as the general public, with on-site support also available for up to 10 residents who are in mental health recovery.

Who is developing the project?

The developer, DePaul, is a private not-for-profit organization founded in 1958.

"DePaul has been aware of the need for additional supported and affordable mid-market housing in the area for a number of years." said Amy Cavalier, communications coordinator at DePaul. "Like most of upstate New York, the population is aging, with fewer options for aging-in-place housing."

Following the public comment session Tuesday, the plan will be considered by the village zoning and planning boards.

NYS Homes and Community Renewal will provide funding for the project via tax credits, and DePaul has already been awarded service support funds by New York state.

Specifics of the zoning proposal

The first zoning law would change eight parcels along the north side of Ossian St. and west side of Barrett Ave. from Agriculture to Low Density Residential. The second would change five parcels adjacent to Franklin Plaza (south side) and along the west side of Franklin St. from Agriculture and General Business to High Density Residential.