CLEVELAND, Ohio - A Cleveland State University professor recently published a history of Greater Cleveland's drug stores, which have changed just as drastically as those across the country.

Names like Marshal's, Revco and Medic Discount Drug once adorned storefronts through Northeast Ohio, selling medicines to price-conscious consumers. However, shifting consumer preferences and an increase in competition led to the rise of new names in the pharmacy industry and the decline of much of the old guard.

The druggists and apothecaries who sold medicines and supposed miracles cures in the 18th and 19th centuries would likely find the nationwide drug-store chains prominent in the 21st century unrecognizable.

Richard Klein, a professor of urban studies and business at Cleveland State, wrote an exhaustive account of the evolution of drug stores, chronicling their rise from neighborhood stores to nationwide giants. "The Legacy of the Pharmacy Industry: Cleveland, Ohio" is now available as an ebook.

"I wanted to write an evolutionary study of the pharmacy industry, mostly in their 19th and 20th century development," Klein said. "But I also wanted to focus on the major drug store chains in Cleveland in those centuries."

Cleveland was the sixth largest city in the United States for much of the 20th Century, and often served as a microcosm for national trends.

Klein spoke about about his work prior to publication and talked again about the project after it became available online.

Other retail industries, such as department stores, have declined precipitously as they've struggled to keep up with shopping trends and advances in technology. Drug stores, on the other hand, have persevered even as their names have changed and their customers have progressed.

They grew from corner stores to local chains, and as nationwide chains encroached on their business, many adapted in order to survive.

For example, chains like Marc's started life as pharmacies but grew beyond their original mandate and are known more as grocery stores today.

In his research, Klein looked at why drug stores persisted as other industries, like department stores, faltered.

"Because the drug store had a unique purpose," Klein concluded in an interview. "They offered a combination of a professional service, in terms of the drugs they provide, and retailing."

Drug-store owners were adept at reading the desires of their customers beyond medicines, Klein said. As the years wore on, they began offering customers products and services beyond medicine and prescription drugs, becoming one-stop shopping destinations.

"What the druggists were able to do, and still do, was bring those things together and anticipate the needs of the public," he said.

Mega-chains like CVS resulted from this evolution. The company bought stores throughout the nation and either erected new stores in their place or renovated existing ones. They built an empire of clean, modern pharmacies that offered a place for customers to fill their prescriptions and fulfill their daily shopping needs.

Now-defunct drug-store chain Revco tried a similar tactic with less success, Klein said. The chain wasn't as discerning as CVS when it bought new stores, and didn't always have the resources to update them.

Revco ultimately folded thanks to behind-the-scenes drama over its leadership and an attempted takeover in the 1980s.

Larger chains like CVS and Walgreens ultimately supplanted local discount drug sellers. Discount Drug Mart is one of the few that remains.

However, nearly all now-defunct drug-store chains either closed voluntarily or merged with other chains, Klein said. Revco's outright failure is unique in the industry.

Klein started work on his book in spring 2016. He said several people reached out to him after cleveland.com published an account of his project.

The professor browsed the archives of the The Plain Dealer for information on Northeast Ohio's drug stores and pulled pictures from groups like the Cleveland Memory Project.