Revco D. S., Inc., and White Cross Stores, Inc., announced yesterday that they had begun negotiations for a possible merger of White Cross into Revco. Both companies operate discount drugstores. The companies said the discussions had indicated an exchange ratio of 0.75 share of Revco common for each share of White Cross common. Based on the closing price of Revco on the New York Stock Exchange yester terday of 53⅛, up ⅞, the transaction is valued at approximately $82‐million. White Cross finished yesterday on the. Big Board at 34¾, up 3⅞. The company has 2,047,521 common shares outstanding.

The merger would, be subject to mutually aceptable conditions, execution of a definitive agrement and approval by directors and shareholders of both companies.

Mobil Oil Corporation And Atlantic Richfield

The Mobil Oil Corporation said wit had signed an agreement to acquire certain retail marketing properties of the Atlantic Richfield Company in Florida for an undisclosed sum. Trade sources estimated the transaction to involve about $20‐million.

Ling‐Temco Vought Sets Restructuring of Company

The board of directors of Ling‐Temco‐Vought, Inc., anThnounced a restructuring of the company, including acquisition of 100 per cent ownership of the LTV Aerospace Corporation, a major subsidiary, a company change and a transition from its present holding‐cornmany structure to that of an operating company.

The board approved in principle a plan whereby the company would acquire. the.100.per cent ownership in LTV. Aerospace through distribution of common stock in two other majority‐owned subsidiaries, LTV Electrosystems, Inc., and LTV Ling Altec, Inc.

Under the tentative terms, public shareholders of LTV, Aerospace would receive for each share of their common stock a package consisting of 1.3 shares of LTV Electrosystems and one share of LTV Altec common.

LTV currently, owns 62 per cent of LTV Aerospace common, G9 per cent of LTV Electrosystems common and 57 per cent of LTV Ling Altec common. Under the proposed plan,, LTV Aerospace warrant‐holders would receive warrants to buy the‐same package as the owners of common shares for each exercisable share under their warrants. The board approved a proposal to stockholders to change the Ling‐Temco‐Votight name to the LTV Corporation.