TWINSBURG, Ohio -- Revco D.S. Inc., the nation's second largest drugstore chain, announced Friday that under its bankruptcy reorganization it will sell 712 stores in 17 states.

Revco, which was the nation's largest drugstore chain until the Rite Aid Corp. acquired Gray Drug in 1987, said its remaining businesses would include 1,161 stores in 10 states.

Revco now has 1,873 stores in 27 sales with annual sales in excess of $2.7 billion.

The stores Revco plans to keep are in Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, New York, Maryland, Virginia, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina and eastern Tennessee.

The stores being sold are in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisana, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas and Tennessee stores west of metropolitan Chattanooga.

Revco said in a prepared statement it told employees it 'intends to concentrate all its resources on its strongest markets.' Revco did not name potential buyers and made no time estimate for the transactions.

Revco, which is privately held, said it will take a one-time charge of $230 million in the third quarter to cover costs of reducing the size of the company.

'We will be a much stronger competitor in our chosen markets, both operationally and financially,' Chairman Boake A. Sells said. 'Since total capital expenditures for the chain will not be reduced, ongoing areas of operation will see remodelings and technological enhancements much earlier than previously planned.'

Sells said money raised through the sale of the 712 stores would ease the the Chapter 11 reorganization.

Sidney Dworkin, who founded the company with a single drugstore in Detroit 32 years ago, took the company private in a $1.2 billion leveraged buyout on Dec. 29, 1986.

Despite optimistic sales and earnings forecasts, Revco plunged into the red, losing $59 million in fiscal 1987 and $150.1 million in the first nine months of fiscal 1988 before filing for federal bankruptcy protection.

Dworkin was outsed in 1987.