CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Although they've largely been forgotten, names like Marshal's, Revco and Medic Discount Drug once dominated Northeast Ohio's drug store industry.

Few of those local drug chains remain -- although you can still find stores in the venerable Discount Drug Mart chain spread throughout Greater Cleveland -- done in by competition and changing customer preferences.

But the story of Cleveland's drug stores starts long before Bernie Shulman opened his first Marc's -- which started life as a discount drug store -- in Mayfield Heights in the 1970s, or the first Revco Discount Drug Store opened in Twinsburg in 1956.

Dr. Richard Klein, a professor of urban studies and business at Cleveland State University, recently discussed the history of Greater Cleveland's drug stores with a cleveland.com reporter. Dr. Klein is writing a book on the history of these stores which he hopes to publish in 2017.

You can see vintage pictures of Cleveland's drug stores in the gallery above.

Druggists and apothecaries sold medicines and supposed miracle cures in the 18th and 19th centuries. They also sometimes sold items forbidden by today's laws, along with their own ointments and remedies.

While most sold real medicines, some of their products, Dr. Klein said, were laced with small amounts of heroin or opium, which druggists used, intentionally or not, to make the customers feel good and get them addicted to their products.

"That continued in the late 19th century," Klein said.

Pharmacies arose following the advent of laws regulating food and drug sales. Increasingly, pharmacists were required to receive training and certification before selling drugs, professionalizing the industry.

"(Drug stores) became more sophisticated because people were being trained in colleges to become pharmacists," Klein said. "They were no longer doctors who made chemicals on the side."

The people running drug stores were legally bound to do right by their customers. But some of them were also shrewd businessmen, Klein said.

Modern drug stores look much like supermarkets, selling groceries, toiletries, alcohol, household cleaners and clothes.

The first hints of this trend materialized when drug store owners realized they had a product (prescription medications) that customers couldn't acquire elsewhere, Klein said.

"The druggists were astute enough to realize that they had a captive audience," he said.

Customers needing prescription medicine could only get them at drug stores, giving the businesses a more or less permanent place in the shopping landscape.

"And while they've got a captive audience, doesn't it make sense to have a one-stop shopping experience?" Klein said.

Recent studies have shown that drug store customers will more likely than not buy other items while waiting for their prescriptions, provided other items are available. But business-conscious pharmacists and drug store owners knew that decades before academics weighed in.

The early 20th Century saw the rise of groceries and household items in drug stores. A handful of drug stores even started to incorporate soda fountains in the early 1900s.

"They needed people to come in and stay, so they opened up soda fountains," Klein said.

In time, some drug stores even added kitchens and began to pride themselves on their menus. The dining spaces would stay open in the afternoon to give customers, particularly women, in the midst of their afternoon shopping, a place to relax and enjoy a meal or a soft drink, Klein said.

"After World War II, they evolved into regular luncheonettes," he said. "People would come in and buy a full lunch."

The second half of the 20th Century gave rise to area drug store chains like Medic Discount Drugs, Revco, Marshal's, and Discount Drug Mart, which is one of the few that remains.

Pictures of these chains are included in the gallery above.

(While Marc's still exists, it now more closely resembles a grocery store chain than a drug store chain.)

Their eventual decline coincided with the rise of national chains like Walgreens and CVS, which could sell products more cheaply.

Some of the local chains held out into the 21st Century. The Mayfield-based Medic, for example, closed most of its remaining stores and sold the rest to Walgreens in 2005.

Selling off stores rather than closing them entirely was common among regional drug store chains, Klein said. The owners saw the writing on the wall and decided to get out of the business while they could still make money.

The national chains dominate the drug store industry today, making up more than half of all drug stores.

Walgreens alone has dozens of locations in Greater Cleveland.