Portumna 5 Creggs 2nds 0: A try by second row Brendan Doyle in the ninth minute gave Portumna a hard-earned win over Creggs in Sunday’s Junior 2 League encounter at the Castle Grounds, Portumna.

The home team started brightly and made several incursions deep into Creggs territory before Doyle powered his way over from close-range with the line at his mercy.

Thereafter, Creggs gradually raised the tempo of their game, and created a few chances out wide. Despite operating with limited quality possession, Robbie Daly and Johnny Pontier impressed with some direct running which stretched the Portumna defence.

The second half failed to yield any further scores, with Portumna missing a couple of easy penalty kicks, while sloppy handling led to the breakdown of several promising Creggs moves.

This was Creggs’ first competitive game at Junior 2 Level for a number of seasons, and all the signs are there that the squad will be capable of performing well in this League.

Graham Curran, David Feeney, Aidan Leech and Bernard Kilcommons caught the eye.

Creggs: Robbie Daly, Graham Curran, David Feeney, Tom Deane, Jonny Pontier, Bernard Kilcommons, David Hoare, Brian Coady, Enda Tully, Aidan Leech, Alan Glennon, Michael Kelly, Declan Nee, Ross Mugan, Kieran Ryan, Paul McNeill, Sean McNeill, Ken Loughrey, Luke Meehan.

Training continues on Tuesdays at 8 pm and Fridays at 8.30 pm for Creggs 2nds. New players are always welcome.

This week: Minis – Creggs Minis will welcome Carrick-on-Shannon RFC for their first Blitz of the year this Saturday with a 10.45 am kick-off. All players to be in Creggs for 10.30 am. Carrick will have a team at every age from U-8 to U-12.

Creggs U-14s will play their first game of the season when they take on local rivals Buccaneers RFC in the U-14 Division 1 League on Saturday at 2.30 pm in Creggs.

Creggs U-17s will also begin their season and League campaign with a home game on Sunday morning in Creggs at 11.30 am against Ballina RFC in Divison 1 of the Connacht League.

Creggs narrowly beat Ballina in the Cup Final last April so this will be another very tight and exciting affair.

Creggs U-15s will play Galwegians RFC in Round 2 of their league in Creggs at 12 noon on Sunday.

U-15 League: Creggs Under-15s put in a very good second-half performance but eventually went down 31-21 to Ballina RFC in their U-15 League Division 1 game last Sunday in Ballina (in the first game of the season).

Creggs were slow to start and failed to score in the first half, going in at half-time 24-0 down.

The restart saw a much-improved performance as Creggs outscored their opponents 21-7 in the second half with tries from John McDonnell and Jack Keegan (2) and three conversions from Mark Purcell.