THERE is an old adage in rugby about games being won and lost in the tight five. While to some degree I appreciated that fact as a player the more I watch now from the sideline the more I am convinced that this is so.

The topsy-turvy nature of St Mary's College RFC in recent seasons represents the definitive case in point. Always threatening without ever fully delivering. In so many ways the great underachievers of Irish rugby.

Well signs are that all that may be about to change. And the main reason is strength in depth at large but most of all up front. In particular in the tight five.

The arrival this season of John Maher from Bective and Peter Smyth from Blackrock allied to the further development of Peter Coyle and Emmet Byrne has brought a new dimension to the Mary's game.

A physical and mental toughness previously marked by its absence. Think back to all the key games a year ago particularly those on foreign soil at Dooradoyle, Thomond and, not a million miles away, in Lakelands.

On Saturday at Templeville they struck a huge psychological blow. Quite simply they took on and beat Shannon at their own game.

Nowhere was this more apparent than in the forward exchanges tight and loose. And for 35 minutes they did so with Trevor Brennan banished for an early shower.

With Ian Bloomer a colossus at the lineout and with Eugene Gibney and Ray McIlreavy bottling up everything in the middle they gave the champions one hell of a dose of their own medicine.

That must surely be the most satisfying aspect of all for Steve Hennessy and Hugh Maguire in the aftermath of this third win in a row over Shannon at Templeville.

And there was another hugely significant factor as well. Unlike crucial stages in crunch games a year ago this time there was a visible sense of control and direction at half-back.

McGuinness as honest and effective in his grafting as ever but it was his partner Fergal Campion who really came of age.

Campion's controlled left footed kicking in defence and attack ultimately broke the back of the Shannon challenge. He was immense throughout. And never afraid to move it through the hands either.

But what of Shannon? Has the bubble finally burst?

WELL to those already merrily dancing on their grave, I say Bi curamach. The task is now considerable but I still believe they have what it takes to win their final four games and sneak in the back door.

And who would bet against them then?

Daragh Kirby's arrival has strengthened their hand up front and increased their already considerable line out options further but for whatever reasons the aura of invincibility once stamped all over this forward unit is no longer readily apparent. It is somewhat overly simplistic to put it all down to lack of appetite but certainly it is an obvious factor. The hunger always evident in delicately poised games was never there on Saturday.

Sure they threatened late on but never with conviction. Mary's wanted this win so badly and fully deserved every point of their winning margin.

Right now Shannon's game plan is too predictable and one dimensional based entirely upon forward dominance in the close exchanges.

Invariably it is Mick Galwey who provides the momentum. The alternative strategy of taking it up the middle ala Rhys Ellison and Paul McMahon thereby providing the strategic field positions and platform to set their runners free up either side is no longer there. Ellison's loss is at the very core of their current difficulties.

ON the plus side was Jim Galvin's impressive return as playmaker in chief. But like so many others he too tired before the end. His tactical kicking having a fairly jaded look about it as the game wore on.

But he will improve his match fitness with games, the rest is already there.

Following Brennan's departure for all his passionate and wholehearted endeavour, a temperamental problem which will simply have to be addressed the likes of Steve Jameson, Mark Cuddihy and the no nonsense Karl Jennings came to the fore. They were up for it ... Shannon in truth weren't.

However my most abiding memory from this always interesting encounter as I left Templeville on Saturday was the manner in which the Mary's eight/seven stuck to the task and eventually got the upper hand in the scrum.

Two precious league points yes but perhaps an even more important psychological blow struck for their front row in the process. And yet the seemingly never ending question remains can they take it on from here? Now I believe they can. 'Con at Temple Hill in a fortnight's time should be a roaster!

CONDITIONS Perfect. A freakishly balmy day. Light but insignificant breeze. Good underfoot.

MOST MEMORABLE MOMENT The seven man Marys' scrum locking out and even gaining the nudge late on. A massive statement of intent in the process.

MAN OF THE MATCH Fergal Campion (St Mary's).