The St. Mary’s University chapter is called Alpha Pi. Joining our local chapter is a great opportunity to get to know your professional peers and to support the community. Most Alpha Pi chapter activities are open to all students in the Counseling programs, but to join Chi Sigma Iota, you must have completed at least one full-time semester of a CACREP or CORE accredited program (at St. Mary’s University, the Clinical Mental Health Counseling and Counselor Education and Supervision programs qualify), maintain a GPA of 3.5 or better, and receive a letter of invitation to membership indicating that you meet the high standards of Chi Sigma Iota. If you are interested in joining Chi Sigma Iota or participating in Chi Sigma Iota events, please contact Melanie Harper, Ph.D., Alpha Pi Chapter Faculty Advisor, at mharper@stmarytx.edu or 210-438-6400. More information about Chi Sigma Iota is available online at www.csi-net.org.

The International Relations Society of St. Mary’s University is a society of students, both graduate and undergraduate, who study or have an interest in international relations. The primary goal of the International Relations Society is to promote social networking among graduate and undergraduate students and alumni interested in international relations. The International Relations Society provides a forum to share information concerning career opportunities, events and academic programs, as well as to provide mentorship to students interested in entering the field of international relations. The Society will also continuously support and promote the values of St. Mary’s University.

Lambda Pi Eta (LPH) is the National Communication Association’s official honor society at four-year colleges and universities. LPH has more than 500 active chapters at four-year colleges and universities nationwide. LPH became a part of the National Communication Association in 1988, and the association’s official honor society in July 1995. It is a member of the Association of College Honor Societies (ACHS). LPH represents what Aristotle described in Rhetoric as three ingredients of persuasion: logos (Lambda), meaning logic; pathos (Pi), relating to emotion; and ethos (Eta), defined as character credibility and ethics.

Omicron Delta Epsilon is one of the world’s largest academic honor societies. The objectives of Omicron Delta Epsilon are recognition of scholastic attainment and the honoring of outstanding achievements in economics; the establishment of closer ties between students and faculty in economics within colleges and universities, and among colleges and universities; the publication of its official journal, The American Economist, and sponsoring of panels at professional meetings as well as the Irving Fisher and Frank W. Taussig competitions.

The mission of the St. Mary’s University Opera Workshop is to provide an educational, entertaining, and welcoming experience in an environment in which all forms of creativity are expressed and explored. We also provide opportunities for musical and creative enhancement, where work and dedication are greatly rewarded. It is our goal to supply sponsorship to quality performances in the public forum. This shall represent the University’s commitment to the arts, help direct the community’s attention to the arts, and invite them to support, enjoy and be a part of the arts wherever encounters allow.

Phi Sigma Tau is the International Honor Society in Philosophy. Founded in 1930 and incorporated as a nonprofit corporation in 1955, the Society now has a network of over 200 chapters throughout the United States and Canada, at both public and private institutions of higher learning. The purpose of Phi Sigma Tau is to encourage interest and activity among students and to promote ties between philosophy departments in accredited institutions. Phi Sigma Tau publishes a journal, Dialogue, for student contributions in all areas of contemporary philosophical research.

The purpose of Student Educators Association for Dynamic Leadership (SEAL) is to discuss subjects of educational, social and cultural natures; to have input on activities, courses and staff in strengthening the degree of Elementary and Secondary Education; to inform the student body, faculty, and administration on subjects of concern to Education majors and minors, and teacher certification candidates; to encourage educational and professional growth of members; to encourage activities on and off campus designed as laboratories for learning and to broaden avenues for careers; to assist the Education Department in sponsoring on-campus activities, speakers, programs, etc., wherein the student body of St. Mary’s be exposed to diverse philosophies and topics based on equal treatment; to assist the endeavors and efforts of the Education Department; to serve as ambassadors for the Education Department; and to serve the community with the values that coincide with the Marianist tradition.

Selection for the national bowl. As usual, the top four teams of the TREB will receive a trophy. The regional bowl’s arrangement with IIT works this way: Our regional event will have a number of places determined by the total number of teams competing in regional bowls around the country. Ten regional bowls mean that we may get to send four teams or we may only get to send three. We won’t know for sure until after the completion of all the separate bowls. The top three (or four) schools from our event (not the top three teams) will receive an invitation to send one team each to the national event. Schools that have two or more winning teams only receive a single invitation. If a school with a winning team declines to accept the invitation, it passes down the list again. To make matters more complex, teams may receive “undistributed places” at the national event. That is, after the national organizers distribute the guaranteed places, they sometimes end up with a few left over. They then fill those places with runner-up teams from regional events. Therefore, even if a team does not win one of the top three places, it may still find itself invited to compete nationally.