Ryan Gallant If it's a problem with the plot or a character motivation, then I'll often gnaw away at it until I come up with a solution. Which, yes, leads to much stress and many sleepless nights. The rest of the time, if it's a general inability to get started, I just try to get away from the work for a while and think about it until the ideas start to overflow, the story starts taking its own shape, and the urge to write becomes so strong that to refuse it is not an option.

Ryan Gallant Write. And if you're not writing, and find yourself procrastinating as I frequently do, then at least read or watch films/TV shows that speak to you, especially in whatever genres you're writing in. If you need inspiration, you can often find it in like-minded works. And for those who say "write what you know"? BOLLOCKS. Your beliefs and experiences will shape your voice as a writer, yes, but storytelling is about discovery as well, and challenging yourself by exploring characters and themes that you may not be entirely familiar with. Never underestimate the powerful combination of research and imagination.

But, most importantly, in terms of your broader goals, just don't give up. EVER. Because perseverance is far more important than talent, though hopefully you have a good chunk of that on your side as well. ;-)

Ryan Gallant Being able to control (or rather, guide) destinies and experience different lives vicariously through your characters, who, if you've done your job right, should be fully fleshed out human beings that you're as fond of as any friend or family member. Not to play God cynically, as it were, but to simply express and discover yourself in the journey of writing and find out what your characters and their stories mean to you beyond just "the plot".

Ryan Gallant I always envisioned the adventures of Canadian spy John Burke as belonging to a franchise akin to James Bond or Jason Bourne, and "Crimson Zero" was the first installment in that franchise. So it was only a matter of time before loose ends from the first book and the fresh intrigues of a new story began to needle away at my mind for a sequel...