Films of the 1940s, 50s and 60s

REVISED: April 2023

The following is revised edition of this blog which I first posted two years ago. I’ve added two chapters and updated the other eight with dozens of additional photos, insights, spotlights, side notes and eight new films. I have notated the NEW additions in red.

FADE IN

In an attempt to avoid political vitriol and pandemic fatigue, I got into my imaginary time machine, travelling back to a simpler time where I could focus my ever-shrinking attention span to an old love: the silver screen.

I remember as a young child watching old movies with my grandmother on her 19-inch Zenith color television. They fascinated me from a very young and impressionable age. I would often wonder why some of these movies and shows would be without color, even though we were fortunate to have a color TV.

My love for cinema would only grow with the years. As a family we we’re always going “to the movies” to “see a show”. The romance of darkened room with a flickering light above, projecting larger than life images on an enormous white canvas was mesmorising. The fact that you could collectively share this very personal experience with a few hundred strangers was in and of itself magical. I remember vast, smoke-filled, single-screen theatres.

In particular, the old Loews Triboro on Steinway street in Astoria, Queens. It’s grand chandelier adorned lobby and ornate inner decor had many believing it was an old world opera house at one time. In fact this 3,290 seat theatre opened in 1931, housing both vaudeville acts and the “talkies”, as movies with sound were called in the early days. I remember the sad day in 1974 when this beautiful movie palace was reduced to rubble to make way for more store fronts and apartments.

Most theatres in the 1970s would convert to multi-plexes by decades end. Theatre seating reduced, smaller screens and no more balconies to satiate the smokers and shield horny teenagers semi-private make-out sessions!

In the 1980s, VCRs became a household staple. I’d rent dozens of “old” movies every month, a few I had seen, but most were before my time. However, some I remembered vividly from those weekend nights at Grandma Mary’s. Others simply transported me to a era long gone, but not forgotten. With the young version of older stars, now staples on Carson or Merv Griffin. Or better yet TV stars.

Over the last few months, I’ve had a steady diet of classic Hollywood cinema. By classics, I mean movies before my time, from the 1940, 50s and 60s. Some of these treasures I watched for the first time ever, others for the first time in many years. Over 50 in a six-week period. From classic black & white film noir to the larger Technicolor masterpieces.

It’s true what they say: “they don’t make movies like this anymore!” Hundreds of scenes created on soundstages and backlots creating worlds with amazing attention to detail all without computers!

THE STUDIO SYSTEM

The Star System is the most famous part of The Studio System. It was common practice between the 1920’s and 1960’s and a big part of the success of Classic Hollywood. In this system the Hollywood stars were employees of the studios that they were working for and were bound to them in contracts.

The star system was the method of creating, promoting and exploiting stars in Hollywood films. Movie studios would select promising young actors, glamourize and create personas for them, often inventing new names and even new backgrounds. Examples of stars who went through the star system include Francis Gumm, Archie Leach, Lucille LeSueur, Roy Scherer Jr. and Norma Jean Baker. We know them better as Judy Garland, Cary Grant, Joan Crawford, Rock Hudson and Marilyn Monroe.

THE MOGULS

Back then, the studios controlled the talent on both sides of the camera. With all actors under contract and in many cases forced to make certain movies, even if they didn’t like the story, the director or their co-stars. The major studio heads had all the power. Movie moguls such as Louis B Mayer, Jack Warner, David O. Selznick, Samuel Goldwyn and Darryl Zanuck competed with one another for the best talent while building their storied studios into powerhouses.

SPOTLIGHT: Irving Thalberg (1899-1936)

There was no greater driving force in the early days of Hollywood than Irving Thalberg. The first great American film producer was dubbed “the Boy Wonder” for his youth and ability to select great scripts, choose actors, gather production staff and make profitable films. He partnered with Louis B. Mayer and helped create Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer where he was made head of production in 1925 at the age of 26.

During his 12 years with M-G-M he produced 400 films. Thalberg created numerous new stars and groomed their screen images. Among them were Lon Chaney, Greta Garbo, Joan Crawford, Clark Gable, Spencer Tracy, Jean Harlow and Norma Shearer, who became his wife. Thalberg was diagnosed with a congenital heart disease shortly after birth. On Labor Day 1936, he would get pneumonia while on vacation and died a few weeks later at the age of 37.

He had the ability to combine quality with commercial success and was credited with bringing his artistic aspirations in line with the demands of the audiences. After his death, Hollywood’s producers dubbed him the worlds “foremost figure in motion picture history”.

The prestigious Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award is given out periodically by the Motion Picture Academy since 1937 and has been awarded to producers whose body of work reflected consistently high-quality films.

THE STARS

It certainly was a more glamourous time and the stars, and their reputations were well protected. Hollywood back then, like now, was all about image.

Studio executives, public relations staffs, and agents worked together with the actor to create a star persona and cover up incidents or lifestyles that would damage the star’s public image. It was common, for example, to arrange sham dates between single (male) stars and starlets to generate publicity. Tabloids and gossip columnists would be tipped off, and photographers would appear to capture the romantic moment. At the same time, a star’s drug use, drinking problems, divorce or adultery would be covered up with hush money for witnesses or promises of exclusive stories (or the withholding of future stories) to gossip columnists.

Thanks to Turner Classic Movies and the internet many of these gems are made available to us on a daily basis. With large screen, high definition televisions, they’re as good as ever. Like a time machine that can instantly transport you back to Hollywood’s Golden Age. To the light and shadows and simplistic beauty of black and white cinema or to the awe and spectacle of vibrant Technicolor. The Hollywood dream factories would document the 20th century.

Motion pictures have always been a director’s medium and though many people are responsible for bringing the director’s vision to fruition, it is from his solitary eye that we are guided on our two hour journey. Both an artist and a craftsman, directors from this era mastered a multitude of techniques, bringing the elements of sight, sound, motion and emotion to the screen with a whole lot of blood, sweat and tears behind the scenes. Many of the tricks of the trade were developed during these decades and remain foundational cornerstones and the foundation of today’s cinematic creators.

At the end of the day, it’s all about telling a great story! So, without further ado and in no particular order, some of my favorite films from the 1940s, 50s and 60s:

CHAPTER ONE:

AUDREY

Audrey Hepburn is my favorite actress from this era. She burst on to the world stage in her debut Oscar-winning performance in Roman Holiday. Born in Belgium 1929 she spent most of her childhood there and in the Netherlands during the German occupation. Following the war she studied ballet and became a chorus girl in West End musical theatre before heading to Broadway in 1951 and then to stardom in Hollywood a few years later.

During her career she was known not only as an actress, but a humanitarian and an international fashion icon. Later in her life, she devoted much of her time to UNICEF, to which she had contributed since 1954. She remains one of only 16 people to have earned an EGOT (Emmy, Grammy Oscar, Tony). In 1992, she received the Presidential Medal of Freedom for her work as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. A month later, she died from appendiceal cancer at the all too young age of 63. Here are of few of my favorite Audrey films:

1953 Roman Holiday directed by William Wyler

Audrey won her only Oscar for the role and her chemistry with Gregory Peck was undeniable. Throw in Eddie Albert way before he gave up big city life for some farm living and you have a charming romance film shot on location in the Eternal City. Director William Wyler insisted on shooting in Rome and Paramount agreed as long as it was shot with less expensive black & white film. A charming tale one can only imagine how beautiful it would look in color!

1954 Sabrina directed by Billy Wilder

Audrey would follow up her Oscar-winning performance in another romance with fellow Oscar winners William Holden and Humphrey Bogart. Unfortunately, her chemistry with the much older Bogie was not there but, but she proved she could hold her own opposite two Hollywood heavyweights and under the skillful direction of Billy Wilder, Audrey pretty much stole the show.

1957 Funny Face directed by Stanley Donan

A musical-romantic comedy opposite Fred Astaire, Audrey gets to show off her singing and dancing skills. A classically trained dancer, Audrey held her own opposite the much older dancing legend. Her Bohemian-style solo dance number has often been replayed in retrospectives of her career.

1961 Breakfast at Tiffany’s directed by Blake Edwards

This charming tale let Audrey out of the box a little, her iconic character Holly Golightly, a naive, eccentric cafe society girl who falls in love with a struggling writer is generally considered one of her most memorable. She considered it her most challenging role, since she was a introvert by nature required to play an extrovert. An Oscar winner for Henry Mancini’s score and original song “Moon River” and the stunning backdrop of New York in the early 1960s makes this classic enjoyable.

1963 Charade directed by Stanley Donan

********* Michael TOP 20 all-time***********

Once again paired with director Stanley Donan, this time in a “Hitchcockian” romantic-comedy-mystery-caper opposite the charismatic Cary Grant. Often called “the best Hitchcock movie that Hitchcock never made”, Charade is a roller-coaster through and under the streets of Paris. Filmed on location in the city of Lights and scored by Henry Mancini, part playful, part nail biting suspenseful with snappy dialogue, a sparkling screenplay and a series satisfying twists and turns.

Grant was concerned about their 25-year age difference. To satisfy his concerns the filmmakers added dialogue which portrayed Audrey’s character Regina as the romantic pursuer and not Grant’s character as a lustful cad. Whatever changes they made worked brilliantly. The chemistry between the two leads was convincing and the movie itself, wildly entertaining.

Following the murder of her husband, Regina Lambert (Hepburn) finds her life in danger as she is threatened by a trio of unsavory characters in search of a quarter of a million dollars. Enter the gallant Peter Joshua (Grant) to serve as her protector, but can he truly be trusted? Great supporting cast which includes George Kennedy, Walter Matthau and James Coburn as a cadre of colorful characters in search of the missing money they believe to be theirs.

1967 Wait Until Dark directed by Terence Young

Her fifth and final Oscar nomination was perhaps her finest acting role. A Psychological thriller based on the 1966 play of the same name. Audrey plays a young blind woman being menaced by a violent criminal played by Alan Arkin and several other unsavory characters as she unwittingly gets involved in a drug smuggling operation. She plays the classic damsel-in-distress to the climatic end and the final payoff is well worth the wait, in the dark!

CHAPTER TWO:

HITCHCOCK IN BLACK & WHITE

Famed British filmmaker Alfred Hitchcock directed over 50 films in a career that spanned 6 decades. Known as the “master of suspense” Hitch was one of the first celebrity directors, usually making his trademark cameo in most of his films and hosting the TV show “Alfred Hitchcock Presents” from 1955-62. His films garnered 46 Academy Award nominations, winning six. Although he never won an Oscar for Best Director, despite being nominated five times. So much has been written about his genius behind the camera and most of his films have stood the test of time. A true testament to a larger-then-life person and talent. He died in 1980 at the age of 80, but his films live on!

1940 Rebecca

Hitchcock’s only film to win Best Picture, it was his first Oscar nomination for directing. Olivier and Fontaine’s perilious performances not withstanding, it was the supporting actress Judith Anderson and her haunting Mrs. Danvers that stole the show. A performance that literally brings the house down!

1942 Suspicion

Joan Fontaine won the Best Actress Oscar. She is the only actor, male or female, to win the prestigious award being directed by Hitchcock. Cary Grant’s playful and charming persona was the perfect balance and he proved a worthy foil for Fontaine’s increasingly suspicious mind!

1943 Lifeboat

Noted stage actress Talullah Bankhead was the perfect centerpiece to this claustrophobic character study at sea. A great supporting cast, Hitchcock received his 2nd Oscar nomination.

Several British and American civilians, service members and United States Merchant Mariners are stuck in a lifeboat after their ship and a German U-boat sink each other in combat. Willi, a German survivor, is pulled aboard. During an animated debate, engine room crewman Kovac demands the German be thrown out to drown. This leads to a series of dramatic encounters among the survivors.

Though highly controversial in its time for what many interpreted as its sympathetic depiction of a German U-boat captain, Lifeboat is now viewed more favorably and has been listed by several modern critics as one of Hitchcock’s more underrated films.

1943 Shadow of a Doubt

Classic Film Noir at its best. Joseph Cotton is no doubt one of Hitchcock’s best villains as the charming yet sinister Uncle Charlie. His arrival in the small town of Santa Rosa to enjoy a fun visit with his family, including his adoring and thrill-seeking teenage niece Charlotte (nicknamed Charlie after him), soon takes a dark turn after he gives her an emerald ring with someone else’s initials engraved in it. Soon after his arrival, two men show up and tell the niece that her uncle is one of two suspects who may be the infamous “Merry Widow Murderer”. She doesn’t want to believe them, but the initials in the ring match those of the murder victim. Coincidence? Or could her beloved uncle actually be a monster!?

This film has the distinction of being Hitchcock’s personal favorite of all his works.

1945 Spellbound

In this Hitchcock psychological mystery-thriller, Bergman’s Dr. Peterson falls for amnesia victim-imposter-possible murderer Peck, but believing in his innocence she uses all her training to unlock the mysteries that are locked in her patient’s mind. Definite chemistry between the two leads, who were having a brief affair with each other during the filming. The memorable Salvador Dali inspired “dream sequence” was powerful, as was the haunting Oscar-winning score.

1946 Notorious

Two Hitchcock veterans Cary Grant and Ingrid Bergman help supply the spark in this post War spy-thriller. Claude Raines co-stars as the third in a love triangle entanglement during an espionage operation in Rio. The predominant theme of the film is trust—trust withheld, or trust given too freely, as well as the age-old conflict between love and duty.

1951 Strangers on a Train

A psychological thriller film noir produced and directed by the Master. This classic stars Farley Granger, Ruth Roman, and Robert Walker and features Pat Hitchcock (the director’s daughter).

The story of two strangers who meet on a train, one a young tennis player (Granger), the other a charming psychopath (Walker). The psychopath suggests that because they each want to “get rid” of someone, they should “exchange” murders, and that way neither will be caught. The psychopath commits the first murder, then tries to force the reluctant tennis player to complete this Faustian bargain. This early 50s film is Hitchcock at his finest and ushers in a decade of truly fabulous film making by the cinematic giant and legend in his own time.

1960 Psycho

Following a decade of big budget box office hits in the 50s, Hitch returned to his filmmaking roots and made perhaps the most memorable film of his lengthy career. A smaller budget horror/thriller that he also produced (mortgaging his Beverly Hills home to do so) and using his less expensive TV show crew to film. With standout performances and masterful direction, this classic film terrorized its audiences while creating a new standard for cinematic shock. Many film historians believe this to be the last of the great classic film noir movies.

Janet Leigh was awesome as the doomed Marion Crane and Anthony Perkins iconic Norman Bates makes for a performance even his overbearing mother would approve of! Great supporting cast!

side note: The 2012 Bio-drama Hitchcock chronicles this storied director and the making of this chilling masterpiece. The film stars Anthony Hopkins, Helen Mirren and Scarlette Johannson

CHAPTER THREE:

CLASSIC FILM NOIR

So, what exactly is classic “Film Noir”? Put simply, it’s a style or genre of cinema marked by a mood of pessimism, fatalism and menace. During the 1940s and 50s this popular film genre often involved tales of crime and moral ambiguity. Shot in black and white with high contrast lighting (bright lights and deep black shadows) these movies shared common motifs such as a narrative dialogue, paranoia and betrayal, foreboding background music, cynical, malevolent males, femme fatales and flashbacks sequences.

1941 Maltese Falcon directed by John Huston

Considered by many to be the first successful American Film Noir classic. Humphrey Bogart stars as iconic character Sam Spade, a private eye who get entangled in a dangerous web of crime and intrigue in his begrudging quest to find the much coveted Maltese falcon.

1944 Laura directed by Otto Preminger

American Film-Noir classic. Detective Mark McPherson is investigating the murder of a highly successful advertising executive, Laura Hunt, killed by a shotgun blast to the face just inside the doorway of her apartment. It’s a murder-mystery with a great twist. Gene Tierney, Dana Andrews and Clifton Webb star. Vincent Price and Judith Anderson lend support.

1944 Double Indemnity directed by Billy Wilder

This Noir/crime drama pairs Barbara Stanwyck and Fred MacMurray in a murderous scheme to kill her husband and collect his life insurance. Edward G. Robinson plays Insurance Investigator Barton Keyes who’s gradually begins to uncover the sinister truth after being prompted by the victim’s suspicious daughter. This classic was nominated for seven Academy Awards but won none. A great classic noir film none the less.

1945 The Lost Weekend directed by Billy Wilder

Wilder followed the success of Double Indemnity with another Noir drama this time striking Oscar gold. Wins for Best Picture, Director, Adapted Screenplay and the Best Actor trophy for Ray Milland as an alcoholic writer who falls off the wagon. The Lost Weekend is one of only three films to win both Best Picture and the prestigious Palme d’Or at the Cannes Film festival. 1955s Marty and 2019s Parasite being the other two.

1948 Key Largo directed by John Huston

Bogart’s fourth collaboration (of 6) with acclaimed director John Huston and his last (of 4) screen appearances with wife Lauren Bacall, they had met while filming To Have and Have Not in 1944 and married a year later. Claire Trevor won an Oscar for Best Supporting Actress. Edward G. Robinson plays Bogie’s foil and Lionel Barrymore his reluctant host.

1948 Sorry, Wrong Number directed by Anatole Litvak

One of my favorites. Suspenseful, Skillful direction, terrific cinematography and haunting score. Originally a 1943 radio play that Orson Welles called “the greatest single radio script ever written”. Smart acting by Barbara Stanwyck (who received an Oscar nod for Best Actress) as an overbearing woman of wealth and Burt Lancaster as her troubled husband. The story begins with a bed-ridden invalid (Stanwych) who accidentally hears (over her telephone) a murder being plotted. Home alone, and through a series of phone conversations (and flashbacks) the story methodically unfolds before your eyes and through her terrified eyes to a shocking, frantic conclusion.

1950 Sunset Boulevard directed by Billy Wilder

Another Billy Wilder gem , this dark-comedy Noir chronicles the unhealthy relationship between a fading silent movie star and a desperate writer. Nominated for 11 Academy Awards it won three (Writing, Art Direction and Score). Silent film legend Gloria Swanson was perfectly cast as the faded star Norma Desmond in search of her close-up and Bill Holden as the ill-fated Joe Gillis.

SPOTLIGHT: BILLY WILDER

Now seems the perfect time to talk about my second favorite director of this time period, Austrian-born 6-time Oscar winner Billy Wilder, who’s career spanned 5 decades. He moved to Hollywood in 1933 and began his legendary career as a writer. One of the first writer-directors, Wilder won 2 Oscars for directing (The Lost Weekend, The Apartment) 3 for writing (Weekend, Apartment and Sunset Boulevard) and one for producing. He was the first ever to win the Academy Award for writing, producing and directing, all for the same film (The Apartment).

Wilder is regarded as being one of the most brilliant and versatile filmmakers of Hollywood’s Golden age. His early efforts took on a more serious tone, though from the mid-50s he preferred to direct mostly comedies and satires. A writer first, Wilder’s directorial choices reflected his belief in the primacy of the written word, thus he avoided the exuberant cinematography of his contemporaries, Hitchcock and Welles, focusing more on tight plotting and memorable dialogue and choosing subject matter that pushed the boundaries of the mainstream entertainment of the times.

Unlike Hitchcock, who famously said “all actors are cattle”, Wilder was an actors-director who many times would bend his scripts toward his actors personality rather than force a performance beyond their limitations. Under his direction 14 different actors garnered Oscar nominations. Wilder received the prestigious Irving Thalberg award in 1988 and lived to the ripe old age of 95.

NEW CHAPTER

CHAPTER FOUR

THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF DISNEY

As a child growing up in New York in the 1970s, I remember every summer going to see classic Disney animated films at the UA theatre with my grandmother. Every Friday, a new to me (old) film would play on the larger-than-life screen, in living color and would have me bursting into song for days. I loved these movies and each and every one of them have a special place in my heart. Seeing them on the big screen was so much more exciting than the 19-inch Zenith experience, plus there was popcorn and candy.

SPOTLIGHT: WALT DISNEY 1901-1966

Walter Elias Disney was an American entrepreneur, animator, writer, voice actor, and film producer. A pioneer of the animation industry, he introduced several developments in the production of cartoons. As a film producer, he holds the record for most Academy Awards earned by an individual, having won 22 Oscars from 59 nominations. Disney became the first person nominated for Academy Awards in six different categories.

Born in Chicago in 1901, Disney developed an early interest in drawing. He took art classes as a boy and got a job as a commercial illustrator at the age of 18. He moved to California in the early 1920s and set up the Disney Brothers Studio with his brother Roy. He developed the character Mickey Mouse in 1928, his first highly popular success; he also provided the voice for his creation in the early years.

As the studio grew, he became more adventurous, introducing synchronized sound, full-color three-strip Technicolor, feature-length cartoons and technical developments in cameras. The results, seen in features such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), Pinocchio, Fantasia (both 1940), Dumbo (1941), and Bambi (1942), furthered the development of animated film. New animated and live-action films followed after World War II, including the critically successful Cinderella (1950) and Mary Poppins (1964), the latter of which received five Academy Awards.

In the 1950s, Disney expanded into the amusement park industry, and in July 1955 he opened Disneyland in Anaheim, California. He was also involved in planning of the 1960 Winter Olympics, and the 1964 New York World’s Fair. In 1965, he began development of a second theme park, Walt Disney World in Orlando, Florida. Sadly, Disney who was a heavy smoker throughout his life died of lung cancer in December 1966 at the age of 65. A shy, self-deprecating and insecure man in private, Disney adopted a warm and outgoing public persona. I think it’s safe to say that there’s not another human being who took a breath in the 20th century that brought more joy and happiness to people of all ages than the wonderful Walt Disney!

1964 Mary Poppins directed by Robert Stevenson

A musical-fantasy film based on P.L. Travers’s book series Mary Poppins. The film, which combines live-action and animation and stars Julie Andrews in her feature film debut as the title character. Walt Disney chased the rights to this children’s classic for more than 20 years. Finally, in 1961, he convinced Travers to allow him to make the film, though she demanded and obtained script approval rights. The Sherman Brothers composed the award-winning musical score and were involved in the film’s development. Pre-production and song composition took about two years.

Poppins is an eccentric nanny with a few fanciful tricks in her big bag that she uses to helps the well-to-do, yet dysfunctional Banks family improve on their dour dispositions. Dick Van Dyke is perfectly cast as cockney accented Bert, a fun fellow who joins the whimsical nanny and the Banks children as they embark on several fantastical adventures in and around turn-of-the-century London. Andrews and Van Dyke’s song-and-dance scenes is fantastic cinema and the dynamic duo light up the screen. Though shot entirely at the Walt Disney Studios in Burbank, California, the Disney Art Department did a fantastic job re-creating Edwardian London. From chimney-sweeping to kite flying, this film is pure delight.

Released to critical acclaim and commercial success, it became the highest-grossing film of 1964 and, at the time of its release, was Disney’s highest-grossing film ever. Poppins received a total of 13 Oscar nominations, including Best Picture – a record for any film released by Walt Disney Studios – and won five: Best Actress for Andrews, Editing, Musical Score, Visual Effects and Original Song. Mary Poppins is considered Walt Disney’s crowning live-action achievement and is the only one of his films which earned a Best Picture nomination during his lifetime.

sidenote: A biographical drama on the making of the film, Saving Mr. Banks, was released in 2013. It stars Emma Thompson as Travers and Tom Hanks as Walt Disney and is worth seeing if you are a fan of Disney and this charming film.

sidenote: A biographical drama on the making of the film, Saving Mr. Banks, was released in 2013. It stars Emma Thompson as Travers and Tom Hanks as Walt Disney. To date, this is the only major motion picture to feature Walt Disney as its main character.

CHAPTER FIVE:

WAR & POLITICS

1943 Casablanca directed by Michael Curtiz

*******Michael TOP 20 all-time********

This Classic Romance/drama is timeless. I’ve seen it a dozen times and can watch it over and over again. Bogart’s iconic portrayal of Casablanca cafe owner Rick Blaine is perhaps his best and considering this movie was made and released during the war, who’s outcome had yet to be decided just adds to its allure. When it was released, it exceeded expectations and went on to win the Oscar for Best Picture, Director and Adapted Screenplay.

SPOTLIGHT: HUMPHREY BOGART

Humphrey Bogart would make 49 films during his career earning three Oscar nominations (1943s Casablanca, 1954s The Caine Mutiny and winning for 1951s The African Queen). He began his acting career on Broadway in the 1930s and broke from supporting roles in movies to leading man status in 1941, usually playing tough guy characters, but often times with a inner sensitivity and strong moral compass. Rick Blaine and Charlie Allnut in African Queen being prime examples.

Bogart was a founding member of the original Hollywood Rat Pack when in 1955, after a long party in Las Vegas attended by Frank Sinatra, Judy Garland, David Niven and Angie Dickenson among others his wife Lauren Bacall surveyed the wreckage and said “you look like a goddamn rat pack”. A heavy smoker and drinker, Bogart died of esophageal cancer in 1957 at the age of 57.

1949 All The Kings Men directed by Robert Rossen

I remember reading this Robert Penn Warren novel in high school and renting the movie. I re-watched recently and was very impressed on how this 70 year old film still stands the test of time and remains relevant. Broderick Crawford won the Oscar for Best Actor playing the fictitious politician Willy Stark. His rise to power, its corrupting influences and his cult of personality could easily pass in today political climate.

1953 Stalag 17 directed by Billy Wilder

Another classic from Billy Wilder as he continues to segue to less serious but culturally relevant film fare. Bill Holden won the Best Actor Oscar for playing Sgt. J.J. Sefton and his quest to protect himself from the suspicions of his fellow POWs while finding the real German spy in their midst.

1957 The Bridge on the River Kwai directed by David Lean

Holden would take another prisoner of war movie, this time in Epic form. However, Alec Guiness would win the Oscar for his portrayal of Colonel Nicholson. Kwai would go on to win seven Oscars including Best Picture and was a massive commercial success. The film would also win for Directing, Adapted Screenplay, Cinematography, Editing and Score. The final explosive scene is one of the all-time best movie moments.

SPOTLIGHT: DAVID LEAN

Sir David Lean was an English film director, producer, screenwriter and editor. Widely considered one of the most influential directors of all time, Lean directed the large-scale epics The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), Lawrence of Arabia (1962), Doctor Zhivago (1965), and A Passage to India (1984).

Nominated seven times for the Academy Award for directing, which he won twice for The Bridge on the River Kwai and Lawrence of Arabia. He died in 1991 at the age of 83.

1959 Ben-Hur directed by William Wyler

At the time of it’s release, this religious epic drama was perhaps the greatest movie ever made. At least it’s 12 Academy Award nominations rivaled that of the 1939 classic Gone With the Wind. The film would go on to win a record 11 Oscars, a record that would be tied twice but not broken. Its awards included Best Picture, Actor (Charlton Heston), Director, Cinematography, Editing, Score and Special Effects.

The famed battle at sea and stunning chariot race are among the best cinematic sequences of all-time. A tremendous feat in the days before computer generated effects, in particular the Nine-minute chariot race! The film used over 300 sets at Rome’s Cinecitta Studios. Over 200 camels, 2,500 horses and over 10,000 extras were used in the making of this amazing film. An absolute must-see for any student of film or film buff.

1960 Spartacus directed by Stanley Kubrick NEW SELECTION

Another fantastic historical epic that follows the events of the third Servile War 73-71BC and its charismatic leader, Spartacus, played by Kirk Douglas, who served as Executive producer of the film. An all-star cast deftly directed by a 32-year-old Stanley Kubrick (his 4th feature film and by far his biggest budget), this powerful presentation delivers. Cinematically brilliant, backed by a powerful score this sweeping epic was rewarded with four Oscars including Best Supporting Actor for Peter Ustinov.

Douglas championed this project after losing out on the role of Ben-Hur a year before. He hired Kubrick after firing Anthony Mann after just one week of filming. They had worked together on the 1957 drama Paths of Glory, and though they had creative differences the end results paid off as it was the top grossing film of the year and is widely considered a commercial and critically success. Blacklisted writer Dalton Trumbo was given Screenplay credit, which in essence heralded the end of a dark chapter in Hollywood history, which began in 1947, but which really took root in the 1930s and early 1940s.

A controversial and suggestive scene with Laurence Olivier and Tony Curtis was cut from film but restored in 1991 when the film was re-released in theatres. The soundtrack was damaged so Tony Curtis had to re-dub his lines. Anthony Hopkins successfully and seamlessly subbed for Olivier, who had died in 1989.

side note: Emmy winning actor Bryan Cranston received an Oscar nomination for playing the controversial and eccentric screenwriter Dalton Trumbo in the 2015 film Trumbo also starring Oscar winner Helen Mirren.

1962 Lawrence of Arabia directed by David Lean

he cinematic masterpiece that made a 16-year-old Steven Spielberg determined to become a film maker. Once again director David Lean teamed up with producer Sam Spiegel on an historical film of epic proportions following their success with The Bridge on the River Kwai five years earlier. New-comer Peter O’Toole would earn his first of eight Oscar nominations for playing the title character in this film that is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential of all time. Winner of 7 Acadamy Awards including Best Picture.

1962 The Manchurian Candidate directed by John Frankenheimer

*******Michael TOP 20 all-time*********

My favorite political thriller of all time based on the 1959 Richard Condon novel. Starring Laurence Harvey as Raymond Shaw as an unwitting sleeper agent, trained assassin and recent Metal of Honor recipient. The film was released at the height of the US-Soviet hostility during the Cuban Missile Crisis and was widely acclaimed by critics. Frank Sinatra is the protagonist who like Raymond has been brainwashed, but whose nightmares plague him as he painfully starts to remember the truth.

Angela Lansbury is a wicked delight as Raymond’s ambitious and domineering mother. She received an Oscar nomination for her powerful portrayal of evil Eleanor Iselin.

1964 The Best Man directed by Franklin J. Shaffner

This lighter, yet cutting and smart political drama stars Henry Fonda and Cliff Robertson as flawed political candidates competing for their parties presidential nomination and the endorsement of the outgoing President. Fonda is William Russell, a principled intellectual with a sexual indiscretion and a past nervous breakdown hurdle. Robertson is Senator Joe Cantwell, a ruthless opportunist who will go to any lengths to get what he wants.

1964 Seven Days in May directed by John Frankenheimer NEW SELECTION

As a follow up to his 1962 classic, John Frankenheimer directed this thought-provoking political thriller about a military coup and planned takeover of the United States government from within. This edge of your seat Cold War drama stars Hollywood heavyweights Burt Lancaster, Kirk Douglas and Ava Gardiner with Fredric Marsh as the embattled US president. Rod Serling of Twilight Zone fame penned the screenplay. The film was produced by Edward Lewis through Douglas’s production company Seven Arts. Lancaster’s involvement nearly caused Frankenheimer to back out due to conflict between the two men during the shooting of Birdman of Alcatraz two years earlier. Douglas managed to keep the peace during filming and the end result was a riveting performance by Lancaster and a very powerful statement film that portrayed the uneasy post-Cuban missile crisis period of our history. Frankenheimer was able to capture a snapshot of the current mood of the nation and the director stated decades later that he considered this film among his most satisfying work.

1965 Doctor Zhivago directed by David Lean NEW SELECTION

Another Blockbuster offering from director David Lean, who by the mid 60s had well established his Big Film Bonafide’s. Doctor Zhivago had all the elements of Lean’s earlier epics: sweeping cinematography, well-choreographed battle scenes balanced with often intense smaller more intimate performances by a stellar cast, paced by a powerful musical score (Lara’s Theme would become one of the most memorable in motion picture history), Lean would add the element of a complex “love story” to the narrative and many movie lovers would also consider this one of the big screen best all-time romances.

This historical epic is based on the 1957 novel and is set in Russia during World War One and the subsequent Bolshevik revolution. It stars Omar Sharif as Yuri Zhivago, a physician and poet and Julie Christie as his love interest Lara Antipova. With strong supporting performances by Rod Stiger, Tom Courtany, Geraldine Chaplin and Alec Guiness, this classic is the 8th highest grossing film of all-time. Nominated for ten Acadamy Awards, it won five, for Best Cinematography, Adapted Screenplay, Art Direction, Costumes and Maurice Jarre’s haunting Score. It would lose the big prize to the Sound of Music.

Most of footage was shot in Spain, due to the fact that like the novel, the film was banned in the Soviet Union.

CHAPTER SIX:

CLASSIC COURTROOM DRAMA

1957 12 Angry Men directed by Sidney Lumet

The only movie Henry Fonda produced is an intense character study that probes the passions and prejudices of 12 very different men who hold the life of a young man in their hands. Fonda hand-picked his 11 co-stars, all who gave stellar performances. The film was shot entirely in New York in three weeks. Sidney Lumet’s first feature film received Oscar nominations for Picture, Director and Adapted screenplay.

1957 Witness For The Prosecution directed by Billy Wilder NEW SELECTION

A gripping legal mystery thriller, superbly acted and skillfully directed with hints of black comedy, dashes of film noir with a surprising and deliciously satisfying twist ending stirred into the mix. The film is based on the 1953 play by Agatha Christie and follows the London trial of the affable Leonard Vole, played by Tyrone Power, who is accused of murdering a wealthy woman. The legendary and badly ailing barrister Sir Wildred Robarts (Charles Laughton) takes on the case over his doctor’s orders and must rely on the alibi witness testimony of Vole’s cold, callous and calculating wife Christine (Marlene Dietrich). Elsa Lanchester adds a lighter and comedic spin to this tale as Sir Wilfred’s dutiful nurse.

Nominated for six Oscars including Best Picture, Director and acting nods for Laughton and real-life wife Lanchester. Sadly, Tyrone Power would die from a heart attack a year later while filming his next project on location in Spain. He was only 44.

1959 Anatomy of a Murder directed by Otto Preminger

Otto Preminger’s best film in my book. The case of Army Lt. Manion (Ben Gazzara) who kills a local innkeeper who he believes raped his wife (Lee Remick). James Stewart and George C. Scott duke it out as folksy defense attorney and aggressive big-city prosecutor. In order to set his client free Stewart must rely on the victim’s mysterious business partner, who’s hiding a dark secret. The jazz score for the film was composed by Duke Ellington, who makes a small cameo appearance as the character Pie Eye. His soundtrack for the film would go on to win three Grammys

SPOTLIGHT: OTTO PREMINGER

Otto Ludwig Preminger was an Austro-Hungarian born theatre and film director. He directed more than 35 feature films in a five-decade career after leaving the theatre. He first gained attention for film noir mysteries such as Laura (1944) and Fallen Angel (1945), while in the 1950s and 1960s, he directed high-profile adaptations of popular novels and stage works.

Several of these later films pushed the boundaries of censorship by dealing with themes which were then taboo in Hollywood, such as drug addiction (The Man with the Golden Arm, 1955), rape (Anatomy of a Murder, 1959) and homosexuality (Advise & Consent, 1962). He was twice nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director. He also had several acting roles most notably as Colonel von Scherbach in Stalag 17 and as the TV Batman super-villain Mr. Freeze.

1960 Inherit the Wind directed by Stanley Kramer

Another story that stands the test of time. The fictionalized account of the real-life 1925 Scopes/Monkey trial, which famously tested the Darwin Theory of Evolution pits two Oscar winning actors against each other Fredric March as Matthew Harrison Brady and Spencer Tracy as Henry Drummond. Throw in original Bewitched-Darren as defendant, a non-dancing, wise-cracking Gene Kelly and Colonel Potter as presiding judge and it’s game on!

SPOTLIGHT: Spencer Tracy

Known for his natural performing style and versatility, Spencer Tracy was one of the major stars of Hollywood’s Golden Age. The first actor to win back-to-back Oscars for Best Actor (Captains Courageous in 1937 and Boys Town in 1938) he appeared in 75 films during his lengthy career. In 1942, he appeared with Katherine Hepburn in Woman of the Year, beginning a professional and personal partnership which led to nine film collaborations in 25 years. His relationship with Hepburn was an open secret due to the fact he never divorced his wife, after becoming estranged in the 1930s. He had affairs with Joan Crawford, Ingrid Bergman and Myrna Loy. Tracy struggled with alcohol most of his adult life and was awful when he was drunk, twice arrested for his behavior while intoxicated. Though he regularly embarked on prolonged periods of sobriety he would fall of the wagon without warning. He was prone to bouts of depression and anxiety and was plagued by insomnia throughout his life. A heavy smoker, Tracy was in poor health by the time he reached his 60s. He died of a heart attack in 1967 at age of 67.

1961 Judgement at Nuremberg directed by Stanley Kramer

******* Michael TOP 20 all-time*********

An incredible film from start to finish highlighted by outstanding acting performances from Hollywood heavyweights Burt Lancaster, Spencer Tracy, Richard Widmark and the supporting roles of screen legends Montgomery Clift, Marlene Dietrich and Judy Garland. The film depicts a fictionalized version of the Nuremberg Judges Trial of 1947. Nominated for ten Oscars winner for Adapted Screenplay and the extraordinary performance by Maximillian Schell as the passionate defense attorney Oscar Rolfe in only his second Hollywood acting role.

This masterpiece would have surely won more love from Oscar if it wasn’t up against the more popular smash hit musical West Side Story.

SPOTLIGHT: JUDY GARLAND

Born Francis Gumm in 1922, Garland began performing in vaudeville at the age of two. As teen, she signed a contract at MGM where she appeared in more than two dozen films including the coveted role of Dorothy Gale in landmark classic 1939s The Wizard of Oz. She was released from her MGM contract after 15 years amid a series of personal struggles, that would continue her entire adult life.

With a career that spanning 45 years, she attained international stardom as an actress, a recording artist and on the concert stage. Besides Oz, her most noteworthy roles Meet Me in St.Louis (1944), The Pirate (1948) both directed by her then husband Vincente Minnelli, Easter Parade (1948) and an Oscar nominated performance in A Star is Born (1954).

Plagued by alcohol and substance abuse and financial instability, her lifelong struggle would ultimately lead to her death from an accidental barbiturate overdose in 1969 at the age of 47.

1962 To Kill a Mockingbird directed by Robert Mulligan

********Michael TOP 20 all-time********

I first saw this movie as a teenager after reading the Pulitzer Prize winning novel by Harper Lee. Her words so powerfully brought to life in a career performance by Gregory Peck as the iconic respected country lawyer Atticus Finch who must defend a black man named Tom Robinson against fabricated rape charges.

Told through the eyes of his 6-year old daughter Scout, the trial and surrounding events expose her, her older brother Jem and their friend Dill to the evils of racism and to the unexpected heroism of their mysterious neighbor Boo Radley played by a young Robert Duvall.

Nominated for 8 Academy Awards including Best Picture, winning three. Peck for Best Actor, Horton Foote’s Adapted Screenplay and Art Direction.

SPOTLIGHT: GREGORY PECK

One of the most popular film stars from the 1940s-60s, Gregory Peck, a California native, was best known for playing upstanding men with heroic qualities and a strong sense of justice. On film he had a commanding presence and deep resonant voice.

One of cinemas most respected actors, Peck appeared in more than 60 films during an esteemed career that stretched from the early 1940s to the early 2000s. His dignity, humanity and integrity endeared him to generations of moviegoers. Nominated five times for Best Actor by the Academy, he finally won in 1963 for Mockingbird.

Peck remained committed to live theatre and in 1947 founded the not-for-profit LaJolla Playhouse in his hometown. Always an outspoken opponent of racism and anti-semitism, he championed films that addressed these issue head-on. He died in 2003 at the age of 87.

CHAPTER SEVEN:

LEGENDARY LEADING LADIES

1944 Gaslight directed by George Cukor

An American psychological thriller starring Ingrid Bergman, Charles Boyer, Joseph Cotten, and 18-year-old Angela Lansbury in an Oscar-nominated screen debut. The film centers around a woman whose husband slowly manipulates her into believing that she is going insane. Ingrid Bergman is superb and won the Best Actress Oscar.

1945 Mildred Pierce directed by Michael Curtiz

An American Film-Noir starring Joan Crawford, Jack Carson, and Zachary Scott, also featuring Eve Arden, Ann Blyth, and Bruce Bennett. This was Crawford’s first starring film for Warner Bros., after leaving MGM, and won her the Best Actress Oscar for the hard-working, divorced, protective mother.

Monte Beragon, the second husband of Mildred Pierce, is murdered. The police tell Mildred that her first husband, Bert Pierce, has confessed. Mildred protests that he is too kind to commit murder and reveals her story to the officer in flashback.

1950 All About Eve directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz

Praised by critics at the time of its release, All About Eve received a record 14 Academy Award nominations and won six, including Best Picture. All About Eve is the only film in Oscar history to receive four female acting nominations ( Bette Davis and Anne Baxter as Best Actress ,Celeste Holm and Thelma Ritter for Supporting Actress). Widely considered to be one of the greatest films of all-time

The film stars the legendary Bette Davis as Margo Channing, a highly regarded but aging Broadway star. Anne Baxter plays Eve Harrington, an ambitious young fan who maneuvers herself into Channing’s life, ultimately threatening Channing’s career and her personal relationships. The film co-stars George Sanders who won the Best Supporting Actor Oscar and features Marilyn Monroe in one of her earliest roles.

1951 A Streetcar Named Desire directed by Elia Kazan NEW SELECTION

Based on the 1947 play by Tennesse Williams, this renowned drama follows troubled former schoolteacher Blanche DuBois, played by Vivien Leigh, who moves to New Orleans and causes problems for her sister, Stella Kowalski (Kim Hunter) and her volatile husband Stanley played by relative newcomer Marlon Brando. It received 10 Oscar nominations and was the first film to win in three of the four acting categories: Supporting for Karl Malden and Kim Hunter and a second Best Actress award for Leigh. Brando would garner his first Best Actor nod (also his first of four consecutive nominations).

SPOTLIGHT: Vivien Leigh

Renowned British actress Vivien Leigh made her acting debut on the stage in 1917 at the age of three. She shot to super stardom after winning the role of Scarlet O’Hara in the 1939 film Gone With the Wind for which she won the hearts of a generation and the Oscar for Best Actress. She wed Laurence Olivier in 1940 and continued her successful career both on stage and screen including 326 performances as Blanche Dubois in the Tennesse Williams play Streetcar Named Desire. She would go on to win her second Oscar for the film version of the play in 1951. She struggled with mental illness and she and Olivier divorced in 1960. Though beset with bouts of depression, she won a Tony award in 1963 for her role in Tovarich. In July of 1967 her lungs filled with liquid, She collapsed and suffocated to death. She was 53.

1953 Niagra directed by Henry Hathaway

My favorite Marilyn Monroe movie. Proving herself to be a serious actress and not just a sex symbol. She was able to use her sex appeal to build a very convincing character, the ill-fated Rose Loomis in this Noir-thriller. Opposite movie veteran Joseph Cotton, Monroe more than held her own. Monroe was given first billing, which elevated her to star status. She would make two other big successes that year: Gentlemen Prefer Blondes and How to Marry a Millionaire.

SPOTLIGHT: MARILYN MONROE

Born Norma Jeane Mortenson in 1926 in Los Angeles, she spent most of her childhood in foster homes and an orphanage. She would marry at 16 and spend the next ten years as a pin-up model and a series of minor film roles. By 1953 she was one of the most marketable stars in Hollywood.

Monroe’s troubled private life received much attention, one critic referring to her as “a bottomless pit of need”. She struggled with addiction and mood disorders. Her high-profile marriages to Joe DiMaggio and Arthur Miller were highly publicized and both ended in divorce. On August 4, 1962, she died from a barbiturates overdose at the age of 36. Her death was ruled a probable suicide.

Probably the greatest icon of American Pop culture, no other star has inspired such a variety of emotions- from lust to pity, from envy to remorse. Marilyn was probably the most photographed person of the 20th century. As the song says, her candle burned out long before her legend ever did. . .or will.

1954 Rear Window directed by Alfred Hitchcock

******Michael TOP 20 All-time********

I consider this film to be Hitchcock’s best. Steller cast that included James Stewart, sharp-tongued character actress Thelma Ritter, a sinister Raymond Burr and the absolutely gorgeous Grace Kelly. She never looked better and she always looked great!

Most of the story takes place on a lazy hot summer day and evening in the Greenwich Village apartment of LB Jefferies (Stewart), a man recuperating from a broken leg and bound to a wheelchair. His rear window looks out onto a courtyard and other apartments. He believes one of his neighbors has murdered his wife. Along with his socialite girlfriend Lisa (Kelly), his sassy nurse Stella (Ritter) and a police detective friend played by Wendell Corey, they slowly unravel the mystery.

Martin Scorsese calls this film a masterpiece, pure cinema. Everything in it worthy of praise-the sets, the colors, the lighting, the music. It’s a master’s masterpiece. I couldn’t agree more!

SPOTLIGHT: GRACE KELLY

Born in Philadelphia in 1929, Grace Kelly had a short but spectacular movie career. She made only seven films, retiring in 1956 at age 26 to marry Prince Rainier of Monaco.

She would win the Oscar for The Country Girl (1954). Her other notable works included High Noon (1952), High Society (1956) and three consecutive Hitchcock thrillers: Dial M for Murder (1954) Rear Window (1954) and To Catch a Thief (1955).

On September 13, 1982, while driving back to Monaco from her country home she suffered a stroke resulting in the loss of control of her car which would drive off a steep cliff and plunge down 120 feet. She would die the next day at the age of 52.

1956 The Man Who Knew Too Much directed by Alfred Hitchcock

Another well-crafted suspense-thriller directed and produced by Alfred Hitchcock starring James Stewert and Doris Day as a small-town doctor and retired popular singer, Ben and Jo McKenna. Filmed on location in Morocco and London, the story follows a vacationing family who accidentally get mixed up in an international plan to assassinate a British diplomat. After the plotters kidnap their son, the McKenna’s work together to find him and bring him safely home, but can they also foil the assassination? The only thing you know for sure is whatever will be, will be! Stewart is at his best in his 3rd collaboration with Hitch, but it’s Doris Day who steals the show, using her beauty, wits and powerful singing voice to save the day. Academy Award winner for Best Original Song “Que Sera, Sera (Whatever Will Be, Will Be)”, this catchy tune would go on to be Day’s signature song.

1960 The Apartment directed by Billy Wilder

A charming romantic-comedy that helped usher in the 1960s and made Shirley MacLaine a star. The story follows C.C. “Bud” Baxter (Jack Lemmon), an insurance clerk who, in the hope of climbing the corporate ladder, lets more senior coworkers use his Upper West Side apartment to conduct extramarital affairs. Bud is attracted to an elevator operator in his office building, Fran Kubelik (MacLaine). He does not know she is having an affair with Bud’s immediate boss, Sheldrake (Fred MacMurray).

Winner of five Oscars, including three for writer-producer-director Billy Wilder. In the years since its release, The Apartment has come to be regarded as one of the greatest films ever made.

1965 The Sound of Music directed by Robert Wise

My favorite cinematic musical of all-time, this delightful film adaptation of the popular 1959 Rodgers and Hammerstein staged musical was the highest grossing movie of 1965. It received five Oscars including Best Picture and Best Director. By November of 1966, it had become the highest grossing film of all-time-surpassing Gone With the Wind. It would hold that title for five years. The film was popular all over the world, breaking previous box-office records in 29 countries.

The pairing of the most adorable Julie Andrews (coming off her Academy Award performance in Mary Poppins a year before) and the dashing Christopher Plummer, the story follows the memoir of Maria Von Trapp (Andrews), a young Austrian woman sent to the villa of a retired naval officer and widower (Plummer) in the year 1938 to be governess to his seven children. After bringing love and music into the lives of the family, they marry and together find a way to survive and ultimately escape the Nazi occupation of their homeland. Filmed in only five months, one month on location in Austria, this captivating tale continues to hold a special place in the hearts of many as well as in the history of cinema!

CHAPTER EIGHT:

THREE BURNING QUESTIONS

1962 Whatever Happened to Baby Jane? directed by Robert Aldrich

The intensely bitter Hollywood rivalry between the film’s two stars, Davis and Crawford, was heavily important to the film’s initial success. This in part led to the revitalization of the careers of the two stars. In the years after release, critics continued to acclaim the film for its psychologically driven black comedy and campiness.

A psychological horror thriller, the plot concerns an aging former actress who holds her paraplegic ex-movie star sister captive in an old Hollywood mansion. Upon the film’s release, it was met with widespread critical and box-office acclaim and was nominated for five Oscars,, including a Best Actress nod for Davis, but not Crawford which added fuel to their already bitter relationship.

SPOTLIGHT: JOAN CRAWFORD

Born Lucille Fay LeSueur, Joan Crawford would sign a contract with MGM in 1925 and by the 1930s she would be one of Hollywood’s brightest stars. Crawford often played hardworking young women who find romance and financial success. These types of Rags to Riches stories played well during the Great Depression. Despite her early success by the end of the 1930s she was considered “box office poison” until her Oscar winning performance in 1945’s Mildred Pearce.

Married 4 times, the first 3 ending in divorce, the last with a death, she adopted 5 children. Her relationship with oldest two, Christina and Christopher were acrimonious. After her death, Christina would publish a best-selling “tell all” memoir called Mommie Dearest. She died of a heart attack in 1977 at the “reported” age of 69.

SPOTLIGHT: BETTE DAVIS

A career spanning more than 50 years 100 acting credits, Bette Davis has soared to the upper echelon of Hollywood legendary and cemented in Pop culture long after her death. Noted for playing unsympathic, sardonic characters she starred in melodramas, historical films, suspense, horror, romantic dramas and even some comedies. A recement of two Oscars (1935 Dangerous, 1938 Jezebel) she was the first thespian to receive 10 nominations. Her forthright manner, idiosyncratic speech and ubiquitous cigarette all contributed to an often-imitated public persona. Her career went through several periods of eclipse, but despite a long period of ill health. she continued acting in film and television until shortly before her death from breast cancer in 1989 at the age of 81.

side note: an excellent 8-episode 2017 FX mini-series called Feud: Bette & Joan chronicles how these two Hollywood mega-stars endured ageism, sexism and misogyny while struggling to hang on to success and fame in the twilight of their careers. It stars Oscar winners Jessican Lange and Susan Sarandon playing the two sometimes bitter screen rivals.

1966 Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? directed by Mike Nichols

A black comedy-drama, it was Mike Nichols directorial debut. Starring Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton, George Segal and Sandy Dennis. The film showcases a late night gathering at the home of George, a college history professor, and his wife Martha, the daughter of the university’s president. The guests are Nick, a new biology professor at the school, and his wife, Honey.

Nominated for 13 Oscars, including Best Picture, it is one of only two films to be nominated in every eligible category at the Academy Awards. All four main actors were nominated in their respective acting categories, the first time a film’s entire credited cast was nominated. The film won five Oscars, including a second Best Actress for Taylor and the Best Supporting Actress for Dennis.

SPOTLIGHT: ELIZABETH TAYLOR

Born in 1932 in London to socially prominent American parents she would move with her family to Los Angeles in 1939. Making her movie acting debut in 1942 she became a popular teen star after appearing in National Velvet (1944) transitioning to adult roles in the 1950s.

Although she disliked her role as a call girl in BUtterfield 8 (1960), she won her first Oscar for the part. Taylor would go on to star in Cleopatra (1961), having an affair with her co-star Richard Burton who she would later marry, divorce, re-marry and divorce again. Liz & Dick would star in 11 movies together and become fodder for the media for many years. All in all she was married 8 times to 7 different men. Taylor received the best reviews of her career for Virginia Woolf (1966), winning her second Academy Award. She was the second celebrity to launch a perfume brand and one of the first celebrities to take part in HIV/AIDS activism. From the 1990s until her death, she dedicated her time to philanthropic causes, receiving many accolades. After many years of ill health, Taylor dies from congestive heart failure in 2011 at the age of 79.

1967 Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner? directed by Stanley Kramer

********Michael TOP 20 all-time*********

A really terrific movie that made a not-so-subtle statement about race in America at a very volatile time in our history. One of the first films to depict an interracial marriage in a positive light. The ninth and final on-screen pairing of Spencer Tracy and Katherine Hepburn, filming ended just 17 days before Tracy’s death. Hepburn never saw the completed film, saying the memories of Tracy were too painful. She would go on to win her second (of 4) Best Actress Oscar. Dinner would also win for best Original Screenplay and garner a total of ten nominations.

SPOTLIGHT: STANLEY KRAMER

Stanley Kramer is responsible for making many of Hollywood’s most famous “message films”. As an independent producer and director, he brought attention to topical social issues that most studios avoided. Among the subjects covered in his films were racism in The Defiant Ones and Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner?, nuclear war in On the Beach, greed in It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World, creationism vs. evolution in Inherit the Wind and the causes and effects of fascism in Judgement at Nuremberg. His other notable films included High Noon (1952, as producer) The Caine Mutiny (1954, as producer), and Ship of Fools (1965).

Director Steven Speilberg described him as an “incredibly talented visionary”, and “one of our great filmmakers, not just for the art and passion he put on screen, but for the impact he has made on the conscience of the world.”

Kramer has been called “a genuine original” as a filmmaker. He made movies that he believed in, and straddled the fence between art and commerce for more than 30 years,

Despite uneven critical reception, both then and now, Kramer’s body of work has received many awards, including 16 Academy Awards and 80 nominations, and he was nominated nine times as either producer or director. Kramer died in 2001 at the age of 87.

NEW CHAPTER

CHAPTER NINE:

COLORFUL CHARACTERS

No doubt the Hollywood Studio system created and maintained the image of their top Box Office stars, but most of the contract talent of the major studios were hundreds of actors who had significant smaller roles that were often vital to the telling of their stories. These smaller “Supporting” stars would make their indelible mark and sometimes even steal the show. Powerful, often tragic parts, a villainous foil for the lead character to battle with, a sympatric friend to lend an ear, or maybe just a colorful character to add some much-needed comic relief. Many of these talented people would find a second home on television later in their careers. These are a few of my all-time favorite Supporting Actors from this time period:

Angela Lansbury-– An Irish-British American actress and singer with a career spanning over eight decades with various roles across film, stage and television. Winner of 4 Tony awards and nominated for three Acadamy awards beginning when she was 18 in 1942s Gaslight. My personal favorite as the evil Ellenor Islin in 1962s Manchurian Candidate. Ms. Lansbury would achieve worldwide fame TV sleuth Jessica Fletcher on the series Murder, She Wrote which ran for 12 seasons (1984-1996). She passed away in 2022 at the age of 96.

Lee J. Cobb— An American screen and stage star, Cobb was twice nominated for a Supporting Actor Oscar (1954 On the Waterfront, 1958 The Brothers Karamazov). He often played arrogant, intimidating and abrasive characters, Johnny Friendly opposite Brando in Waterfront or Jury #3 opposite Henry Fonda in 12 Angry Men. Cobb died of a heart attack in 1976 at the age of 67.

Martin Balsam–An American actor who enjoyed a prolific career as a character actor for five decades with memorable roles 12 Angry Men 1957, Psycho 1960, Breakfast at Tiffany’s 1961, The Taken of Pelham 123 1973 and All the President’s Men 1976 and won a Supporting Actor Oscar for 1965s A Thousand Clowns. An early member of The Actors Studio, he began his career on the New York stage winning a Tony award in 1968. He died of a stroke while vacationing in Rome in 1996 at the age of 76.

Thelma Ritter--An American actress who received six Academy Award nominations for Supporting Actress (the most ever in this category) beginning in 1950 with All About Eve and concluding with 1962s Birdman of Alcatraz. My favorite Ritter role was as Jimmy Stewart’s nurse Stella in 1954s Rear Window. She is best known for her comedy roles (Pillow Talk 1959) but proved to be a fine dramatic actress as well most notably in With a Song in My Heart 1952, Titanic 1953 and The Misfits 1961. Sadly, she would die of a heart attack 9 days before her 67th birthday in 1969.

George Kennedy–An American actor who appeared in more than 100 film and television productions winning an Oscar for his role opposite Paul Newman in Cool Hand Luke 1967. Other notable film works included The Dirty Dozen 1967, The Boston Strangler 1968, all four Airport movies (1970-79) and three Naked Gun spoofs. My personal favorite: the sinister Herman Scobie opposite Cary Grant and Audrey Hepburn in 1963s Charade. He also appeared on 4 seasons of the TV show Dallas in the 1988-1991. He died in 2016 following a long history of heart disease at the age of 91.

Raymond Burr— A Canadian actor who appeared in more than 50 feature films between 1946-1957, creating an array of villains that established him as an icon of film noir. He referred to himself as “just a fat heavy” while in his 20s being cast as the father of actors older than he. His most notable feature film role was as the sinister Lars Thorwald in Hitchcock’s Rear Window 1954. Burr would later establish himself as TV good guy Perry Mason (1957-66) which made him a star and multiple Emmy winner as would Ironside (1967-75) which he played the main character, a police chief confined to a wheelchair. He died of kidney cancer in 1993 at the age of 76.

Karl Malden– An American character actor who brought an intelligent intensity and homespun authenticity to a career that spanned 60 years. He won a Best Supporting Actor Oscar for 1951s Streetcar Named Desire and was nominated again for playing the hardnosed priest in On the Waterfront 1954. His film career began in 1940 and continued through the 1970s when he starred as Lt. Mike Stone opposite Michael Douglas on the TV crime drama The Streets of San Francisco (1972-77) and later as the spokesman for American Express (“It’s dangerous to carry cash”). Malden also served as Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences president from 1989 to 1992. Regarded as one of the greatest character actors of all time, he died in 2009 at the age of 97 having been in poor health for several years.

Shelley Winters— An American actress whose career spanned seven decades. Making her Broadway debut in 1941 she first acchieved stardom with a breakout performance on 1947s A Double Life. Wanting to shed her original Blonde Bombshell type casting she took on the non-glamorous role of Alice Tripp in 1951s A Place in the Sun, earning her first of four Oscar nominations. She would win the coveted award for Supporting Actress twice (The Diary of Anne Frank 1960 and A Patch of Blue 1965). My favorite Winters performance was as ill-fated heroine Belle Rosen in the 1972 disaster classic The Poseidon Adventure for which she received her final Oscar nomination. Winters died of heart failure in 2006 at the age of 85.

CHAPTER TEN:

A FEW GOOD MEN

1951 A Place in the Sun directed by George Stevens

Considered one of the best American film dramas this tragedy tells the story of a working-class young man (Montgomery Clift) who is entangled in a love triangle with two women: a plain Jane (Shelley Winters) that works at his Uncle’s factory, and a beautiful socialite (Elizabeth Taylor). Winner of six Oscars including Direction, Screenplay, Cinematography, Editing, Score and Costumes, A Place in the Sun definitely has a place on the Top Hollywood drama list.

1951 An American in Paris directed by Vincente Minnelli

The shocking surprise Best Picture winner for 1951 beating out heavy favorites A Place in the Sun and A Streetcar Named Desire, this classic established the Hollywood musical as legitimate serious film making. It’s win paved the way for other Musicals like Gigi (1958), West Side Story (1961), My Fair Lady (1964) and The Sound of Music (1965) to dominate the silver screen for the next 20 years.

Gene Kelly received a special Oscar for his outstanding choreography and dancing. Filmed almost entirely on the soundstages of MGM on 44 different sets that re-created Paris! So, technically it was Paris in an American Soundstage! What is was, was amazing filmmaking and a dazzling tour de force performance by Kelly and newcomer Leslie Caron.

The 17- minute dialogue-free “fantasy dance” finale is timeless pure movie magic. This classic garnered 8 Oscar nominations, winning six, including the big one.

SPOTLIGHT: GENE KELLY

Eugene Curran Kelly was an American actor, dancer, singer, filmmaker, and choreographer. He was known for his energetic and athletic dancing style, his good looks, and the likable characters that he played on screen. He starred in, choreographed, or co-directed some of the most well-regarded musical films of the 1940s and 1950s, until they fell out of fashion in the late 1950s. He won an honorary Oscar in 1952 for career achievements. His many innovations transformed the Hollywood musical.

Kelly made his film debut in 1942 opposite Judy Garland in For Me and My Gal and would go on to delight audiences in other many other musicals such as Anchors Away (1945), The Pirate (1948), On the Town (1949) which he directed, An American in Paris (1951) and Singin in the Rain (1952). He died in 1996 at the age of 83.

1953 From Here To Eternity directed by Fred Zinnemann

Starring Hollywood heavyweights Burt Lancaster, Montgomery Clift and Frank Sinatra, this classic was nominated for 13 Oscars, winning eight including Best Picture, Director, Adapted Screenplay, Editing and Cinematography. Both Sinatra and Donna Reed won for Supporting Actor and Actress. The Lancaster/Kerr romantic rendezvous beach scene is considered one of the most memorable movie moments.

SPOTLIGHT: MONTGOMERY CLIFT

Edward Montgomery Clift was born in Omaha, Nebraska in 1920. A four-time Oscar nominee, Clift was known for playing moody, sensitive young men in such films like Red River (1948), The Heiress (1949) and A Place in the Sun (1951). Clift was notoriously picky about his projects and reportedly turned down the male lead in East of Eden and Sunset Boulevard.

He was involved in a serious car crash after falling asleep at the wheel and smashing into a telephone pole after having dinner at the home of close friend Elizabeth Taylor. He suffered a broken jaw and nose and several facial lacerations that would require plastic surgery. The pain from these injuries led him to rely on alcohol and pills for relief. Clift never fully recovered fully physically or mentally from this accident. This caused his acting teacher to call the later years of his career as “the longest suicide in Hollywood history”.

Clift co-starred in John Huston’s The Misfits, the final film of both Clark Gable and Marilyn Monroe. Monroe who was also having emotional and substance abuse problems at the time and in 1961 described Clift as the only person she knew that was in even worse shape than she was.

He would be barred from feature films and would return to the stage. After four years, with help from Taylor he was poised to return to the movies. That comeback would never happen, On July 23,1966 he was found dead of a heart attack in the bathtub of his Manhattan apartment. He was only 45.

1954 On The Waterfront directed By Elia Kazan

*********Michael TOP 20 all-time*********

Another of my favorite all-time films and one I can watch over and over. Winner of Eight Oscars including Best Picture, Actor (Brando), Screenplay, Directing, Editing and Supporting Actress (Eva Marie Saint in her first motion picture). The timeless tale of former boxer and current dockworker Terry Malloy teaming up with a murdered man’s sister and streetwise priest (Karl Malden) to take on powerful mob boss Johnny Friendly (Lee J. Cobb) against the wishes of his older brother Charlie (Rod Steiger) who happens to be the mob lawyer. Powerful performances all around. This film packs a punch and pulls no punches! It is certainly “a contenda” for one of the finest films ever.

SPOTLIGHT: METHOD ACTING

“The Method”, is a technique of acting in which an actor aspires to complete emotional identification with a part, based on the system evolved by Stanislavsky and brought into prominence in the US in the 1930s. Method acting was developed in institutions such as the Actors’ Studio in New York City, notably by Elia Kazan and Lee Strasberg, and is particularly associated with actors such as Marlon Brando and Dustin Hoffman. Other method actors of this period included Monty Cliff, Paul Newman, Marilyn Monroe and James Dean, who tragically died in 1955 after making only three movies.

Dean’s death at the age of 24 made him a cultural icon of teenage angst and social estrangement, largely do to the success of his first and most celebrated film Rebel Without a Cause (1955). He is the only actor to receive two posthumous Oscar nominations for East of Eden (1955) and the epic George Stevens film Giant (1956).

The “method” did not sit well with many of the directors of the day and even some of the old school actors who came up in theatre. Alfred Hitchcock described his work with Montgomery Clift in I Confess as difficult “because you know, he was a method actor”. Charles Laughton argued that “Method actors give you a photograph”, while “real actors give you an oil painting.” And during filming of Marathon Man (1976), Laurence Olivier who had lost patience with method acting two decades earlier while filming The Prince and the Showgirl (1957), with Marilyn Monroe was said to have quipped to Dustin Hoffman, after Hoffman stayed up all night to match his character’s situation, that Hoffman should “try acting… It’s so much easier.”[

1956 Somebody Up There Likes Me directed by Robert Wise

Following the death of James Dean, director Robert Wise chose another up and coming method actor-Paul Newman for his film about the life of boxer Rocky Graziano. Pier Angeli and Sal Mineo co-star. This classic would win two Oscars for Best Cinematography and Art Direction.

1956 Giant directed by George Stevens

Giant is an epic western drama that stars Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson and James Dean. Giant was the last of Dean’s three films as a leading actor and earned him his second and last Academy Award nomination– he was killed in a car crash before the film was released.

The film chronicles the bitter rivalry between the established “old money” Dirk Benedict and brash new-comer Jett Rink as they battle for love and oil in 1920s Texas.

A huge box office success, the film would be nominated for 9 Oscars, winning director Stevens his 2nd gold statue.

1958 Vertigo directed by Alfred Hitchcock

Another Hitchcock classic and perhaps James Stewart’s best role, it was his fourth collaboration with Hitch, following Rope (1948), Rear Window (1954), and The Man Who Knew Too Much (1956).

Stewart stars as as former police detective John “Scottie” Ferguson. Scottie is forced into early retirement because an incident in the line of duty has caused him to develop acrophobia (an extreme fear of heights) and vertigo (a false sense of rotational movement). Scottie is hired by an acquaintance, Gavin Elster, as a private investigator to follow Gavin’s wife Madeleine (Kim Novak), who is behaving strangely. Barbara Bel Geddes (the future Miss Ellie of TV Dallas fame) plays Scottie’s adoring gal pal Midge.

SPOTLIGHT: JAMES STEWART

Known for his distinctive drawl and everyman screen persona, Stewart’s film career spanned 80 films from 1935 to 1991. With the strong morality he portrayed both on and off the screen, he epitomized the “American ideal” in the twentieth century.

Born in Indiana, Pennsylvania in 1908 Stewart started acting while studying at Princeton University. After graduating in 1932, he began a career as a stage actor, appearing on Broadway and in summer stock productions.

In 1935, he landed his first of several supporting roles in movies and in 1938 he had his big breakthrough in Frank Capra’s ensemble comedy You Can’t Take it With You. The following year, Stewart garnered his first of five Oscar nominations for his portrayal of an idealized and virtuous man who becomes a senator in Capra’s Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (1939). He won his only Academy Award for Best Actor for his work in the comedy The Philadelphia Story(1940).

A decorated war veteran, who fought in the European theatre, Stewart’s first postwar role was as George Bailey in Capra’s It’s a Wonderful Life (1946). Although it earned him an Oscar nomination, the film was not a big success at first. It has increased in popularity since its release and is considered a Christmas classic and one of Stewart’s most famous performances. Stewart died in 1997 at the age of 89.

1959 North By Northwest directed by Alfred Hitchcock

********Michael TOP 20 all-time*********

Yet another Hitchcock classic pairing the impeccable Cary Grant with Eva Marie Saint in a mystery-thriller that takes you from the United Nations in New York across country to the faces of Mount Rushmore. James Mason’s ruthless spy villain Phillip Vandamm is the perfect foil to Grant’s polished Roger Thornhill, a New York City Ad executive who has been mistaken for a government agent with deadly consequences.

SPOTLIGHT: CARY GRANT

One of my all-time favorite actors. Born Archibald Leach, he made himself the larger-than-life persona of Cary Grant. He was quoted as saying “Everyone wants to be Cary Grant. Even I want to be Cary Grant. Defined by his debonair demeanor, light-hearted approach to acting and sense of comedic timing, these combined traits made him one of the greatest leading men of the 1940s-50s. His unique trans-Atlantic accent is probably the most mimicked in the history of film.

Immaculate in his personal grooming, he is described by renowned Hollywood costume designer Edith Head as meticulous in his attention to detail and she considered him to have the greatest fashion sense of any actor she had worked with.

Grant was given an honorary Oscar in 1970 and died of a stroke in 1986 at the age of 82.

1960 Ocean’s 11 directed by Lewis Milestone

I consider this film to be a classic because it has a certain quality about it, a period Elan that pulls back the curtain on the Las Vegas of yesteryear. The style of the times. The star-power. It’s just a fun film, no pretense, no excuses. A swinging good time. And though it’s sequel is also very good (one of the only sequels I have any use for) this charming buddy heist flick was better, maybe just because it was first. Look for an uncredited Shirley MacClaine in one of her first screen roles as a tipsy lady of the night.

1962 Cape Fear directed by J. Lee Thompson

I remember seeing this classic as a young kid and being scared to death. Mitchum’s Max Caddy so much more menacing then DeNiro’s cartoonish turn in the 1991 sequel. I remember thinking “why would anyone do this to Atticus Finch?” I’ve seen it several times since and still ask the same question! And Mitchum’s menacing still gives me nightmares!

1964 Goldfinger directed by Guy Hamiliton

The best Sean Connery Bond film, Goldfinger stands the test of time and ages like a fine wine. Gert Frobe’s Goldfinger is one of the series all-time best villains! Throw in Odd job and Pussy Galore. In the words of 007 “I must be dreaming”.

1967 Bonnie and Clyde directed by Arthur Penn

A biographical crime drama that chronicles the infamous Great Depression era crime spree and the lives of the two notorious bank robbers and their ruthless gang. This film is considered one of the first of the “new” Hollywood era and prompted other films that followed to be more open (and graphic) when presenting sex and violence. It was the first film to be produced by actor and up and coming leading man Warren Beatty. Beatty was involved in all aspects of the production, most importantly the hiring of the writing team, director Penn and the film’s stellar cast. Nominated for ten Oscars, including Best Picture, it won the coveted statue for Best Cinematography and Supporting Actress (Estelle Parsons). The film would also launch the careers of Faye Dunaway and Gene Hackman, both of whom would receive Oscar nominations for their acting, along with Beatty.

1967 In the Heat of the Night directed by Norman Jewison

The Best Picture winner of 1967, beating out some other great films, Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, Bonnie & Clyde, The Graduate. Rod Steiger would win the Oscar for Best Actor for his drawly Southern Police chief Gillespie, but he should share the honor with Poitier who’s passionate Virgil Tibbs is the heart and soul of the story. the film would win 5 Oscars.

1967 To Sir With Love directed by James Clavell

Another topical social and racial drama starring Sidney Poitier as a new school teacher dealing with a unruly group of inner-city high school students. Written and directed by James Clavell who achieve greater fame for his novels: King Rat, Shogun, Tai-pan and Noble House.

SPOTLIGHT: SIDNEY POITIER

No better time to talk about the genius of Sidney Poitier. The first black actor to win the coveted Best Actor Oscar (for 1964s Lilies of the Field), Poitier burst on the scene in 1958, starring with Tony Curtis as chained-together escaped convicts in The Defiant Ones, which received nine Academy Award nominations. Both actors received a nomination for Best Actor, with Poitier’s being the first for a black actor,

Poitier also received acclaim for Porgy and Bess (1959), A Raisin in the Sun (1961) and A Patch of Blue (1965). He continued to break ground in three successful 1967 films which dealt with issues of race and race relations: To Sir, With Love; Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner?, and In the Heat of the Night. He was the top box-office star of the year.

One of the last surviving stars from the Golden Age of Hollywood, this renowned actor, director and activist died of a combination heart failure, Alzheimer’s dementia and prostate cancer in 2022 at the age of 94.

1967 The Graduate directed by Mike Nichols

*******Michael TOP 20 all-time********

I must confess I love this film, probably have seen it 20 plus times over the years and it just amuses the hell out me every time. Very nuanced classic boy-meets-girl-but-doesn’t know-what-he wants-to-do-with-the-rest-of-his-life-so-he-sleeps-with-the-girls-alcoholic-mother-then-realizes-he-loves-the-girl-and-sleeping-with-her-mother- is- bad story. Throw on a little Simon and Garfunkel and ladies and gentleman welcome to the 60s! Talk about coming of age!

Dustin Hoffman’s breakthrough performance as the 21-year old college Graduate Benjamin Braddock, Anne Bancroft as the seducing Mrs. Robinson and the absolutely adorable Katherine Ross as Elaine, the future grandmother with one hell of a story to tell the kids! Terrific supporting cast and a slew of awesome one-liners.

Mike Nichols won the Best Director Oscar for this timeless classic. And Mrs. Robinson “Jesus loves you more than you will know!” and so do the rest of us! In my book one of the best female characters of all-time!

1969 Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid Directed by George Roy Hill

The first pairing of Hollywood golden boy Paul Newman and Robert Redford is a highly entertaining biopic that follows the exploits of Newman’s Butch, his fearless sidekick Sundance (Redford) and their motley Hole in the Wall gang. The film elevated Redford to super stardom. Katherine Ross is a delight as Sundance’s love interest Etta Place. In an effort to avoid a US posse the gang of bandits flee to Bolivia falsely thinking it’s an outlaw paradise. By the end of the film the law catches up to this dynamic duo in dramatic fashion and they go down in a blaze of glory! Nominated for seven Oscars including Best Picture and Director. Winner of four for William Goldman’s screenplay, its spectacular Cinematography, Score and the Original Song “Raindrops Keep Falling on My Head”.

1969 Midnight Cowboy directed by John Schlesinger NEW SELECTION

Fittingly the final film of this tumultuous decade to win Best Picture honors was indeed a signal of the changing tides of Hollywood filmmaking. A somewhat bleak, but emotionally compelling drama focuses on the relationship of “just off the bus” Texas hustler wannabe Joe Buck and his newly found sickly friend Rico Rizzo, a longtime New York con man, Un affectionally known as “Ratso”. Hoffman’s Rizzo tries to teach Voight’s naive Buck the ropes and ways of the dirty sidewalks of seedy New York City. Definitely a good chemistry between the two young leads (both would be nominated for Best Actor) and a visual masterpiece that weaves a compelling story of the Texan’s troubled past and worn-out dying dreams of his mentor. Add a Kaleidescope of colorful characters that the two men encounter and a series of precarious situations they find themselves in and this Avant Garde cinematic feat packs plenty of punch. It remains the only Oscar winning film to receive an X-rating by the relatively new Motion Picture Association of America.

EPILOGUE

Of course I know my list is subjective and that there are many more great classic movies, so please feel free to let me know a few of your favorites as well. I’ve thoroughly enjoyed watching scores of old movies with very dramatic scores! It is truly an engaging art form and some really terrific entertainment. So, if you’re experiencing binge-fatigue curl up with one or more of these classics! It’s like visiting with an old friend.

I’m currently revising my 2021 My Love of the Movies Part II– Films of the 1970s, to include another dozen or so films from the 1980s. Should be posting that by June 2023.

Hard to believe I haven’t been on a plane in three years! I guess nothing is hard to believe anymore in the age of Covid. I’ve never had issues with flying in my life, but this year my travel anxiety was through the roof. Everyday a steady stream of travel chaos on the news: cancelled flights, long delays, lost luggage nightmares and not to mention a new virus Dejour– Monkeypox and a return of Polio??!! All that and lingering Covid cases, a new and exciting variant and the annual summer spike.

Even the simple task of renewing my passport became a stress point when my local office screwed up by telling me the wrong dollar amount! I paid $60 extra for expedited service only to be be told 4 weeks into the process I was $10 short! I had to Fedex a $10 check at a cost of $45 with no guarantee I would get my passport in time for my trip! In the end, I got my passport on time, with 10 days to spare and on July 28th, my double vaxed, double boosted self was on a non-stop flight from LA to NYC. Double Bloody Mary please! Let’s get this party started.

Upon arrival at JFK, I took a car service to my Uncle Fred and Aunt Dot’s beautiful home on the north shore of Long Island. I am no stranger to the Incorporated Village of Bayville having spent the summers of my youth and teenage years here. My grandparents bought the house in 1967 and for the last 25 years, the Gallo’s have called this special place their year-round home. My Aunt Dot never disappoints when it comes to a lovely family dinner and making everyone feel at home. Jessica, her Mom, my Dad and longtime family friend and ex-roommate Big Mike would join the festivities and we’d enjoy a lovely afternoon of food, wine and memory lane on 2 Pine Lane moments. It was the first time in 3 years I got to see my New York family, so it was extra-special!

It was 97 degrees and Jessica, and I would take the short walk to the pebbled beach of our youth where I couldn’t resist taking a refreshing Long Island Sound dip. Later in the day, Dad would drive Jessica and I back to her place in Brooklyn Heights.

For the next few days I would catch-up with a few friends while enjoying several hot-town summer-in-the-city-back-of my-neck-feeling-hot-and-gritty moments.

Monday lunch with Tanya at a cute restaurant called Banter on the West Side. Appropriate name since we had much catching up to do. It’s been 8 years since I’ve last seen and bantered with my Texan turned New Yorker friend. We picked up where we left off years ago in Bryant Park and vowed not to let 8 more years pass till we meet again!

After checking into my Tribeca hotel, I walked exactly one mile to Katz Delicatessen, made famous by the “I’ll have what she’s having” scene from “When Harry Met Sally”. I’ve been craving a hot pastrami and real New York knish for several years and fortunately, Katz is the place where cravings like this go to die! Well worth the walk and 20-minute line. I’d Uber back to the hotel with leftovers in hand for a greatly anticipated midnight snack.

Tuesday, I would walk the High Line for the first time with my longtime (47years) friend Jill. Starting at the newly opened (2021) Little Island all the way to the $200 million dollar death-trap-suicide-rap, interactive structure known as the Vessel. Due to four people jumping to their death, since it opened in 2019, you can no longer walk up this oddly interesting, but somewhat head scratching “Ode to a Pretzel” masterpiece. The elaborate honeycomb-like structure rises 16 stories and consists of 154 flights of stairs, 2,500 steps and 80 landings. Unfortunately, the tragic four “landings” will have this landmark closed to the public indefinitely.

The High Line first opened in 2009 and is a 1.45-mile-long elevated linear park that runs along the westside of Manhattan. A literal rail trail created on a former NY Central Railroad spur, it begins in the Meatpacking district and runs from Gansevoort Street just below 14th, north through Chelsea to the northern edge of the West Side Railroad Yards on 34th Street. The High Line has become an icon of contemporary landscape architecture and is a very popular “new” New York tourist attraction.

After our West side walking adventure, Jill and I would enjoy a lovely Italian dinner at Pepolino Ristorante across the street from my hotel. Delicious grilled Pulpo antipasti, homemade pappardelle Al Pepolino, a simple tomato sauce with fresh thyme second course and a perfect panna cotta to finish off a terrific meal. I would definitely dine here again.

Wednesday lunch with Dad and Jessica in Brooklyn Heights. For our Bon Voyage dinner, Jessica and I would meet my friend Hayley at my new favorite BH restaurant– Bevacco. Piccata, pizza and delish Cacio a Pepe highlighted this hot, but bearable-after-the-sun-went-down evening. I know Hayley from LA and wanted her to meet Jessica because they live 10 minutes away from each other in Brooklyn. Jessica has lived this area for 22 years and it’s usually my home base when I visit. A great location, one stop into Brooklyn from lower Manhattan.

Thursday, Jessica and I took a car service to JFK around 1pm to officially begin our second Spanish adventure together. For Jessica, it’ll be her 5th time in Spain. Our 5pm flight left on time and in less than 8 hours we touched down in beautiful Barcelona.

Day One — Viernes. Dazed, but not Confused

We arrived under the cover of darkness, turning our clocks forward 6 hours. On-time, we breezed through customs and the additional vaccination checkpoint. Our Airbnb host Rob was waiting curbside to whisk us to our destination. Rob is a very nice Dutch man, who moved to Sitges 12 years earlier. He provides airport transfers to his guests for 55euro, considerably less than the 80euros wanted by other car services. We would stay at a hotel the first night and Rob gets us there in 30 minutes. Unfortunately, we cannot check-in for another 5 hours! Jessica did get some sleep on the plane, but not me I was too busy with Tetris and episodes of Only Murders in the Building. I never sleep well on planes.

We secured our luggage at the hotel and decided to zombie walk around and acquaint ourselves with our new surroundings. Jessica and I were here 4 years ago for only 2 days and stayed at a fancy 4-star hotel. We knew then that we wanted to return and spend at least a week (a month would be better) in this beautiful paradise. But we wanted a different experience this time around. We wanted to live among the locals, so we rented a 2-bedroom apartment, half a block from the beach.

Sitges is a coastal town in Spain’s Catalonia region, 30 minutes southwest of Barcelona, backed by the mountainous Parc Natural del Garraf. It’s known for its Mediterranean beaches and seafront promenade. The compact old town and surrounding streets are lined with shops, restaurants, bars and nightclubs and is a popular vacation destination for Europeans and a weekend get-a-way for Barcelona residents.

With a population of almost 29,000 of which 35% of its permanent residents are from the Netherlands, the UK, France and Scandinavia. Sitges economy is based on tourism and culture offering more than 4,500 beds, half of them in 4-star hotels. There are 17 sand beaches in total in this town that has been described as the Saint-Tropez of Spain thanks to its glitzy beach crowd and lively nightlife.

The centerpiece of this beautiful paradise is the Church of Sant Bartomeu i Santa Tecla which was built in the 17th century and still stands proudly welcoming roughly 5.8 million visitors a year (70% of which come from the rest of Catalonia and Spain).

We hit the town running, Ha! who am I kidding, at this early hour it was a leisurely stroll at best. The town is so quiet early in the morning but will come alive in a few short hours. Shops and restaurants slowly start opening and a hand full of running enthusiasts whisk past us two slow moving dazed, but not confused new arrivals. We get Euros from a nearby ATM and have a nice breakfast at a beachside eatery.

Afterwards, we walk out onto the beach for a refreshing feet-in-the-water moment of Zen, before heading back to the hotel and camping in the lobby in hopes of an early check-in. The Hotel Medium Renaixenca is a quaint, older, well-kept 3-star hotel. In Europe this usually means no elevator! Good thing we’re only on the second floor. We get into our room around 1pm.

After checking in, a refreshing shower and power nap is needed. It’s hot outside, but our AC is cranked and it’s time for a well-deserved two-hour siesta! We venture out to a local store for meat, cheese, wine and gazpacho in a box and enjoyed our snacks on our hotel balcony. After a nice leisurely evening walk we find our way to The Way, a nice gastropub along the busy and bustling waterfront called the Passeig de la Ribera. It’s Friday night and they are able to squeeze us in.

The owner is a lovely, super friendly lady, who recommends the salmon, which her husband (the chef) gets fresh every morning. SOLD. Peruvian scallops to start and a refreshing bottle of Spanish white pairs well with the relaxing live music and the parade of people passing by. A slight breeze and disticnt beach aromas accent this beautiful evening as we see our first day turn to night as the sun sets a little past 9pm. Back to our hotel for an awesome much needed night’s sleep. Feeling very blessed and sweetly dreaming!

Day Two — Sabado — Livin La Vida Local

Enjoyed a terrific hotel buffet breakfast on an outdoor patio. We checked out around noon and rolled our luggage a few blocks to Carrer de Sant Pere where Rob was there to welcome us to our new digs. It was just like the photos and a perfect space for us to spend the next fun-filled and chillaxing eight days and nights. A cheery and vibrant decor, comfortable beds and most importantly a fully working air conditioner! After settling in we walked approximately 50 steps to the sand (75 to the water) of the nearest beach.

La Fragata Platja is a compact oasis nestled in the shadow of the Church and a walkout jetty which divides it from the Platja Ribera, the next beach. There’s a small sailing club here, so boats come and go all day long, hence Fragata, which in Spanish means small ship that can move fast. Time for our first Mediterranean plunge, almost four years the day of our last one. These magical waters melt away several months of stress and anxiety in an instant and we will spend many hours bathing in these warm and friendly waters!

Back to our place to freshen up, drink some wine and snack on delicious peaches, pineapples, watermelon and juicy figs before venturing out to enjoy a nice dinner and some nightlife. We chose a tapas restaurant not far from our abode which was ok. Gambas A’jillo for Jessica, Pulpo alla Griglia for me, with of side of jamon crochettas and patatas bravas. We didn’t have a reservation, so our choices were limited on a busy Saturday night.

The restaurant was across the street from interesting bar called El Gin Tub. We wandered into this busy gin joint to find a cool, speakeasy vibe, crafty cocktails and live music. It is owned by a gruff Brit named Drew. What he lacks in friendliness he makes up for with his masterful mixology skills. After a few drinks we float home around midnight. What an exhilarating day of delight and discovery! Feeling extra blessed.

Day Three — Domingo– King for the Day, Queenz for a Night

Sitges is a sea of seemingly endless shops and restaurants all catering to tourists from all over but mainly Europe. A very popular summer holiday destination for people from the UK, France, Holland, Germany and other parts of Spain, but very few Americans, which I think is awesome. Europeans, in particular the Spanish people, have a much better way of dealing with life’s stresses and a passion for living that rivals the Italians. A warmth and genuine welcoming friendliness that I find so lacking in the States these days.

Jessica and I would quickly adapt to this lifestyle and a relaxing routine that would begin with two Cafe Con Leches from the corner coffee house then a late morning beach dip. I would take a mid-day tapas break at one of the many restaurants along the Sitges beaches. Jessica doesn’t enjoy eating the way I do; she rather prefers laying on the beach, reading and soaking up the sun. I rejoin her in the afternoon, and we take a refreshing dip together for at least an hour, usually longer. We people watch and choose our candidates for Lobster of the day. It is amazing how many very fair skinned painfully white people go to the beach! This would be our daily routine.

In the late afternoon we would freshen up at our place, enjoy some wine and snacks and plan our evening activities. Tonight, we will go to a popular Cabaret dinner show at the Queenz Restaurant that was a recommendation from our host. I booked the reservation 3 months in advance and it’s a short 5-minute walk from our apartment.

We arrive at 8pm and are promptly greeted by “Dutch” the owner. He, like our host Rob, is a transplant from the N