The grandson of Hollywood legend Clark Gable died from an accidental drug overdose, it has been revealed.

Clark Gable III, 30, took a fatal dose of fentanyl, oxycodone and alprazolam (generic Xanax), according to an autopsy report from Dallas County released to TMZ on Friday.

His time of death is listed as 9:11am on February 22. He was found dead in his bed by his fiancee.

The tragedy sparked a bitter row, with his father refusing to pay for his own son's funeral or let him be buried in the Gable family plot.

DailyMail.com exclusively revealed earlier this year that Clark Gable III's sister, Kayley Gable, 32, said she called her estranged father, John Clark Gable, 57, to tell him about the tragic news.

But she claimed he 'hung up' on her and sent a vitriolic text message, which she posted on Facebook.

'I'm sorry for your loss. This is what I want. Cremate him he's not going in my family's plot and I'm not paying for anything,' John wrote in a text.

The family's plot is located at Forrest Lawn Cemetery in Los Angeles, where Clark Gable is buried.

'All of you use my Fathers name in disgrace and you don't want me to go to the media believe me. Leave me and my Father out of this drug mess. There are no services on my end. Kayley is to never call me. Sorry for your loss I'm done it's just that simple. Respect my wishes.'

In her Facebook post, Kayley shot back at her father claiming that he 'tortured us', 'got us high' and 'did drugs in front of us as kids'.

'I'm sorry, as my brother is in a coffin I'm standing up for him, as I always have, and the world needs to know the truth. I'm putting this out before you start telling lies,' she wrote.

'John F*** YOU!! Your (sic) the one who got us high on drugs and did drugs in front of us as kids and tortured us and especially Clark so I'm going to write a book and let the world know the truth!! Im Disgusted I'm related to you! bring it ON!!!!! your (sic) the druggie!!!!'

Kayley also posted a page from a back copy of a celebrity magazine from around 2006 showing photos of her father leaving a courthouse to head to rehab with what appear to be several needle marks on his arm.

Drug problems have dogged the family, Clark's mother, Tracy Scheff, previously told DailyMail.com in an exclusive interview.

John's brother died age 27 of an overdose, and his girlfriend's death in 2012 was linked to prescription medication.

Scheff said her son had previously struggled with drug addiction, as had all four of her children, including her 17-year-old son who is now one year sober.

Scheff revealed that Gable had sought therapy for addiction in the past, and several members of his family had struggled with drug abuse.

She said her marriage with Clark's father John ended over his addiction problems. The bereaved mother also revealed Clark's three siblings have had issues with drugs.

'My current husband, we’ve been together 27 years, and he’s 32 years sober. It’s a struggle that is real,' she said.

'I have four children, all of them have struggled,' Scheff added. 'I have two younger boys with my current husband, Jason. I think one of them’s fine, he just likes to party, but the baby has struggled. He’s got a year sober, he’s 17 and doing great.

'I have a daughter that’s seven months pregnant. She’s doing great now, but she’s struggled too.'

A colleague of the late 30-year-old also told DailyMail.com that Gable had used drugs.

Bobby Goldstein, Cheaters creator and show Executive Producer, said that he was aware Gable took drugs but said it never affected his work.

‘While it’s true I have heard from others that Clark indulged in drugs, of the many years, almost a decade I’ve known him I never saw him on drugs,' he said.

‘Clark was a beautiful boy, he was a beautiful soul. He was the spitting image of his grandfather on screen and I’ve never thought of him other than the most earnest, kind, loving friend and it’s been a great pleasure to work with him.

‘He was a great colleague and a great host on Cheaters.’