''Chihwaseon,'' the new film by Im Kwon-Taek, the prolific grand old man of South Korean cinema, is one eminent artist's biography of another. The subject of the film is Jang Seung-Ub, a 19th-century painter known by the pseudonym Ohwon who lived, in Mr. Im's rendition, like a vagabond rock star. Jang, born a commoner and discovered as a boy by a sympathetic aristocrat, dazzled and scandalized his country's politically fragmented ruling class and spent his long career in and out of favor, and in and out of trouble.

For viewers (like this one) not versed in Korean history, the movie's broader narrative currents may be hard to follow. Occasional printed titles referring to events like the anti-Catholic persecution of 1866 and the peasant revolt of 1894 are somewhat helpful, but the shifting allegiances in which Ohwon and his patrons are embroiled remain confusing. As, perhaps, they were to the artist himself. He is meant to be the kind of national hero not readily assimilated to any political program.

His work, undertaken at a time when the country was struggling to retain its identity in the shadow of its more powerful, imperially minded neighbors, Japan and China, is understood as an expression of the strength and uniqueness of Korean culture. During his apprenticeship, Ohwon dutifully studies Chinese models, but the source of his vivid and intricate compositions is the unique beauty of his native land.

The depiction of the artistic temperament will seem familiar to anyone who has seen ''The Agony and the Ecstasy,'' ''Lust for Life,'' or ''Pollock.'' The stout, goateed Choi Min-Sik, who plays Ohwon, bears a passing resemblance to Julian Schnabel, the filmmaker and former bad boy of the New York art world (who designed the poster for this year's New York Film Festival, where ''Chihwaseon'' will be shown tonight and Monday), and the character incarnates myths about the wildness of creative genius.

''How can I paint without an erection?'' Ohwon bellows during his residence (indistinguishable from captivity) at the royal court. ''If you want to paint, first learn how to drink!'' he tells an admiring portraitist who wants to know his secrets. Accordingly, Ohwon's moods vacillate between roistering good spirits, sad-eyed lechery and furious melancholy. And always, he paints -- alone and in front of a gathering of notables in tall, wide-brimmed black hats, before and after sex, indoors and out, drunk and sober.

Mr. Im's meandering, episodic tale keeps its subject at a distance, observing even his wildest moments with decorous detachment. But if the director can be a plodding storyteller, he is also a visual artist as inspired, at times, as Ohwon himself. He lingers over the painter's delicate, vibrant compositions, providing a lesson in aesthetics underscored (and sometimes undermined) by the comments of various patrons, rivals and clients. In 19th-century Korea, it seems, everyone was a critic.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.