As Professor of Astronomy at Cornell University, Carl Sagan probably brought “science” to mainstream consciousness better than any scientist in our age. His work on the Mariner, Viking and Voyager spacecraft expeditions won him awards and medals from NASA. He won a Pulitzer Prize in 1977 for his book The Dragons of Eden, and an Emmy for his highly-acclaimed TV series Cosmos which was based on his 1980 book of the same name. He has written many non-fiction books, including Broca’s Brain and The Cosmic Connection in the 1970’s. After Cosmos, which is the best-selling science book of all time, he wrote Pale Blue Dot, The Demon-Haunted World, my favorite The Varieties of Scientific Experience, and Billions & Billions, the title of which became the go-to line for comedians and impersonators who treated Sagan with humor. In 1979, Sagan wrote a screenplay called Contact for a movie. When the movie failed to be made, he turned it into a novel in 1985. As the only fictional novel he ever wrote, Contact is the book I am writing about here. It was later made into an excellant movie in 1997 starring Jodie Foster. This is one of the rare cases where I think the movie, even with simplifications and changes, is about as good as the novel.

Contact: A Novel (1985) by Carl Sagan, 1st ed. 1st printing. Simon & Schuster, New York, New York

“…imagine the greatest adventure of all–humanity’s first encounter with other intelligent beings.”

As Sagan’s only solo fictional novel, it is remarkably well structured and written. I like that he starts each chapter with a pithy quotation by the likes of William Blake, Bertrand Russell, John Keats, Thomas Paine and many other significant luminaries. My copy is a true 1st ed. in pristine condition. Generally considered to be the world’s best-known scientist in the late twentieth century, Sagan was driven in his academic and public careers to understand how the universe works and particularly to communicate what we know broadly to others. He was always a committed defender of scientific thinking and discovery.

The story of the novel focuses on Eleanor “Ellie” Arroway who grows up with a great interest and ability in science. She graduates from Harvard and eventually earns a doctorate from Caltech in Radio Astronomy. She begins working and eventually is named the director of “Project Argus,” a radiotelescope facility in the New Mexico desert that was dedicated to the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence or SETI. Ellie enjoys this work even though it also makes her an outsider from the mainstream of astrological science. Events take a dramatic turn when Ellie and Project Argus discover a repetitive series of 26 prime numbers being broadcast from 25 light years away apparently originating from the Vega solar system. As Ellie and other scientists conduct more analysis of the message, a second message is found in the polarization modulation of the signal. This second message turns out to be a retransmission of our first television signal powerful enough to escape Earth’s ionosphere. It was a recording of Adolf Hitler’s opening speech at the Berlin Summer Olympics in 1936.

Ellie’s discovery gained notoriety and she met with other scientists, politicians and even a couple of religious leaders. With the help of a Russian colleague Vaygay Lunacharsky, she was also able to set up a redundant system for monitoring the signal with telescopes constantly aimed at Vega. This effort produced a third message which appeared to describe some sort of advanced machine. But, working with a consortium of scientists that included Devi Sukhavati, Ellie and the others came to think that the machine is some sort of dodecahedron-shaped vehicle with seats for five people. The problem is the group was unable to decode the 30,000 page description of the machine. They conclude that there must be some sort of set of directions or primer that they had missed which would be neccessary to actually build the machine. Things were stalled until a billionaire industrialist S.R. Hadden, who was obsessed with his own immortality, suggested to Ellie that she might check the signal for phase modulation. That led to her discovery of the primer or set of directions which they had missed before. With that, the machine could now be constructed.

Both the American and Societ Union governments set out to build this machine. Problems developed in the Russian machine which made the American project the only one that was viable. As plans to test the vehicle developed, Ellie applied to be one of the five passengers on the craft but her place was taken by her mentor David Drumlin. While the preparations to launch the machine were developing, a terrorist group planted a bomb in one of the craft’s fabrication plants in Wyoming. Eventually the bomb exploded and killed Drumlin and interrupted completion of the machine with no expectations for its completion.

It turns out that the billionaire S.R. Hadden had gone into exile on a Russian space station. He reveals that he had secretly built a third machine in Hokkaido, Japan. He was ready to activate it on December 31, 1999. He chose Ellie, her colleagues Vaygay and Devi for three of the seats on the craft. The other two were given to Abonnema Eda, a well-known Nigerian physicist and Xi Qiaomu who was a Chinese archaeologist. Once the dodecahedron vessel was activated, the five passengers were transported through a series of wormholes. They ended up at a place near the center of the Milky Way Galaxy. They find themselves on a beach and decide to split up to investigate the place separately.

On the beach, Ellie encounters a man who appears to be her late father Ted Arroway who died when she was in the seventh grade. He explains that he is not her father but is a part of an on-going project to change the nature of the galaxy by creating enough mass in Cygnus A to overcome the effects of entropy. He tells her that the wormholes through which she traveled were made by other much earlier, more advanced beings that have left messages for all of us in transcendental numbers like pi. Ellie eventually meets back with the other four travelers. She learns that each of them also encountered what appeared to be a loved one. She creates some video evidence of their trip and then they re-entered the dodecahedron to return back to Earth.

I highly recommend this book. I have read a large amount of science fiction novels over the years and the best of them have a knack of focusing the fictional story on a rather specific feature or event of the world that is being imagined. Sagan has brought his scientific and prose expertise to take on the large, ultimate possibility of humankind learning about and having interaction with another sentient species. His ability to accomplish such a huge task is simply masterful! I love this novel.