Photo courtesy of Vanessa Bell Armstrong, Album Cover ‘Today’

Acclaimed American gospel singer and Detroit native Vanessa Bell Armstrong shaped the music landscape by blending traditional gospel with contemporary R&B sounds. Rising from her roots singing in church, Armstrong’s powerful voice and emotive performances have garnered national recognition. With decades of musical evolution behind her, she is set to release her highly anticipated latest album, ‘Today.’

“This new album ‘Today’ is the first single, and it’s going to reach the young people too, and it’s saying ‘Today is a good day to smile’ and be happy, and ‘Today is a good day to smile with no worries’ because so many people are going through so much right now. So we’re trying to encourage them to hang in there with this album,” Armstrong said.

In the early 1980s, gospel artist Armstrong’s career skyrocketed with the release of her groundbreaking debut album, “Peace Be Still.” This highly acclaimed album featured the chart-topping title track and solidified her position as a leading figure in the gospel music industry. Following this success, Armstrong has consistently delivered powerful and inspirational music, captivating audiences with her soul-stirring compositions.

Despite experiencing personal challenges and hardships, including the loss of her son, mother, and, most recently, her father, she has remained unwavering in her faith, showing remarkable resilience and determination on her journey to success.

Photo courtesy of Vanessa Bell Armstrong

“A couple of months ago, my best friend, my dad, my hero, passed, and I said, ‘Well, God, okay, here we go again’. But I knew what he (her father) set me up to do was ministry. He was a pastor, and I sang at his church all the time, and he wanted me to do my work right,” Armstrong said. “I still cry, but I get past it by saying, I know I’m making my dad and mom proud to do what they raised me to do.”

After over a decade since her last album release, ‘Timeless,’ ‘Today’ is a fresh and new testament to Armstrong’s artistic versatility. This album encapsulates a variety of musical styles, from classic Gospel anthems to soul-stirring praise and worship songs and uplifting, inspirational compositions, offering a little something for every fan.

“This album, it’s hot. It’s really hot. These producers, Walter Millsap, Donald Lawrence, and John P. Key, they gave me some songs. Do you hear me?! And so we are getting ready to rock one more time,” Armstrong said joyfully.

Armstrong has an impressive list of achievements. She has showcased her talents on Broadway and at Carnegie Hall and made notable recordings at the Apollo Theater. In addition, she has appeared in the film ‘The Women of Brewster Place,’ lent her voice to the title song for the TV show ‘Amen,’ and secured seven nominations for prestigious awards, including the Grammys and Stellar Awards.

“All of the accolades don’t matter. It’s an honor just to be nominated that many times and be recognized. But the main thing is that I want my reward. I want to see Jesus and hear him say, ‘Well done, my good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of the Lord.’ That’s all I’m singing for.”

About Post Author