The artist Tania, who adopted the mononym in 1958 after working under a number of married names through the 1940s and early '50s, created art in a wide range of mediums (painting, sculpture, works on paper, and collage), but is perhaps most well known for her wall murals. In particular, she is recognized for a highly visible monumental wall painting from 1970 that stretches 13 stories along the side of a Greenwich Village high rise. Not only exemplary of Tania’s typical abstract style, the work also represents her interest in public art. In 1966, Tania co-founded the non-profit City Walls, Inc., and although it operates today as the Public Art Fund, the organization continues to commission artists to enliven urban space with new art, just as Tania envisioned.

While Tania’s early work exhibits traces of Pop art, by 1967 she had fully developed her geometric, hard-edge style. Tania experimented heavily with compositions of “overlapped triangles,” both in two-dimensional paintings and in three-dimensional aluminum sculptures. For Tania, these works fundamentally relate to architecture. Rendering her paintings on the floor, Tania conceived of them as “rooftops seen from the air,” or a sort of urban version of The Spiral Jetty, Robert Smithson’s …

The artist Tania, who adopted the mononym in 1958 after working under a number of married names through the 1940s and early '50s, created art in a wide range of mediums (painting, sculpture, works on paper, and collage), but is perhaps most well known for her wall murals. In particular, she is recognized for a highly visible monumental wall painting from 1970 that stretches 13 stories along the side of a Greenwich Village high rise. Not only exemplary of Tania’s typical abstract style, the work also represents her interest in public art. In 1966, Tania co-founded the non-profit City Walls, Inc., and although it operates today as the Public Art Fund, the organization continues to commission artists to enliven urban space with new art, just as Tania envisioned.

While Tania’s early work exhibits traces of Pop art, by 1967 she had fully developed her geometric, hard-edge style. Tania experimented heavily with compositions of “overlapped triangles,” both in two-dimensional paintings and in three-dimensional aluminum sculptures. For Tania, these works fundamentally relate to architecture. Rendering her paintings on the floor, Tania conceived of them as “rooftops seen from the air,” or a sort of urban version of The Spiral Jetty, Robert Smithson’s celebrated work of land art.

show more descriptionshow less description

Every bid submitted is treated as a maximum bid. You should always bid the maximum you are willing to spend for a work, though this does not necessarily mean you will pay that price. As the auction unfolds, we will increase your bid by increments to ensure you remain the highest bidder. If the winning amount is less than your maximum bid, you will pay the current increment. If your maximum bid no longer exceeds the current bid, you will receive an outbid notification email, and have the option to bid again.

In the case of multiple bidders placing the same maximum bid, the first person to place the maximum amount takes precedence as the highest bid until another bidder exceeds the maximum amount.

Buyer's Premium & Additional Charges

For Artspace Auctions winning bidders are charged a 15% Buyer's Premium on top of the hammer price. For Artspace Benefit Auctions, Buyer's Premiums are not applied. If they are, this will be clearly noted. Purchases made from all auctions, including benefit auctions, are subject to sales tax.

Check Out

Winning bidders will be contacted within 48 hours to arrange shipping and to provide final price including commission, shipping, and taxes and duties when applicable. Promotion codes cannot be applied to auction works.