New York-based artist Tania Marmolejo, fashion illustrator, commercial artist, author and painter, is a creative jack of all trades. Her Dominican and Scandinavian ancestry germinates a unique heritage that births a bold and arresting fine art style. On the eve of her solo show at GR Gallery in NYC opening June 10, 2022, Juxtapoz sat down with Tania to discuss how such a lineage influences her work, how movement plays into the practice, as well as some current artists on her radar.

Evan Pricco: Do you remember the first piece of art that moved you?

Tania Marmolejo: I believe it must have been paintings by my maternal grandmother in Sweden. She passed away before I was born, but her art—paintings and drawings—were amazing and always captivated me. I would sit and study them for hours in my grandfather’s house and my own. I now have her sketchbook, which is my most prized possession, and I still love looking through it. Her drawings definitely were the biggest influence on my own drawing and painting as I grew up. Both my grandmothers were artistic, but my maternal grandmother had the doodles and cartoonish style that were more my taste. I have always felt connected to her through my art.

You have both Dominican and Scandinavian lineage, and I wonder what you have gleaned from each of their artistic influences, especially because both are rich in folk art traditions. And, where do you see your ancestry converging when you paint?

I am definitely influenced by both lineages. Sometimes they present themselves separately, where a painting is definitely more “Caribbean” in color and theme, or “Scandinavian” in its moodiness and color story. The Dominican influence seeps through me in bright colors, especially the blues and greens of the mountains and nature around where I grew up. The incredible color of the water- turquoise, and sometimes a darker skin tone in the character. The Scandinavian influence shows in a darker palette in the backgrounds, also influenced by the Swedish children’s books about trolls and fairies that I grew up reading, and the blonder characters that many times are directly influenced by my mother. Sometimes in a painting I will mix the influences, and strange color combinations and moods arise, which I really like because that’s basically me: A muddy, colorful mix of influences.

What do you think is the hardest thing for an artist to explain about process? And here I am, asking you! I think what I mean is, what part of the process of making a painting, at what stage, is it just instinct?

I don’t mind explaining my process! I don’t like writing artist statements though, because my intentions and themes change as I work. Each artist has their own process that determines the outcome of their work, so it may be the most important part of creating. I do not sketch my works in advance, for example, as my work is completely expressionistic. I never know what the painting will actually look like in the end. I may have an idea, a certain plan, but as I paint, the expressions on the faces may start doing their own interesting thing - and I try not to force it. So many times, even if I look at a reference in the beginning, the expression, color and mood of the painting will turn out completely differently than I had initially planned. And I try to get as much of the painting done in one or two days as possible, even if I have to go slower afterwards to allow the paint to dry before making any details, since I work with oils. So it is a very quick, instinctive and purging initial process, and then it slows down a little and I really have to remember to be patient because I always want to start a new one.

Which artists are you looking at these days, and who is an influence?

I think more than artists today— though there are many I admire, I am more influenced by art movements from the past. Not in a direct sense, but more for the feeling— from Renaissance and Baroque movements for their play on light and dramatic backgrounds, to the German Expressionists and Abstract Expressionists for the pure expression in the work and experimentation with color. I look towards—backwards—to art history more than current art. I prefer museums that show human expression through the ages, more than contemporary art museums. But I do admire many artists today that do not necessarily directly influence my work, especially female artists who are breaking barriers and creating a language all their own. Cecily Brown, Mikalene Thomas, Dana Schutz, Cindy Sherman. Julie Mehretu, Kara Walker, Claire Tabouret, Genieve Figgis, Jesse Mockrin, Lisa Yuskavage…the list goes on. So many badass women artists!

Let's talk about doodling. You paint, and yet you have two books about drawing and just plain doodling. How does that play in your daily practice?

I used to draw much more than I do today, when I worked as print a designer for several years. I missed my own drawing time so much that I would doodle any chance I got, on post-it notes and any paper I could get my hands on. That is where the Doodle books come from, compilations from those times. But today, since I draw directly on the canvas when I paint— that has taken over—and though I also like to draw ink on paper and have exhibited them several times—I definitely do it less than painting. But the initial process of my paintings is a drawing (very loose, yet still a drawing), I suppose that counts!

How did working in a more commercial art setting enhance what you do with your gallery work? I think I can see a scale and bold use of colors that must have come from commercial work.

Actually, what I learned more from working in a commercial setting is the discipline it takes to consistently create. I’m always thinking of the next “design” for my paintings, and I work very diligently, constantly. I have to actually travel and remove myself from my studio to relax and think of something else. But the scale of my works is actually a direct consequence of having been restricted to smaller sized artworks for my designs. It felt great to blow everything up in size once I got home and could work on my own art. It’s also a direct consequence of being told my work was too feminine and that I should change it— and in protest I blew up the sizes of the works so you couldn’t escape the femaleness. But that’s a different story!