Tania Traver is an artist from Valencia, Spain currently based in Berlin, Germany. Her work explores different aspects that shape our identity, both cultural and ethnic. It is based on the conjugation of one’s own experiences stored in memory and the stories told by others, deposited in our imagination.

In her creative process she investigates the limits between painting and photography through the technical experimentation of cyanotype and the development of pictorial procedures. This analogical register poses the different perceptions of the viewer before the same representation of the subject and questions the rhetoric of artistic language.

Motivated by the lack of a sense of belonging, she analyses the migration movements and cultural transformations of large cities through the eyes of the outsider. She portrays figures from the reverse to reflect on anonymity and the hidden parts that end up being relegated to oblivion.

The project “The Gaze of the Other” addresses personal concerns about migration and the fluctuation of identity. The detachment from the place of origin, motivated by the rural exodus, has generated a need to deepen the knowledge of urban problems. Upon landing in the city of Berlin, a series of concerns arise that articulate this work, the new spaces of flow, the social portrait, the hybridism of passers-by, the formulation of identities. Through numerous photographic tours, the aim is to study different aspects derived from gentrification, as well as the standardization of central areas and the loss of identity, new forms of appropriation of spaces, the spectacularization of cultural diversity, and the reduction of collective significance. The idea of this search is to be exposed in a plastic way in order to place the creation of images in a real contemporary context.

Education

2024. Women Rural Artists Cultural Tectònica project, Valencia.

2022. Master’s Degree in Secondary Education, University of Valencia.

2021. The Artist and Self-Management, Institute of Contemporary Art of Madrid.

2018. Painting workshop with Denis Sarazhin, La Galería Roja, Seville.

2017. Master’s Degree in Art: Idea and Production, University of Seville.

2016. Hyperrealism Workshop, Lifelong Learning Centre, Valencia.

2011. Degree in Fine Arts, Polytechnic University of Valencia.

Exhibitions

Solo

2024. Let’s open our eyes. Uniques Foundation, Barcelona.

2023. Ways of understanding Painting. Plenary hall of the town hall of La Serra d’en Galceran, Castellón.

2022. Painting with a woman’s eyes. Hermitage of Sant Joan d’Albocàsser, Castellón.

2021. Rocart Culture. II Peñíscola Art Festival. Ephemeral Museum of Peñíscola, Castellón.

2020. A retrospective look. Exhibition Hall of the Town Hall of Atzeneta del Maestrat, Castellón.

2019. The language of the artist. Exhibition space of the Old Hospital of Culla, Castellón.

Collective

2015. The shape of the time. Municipal exhibition hall of the Mislata Cultural Centre, Valencia.

2014. Illustrated poems by Vicent Andrés Estellés. Exhibition Hall of the City Council of Sumacàrcer, Valencia.

2013. Alter Ego. Sala de Les Naus of the City Council of Valencia.

Experience

2019 – now. Freelance artist, painting instructor and muralist, Valencia.

2018. Student intern at the Andalusian Centre for Contemporary Art, Seville.

2016. Intern at the Office of Culture and Tourism, Castelló.