As the players enter the pitch at St. James Park, a familiar drum beat begins, applause gradually grows in rhythm and volume as those in attendance rise to “sing a song for our Stanno.”

Born in 1978, Adam Stansfield began his career playing Non League Football for Cullompton and Elmore. It would be at the later age of 23 that he would sign his first Professional contract, then Yeovil Town manager, Gary Johnson bringing him to Huish Park in 2001. Adam finished as the leading scorer for the Glovers in his first season, sixteen goals, including eight in the club’s successful FA Trophy run. Scoring the second in a 2-0 victory over Stevenage at Villa Park would conclude an exciting first year in the Professional game. Unfortunately, Adam suffered a broken fibula and tibia on the first day of the following season and his progress was curtailed. Yeovil Town would go on to win the Conference title that season and Stanno would only feature sporadically the following year, as Gary Johnson’s side adjusted to life in the Football League, and the player himself returned from long term injury. However, during Adam’s first season in the Football League he would hit six goals, including his first against, then League Two side, Swansea City, showing he had the capability to perform at a higher level.

After leaving Somerset in the summer of 2004, Adam headed north to Hereford United. An excellent first season would see a return of 24 goals, a career best. Hereford would narrowly miss out on promotion that season, losing in the Semi Final to Stevenage. The following year would prove more successful, Adam started the game in a 3-2 Extra Time victory against Halifax Town, as Herford won the Play Off Final and gained promotion to the Football League.

So to 2006. Whilst between the management tenures of Ingelthorpe and Tisdale, the board brought Adam to SJP. Stanno would go on to score 37 in 142 appearances for the mighty Grecians, win Promotion twice, play at Wembley twice and, with a goal at Oxford in a Play Off Semi Final, give most City fans one of their all time favourite moments. On a personal note, it was about more than goals with Adam, it was his work rate, attitude and determination. As a supporter you can forgive many things, but a lack of effort is the one that most wont and you could never accuse Adam of not caring. My foremost memory of Stanno is from a League win over Leeds United in 2010. We were one goal ahead in the game, but Leeds were considerably on top, Adam was playing the lone forward role and he put the United defence under continuous pressure. When the ball came up field, Adam won free kicks, throw ins, corners, anything he could to take the pressure off his team. That work rate and unselfish play ultimately led to us winning the match. Come the end of the game he was suffering badly with cramp purely from the effort he had expended to help his team. Paul Tisdale perfectly surmised in his eulogy when he said “always courageous in the fight, Adam was the engine to our train.” Unselfish, committed, determined, there is not one football supporter who would not have wanted an Adam Stansfield in their team.

After being diagnosed with Bowel Cancer in April of 2010, Adam would pass away on August 10th of the same year, aged 31 years old. A heart breaking loss to those at Exeter City Football Club, a devastating loss to his Family.

After Adam’s passing the Stansfield family were inundated with donations and people wanting to raise money in his name. Shaun Parkin of the Foundation recalls how the concept of the charity began. “Ads used to help out at Jay’s Football team, Twyford Spartans in Tiverton. There was a young lad who was playing in trainers and Ads told him to wear boots for the next session. The boy explained that his Mum could not afford to buy him new boots so Ads bought him a pair. Wayne, Ads older brother, remembered this and the idea of the Foundation to help Under 16’s who were disadvantaged developed.”

As a registered charity, the Foundation set out to promote participation and healthy recreation for the benefit of Children up to the age of 18 in Devon, Somerset and Herefordshire. The success that has been achieved has been considerable, Shaun explains “We have worked extensively with all three Community teams in Exeter, Yeovil and Hereford. We have supported a range of activities from Coaching courses, Power Chair Football and Soccer Tots, as well as Downs Syndrome, Deaf and Ability Counts Football. The Foundation also helps individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds with boots, kit, subscriptions and recently goggles for visually impaired footballers. We have also helped schools and teams with strips, equipment and facility hire.”

Whilst heavily committing to aid young people in sport, the Foundation also focuses it’s resources on raising awareness of Bowel Cancer and has worked closely with other charities. “We have worked with the ‘Know the Score’ initiative in partnership with Mr Brightside, The Bobby Moore Foundation and the PFA. During Bowel Cancer Awareness Month (April) it was good to see all Football League Clubs get involved.”

The past year has been one of incredible highs for the Foundation and its future. Exeter City supporter’s Tom and Jack Vickery set out with the bold target of raising £3,000 to assist with funding and future ambitions for the charity. With an unmatched dedication, and the help of the Football Family around the country, the brothers raised a phenomenal £35,000 in 2019. A game changing moment for all involved. “Tom and Jack have been amazing, these boys are driven! I’m not sure they’re going to stop! We have asked them for ideas for projects, which they are considering. We have supplied over 135 primary schools in the three Counties with Football equipment in 2019. We hope to roll this out to Secondary Schools, starting with Tom and Jack’s school this year.”

2020 sees the Foundation enter its tenth year and Shaun certainly feels it is a reflective moment. “Knowing we have made a difference to 70,000 5-11 year olds with the Primary School Initiative, helping individuals participate in football when everything was against them doing so, working with disabled and special need groups, we have had some wonderful success.”

In 2018 the unveiling of the new Family Stand at SJP proudly stated Adam’s name above it, Elmore Football Club had led the way with a similar gesture in 2011. Supporters continue to show their admiration for Stanno with an annual match being held between Yeovil Town and Exeter City supporters for the Adam Stansfield Memorial Trophy. At Exeter, the Number 9 shirt remains retired and the memory of Adam is still on prominent display as you enter the Cat and Fiddle Training Ground. As the Foundation continues to honour his legacy, Shaun recognises the commitment of all those who give their time to maintain the charities work. “We only expected the Foundation to last 5 years. We have four main roles all completed by family in their own time. We do it for Ads, we do it for his children and we do because there are still supporters out there who loved and respected him.”

The Foundation, like all charitable organisations, lives on donations and fundraising. Raising awareness of the charity will always be significant, but equally important, is promoting how the Foundation can help and support young people. Something Shaun explains is not always that easy. “We love to help individuals and often they are not aware of the support we can give them. We have emailed over 450 schools in Devon on how we can support some of their pupils – no response. We informed staff and issued leaflets to 135 Primary schools on how we can support their pupils – no response. The Foundation wants to make a difference to young people’s lives through participation in healthy recreation.”

The future of the Foundation looks strong, the Vickery’s incredible efforts will allow a difference to be made to the lives of many youngsters with a love for sport. However, there is a caution to that optimism. “When visiting Yeovil Town FC in April 2019 I discovered that staff in their reception didn’t know who Adam Stansfield was. We are aware that we have a “shelf life,” but we don’t know how long that is. We will keep working hard as a family in Adam’s name. Until then, we continue to make a difference to those we can help and continue to support fundraisers who want to help us.”

So it rests with us. The Adam Stansfield Foundation exists to remember Adam in the most positive of ways. A Foundation that gives to those who need assistance, to honour the legacy of the type of man who would choose to buy a boy football boots simply because his family could not afford to buy him his own. Keep supporting the Foundation and its many activities, help them to keep helping others, and to do so in the name of a player who gave many happy memories to those who watched him play.

http://www.adamstansfieldfoundation.com