This season, as part of the big match build up at YTFC.net we will be profiling a player that has represented both Yeovil and their upcoming opponents in this feature “A foot in both camps”.

That’s a minimum of 49 fixtures across four competitions so we’ll take regular trips down memory lane and dig up a few blasts from the past as the excitement builds for each match.

For the first game of the season, Yeovil Town travel to Exeter City in a local derby – tickets for Yeovil fans are fast running out call the ticket office now on 01935 847888 to confirm availability.

With the date of Saturday’s fixture proving poignant for both clubs there was only really one man we could use to kick off this article.

The late, great, Adam Stansfield.

Adam Stansfield is seen as a legend on the terraces of both Huish Park and St James’ Park and following the striker’s untimely death on 10th August 2010, both clubs and their fans have time and time again made the effort to remember the front man for all the good he has done for football in the south west.

Stansfield started his career in Collumpton, Devon and joined Elmore before he got his big move to the Football League.

It was in 2001 that non-league Yeovil were making moves in the conference when Stansfield was snapped up by Gary Johnson following a Yeovil Town reserve fixture vs Elmore.

Scoring 16 goals in his first campaign, cumulating in the winning goal in the 2002 FA Trophy Final at Villa Park had cemented his name in Glovers’ folklore forever more.

His hard working attitude and the feeling that he was a local lad living the professional football dream rubbed off on all around him and despite missing the entire 2002/03 title winning season with a broken leg he returned to score six goals in a successful Division Three campaign.

He would leave Yeovil for Hereford where promotion to the Football League would be achieved for a second time, before in June 2006 he remained in the Conference with Exeter City.

He would play nearly 150 times for the Grecians scoring 37 league goals during that spell, including, most notably, against Yeovil in 2010. True to his character and respect for his former club, his celebration was almost one of apology, rather than ecstasy.

In April 2010, the news has been released that Adam was suffering from bowel cancer and that it needed both surgery and treatment.

Sadly, in August 2010, despite positive results from the surgery and his appearance at training with his teammates that summer, Adam passed away.

Since then his family, friends and supporters have been working together to form the Adam Stansfield Foundation. A charity set up in his memory to not only raise awareness of bowel related cancers but support local football clubs offering equipment, sponsorship and guidance to junior sides in the south west.

Adam will be remembered in the upcoming fixture this Saturday with two minutes of applause, one in the 7th minute and one in the 9th minute to honour the shirt numbers he wore at the respective clubs.

Beyond that, if any supporter wishes to visit www.adamstansfieldfoundation.com you can learn more about the fan’s favourite as well as donate to the causes or apply for funding if your club would benefit from the legacy of Adam’s game.

An emotional start to this ‘Foot in both camps’ feature, but hopefully a worthwhile one.

We’ll be previewing the QPR League Cup match this weekend and talking about a manager who is credited by some for coming up with the 442 system as well as the Glovers’ greatest ever cup run.

Tickets for the Exeter City match are currently on sale from the Huish Park ticket office, but the advice is to call before 4pm on Friday as no tickets will be on sale on the day.