the ironic thing is that the lakers being an All star team, i was more afraid of the Nets and the Pacers than i am of the Lakers.

in yesterday's game we saw that the Pistons defense had locked down D. George, G. Payton, K. Malone, D. Fisher, and Madvedenko. they let Kobe and Shaq score all the points, but the Pistons had the up since they have so many great shooters.. the pistons bench scored a good amount of points and the opposite for the lakers.

what i'm wondering now is, what does Phil Jackson have up his sleeves, i dont' think he has any game plans, but what scares me is that if the pistons have bad shooting tomorrow night, the lakers are going to up their tempo and that is a pistons weakness although they are doing much better that coming back this season. they used to give up after the 1st half if they were down by a lot of points.

GO PISTONS!

edit.. i also think that R. Wallace should be benched until the 2nd half, Okur should take his place and guard malone and at the same time guard shaq since he's bigger than Williamson and makes more baskets. so Okur can foul and they can substitute between Okur and Williamson, then they can bring in R. Wallace and B. Wallace (Campbell will take Big Bens spot)

I Am Glad the Pistons proved me wrong, I truly am...

but heed the quote...

and remember back to just 2 rounds in the playoffs, Spurs had a 2-0 lead on LA.

Also remember to 3 years ago in the finals, Larry Brown's team at the time also won the first game of the Finals...

I really do hope Detroit wins, more than anything I do, but just as the quote says, it is indeed FARRRRRRRRRR from over

Hehe, luckily Larry Brown isn't relying on one particular player this time (Allen Iverson). Don't get me wrong, I pray to God every night that the Lakers lose, I absolutely HATE them. I respect Shaq because he is what he is...his post-game philosophical crap can go though. But Malone (stupid WWF player), Payton (ugly, cocky attitude and facial expressions), Fisher (complains at EVERY foul called on him), Bryant (do I need to say anything here? wannabe MJ), Fox (hahahaha, what hair!)...they're just irritating.

And for some stupid, unexplained reason, they always come back, like they did on San Antonio. <sigh> I just hope the Pistons don't have a let up game, and they continue to fight hard. If they can somehow win Game 2 with 3 games in Detroit, then there's a chance. But, like you said, Indiana won that first game and it was all down hill; so did Philly, for that matter.

~1:33 left...

~85-82 Detroit leads...

~Detroit Ball

~WHAT A SERIES :woot:

~Foul On Fisher!

~Hamilton Hits 1st Free Throw 86-82

~Hamilton Hits 2nd Free Thow 87-82 Detroit by 5

~DOWN WITH LA!!!!

~KOBE Misses his 1st FREE THROW HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA

~87-83 Less Than A Minute BIG BEN HUGE REBOUND AND FOLLOW THROUGH!!! 89-83 Detroit

~Oh No-- SHAQ hits the basket and gtes fouled, To The Line For 1... OMG Shaq Made it!!!-- 3 point Game... 89-96 Detroit

~Announcer Al Michaels "No Team Has Ever Come Back From losing 2 AT HOME to win The Finals!!!!"

~Detroit's Ball 30.4 seconds left..

~Prince Inbounds, Billups Misses The Drive...

~Laker Ball, Time Out Called with 10.9 seconds left...

~DAMN WHAT A GAME :woot:

~Okay Plays About To Begin

~Malone To Inbound...Ball gets To Kobe - KOBE HITS A 3 FROM WAY OUT!!! H|O|L|Y S|H|I|T I HATE KOBE!!! :angry:

~TIED GAME 89-89... 2.1 Left ... Detroit Ball

~ Prince To Inbound.. Cant Get The Ball In...Finally does Bad Pass... Malone Breaks it Up...

OH NO OVERTIME!!!! :o

FINAL EDIT -

I am upset. Kobe pretty much completely took over in Overtime. I have to give him credit, even though i do hate him (and way before any of these other "issues" of his, i tend to hate really good players who are not on the knicks ;) ) But Kobe is damn, damn good...

DAMN Detroit had such a good chance at possibly putting this series away completely...

Edited June 9, 2004 by DirtyLarry