Members of the Pistons touch the NBA Finals trophy after they defeated the Lakers, four games to one, in the 2004 championship series. Would the 2004 Pistons raise the trophy had they played the 2017 Warriors? (Ryan Garza | Flint Journal file)

2004 Pistons vs. 2017 Warriors a contrast in styles

By Scott DeCamp | sdecamp1@mlive.com

It was only a week ago that Rasheed Wallace said that his 2003-04 NBA champion Detroit Pistons squad would “run through” this year's Golden State Warriors team.

Both teams were loaded with talent and, Monday night, the Warriors claimed the NBA title with a 4-1 series win over the Cleveland Cavaliers.

But is Sheed right? Would the 2004 Pistons take down the Warriors?

In the ’04 finals, the defensive-minded Pistons put the clamps down on a Los Angeles Lakers team that featured Kobe Bryant, Shaquille O’Neal, Karl Malone and Gary Payton. The Pistons won the series in five games, allowing the Lakers to eclipse 90 points just once and limiting them to 80 points or fewer in three of the five games, including only 68 in Game 3.

The current group of Warriors is a high-octane outfit that operates on an offense-first approach. And while the Warriors may have more so-called “star power,” you could make a good argument that the Pistons’ mentality and the sum of their parts was better.

Would it be enough?

Let's break it down.

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com file and Associated Press)

Starting point guard: Chauncey Billups vs. Steph Curry

Chauncey Ba-ba-ba-Billups was the engine for the Pistons’ title team in 2003-04 and he earned MVP honors in the NBA Finals. That season, the 6-foot-3 point guard averaged 16.9 points, 5.7 assists, 3.5 rebounds and 1.1 steals per game. Billups shot 39.4 percent from the floor, 38.8 percent from 3-point range and 87.8 percent from the free-throw line.

Like many leading players, Billups also had some intangibles that helped elevate his team. In the NBA Finals, he elevated his scoring average to 21 per game. With those things in mind, it’s debatable who had/has a bigger impact on his team – Billups or Steph Curry.

There is only one Steph Curry, though. The 6-3 prolific scorer averaged 25.3 points, 6.6 assists, 4.5 rebounds and 1.8 steals this season while shooting 46.8 percent from the field, 41.1 percent from long range and 90 percent from the free-throw line.

Edge: Curry

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com and Associated Press)

Starting shooting guard: Richard Hamilton vs. Klay Thompson

Take Klay Thompson out of the lineup, or get him on an off-night, and the Warriors can still win in many cases. Without Richard Hamilton, the Pistons didn’t stand a chance.

The 6-foot-7 Hamilton was the Pistons’ leading scorer throughout the 2003-04 season at 17.6 ppg along with 4.0 assists, 3.6 rebounds and 1.3 steals per contest. He shot 45.5 percent from the floor and 86.8 percent from the free-throw line.

The 6-7 Thompson is a much more prolific shooter at 46.8 percent from the floor and 41.4 percent from 3-point range while averaging 22.3 points, 3.7 rebounds and 2.1 assists this season. In the event that Thompson had to guard Rip, could he have kept up? Hamilton was the best at moving away from the ball and getting into position to score.

Edge: Hamilton

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com and Associated Press)

Starting small forward: Tayshaun Prince vs. Kevin Durant

Let’s just cut to the chase on this one. As good a defender as Tayshaun was, he would have had his hands full containing Durant, especially the Durant who has shown up for these NBA Finals and earned series MVP.

A knee injury sidelined the 6-foot-9 Durant in the regular season, when he was averaging 25.1 points, 8.3 rebounds and 4.8 assists while shooting 53.7 percent from the floor, 37.5 percent from the long line and 88 percent from the foul line. But he returned to form and then some.

It's not that Prince was chopped liver. The 6-9 wing made solid contributions on the stat sheet with 10.3 ppg, 4.8 rpg and 2.3 apg. He'll forever be remembered for that timely, highlight-reel block of Reggie Miller earlier in the playoffs in 2004. But Prince is not Kevin Durant.

Edge: Durant

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com and Associated Press)

Starting power forward: Rasheed Wallace vs. Draymond Green

Is there much point in comparing and contrasting measurables and stats with these guys? The 6-foot-11 Rasheed had four inches on Draymond and he averaged 3 ½ more points per game in 2003-04 than what Green did this season. But Draymond is Sheed’s equal when it comes to nastiness on the floor and trash talk.

We’ll throw the respective numbers out there anyway. Wallace averaged 13.7 points, 7.0 rebounds, 1.8 assists, 1.1 steals and 2.0 blocks while shooting 43.1 percent from the field, 31.9 percent from 3-point land and 70.4 percent from the free-throw line. Green averaged 10.2 points, 7.9 rebounds. 7.0 assists, 2.03 steals and 1.39 blocks while shooting 41.8 percent from the floor, 30.8 percent from 3 and 71 percent at the line.

This one’s a toss-up: Sheed was an intimidating presence who would also stretch the floor, but Draymond is a true point-forward who makes things happen for others with his passing and basketball smarts.

Edge: Push (yes, this is a cop-out)

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com file and Associated Press)

Starting center: Ben Wallace vs. Zaza Pachulia

This really is no comparison. Wallace was so much more of a factor than Pachulia is. Big Ben was menacing, while Zaza pretty much just takes up space.

Pachulia shoots the ball better than Wallace did, at 53.4 percent from the floor compared to 42.1 percent, but Ben pulled down more than a dozen rebounds per game – more than twice as many as Zaza. Plus, Wallace averaged just under 10 points and three blocks, while Pachulia was at 6.1 points and 0.47 blocks this season.

Big Ben had the intimidation factor, while Zaza seems like more of the goon/hack variety.

Edge: Wallace

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com file and Associated Press)

Sixth man: Corliss Williamson vs. Andre Iguodala

This individual matchup may have never materialized on the floor as they’re different types of players.

Corliss Williamson was a load at 6-foot-7, 245 pounds, and he was productive in his 20 minutes per game off the bench with 9.5 points and 3.2 rebounds. Andre Iguodala is more wiry and athletic, and he’s no less productive at 7.6 points, 4.0 rebounds and 3.4 assists in about 14 ½ minutes per game.

If you’re talking 2004 Williamson vs. 2017 Iguodala, then Iguodala probably has the upper hand.

Edge: Iguodala

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com file and Associated Press)

Pistons bench vs. Warriors bench

Including sixth man Corliss Williamson, the Pistons’ bench in 2003-04 went a solid six deep with the likes of Mehmet Okur, Lindsey Hunter, Mike James, Chucky Atkins and Elden Campbell. That group averaged better than 40 points per game.

The Warriors’ bench also went about six deep, including Iguodala, who is joined in the main reserve group by Shaun Livingston, David West, JaVale McGee, Ian Clark and Patrick McCaw. This group contributed about 33 points per contest.

While both teams’ benches would be considered solid if not strong, the Pistons’ group of reserves seemed to be stronger overall.

Edge: Pistons

(Photos courtesy of MLive.com file and Associated Press)

Coach: Larry Brown vs. Steve Kerr

One is a Hall of Fame coach. The other is not – not yet, anyway.

Larry Brown has been there, done that. In fact, it was during his first season with Detroit in 2003-04 during when he led the Pistons to the NBA title. The Warriors’ Steve Kerr is stacking up wins as fast as anybody and he wrapped up a second championship in three seasons.

But, for now, Brown has the coaching edge based on his experience and achievements.

Edge: Brown

The Warriors' Kevin Durant, left, and Draymond Green have had plenty of times to celebrate this season. (Marcio Jose Sanchez | Associated Press)

Warriors set the pace in 2016-17

The 2016-17 Warriors put up a gaudy 67-15 record in the regular season, far and away best in the league. They were the top-seeded team in these playoffs, and they certainly played like it. The Warriors finished with a 16-1 record in the playoffs, their lone loss coming in Game 4 against the Cavaliers.

How would the 2003-04 Pistons squad have fared in today’s NBA? Would they have still been 54-28 like they were back in that most recent title season? That season, the Pistons finished second in the Central Division behind the rival Indiana Pacers. The Pistons were the No. 3 seed in the Eastern Conference.

What do you say?

Are you ready to let the 2004 Pistons-2017 Warriors NBA Finals play out? Here we go below:

Golden State Warriors forward Kevin Durant (35) is jacked up during his big Game 1 performance. (Ben Margot | Associated Press)

Championship faceoff: Game 1

Warriors 105, Pistons 98

Golden State has home-court advantage throughout the playoffs, so the first two games of the hypothetical NBA Finals are played on the West Coast.

The well-rested Warriors get off to a hot start before the jet-lagged Pistons find their legs and make a game of it. The Pistons pull within two, 89-87, early in the fourth quarter before they run out of gas. The Warriors are able to hold on.

Rasheed Wallace and Draymond Green waste no time with their war of words, getting assessed double technicals in the first quarter but somehow keeping their cool the rest of the way.

Kevin Durant continues to roll in the playoffs after he suffered a scary knee injury in the regular season, and he posts a triple-double for the Warriors with 27 points, 11 rebounds and 10 assists. Richard Hamilton leads the Pistons with 22 points, four rebounds and five assists.

Golden State Warriors guard Klay Thompson celebrates as he walks off the floor following his team's Game 2 victory. (Marcio Jose Sanchez | Associated Press)

Game 2

Warriors 97, Pistons 94 (OT)

Desperately trying to avoid slipping in an 0-2 hole, the Pistons pull out all the stops in Game 2 of the NBA Finals at Oracle Arena. They nearly pull it off, but a Klay Thompson 3 from the right corner at the buzzer forces overtime and Steph Curry’s back-to-back triples in the final minute of the extra session prove to be back-breakers.

Chauncey Billups scores a game-high 29 points, outdueling Curry in the point-guard matchup, but the effort is not enough to push the Pistons over the top.

Curry finishes with 22 points on 6-of-14 shooting from long range. Thompson adds 17 points despite missing his first 12 attempts from 3-point range before making the pivotal 13th try forced OT.

The game is heated throughout, fueled by the antics of none other than Rasheed Wallace and Draymond Green.

Rasheed Wallace, right, and Richard Hamilton celebrate during a timeout called by the Warriors in the second quarter of Game 3.

Game 3

Pistons 92, Warriors 78

This is the last NBA Finals series to be played at The Palace of Auburn Hills, and the Pistons return home to a raucous crowd.

Detroit’s defense locks down Golden State’s perimeter and limits the Warriors to their lowest point total in three seasons in what was essentially a must-win for the Pistons. In another physical game, Rasheed Wallace comes to play for the Pistons in scoring a playoff-high 24. Sheed adds eight boards and four blocks in the inspired effort.

Despite an uncharacteristic defensive performance from Draymond Green, the Saginaw native scores a team-high 18 points for the Warriors in a homecoming of sorts.

The Pistons could not afford to fall into a 3-0 hole and they managed to avoid it with a familiar effort.

The Pistons' Chauncey Billups, left, offers instructions to Corliss Williamson. (MLive.com file)

Game 4

Pistons 115, Warriors 110

Detroit’s grinding defense went missing at different moments during Game 4, but it did enough at key times to allow the Pistons to outscore the Warriors and even the series at two games apiece.

The series resumes with Game 5 and shifts back to Oracle Arena, where Golden State is 8-0 these playoffs.

In Game 4, Chauncey Billups again has the hot hand with a team-high 23 points on 5-of-8 shooting from 3-point land. Richard Hamilton serves as the other half of the Pistons’ 1-2 offensive punch, scoring 20 points.

Steph Curry leads all scorers with 30 for the Warriors, including 20 in the first half. Golden State managed to shake off the cobwebs from their Game 3 throttling, but the Warriors see the series evened.

Warriors forward Draymond Green pleads his case with an official. (Mike Mulholland | MLive.com file)

Game 5

Warriors 105, Pistons 99 (OT)

For the second time in three games at Oracle Arena during these NBA Finals, the Warriors pull it out in overtime. Kevin Durant gets hot in the extra session, scoring 10 of his 22 points in overtime to lift Golden State.

The Pistons lead 86-76 with one minute left in the quarter before the Warriors climb right back into the game on a 10-0 run that carries into the fourth quarter and is fueled by Draymond Green’s three baskets and defensive energy.

Green and Rasheed Wallace are both ejected after each player receives his second and third technical fouls of the NBA Finals.

Seth Curry paces the Warriors with 25 points and 11 assists. Tayshaun Prince shuts down Klay Thompson this time, while scoring a team-high 19 of his own.

Pistons center Ben Wallace raises his arms in celebration. (MLive.com file)

Game 6

Pistons 99, Warriors 88

With their backs against the wall and returning to The Palace, the Pistons deliver. Draymond Green gets into early foul trouble, and it has a major impact on the outcome.

With Green on the bench for most of the evening and the Warriors lacking post presence, the Pistons have their way in the paint. Ben Wallace emerges as the hero for the Pistons, scoring a career-high 24 points on 10-of-13 shooting and grabbing 14 rebounds. For good measure, Big Ben also swats six shots.

Rasheed Wallace scores 18 points, followed by three others in double-figures in the balanced effort for the Pistons.

Klay Thompson leads the Warriors with 20 points.

The series heads back to Oakland yet again for the seventh and deciding game.

Warriors players, coaches and the ownership group hold the Larry O'Brien NBA Championship Trophy. (Marcio Jose Sanchez | Associated Press)

Game 7

Warriors 102, Pistons 99

Game 7 is fitting for this series, just as this series is fitting for these two teams.

What separates the Pistons and Warriors is a mental miscue by Rasheed Wallace, who helps on a drive by Kevin Durant and leaves Klay Thompson wide open for the winning 3-pointer from the right wing with 3 seconds left.

Durant finishes with a game-high 23 points, 12 rebounds and eight assists en route to earning NBA Finals MVP honors. Thompson scores 21 points, while Steph Curry has 19.

Chauncey Billups leads the Pistons with 24 points, followed by Richard Hamilton with 17.

Some have wondered whether the Pistons could hang with the up-tempo Warriors, while others doubted whether the Warriors would adapt to the Pistons’ physical, defensive style. Both sets of doubters prove to be wrong.

Home court means everything in the hypothetical 2004 Pistons-2017 Warriors NBA Finals series. But, in the end, the Warriors have too just a little too much firepower for the Pistons.