A kind of application of opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene compound in anti-eliminate aphis

Technical field

The present invention relates to the botanical pesticide of technical field of agricultural insecticide, more particularly to a kind of bisabolane type sequiterpene Application of the class compound in anti-eliminate aphis.

Background technology

Pulse family (Leguminosae sp.) is dicotyledon arbor, shrub, undershrub or draft, uprightly or is climbed up by holding on to, and is had There is important economic implications, be one of starch, protein, oil and important sources of vegetables in human food.Broad bean (Vicia Faba L.), also known as broad bean etc., pulse family, Vetch, annual herb, nutritive value enrich, and edible, can also raise Material, green manure and nectariferous plant plantation.For grain, vegetables and feed, green manure dual-purpose crop.

Aphis craccivora (Aphis craccivora Koch, 1854), legume of mainly causing harm, host plant are peanut, brocade A variety of legumes such as chicken, soybean, wild alfalfa, locust tree, broad bean, mung bean, it is the important pests of broad bean, alfalfa, Kidney bean.Winter Season is survived the winter on perennial root herbaceous plant with ovum, is often largely occurred in 5~June, is caused growing point to wither, and spire diminishes, children Branch bending, stops growing, and when occurring serious, plant is dead in flakes, often results in underproduction loss.

Preventing and treating for aphis craccivora, get used to applying the high poison organophosphorus pesticides such as flolimat for a long time in production, it is not only Environment is polluted, kills natural enemy, and the resistance to the action of a drug of insect is also more and more stronger., can frequently using insecticide control aphid The problem of poisonous residual and environmental pollution can be caused, is, it is necessary to the biological pesticide available for pest control of safety.With Environmental Law Rule and the reinforcement of Public environmental attitude, it is also more and more stronger to the demand of few agricultural product with or without chemical residue.Plant source Agricultural chemicals with low-residual, low toxicity or it is nontoxic, be not likely to produce the features such as resistance to the action of a drug and favored by people.From living resources, especially Effective bioactive substance is found in plant resources and is developed into novel pesticide, it has also become an important channel of pesticide developing.

Turmeric (Curcuma longa L.) is the root of zingiberaceous plant.For clinical parts of generic medicinal plants, belong to perennial herb Plant.Curcumin in turmeric has cholagogic, reducing blood lipid, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, anti-infective, antitumor, anti-artery congee Sample hardening, prevent many-sided pharmacological action such as aging, and safe without toxic side effect；And it is allowed for the important of food both at home and abroad One of natural pigment.

Qiu Hairong《The collaboration anti-inflammatory Journal of Sex Research of bisabolol and zingiberol》In confirm bisabolol in human trial condition Under anti-inflammatory, and prove that bisabolol can mitigate rats paw oedema caused by chemistry, mitigate UV-induced cavy Erythema, mitigate NaOH and skin irritatins of the SDS to people.Hou Yangshuai etc.《Derived essential oil analysis and suppression mattress are anti-oxidant in cypress wood chip Activity research》In be found that the Cypress ethereal oil containing (+)-β-cedrene has extremely sensitive fungistatic effect to salmonella, There is moderate fungistatic effect to Escherichia coli, bacillus subtilis, Huo Shi enterobacterias, bacillus anthracis and Klebsiella.Xie Xiao Woods etc.《The chemical composition of SCF-CO 2 Guizhou Province production Rhizoma Zingiberis volatile oil and bacteriostatic activity research》Show that the rhizoma zingiberis containing α-zingiberene is waved Hair oil has inhibitory action to staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa.Li Shao equalitys《Traditional Chinese medicine Rhizoma curcumae method of quality control Research》Show that the Traditional Chinese medicine Rhizoma curcumae containing Curcumenol has antitumor, antipathogen, enhancing immune, anti-inflammatory, Robust speaker feature etc. a variety of Pharmacological action.Liu Xiaoyu etc.《The bioactivity and progress of synthesis of β-carypohyllene and its derivative》In show β-carypohyllene tool There are local anesthetic action, antiinflammatory action, mosquito dispersing effect, antianxiety, antidepressant effect.It is fine etc. to carry out rain《Huashan pine winter volatilization quality testing Survey analysis》In measure in Huashan pine winter volatile matter and contain terpinolene, it has the health-care effect such as sterilization, antibacterial, in the winter time There is larger contribution to ecological environment.Sun Xiuyan etc.《The research of the oxygen-containing sesquiterpenoids chemical composition of Curcuma wenyujin ring-type》It is middle to find warm cowherb Contain the bicyclic ketenes of curcuma zedoary in art, there is certain antiinflammatory action.Marseille《Xanthorrhizol increases to Tongue cancer Tca8113 cell system Grow, the research of the influence of apoptosis and its related mechanism》With stone light《Xanthorrhizol to Tca8113 cell growth inhibitions and its The influence expressed COX-2 and iNOS》In point out that xanthorrhizol has certain antitumaous effect.Ar-turmerone is as turmeric A kind of important component, belongs to terpene compound, has the multiple biological activities such as antibacterium, antimycotic, anti-snake venom, Ji Mingjie 《The research of Turmeric component ar-turmerone inducing apoptosis of tumour cell》It was found that it has a cytotoxicity, induced tumor is thin The effect of born of the same parents' apoptosis.The classes of compounds contained in above turmeric has no that it is applied to the preventing and treating of agriculture field aphid.

Research about turmeric bioactivity shows that Turmeric P.E has certain insecticidal and antifungal effect.By to existing There is technical literature retrieval to find, Zhang Yongqiang etc.《Bioactivity of the turmeric to Tetranychus cinnabarinus》The benzene extractives for reporting turmeric has Stronger acaricidal activity.Hemanta etc.《Isolation, characterization and insect growth inhibitory activity of major turmeric constituents and their derivatives against Schistocerca gregaria(Forsk)and Dysdercus koenigii(Walk)》In, it have studied ginger Flavine, turmeric essential oil, the benzene extractives of turmeric rhizome are to growth inhibition effect of red stinkbug nymph and desert locusts etc..For turmeric In terms of prevention effect research of the extract to aphid, S.Bushra etc.《Efficacy of neem oil and turmeric powder against Sitobion avenae and Rhopalosiphum padi》Have studied 3% concentration veepa oil and Turmeric P.E can effectively control grain aphid and the bird-cherry aphid, Nadia Z.Dimetry etc. of wheat plant《Importance of plant extract formulations in managing different pests attacking beans in new reclaimed area and under storage conditions》Report the ligroin extraction of turmeric for Beans aphid has certain prevention and control to act on.Pang Qianru etc.《Control action of the curcuma oil to aphid in turmeric root extract》In report Zingiberaceous plant crude extract has certain prevention effect to aphid.

The content of the invention

For the limitation of chemical insecticide in the prior art, development botanical pesticide have it is environmentally friendly, less toxic or The advantages of nontoxic etc..Finding suitable botanical pesticide and its active ingredient turns into the key solved the problems, such as.Asked for this Topic, present invention firstly discloses a kind of application of compound shown in formula I in control of aphids,

Wherein, R1Selected from H or OH；R2It is selected from

R3Selected from H or

Further, R1-R3The accordingly listed group in table 1；Change of the compound i.e. shown in formula I in table 1 Compound.

Table 1

Sequiterpene (sesquiterpenes) refers to the natural terpenoids containing 15 carbon atoms in molecule.Such as Formulas I institute The compound shown belongs to opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene compound.

Further, aphid is beans aphid.Preferably, the aphid is beans aphis craccivora.Beans aphis craccivora includes Broad bean aphis craccivora, soybean aphis craccivora and alfalfa aphis craccivora.The aphid includes broad bean aphis craccivora, soybean aphis craccivora and alfalfa One or more in aphis craccivora.

Further, compound shown in formula I is used for the preventing and treating of aphid as agricultural chemicals or agriculture the effective elements of the medicine.

Further, compound shown in formula I is configured to the μ of concentration 100-500 g/ml solution with the aqueous solution, and applies In the blade face for suffering from aphid plant.

Further, DMSO is included in the aqueous solution.

Further, compound shown in formula I extracts from curcuma plant.

Further, the preventing and treating for aphid.Show as killing and suppressing aphid.Certainly, killed due to having to aphid And inhibitory action, so can also prevent aphid parasitics occur, so as to play a part of preventing aphid.

The invention also discloses a kind of medicine, and it contains compound shown in formula I, wherein R1Selected from H or OH；R2It is selected from

R3Selected from H or

Further, the medicine is a kind of agricultural chemicals.

Further, the medicine is used for anti-eliminate aphis.

The invention further relates to a kind of compound shown in formula I, is eliminated aphis for anti-, wherein R1 is selected from H or OH；R2It is selected from

R3Selected from H or

The invention also discloses a kind of application of compound in anti-eliminate aphis, the compound is selected from as shown in Formula II to IX Compound in one or more,

Further, the one or more in the compound as shown in Formula II to IX are to extract from curcuma plant.

Further, one or more applications in beans aphid is prevented and treated in the compound as shown in Formula II to IX, Especially aphis craccivora.Wherein, the English name of the compound as shown in Formula II：β-Bisabolol；Chinese name：β-bisabolol.Such as The English name of compound shown in formula III：β-Cedrene；Chinese name：(+)-β-cedrene.Compound as shown in formula IV English name：α-Zingiberene；Chinese name：Zingiberene.The English name of compound shown as a formula V：Curcumenol；Chinese name： Curcumenol.The English name of compound as shown in Formula IV：Caryophyllene；Chinese name：Carypohyllene.As shown in Formula VII The English name of compound：Terpinolene；Chinese name：Terpinolene.The English name of compound as shown in Formula VIII： Curcumenone；Chinese name：Cowherb states bicyclic ketenes.The English name of compound as shown in Formula IX：Xanthorrhizol；Chinese Name：Xanthorrhizol.

Compound shown in formula I, and/or the method bag of the compound as shown in Formula II to IX are extracted from curcuma plant Include thin plate chromatography and prepare method, column chromatography, one or more of methods in high performance liquid chromatography preparation method, from solvent from turmeric Separation and Extraction in crude extract.

Preferably, the curcuma plant crude extract, be Zingiber ginger is soaked using organic or inorganic solvent, Extract the material of gained.

Preferably, thin plate chromatography method refers to：From solvent, Zingiber curcuma crude extract is placed in the thin of tiling silica gel Chromatography is carried out on plate.

Preferably, column chromatography refers to：From solvent, Zingiber curcuma crude extract is placed in equipped with silica gel as solid Determine to carry out separation and Extraction in the glass column of phase.

Preferably, high performance liquid chromatography refers to：From solvent, thin plate chromatography and column chromatography initial gross separation will be passed through Material is placed in chromatographic column, and separation and Extraction preparation is carried out to it using high pressure.

Preferably, solvent includes the one or more in petroleum ether, ethyl acetate, methanol, dichloromethane and water.

Preferably, it is 1 that the volume ratio of each component, which includes petroleum ether and the ratio of ethyl acetate, in solvent:0 to 0:1, acetic acid The ratio of ethyl ester and methanol is 1:0 to 0:1, the ratio of methanol and water is 1:0 to 0:1, or the ratio of dichloromethane and water is 2: 1。

" compound " of the present invention, including all stereoisomers, geometric isomer, dynamic isomer and same position Element.

" compound " of the present invention, can be asymmetric, for example, having one or more stereoisomers.Remove Non- to be otherwise noted, all stereoisomers all include, such as enantiomter and diastereoisomer.Contain asymmetry in the present invention The compound of carbon atom, can be in the form of optical activity be pure or racemic form is separated；The pure form of optical activity can To be synthesized from racemic mixture, or by using chiral raw material or chiral reagent.

" compound " of the present invention, in addition to tautomeric forms；Tautomeric forms derive from a list Key is exchanged together with simultaneously with the migration of a proton with adjacent double bond.

Present invention additionally comprises the atom of all isotopes, either in intermediate or last compound；The original of isotope Attached bag is included with identical atomicity but different quality number, for example, the isotope of hydrogen includes deuterium and tritium.

Compared with prior art, the present invention has following beneficial effect：

1st, the invention discloses nine class reactive compounds (from Formulas I to Formula IX), bisabolol times especially shown in formula I Half terpenoid, the application in anti-eliminate aphis.New active matter is provided for the preventing and treating of aphid, especially beans aphid Matter, be advantageous to agricultural production.

2nd, turmeric is of long standing and well established as usage history of the Chinese medicine in China, and its is environmentally safe, to person poultry harmless, root The botanical pesticide that research and development are continued deeper into according to turmeric crude extract can be used as the green plant insecticide of natural environmental-protective.It is anti-to eliminate aphis Compound extract from curcuma plant, have the advantages that to more environment-friendly, less toxic or nontoxic, low-residual, for research and develop it is new Botanical pesticide provides the foundation.

3rd, separation and Extraction has gone out in turmeric can be used for the bisabolol sesquiterpenoids of preventing and treating beans aphid, sets system Row concentration gradient carries out indoor biometricses experiment, it is determined that its suitable dosage, is advantageous to further investigate its physicochemical property.

4th, effectively prevent eliminating aphis, especially beans aphid, reduce disease hazard degree, reduce the economic damage in agricultural production Lose, and drug-fast feature is not likely to produce with low toxicity, low stain and target, avoid a series of side effects of chemical pesticide.

Embodiment

The invention will be further described with reference to embodiments.The experiment that experiment to control of aphids effect is taken If the place that method does not elaborate, according to《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity Test dip method》(NY/T1154.6-2006) perform, it is specific as follows：

1st, medicament is prepared

Water soluble medicament is directly dissolved with water, diluted.Other medicaments select suitable organic solvent (such as acetone, chloroform, second Alcohol etc.) dissolving, then it is dilute with the aqueous solution containing proper amount of surfactant such as 0.1% Tween 80 (or 0.1%Triton-X100) Release.According to agent activity, 5-7 series mass concentration are set according to method of ratio or equal difference is waited.Per mass concentration amount of liquid medicine No less than 50ml.

3rd, chemicals treatment

After target insect is immersed into decoction 5s -10s, unnecessary decoction is drawn with filter paper, test worm is transferred under normal condition Raising.4 repetitions are often handled, often repeat leaching worm 10-20, and the processing for setting the corresponding organic solvent without medicament is made For control.

4th, investigate

24h investigates test worm death condition after processing, records total borer population and dead borer population, according to requirement of experiment and medicament feature, It can shorten or extend control time.

5th, computational methods

According to survey data, the corrected mortality of each processing is calculated, unit is percentage (%).Based on formula (1) and (2) Calculate, result of calculation remains into 2 significant digits：

P1=K/N × 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (1)

In formula：

P1 --- the death rate；

K --- dead borer population；

N --- handle total borer population.

P2=(Pi-P0)/(1-P0) × 100 ... ... ... ... (2)

In formula：

P2 --- corrected mortality；

Pi --- the processing death rate；

P0 --- the blank control death rate.

If compareing dead ＜ 5%, without correction；The death rate is compareed between 5%~20%, school should be carried out by formula (2) Just；Death rate ＞ 20% is compareed, experiment need to reform.

Broad bean aphis craccivora, soybean aphis craccivora, cowpea aphis craccivora, alfalfa aphis craccivora and Kidney bean aphis craccivora

Prevention effect of the bisabolol sesquiterpenoids of table 2 to beans aphid

Embodiment 1

The opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Embodiment 1.1

Select the compound (turmeronol A) of opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene numbering 1, i.e. No. 1 compound.By 100mg No. 1 compound is dissolved in the solution that 100mg ml-1 are configured in 1ml DMSO, is matched and (matched somebody with somebody further according to required solution concentration Into solution in DMSO contents it is few), it is stand-by to be configured to 100,200,300,400,500 μ g ml-1 concentration.By 4 age lucernes After Mu aphid immerses decoction 10s, unnecessary decoction is drawn with filter paper, test worm is transferred under normal condition and raised.Often handle 4 weights It is multiple, leaching worm 10-20 is often repeated, after processing in insectary (26 ± 1 DEG C of temperature, relative humidity 40 ± 10%), after 24h Test worm death condition is investigated, records total borer population and dead borer population, when being observed, each aphid on Broad Bean Leaves is determined using naked eyes Position, touch aphid with fine, soft fur pen in disecting microscope, it is motionless to judge dead standard with aphid body.As a result 1 is shown The anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of number compound is 228.21 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 1.2

With the compound (turmeronol B) of numbering 2, i.e. No. 2 compounds, replace No. 1 compound, remaining same embodiment 1.1, the results showed that the anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of No. 2 compounds is 260.52 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 1.3

With the compound (bisabolone) of numbering 3, i.e. No. 3 compounds, No. 1 compound, remaining same embodiment are replaced 1.1, the results showed that the anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of No. 3 compounds is 300.49 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 1.4

With the compound (8-hydroxyl-ar-turmerone) of numbering 4, i.e. No. 4 compounds, No. 1 compound is replaced, its Remaining same embodiment 1.1, the results showed that the anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of No. 4 compounds is 298.64 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 1.5

With the compound (bisabolone-9-one) of numbering 5, i.e. No. 5 compounds, No. 1 compound is replaced, remaining is the same as real Apply example 1.1, the results showed that the anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of No. 5 compounds is 261.71 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 1.6

With compound ((6S) -2-methyl-6- [(1R, 5S)-(4-methene-5-hydroxyl-2- of numbering 6 Cyclohexen) -2-hepten-4-one]), i.e. No. 6 compounds, No. 1 compound is replaced, remaining is with embodiment 1.1, as a result table The anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of bright No. 6 compounds is 316.81 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 1.7

With the compound (α-Curcumene) of numbering 7, i.e. No. 7 compounds, replace No. 1 compound, remaining same embodiment 1.1, the results showed that the anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of No. 7 compounds is 244.06 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 1.8

With the compound ((+)-(S)-ar-turmerone) of numbering 8, i.e. No. 8 compounds, No. 1 compound is replaced, remaining With embodiment 1.1, the results showed that the anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of No. 8 compounds is 243.84 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 2

The opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of soybean aphis craccivora

Embodiment 2.1

Select the compound (turmeronol A) of opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene numbering 1, i.e. No. 1 compound.By 100mg No. 1 compound is dissolved in the solution that 100mg ml-1 are configured in 1ml DMSO, is matched and (matched somebody with somebody further according to required solution concentration Into solution in DMSO contents it is few), it is stand-by to be configured to 100,200,300,400,500 μ g ml-1 concentration.By 4 age lucernes After Mu aphid immerses decoction 10s, unnecessary decoction is drawn with filter paper, test worm is transferred under normal condition and raised.Often handle 4 weights It is multiple, leaching worm 10-20 is often repeated, after processing in insectary (26 ± 1 DEG C of temperature, relative humidity 40 ± 10%), after 24h Test worm death condition is investigated, records total borer population and dead borer population, when being observed, each aphid on Broad Bean Leaves is determined using naked eyes Position, touch aphid with fine, soft fur pen in disecting microscope, it is motionless to judge dead standard with aphid body.As a result 1 is shown The anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of number compound is 211.87 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 2.2

No. 2 compounds are replaced with No. 1 compound, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 2.1.

Embodiment 2.3

No. 2 compounds are replaced with No. 3 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 2.1.

Embodiment 2.4

No. 2 compounds are replaced with No. 4 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 2.1.

Embodiment 2.5

No. 2 compounds are replaced with No. 5 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 2.1.

Embodiment 2.6

No. 2 compounds are replaced with No. 6 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 2.1.

Embodiment 2.7

No. 2 compounds are replaced with No. 7 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 2.1.

Embodiment 2.8

No. 2 compounds are replaced with No. 8 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 2.1.

Embodiment 3

The opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of alfalfa aphis craccivora

Embodiment 3.1

Select the compound (turmeronol A) of opopanax alkane type sesquiterpene numbering 1, i.e. No. 1 compound.By 100mg No. 1 compound is dissolved in the solution that 100mg ml-1 are configured in 1ml DMSO, is matched and (matched somebody with somebody further according to required solution concentration Into solution in DMSO contents it is few), it is stand-by to be configured to 100,200,300,400,500 μ g ml-1 concentration.By 4 age lucernes After Mu aphid immerses decoction 10s, unnecessary decoction is drawn with filter paper, test worm is transferred under normal condition and raised.Often handle 4 weights It is multiple, leaching worm 10-20 is often repeated, after processing in insectary (26 ± 1 DEG C of temperature, relative humidity 40 ± 10%), after 24h Test worm death condition is investigated, records total borer population and dead borer population, when being observed, each aphid on Broad Bean Leaves is determined using naked eyes Position, touch aphid with fine, soft fur pen in disecting microscope, it is motionless to judge dead standard with aphid body.As a result 1 is shown The anti-LC50 that indoor biometricses obtain that eliminates aphis of number compound is 232.02 μ g ml-1.

Embodiment 3.2

No. 3 compounds are replaced with No. 1 compound, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 3.1.

Embodiment 3.3

No. 3 compounds are replaced with No. 2 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 3.1.

Embodiment 3.4

No. 3 compounds are replaced with No. 4 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 3.1.

Embodiment 3.5

No. 3 compounds are replaced with No. 5 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 3.1.

Embodiment 3.6

No. 3 compounds are replaced with No. 6 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 3.1.

Embodiment 3.7

No. 3 compounds are replaced with No. 7 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 3.1.

Embodiment 3.8

No. 3 compounds are replaced with No. 8 compounds, remaining the results are shown in Table 2 with embodiment 3.1.

Above-described embodiment simply lists the bisabolol sesquiterpenoids extracted in turmeric and is applied to beans aphid The method of preventing and treating.Above-described embodiment, which can be seen that in the present invention, to be contained compared with multivariable, it is impossible to is sentenced according to the change of a certain variable It break preventing and treating relation between result, but reactive compound is carried out in preventing and treating beans by the coordination combination between multiple variables Application in terms of class aphid.

Embodiment 4

Under each concentration, prevention effect of the 1-8 compounds in beans aphid, as a result as shown in table 3.

Prevention effect of the 1-8 compounds of table 3 in beans aphid

Embodiment 5

Medicine of the present invention contains compound shown in formula I, wherein R1Selected from H or OH；R2It is selected from

R3Selected from H or

The medicine is used to prevent eliminating aphis or can be a kind of agricultural chemicals for dissipation and/or suppression aphid.The medicine can match somebody with somebody Solid-state, semisolid, liquid or gaseous state preparation is made, such as tablet, pill, capsule, pulvis, granule, paste, emulsion, suspension Agent, solution, suppository, injection, inhalant, gel, microballoon and aerosol etc..

The extracting method of embodiment 6

Embodiment 6.1

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 1 compound of homozygosis is obtained.Preventing and treating experiment is carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain, Test method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/ T1154.6-2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.2

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 2 compounds of homozygosis are obtained.Preventing and treating experiment is carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain, Test method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/ T1154.6-2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.3

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 3 compounds are obtained.Preventing and treating experiment, experiment side are carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/T1154.6- 2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.4

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 4 compounds are obtained.Preventing and treating experiment, experiment side are carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/T1154.6- 2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.5

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 5 compounds of homozygosis are obtained.Preventing and treating experiment is carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain, Test method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/ T1154.6-2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.6

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 6 compounds of homozygosis are obtained.Preventing and treating experiment is carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain, Test method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/ T1154.6-2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.7

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 7 compounds of homozygosis are obtained.Preventing and treating experiment is carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain, Test method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/ T1154.6-2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.8

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of beans aphid

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, No. 8 compounds are obtained.Preventing and treating experiment, experiment side are carried out to beans aphid with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/T1154.6- 2006).It the results are shown in Table 3.

Embodiment 6.9

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, the compound of homozygosis is obtained：β-bisabolol.Broad bean aphis craccivora is carried out with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Preventing and treating experiment, test method use《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity experiment leaching worm Method》(NY/T1154.6-2006).As a result：500 μ g/ml β-bisabolol prevention effect in potted plant experiment is 68.6%.

Embodiment 6.10

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, the compound of homozygosis is obtained：(+)-β-cedrene.Broad bean aphis craccivora is entered with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Row preventing and treating experiment, test method use《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity experiment leaching Worm method》(NY/T1154.6-2006).As a result：500 μ g/ml (+)-β-cedrene prevention effect in potted plant experiment is 62.9%.

Embodiment 6.11

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, compound is obtained：Zingiberene.Preventing and treating experiment is carried out to broad bean aphis craccivora with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain, tried Proved recipe method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/ T1154.6-2006).As a result：500 μ g/ml zingiberene prevention effect in potted plant experiment is 76.0%.

Embodiment 6.12

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, compound is obtained：Curcumenol.It is real that preventing and treating is carried out to broad bean aphis craccivora with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Test, test method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》(NY/ T1154.6-2006).As a result：500 μ g/ml Curcumenol prevention effect in potted plant experiment is 63.1%.

Embodiment 6.13

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, the compound of homozygosis is obtained：Carypohyllene.Broad bean aphis craccivora is prevented and treated with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Experiment, test method use《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》 (NY/T1154.6-2006).As a result：500 μ g/ml carypohyllene prevention effect in potted plant experiment is 59.7%.

Embodiment 6.14

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, the compound of homozygosis is obtained：Terpinolene.Broad bean aphis craccivora is prevented with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Experiment is controlled, test method uses《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity tests dip method》 (NY/T1154.6-2006).As a result：500 μ g/ml terpinolene prevention effect in potted plant experiment is 77.1%.

Embodiment 6.15

The reactive compound extracted in turmeric is applied to the controlling experiment of broad bean aphis craccivora

Turmeric crude extract 80g is weighed, the use of silica gel is stationary phase, (volume ratio is mobile phase from petroleum ether-ethyl acetate 1:0-0:And acetate-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) various ingredients, are obtained, using high performance liquid chromatography, are selected Methanol-water (volume ratio 1:0-0:Or chloroform-methanol (volume ratio 1 1):0-0:1) crude extract is divided as mobile phase From purifying, the compound of homozygosis is obtained：The bicyclic ketenes of curcuma zedoary.Broad bean aphis craccivora is entered with the above-mentioned compound for isolating and purifying to obtain Row preventing and treating experiment, test method use《The part of farm-chemical indoor determination test rule insecticide the 6th:Insecticidal activity experiment leaching Worm method》(NY/T1154.6-2006).As a result：The 500 μ g/ml bicyclic ketenes of curcuma zedoary prevention effect in potted plant experiment is 70.6%.